CASTIGATIONS OF Mr. HOBBES HIS LAST ANIMADVERSIONS, IN The case concerning
LIBERTY* and Universal NECESSITY, Wherein all his Excep^ions about that
Controversy are fully satisfied.

By John Bramhall, D. D. and Bishop of Derry.

Prove. 12. 19. The lip of truth shall be established for ever, but a lying
tongue is but for a moment.

London, Printed by E. T. for I. Crook. 1657.

An Answer to Mr. Hobs his (...): and first to his Epistle to the Reader
CHristian Reader, thou have here the testimony of Mr. Hobs, that the questions
concerning Necessity, Freedom, and Chance, are clearly discussed between him
and me, in that little volume which he has lately published. If they be, it
were strange, whilst we agree not much better about the terms of the
controversy, than the builders of Babel did understand one another language.
A necessity upon supposition (which admits a possibility of the Mr. Hobs
mistake of the question.
contrary) is mistaken for an absolute and true necessity. A freedom from
compulsion is confounded with a freedom from necessitation, mere spontaneity
usurpeth the place of true liberty; no chance is acknowledged, but what is made
chance by our ignorance or nescience, because we know not the right causes of
it. I desire to retein the proper terms of the Schools: Mr. Hobs flies to the
common conceptions of the vulgar, a way seldom trodden, but by false Prophets,
and seditious Orators. He prefers their terms as more intelligible; I
esteem them much more obscure and confused. In such intricate questions, vulgar
brains are as incapable of the things, as of the terms.

But thus it behoved him to prevaricate, that he might not seem to swim against
an universal stream, nor directly to oppose the general current of the
Christian World. There was an odd fantastic person in our times, one Thomas
Leaver, who would needs publish a Logic in our mothers tongue. You need not
doubt but that the public good was pretended. And because the received terms
of art seemed to him too abstruce, he translated them into English, stiling a
Subject an Inholder, an Accident an Inbeer. A Proposition a Shewsay, an
affirmative Proposition a Yeasav, a negative proposition a Naysay, the subject
of the Proposition the Foreset, the predicate the Backset, the conversion the
turning of the Foreset, into the Backset, and the Backset into the Foreset. Let
M. Hobs himself be judge, whether the common Logical notions, or this new
gibrish were less intelligible. Haec a se non multum abludit imago.


But Reader, do thou desire to see the question Mr. Hobs his principles
refuted by his practice.
discussed clearly to thy satisfastion? observe but Mr. Hobs his practicks, and
compare them with his principles, and there needs no more. He teaches that all
causes, and all events are absolutely necessary; yet if any man cross him, he
frets and fumes and talks his pleasure; jussit quod splendida bilis. Does any
man in his right wits use to be angry with causes that act necessarily? He
might as well be angry with the Sun, because it does not rise an hour sooner,
or with the Moon because it is not always full for his pleasure. he commands
his servant to do thus, to as much purpose if he be necessitated to do
otherwise, as Canutus commanded the waves of the Sea to flow no higher. He
punishes him if he transgress his commands, with as much justice if he have
no dominion over his own actions, as Xe^xes commanded so many stripes to be
given to the H^llespont, for breaking down his Bridge. He exhorts him and
reprehends him; He might as well exhort the fire to burn, or reprehend it for
burning of his clothes. He is as timorous in a thunder, or a storm, as
cautelous and deliberative in doubtful cases, as if he believed that all things
in the World were contingent, and nothing necessary. Sometimes he chideth
himself; how ill advised was I, to do thus or so? O that I had thought better
upon it, or had done otherwise. Yet all this while he believes that it was
absolutely necessary for him to do what he did and impossible for him to have
done otherwise. Thus his own practice does sufficiently confute his tenets. He
will tell us that he is timorous and solicitous because he knows not how the
causes will determine. To what purpose? Whether their determination be known or
unknown, he cannot alter it with his endeavors. He will tell us that
deliberation must concur to the production of the effect. Let it be so but if
it do concur necessarily, Why is he so solicitous and so much perplexed? Let
him sleep or wake, take care or take no care, the necessary causes must do
their work.

Yet from our collision some light has proceeded toward the elucidation of
this question, and much more might have arisen, if Mr. Hobbes had been pleased
to retain the ancient School terms, for want of which his discourse is still
ambiguous and confused. As here he tells thee, That we both maintain that men
are free to do as they will, and to forbear as they will. My charity leads me
to take him in the best sense, only of free acts, and then with dependence
upon the first cause. That man who knows not his idiotismes, would think the
cause was yielded in these words, whereas in truth they Freedom to do and not
to will, refuted.
signify nothing. His meaning is, He is as free to do and forbear, as he is
free to call back yesterday. He may call until his heart ache, but it will never
come. He says, A man is free to do if he will, but he is not free to will if
he will. If he be not free to will, then he is not free to do. Without the
concurrence of all necessary causes it is impossible that the effect should be
produced. But the concurrence of the will is necessary to the production of all
free or voluntary acts. And if the will be necessitated to nil, as it may be,
then the act is impossible: And then he says no more in effect but this. A man
is free to do if he will, that which is impossible for him to do. By his
doctrine all the powers and faculties of a man are as much necessitated and
determinated to one, by the natural influence of extrinsecal causes, as the
will. And therefore upon his own grounds, a man is as free to will as to do.

The points wherein he says we disagree are set down loosely in like manner.
What our Tenets are, the Reader shall know more truly and distinctly, by
comparing our writings together, then by this false dim light which he holds
out unto him.

He is pleased, if not ironically, yet certainly more for his own glory, than
out of any respect to me, to name me a learned Schoole-Divine, An honor which
I vouchsafe not to my self. My life has been too practical, to attend so much
to those speculative Studies. It may be the Schoolmen have started many
superfluous questions, and some of dangerous conse quence; But yet I say the
weightier Ecclesiastical controversies will never be understood and stated
distinctly, without the help of their necessary distinctions.

Reader, I shall not in this rejoinder abuse thy patience with the needless
repetition of those things which thou have seen already, nor quest at every
lark which he springs; but wheresoever he has put any new weight into the
scale, either in his answers or objections, I shall not omit it in due place.

AN ANSWER TO HIS RELATION Of the Occasion of the Controversy.
HEre is nothing of moment to advantage his cause. Another man would say, Here
is nothing alleged by him which is true. Whereas he says, That the question
disputed among the old Philosophers was, Whether all things that 1. Eleven
gross mistakes in a few lines.
come to pass, proceed from necessity, or some from chance? It was as well
debated among the old Philosophers, Whether all things come to pass by chance,
and nothing proceed from necessity? And likewise, Whether some events proceed
from necessity, and some come to pass by chance? as that which he mentions,
Whether all events proceed from necessity, or some come to pass by chance?
That is the first error.

His second error is, That he opposes chance to necessity, as if all things
came to 2.
pass by necessity, which come not to pass by chance: whereas those ancient
Philosophers, (of whom he speaks) did oppose contigency to necessity, and not
chance alone. Chance is but one branch of contingency. Free acts are done
contingently, but not by chance.

Thirdly, He is mistaken in this also, that he says, Those ancient
Philosophers did never 3.
draw into argument, the allmighty power of the Deity. For we find in Tully,
and in Chrysippus, (as he is alleged by Eusebius) That one De praepar. Evang.
l. 4. c. 11.
of the main grounds of the Stoics was the prescience of God; and that the
predictions of their Oracles and Prophets could not be certain, unless all
things came to pass by inevitable necessity.

Fourthly, he erreth in this, That liberty is a third way of bringing things to
pass, distinct 4.
from necessity and contingency: For liberty is subordinate to contingency.
They defined contingents to be those things, which might either come to pass,
or not come to pass, that is, either freely, or casually: and in all their
questions of contingency, liberty was principally understood.

His fifth error is, That free will is a thing that was never mentioned among
them. I believe 5.
it was never mentioned by them in English, by the name of free will; but he
may find (...) and (...). Let him read Aristotle alone, and he shall find not
only this free elective power of the will, but also the difference between
voluntary or spontaneous Ethic. l. 3. c. 3. 4, 5.
(which is all the liberty he admits) and free, or that which is elected
upon deliberation. Here Calvine, Semper apud Latinos liberi arbitrii nomen
extitit, Graecos vero non puduit arrogantius usurpare vocabulum, seiquidem,
(...), dixerunt, 2 Instit. cap. 2. Sect. 4.

Sixthly, he erreth yet more grossly, in saying, 6.
That free will was never mentioned by Christians in the beginning of
Christianity, but, for some ages brought in by the Doctors of the Roman Curch.
Whereas it is undeniably true, That sundry ancient fathers have written whole
Treatises expressly of free will, that there is scarcely one father that does
not mention it; and sundry of the first Heretics, as Simon Magus, the
Manichees, the Marcionites, etc. and their followers, have been condemned for
maintaining absolute necessity against free will.

His seventh error is, That St. Paul never 7.
uses the term of free will, nor did hold any doctrine equivalent to it. Hear
himself, Am I not 1 Cor. 9. 1, 5, 6.
an Apostle? Am I not free? Have we not power to lead about a sister, a wife,
as well as the othor Apostles? Or I only and Barnabas, have not we power to
forbear working? St. Paul did those things freely upon his own election, which
he was not necessitated to do; and did forbear those things freely, which he
was not necessitated to forbear. This doctrine is equivalent to ours of the
freedom of the will from necessitation. Take another place, wherein you have
both the name and the thing; Nevertheless, he that stands steadfast in his
heart, having no 1 Cor. 7. 3.
necessity, bu^ has power over his own will. The words in the original are a
plain description of the old (...), (which name Calvin did so much dislike) or
free will, (...). Here is not only freedom, but power and dominion. Mr. Hobbes
teaches us, That a man is free to do, but not free to will. St. Paul teaches
us, That a man has power over his own will: If he have power over his own
will, then he is free to will, then his will is not extrinsecally predetermined.

Eighthly, he wrongs the Doctors of the Roman Church, as if they exemted the
will 8.
of man from the dominion of Gods will. They maintain, That the freedom of the
will of man is expressly from the will of God, who made it free. They reach
that God can suspend the act of the will, can determine the will, can change
the will, does dispose of all the acts of the will, can do any thing but
compel the will, which implies a contradiction.

Ninthly, (to let us see what a profound 9,
Clerk he is in Ecclesiastical controversies) Mr. Hobbes thinks he has hit
the nail on the head, of the difference between the Church of Rome and us,
concerning free will, in this disputation, Just as the blind Senator in Juvenal
made a large encomium of the goodly Turbot which lay before Caesar, but (as ill
luck would have it) turned himself the quite contrary way: At illi dextr^
jacebat Bellua. The controversy lies on the other side, not about the freedom
of the will in natural or civil actions, which is our question, but (if it be
not a logomachy) about the power of free will, in moral and supernatural
actions, without the assistance of grace.

In the tenth place, he misinforms his Readers, 10.
That this opinion (of freedom from necessitation and determination to one,)
was cast out by the reformed Churches, instructed by Luther, Calvine, and
others. Where have the reformed Churches, or any of them in their public
confessions cast out this freedom from necessitation, whereof we write? Indeed
Luther was once against it, and so was Melancthon, but they grew wiser, and
retracted whatsoever they had written against it. And Visitat. Saxon. Loc. com.
edit. poster.
so would Mr. Hobbes do likewise, if he were well advised: Either he did know
of Luthers retraction; and then it was not ingenously done to conceal it, or
(which I rather believe) he did not know of it, and then he is but meanly
versed in the doctrine and affairs of the Protestants.

Lastly, he accuses Arminius to have been 11
a restorer or reducer of the Romish doctrine of free will, by a postliminium.
I do not think that ever he read one word of Arminius in his life, or knows
distinctly one opinion that Arminius held. It was such deep Controvertists as
himself, that accused the Church of England of^ Arminianisme, for holding those
truths, which they ever professed before Arminius was born. If Arminius were
alive, Mr. Hobbes out of conscience, ought to ask him forgiveness. Let him
speak for himself, De libero hominis arbitrio ita sentio, etc, In statu vero
lapsus, etc, This is my sentence of free will, That man fallen, can neither
think, nor will, nor do that which is truly good, of himself, and Declar.
Sententiae. Arminii ad Ord. Hollandiae.
from himself, But that it is needful, that he be regenerated, and renewed in
his understanding, will, affections, and all his powers, from God, in Christ,
by the Holy Ghost, to understand, esteem, consider, will, and do aright that
which is truly good. It was not the speculative doctrine of Arminius, but the
seditious tenets of Mr. Hobbes, and such like, which opened a large window to
our troubles.

How is it possible to pack up more errors together in so narrow a compass?
If I were worthy to advise Mr. Hobbes, he should never have more to do with
these old Philosophe^ (except it were to weed them for some obs^lete opinions:
Chrysippus used to say, He sometimes wanted opinions, but never wanted
arguments) but to stand upon his own bottom, and make himself both Party,
Jurer, and Judge in his own cause.

Concerning the stating of the question.
THe righ stating of the question, is commonly the mid way to the determination
of the difference, and he himself confesses, that I have done that more than
once, saving that he thinks, I have done it over cautiously, with as much
caution as I would draw up a lease. Abundant caution was never thought hurtful
until now: Does not the truth require as much regard as a lease? On the other
side, I accuse him to have stated it too carelessely, loosly, and confusedly.
He says, He understands not these words, [the contversion of a The conversion
of a sinner concerns not this question.
sinner concerns not the question] I do really believe him: But in concluding,
That whatsoever he does not understand, is unintelligible; he does but abuse
himself and his readers. Let him study better what is the different power of
the will, in natural or civil actions, which is the subject of our discourse,
and moral or supernatural acts, which concerns not this question; and the
necessity of adding these words, will clearly appear to him.

Such another pitiful piece is his other exception, A wilful cavil.
against these words, [without their own concurrence] which he says are
unsignificant, unless I mean that the events themselves, should concur to
their own production: Either these words were unsignificant, or he was blind,
or worse than blind, when he transcribed them. My words were these, [Whether
all Agents, and all Events be predetermined:] He fraudulently Number. 3.
leaves out these words, [all Agents,] and makes me to state the question thus,
Whether all Events be predetermined without their own concurrence. Whereas
those words, without their own concurrence, had no reference at all to all
Events, but to all Agents; which words he has omitted.

The state of the question being agreed upon, it were vanity, and mere beating
of the air in me, to weary my self and the reader, with the serious examination
of all his extravagant and impertinent fancies: As this, Whether there be a
moral efficacy which is not natural? which is so far from being the question
Difference between natural and moral efficacy.
between us, that no man makes any question of it, except one, who has got a
blow upon his head with a mill-saile. Natural causes produce their effects by
a true real influence, which implies an absolute determination to one: as a
father begets a son, or fire produces fire. Moral causes have no natural
influence into the effect, but move or induce some other cause without
themselves to produce it: As when a Preacher persuades his hearers to give
alms; here is no absolute necessitation of his hearers, nor any thing that is
opposite to true liberty.

Such another question is that which follows, Whether the object of the sight
be the cause of seeing? meaning, (if he mean aright,) the subjective cause. Or,
how the understanding does propose the object to the will? which though it be
blind, as Philosophers agree, yet not so blind as he, that will not see, but is
ready to follow the good advice of the intellect. I may not desert that which
is generally approved, to satisfy the fantastic humor of a single conceited
person. No man would take exceptions at these phrases, the will wills, the
understanding understands, the former term expressing the faculty, the later,
the elicite act, but one who is resolved to pick quarrels with the whole World.

To permit a thing willingly to be done by another, that is evil, not for the
evils sake which Not to will is a means of abnegation between willing and
niling.
is permitted, but for that goods sake which is to be drawn out of it, is not
to will it positively, nor to determine it to evil by a natural influence;
which whosoever do maintain, do undeniably make God the author of sin.
Between positive willing, and nilling, there is a mean of abnegation, that is
not to will.

That the will does determine it self, is a truth not to be doubted of; what
different degrees of aid or assistance the will does stand in need of in
different Acts, natural, moral, supernatural; where a general assistance is
sufficent, and where a special assistance is necessary; is altogether
impertinent to this present controversy, or to the right stating of this
question.

In the last place, he repeateth his old distinction, between a man's freedom to
do those His distinction between free to will, and free to do, confuted.
things which are in his power, if he will; and the freedom to will what he
will, which he illustrateth (for similitudes prove nothing) by a comparison
drawn from the natural appetite, to the rational appetite. Will is appetite,
but it is one question Whether he be free to eat that has an appetite; And
another question whether he be free to have an appetite. In the former, he
says, He agrees with me, That a man is free to do what he will. In the later
he says, He dissents from me, That a man is not free to will, And (as if he
had uttered some profound mystery) he adds in a triumphing manner, That, if I
have not been able to distinguish between th^se two questions, I have not done
well to meddle with either. And if I have understood them, to bring arguments
to prove that a man is free to do if he will, is to deal uningenuously and
fraudulently with my readers.

Yet let us have good words. Homini homino quid praestat? What difference is
there between man and man? That so many wits before Mr. Hobbes in all Ages
should beat their brains about this question, all their lives long, and never
meet with this distinction, which strikes the question dead. What should hinder
him from crying out (...). I have found it, I have found it. But stay a little,
the second thoughts are wiser, and the more I look upon this distinction, the
less I like it. It seems like the logge in the fable, which terrified the
poor Frogs with the noise it made at the first falling of it into the water,
but afterward they insulted over it, and took their turns to leap upon it.
Some take it to be pure nonsense; Whether a man be free in such things as be
within his power: That is, whether he be free wherein he is free, or that be
within his power, which is in his power.

I have formerly showed, and shall demonmonstrate further as there is occasion,
that this distinction is contradictory and destructive to his own grounds,
according to which all the other powers and faculties of a man are determined
to one, by an extrinsecal flux of natural causes, equally with the will. And
therefore a man is no more necessitated to will, or choose what he will do, than
to do what he wills. Secondly, I have showed, that this distinction is vain and
unuseful, and does not hold off, so much as one blow from Mr. Hob^es and his
bleeding cause. All those gross absurdities which do necessarily follow the
inevitable determinations of all actions and events by extrinsecal causes, do
fall much more heavily and insupportably upon the extrinsecal determination of
the will. So he sticks deeper, by means of this distinction in the same mire.
All the ground of justice that he can find in punishments, is this; That though
men's actions be necessary, yet they do them willingly. Now if the will be
irresistibly determined to all its individial acts, then there is no more
justice to punish a man for willing necessarily, than for doing necessarily.
Thirdly, I have showed already in part, that this distinction is contrary to
the sense of the whole World, who take the will to be much more free than the
performance: Which may be thus enlarged.

Though a man were thrust into the deepest dungeon in Europe, yet in despite of
all the second causes, he may will his own liberty. Let the causes heap a
conglomeration of diseases upon a man, more than Herod had, yet he may will his
own health, Though a man be withheld from his friend by Seas and Mountains, yet
he may will his presence. He that has not so much as a cracked groat toward
the payment of his debts, may yet will the satisfaction of his Creditors. And
though some of these may seem but pendulous wishes of impossibilities, and not
so compatibile with a serious deliberation, yet they do plainly show the
freedom of the will. In great things (said the Poet) it is sufficient to have
willed, that is, to have done what is in our power. So we say, God accepts
the will, that which we can, for the deed, that which we cannot. If there be
first a willing mind, it is accepted according to that a man has, that is to
will, And not according 2 Cor. 8. 12.
to that he has not, that is to perform. And yet more plainly: To will is
present with me, but Romans 7. 18.
how to perform that which is good, that find I not. Yet says T. H. A man is
free to do what he wills, but not to will what he will do.

To come yet a little nearer to T. H. For since he refuses all humane
authority, I must stick to Scripture. It is called a man's own will, and his own
voluntary will. If it be determined Levit. 1. 3. and 19. 5.
irresistibly by outward causes, it is rather their own will, than his own
will. Nay to let him see that the very name of free will it self is not such a
stranger in Scripture as he imagines, it is called, a man's own free will. How
often do we read in the books of Moses, Ezra, and the Psalms, of free will
offerings? Ezra. 7. 13.
This free will is opposed not only to compulsion, but also to necessity, not
of necessity but willingly. And is inconsistent with all extrinsecal Philem. 14.
determination to one, with which election of this or that indifferently is
incompatible. Is not the whole land before thee (said Abraham to Lot?) If thou will take the left hand, Genesis 13. (...).
then I will go to the right; or if thou depart to the right hand, then I will
go to the left. God said to David, I offer thee three things, choose one of
them. And to Solomon, Because thou have asked this thing, and have not asked
long life, or riches. And Herod to his daughter, Ask of me whatsoever thou will. And Pilate to the Jews, Whether of the twain will ye that I release unto
you? And St. Paul unto the Corinthians, What will ye? shall I come unto you
with a rod, or in love? Both were in their choice. Yet T. H. does tell us, That
all these were free to do this or that indifferently if they would, but not
free to will. To choose and to elect, is, of all others, the most proper Act of
the will. But all these were free to choose and elect this or that
indifferently, or else all this were mere mockery: And therefore they were free
to will.

The Scripture koweth no extrinsecal determiners of the will, but i^self. So it
is said of Eli's sons, Give flesh to roast for the Priest, for he will not have
sodden flesh of thee, but raw. And 1 Samuel 2. 15.
if thou will not give it, I will take it by force. Sic volo, sic jubeo, stat
pro ratione voluntas. Here was more will than necessity. So it is said of the
rich man in the Gospel. What shall I do? This I will do, I will pull down my
barnes and build greater, and there will I bestow all my fruits and Luke 12. 17.
my goods. And I will say to my soul, take thine ease, eat, drink, and be
merry. Both his purse and person, were under the command of his w^ll. So St.
James says, Go to now, ye that say to day, or tomorrow we will go into such a
City, Jam. 4. 13.
and continue there a year, and buy and sell, and get gain: whereas ye know not
what shall be to morrow, etc. for that ye ought to say, if the Lord will we
shall live, and do this, or that. The defect was not in their will to resolve,
but in their power to perform. So T. H. his necessity was their liberty, and
their liberty was his necessity.

Lastly, the Scriptures teach us, that it is in the power of a man to choose his
own will for the future; All that thou command us we will do. And
whithersoever thou sendest us we will go. Josh. 1. 16.
As we hearkened unto Moses in all things, so will we hearken unto thee. So
says St. Paul, What I do, that I will do. And in another place, I do rejoice,
2 Cor. 11. 12.
and I will rejoice. And they that will be rich. When Christ inquired of his
Disciples, Will ye also go away? According to T. H. his principles he should
have said, Must ye also go away?

We have viewed his distinction, but we have not answered his comparison. Will
is an appetite; And it is one question whether he be free to eat, that has an
appetite? And another, Whether he be free to have an appetite? Comparisons are
but a poor kind of reasoning at the best, which may illustrate something, but
prove nothing. And of all comparisons this is one of the worst, which is drawn
from the sensual appetite, to the rational appetite. The The sensual and
rational appetite very different.
rational appetite and the sensual appetite, are even as like one to another,
as an apple and an oyster. The one is a natural Agent, the other is a free
Agent; The one acts necessarily, the other acts contingently, (I take the word
largly.) The one is determined to one, the other is not determined to one: The
one has under God a Dominion over it self, and its own acts; The other has no
Dominion over it self, or its own acts. Even the will it self, when it acts
after a natural manner, (which is but rarely, in some extraordinary cases, as
in the appetite of the chiefest good being fully revealed, or in a panical
terror, which admits no deliberation,) acts not freely, but necessarily.
How much more must Agents merely Natural, which have neither reason to
deliberate, nor dominion or liberty to elect, act necessarily and
determinately? So to answer a comparison, with a comparison, his Argument is
just such another as this; The Gally-slave which is chained to the oar, is a
man, as well as the Pilot that sits at the stern, therefore the Gally-slave
has as much dominion in the ship as the Pilot, and is as free to turn it
hither and thither. So falls this dreadful engine all in pieces, which should
have battered down the Fort of Liberty.

His gentle reprehension, That if I have not been able to distinguish between
these two questions, I have not done well to meddle with either. And if I have
understood them, I have dealt uningenuously and frandulently, would better
become me, who defend liberty, than him who supposes an irresistible necessity
of all events. If he think I have not done well, yet according to his own
grounds, he may rather blame the causes that do necessitate me, than blame me,
who am irresistibly necessitated to do what I do. Fraud and deceit have no
place in necessary Agents, who can do no otherwise then they do. He might as
well accuse the Sea to have dealt fraudulently with him, because he mistook the
tide, and could not pass over the Foard at an high water, as he purposed. Such
is the power of truth, that it comes to light many times when it is not sought
for. He does see in part already that I understand the vanity of his
distinction: and shall see it better yet before this Treatise be ended. Yet if
I would be so courteous as to forgive him all this, his distinction would not
prejudice me. The places of Scripture alleged by me in my former defense, do
not only prove that a man is free to do if he will; but much more, that a man
is free to choose and to elect, that is as much to say, as to will, and
determine it self.

An answer to his Fountains of Arguments in this Question.
IT is a certain rule, Contraries being placed one besides another, do appear
much more clearly. He who desires to satisfy his judgment in this
controversy, must compare our writings one with another without partiality,
the Arguments, and Answers, and pretended absurdities on both sides. But T. H.
seeks to ingratiate himself and his cause before hand; and, if it be
possible, to anticipate and preoccupate the judgments of his readers, with a
Flourish or Preludium, under the specious Mr. Hobbs his Flourish.
name of Fountains of Arguments. So before a serious war, Cities use to
personate their adverse party, and feign mock-combats and skirmishes, to
encourage their friends; wherein (you may be sure) their own side shall
conquer. As Players make their little puppets prate and act what they please,
and stand or fall as they lend them motion: which brings to my mind, the Lions
answer in the Fable, when the picture of a man beating a Lion was produced to
him; If a Lion had made this picture, he would have made the Lio^ above, and
the man beneath. It is a sufficient answer to this prologue, That Mr. Hobbes
(that is an adversary) made it. Nihil est, quin male narrando possit,
depravarier.



What had he to do to urge arguments for me? or to give solutions for me? or to
pres^ the inconveniences and absurdities which flow from fatal destiny on my
behalf? I ga^ him no commission. I need none of his help* yet by this
personated conflict, he hoped to have stolen an easy victory, without either
blood or sweat.

I will not tire out my self and the reader, with the superfluous repetition
of those things which we shall meet with again much more opportunely in their
proper places. Some Authors are like those people, who measuring all others by
themselves, believe nothing is well understood, until it be repeated over and
over again. Qui nihil alios credunt intelligere, nisi idem dictum est centies.



But whatsoever is new in this Preface, if it have but any one grain of weight,
I will not fail to examine and answer it, either here or there.

And first, I cannot choose but wonder at his His presumption.
confidence, that a single person who never took degree in schools, that I
have heard of, (except it were by chance in Malmesbury) should so much slight,
not only all the scholars of this present Age; but all the Fathers,
Schoolmen, and old Philosophers, which I dare say he has not studied much,
and forget himself so far, as to deny all their authorities at once; if they
give not him satisfaction, to make his private and crasy judgment to be the
standard and seal of truth, and himself an universal Dictatour among Scholars,
to plant and to pull up, to reform and new modulate; or rather turn upside
down, Theology, Philosophy, Morality, and all other Arts and Sciences, which he
is pleased to favor so much, as not to eradicate them, or pluck them up root
and branch, as if he was one of Aesops fellows, who could do all things, and
say all things. He is not the first man in the World, who has lost himself by
grasping and engrossing too much. As the Athenians used to say of Metiochus.
Metiochus is Captain, Metiochus is Surveier, Metiochus bakes the bread,
Metiochus grinds the Plutar^h.
Corn, Metiochus does all; an evil year to Metiochus. He mentions the
Scriptures indeed, but his meaning is to be the sole Interpreter of them
himself, without any respect to the perpetual and universal tradition of the
Catholic Church, or the sense of all ancient Expositors. Well, for once, I
will forbear all the advantage which I have from the authority of Counsels,
Fathers, Schoolmen, and Philosophers, and meet him singly at his own weapon,
yet with this protestation, that if he value his own single judgment above all
theirs, he comes within the compass of Solomon's censure, See thou a man wise
in his own eyes? there is more hope of a fool than of him.

He tells us, That the Attributes of God The attributes of God argumentative.
are oblations given only for honor, but no sufficient premises to infer
truth, or convin^ falshhood. Let them be Oblations, or Sacrifices of praise if
he will; but are they not likewise truths? Has not God given the same
attributes to himself every where in holy Scripture? Does God stand in need of
a lie, to uphold his honor? It is true, they are not perfectly conceivable by
mortal man. The goodness, and justice, and mercy, and truth of God, are
transcendent above the goodness, and justice, and mercy, and truth of men, and
of a quite different nature from them: As St, Austine said, God is good without
quality, great without quantity, a Creator without indigence, every where
without place, eternal without time. But yet we do understand these attributes
so far, as to remove from God all contrary imperfections. He that is good, or
goodness it self, can not be the author of evil. He that is true or truth it
self, cannot lie or dissemble. He that is merciful or mercy it self, cannot be
guilty of tyranny or cruel. He that is just or justice it self, cannot do
unjust actions. And thus far the attributes of God are argumentative, That be
far from thee, to slay the righteous with the Genesis 18 25
wicked, Shall not the Judge of all the earth do right?

I come now to his Texts of Scripture, and His texts of Scripture cited
impertinently.
first to those which he says do make for him: To which I answer, first in
general, That there is not one of them all pertinent to the present question,
they concern not true liberty from extrinsecall necessity, but the power of
free will in moral and supernatural acts, wherein we acknowledge, That the
will of man has not power to determine it self aright, without the assistance
of Grace: His arguments tend rather to prove that God is the author of sin, or
that he saves men without their own endeavors, than to disprove true liberty.

Secondly, I answer, That though his allegations were pertinent, yet they come
all short of his conclusion: He should prove that all acts of free Agents are
necessitated antecedently, and extrinsecally: and he endeavors only to
prove that some particular acts of some particular persons were not free from
necessity. Which Thesis we do not simply disapprove, though we dislike his
instances. God may and does sometimes extraordinarily determine the will of man
to one; but when it is so determined, the act may be voluntary, not free: So he
concludes not contradictorily.

Concerning his places in particular. To his first place, Genesis 45. 5. I answer,
That All his arguments out of Scripture answered.
we ought to distinguish between the action of Joseph's brethren which was
evil, and the passion of Joseph which was good. God willed and predefined the
suffering of Joseph, and disposed them to his own glory, and the good of his
Church. God sent Joseph before, how? dispositively, to preserve life. But he
willed not, nor predefined the action of his brethren, otherwise than
permissively, or at the most occasionally, by doing good, which they made an
occasion of doing evil, or in respect of the order of their evil act. The
very same answer serves to Acts 2. 23. and Acts 4. 27, 28.

To his instances of Gods hardening the heart, Exodus 7. 3. and Deuteronomy. 2. 30. and
to Romans 9. 16. he has had a large answer in my former defense.

To Shimei's cursing David, 2 Samuel 16. 10. Number. 12.
I answer three ways, first, That God is often said to do, or will those
things, which he does only will to permit, and dispose. All that was acted
against Job, is ascribed to God, The Lord has taken away: yet it is as clear
as Job. 1. 12.
the noonday sun, That Gods concurrence in the determination of Jobs
sufferings, in respect of Satan, was only permssive. Secondly, God was the
cause of Schimeis cursing David occasionally, by afflicting David for his sins,
which exposed him to Shimeis curses. So we say, occasion makes a thief, and
gifts blind the eyes of the wise. Thirdly, God was the cause of Shimeis cursing
David, not as the author of that evil, but as the author of the order in
evil, that is by restreining Shimeis malice from breaking out at other times,
and in another manner, and letting him loose to vent his vindictive thoughts at
that time, in that manner. So he who shuts all the doors and windows in a
Chamber, and leaves only one open, is in some sort, the cause why a desperate
person throws himself down headlong from that window, rather than from another.
In the same sense, the cause of Rehoboams obstinacy is said to be from the
Lord, 1 Kings 12. 15. God is not obliged to confer prudence and other favors
upon undeserving persons. So likewise God is said to lay a stumbling block
before a wicked person, Ezekiel. 3. 20. and therefore this note thence, That the
sins of the wicked are not the cause of their punishment, is a mere collusion.
The order in evil is Gods, the sins are their own, what he objecteth out of
Job 12. 14. etc. and likewise out of Isaiah 10. 6. concerning the King of
Assyria, deserves no answer, God may freely and justly withdraw his protection
and his other graces and favors from his creatures, and leave them to be
afflicted for their offenses by evil Agents and Instruments, and dispose the
sins of others to be their punishments, without necessitating them to acts
morally evil. Job is as far from disputing our question in that place, as
these places by him alleged are from making God the author of evil by a
physical determination.

The Prophet Jeremy says, Jer. 10, 23. O Lord, I know that the way of man is
not in himself, it is not in man that walks to direct his steps. Most true,
man is not secured from danger by his own wisdom and care, but by Gods
providence and protection, nor preserved from all sin and utter destruction by
the power of his own free will, but by the special grace of God, which does
freely prevent us, pursue us, excite us, assist us, operate in us, cooperate
with us, by permanent habits, by transient motions, sufficiently, effectually,
according to his good pleasure, whose grace is the only fountain of salvation.
If we fancied an all-sufficient or independent power to our selves, this text
were to the purpose; now it signifies nothing.

Our Savior says, John 6. 44. No man can come unto me except the father which
has sent me draw him. Scis tu simulare cupressum, quid hoc? He knows how to
paint a Cypress tree, but what is that to the question of liberty and
necessity? The coming unto Christ is a ^upernaturall action, and requires the
preventing or preparing grace of God, which is called his fathers drawing. But
this drawing is not such a physical determination of the will, as to destroy
liberty in the very act of conversion, but an inward calling in an opportune
time, a persuading of the heart, an inlightning of the mind, an inspiring of
the ^eed of good desires, yet withal, leaving to ^he will its natural freedom
to elect, and will actually, and to consent to the calling of God, that is to
determine it self by the power of grace.

To 1 Cor. 4. 7. I answer, whether we understand the text of saving grace, or
of graces freely given, both ways it is the grace of God that makes the
discrimination. But all the debate is of the manner how it is made, whether
morally by persuasion, or physically by determination of the will to one, and
destroying the liberty of it: Of which this text is silent.

The next place, 1 Cor. 12. 6. is understood of those miraculous graces freely
given, such as the gift of tongues, of healing, of prophesying, etc. and if it
were understood of saving grace, yet it did not at all exclude our cooperation.
The same Apostle who teaches us, that it is God who works in us both to will
and to do of his good pleasure, in the same place exhorts us to work out our
own salvation with fear Phil. 2. 12. 13.
and trembling. God works in us both the will and the deed, not by physical
determination of the will, not by destroying the nature of his Creature, but
sweetly, morally, by illumination, persuasion and inspiration.

We are said to be the workmanship of God created in Christ Jesus unto good
works, 2 Ephesians. 10. because without Christ we can do nothing. No man can have the
actual will to believe and to be converted, but by the preventing grace of
God. Our indeavous are in vain, except he help them, and none at all except he
excite them. Gods calling and illumination, and inspiration is not in our
power; and we are brought by his grace, as it were for nothing, to a new being
in Christ; in which respect a regenerated Christian is called a new Creature.
Metaphors do not hold in all things: when David prayed, Create in me a new
heart, O Lord, his meaning was not that his heart should be annihilated, and a
new substance crated, but to have his heart purged and cleansed.

The main body of his forces is dispersed, yet his reserve remains untouched;
Even all the places, that make God the Giver of all graces, and wherein men are
said to be dead in sin, for by all these (says he) it is manifest, That
although a man may live holily if he will, yet to will is the work of God, and
not eligible by man. Let him reduce his argument into what form he will, there
is more in the conclusion, than in the premises; namely, these words, and not
illigible by man. Who ever argued from the position of the principal cause, to
the removal of all second Agents and means? It is most true, That all grace is
from God, but it is most false, that God has not given man a will to receive
it freely. This is plain boys play, to jump over the backs of all second
causes. As all grace is from God, so the elective power to assent to the
motions of grace is from God likewise. To show him the weakness of his
consequence, he argues thus, All light is from the sun, therefore, though a
man may see if he will open his eyes, yet to open his eyes is the work of God,
and not eligible by man.

It is usual i^ Scripture, to call an habitual How sinners are said to be
dead.
sinner a dead man, but it is a weak argument which is drawn from a metaphor,
beyond the scope of him that uses it, And if it be insisted upon too much,
involves men in palpable contradictions, as not to step aside from the same
metaphor, This thy brother was dead, Luke. 15. 32.
and is alive again, and was lost, and is found. If he was but lost, then he
was not absolutely dead: If he was absolutely dead, then he was more than lost.
So in another place, Awak^ Ephesians. 5. 14.
thou that sleep, and arise from the dead. To sleep and to be dead are
inconsistent: but sleep is an image of death. So is idleness, Hic situs est
Vaccia, Here lies Vaccia, was written upon an idle persons door. So is old
age, He considered not his own body now dead, nor the Romans 4. 19.
deadness of Sarahs womb. So is habitual sin, And you has he quickened, who
were dead in Ephesians. 2. 1.
trespasses and sins. In some, wheresover there is no appearance of life, (as
in the trees in winter) there is an image of death.

To leave Metaphors, this death in sin is not a natural, but a spiritual
death, and therefore no utter extinction of the natural powers and faculties
of a man. Such are the understanding and the will, which though they were much
weakened by the fall of Adam, yet they were not, they are not utterly extinct,
either by original or actual sin, but being excited, and, as it were, enlived
by preventing grace, they may and do become subservien^ to grace; the
understanding being illuminated by those rays of heavenly light, and the will
enabled to consent as freely to the motions of grace, in supernatural acts, as
it did formerly to the dictates of reason in natural and civil acts. So every
way T. H. is gone. First, the will is able and free without preventing grace,
to determine it self in natural and civil acts, which is enough to prove my
intention, against the universal necessity of all Events. Secondly, the will
being excited and assisted by grace, has power to put in practice its natural
freedom in suprernatural acts: as to consent to the motions of grace, and to
reject the suggestions of the flesh and the devil, without any physical
determination of it self without it self. Even as the dead body of Abraham, and
the dead womb of Sarah, being, as it were; new quickened by God, did truly
beget Isaac; so even in the act of conversion it self, the will is free from
physical determination.

That Physical determation of all causes and events whatsoever to one, by an
outward Man is more free to will than to do.
flux of natural causes, which T. H. maintains, does as much necessitate all
the actions of free Agents as their wills, or more; because volition is an
inward immediate act of the will, but all other acts of a free Agent are
external and mediate acts of the will, over which the will has not so
absolute a dominion as over the volition: whence it follows irrefragably,
That if there be no freedom to will, much less is there a freedom to do. He
says a man may live holily if he will, but to will is the work of God, and not
eligible by man. Can a man then live holily without the grace of God? Or is not
an holy life the work of God as much as a sanctified will. If he can not show
this, let him never mention this vain destinction any more, of freedom to do,
without freedom to will. May not a man be so bold to put him himself in mind of
that Iargon, which he objected to the Schoolmen? unless perhaps he thinks
nonsense is more intelligible in English than in Latin.

Hitherto I have traced T. H. his steps, though he be wandered quite out of the
lists, or rather, in plain terms, fled away from his cause, to take sanctuary
under the sacred name of Gods grace, which will afford no shelter for his
error. Our question was not about the concurrence of grace and free will in
the conversion of a sinner, but merely about the liberty or necessity of all
natural and civil events: when he has acquitted himself like a man in the
former cause, then he is free to undertake the second.

The next collection is of such places of Scripture as say there is election,
of which T. His second sort of texts do confute him unanswerably.
H. is pleased to affirm, That they make equally for him and me. I do not blame
him if he desire that all places which maintain Election, and that all natural
and civil events, should quite be sequestered from this controversy. For it is
not possible to reconcile these places with fatal necessity. All choice or
election is of more than one, but there can be no choice of more than one,
where there is an extrinsecal determination of all particular events with all
their circumstances, inevitably, irresistibly to one, by a flux of natural
causes. So they leave no manner of Election at all, no more freedom to choose a
man's actions, than to choose his will. But all these places, and many more,
prove expressly, that a man is free, not only to do it if he will, but to
will: The reason is evident, because to choose is to will, the proper, elicite,
immediate act of the will, and to choose one thing before another, is nothing
else, but to will one thing before another. But all these places say, that a
man is free to choose; that is, to will one thing before another. Choose life,
says one place, Choose whom ye will serve, says a second place; Choose Defense,
Nu. 6. 7, 8, 9.
one of three, says a third place: and so of the rest. But I have pressed
these places formerly, and shall do further, if there be occasion.

His third sort of Texts, are those which seem to make for me against him. But
I am at age to choose and urge mine own arguments for my self, and cannot want
weapons in this cause. Therefore he may forbear such a thanklesse office. He
tells us of a great apparent contradiction, between the first sort of Texts,
and the last; but being both Scripture, T. H. First wounds the Scripture, and
then gives it a plaster.
they may and must be reconciled. This is first to wound the credit of the
Scriptures, and then to give them a plaster. The supposed contradiction is in
his own fancy. Let him take them according to the analogy of faith, in that
sense wherein the Church has ever taken them, and there is no show of
contradiction. The Scripture consists not in the words, but in the sense, not
in the outside but in the marrow.

He demands, Whether the selling of Joseph Gods prescience does not necessitate.
did follow infallibly and inevitably upon the permission of God? I answer, If
we consider Gods permission alone, neither inevitably nor infallibly: If we
consider his permission jointly with his prescience, then infallibly, but not
inevitably. Foreknowledge does no more necessitate events to come to pass,
than after-knowledge. Gods prescience did no more make Judas his treason
inevitable to him, than my remembrance now of what was done yesterday, did make
it inevitable then to him that did it.

He urges further, So the prescience of God might have been frustrated by the
liberty of humane Yet is infallible.
will. I answer nothing less. The natures and essences of all things come to
pass, because they were foreknown by God, whose knowledge was the directive
cause of them. But the acts and operations of free Agents are therefore
foreknown, because they will come to pass. If any thing should come to pass
otherwise, God had foreknown from eternity, that it should have come to pass
otherwise, because his infinite understanding does encompasse all times and all
events in the instant of eternity. And consequently he beholds all things past,
present, and to come, as present. And therefore, leaving those forms of speech,
which are accommodated to us and our capacities: To speak properly there is
neither foreknowledge nor after-knowledge in God, who neither knows one thing
after another, nor one thing by deduction from another.

He asks, Whether the treachery and fratricide of Joseph's brethren were no
sin? I answer, yes; and therefore it was not from God positively, but
permissively, and dispositively; Ye thought evil against me, but God meant it
unto good, to save much people alive. But (he urges,) Joseph said, Be not
grieved, nor angry Genesis 50. 20.
with your selves that ye sold me hither: Ought not a man to be grieved and
angry with himself for sinning? Yes, but penitent sinners such as Joseph's
brethren were, have great cause of joy and comfort, when they understand that
God has disposed their sin to his glory, their own good, and the benefit of
others.

He demands further, Does God barely permit corporal motions, and neither will
them, nor nill them? Or how is God the cause of the motion, and the cause of
the law, yet not of the irregularity? It were a much readier way to tell us at
once directly, That either there is no sin in the World, or that God is the
author of sin, than to be continually beating the bush after this manner. But
I answer, All corporal motion in general, is from God, not only permissively,
but also causally; that is, by a general influence, but not by a special
influence. The specifical determination of this good general power to evil, is
from the free Agent, who thereby does become the cause of the irregularity.
There is no contrariety between motion in general, and the law, but between the
actual and determinate abuse of this good locomitive power, and the law.

He demands, Whether the necessity of hardness of heart be not as easily
derived from Gods Hardness of heart not derived from Gods permission.
permission, that is from his withholding his grace, as from his positive
decree? This question is proposed in a confused blundering manner, without
declaring distinctly, what grace he means. I answer two ways. First we are
to distinguish between a necessity of consequence, or an infallibility, and a
necessity of consequent or a causal necessity: Supposing, but not granting,
that hardness of heart is as in^allibly derived from the one, as from the
other, yet not so causally, nor so culpably in ^espect of God, who is not
obliged in justice ^o give his free grace to his creature, but he is ^bliged by
the rule of his own justice, not to determine his own creature to evil, and
then punish him for the same evil.

Secondly, I answer, that even this supposed necessity of infabillity can no
way be imputed to God, who never forsakes his creature by with holding his
grace from him, until his creature have first forsaken him; who never forsakes
his creature so far, but that he may by prayers, and using good endeavors,
obtain the aid of Gods grace, either to prevent or remove hardness of heart.
When God created man, he made him in such a condition, that he did not need
special exciting grace to the determination of his will to supernatural good.
And to all that are within the pale of his Church he gives sufficient grace to
prevent hardness of heart, if they will. If man have lost his primogenious
power, if he will not make use of those supplies of grace which Gods mercy does
afford him, that is his own fault. But still here is no physical determination
to evil, here is no antecedent extrinsecal determination of any man to
hardness of heart, here is nothing but that which does consist with true
liberty.

Lastly, he says, We make God only to permit evil, and to will good actions
conditionally and consequently, Gods hand in good and evil actions.
if man will them. So we ascribe nothing at all to God, in the causation of any
action, good or bad. He erreth throughout, God is the total cause of all
natures and all essences. In evil actions God is cause of the power to act, of
the order in acting, of the occasion, and of the disposition thereof to good.
In good actions freely done, he is the author and original of liberty, he
enableth by general influence, he concurreth by special assistance and
cooperation to the performance of them, and he disposes of them to good. He
does not will that merely upon condition which himself has prescribed, nor
consequently which he himself has antecedently ordained and instituted.

Now having cleared all his exceptions; it remains next to examine, how he
reconcileth the first and the third sort of Texts. The will of God (says he)
sometimes signifies the word of God, or the commandments of God, that is his
revealed will, or the signs or significations of his will. Sometimes it
signifies an internal act of God, that is, his counsel and decree. By his
revealed will God would have all men to be saved, but by his internal will, he
would not. By his revealed will he would have gathered Jerusalem, not by his
inward will. So when God says, [What could I have done more to my vineyard?]
that is to be understood outwardly, in respect of his revealed will. What
directions, what laws, what threatenings, could have been used more? And when he
says, [It came not into my mind,] the sense is, to command it. This I take to
be the scope and sum of what he says. Thus far he is right, that he
distinguishes between the signifying will of God, and his good pleasure, for
which he is beholding to the Schools: And that he makes the revealed will of
God, to be the rule of all our actions; And that many things happen against the
revealed will of God, but nothing against his good pleasure. But herein he
erreth grossly, that he makes the revealed will of God and his internal will
to be contrary Gods revealed will and his secret will, not contrary.
one to another; as if God did say one thing, and mean another, or command one
thing, and necessitate men to do another, which is the grossest dissimilation
in the World. Odi illos seu claustr^ erebi quicunque loquu^nr
Ore aliud, tacitoque aliud sub pectore condunt.


He says, It is not Christian to think, if God had a purpose to save all men,
that any could be damned, because it were a sign of want of power to ^ffect
what he would. It is true, if God had an absolute purpose to work all men's
salvation irresistibly, against their wills, or without themselves. But God
has no such absolute will to save all men. He loves his creatures well, but his
own justice better: And he that made men without themselves, will not save them
without themselves. He co-operates with all his creatures according to their
distinct natures which he has given them, with necessary Agents necessarily,
with free Agents freely. God has given men liberty to assent to saving truth,
They abuse it. He has proposed a condition under which they may be saved, They
reject it. So he wills their salvation by an antecedent will, and their
damnation by a consequent will: which two wills in God, or within the Divine
Essence, are no way distinct; for they are the same with the Divine Essence.
But they are distinguished only in order to the things willed of God; Neither
is there the least contradiction between them. The one shows us what God would
have us to do, The other is, what God himself will do. The one looks upon man
as he was created by God, or as he should have been or might have been without
his own fault; The other looks upon man as he is with all circumstances. The
one regards only the order of the causes and means designed by God for our
salvation; The other regards also the application or misapplication of these
means by our selves.

In answering to these words, Say not thou it is through the Lord I fell away,
Say not thou, he has caused me to err. He distinguishes between say not, and
think not; as if it were unlawful to say so, but not unlawful to think so.
Curse not thy King (says Solomon) no not in thy thought, much less thy God.
Thought is free from man, but not from God. It is not honorable (says he) to
say so; No more is it to think so.

It is not lawful (says he) to say that any action can be done, which God has
purposed shall not The doctrine of universal necessity takes away all care of
doing well.
be done; that is, in his language, which shall not actually come to pass in
due time. Our Savior was of another mind. Think thou that I cannot now pray
to my father, and he shall presently give me more than twelve Legions of
Angels? He knew some things can be done, which never will be done.

Next he proceeds to touch those inconveniences, which flow from the opinion
of universal necessity, but very gently and sparingly. Arts, and arms, and
books, and consultations, and medicines, etc. are not superfluous, though all
events be necessary, because the means are equally necessitated with the event.
Suppose it were so, so much the worse. This must needs utterly destroy all care
and solicitude of free Agents. He is a madman that will vex and trouble
himself, and take care, and consult, about things that are either absolutely
necessary, or absolutely impossible; as about the rising of the Sun, or about
the draining of the sea with a sieve. Yet such are all events, and all the
means to effect them in his opinion, either as absolutely necessary as the
rising of the Sun, or as absolutely impossible as the draining of the Ocean
with a sieve. What need he take care for a Medicine, or a Physician, who knows
that if he must recover, and if a Medicine or a Physician be a necessary means
for his recovery, the causes will infallibly provide him one, and it may be a
better Medicine, or a better Physician, than he should have used? If a man may
recover or not recover, both means, and care to use means, do well: But if a
man must recover, or not recover; that is, if the end and the means be both
predetermined, the means may be necessary, but all care and solicitude is
altogether vain and superfluous

But he tells the Reader, that this absurdity follows as much from my
opinion, as That which shall be shall be; a poor fallacy.
from his. For as I beli^e that what is, is, and what has been, has been; So
I hold this for a certain truth, that what shall be, shall be. And therefore
the argument holds as strongly against me, as against him; If I shall recover I
need not his unsavory potion; If I shall not recover, it will do me no good.
In all my life I never heard a weaker or sillier Sophisme, urged in earnest, by
a rational man. That which is, is necessary to be, upon supposition that it is:
That which has been, is necessary to have been, upon supposition that it has
been; So that which shall be, shall be necessarily; that is, infallibly upon
supposition that it shall be. And the event cannot be supposed, except it be
supposed that the free Agent shall determine it self in such manner, and except
all necessary means be likewise supposed. Such a necessity upon supposition is
very consistent with true libery, but T. H. his necessity is of another nature,
an antecedent extrinsecal necessitation and determination to one, which is
altogether inconsistent with election, and true liberty. According to my
opinion we say, That which may be, may be; but that which may be, may not be.
According to his opinion we say, That which must be, must be; but that which
must be, cannot be otherwise. According to my opinion, I am free either to walk
abroad, or to stay within doors, whethersoever I do this is true, that which
shall be, shall be, But if I walk abroad, (as I may do) then my stay within
doors shall not be. And on the other side, If I stay within doors, (as I may do
likewise,) then my walking abroad shall not be. The event has yet no
determinate certainty in the causes, for they are not yet determined. The Agent
may determine it self otherwise, the event may come otherwise to pass, even
until the last moment before the production. And when the event is actually
produced, and is without its causes, it has a determinate certainty, not
antecedent, not from extrinsecal determination, not absolute; but merely
hypothetical or upon supposition; the not distinguishing aright of which two
different kinds of necessity, makes the reader and us all this trouble.

It follows, Laws are not superfluous, because by the punishment of one, or a
few unjust men, they Number. 14.
are the cause of justice in a great many. This answer has been taken away
already, and shall be surther refelled if it be surther pressed. But he
willingly declineth the main scope of my argument, which reflected more upon
the unjustice, than upon the superfluity of human laws, if his opinion were
true. Those laws are unjust which punish men for not doing that which was
antecedently impossible for them to do, and for doing that which was impossible
for them to leave undone. But upon supposition of T. H. his opinion of the
absolute necessity of all events, all humane laws do punish men for not doing
that which was antecedently impossible for them to do, and for doing that which
was antecedently impossible for them to leave undone. Here we have confitentem
reum, our adversaries confession within a very few lines. It is true that T. H.
His confession that no man is justly punished, but for crimes he might have
shunned.
seeing the name of punishment has relation to the name of crime, there can be
no punishment but for crimes that might have been left undone. This is the
first ingenuous confession we have had from T. H. I hope we shall have more:
From whence it follows, First, that there neither is, nor can be any crime
deserving punishment in the World, that is to say, no such criminal thing as
sin; for nothing by his doctrine was ever done, that could have been left
undone. Secondly, it follows hence, that no punishment is just, because
nothing can be left undone that is done. And that all men are innocent, and
there is no such thing as a delinquent in the World. How says he then, That
the laws are the cause of justice in many, by punishing one or a few unjust
men? Upon his principles, the Laws and Judges themselves are unjust, to punish
any men. If this be not a contradiction, I have lost my aim.

And if punishments are not just, then neither are ^ewards just. Thus by his
doctrine we have lost the two great pillars or preservatives of all
well-ordered Societies, as Lycurgus called them, the two hinges whereupon the
Commonwealth is turned, Reward, and Punishment. Yet St. Peter does teach us,
That Kings and Governors are sent from God, for the 1 Pet. 2. 14.
punishment of evildoers, and for the praise of them that do well.

The last inconvenience which he mentions, (of those that were urged by me) is
this. God in justice cannot punish a man with eternal torments for doing that
which never was in his power to leave undone. To which admitting (as you have
heard) that there can be no punishment but for crimes that might have been left
undone, he gives two answers: The first is this. Instead of punishment if he
had said affliction, may not I say that God may afflict, No proper punishment
but for sin.
and not for sin? Does he not afflict those creatures that cannot sin? And
sometimes those that can ^n, yet not for sin; as Job, and the blind man in the
Gospel? This is still worser and worser. He told us even now, that nothing
which is dishonorable ought to be attributed to God: And can there be any
thing in the World more dishonorable, than to say, That God does torment poor
innocent creatures in hell fire, without any fault of theirs, without any
relation to sin, merely to show his dominion over them? The Scripture teaches
us clear otherwise, That a man complains for the punishment of his sins. Sin
and punishment are Lam. 3. 39.
knit together with adamantine bonds. He phrases it for the manifestation of
his power. If it were true, it was the greatest manifestation of cruelty and
tyranny that is imaginable.

I confess, that chastisements ioflicted after the sin is forgiven, are not
properly punishments, because they proceed a patre castigant^, non a Iudice
vindicante, from a father correcting, not from a Judge revenging. Yet even
these chastisements are grounded upon sin, The Lord has put away thy sin, thou
shall not die, Howbeit, because by this deed thou have given 2 Samuel 12. 13. 14.
great occasion to the enemies of the Lord to blaspheme, the child that is born
unto thee, shall surely die. But what place have such chastisements as David's
were in hell? Is any man bettered by his sufferings there? What place have
probations and trialls of men's graces (such as Jobs were) in hell, where there
are no graces to be tried. Jobs trial, and David's chastisements, and the poor
man's blindness, were the greatest blessings that ever befell them; For their
light afflictions which were but for a 2 Cor. 4. 17.
moment, did work out unto them a far more excellent and eternal weight of
glory. But the pains of hell are heavy, and endless, and work out nothing but
torment: In a word, these afflictions we now treat of are downright
punishments. So the Holy Ghost styles them, everlasting punishment: he does not
afflict the children of men willingly, except it be for sin, Matthew. 25. 46. Ioh
37. 23. Lam. 3. 33. Psalm. 107. 17.
Fools are afflicted because of their transgression. The afflictions (as he
calls them) of those creatures that cannot sin, that is, brute beasts, are
altogether of another nature. They were created for the use of man, they were
given for the sustenance of men, every moving thing that lives shall be meat
for you, even as Genesis 9. 3.
the green herb, have I given you all things. But the tormenting even of the
brute creatures needlessely for the pleasing of our sensual appetites, or the
satisfaction of our humor, is not only unchristian, but unhumane, A Prove. 12.
10.
righteous man regards the life of his beast, but the tender mercies of the
wicked are cruel. God has made two covenants with man, none with the beasts.

He says, It is no more cruelty to afflict a man with endless torment for
sin, than without sin, when he might without trouble have kept him from
sinning. Is it not great pity, that T. H. was not of God Almighties council,
when he ordered the World? that he might have Why God did not make man
impeccable.
advised him to have made man impeccable, which he might have done without any
trouble, or that otherwise his fall, and consequently his punishment, might be
justly imputed to God himself. It was well enacted in the laws of the twelve
tables, Ad divos adeunto cast, pietatem adhibento, qui secus faxit Deus ipse
vindex erit, our addresses to God ought to be pure and devout, they who do
otherwise, will find God himself the revenger. Does T. H. believe St. Jude,
That God has reserved the Angels, that kept not their first Jude v. 6.
estate, in everlasting chains, under darkness, unto the judgment of the
great day? God could by his absolute power have kept them in their first
estate, yet he would not. By his absolute power, he can do all things which do
not implic imperfection or contradiction: but by his ordinate power he cannot
change his decrees, nor alter whathe has ordained. Acts of grace may be free,
but punishments must be always just. That King who does not pardon a wilful
traitor, is not equally guilty of murder, with him that hangs up an innocent
Subject. Then to answer fully to his question, Why God suffered man to sin,
having power to withhold him? To preserve that order and course which he had
established in the World, and to draw a greater good out of evil, for the
further manifestation of his own glory, First, the manifestation of his power,
as St. Austin says, He that created all things very good, and did foreknow
that evil would arise from good, knew likewise that it appeerteined rather to
his most Almighty goodness, to draw good out of evil, then not to suffer
evil. Secondly, the manifestation of his providence, in suffering man, whom he
had endowed with freedom of will and power, sufficient to resist and overcome
Satan, either to conquer or yield at his own choice. Thirdly, the manifestation
of his justice and mercy, by punishing some out of the corrupted mass justly,
and saving others out of his mere mercy. If T. H. thinks vainly, that the only
manifestation of Gods power, is a sufficient ground for the punishment of men
in hell fire, without their own faults or crimes, how much better may good
Christians conclude, That the greater manifestation of Gods power, and
providence, and justice, and mercy, is a sufficient ground for the punishment
of men with the like torments, for their own crimes.

His second answer is set down by way of interrogation, What infallible
evidence has the Bishop, that a man shall be eternally in torments, and never
die? Even the authority of our Savior and the Holy Scriptures, which call it
an everlasting Matthew. 25. 41, 46. Mar. 9. 44, 45. Jud. v. 6, 7.
fire, an eternal fire, a fire that is not quenched, everlasting punishment,
everlasting chains, the worm that never dies, and the fire that goes not out,
Go ye cursed into everlasting fire, prepared for the devil and his angels. The
Bishop has the testimony of the Athanasian creed, that Punishments of the
damned are eternal.
they who have done good, shall go into life everlasting, and they that have
done evil, into everlasting fire. He has the testimony of the universal
Church of all ages, except a few Originists. If T. H. have no more than his own
single private authority to oppose against all these, he is a bold man. They
who question everlasting torments, will not stick to question everlasting life.
To his demand, about the second death, I answer, This is the second death, if
he could see wood for trees.

In the next place, he urges how that inconveniences Gods prescience proves
infalliblity, not necessity.
follow from our opinion. First, That man's liberty to will, quite takes away
the prescience of God; for if man have it in his power to will or not to will,
it cannot be certainly foreknown what he will will. The second, That Gods
prescience does take away liberty, by making all events necessary from
eternity, for it is impossible that that should not come to pass, or come to
pass otherwise than it was foreknown, which God foreknoweth shall come to
pass; And if it be impossible that it should not come to pass, then it is
necessary that it should come to pass. This is too severe, first, to make us
take prescience quite away, and yet with the same breath, to argue against us
from prescience. But for once, I will give him a clea^ solution to both his
pretended demonstrations, and let him see that there is no necessity, that men
must either turn blocks without liberty, or sacrilegious to rob God of his
prescience. But I give him it upon a condition, That hereafter, before he take
away either prescience or liberty, he will first take away this answer, and not
repeat us the same thing over and over again, to no purpose.

To the first inconvenience I answer, That a thing may be said to be foreknown
two ways; either as it is in its causes, before it be produced, and so I
confess, That if the free Agent have it in his power, to will or not to will,
there is no determinate truth of future contingents, that is, in their causes,
and consequently no prescience or foreknowledge in that respect; or else a
thing may be said to be foreknown, as it is or shall be in it self, in the
nature of things, after it is produced. And thus every particular event, that
shall be until the end of the World is foreknown, or, to speak more properly,
is known to God from all eternity. For in Gods knowledge there is neither
before nor after, past nor to come. Those things which are past or to come to
us, are always present to God, whose infinite understanding (that is himself)
does encompasse all times and events in one instant of eternity, and so does
prevent or anticipate all differences of time. Time is the measure of all our
acts; but Gods knowledge, being infinite, is not measured but by eternity; so
that which is a prescience, or a beforehand knowledge (as he calls it) to
us, is a present intuition with God. And therefore as my present beholding of a
man casting himself down headlong from some precipice, whilst ^e is in the act
of casting himself down, is not ^he cause of his precipitation, nor does any
way neccessitate him to precipitate himself, yet upon supposition, that I do
see him precipitate himself, it is necessarily, that is, infal^ibly true, that
he does precipitate himself, but not necessarily true, by any antecedent and
extrinsecall determination of him to do that act, nor so necessarily true as to
exclude his freedom or liberty in the act. Even so Gods knowledge of future
contingents, being a present intuition or beholding of them, by reason of his
infinite intellect, does not at all determine free Agents, nor necessitate
contingent events, but only infers an infallibility, that is, as we use to
call it, an hypotheticall necessity, or a necessity upon supposition, which
does consist with true liberty.

Much of this is confessed by Mr. Hobbes himself, That the foreknowledge of God
should be the cause of any thing, cannot be truly said, seeing foreknowledge
is knowledge, and knowledge depends on the existence of thing known, and not
they on it.

I desire to know whether God do his own works, ad extra, as the creation and
destruction of the World freely or necessarily? a^ whether he was necessitated
to create the World precisely a such at time, in such a manner? Certainly God
foreknoweth his own works, as much as he foreknoweth the determinate acts of
free Agents. Yet his foreknowledge of his own works, ad extra, does not
necessitate himself. If he say that God himself determines his own acts, ad
extra, so I say does the free Agent also, with this difference, That God is
infinite and independent upon any other, but the free Agent is finite and
dependent upon God, both for his being, and for his acting. Then if Gods
freedom in his own works, ad extra, does not take away his prescience, neither
does the liberty of free Agents take it away.

To his second inconvenience, That it is impossible that that which is for:
known by God should not come to pass, or come to pass otherwise than it is
foreknown, I answer, That Gods foreknowledge is not such an act as T. H.
imagines, that is, an act that is expired, or an act that is done and past;
but it is always in doing, an eternal act: a present act, a present
intuition: and consequently, does no more make the Agent unfree, or the
contrary event impossible, until it be actually produced, than my knowing that
such a man stabbed himself upon such a day, made it then unpossible for him to
have forborne stabbing of himself, or my seeing a man eat in present, made it
unpossible for him before he did eat, to have forborne eating. God is the total
cause of all natures and essences, but he is not the total cause of all their
acts and operations. Neither did he create his Creatures to be idle, but that
they should each of them exercise such acts, as are agreeable to their
respective natures, necessary Agents, necessary Acts, free Agents, free Acts.
And until the free Agent have determined it self, that is, until the last
moment before production, the contrary Act is not made unpossible, and then
only upon supposition. He that precipated himself, until the very moment that
he did precipitate himself, might have withheld himself. And if he had withheld
himself, then I had not seen him precipitate himself, but withhold himself.

His frequent invectives against unsignificant words are but like the
complaints of that old Belldam Harpaste in Seneca, who still cried out against
the darkness of the room, and desired to be brought into another chamber,
little believing that her own blindness was the true cause of it. What Suares
says, As I know neither what, nor where, so neither does it concern either me
or the cause.

His last assault against liberty in his fountains of Arguments is this,
Certainly to will is impossible without thinking on what a man wills, but it
is in no man's election what he shall at any named time hereafter think on. A
man might well conjecture by this very reason that his fountain was very near
drying up. This Argument is levied rather against the memory, or against the
understanding, than against the will, and may serve as well against freedom to
do, as against freedom to will, which is contrary to his principles. It is as
impossible to do without thinking on what a man does, as it is to will without
thinking on what he wills, but it is in no man's election what he shall at any
named time hereafter think on: Therefore a man is not free to choose what he
will do. I know not what this word [to think] signifies with him, but I know
what other Authors make it to signify, to use reason, to understand, to know,
and they define a thought to be the understanding actually employed, or busied
about some object. Has not he spun us a fair thread? He undertaketh to show a
defect in the will, and he alleadeth a defect in the understanding. Is a man
therefore not free to go to his dinner, because perhaps he thinks not on it
just at dinner time? Let the free Agent be free to will or nill, and to choose
which part he will, without necessitation or determination to one, when he does
think on it, and we shall not want true liberty.

An Answer to the Animadversions upon the Epistle to my Lord of Newcastle.
IT was no passion but a sad truth, To call the opinion of fatal destiny
blasphemous, which makes God to be directly the author of sin, which is a
degree worse then Athisme; and desperate, which takes away all care and
solicitude, and thrusts men headlong without fear or wit, upon rocks and
precipices; and destructive, which turns all government divine and humane off
from their hinges: the practical consequences whereof do utterly ruin all
societies. Neither am I guilty (that I know of yet) so much as of one uncivil
word, either against Mr. Hobbes his person or his parts. He is over unequal
and indulgent to himself, who dare assume the boldness to introduce such
insolent and paradoxicall opinions into the World, and will not allow other men
the liberty to welcome them as they deserve. I wish he himself in his
Animadversions, and his parasiticall publisher of his former treatise, had
observed the same temper and moderation: particularly toward the lights of the
Shools, whom he slighteth and vilifieth every where, as a company of pedantick
dunses, who understood not themselves, yet held the World in awe under
contribution, by their ^stian jargon, until a third Cato dropped down from
Heaven, to stand up for the vindication of Christian liberty from Scholastic
tyranny, and Stoicall necessity, from natural and moral liberty. But this is
certain, if these poor despised Schoolmen were necessitated by antecedent and
extrinsecall causes, to speak such gibrish and nonsense, and the Christian
World to receive it, and applaud it, they cannot be justly blamed. And if that
great assertour were necessitated in like manner, he cannot justly be praised,
any more than we praise a Conduit for spouting out water, when the cock is
turned.

An answer to the Animadversions upon the Bishops Epistle to the Reader.
I Am well contented to believe that the Copy of T. H. his Treatise was
surreptitiously gained from him. Yet he acknowledges, that he showed it to
two, and if my intelligence out of France did not fail, to many more. I am well
pleased to believe that he was not the author of that lewd Epistle, which was
perfixed before it; but rather some young braggadochio, one of his disciples,
who wanted all other means to requite his Master, for his new acquired light,
but servile flattery: whom he styles the great Author, the repairer of our
breaches, the Assertour of our reputation, who has performed more in a few
sheets, than is comprehended in all the voluminous Works of the Priests and
Ministers; yea, as if that expression were too modest, in all the Libraries of
the Priests, Jesuits, and Ministers, or in the Catechismes and Confessions of
a thousand Assemblies. On the other side, he belcheth out reproaches against
the poor Clergy, as if they were a pack of fools and knaves. For their folly,
he sticks not to style the black-coates, generally taken, a sort of ignorant
tinkars, etc. And for their knavery, he says, they make the Scriptures, (which
he sets forth in as graceless a dress, as he can imagine) the decoies of
the people, to advance themselves to promotions, leisure and luxury. And so he
concludes that this little Treatise of Mr. Hobbes, will cast an eternal
blemish on all the corn^rd caps of the Priests and Jesuits, and all the black
and white caps of the Ministers. Herein I cannot acquit Mr. Hobbes, That being
in London at the same time when this ridiculous Epistle was printed and
published, he did not for his own cause, sooner or later, procure it to be
suppressed.

Concerning my self, I can safely say, That I was so far from intending my
defense for the press, that since it was perfected, and one only Copy
transcribed for the Marq. of Newcastle and himself, it has scarcely ever
beheld the Sun. Questions may be ventilated, and truth cleared from mistakes
privately between particular persons, as well or better, than publicly in
print.

As touching my exceptions to his book de Cive, he says, He did indeed intend
to have answered them, as finding them neither political, nor Theological, nor
that I alleged any reasons by which they were to be justified. The inference
would have holden more strongly the contrary way; that because they were
neither Theological, nor Political, and destitute of reasons to support them,
they were fitter to be despised, than to be answered. But why did he then
intend to answer them, and thought himself so much concerned in it? Surely he
has forgotten himself; for there was never a one of those exceptions, which
was not backed with several reasons. But concerning them and his Leviathan, I
shall be sparing to speak more in present. Peradventure I may reserve two or
three Chapters; one to show him his Theological errors, another how
destructive his Political errors are to all Societies; a third of his
contradictions: out of all which, if my leisure serve me, I may chance to
gather a posie, and present it to him.

He charge me to say, That there were two of our own Church answering his
Leviathan: It may be so; but it is more than I know. I said one of our own
Church, and one stranger.

In the conclusion of my Epistle to the reader, I used this innocent form of
valediction, So God bless us, a form of all others most usual for shutting up
our Epistles, So God bless us, or So God bless you, or So I commit you to
God, or Commend you to the protection of the hig hest Majesty. But it seems,
he, misapprending it to be a prayer for protection or deliverance from his
opinions, styles my well-meant prayer, a Bouffonly abusing of the name of God
t^ calumny. How, am I charged with Bouffonery, and calumny, and abusing of the
holy name of God? And all this for saying, God bless us? Is this a fit man to
reprehend others for uncivility? Did he learn this high strain of courtesy at
Malmsbury? I confess, I do not dislike a little tooth-lesse jesting, when the
subject will bear it. -- Ridiculum acri
Fortius and melius magnas plerumque secat res.


But I do not like jesting with edge-tooles, nor jesting with God Almighty,
much less bouffonly abusing of the holy Name of God to calumny. He need not
fear any such reviling terms from me; But if his cause meet now and then with
an innocent jerk for it, Sciat responsum, non dictum esse. He that knows not
the way to the Sea, must get a River to be his guide.

An answer to his Animadversions upon my Reply. Number. 1.
I Said I was diverted from reading his defense by business: Hence he
infers, that the will is not free; for nothing is free that can be diverted
by any thing but it self. I deny this Proposition, and he will prove it at the
Greek calends. There is a great difference between diversion, and
determination. Diversion is but an occasional suspension of the exercise of
liberty; but physical determination to one, is a compulsion of the will, so far
as the will is capable of compulsion, that is, necessitation. The will does
choose its own diversion, but there is no choice in necessitation. And therefore
necessitation to one is opposite to liberty, but diversion is not, nor moral
efficacy.

Out of his very first words [I had once resolved, Resolution proves election
and liberty.
etc.] I urged two arguments against him. Frst all resolution presupposes
deliberation: So much is acknowledged by himself, That to resolve, is to will
after deliberation, (he knows no difference between willing and electing,)
But all deliberation of that which is inevitably determined without our selves,
(as all events are determined according to his opinion,) is vain. As it is vain
for a condemned person to deliberate whether he should be executed, it is vain
for a man to deliberate whether he should grow in stature, or whether he should
breath. The only thing questionable in this argument, is the truth of the
assumption, whether it be vain to deliberate of that which is already
inevitably determined? to which he answers not one syllable in terminis, but
runs away with a false sent, altogether wide from the purpose. A man (says he)
may deliberate of what he shall do, whether the thing be possible or not, in
case he know not of the impossibility, though he can not deliberate what
another shall do to him. And therefore my three instances are impertinent,
because the question is not what they shall do, but what they shall suffer. And
here he vapoureth marvellously, supposing that he has me at an huge advantage.
Such are commonly all his advantages; much good may they do him. First he
erreth grossly in affirming, that all deliberation is only of what a man will
do, or not do; And not at all of what a man will suffer, or not suffer.
Deliberation is as well about evil to be eschewed, as about good to be pursued.
Men deliberate equally of their doings and of their sufferings, if they be not
inevitably determined; but if they be, then neither of the one nor of the
other. A Martyr or a Confessor, may deliberate what torments he will suffer for
his Religion. Many of those acts whereabout we do usually deliberate are mixed
motions, partly active, and partly passive, as all our senses. Secondly, it is
a shame for him to distinguish between actions and sufferings in this cause,
when all the actions of all the free Agents in the World, by his doctrine, are
mere sufferings. A free Agent is but like a bullet rammed up into the barrel by
the outward causes, and fired off by the outward causes; the will serves for no
use but to be a touchhole; and the poor Agent has no more aim or
understanding of what he does, than the arrow which is forced out of the bow
toward the mark, without any sense or concurrent in it self. A condemned
person may be reprieved, and deliberate about that, but the sentence of the
causes produces a necessity from eternity, (as he phraseth it) never to be
interrupted or altered.

Thirdly, he erreth in this also, That he affirms all my three instances to
be only of passions or sufferings; Growing up in stature is a vegetative act,
Respiration is a sensitive act, or an act of the moving and animal faculty.
Some question there has been, whether respiration were a natural motion, or a
voluntary motion, or a mixed motion; but all conclude, that it is an act or
motion, which is performed whilst we sleep, when we are incapable of
deliberation.

Lastly, to say that a man may deliberate of a thing that is not possible, if
he know not of the impossibility, will not advantage his cause the value of a
rush; for supposing an universal necessity of all events from eternity, there
can be no such case, seeing all men know, that upon this supposition all acts
and events, are either antecedently and absolutely necessary, or antecedently
and absolutely impossible, bo^ which are equally incapable of deliberation. So
the impertinence will prove to be in (...) answer, not in my instances.

My second argument out of his own word^ was this. To resolve a man's self, is
to determine his own will, and if a man determine his own will, then he is free
from outward necessity. But T. H. confesses, that a man (...) resolve himself:
I resolved once, etc. And (...) further to resolve is to will after
deliberation. Now to will after deliberation, is to elect, but that he hates
the very term of electing or choosing, as being utterly destructive to his new
modeled fabric of universal necessity. And for that very reason, he confounds
and blunders together the natural, sensitive, and intellectual appetites.
Either the will determines it self in its resolution, or both will and
deliberation and resolution, are predetermined by a necessary flux of natural
causes; if the will determine it self in its resolution, then we have true
liberty to will or nill: If both the will, and the deliberation, and the
resolution, be predetermined by outward causes, then it is not the resolution
of the will it self, nor of the Agent, but of the outward causes; then it was
as much determined, that is to say, resolved before the deliberation, as after,
because the deliberation it self and the whole event of it, particularly the
last resolution, was outwardly predetermined from eternity.

To this he answers nothing, but according to his usual manner, he makes
three objections. First, No man can determine his own will, for the will is an
appetite, and it is not in man's power to have an appetite when he will. This
argument would much better become the kitchen than the Schools: to argue from
the lesser to the greater negatively, which is against all rules of Logic.
Just thus, A brute beast cannot make a Categorical Syllogism, thererefore a
man cannot make one. So here, the sensitive appetite has no dominion over its
own acts, therefore neither has the rational appetite any dominion over its
own acts. Yet this is the only pillar that supporteth his main distinction,
which must uphold his In the answer to the stating of the question.
Castle in the air, from tumbling down about his ears. But be what it will be,
it has been sufficiently answered already.

His second oblection has so little solidity in it, that it is ridiculous,
Over whatsoever things there is dominion, those things are not free; but over a
man's actions there is the dominion of his will. What a medius terminus has he
light upon? This which he urges against liberty, is the very essence of
liberty. If a man's actions were under the dominion of another man's will, or
under the dominion of his extrinsecall causes, then they were not free indeed;
but for a man's own actions to be in his own power, or in the power, or under
the dominion of his own will, that is that which makes them free.

Thirdly he objects, If a man determine himself, the question will yet remain,
What determined him to determine himself? If he speak properly in his own sense
of physical determination, by outward causes, he speaks plain nonsense; for
if he was so determined by another, then he did not determine himself. But if
he mean only this, What did concur with the will in the determination of it
self, I answer, That a friend, by persuasion, might concur morally, and the
understanding, by representing might, concur intrinsecally, but it has been
demonstrated to him over and over, that neither of these concurrences is
inconsistent with true liberty from necessitation and physical determination
to one.

Something I say afterward which does not please him, which he calls a
talking to my self at random; My aim in present is only to answer his
exceptions, a little more punctually, then he has done mine: not at all to
call him to an account for his omissions; that part I leave to the Readers own
observation. What is necessary.


He tells me plainly, That I neither understand him, nor what the word
(necessary) signifies, if I think he holds no other necessity, then that which
is expressed in that old foolish rule, what soever is, when it is, is
necessarily so as it is. If I understand him not, I cannot help it, I
understand him as well as I can, and wish that he understood himself a little
better, to make him speak more significantly. Let us see where the fault lies,
that he is no better understood. First he defines what is necessary; That is
necessary, which is impossible to be otherwise. Whence he infers, That
Necessary, Possible, and Impossible, have no signification in reference to the
time past, or time present, but only the time to come. I think all men will
condescend to him thus far, That possibility has only referrence to the time
to come. But for necessity, and impossibility, he overshooteth himself beyond
all aim. If an house do actually burn in present, it is necessary, that is,
infallible, that that house do burn in present, and impossible that it do not
burn. If a man was slain yestarday, it is necessary, that he is slain to day,
and impossible that he should nor be slain. His own definition does
sufficiently confute him, That is necessary which is impossible to be
otherwise, but it is impossible, that that which is doing in present, or which
was done yestarday should be otherwise. How hang these things together? Or this
that he tells us, That his necessary is a necessary from all eternity, which
with him is an everlasting succession. And yet he tells us, That necessary
signifies nothing in reference to the time past; then how is it necessary from
all eternity? And here he thrusts out for rotten, a great many of old
Scholastic terms, as empty words. As necessary when it is, or absolutely and
hypothecally necessary, and sensus compositus and divisus, and the dominion of
the will, and the determining of its self. I must put him in mind again of the
good old woman in Seneca, who complained of the darkness of the room, when the
defect was in her own eyesight. I wonder not that he is out of love with
distinctions, more than I wonder why a bungling workman regards not a square or
a plum. But if he understood these distinctions a little better, he would not
trouble his reader with That which shall be shall be, and a bundle of such like
impertinencies.

He acknowledges, That my Lord of Newcastle desire, and my entreaty were
enough to produce a will in him to write his answer. If they were enough, then
he was not necessitated, nor physically predetermined to write it. We had no
more power than to persuade, no natural influence upon his will. And so he was,
for us, not only free to write, but free to will also. But perhaps there were
other imaginations of his own, that contributed their part. Let it be so, yet
that was no extrinsecall or absolute determination of his will. And so far was
our request from producing his consent, as necessarily as the fire burns,
that it did not, it could not produce it at all, by any natural causall
influence and efficacy, The sufficiency and efficiency and productive power was
in his will it self, which he will not be brought to understand.

An Answer to his Animadversions upon the Reply, Number. 2.
HEre is nothing of moment to detain the Reader. He says, Whosoever chances
to read Suares his opuscula, shall find the greatest part, if not all, that I
have urged in this question. Said I not truly? Give Innovators line enough,
and they will confute themselves? whosoever chances, etc. And why chances?
Chance is from accidental concurrence, not from ignorance.
By his doctrine, it was as necessary for him that reads to read, as it is
for the fire to burn. Does the fire sometimes burn by chance? He will say, That
where the certain causes are not known, we attribute Events to Chance. But he
sticks still in the same mire, without hope ever to be freed; who knows the
certain reason why the needle touched with the loadstone points always
toward the North? Does it therefore point by chance? How many thousands are
ignorant of the true causes of Comets and Earthquakes and Eclipses? Do they
therefore attribute them to chance? Chance never has place, but where the
causes concur accidentally to produce some effect, which might have been
produced otherwise. Though a man strive to expel these common notions with a
fork, yet now and then they will return. And though I could not surprise him,
yet the truth can. Thus, Penelope like, he has undone that in the dark, which
he has been weaving all this while in the light. It were more ingenuous to say
it was a slip of his pen.

It is indifferent to me, whether the greatest part of what I urge in this
question, or all that I urge, or perhaps more than I urge, be contained in
Suares his Opuscula. So the truth may prevail, I care not who have the honor
of the achievement. But Suares understood himself better, then to confound two
such different questions, namely, that of the necessity or liberty of all
Events, natural and civil, which is our question, with the concurrence of
grace and free will, in moral and supernatural acts, which he says is the
subject of Suares his discourse in that place. In all my life, that I do
remember, I never read one line of Suares his Opuscula, nor any of his works,
the sixteen years last past. I wish he had been versed in his greater works, as
well as in his Opuscula, that he might not be so averse from the Schools,
Ignoti nulla cupido. Then he would have known the terms and arguments used in
the Schools as well as others. It is no blemish to make advantage of other men's
pains and experience. Dies diei eructat verbum, and nox nocti indicat
scientiam. But Mr. Hobbes, trusting over much to his own particular abilities,
presumes to stand upon his own bottom, without any dread of Solomon's ve sol^,
Woe to him that is alone when he falls, He scrupleth not to remove the ancient
Eccles. 4. 10. Prove. 22. 28. Jer. 18. 15.
landmarks which his fathers had set, nor to stumble from the ancient paths,
to walk in a way that was never cast up. It were mere folly to expect either a
known ground, or a received term from him. Other men are contented to learn to
write after a Copy, but he will be printed a Philosopher, and a Divine of the
first edition by himself: and, Icarus like, find out a new way with his waxen
wings, which mortals never knew, though he perish in the attempt. Such
undigested phancies may please for a while, during the distemper and
green sickness fit of this present age, as maids infected Ex Plutarchi Polit.
ad Trajan.
with that malady, prefer chalk or coals in a corner, before healthful food
in their fathers house, but when time has cured their malady, and experience
opened their eyes, they will abominate their former errors, and those who were
their misleaders.

He had slighted whatsoever I produced as common and trivial, having nothing
new in it, either from Scripture or reason, which he had not often heard. I
replied only that then I might expect a more mature answer, and advised him,
under the similitude of Epictetus his sheep, rather to show his reading in his
works, than to glory of it. And where I said, that great recruits of reasons
and authorities did offer themselves to me in this cause, he threatens before
he have done with me, to make it appear to be very bragging, and nothing else,
Adding, That it is not likely, that Epictetus should take a metaphor from lamb
and wool, because he was not acquainted with paying of tithes. I could not
suspect that a poor similitude out of Epictetus should make him so passionate.
But tange montes, and fumigabunt; touch the high mountains, and they will fume
and smoke. It seems strange to me, that he should be so ignorant in Epictetus
a Stoic, one of his principal friends, of so great fame, that his earthen
lamp was preserved as a relick, and sold for three thousand Drachmes, whom,
even Lucian, that great scoffer, calls, an admirable old man, as to say, That
it is not likely, that Epictetus should take a metaphor from lamb and wool, he
means from sheep. To inform Encheiridion. c. 16.
him better; let him hear his words, For sheep do not bring their grass to
their shepherd, to show him how much they have eaten, but concocting their meat
inwardly, do bring forth wool and milk. This might be pardoned, but his
scoffing at payment of tithes, and particularly, lamb and wool, being an
institution of God himself, and established by the laws of our own realm,
cannot be excused. I appeal to all those who have read any thing upon this
subject, whether I might not have added many more reasons, and produced the
authority of the Christian World against him, in this cause of liberty, with
the suffrages of the Fathers in all successive ages. But I remember that of our
Savior, Cast not your Pearls before swine least they trample them under their
feet. Math. 7. 6.


An answer to the Animadversions upon Number. 3.
HE is displeased that I do not set down the difinitions of necessity,
spontaneity, and liberty, without which (he says) their difference cannot
possibly appear: Yet formerly, and again in this very Chapter, he confesses,
that the question is truly and clearly stated by me.

The question which the Bishop stateth in this place, I have before set down
verbatim, and allowed. What a trifling humor is this? Many things are not
capable of perfect definitions, as (to pass by all others) accidents, and
modes, or such terms as signify the manner of being. And in such things as are
capable of definition, yet essentials (whereof a definition must consist, (...)
Exact definitions not frequent.
(...)) are neither so obvious nor so useful, to common capacities. I believe
that all the perfect definitions which T. H. has made in his life in
Philosophy or Theology, may be written in one little ring; whereof I shall be
bold henceforth, now and then as I find occasion, to put him in mind. Nay even
in Mathematics, which by reason of their abstraction from matter are less
subject to error, he can miss the cushion as well as his neighbors, and be
contented sometimes to acknowledge it; not because those errors are greater,
or so great as his errors in Philosophy or Theology, but because their
conviction is more easy, and more evident. And therefore for the most part a
plain description must serve the turn; sometimes from the etymological
unfolding of the name, sometimes by the removing of what is opposite or
contrary, sometimes by a periphrastical circumlocution, sometimes by instances
and examples. And thus, by his own confession, the question is cleared between
us.

Yet, to satisfy him, I will describe them more formally. To begin with
liberty. Liberty What liberty is.
is a power of the will, (or free Agent) to choose or to refuse, this or that
indifferently, after deliberation, free from all antecedent and extrinsecal
determination to one. Election is the proper act of the will; and without
indifferency or indetermination and deliberation, there can be no election,
which is a consultative appetition. And they, and they only, are free Agents,
who (supposing all things to be present that are requisite to action,) can
nevertheless either act, or forbear to act, at their own choice: Which
description has already been explained, and shall be further in due place.

Secondly voluntary or Spontaneous, is that which has its beginning from an
inward principle, What is spontaneity?
(that is the will) with some knowledge of the end. Such are the acts of
children, fools, and madmen, whilst they want the use of reason; And the
sudden acts of passionate persons, whenever the violence of their passion
does prevent all deliberation. Such are many actions of brute beasts, as the
spiders making of her webs to catch flies; the birds building of her nest
therein to lay her eggs; both which proceed from an inward principle, with
some knowledge of the end. So then this is the difference between that which is
free, and that which is voluntary or spontaneous; that every free act is also a
voluntary or spontaneous act, but every voluntary or spontaneous act is not a
free act. The reason is evident, because no act is free, except it be done upon
deliberation: But many voluntary or spontaneous acts are done without all
deliberation, as the acts of brute beasts, fools, children, madmen, and some
acts of passionate persons. Secondly, there is no liberty but where there is a
possibility toward more than one, and freedom to choose this or that
indifferently. But in all those other kinds of voluntary or spontaneous acts,
there is an antecedent determination to one, and no indifferency of election.
So spontaneity is an appetite of some object, proceeding either from the
rational or sensitive will, either antecedently determined, or not determined
to one, either upon deliberation or without deliberation, either with election,
or without election.

The last term is necessity; He himself has defined necessary, to be that
which is impossible What is necessity?
to be otherwise. Here is a difinition without either matter or form, genus or
differentia, without any thing in it that is essential, or so much as positive,
a very periphrase or circumlocution, and (which is worst) not convertible or
reciprocal with the thing defined. Many things may be necessary respectively,
which are not impossible to be otherwise: as to let blood in a Ple^risie; A
horse is necessary for a long voyage: yet it is not impossible for a man to
perform it on foot. And on the other side, Many things are impossible to be
otherwise, which are not necessary in that sense wherein we take necessity in
this question, as that which is necessary upon science or prescience; and that
which is necessary upon condition or supposition. As if Thomas write, then he
lives; Yet neither his writing, nor his living, is absolutely necessary. So
whatsoever is, when it is, is necessarily so as it is, or impossible to be
otherwise. None of these necessities have any place in this controversy. None
of these sorts of necessity are opposite to true liberty. By the way, T. H.
calls this rule Whatsoever is, when it is, is necessarily so as it is; and old
foolish rule, (yet it is delivered by Aristotle, and received ever since in the
World,) upon his own authority, without De interpret. l. 1. c. ultimo.
ever examining it, or understanding it. Satis pro imperio. So then necessity
(as it is proper to this question) I conceive may be thus fitly described,
Necessity is a manner or propriety of being, or of acting, whereby that which
is, or acts, cannot possibly but be and act, nor be, or act otherwise then it
does, by reason of an antecedent extrinsecal and inevitable determination to
one. I say of being, or of acting, because there is a double necessity, in
essendo, and in operando, Necessity of being and acting distinguished.
and both considerable in this cause. That which is necessarily, may act
freely, as God Almighty without himself; And that which is freely or
contingently, as fire kindled by the help of a tinderbox, or by the stumbling
of an horse upon the pavement of a street, may act and burn necessarily. Here
he may see if he please, how necessity and will, or spontaneity may meet
together, because that which is antecedently and extrinsecally determined to
one, may agree well enough with my appetite, or the appetite of another: But
necessity and liberty, can never meet together; because that which is
antecedently and extrinsecally determined to one, cannot possibly be free; that
is, undetermined to one, nor capable of election, which must be inter plura,
nor a fit subject for deliberation.

He urges that, seeing I say necessity and spontaneity may meet together, he
may say that necessity and will may stand together. He does but betray his own
ignorance, and intolerable boldness, to censure all the World for that which
he never read nor understood. We all say in like manner, That necessity and
will may stand together, for will and spontaneity a^e the same thing. But
necessity and liberty, can never stand together. If he will shut his eyes
against the light, he may stumble as often as he pleases.

He says, He does not fear that it will be thought too hot for his fingers, to
show the vanity of such words as these, Intellectual appetite, Conformity of
the appetite to the object, Rational will, Elective power of the rational will,
Reason is the root of liberty, Reason represents to the will. Reader, behold
once more the unparalelled presumption of this man. Words and terms are not by
nature, but by imposition. And who are fit to impose terms of Art, but Artists,
who understand the Art? Thus were all these terms imposed. Again, verborum ut
nummorum, words are as money is; The most current is the best. This was the
current language of all Schools of learning, which we learned from our Tutours
and Professors: But a private man starteth up, not bred in the Schools, who
opposes his own authority to the authority of the whole World, and cries down
the current coin, that is, the generally received terms of Art; Where is his
commission? What is his reason? Because he does not understand them, he
guesseth that they did not understand themselves. Is his private understanding
(which is filled up to the brime with prejudice and presumption) fit to be the
public standard and seal of other men's capacities? They who will understand
Schoole-terms, must learn and study them; which he never did. Those things that
are excellent and rare, are always difficult. He who shall affirm that all the
famous Divines and Philosophers in the World, for so many succeeding Ages did
speak nonsense, deserves to be contemned. His respect to weak capacities must
not serve his turn, Nullae sunt occultiores insidiae, quam hae quae latent in
simulatione Tull.
officii. If he could show any author before himself, wherein these terms were
not used, or wherein his new terms were used, it were something. There is no
Art in the World which has not proper terms, which none understand but they
who understand that Art.

But cui bono? If we should be so mad to quit all received Schoole-terms, and
distinctions, and lose all the advantage which we might reap by the labors and
experience of so many great wits, What advantage would this be to him? None at
all at long running. Whatsoever be the terms, the state of the question must be
the same: And those very reasons which convince him now in the old language of
the Schools, would convince him likewise in the new language, which he
desires to introduce, after it was formed and generally understood. All the
benefit that he could make of it, would be only a little time between the
suppression of the one, and the introduction of the other, wherein he might
jugle, and play hocus pocus, under the cloak of harmonymies and ambiguous
expressions. And that is the reason why he is so great a friend to definitions,
and so great an enemy to distinctions.

Whereas I affirmed that necessity of supposition Necessity upon supposition,
what it is.
may consist with true liberty, he objecteth, That all necessity is upon
supposition; as the fire burns necessarily, upon supposition that the
ordinary course of nature be not hindered by God, for the fire burnt not the
three children in the furnace: And upon supposition that fuel be put unto it.
His supposition, if the ordinary course of nature be not hindered, is
impertinent and destructive to his own grounds. For though it be true, that
those things which are impossible to the second causes, as to make a Camel go
thorough the eye of a needle, are all possible with God: Yet upon his opinion
that all things are necessary from eternity, God has Mark 10. 27.
tied his own hands, and nothing is possible to God, which is not absolutely
necessary and impossible to be otherwise. His other instance of putting fuel
to the fire, is a necessary supposition, to the continuance or duration of the
fire, but not to the acting or burning of the fire. So long as there is fire,
it does and must burn. When all requisites to action are present, the will is
still free to choose or refuse. When all things requisite to action are present
to the fire, it cannot choose but burn, and cannot do otherwise.

Thirdly I answer, That there is a twofold necessity upon supposition; the one
a necessity upon an antecedent extrinsecall supposition. This cannot consist
with liberty, because it implies an antecedent determination, and the thing
supposed was never in the power of the Agent. The other is a necessity upon a
consequent supposition, where the thing supposed is in the power of the free
Agent, or depends upon something, or supposes something that is in his power;
this is very well consistent with true liberty. As for example, If T. H. do
run, then it is necessary, that he moves. This necessity is no impediment at
all to liberty, because the thing supposed, that is to run or not to run, is in
the power of the free Agent. If a man's will be determined antecedently by
extrinsecall causes, to choose such a woman for his wife, and her will to choose
him for her husband, then it is necessary, that they elect one another. This
necessity is upon an antecedent supposition, and is utterly destructive to
liberty, because the determination of the extrinsecall causes, is not in the
power of the free Agent.

Lastly, T. H. his two instances of the fire are altogether impertinent. For
first, The fire is a natural necessary Agent; and therefore no supposition,
antecedent or consequent can make it free. Secondly, God^ hindering the
ordinary course of nature is an antecedent supposition, And if the fire were a
free Agent, it were suffi^ient to destroy the liberty thereof, as to that act.

He says, That it seems I understand not what these words free and
contingent mean, because I put causes among those things that operate freely.
What does the man mean? Are not free Agents causes? If they be not, how do they
act? I understand these words, free and contingent, as they ought to be
understood; and as the World has understood them for two thousand years. As
for his new nick-naming of free and contingent Agents, I heed it not.

He has showed, That this liberty, whereof we treat, is common to bruit
beasts, and inanimate creatures with man, as well as he could show it, or can
show it, or ever will be able to show it: that is, just as much as he has
showed that the sea burns. If it were not for this confounding of terms, and
a company of trifling homonymies, he would have nothing to say or do.

When a man (says he) does any thing freely, many other concurrent Agents work
necessarily. As the man moves the sword freely, the sword wounds
necessarily. A free Agent may have concurrent Man is not a passive instrument
as the sword in his hand.
Agents: but his instance in a sword is very impertinent, which is but an
instrument, yea, a passive instrument, and though it have an aptitude in it
self, from the sharpness and weight thereof, yet the determination of the
action, and the efficacy or causation ought to be ascribed to the principal
Agent. The sword did not wound, but the man wounded with the sword. Admit the
sword may be said in some sense to concur actively to the cutting, certainly it
concurs only passively to the motion.

But he would make us believe that the man is no more active than his sword,
and has no more power to suspend or deny his concurrence, then the sword,
because a man does not move himself, or at least, not move himself originally.
I have heard of some, who held an opinion, that the soul of man was but like
the winding up of a watch, and when the string was run out, the man dyed, and
there the soul determined. But I had not thought before this, that any man had
made the body also to be like a Clock, or a Jack, or a Puppet in a play, to
have the original of its motion from without itself, so as to make a man in
his animal motion, to be as mere a passive instrument, as the sword in his
hand. If by originally he do understand independently, so as to suppose that a
man has his locomotive faculty from himself, and not from God, we all affirm,
That the original of a man's locomotive faculty is from God, in whom we live
and move and have our being. But if he understand originally, Act. 17. 28.
not in relation to the faculty, but to the act of moving (as he must mean,
unless he mean nonsense) then we affirm, that a man does move himself
originally, and desire not to taste of his paradoxicall knowledge of motion. It
is folly to dispute with such men, and not rather to leave them to their own
fantastical Chimera's, who deny all principles and rules of art, whom an
adversary cannot drive into greater absurdities, than they do willingly plunge
themselves into. Thus they do on purpose put out the lights, and leave men to
fence in the dark; and then it is all one, whether a man have skill at his
weapon or not.

That he would have contingency to depend upon our knowledge, or rather our
ignorance, and not upon the accidental concurrence of causes; That he
confounds free causes, which have power to suspend or deny their concurrence,
with contingent causes, which admit only a possibility to concur, or not
concur, rather out of impotence than power; That he makes free causes, which
are principal causes, to be guided by inferior and isntrumental causes, as
if a man should say, That a man is guided by the sword in his hand, and not the
sword by the man, deserves no other answer, but contempt; or pity, that a man
should so poison his intellectuals, and entangle himself in his own errors.

Such another mistake is his argument to prove that contingent causes could not
have concurred otherwise then they did, I know no^ whether more pedanticall or
ridiculous. For I conceive not (says he) how when this runs this way, and
that another; they can be said to concur, that is, run together. Wheresoever
there are divided parties, as in a Court or a Camp, or a Corporation, he who
concurreth with one party, does thereby desert the other.

Concerning his instance of the necessity of casting ambs ace, If he can show
that the caster, was antecedently necessitated to cast, so that he could not
possibly, have denied his concurrence, and to cast so soon, so that he could
not possibly have suspended his concurrence, and to cast just with so much
force, so that he could not possibly have used more force or less force, and
to cast into that table, and that very individual place, (it may be whilst he
winked, or looked another way) I say, if he can show that all these contingent
accidents were absolutely predetermined, and that it was not at all in the
Casters power to have done otherwise than he did, then he has brought
contingency under the jurisdiction of fate. But if he fail in any one of
these, (as all men see that he must fail in all of these) then I may have
leave to tell him, that his casting of ambs ace, has lost him his game.

But now Reader, I desire thee to observe his answer, and to see him plainly
yield the The instance in ambs ace has lost T. H. his game.
cause. Though the subject [ambs ace] be mean and contemptible, yet it yields
thee light enough to see what notorious triflers these are. Thus he says, The
suspending of the casters concurrence, or altering of his force, and the l^ke
accidents, serve not to take away the necessity of ambs ace, otherwise then by
making a necessity of deux ace, or some other cast that shall be thrown. This
is ingenuously answered, I ask no more of him. He confesses, That the caster
might have suspended his concurrence, or have altered his force, or the
accidents might have fallen out otherwise than they did. And that if these
alterations had happened, as they might have happened, then there had been as
great a necessity of deux ace, or some other cast, as there was of ambs ace:
where he says, That the alteration of the accidents serves not to take away
the necessity of ambs ace, otherwise than by making a necessity of deux ace, or
some other cast, he confesses, That by making a necessity of deux ace, or some
other cast, they might serve to take away the necessity of ambs ace. What is
now become of his antecedent determination, of all things to one from eternity?
and of the absolute impossibility that any Event should come to pass otherwise
than it does. If this be all his necessity, it is no more than a necessity upon
supposition, where the thing supposed was in the Agents power: And where the
contrary determination by the Agent being supposed, the Event must necessarily
have been otherwise. And so he is come unwittingly under the protection of that
old foolish rule, which even now he renounced, Whatsoever is, when it is, is
necessarily so as it is.

I said most truly, That that is not the question which he makes to be the
question. For although at sometimes he assent to the right stating of the
question, yet at other times, like a man that does not understand himself, he
varieth quite from it. And in the place of an absolute antecedent necessity, he
introduces a consequent hypothecal necessity. As we have seen even now in the
case of ambs ace: and where he argues from prescience; and where he reasons
thus, That which shall be, shall be, as if the manner how it should be, were
not material: and where he makes deliberation and persuasion to determine the
will. All these do amount to no more then a necessity upon supposition. The
question is as much or more of the liberty of doing what we will, as willing
what we will. But he makes it to be only of willing.

He proceeds like another Jehu, He that cannot understand the difference
between free to do, if he will, and free to will, is not fit to hear this
controversy disputed, much less to be a writer in it. Certainly, I think he
means by himself, for he neither understands what free is, nor what the
will is. A bowl has as much free will as he, the bowl is as much an agent as
he, neither of them, according to his his opinion, do move themselves
originally. The bias is as much to the bowl, as his will is to him. The bias
is determined to the one, so is his will. The bowl does not bias it self, T.
H. his will is no more than the bias of a bowl.
no more has he the government of his own will, but the outward causes. It is
not the fault of the bowl, if it have too much bias, or too little bias, but
his fault that biast it: So if he choose evil, it is not his fault, but the
causes which biast him over much, or over little, or on the wrong side. And
this is all his freedom; a determinate propension to one side, without any
possibility to incline the other way. As a man that is nailed to a post, is
free to lay his ear to it. Then as Diogenes called a displmued cock, Platos
man, a living creature with two feet, without feathers. So I may call a bowl
Mr. Hobbes his free Agent.

And yet he glories in this silly distinction, and hugs himself for the
invention of it. It is true, very few have learned from tutours, that a man is
not free to will, nor do they find it much in books, Yea, when I call
shepherds, Poets, Pastors, Doctors, and all mankind to bear witness for
liberty, he answers, That neither the Bishop nor they ever thought on this
question. If he make much of his own invention, I do not blame him, The infant
will not live long before it be hissed out of the World. In all my life, I
never saw a little empty boat bear so great a sail, as if he meant te tow the
World after him: but when the sun is at the lowest, it makes the longest
shadows. Take notice (by the way) that his freedom is such a freedom, as none
of mankind, from the shepherd to the Doctor, ever dreamed of before himself.
This vain unprofitable distinction which wounds himself and his cause more then
his adversary, and leaves him open to the blows of every one that will
vouchsafe to assault him, which contradicts both the truth and it self, has
been twice taken away already in a voider, (whither I refer the Reader) and
ought not, like twice sodden Coleworts, to have been served up again in triumph
so quickly, upon his single authority, and before this Treatise be ended. I
shall meet with it again to some purpose, I wonder whether See stateing of the
question and answer to Number. 1.
he do never cast away a thought upon the poor woman that was drowned
bymischance, whose dead body, whilst her neighbors sought for down the river;
her husband, who knew her conditions better than they, advised them to seek up
the river; for all her life long she loved to be contrary to all others, and he
presumed she would swim against the stream being dead. Is it not hard that he
who will not allow to other men any dominion over themselves, or their own
acts, will himself needs usurp an Universal Empire over the wills and
understandings of all other men.

Is it not freedom enough (says he) unless a man's will have power over his
will, and that his St. Austi^ more to be credited than T. H:
will must have another power within it, to do voluntary acts? His error
proceeds from the confounding of voluntas and volitio, the faculty of the
will, and the act of willing. Not long after he reiterateth his mistake, taxing
me for saying, that our wills are in our power, adding, that through ignorance
I detect the same fault in St. Austine. If he mean my ignorance to mistake St,
Austin, let St. Austine himself De lib. Arbit. l. 3. c. 3.
be Judge, Voluntas igitur nostra nec voluntas esset nisi esset in nostra
potestate, etc. Therefore our will should not be our will, unless it were in
our power. Because it is in our power, it is free to us, for that is not free
to us which is not in our power, etc. If he mean that it is an error in St.
Austine, he shows his insolence and vainglory. If this be an error in him,
it is an error in all the rest of the Fathers; I will not bate him one of them
in this cause. Mr. Calvin (whom he cites sometimes in this Treatise)
professes, that he will not differ a syllable from St. Austine; I do not say
in this question of natural necessity or liberty, which no man then doubted of,
but even in that higher question of the concurrence of grace with freewill. So
here is neither error in St. Austine, nor ignorance in me.

Whereas I demanded thus; If whatsoever a man does and wills be predetermined
to one precisely and inevitably, to what purpose is that power whereof T. H.
speaks, to do if he will, and not to do if he will, which is never deduced
into act indifferently and in utramque partem, and consequently frustraneous?
He answers, That all those things may To give liberty to two, and limite to
one, is a contradiction.
be brought to pass, which God has from eternity predetermined. In good time;
he might as well say, that God has given man a liberty to both parts, to do or
not to do, to choose or to refuse, and yet has limited him punctually and
precisely to one part; which is a pure contradiction, to give him choice of
two, and yet restrain him to one.

He adds, that though the will be necessitated, yet the doing what we will is
liberty: Yes, it is the liberty of a bowl, it is his mock liberty, but it is
no wise man's liberty, where all deliberation is vain, and all election is
impossible.

I argued thus, If a man be free to act, he is much more free to will, because
quod efficit tale illud magis est tale. To which he answers with an ignorant
jeere, As if he should say, if I make him angry, then I am more angry. Pardon
me, I will free him from this fear: I see nothing in him that should move a
man to anger, but rather to pity. That Canon holds only in causis perse,
such causes as by nature or the intention of the free Agent, are properly
ordained to produce that effect, such as his outward causes are; supposed by
him to be, in the determination of the will. And therefore my instance was
proper, Not in causis per accidens, where the effect is not produced naturally,
or intentionally, but accidentally, as in his ridiculous instance.

My last argument, which he vouchsafes to take notice of, was this; If the
will be determined, then the writing is determined: And then he ought not to
say, he may write, but he must write. His answer is, It follows that he must
write; but it follows not that I ought to say, he must write, unless he
would have me say more than I know, as he himself does. What poor crotchets are
these, unworthy of a man that has any thing of reality in him? as if my
argument did regard the saying of it, and not the thing it self. If it follow
precisely that he must write, then he has no freedom in utramque partem,
either to write or not to write, then he is no more free to do, than to will;
both which are contrary to his assertion.

I demanded, if a man's will be determined without his will? Why we do ask him,
whether he will do such a thing or not? His answer is, because we desire to
know. But he wholly mistaketh the scope of the question. The emphasis lies not
in the word we, but in the word his; how it is his will? For if his will be
determined by natural causes without his will, then it is the will of the
causes, rather than his own will.

I demanded further, why we do represent reasons to men, why we do entreat
them? He According to T. H. his principles all persuasions are vvin.
answers, Because we think to make them have the will they have not. So he
teaches us, First that the will is determined by a necessary influence of
natural causes; and then prateth of changing the will by advice and moral
persuasions. Let him advise the clock to strike sooner or later than it is
determined by the weight of the plumb, and motion of the wheels. Let him
dissuade the Plants from growing, and see how much it avails. He says the
will does will as necessarily as the fire burns. Then let him entreat the
fire to leave burning at his request. But thus it falls out with them who
cannot, or will not, dishinguish between natural and moral efficacy.

I asked then, why do we blame free Agents? since no man blames fire for
burning Cities, nor accuses poison for destroying men. First he returns an
answer, We blame them because they do not please us. Why? may We can blame no
man justly.
a man blame every thing that does not please his humor? Then I do not wonder
why T. H. is so apt to blame others without cause. So the Scholar may blame
his Master for correcting him deservedly for his good. So he who has a vicious
stomach may blame healthful food. So a Lethargical person may blame his best
friend for endeavoring to save his life.

And now having shot his bolt, he begins to examine the case, Whether blaming
be any more than saying the thing blamed is ill or imperfect? Yes, moral blame
is much more, It is an imputation of a fault. If a man be born blind or with
one eye, we do not blame him for it: But if a man have lost his sight by his
intemperance, we blame him justly. He inquireth, May not we say, a lame horse
is lame? Yes, but you cannot blame the horse for it, if he was lamed by another
without his own fault. May not a man say one is a fool or a knave (says he) if
he be so, though he could not help it? If he made himself a sot, we may blame
him, though if he be a stark sot, we lose our labor. But if he were born a
natural idiot, it were both injurious and ridiculous to blame him for it. Where
did he learn, that, a man may be a knave, and cannot help it? Or that knavery
is imposed inevitably upon a man without his own fault? If a man put fire to
his neighbors house, it is the fault of the man, not of the fire. He has
confessed formerly, that, a man ought not to be punished but for crimes; The
reason is the very same that he should not be blamed for doing that which he
could not possibly leave undone; no more than a servant whom his Master has
chained to a pillar, ought to be blamed for not waiting at his elbow. No chain
is stronger than the chain of fatal Destiny is supposed to be.

That piece of eloquence which he thinks I borrowed from Tully, was in truth
taken immediately out of St. Austine, who applies it most properly to this
case now in question. He urges, That a man might as well say, that no man
halteth which can not choose but halt, as A lame comparison.
say, That no man sins in those things which he cannot shun; for what is sin
but halting? This is not the first time that he has contradicted himself.
Before he told us, that there can be no punishment but for crimes that might
have been left undone: Now he tells us, that a man may sin who cannot choose
but sin; Then sin is not a punishable crime. He might even as well say, that
there is no such thing as sin in the World; Or if there be, that God is the
author of it. Reader, whosoever thou art, if thou reverence God, eschew such
doctrines. His comparison of halting is frivolous and impertinent. Halting is
not against the eternal rule of Gods justice, as sinning is. Neither does a man
choose his halting freely, as he does his sinning.

In the conclusion of his Animadversions upon Number. 3. there is nothing that is
new, but that he is pleased to play with a wooden top. He calls my argument
from Zenos cudgelling T. H. makes himself no better than a wooden top.
of his man, a wooden argument. Let him choose whether I shall call his a
wooden, or a boyish comparison. I did never meet with a more unfortunate
instancer than he is. He should produce an instance of natural Agents, and he
produces an instance of voluntary Agents. Such are the boys that whip his
wooden top. He should produce an instance of a natural determination; so he
affirms, that the will is determined; and he produces an instance of a
violent determination, for such is the motion of his top. I hope he does not
mean that the will is compelled; if he do, he may string it up with the rest of
his contradictions.

Has not he brought his hogs to a fair market, when God has created him a
free man, a noble creature, to make himself like a wooden top? Deserves not
he to be moved as the top is with a whip, until he confess his error, and
acknowledge his own liberty. If this wooden top should chance to hit T. H. on
the shinnes, I desire to know whom he would accuse: The top? That were as mad
a part, as it is in the dog to run after the stone and bite it, never looking
at the man who did throw it. What then should he accuse the boys that whipped
the top? No, that were equally ludibrious, seeing the boys are as much
necessitated; and to use his own phrase, as much lasht to what they do by the
causes, as the top is by the boys. So he may sit down patiently, and at last
think upon his liberty which he had abandoned, and if the causes will give him
leave, get a plantin leaf to heal his broken shinne.

Such an unruly thing as this top which he fancieth, is he himself, sometimes
dictating errors, sometimes writing paradoxes, sometimes justling out
Metaphysics, sometimes wounding the Mathematics; And in a word, troubling the
World, and disordering all things, Logic, Philosophy, Theology, with his
extravagant conceits. And yet he is offended that men will go about to keep
possession of their ancient Principles against his upstart innovations, and is
ready to implead them (with that quarrelsome Roman) because they would not
receive his weapon fairly with their whole bodies. It were a much more
Christian contemplation to elevate his thoughts from this wooden top; to the
organical body of a man, wherein he may find God an hundred times, from the
external form or figure of the one, which affords it only an aptitude to move
and turn, to the internal and substantial form of the other, which is the
subordinate beginning of animal motion, from the turning of his top, which is
so swift, that it prevents the discovery of the sharpest eyesight, and seems
to stand stock still, to the eternity of God where motion and rest do meet
together, or all motion is swallowed up into rest; Lastly from these boys who
hold the top up by their continued lashings, to the infinite power of an
Almighty God, who is both the procreating and conserving cause of all our life,
being, and motion, and to magnify him for his wonderful works, wherein he
has manifested to the World his own power and wisdom.

An answer to his Animadversions upon Number. 4.
THese Animadversions will produce no great trouble either to me or the Reader.
I did demonstrate in this Section the difference between liberty of exercise or
contradiction, and liberty of specification or contrariety. He only takes
notice of it, and calls it Jargon; and so without one word more, shakes hands
and withdraws himself.

I said it was a rule in art, that homonymous words, or words of a double or
doubtful signification, ought first to be distinguished, that Disputants may
understand one another rightly, and not beat the air to no purpose.

I showed out of the Scriptures, that the word liberty or freedom, was such an
ambiguous word, and showed further what this liberty is whereof we dispute: A
liberty from necessitation or determination to one by extrinsecal causes. He
confesses, that this is the question; adding, That he understands not how
such a liberty can be. Then what remained T. H, his deep skill in Logic.
but to go to our proofs? Yet here he raises a storm of words upon the by,
and foameth out his own disgrace. He denies that there is any such rule of
Art. I am sure (says he) not in the art of reason which men call Logic. And
all Logicians are sure of the contrary who give not only one but many such
rules, in treating of simple terms, of complex terms, of fallacies. They teach
that an ambiguous term before it be distinguished, signifies nothing; That it
cannot be placed in any predicament; That it cannot be defined nor divided: And
they give this general Rule, Distinctio vocis ambiguae prima sit in omni rerum
consideratione. Either this man never read one word of Logic in his life, or
it is most strange how pride has defaced all Logical notions out of his mind.

He tells us, that the signification of an ambiguous word may be rendered
perspicuous His silly definitions.
by a definition. But Logicians teach us better, that it cannot be defined
before it be distinguished. How should a man define he knows not what?
Suppose I should ask him the definition of a degree, Can he or any man define
a degree, before they know what degree is to be defined? whether a degree in
the Heavens, or a degree in the Schools, or a degree of Consanguinity, or a
degree of Comparison? He may as well define a crabbe before he know whether it
be a crab-fish or a crabbe-fruit. The difinition and the thing defined, are the
same thing. But ambiguous words have several significations, which cannot be of
the same thing.

His definition of liberty is this; Liberty is the absence of external
impediments to motion. Before I have done, I shall make him out of love with
his definitions. Liberty is an absence; If liberty be an absence, then liberty
is nothing, for an absence is nothing in the nature of things; but a mere
privation. An absence of impediments; Impediments may take away the liberty of
execution, not the liberty of election. There may be true liberty where there
are impediments; and there may be no impediments, yet without liberty. An
absence of outward impediments: And why of outward impediments? may not inward
impediments withhold a man from acting freely as well as outward? May not a fit
of sickness keep a man at home, as well as a shower of rain? A man may be
free, and act freely, notwithstanding impediments. Many impediments are
vincible: A man may go out of his house though there be a great logge laid at
his door. Lastly an absence of impediments to motions. Election is the most
proper intrinsecall act of liberty, which may be without local motion.

I durst not style my poor description by the name of a definition. Yet it set
down the right nature of liberty, and showed what was the difference between
us. His definition has nothing to do with liberty, and comes not near our
question by twenty furlongs.

Our controversy is, Whether the will be antecedently determined by
extrinsecall causes, we have nothing to do with impediments of motion. But to
let him see the vanity of his definitions, I will demonstrate out of them, That
the most necessary Agents are free Agents, and the most free Agents necessary
Agents, that the will is free, and necessity is liberty. First, when a stone
falls from a steeple to the ground, or when a fire burns, there is an
absence of all external impediments to motion: yet by his own confession,
these are not free, nor so much as voluntary, but natural necessary actions.
The stone falls necessarily, not freely. The fire burns necessarily, not
freely. So his definition fitteth a necessary Agent, as well as a free Agent.
On the other side, he defines necessary to be that which is impossible to be
otherwise. But by this doctrine, it is impossible for any free or voluntary
Agent to be otherwise than it is, or act otherwise than it does. Therefore by
his definition, all free and voluntary Agents are necessary Agents. Secondly,
if an absence of external impedements to motion be a true definition of
liberty, then the will is free, for the will has no external impediment to
motion. External impediments may hinder action, not election, which is the
proper act of the will.

Lastly, by his definition, liberty it self is necessity, and necessity is
liberty, as is made evident thus. The absence of outward impediments to motion
is the definition which he gives of liberty, and therefore must be reciprocal
or convertible with liberty it self. But necessity is much more an absence of
outward impediments to motion. For if there were any impediments that could
hinder the production of the effect, there could be no necessity. Thus he
confounds all things with his definitions, free Agents with necessary Agents,
and necessary Agents, with free Agents: necessity it self with liberty, and
liberty with necessity. And now learning is well reformed.

He is displeased at me for calling him a particular man, as if (says he) I or
any other was an universal man; and he conceives that I mean a private man. I
mean as I write, a particular man is not opposed to an universal man, but to
mankind, though he makes his City, to be a kind of universal man. My meaning
was, a particular man, that is, not a Church, not a Council, not so much as a
company of men, but one single man, and it may, an handful of his seduced
disciples. There is neither a Church, nor a Council, nor a company of men, but
they may justly challenge more respect than one single man.

Here he boasts of his constant meditations, That he has done almost
nothing else Medition little worth without making use of other men's experience
but to meditate upon this and other natural questions. Still he forgeteth
Epictetus his rule, that the sheep should not brag how much it has eaten. If
he had meditated to any great purpose, we should have found it in his works.
For my part, I do neither believe, that he had so much spare time from other
employments, to bestow upon his meditations. Nor that private meditation,
without making use of the studies and experience of other men, is so ready a
way to attain to perfection in such hidden learning. If he had spent all his
time in meditating how to become a good Physician, and had never read a line of
Hippocrates or Galen, or any other learned Author, the meanest of which, had
more knowledge, than he is able to attain unto with all his meditation, during
his whole life, What would it have availed him? Facile est inventis addere, It
is much easier to top a stately edefice, then to build it up from the very
foundation. Lastly, I do not believe that he was capable of meditation, upon
those high subjects, which he never understood, as appears plainly by his
writings. How should a blind man judge of colors?

Yet he will not give over, until he have had another fling against School
terms, because he finds it easier to censure, than either to confute or
understand. He has been answered formerly, and shall receive a further answer
in due place. For the present, I shall only put him in mind of two sayings,
the one of Schaliger, Voces didacticae rudibus ingeniis acerbae, delicatis
ridiculae sunt, Terms of art devised Terms of art are unungrateful to rude
persons.
for instruction, are unpleasant to palates not exercised in them, and
ridiculous to nice and delicate ears. There is a double perspicuity, the one
vulgar to common people, the other more intellectual to Artists. In vulgar
appellations (says Aristotle) we are to speak as the 1 Top. c. 2. ss. 2.
common people, but in terms of art, we are to follow the most approved Artists.

He asks with what patience I can hear Martine Luther and Philip Melancthon,
speak against School Theology, whereof he gives some instances, but without
citing the places. So he must receive an answer without perusing of them. If
they have condemned all Schoolmen and School-learning, it is for him to defend
them, not for me. If they did so, I should not much value their judgment in
that particular. But I do not believe that any who made so great use of
School-learning, did condemn all Schoolmen in general. Luther stinted his
accusation to under 300 years. It may well be, That in that time some
Schoolmen, in some questions were too licentious. But T. H. condemns not
only the men, but the learning, all their grounds, all their terms, and more
particularly in this very question of the liberty of the will, he censurureth
and contemns all Fathers, Philosophers, and Classick Writers. I trow, Martine
Luther and Philip Melancthon did not so.

He pleads, That he does not call all School-learning Iargon, but that which
they say in defense of untruths, and especially in the maintenance of free will
I believe he has read very little School-learning, either upon that subject,
or any other; if he have, we find very little fruit of it in his writings. But
if that be his quarrel against the Schoolmen, for maintaining of freedom of
will from antecedent and extrinsecall necessitation in natural acts, if he
will stand to authorities, I am contented to join issue with him, that not
only all the Schoolmen, but all Fathers, Philosophers, and Chassick Writers
were propugners of this freedom or liberty of will; and particularly his two
witnesses, whose words he cites in this place, Luther and Melancthon, whereof
the former says, That he and his party speak undiscreetly, and the other (that
is, Melacthon) calls his opinion of universal necessity, a Manichean
opinion, and an horrible lie.

Castigations upon the Animadversions, Number. 5.
IN this fifth Section there are no Animadversions, and so there is no need of
Castigations.

Castigations upon the Animaversions, Number. 6.
THere is no occasion offered to make any long stay upon this subject. I
produced three places of Scripture to prove, That men have liberty, or power of
election. He answered, That men are necessitated to what they do choose by
antecedent causes. I took away this answer three ways. First by reason. To
this he is silent. Secondly by instances. Thirdly by the texts themselves. To
this he rejoyneth. That these texts and instances do only prove, that a man is
free Ans. to the stat. quest. fount. of Argum. cast. Number. 1, 3. def. Number. 3.
to do if he will, which he denies not. But they do not prove that he is free
to will. And in the second instance, The Seniour of the mess, chooses what he
has an appetite to, but he chooses not his appetite. This is all he answers.

This distinction has been already sufficiently refuted, as contradictory to
his own Freedom to do if one will, without freedom to will, a vain distinction.
grounds, which do as much necessitate a man to do, as to will. Secondly, as
unprofitable, the necessity of willing being much more subject and obnoxious to
all those blows, and all those absurdities, which flow from fatal destiny,
than the necessity of doing. Thirdly as contrary to the sense, and meaning of
the whole world. Fourthly as contrary to the Scriptures. Lastly, I have
demonstrated the unreasonablenesse of his comparison between the intellectual
and sensitive appetite, both as it is a comparison, Theologia Symbolica non est
argumentativa. As also as it is an inference from the lesser to the greater
negatively.

Now I add, That that gloss is accursed, which does corrupt the text, as this
gloss of his does, That a man is free to do if he will, but not free to will.
Election is that very thing which he says is not free, that is the appetite;
and it is thus defined, Electio est appetitus rei praeconsileatae, Election is
an appetite of some thing, that has been predeliberated of. But the texts
alleged do demonstrate that to choose or elect is free, and undetermined to
one. Therefore they do demonstrate that it is not free only to do, but much
more to will or to choose. It is in the husbands choice, either to establish the
vow of his wife, or to make it Number. 30. 14. Josh. 24. 15.
void. Here is a liberty of contradiction or of exercise. Again, Choose ye this
day whom ye will serve, whether the gods of your fathers, or the gods of the
Amorites, and, I offer thee three 2 Samuel 24. 12.
things, choose the which of them I shall do. Here is a liberty of contrariety
or specification. And in all these places, here is a liberty of election, to
will, to desire, to choose their own appetite.

Secondly, the same is demonstrated from the definition of free will, to be a
free power given of choosing one thing before another, or accepting or rejecting
the same thing indifferently, given to the intellectual nature for the glory
of God, in order to some end. But all these texts by me alleged, and many more
do attribute unto the will, a power of choosing one thing before another, or of
accepting or rejecting the same thing indifferently. Therefore all these texts
do demonstrate that the will of man is free, not only to do if he will, but to
will, that is, to, choose or to elect. Wheresoever, whenever and howsoever the
will acts, it is volition, but election is the proper formal act of the
will, as it is free. And it is altogether impossible there should be any
election, without a freedom to will. The will imployeth the understanding to
consider of the most convenient means to attain some desired end. The
understanding does return its judgment, which is like a bill presented to the
King by the two houses. The will is free either to suspend its act, or deny its
approbation with la volonte s'advisera, The will will advise better, or else to
consent, with la volonte l^ vent, the will approves it, which consent to the
judgment of the understanding is properly election, as it were the conclusion
of a practical Syllogism, an intellective appetite, or an appetite intelect.

If a great Prince should offer to his poor subject three distinct gifts, and
bid him take his choice of them, having underhand given away two of them before
to another from him, Were it not an abuse, and a mere mockery? God offered
David in like manner his choice of three things; I offer thee three things,
choose which of them I shall do. Did God openly offer to David the free choice
of three things, and had secretly determined that two of them should never be?
Far be this from God. Especially to do it so seriously, and with such solemn
protestations, as I call heaven and earth this day to record against you, that
I have set before you life and death, blessing and cursing, therefore Deuteronomy. 30.
19.
choose life, that both thou and thy seed may li^e. Can any man who has but so
much reverential fear of God, as a grain of mustard seed, which is the least of
seeds, harbor such an unworthy thought in his breast, that truth itself should
be guilty of such gross dissimulation? It is a decided case in law, that he
who has granted to another liberty of election, cannot before his election,
dispose of that which he has granted away to another. He who has a right to
elect, if he choose an unworthy person, by the sentence of the law forfeites his
right to elect, for that turn. Why so, if he was necessitated without his will
to choose as he did? We say truly, consent takes away error. That man is not
wronged, who consents to his own wrong: how so, if his consent be against or
without his own will? If the will be not free ^ut necessitated, then nothing is
unlawful. That which is not lawful by the law, necessity makes lawful. In case
not only of absolute, but even of extreme necessity, meum and tuum cease,
and that which otherwise had been plain the^, becomes just. He who
necessitateth all events, takes sin out of the World.

One of my instances was in the election of the King of the Romans, to which he
answers as formerly, That the electors are free to name whom they will, but
not free to will. If they be not free to will, then they are not free to elect,
for election is the proper formal act of the will; and then the electors are no
electors. There is one contradiction. Neither are they free to name whom they
will indifferently, if they be determined necessarily and antecedently to name
one. Possibility of more than one, and a precise determination to one, (that
is, may name and must name,) are likewise contradictories in adjecto. This is
not all: We see by the golden Bull Bulla Caroli. 4.
what care there is to bring the electors together to Frankfort, and to secure
them there. Every one of them must take a solemn oath upon the Gospel of St.
John, that according to his faith which he owes to God and the Roman Empire,
to the best of his discretion and understanding, he will choose [volo eligere]
with the help of God a King of the Romans, that is, fit for it, and give his
voice and vote without all pact, stipend, price, or promise. And if they do not
accord actually within thirty days, they are thenceforth to have nothing but
bread and water until they have made their election. If it was antecedently
determined by extrinsecal causes who should be chosen, and no other; What
needed all this trouble and charge to so many great Princes, when they might as
well have stayed at home, and have set seven ordinary Burgers to have drawn
lots for it? Do men use to swear to choose that which (it may by) is not in
their power to choose, and to refuse that which (it may be) is not in their
power to refuse. The belly is a vehement orator; but if it be absolutely
determined whom they must choose, and when, they might as well give them mosel,
wine, and the best meat the Country affords, as bread and water. Here we have
expressly volo eligere, I will choose, which is as much as to say, vollo velle,
I will will: Which phrase T. H. esteems an absurd speech: But Julius Scaliger
thought otherwise, Dicimus and Exercit. 307.
vere, and ex omnium gentium consensu, vollo velle. The very words cum
adjutorio Dei, with the help of God, might teach them, that God is neither the
total cause, nor the determining cause of man's election.

Lastly, this distinction makes T. H. worse than the Stoics themselves; for
the Soicks And makes T. H. a degree worse than the St^cks.
together with their Fate, did also maintain the freedom of the will. And as
we find in many Authors, both theirs and ours, did not subject the soul of man
nor the will of man to the rigid dominion of destiny. The Stoics subtracted
some causes, and subjected others to necessity. And among those which they
Aust. de civit. de^ l. 5. c. 10.
would not have to be under necessity, they placed the will of man, lest it
should seem not to be free, if it were subjected to necessity. Chrysippus made
two sorts of causes, principal causes which did necessitate and compel all
things, except the will of man, and adjuvant causes, as objects, which did
only excite and allure. These (said he) do awaken the mind of man, but being
awakened it can move of it self: which he sets forth by the comparison of a
wherlegigge, and a roller cast down a steep place, which have the beginning of
their motion from without themselves, but the progress from their own form and
volubility. So T. H. is worse than a Stoic in this respect, and extends
fatal necessity Apud Gellium.
further than they did. I have done with this distinction for this time; I say
nothing of the bird, but the egg is bad.

Castigations of the Animadversions, Number. 7.
IN these Animadversions there is nothing contained which is material, either
for necessity or against liberty, but passion and animosity. Where it is said,
that the will does perpetually follow the last dictate of the understanding, or
the last judgment of right reason: He excepteth that I am mistaken, for the
will follows as well the judgment of an erroneous, as of a true reasoning.
First his exception is improper, it is the judgment of Reason, not of
reasoning. Secondly it is impertinent, the only question here is, whether the
will do follow the last judgment of reason, not whether the reason be right or
not. Thirdly it is false, whilst the will does follow the erroneous judgment
of reason, yet it follows it as the judgment of right reason: When the
judgment of Reason is erroneous, the will follows it only de facto, but
when it is right, it follows it both de facto and de jure.

His second exception is, that I make the understanding to be an effect of the
will. Good words. I said not the understanding, but the act of the
understanding; that is, the deliberation or judgment of the understanding,
which is so far truly said to proceed from the will, because the will
employeth the understanding to deliberate and judge. How the understanding
moves the will, and the will moves the understanding mutually, is a
superfluous question, seeing they do not differ really, but rationally. The
understanding is the essence of the soul as it knows, the will the same
essence of the soul as it extends it self to enjoy the thing known. Neither
am I obliged to read Lectures. It is sufficient to know that the will is moved
to the specification of its act, only by the understanding, or which is all
one, by the object known and represented. But the will is moved and does move
the understanding to the exercise of its act by it self, except only in that
motion which is called motus primo primus, that is the motion of the will
toward the last end, which it is not in the power of the will to will, or not
to will, as its other motions are, but requires the excitation of the first
cause. The will moves both the understanding and it self effectively. The
understanding moves the will objectively, by making those things to be
actually known, which were only potentially intelligible. As the light of the
Sun makes those things actually visible, which before did lie hid in darkness.

If he will not understand those things, which all old Divines and Philosophers
do assent unto, (choosing rather to be a blind leader of the blind, than a
follower of them who see) nor the command of the will, nor the difference
between natural and moral efficacy; If he understand not what is the judgment
of the understanding practically practical, he must learn, and not adventure to
censure before he Iudicium practice practicum explained.
knows what he censures. What he is not able to confute, he should not dare to
slight. I do not justify all the questions, nor all the expressions of all
Schoolmen: But this I will say, There is often more profound sense and
learning in one of these obscure phrases, which he censureth as jargon, and
unintelligible, than in own of his whole Treatises.

And particularly, in this which he sleighteth more than any of the rest in a
domineering manner; that is, The judgment of the understanding practically
practical. A country man (says he) will ackowledge there is judgment in men,
but will as soon say, the judgment of the judgment, as the judgment of the
understanding. Then, shall country men be Judges of terms of Art, who
understand not any one term of any Art? much less the things intended by
those terms, and the faculties of the soul with their proper acts. But such a
sily Judge is fittest for T. H. I will not cite a Schoole-man, but contain my
self within the bounds of Philosophy.

Philosophers do define the understanding by its subject, proper acts, and
objects, to be a faculty of the soul understanding, knowing, and judging,
things intelligible. If to judge of its object, be the proper act of the
understanding, then there must needs be a judgment of the understanding. Every
sense judges of its proper object, as the sight of colors, the hearing of
sounds. Shall we grant judgment to the senses, and deny judgment to the
understanding? Now this judgment is either contemplative, or practical.
Contemplative is when the understanding aims only at knowledge, what is
true, and what is false, without thought of any external action. Practical
judgment is when the understanding does not only judge what is true, and what
is false, but also what is good, and what is evil, what is to be pursued, and
what is to be shunned. So we have the practical judgment of the understanding.
Yet further, when the understanding has given such a practical judgment, it
is not necessary that the will shall follow it: but it may suspend its consent
and not elect. It may put the understanding upon a new deliberation, and
require a new judgment. In this case the judgment of the understanding is
practical, because it intends not merely contemplation, what is true and what
is false, but also action, what is to be pursued, and what is to be shunned:
But yet it is not practically practical, because it takes not effect, by reason
of the dissent of the will. But whenever the will shall give its free assent
to the practical judgment of the understanding, and the sentence of reason is
approved by the acceptance of the will; then the judgment of the
understanding becomes practically practical. Then the election is made, which
Philosophers do therefore call a consultative appetition. Not that the will can
elect contrary to the judgment of reason, but that the will may suspend its
consent, and require a new deliberation, and a new judgment, and give consent
to the later. So we have this seeming piece of nonsense judicium intellectus
practice practicum: not only translated, but explained in English, consonantly
to the most received opinions of Classical Authors. If he have any thing to
say against it; let him bring arguments, not reproaches: And remember, how
Memnon Plut.
gave a railing soldier a good blow with his Lance, saying, I hired thee to
fight, and not to rail.

The absurdity which he imputes to me in How the object is, and how it is not
the cause of seeing.
natural Philosophy, That it is ridiculous to say, that the object of the sight
is the cause of seeing, which makes him sorry that he had the ill fortune to
be engaged with me in a dispute of this kind, is altogether impertinent and
groundless. The cause of seeing is either the cause of the exercise of seeing,
or the cause of the specification of the act of seeing. The object is the cause
of the specification, why we see this or that, and not the cause of the
exercise. He that should affirm, that the object does not concur in the
causation of sight, (especially going upon those grounds that I do, that the
manner of vision is not by sending out beams from the eye to the object, but
by receiving the species from the object to the eye,) was in an error indeed.
For in sending out the species there is action, and in the reception of them
passion. But he that should affirm, that the object is the cause of the
exercise of sight, or that it is that which makes that which is facultate
espectabile to be actu aspectabile, or that it is that which judges of the
color or light; or (to come home to the scope of the place,) that the object
does necessitate or determine the faculty of sight, or the sensitive soul to
the exercise of seeing, were in a greater error. Among many answers which I
gave to that objection, that the dictate of the understanding does determine
the will, this was one, That supposing it did determine it, yet it was not
naturally, but morally, not as an efficient by physical influence into the
will, but by proposing and representing the object, which is not my single
opinion, but the received judgment of the best Schoolmen. And in this sense,
and this sense only, I said truly, that the understanding does no more by
proposing the object determine and necessitate the will to will, than the
object of sight does determine and necessitate the sensitive soul to the actual
exercise of seeing: whereas all men know that the sensitive Agent
(notwithstanding any efficacy that is in the object) may shut his eyes, or turn
his face another way. So that which I said was both true and pertinent to the
question. But his exception is altogether impertinent, and if it be understood
according to the proper sense and scope of the place, untrue. And this is the
only Philosophical notion which hitherto I have found in his Animadversions.

Castigations of his Animadversions, Number. 8.
WHosoever desires to be secure from T. H. his arguments, may hold himself
close to the question, where he will find no great cause of fear. All his
contention is about terms. Whatsoever there was in this Section which came home
to the principal question, is omitted, and nothing minded; but the meaning or
signification of voluntary and spontaneous acts, etc. which were well enough
understood before by all Scholars, until he arose up like another Davus in the
Comedy, to trouble all things. So he acts his part like those fond Musicians,
who spent so much time in tuning of their Instruments, that there was none left
to spare for their music.

Which are free, which are voluntary, or Number. 3.
spontaneous, and which are necessary Agents, I have set down at large, whither
(to prevent further trouble) I refer the Reader: And am ready to make it good
by the joint testimonies of an hundred Classick Authors, that this has been
the common and current language of Scholars for many Ages. If he could produce
but one Author, Stoic or Christian before himself, who in the ventilation of
this question did ever define liberty as he does, it were some satisfaction.
Zeno, one of the fairest flowers in the Stoics Garland, used to boast, that he
sometimes wanted opinions, but never wanted arguments. He is not so lucky;
never wanting opinions, ever wanting proofs. Hitherto we have found no
demonstrations, either from the cause or from the effect; few topical
arguments, or authorities that are pertinent to the question; except it be of
country men and common people, with one comparison.

But to come to the Animadversions themselves. Spontaneity.
He charge me, or rather the Schoolmen, for bringing in this strange word,
Spontaneous, merely to shift off the difficulty of maintaining our Tenet of
free will. If spontaneous and voluntary be the same thing, as we affirm, and
use them both indifferently; I would gladly know how the one can be a
subterfuge more than the other? or why we may not use a word that is
equipollent to his own word? But to cure him of his suspicion, I answer, That
the same thing and the same term of spontaneous, both in Greek and Latin, in
the same sense that we take it, as it is distinguished from free, and just as
we define it, was used by Philosophers a thousand years before either I, or any
Schoolmen were borne: as we find in Aristotle. That is spontaneous [or
voluntary, (...)] whose beginning Ethic. l. 3. c. 2.
is in it self, with knowledge of the end, or knowing every thing wherein the
action does consist. And the same Author in the very next Chapter, makes the
very same difference between that which is voluntary, and that which is free or
eligible, that we do.

His second exception is against these Number. 3. Conformity signifies
agreeableness as well as likeness.
words, Spontaneity consists in a conformity of the appetite, either
intellectual or sensitive to the object, which words (says he) do signify
that spontaneity is a conformity or likeness of the appetite to the object,
which to him sounds as if I had said, that the appetite is like the object,
which is as proper, as if I had said, that the hunger is like the meat. And
then he concludes triumphantly, If this be his meaning, as it is the meaning of
the words, he is a very fine Philosopher. All his Philosophy consists in words:
If there had been an impropriety in the phrase, (as there is none) this
exception had been below an Athenian Sophister. I had almost said, (saving the
rigorous acception of the word, as it was used afterward) an Athenian
Sycophant. Conformity signifies not only such a likeness of feature as he
imagines, but also a convenience, accommodation, and agreeableness. So the
savoury meat which Rebeckah made for her husband, was conform to his appetite.
So Daniel and his fellows conformed their appetites to their pulse and water.
Thus Tully says, Ego me comformo ad ejus voluntatem, I conform my self to his
will. Where there is an agreeableness, there is a conformity; as to conform
ones self to another man's humor, or to his council, or to his commands. He
resolves to have no more to do with spontaneity: I thought that it had not
been himself, but the causes that resolved him, without his own will. But
whether it be himself, or the causes, I think, if he hold his resolution, and
include liberty therein for company, it will not be much amiss for him.

Here he reads us a profound Lecture, what the common people, on whose
arbitration depends the signification of words in common use among the
Latins and Greeks, did call all actions and motions, whereof they did perceive
no cause, spontaneous and (...), And in the conclusion (...), what they are.
of his Lecture, according to his custom he forgeteth not himself. The Bishop
understanding nothing of this, might if it pleased him, have called it Iargon.
What pity is it, that he has not his Gnatho about him, to ease him of this
trouble, of stroaking his own head? Here is a Lecture, able to make all the
Blacksmiths and Watchmakers in a City, gape and wonder, to see their
workmanship so highly advanced.

Thus he vapoureth still, when he lights upon the blind side of an equivocall
word. For my part, I not only might have called it, but do still call it mere
Iargon, and no better.

To pass by peccadillo's, First he tells us, How the common people did call
all actions spontaneous, and (...), etc. How does he know what the common
people called them? The books which we have, are the books of Scholars, not of
the common people.

Secondly he says, That the signification of all words depends upon the
arbitration of the common people. Surely he means only at Athens, where it
is observed, That wise men did speak, and fools did judge. But neither at
Athens, nor at any other place were the common people, either the perfecters or
arbitrators of language, who neither speak regularly nor properly, much less
in words that are borrowed from learned languages.

Thirdly, he supposes, that these words liberty, necessity, and spontaneity,
are words in common use, which in truth are terms of art. There is as much
difference between that liberty and necessity, which ordinary people speak, and
the liberty and necessity intended in this question, (whereof we are agreed) as
there is between the pointing out of a man with ones finger, and a logical
demonstration, or between an habit in a Tailers shop, and an habit in Logic or
Ethics.

Fourthly, He confounds spontaneity and chance comprehending them both under
the name of (...), I confess that (...) in Poets and Orators, is a word of
very ambiguous signification; sometimes signifieing a necessary; sometimes a
voluntary, or spontaneous; sometimes a casual; sometimes an artificial Agent
or Event. Such equivocall words are his delight: But as they are terms of art,
all these words are exactly distinguished, and defined, and limited to their
proper and certain signification. That which is voluntary or spontaneous, is
called (...), as we see plainly in Aristotle. That which Eth. l. 3. c. 1, 2. l.
3. c. 3, 4.
is freely elected, is called (...), and that which is by chance, is called
(...), as he may see in the places cited in the margent, Phys. l. 2. c. 6.
where all these words are exactly distinguished and defined.

Fifthly, He says, the Latins and Greeks did call all actions and motions,
whereof they did perceive no cause, (...), which according to Aristotle and
other Philosophers, does signify things done by chance. And in his reason
whereof they did perceive no cause, He is mistaken on hoth sides. For first the
causes of many things are apparent, which yet are said to be done by chance, as
when a tile falls down accidentally from an house, and breaks a man's head.
And on the other side, many things whereof the causes were not known, as the
ebbing and flowing of the sea, were not said to be done by chance.

I shall not need for the present to make any further inquiry into his
extravagant interpretations of words, which he makes gratis upon his own head
and authority, and which no man admits but himself. Rectum est Index sui and
obliqui.

Sixthly he says, Not every appetite, but the A true will may be changed.
last is esteemed the will, when men do judge of the regularity or irregularity
of one another actions. I do acknowledge, that de non apparentibus, and non
existentibus eadem est ratio, If it do not appear outwardly to be his will, man
cannot judge of it as his will. But if it did appear to be his will, first or
last, though he change it over and over, it was his will, and is judged by God,
to have been his will, and may be justly judged so by man, so far as it did
appear to have been his will by his words and actions. If he mean his last will
and testament, that indeed takes place and not the former; yet the former will
was truly his will, until it was revoked. But of this, and of his
deliberation, I shall have cause to speak more hereafter.

I come now to his contradictions. His first contradiction is this, All
voluntary acts are deliberate: Some voluntary acts are not deliberate. The
former part of his contradiction is proved out of these words, Voluntary Number. 8.
presupposes some precedent deliberation, that is to to say, some consideration
and meditation of what is likely to follow, both upon the doing, and abstaining
from the action deliberated of. The second part is proved as plainly, When a
man has time to deliberate, but deliberates not, because Number. 25.
never any thing appeared that could make him doubt of the consequence, the
action follows his opinions, of the goodness or harm of it. These actions I
call voluntary, etc. because these actions that follow immediately, the last
appetitite are voluntary. And here, where there is one only apppetite, that
one is the last. To this he answers, Voluntary presupposes deliberation when
the judgment whether the action be voluntary, or Voluntarinesse does not
desend on the judgment of other.
not, is not in the Actor, but in the Judge, who regards not the will of the
Actor, when there is nothing to be accused in the action of deliberate malice,
yet knows, that though there be but one appetite, the same is truly will for
the time, and the action, if it follow, a voluntary action.

To which term does he answer? Of what term does he distinguish? Some have been
observed to have lost the benefit of their Clergy, at their deaths, because
they despised it in their life's. It is no marvel, if he receive no help from
any distinction now, who has ever been an enemy to distinctions, and a friend
to confusion. If his answer have any sense at all, this must be it. That an
indeliberate act may be in truth, and in the judgment of the Agent himself a
voluntary act: yet, in the common or public judgment of other men, it may be
esteemed and pass for an involuntary and unpunishable act. But first, neither
the questionn nor his assertion was, what is to be judged a voluntary act by
men, who neither know the heart of man, nor are able to judge of his will, but
what is a voluntary act in it self; and what is the essence and definition of a
voluntary act. I argue thus, That which is essentially a voluntary act, cannot
by any thing that is extrinsecall and subsequent, and which perhaps may never
be, be made no voluntary act. But the judgment of other men is extrinsecall
and subsequent to the act, and may perhaps never be. How many thoughts of every
man every day pass unknown, unjudged whether they were regular, or irregular.

Secondly, God Allmighty, who is the only searcher of hearts, is the proper
and only Judge of the will, If the act be truly voluntary, he judges it to
be truly voluntary, whether it be for the Agents advantage or disadvantage:
man cannot judge what acts are voluntary, and what are not, because he does not
know the heart. If one perform outward obedience to the law against his will,
man judges it to be willing obedience, and cannot do otherwise. If a man do an
evil act, man must needs judge it to be a voluntary act: And indeed so much
more voluntary, by how much it was less deliberated of, because the will is
less curbed, and must have less reluctation. How much does he err, who
prefers the judgment of man before the judgment of God?

Thirdly, according to T. H. his principles, all acts of free Agents,
whatsoever are voluntary, and cannot possibly but be voluntary. For so he
teaches, That a man is free to do if he will, but he is not free to will:
Would he have men to judge that to be unvoluntary, which cannot possibly but be
voluntary? If he will, with him is a necessary supposition.

Lastly, Judges do esteem rash unadvised acts, not to be so irregular, or so
punishable as other acts, not because they are less voluntary, for they are
more voluntary, but because the carefullest man breathing, cannot arm himself
sufficlently against all occasions, but that he may be surprised by sudden
passion. But if after the first fit of passion, he had time and means to cool
his heat, and to deliberate of his duty, before the fact committed, and yet he
continued obstinate, the law looks upon him without pity, not only as a
willing, but as a willful offender, though there was no malice nor inveterate
hatred in the case, but perhaps a quarrel upon some punctilio of honor, But
for persons incapable of deliberation, as natural fools, mad men, and
children, before they have use of reason, though there may be hatred and
malice, as experience has taught us, yet the law does not punish them in the
same nature, because it supposes them incapable of deliberation, and unable to
consider seriously and sufficiently, either of their duty, which they owe to
God and man, or of the dangers which they incur by that act, and because it is
not their fault, that they are incapable. So the judgment of men is no
save-guard to him from his contradiction. For Judges go upon our grounds, which
deny all liberty and power of election, to such as have not sufficient use of
reason, without their own fault. But he goes upon contrary grounds to us and
to the law, holding fools, mad men, children, yea, even bruit beasts, to be
capable of deliberation and election, and thereupon, supposing all voluntary
acts to be deliberated, in vain does he seek shelter under our practice, who is
an enemy to those principles, whereupon our practice is grounded.

His second contradiction, which he relates Number. 33.
amiss, is this, All spontaneity is an inconsiderate proceeding. This is
plainly set down by himself, By spontaneity is meant inconsiderate Number. 8.
proceeding, or else nothing is meant by it. To which this is contradictory,
Some spontaneity is not an inconsiderable proceeding, affirmed by him likewise,
When a man gives money voluntarily to another for merchandise, etc. he is said
to do it of his own accord, which in Latin is sponte, and therefore the action
is spontaneous. From whence I argue thus, All giving of merchandise for money is
a spontaneous act, but all giving of merchandise for money, is not an
inconsiderate act, therefore all spontaneous acts, are not inconsiderate act.
To this he answers nothing.

His third contradiction is this, That having undertaken to prove that
children, before they have the use of reason, do deliberate and elect, yet he
says by and by after, That a child may be so young as to do what he does,
without all deliberation.

I acknowledge this to be no contradiction, as it is here proposed. The acts of
reason, as deliberation, do not come to a child in an instant, but by degrees.
A child is fit to deliberate of his childish sports, or whether he should cry
or not, before he can deliberate of matters of greater moment. Bu^ if the
contradiction be proposed, as I proposed it, and always intended it, of young
suckling children, soon after their birth, I see not how he can excuse his
contradiction. For they have spontaneity the first hour: And yet by his
confession, they are too young to deliberate. But if deliberation were no more
than he makes it, a demurring upon what they should do, out of sensitive hope,
to suck the breast, and sensitive fear of some strange figure: Number. 8.
Or as he calls it elsewhere, An alternate Number. 26.
appetite to do or to acquire an action, they may deliberate well enough.

Castigations of the Animadversions, Number. 9.
TO that place by me alleged, Because 1 King. 3. 11.
thou have asked this thing, and have not asked for thy self long life, etc. He
answers thus, How does he know (understanding power properly taken) that
Solomon had a real power to ask long life? No doubt Solomon knew nothing to
the contrary: Yet it was possible that God might have hindered him. For though
God gave Solomon his choice, that is, the thing that he should choose, it does
not follow that he did not also give him the act of election. It is no new
thing with him to confound the act and the object, choice, and the thing
chosen; election, which is always of more than one, and the thing elected,
which is precisely one.

I doubt not, but Solomon had his power to Election of more than one.
elect from God, I doubt not, but the grace of God did excite Solomon, and
assist him in his election to choose well. But that Solomon was necessitated by
God to ask wisdom, and not to ask long life, or riches, or the life of his
enemy, is clearly against the text.

First God said to Solomon, Ask what I shall Verse 5.
give thee. If God had predetermined precisely what Solomon must ask, and what
he must have, and what he must not ask, and what he must not have: it was not
only a superfluous, but a ludicrous thing, to bid him ask what gift he would
have from God. Then follows Solomon's deliberation to enable him to choose what
was most fit for him. If God had Ver. 6, 7, 8, 9.
predetermined what he would give, and what Solomon must ask, how ridiculous
had it been for him to deliberate of what God had done.

Thirdly it is said, The speech pleased the Lord, that Solomon had asked this
thing. There is no Ver. 10.
doubt but all the works of God do please him, God saw all that he made, and it
was very good. But what had Solomon done to please God, if God did necessitate
Solomon irresistibly, to do what he did?

Then follow the words alleged by me, Because thou have asked this thing, and
have not Ver. 11.
asked for thy self long life, etc. which words, if this opinion of universal
necessity were true, can bear no other sense but this, Because thou have done
this which was inevitably imposed upon thee to do, and have not done that,
which was altogether impossible for thee to have done. As if a master should
first bind his servant head and foot, head and heels together, and chain him
fast to a post, and then tell him, Because thou have staid here, and did not
run away.

He urges, That Solomon knew nothing to the contrary, but that it was in his
power to have done otherwise. If Solomon the wisest of men did not know it,
there is little probability that T. H. should know it. But he must know, that
it is not Solomon who speaks these words, but God; I hope he will not suspect
God Allmighty, either of ignorance or of nescience. Lastly, we see what a
corollary God gave Solomon for asking well, about that which he did ask, riches
and honor. No man Ver. 13.
deserves either reward or punishment, for doing that which it was not in his
power to leave undone.

I urged these words of St. Peter, After it was sold, was it not in thine own
power? to show Acts 5. 4. Was it not in thy power? Explained.
that power which a man has over his own actions. He answers, That the word
power signifies no more than right, not a real natural, but a civil power,
made by a Covenant, or a right to do with his own what he pleased. I answer the
word power does not, cannot signify any such right to do with his own as he
pleased in this place. For that which St. Peter complains of, was Annanias
his unjust and sacrilegious detention of part of that which he had devoted to
God, when it was in his power to have offered the whole, that is, to have
performed his vow: If sacrilege be right, then this was right: If that which
he had purloined sacrilegously were his own, then this was his own: If Ananias
had been necessitated by external causes, to hold back that part of the price,
it had been no more sacrilege, than if Thieves had robbed him of it before he
could offer it. The reason is thus made evident, If it was in the power of
Ananias to have done that which he did not do, and to have offered that
according to his vow, which he did detain contrary to his vow, then all actions
and events are not necessitated: and it is in men's power to do otherwise than
they do, But St, Peter says it was in Ananias his power to have offered that
which he did not offer, etc.

Castigations upon the Animadversions, Number. 10.
MY reason against universal necessity in this Section was this. To necessitate
all men to all the individual actions which they do, inevitably; And to
expostulate with them, and chide them, and reprehend them, for doing of those
very things which they were necessitated to do, is a counterfeited hypocritical
exaggaration. Out of hatred to true liberty T. H. makes God hypocritical.
But according to T. H. his doctrine, God does necessitate all men inevitably
to do all the individual actions which they do; and yet expostulates with them,
and chides them, and reprehends them for doing of those very things which he
did necessitate them inevitably to do. This assumption, which only can be
questioned, is proved by the expostulations and objurations and reprehensions
themselves contained in holy Scripture. Therefore, according to his opin^on,
God himself is guilty of counterfeited, hypocritical exaggarations.

It were more ingenuous to confess that this is not to be answered, than to
bustle and keep a coile, and twist new errors with old, and tax others
ignorantly of ignorance, and say nothing to the purpose.

His first answer is generally, That I would have men believe, that because he
holds necessity, therefore he denies liberty. A dangerous accusation, to accuse
him of a matter of truth. But he says, He holds as much that there is true
liberty, as I do, or more. Yea, such a liberty as children, and fools, and
madmen, and brute beasts, and rivers have; A liberty that consists in negation,
or nothing. He says indeed that he holds a liberty from outward impediments.
But it is not true, for external causes are external impediments. And if he say
truly, all other causes are hindered from all other actions than what they do
by external causes. But true liberty from necessitation and dtermination to
one, he does not acknowledge, and without acknowledging that, he does
acknowledge nothing. I wonder to which of my Propositions, or to what term in
them, this answer is accommodated.

His second answer is particular to the expostulations themselves, That these
words spoken by God to Adam; Have thou eaten of the tree whereof I commanded
that thou should not eat, do convince Adam, that notwithstanding that God
had placed him in the Garden a means to keep him perpetually from dying, in
case he should accomodate his will to obedience of Gods Commandment, concerning
the tree of knowledge of good and evil, Yet Adam was not so much master of his
own will, as to do it. What ridiculous, or rather deplorable stuff is this?
How should it be expected that Adam should be master of his own will, if God
did necessitate his will without his will? and determine him inevitably to what
he did? If his doctrine were true, this does not convince Adam, but God
Almighty, who did first necessitate his will, and then chide him for that which
was Gods own act. Can any man be so blind as not to see the absurdity of this
doctrine? That God did place in the Garden a means to keep man perpetually from
dying, and yet did deprive him of it inevitably without his own fault? And this
is all that he answers to the other places; as that to Eve, Why have thou
done this? And to Cain, Why art thou wroth? And, Why will ye die, O ye house of
Israel?

I urged this Argument further. Does God reprehend man for doing that which he
had antecedently determined that he must do? He answers, no. How, no? Are not
these reprehensions? Or does not he maintain, that God had determined man
antecedently to do what he did? yes, but he says, God convinces man and
instructs him, that though immortality was so easy to be obtained, as that
it might be had for the abstinence from the fruit of one only tree, yet he
could not obtain it thereby. If God would only have convinced man, certainly
he would have convinced him by fitter, and juster means than hypocritical
exaggerations. But how does he say that, immortality was so easy to be
obtained? which by his doctrine was altogether impossible to be obtained by
man, by that means? It is neither so easy, nor possible to oppose and
frustrate the Decrees of an infinite God.

I shall reserve his errors in Theology for a fitter place. Whosoever would
trouble himself with his contradictions, might find more than enough. Here he
tells us that the dependence of the actions on the will, is that which
properly and truly is called liberty; elsewhere he told us, that Rivers are
free Agents, and that a River has true liberty, which if my ignorance do not
mislead me, have no wills.

That God has a secret and revealed will Gods secret and revealed will not
contrary. And why.
no man denies. To say that these wills are opposite one to another, all good
men do detest, because as I said formerly (which he takes no notice of,) they
concern several persons. The secret will of God is what he will do himself. The
revealed will is that which he would have us to do. He objecteth, God commanded
Abraham to sacrifice Isaac, yet his will was he should not do it. Jonah by Gods
command denounced the destruction of Nineveh, yet it was Gods will it should
not be destroyed. Does not he see that the person is varied in both these
instances? God would prove Abraham's faith by his readiness to sacrifice his
son upon his command. He did it. He would have Nineveth prepared for repentance
by Ionahs denunciations of his judgments; His will was accomplished. But it
was not Gods will that Isaac should be sacrificed, or Nineveh destroyed. All
denunciations of Gods judgments are understood with exception. He who
phansieth any contradiction in these two instances, understands little of the
rules of contradictions. There is great difference between that which God will
have done by others, and what he will do himself. There was just reason for
what Abraham did, and what Jonah did; but there can be no reason for God to
contradict himself.

If God had reprehended Abraham or Jonah for what they did in obedience to his
own commands, and punished them for it, and justified it by his omnipotence,
which is T. H. his inexcusable error, (as I have showed him already, and shall
show him further in due place, if there be occasion,) this had been something
to his purpose; now all that he says is wholly impertinent.

Likewise, whereas he says, that the expostulation of man against God will be
equally just or unjust, whether the necessity of all things be granted or
denied, because God could have made man impeccable and d^d not. He does but
betray his own weakness and presumption, to talk of any just expostulation
with God in any case, I have showed him already what a vain recrimination this
is, and given him just reasons why God Almighty did not Fount. of Arg. in fine.
make men impeccable.

Castigations of the Animadversions, Number. 11.
IN these Animadversions is contained, first a repetition of my Argument, to
which he answers nothing but this, That liberty is to choose what we will, not
to choose our will, which he says no inculcation is sufficient to make me take
notice of. I know not what he calls taking notice. I have confuted it over
and over again, both in my defense formerly, and now in these Castigations; And
showed it to be a vain, silly, unprofitable, false, contradictory, distinction.
What he would have me to do more for it, I understand not: But I observe that
he never mentions this distinction, but he is presently up upon his
tippetoes. He will find by degrees how little ground he has for it.

Then he proceeds to my Reply, to which he gives two Answers. First, that if
you take away these words from it, Knowledge of approbation, practical
knowledge, heavenly bodies act upon sublunary things, not only by their
motion, but also by an occult virtue; which we call influence, moral efficacy,
general influence, special influence, infuse something into the will, the will
is moved, the will is induced to will, the will suspends its own acts; which
are all nonsense, unworthy of a man; nay, if a beast could speak, unworthy of a
beast. There is an hundred times more sense in these phrases, than there is in
his great Leviathan put altogether. He who dare abuse and so much vilify many
of the Ancient Fathers, and all the lights of the Schools for so many
successive ages, and all Philosophers, natural and moral, who have written any
thing, as to style them all without exception beasts, and worse than beasts,
deserves no other answer, but contempt of his ignorant presumption, or pity of
his bold blindness. He says This malady happened to us by having our natures
depraved by doctrine. We say, His malady happened to him, because his nature
was never polished with doctrine; but he would needs be a Master in all Arts,
before he had been a Scholar in any Art. The true reason why he sleighteth
these words, is because he understands very little of them: and what he does
understand, he is not able to answer. So it fares with him as with one that
has a politic deafness, who seems not to hear, what he knows not how to
answer; as I could show him by many and many instances, but that I dare not
tell him, that any thing is too hot for his fingers.

I said that the heavenly bodies do act upon Occulte virtue, or influence.
sublunary things, not only by their motion and light, but also by an occult
virtue, which we call influence. Against the matter he excepteth not, but
against the expression, an occult virtue, whereas I should have said, I know
not how. If he alone be so happy as to know distinctly the causes of all acts,
it is well for him, but if this be nothing but bold presumption, it is so much
the worse. I have good ground for the thing it self; Can thou bind the sweet
influences of the Pleiades? If he be so much Job 38, 31.
more skilful than all other men, about the influences of the Stars, I desire
to know of him a natural reason of that peculiar virtue which the Moon has of
moistning, and Saturn of cooling, and Mercury of raising winds, etc. I fear
when all is done, he will prove to be but one of Aesops companions, who
pretended to know all things, and did know nothing.

I argued from his principles, that if God by special influence did necessitate
the second causes to operate as they did, and if they, being thus determined,
did necessitate man inevitably, unresistably, by an essential subordination of
causes to do whatsoever he did; then one of these two absurdities must follow,
either, That there is no such thing as sin in the World, or, That God is more
guilty of it than man; as the motion of the watch is more from the Artificer
who makes it and winds it up, than from the watch it self. To this he answers
only this, That my consequence is no stronger then if out of this, That a man
is lame necessarily, one should infer, That either he is not lame, or that
his lamenesse proceeded necessarily from the will of God. And is it possible
that he does not see that this inference follows clearly and necessarily from
his principles? If he does not, I will help his eyesight. All actions, and
accidents, and events, whatsoever, do proceed from the will of God, as the
principal cause determining them to do what they are, by a natural necessary
subordination of causes. This is the principle. I assume that which no man can
deny; But the lamenesse of this man (whom he mentions) is an accident or
event. Therefore this lamenesse (upon his principles) is from the will of God,
etc.

Castigations upon the Animadversions, Number. 12.
IN this Section, he behaveth himself as the Hound by Nilus, drinks and
runs, as if he were afraid to make any stay; quite omitting the whole
contexture and frame of my discourse: only catching here and there at some
phrase, or odd ends of broken sentences. The authority of St. Paul was formerly
his Palladium, the fate of his opinion of Fate, or his sevenfold shield which
he bore up against all assailants. And now to desert it as the Oestredge does
her eggs in the sand, and leave it to the judgment of the Reader, to think of
the same as he pleases, seems strange. That man usually is in some great
distress, who quitteth his buckler. I desire but the judicious Reader upon the
By, to compare my former defense with his trifling exceptions, and I do not
fear his veredict.

He says it is blasphemy to say that God can sin, so it is blasphemy also to
say that God is It is blasphemy to say that God is the cause of sin.
the author or cause of any sin. This he himself says, (at least
implicitly) and this he cannot but say, so long as he maintains an universal
antecedent necessity of all things flowing from God by a necessary flux of
second causes. He who teaches that all men are determined to sin antecedently,
without their own concurrence, irresistibly beyond their own power to prevent
it, and efficaciously to the production of sin: He who teaches that it is
the antecedent will of God, that men should sin and must sin: He who makes
God to be not only the cause of the act and of the law, but likewise of the
irregularity or deviation, and of that very anomy wherein the being of sin (so
far as sin has a being) does consist; makes God to be the principal cause
and author of sin. But T. H. does all this.

He says it is no blasphemy to say that God has so ordered the World, that
sin may necessarily be committed. That is true in a right sense, if Or to say
that sin is efficaciously decreed by God.
he understand only a necessity of infallability upon Gods presence, or a
necessity of supposition upon Gods permission. But what trifling and minsing of
the matter is this? Let him cough out, and show us the bottom of his opinion,
which he cannot deny, that God has so ordered the World, that sin must of
necessity be committed, and inevitably be committed: that it is beyond the
power of man to help it or hinder it; and that by virtue of Gods omnipotent
will, and eternal decree. This is that which we abominate.

Yet he tells us, That it cannot be said that God is the author of sin,
because not he that necessitateth an action, but he who does command or warrant
it, is the author. First I take that for granted which he admits, that by
his opinion, God necessitateth men to sinful actions, which is a blasphemy as
well as the other. Secondly his later part of his assertion is most false, That
he only, who commands or warranteth sin, is the author of it: He who acts
sin, he who necessitateth to sin, he who first bringes sin into the World, is
much more the author of it, than the bare commander of it. They make God to be
the proper and predominate cause of sin, by an essential subordination of the
sin of man, to the will of God, and in essential subordinates always the
cause of the cause, is the cause of the effect. If there had never been any
positive commandment or law given, yet sin had still been sin, as being
contrary to the eternal law of justice in God himself. If an Heathen. Prince
should command a Christian to sacrifice to Idols or Devils, and he should do
it; not the commander only, but he who commits the idolatry, is the cause of
the sin. His instance in the Act of the Israelites robbing the Egyptians of
their Jewels, is impertinent: For it was no robbery nor sin, God who is the
Lord Paramount of Heaven and Earth, having first justly transfered the right
from the Egyptians to the Israelites, and in probability, to make them some
competent satisfaction for all that work and drudgery which they had done for
the Egyptians without payment. This is certain, if God necessitate the Agent to
sin, either the act necessitated is no sin, or God is the principal cause of
it. Let him choose whether of these two absurdities, this Scylla, or that
Charybdis, he will fall into.

The reason which he gives of Gods objurgations, to convince men that their
wills were not in their own power, but in Gods power, is senseless, and much
rather proves the contrary, that because they were chidden, therefore their
wills were in their own power. And if their wills had not been in their own
power, most certainly God would not have reprehended them for that which was
not their own fault.

He says, That by interpreting hardening to be a permission of God, I
attribute no more to God in such actions, then I might attribute to any of
Pharaohs servants, the not persuading their master, etc. As if Pharaohs
servants had the same power over their master, that God Allmighty had, to
hinder him, and stop (...) no ^d per^ssion.
him in his evil courses: As if Pharaohs servants were able to give or
withhold grace, as if Pharoahs servants had divine power to draw good out of
evil, and dispose of sin, to the advancement of Gods glory, and the good of
his Church: As if an humble petition or persuasion of a servant, and a
physical determination of the will, by a necessary flux of natural causes,
were the same thing. He who sees a water break over its banks, and suffers it
to run out of its due channel, that he may draw it by furrows into his medows,
to render them more fruitful, is not a mere nor idle sufferer. His absurdities
drop as thick as Sampsons enemies, heaps upon heaps.

He objecteth, That I compare this permission of God, to the indulgence of a
parent, who by his patience encourages his son to become more rebellious,
which indulgence is a sin. Arguments taken from a parable or similitude, are
of force no further than they pertein to the end of the parable, or that
resemblance for which things are compared. The laborers penny does not prove an
equality of glory in Heaven. Nor our Saviors commendation of the unjust
Steward, justify his cheating of his Master. Christ proves the readiness of
God to do justice to his servants, upon their constant prayers, by a similitude
taken from an unjust Judge. So here the end of the similitude was only to show
that goodness may accidentally render evil natures more obdurate and
presumtuous. Neither was there any sinful indulgence, either intended or
intimated in my words, like that of Eli to his sons, but only patience, and
innocence, gentleness of a render father, such as God himself does vouchsafe
to own, Despisest thou the riches of his goodness, and forbearance, and long
suffering, not knowing that the goodness of God leads thee to repentance?
But after thy hardness and impenitent heart treasurest up unto thy self wrath.

He urges, That whether it be called an antecedent, or a consequent will, an
operate or a permissive will, it is enough for the necessity of the thing, that
the heart of Pharaoh should be hardened. An antecedent will is without
prevision of sin; A consequent will is upon prevision of sin: Is it all one
whether God do harden men's hearts for sin, or without sin, for his fault, or
without his fault? An opperate will produces an absolute necessity, an
antecedent necessity: A permissive will infers no more at the highest, but a
consequent necessity upon supposion, which may consist with true liberty, as
has been made clear to him over and over.

He desires the Reader to take notice, that if I blame him for speaking of God
as a necessitating cause, and as it were a principal Agent in causing The
difference between general and special influence.
of all actions: I may with as good reason blame my self, for making him an
accessory by concurrence. And here he vapors, Let men hold what they will
contrary to the truth, if they write much, the truth will fall into their pens.
I desire the Reader likewise to take notice, and observe, what silly cavels he
brings, commands for exceptions, and how vainly he puffs up himself, like the
Frog in the fable, with his abortive conceptions: Where did I ever use the word
[accessary] or any thing in that sense? Mala men's malus animus. If he knew the
difference between general and special influence, he would be ashamed to
infer a particular guilt from a general occurrence, A general and special
influence, is no nonsense. A Prince gives commission to a Judge, thereby
enabling him to determine criminal and capital causes; that is a general
influence of power. By virtue of this commission he hears causes, and abusing
this general power, takes bribes, gives unjust sentences, and punishes
innocent persons. Is the Prince that gave him the commission and judiciary
power, accessory to his fault? Nothing less, But the Judge abuses his
commission, and misapplyeth his just power. But if the Prince had given him a
special commission, like that of Iezabel, Proclaim a fast, set Naboth on high,
and let two men of Belial bear witness against 1 King. 21. 9.
him, saying, Thou did blaspheme God and the King, and stone him that he may
die. This had been special influence indeed; and the Prince had not only been
an accessory, but a principal in the murder. By which we may see how God
concurreth to the doing of evil by a general, not by a special influence.

I exemplified this distinction of general and special influence to him in the
earth, which concurreth to the nourishment of all plants by a general
influence, but that one plant converteth this nourishment to healthful food,
another to poison, that is, not from the general influence of the earth, but
from the special quality of the root. But quite contrary, both to my words,
and to my sense, he misapplieth it to the operative and permissive will of God,
without head or foot. It seems (says he) that he thinks that God does will
but permissively, that the hemlock should poison a man, but operatively, that
the wheat should nourish him, Risum teneatis amici?

I cleared this likewise to him in his instance of the murder of Uriah,
showing him that David's power was from God, but the misapplication of that
power was from David himself, As if (says he) there were a power that were not
the power to do some particular Act, or a power to kill, and yet to kill no
body in particular. He might even as well say, as if there were a commission or
a power given by the Prince to hear and determine causes in general, o^ to
arraign and try malefactors in general, and not to sentence this man, and hang
that man in particular. Every general commission o^ power does justify
particular Acts, whilst they, who are empowered do pursue their commission,
and not abuse their power, but if they abuse their power, neither will their
general power justify their particular misdeeds, nor their particular faults
render the Prince accessory, who gave them their general power.

In this impertinent instance of the divine. right of Bishops to ordain
Ministers, which he brings in by the head and shoulders, he shows nothing
but his ignorance and his teeth. Every man who has an undoubted right to do
some act, has not presently a right to exercise it promiscuously, when and
where, and upon whom he will, without any respect to those who had a precedent
right before himself. Let him inquire further into the difference between an
actual and habitual power, and it will save him the further labor of
inquiring, and me of informing him. Qui pauca consider at facile pronunciat.

He demands, Did not God foreknow that Uriah in particular, should be
murdered by David in particular? And what God for knows shall come to pass.
Yes, God does know in eternity; for with God, properly, there is neither
foreknowledge nor afterknowledge, neither past, nor to come, but all things
present always. Or if he will have us speak after the manner of men, God did
foreknow that David should kill Uriah with the sword of the children of Ammon.
And God did likewise foreknow that T. H. should maintain this Paradox so
dishonorable to his Majesty, that God did necessitate David to kill Uriah: But
knowledge of what kind soever it be, takes away no man's liberty. Uriah might
have gone to his own house upon David's entreaty: and then David had not killed
Uriah upon any necessitation from Gods foreknowledge. Uriah might have killed
David, and then God had foreknown that, not this. But this objection Fountains
of Arg^ments.
has been formerly fully answered: whither I refer the Reader.

He charge me to say, that the case agitated between us, is Whether Gods
irresistible power, or man's sin, be the cause why he punishes one man more
than another? whereas the case agitated between us, is, Whether a man can now
choose, what shall be his will anon. There are several cases or questions
between us. First the general or main question which is already stated by
consent, Whether the will of man be free from extrinsecal determination to one
antecedently? and not as it is here proposed by him fondly and ambiguously,
Whether a man can now choose what shall be his will anon. For first a man is not
certain that he shall live so long, to be able to choose his will. And althought
he were certain to live so long, yet Iam. 4. 13, 14.
succeeding time may make such a change of affairs, that he may have just
reason to choose otherwise. Quemquam posse putas more's narrare futuros?
Dic mihi si fias tu leo qualis eris.


But besides the maine general question, there are likewise many particular
subordinate questions, as this in this Section, whether this opinion of
universal necessity do not make all punishment to be unjust, because if a man
be necessitated antecedently and unavoidably to do what he does, he is punished
without his own fault, and consequently unjustly. To escape this argument he is
driven to seek shelter under the omnipotence of God. Power irresistble
justifies all actions really and properly in whomsoever it be found. And when
God afflicted Job he did object no sin to him. That which he does is justified
by his doing it. So the present dispute was, Whether man's sin or Gods
omnipotence were the just ground of punishment? This was all I said, and more
than I said. But he can set down nothing without either mistaking it, or
confounding it. Gods Power is not the rule of his Justice, but his will; not
because his will makes that to be just which otherwise was unjust, but because
he can will nothing, but that which is just. But he adds not one grain of
weight more in these Animadversions about this subject, to what he had formerly
said; all which has been fully and clearly satisfied in Number. 12.
my former defense, to which he has replied nothing.

That which I said of the Jews, that it was in their own power by their
concurrence with Gods grace to prevent those judgments, and to recover their
former estate, is so true, and so plainly affirmed by St. Paul, that no man but
himself durst have cavilled Romans 11. 23.
against it, But he who knows no liberty but from outward impediments, no
general power of motion without a necessitation to kill Uriah, no grace but
that which is irresistible, who has never heard of the concurrence of grace
and free will in the conversion of a sinner, it is no marvel if he think that
God will save men without themselves, as well as he made them without
themselves.

I said God may oblige himself freely to his creature. Who ever doubted of it
before him? God may oblige himself.
What does he think of Gods promise to Abraham; I will be the God of thee, and
of thy seed after thee? Or of the legal Covenant, Do this and thou shall live?
Or of the Evangelical Covenant; He that believes and is baptized, shall be
saved? But he says, He that can oblige, can also release when he will; and be
that can release himself when he will is not obliged. Is not this comfortable
doctrine, and suitable to the truth and majesty of Almighty God, in whom there
is no variableness nor shadow Jam. 1. 17.
of turning? Nothing is impossible to Gods absolute power: But according to his
ordinate power, which is disposed by his will, he cannot change his own
decrees, not go from his promise. If Gods decrees were changeable, what would
become of his universal necessity? But he shoots at random, not much
regarding so it fit his present humor, whether it make for his cause or
against it.

But now I am to expect an heavy charge. Hitherto he has been but in jest,
That I am God cannot do any unrighteous thing.
driven to words ill becoming me to speak of God Almighty, for I make him
unable to do that which has been within the ordinary power of men to do. How
is this? I said God cannot destroy the righteous with the wicked, which
nevertheless is a thing done ordinarily by armies. The great mountain has
brough forth a little mouse. Might not I say, that God cannot sin, though mean
men can do it? Why might not I say that God cannot do unrighteous things, or
God cannot be unrighteous, which is the same thing in effect? as well as the
Scripture says, God cannot lie, God cannot repent, God cannot Tit. 1. 2. Number.
(...). 19. 2 Timothy 2. 13. Hebr. 6. 10. Mich. 6. 2.
deny himself? And God is not unrighteous to forget your works. As if he should
say, If God could break his promise, God could be unrighteous, but he cannot be
unrighteous. Yea the Lord does submit himself, as it were, to a trial upon this
point; The Lord has a controversy with his people, and he will plead with
Israel. And he does challenge them upon this very point. Hear now, O house of
Israel, is not my way equal? are not your ways unequal? Ezekiel. 18. 25.
And in the same Chapter he protests, As I live s^h the Lord, ye shall not
have occasion any more to use this proverb in Israel; the fathers have eaten
sour grapes, and the childrens teeth are set on edge: But the soul that
sins shall die. And Abraham says the same that I say, (thought he deny it,)
by way of intrrogation indeed, but with much more vehemence; Will thou also
destroy the righteous with Genesis 18. 23, 25.
the wicked, etc? That be far from thee to do after this manner, to slay the
righteous with the wicked, and that the righteous should be as the wicked, that
be far from thee. Shall not the Judge of all the Earth do right? Neither can he
except, because it is not said, Can thou? but Will thou? for we speak of the
ordinate power of God which is ordered by his will.

That which he says of an army, weighs less than nothing. For first that
destruction which an army makes, is not like that destruction whereof Abraham
speaks, which fell upon Sodom and Gomorrah, which the Apostle calls the
vengeance of eternal fire. Iud. 7.
The destruction made by an army may be a punishment to some, a chastisement or
a blessing to others. Jeremy the Prophet was involved with the rest of the Jews
in the same Babylonian Captivity; but the destruction of Sodom and Gomorrah,
was an express punishment for sin. Thirdly, an army acts by way of public
Justice, regarding the justice of the cause, not of particular persons; for it
is not possible in the height of war to do justice according to the particular
merits of single persons. But after this necessity is over, and particular
Justice can take place, then no man ought to suffer, but according to his
guilt: Then it is no more lawful to destroy the righteous with the wicked.
Necessity may justify the sufferings of innocent persons in some cases. But no
necessity can warrant the punishment of innocent persons. Innocentium lachrimae
diluvio periculosiores.

Whether they did well or ill for the manner of the act, who put out their
bodily eyes, because they supposed them to be an impediment to the eye of the
soul, is not pertinent to our purpose, yet was apt enough to prove my
intention, that bodily blindness may sometimes be a benefit.

His instance in brute beasts which are afflicted, yet cannot sin, is
extravagant. I did not go about to prove that universal necessity does take
away afflictions, it rather rendereth them unavoidable. But I did demonstrate
(and he has not been able to make any show of an answer to it,) that it takes
away all just rewards and punishments, which is against the universal notion
and common belief of the whole World. Brute beasts are not capable of
punishment: They are not knocked down out of vindictive justice for faults
committed, but for future use and benefit. I said there was a vast difference
between the light and momentany pangs of brute beasts, and the intolerable and
endless pains of Hell. Sure enough. Dionysius the Tyrant seeing an ox knocked
down at one blow, said to his friends, What a folly it is to quit so fair a
command for Plut.
fear of dying, which lasts no longer a space. He himself, when his wits are
calmer, does acknowledge as much as I, and somewhat more. Perhaps (says he) if
the death of a sinner Number. 10.
were an eternal life in extreme misery, a man might as far as Job has done,
expostulate with God Allmighty, not accusing him of injustice, etc. but of
little tenderness and love to mankind. But now he is pleased to give another
judgment of it, As if the length or greatness of the pain, made any
difference of the justice or unjustice of inflicting it, yes, very much.
According to the measure of the fault, ought to be the number of the stripes.
If the punishment exceed the offense, it is unjust. On the other side, it is
not only an act of justice, but of favor and grace to It is just to afflict
innocent persons for their own good.
inflict temporary pains for a greater good. Otherwise a Master could not
justly correct his Scholar. Otherwise a Surgeon might not lance an
impostume, or put a man to pain to cure him of the stone. If God afflict a man
with a momentary sickness, and make this sickness a means to fit him for an
eternal weight of glory, he has no cause to complain of injustice.

He is angry that I would make men believe that he holds all things to be just,
that are done by them who have power enough to avoid punishment. He does me
wrong, I said no such thing; If he be guilty of this imputation, either
directly, or by consequence, let him look to it; he has errors enough which
are evident. I did indeed con44te this tenet of his, That irresistible power is
the rule of justice, of which he is pleased to take no notice in his
Animadversions. But whereas he does now restrain this privilege to that power
alone, which is absolutely irresistible, he forgets himself over much,
having formerly extended it to all Sovereigns and Supreme Councels, within
their own dominions. It is manifest therefore, that in every Commonwealth
there Lib. de cive tit. Imp. c. 6. n. 18.
is some one man or Council which has, etc. a Sovereign and absolute power, to
be limited by the strength of the Common wealth, and by no other thing. What
neither by the Law of God, nor nature, nor nations, nor the municipall laws of
the land, nor by any other thing but his power and strength? Good doctrine,
Hunc tu Roman caveto.

Lastly, to make his presumtion complete, he indeavoureth to prove that God is
not only ^n is properly irregularity.
the author of the Law: which is most true, and the cause of the act, which is
partly true, because he is the only fountain of power, but that he is the
cause of the irregularity, that is, in plain English, (which he delights in)
the sin it self. I think (says he) there is no man but understands, etc. That
where two things are compared, the similitude or dissimilitude, regularity or
irregularity that is between them, is made in, and by the things themselves
that are compared. The Bishop therefore that denies God to be the cause of the
irregularity, denies him to be the cause both of the law, and of the action.
This is that which he himself calls blasphemy elsewhere, that God is the
author or cause of sin. Sin is nothing, but the irregularity of the Act. So
St. John defines it in express terms, (...), Sin is an anomy, or an
irregularity, or a transgression of the law. For sin is nothing else but a
declination from the rule, that is, an irregularity. Another definition of sin
is this, Sin is that which is thought or said or done against the eternal law.
Still you see the formal reason of sin, does consist in the contrariety to the
law, that is, the irregularity. Othets define sin to be a want of rectitude,
or a privation of conformity to the rule, that is, irregularity. An irregular
action is sin materially, Irregularity is sin formally. Others define sin to
be a free transgression of the commandment. Every one of these definitions
demonstrate that Mr. Hobbes makes God to be properly the cause of sin.

But let us weigh his argument, He who is the cause of the law, and the cause
of the action, God no cause of irregularity.
is the cause of the irregularity; but God is the cause of the law, and the
cause of the action. I deny his assumption, God indeed is the cause of the law,
but God is not the total or adaequate cause of the action: Nay, God is not at
all the cause of the action qua talis, as it is irregular, but the free Agent.
To use our former instance of an unjust judge; The Prince is the author or
cause of the law, and the Prince is the cause of the judiciary action of the
Judge in general, because the Judge deriveth all his power of judicature from
the Prince. But the Prince is not the cause of the irregularity, or repugnance,
or nonconformity, or contrariety which is between the Judges actions and the
law, but the Judge himself, who by his own fault, did abuse and misapply that
good general power, which was committed and entrusted to him by the Prince; he
is the only cause of the anomy or irregularity.

Or as a Scrivener that teaches one to write, and sets him a copy, is both the
cause of the rule, and of the action, or writing, and yet not the cause of the
irregularity or deviation from the rule. Sin is a defect, or deviation, or
irregularity. No defect, no deviation, no irregularity can proceed from God.
But herein does consist T. H. his error, that he distinguishes not between an
essential and an accidental subordination. Or between a good general power,
and the derermination or misapplication of this general power to evil. What
times are we fallen into! to see it publicly maintained, That God is the cause
of all irregularity, or deviation from his own rules.

Number. 13.
HEre is no need of Castigations, there being no Animadversions.

Castigations of the Animadversions, Number. 14.
IN the beginning, he repeateth his empty objections, from what shall be, shall
be, and from foreknowledge, and that a man cannot choose to day for tomorrow:
and thence concludes, (nemine consentiente) That my deductions are irrational
and fallacious, and that he need make no further answer. As if he should say, I
sent forth two or three light horsemen to vapor, who were soundly beaten back,
and made their defense with their heels, therefore I need not answer the charge
of the main battle. He told me that I did not understand him, if I thought he
held no other necessity, than that which is contained in that old foolish rule,
Whatsoever is, when it is, it is necessarily so as it is. But I see, when all
is done, he must sit down and be contented to make his best of that old foolish
rule, For praescience, and what shall be shall be, do imply no more.

In the next place, he charge me with three great abfurdities. The first that
I say, A law may be unjust. The second, That a law may be Laws may be unjust.
tyrannical. The third that I say, It is an unjust law which prescribes things
impossible in themselves to be done. A grievous accusation. These absurdities
are at age, let them even answer for themselves.

He says, Civil laws are made by every man that is subject to them, because
every one of them consented to the placing of the Legislative power. I deny his
consequence. Indeed in causes that are naturally, necessarily, and essentially
subordinate, the cause of the cause is always the cause of the effect, as he
that planteth a vineyard, is the cause of the vine. But in causes that are
accidentally or contingently subordinate, as the people electing, the lawgiver
elected, and the law made are; the cause of the cause is not always the cause
of the effect. As he that planteth a vineyard, is not the cause of the
drunkenness. The Kings commission makes a Judge, but it is not the cause of
his unrighteous judgment. Two Cities in Italy contending about their bounds,
chose the people of Rome to be their Arbitrators; they gave either City a small
pittance, and reserved all the rest to themselves, Quod in medio est, populo
Romano adjucetur. The two Cities did not so much like their Arbitators at the
first, as they detested the Arbitrament at the last. And though they had
contracted a necessity of compliance by their credulous submission, yet this
did not free that unconscionable Arbitrament from palpable injustice; no, nor
yet so much as from palpable injury: for though a man is not injuried, who is
willing to be injuried, volenti non fit injuria; Yet he who does choose an
Arbitrator, does not choose his unjust Arbitrament; nor he that chooses a
Lawgiver, choose his tyrannical Law. Though he have obliged himself to passive
obedience, yet his obligation does not render either the injur^ous Arbitrament
of the one, or the tyrannical law of the other to be just. So the main ground
of his error is a gross fallacy, which every Sophister in the University is
able to discover.

I answer secondly, That though every subject had actually consented, as well
to the laws, as to the Lawgiver; yea, though the law were made by the whole
collective body of the people in their own persons; yet if it be contrary to
the law of God or nature, it is still an unjust law. The people cannot give
that power to their Prince, which they have not themselves.

Thirdly, many laws are made by those who are not duly invested with
Legislative power, which are therefore unjust laws.

Fourthly, many laws are made to bind forraigners: who exercise commerce with
subjects, which if they be contrary to the pacts and capitulations of the
confederate nations, are unjust laws. Forraigners never consented to the
placing of the Legislative power.

Fifthly, no humane power whatsoever, judiciary or Legislative, civil or
sacred, is exempted from excesses, and possibility of doing or making unjuct
acts.

Lastly, the people cannot confer more power upon their Lawgiver, than God
himself does confer; neither is their election a greater privilege from
injustice, than Gods own disposition: but they, who have been placed in
sovereign power by God himself, have both made unjust laws, and prescribed
unjust acts to their subjects.

I said those laws were unjust, which prescribed Impossibilities made b^ our
selves, may be justly imposed, not impossibilities in them, selves,
things impossible in themselves. Against this he excepteth, Only
contradictions are impossible in themselves; all other things are possible in
themselves, as to raise the dead, to change the course of nature. But never any
Tyrant did bind a man to contradictions, or make a law, commanding him to do
and not to do the same action, or to be, and not to be in the same place, at
the same moment of time. I answer first, That Tyrants may command, and by their
Deputies have commanded contradictory Acts, as for the same Subjects to appear
before several Judges, in several places, at the same time. And to do several
duties inconsistent one with another, which imply a contradiction: and have
punished Subjects for disobedience in such cases.

Secondly I answer, That when we say Lawmakers ought to command things
possible, it ought to be understood of things possible to their Subjects, upon
whom they impose their commands; not of such things as are possible to God
Allmighty. To make a law that subjects should raise the dead, or change the
course of nature, (which he reckons as things possible in themselves) is as
unjust a law, as a law that should injoine them contradictions, and the acts as
impossible to the Subject.

Thirdly, these words, [impossible in themselves] which he lays hold on, have
a quite contrary sense to that which he imagines, and are warranted by great
Authors, Some things are impossible to us by our own defaults, as for a man to
hold the liquour firmly without shedding, who has contracted the Palsy by his
own intemperance. These impossibilities may justly be forbidden and punished,
when we have had power, and lost it byour own fault. Secondly, there are other
impossibilities in themselves, such as proceed not from our own faults, which
never were in our power, as those which proceed from the antecedent
determinatioo of extrinsecall causes. To injoine these by law, and to punish a
man for not obeying, is unjust and tyrannical.

Whereas I called just laws the ordinances of right reason, he says It is an
error that has cost many thousands of men their lives. His reason is, If laws
be erroneous shall they not be obeyed? Shall we rather rebel? I answer,
neitheir the one one nor the other. We are not to obey them actively, because
we ought Acts 5. 29.
to obey God rather than man. Yet may we not rebel, Submit your selves to
every ordinance of 1 Pet. 2. 13
man, for the Lords sake. Passive obedience is a mean between active obedience
and rebellion. To just laws which are the ordinances of right reason, active
obedience is due. To unjust laws which are the ordinances of reason erring,
passive obedience is due. Who shall hope to escape exception, when this
innocent difinition is quarrelled at. I wish his own principles were half so
loiall.

He says I take punishment for a kind of revenge, Proper punishment is ever
vindictive in part.
and therefore can never agree with him, who takes it for nothing else but for
a correction, or for an example, etc. I take punishment in the same sense, that
all Authors both sacred and civil, Divines and Philosophers, Lawyers, and
generally all Classick Writers have ever taken it. That is, for an evil of
passion which is inflicted for an evil of action. So to pass by other
Authors, as slighted by him, the holy Scripture does always take it. As
wherefore does a living man complain? for the punishment Lam. 3. 39.
of his sins. And this is an heinous crime, Job. 31. 11.
yea it is an iniquity to be punished by the Judges. And thou have punished us
less than our iniquities Ezra, 9. 13.
deserved. Yea, punishment does not only presuppose sin, but the measure of
punishment, the degree of sin. He that despised Moses law, Heb. 10. 28.
died without mercy; of how much sorer punishment shall he be thought worthy,
who has trampled under foot the son of God? The Judge was commanded to cause
the offender to be beaten Deuteronomy. 25. 2.
according to the fault. This truth we learned from the ferula's and rods which
we smarted under when we were boys. And from the gibbets and axes, and
wheels, which are prepared for offenders. Omnis paena si justa est, peccati
paena est.

That the punishment of Delinquents has other ends also, there is no doubt,
Nemo prudens punit quia peccatum est, sed ne peccetur. Punishment respects the
Delinquent in the first place, either to amend him, or to prevent his doing of
more mischief. Secondly, it regards the party suffering, to repair his
honor, or preserve him from contempt, or secure him for the time to come.
Lastly, it respects other persons, that the suffering of a few may be
ex^mplary, and an admonition to many. But herein lies his error, That
punishment is for nothing else but for correction or example. God spared not
the Angels that sinned, but cast 1 Pet. 2 4.
them down into Hell. That was no correction. And at the last Judgment, Go ye
cursed into everlasting fire: there is neither correction nor example, but in
both instances there is punishment. Whence it is apparent, that some
punishment, especially divine, does look only at the satisfaction of justice.

I gave five instances of unjust laws; Pharaohs law to drown the Israelitish
children; Yet further of unjust laws.
Nebuchadnezars law to cast them who would not commit idolatry, into the firey
Furnace; Darius his law that whosoever prayed to God for thirty days, should
be cast into the Den of Lions; Ahashuerosh his law to destroy the Jewish Nation
root and branch; The Pharisees law to excommunicate all those who confessed
Christ. To all these he answers nothing in particular, but in general, he
gives this answer; That they were just laws in relation to their subjects,
because all laws made by him to whom the people have given the Legislative
power, are the acts of every one of that people: and no man can do injustice to
himself. But they were unjust actions in relation to God. He fears the Bishop
will think this d^scourse too subtle: Nay rather the Bishop thinks it too
flat and dull. Dii te Damasippe deaeque Tale jud^cium donent tenere. I have
answered his reason before, that it is a Sophistical fallacy, flowing from the
accidental subordination of the causes. A man may will the Lawgiver, and yet
not will the Law. That is one reply to his distinction.

Secondly, I reply, That when the people did give them the Legislative power,
they gave a Kingly power to preserve and protect their Subjects: they meant not
a power to drown them, to burn them, to cast them to the Lions, to root them
out from the earth by the means of unjust, bloody, tyrannical laws, made on
purpose to be pitfalls to catch Subjects. Hear himself: No man can transfer
or lay down his right to save himself from death, L. 1. 14.
wounds, and imprisonment. If the right be not transferred in such cases, then
the law is groundless and unjust, and made without the consent of the Subject.
They did not give, they did not intend to give, they could not give them a
divine power, or rather a power paramount above God: To command idolatry, to
forbid all prayer and invocation of Gods holy Name; And therefore, though such
laws do not warrant rebellion, because it is better to die innocent, than to
live nocent; yet that hinders not but such laws are un-just, both toward
God, and toward man.

Thirdly, if these laws had been just in relation to the Subjects, then the
Subjects had been bound to obey them actively, but they were not bound to obey
them actively; yea they were bound not to obey them. The Midwives Exodus 1. 17.
feared God, and did not as the King of Egypt commanded them. The three
children answered; Be it known unto thee, O King, that Dan. 3. 18.
we will not serve thy gods, nor worship thy golden image, which thou have set
up. The Parents of Heb. 11. 23.
Moses are commended for their faith, in saving Moses contrary to the Kings
commandment.

Fourthly, Subjects have given to their Sovereigns, as well Judiciary as
Legislative power over themselves; but their Judiciary power does not justify
their unjust acts or sentences, even toward their Subjects. Elias 1 King. 21.
accused Ahab of murder. And Elisha called his son Joram, The son of a
murderer. Saul's injustice toward the Gibeonites, did draw the 2 King. 6. 32.
guilt of blood upon his House. And the Lord was not satisfied until the
Gibeonites had received satisfaction. He himself styles David's act toward
Uriah murder. Certainly murder is not just, either toward God, or toward
man. Therefore neither does the Legislative power justify their unjust laws.

Fifthly, of all Lawgivers, those who are placed freely by the people, have the
least pretense to such an absolute and universal resignation of all the
property and interest of the Subject. For it is to be presumed that the people
who did choose them, had more regard to their own good, than to the good of
their Lawgiver, and did look principally at the protection of their own
persons, and the preservation of their own rights, and did contract
accordingly. As we see in the most flourishing Monarchies of the World; as that
of the Medes and Persians: They had their fundamental laws, which were not in
the single power of the present Lawgiver to alter or violate by a new law or
command, without injustice. Dan. 6. 8.


If a pupil shall choose a Tutour or Guardian for himself, he investeth him
with all his power, he obliges himself to make good all his acts.
Nevertheless he may wrong his pupil, or do him injustice: There is only this
difference, that a pupil may implead his Guardian, and recover his right
against him; But from a Sovereign Lawgiver there lies no appeal, but only to
God. Otherwise there would be endless appeals, which both nature and policy
does abhor. As in the instance of the Roman Arbitrament, formerly mentioned. An
arbitrary power is the highest of all powers: Judges must proceed according to
law, Arbitrators are tied to no law, but their own reason, and their own
consciences. Yet all the world will say, that the Romans dealt fraudulently and
unjustly with the two parties.

Lastly, the holy Scriptures do every where Mich. 6. 16. 2 K. 17 19. Isay 10.
1. The authority of the Scripture, not dependent on the printer.
brand wicked Laws as infamous. As the Statutes of Omr^, and the Statutes of
Israel, and styles them expressly unjust laws, or unrighteous decrees.

He asks to whom the Bible is a law? The Bible is not a law, but the positive
laws of God are contained in the Bible. Does he think the Law of God is no Law
without his suffrage? He might have been one of Tiberius his Council, when it
was proposed to the Senate, Whether they should admit Christ to be a God or
not. He says, I know that it is not a law to all the World. Not de facto
indeed. How should it? when the World is so full of Atheists, that make no more
account of their souls, than of so many handfuls of salt, to keep their bodies
from stinking? But de jure, by right it is a Law, and ought to be a Law to all
the World. The Heathens, and particularly the Stoics themselves, did speak
Ammon. in lib. de Interpret.
with much more reverence of the holy Books, of which to suspect a falsehood,
they held to be an heinous and detestable crime. And the first argument for
necessity, they produced from the authority of those Books, because they said
that God did know all things, and dispose all things.

He asks, How the Bible came to be a Law to us? Did God speak it viva voce
to us? have we seen the miracles? have we any other assurance then the words of
the Prophets, and the authority of the Church? And so it concludes, that it is
the Legislative power of the Commonwealth, wheresoever it is placed, which
makes the Bible a Law in England. If a man dug a pit, and covered it not
again, so that an ox or an ass fell into it, he was obbliged by the Mosaical
Law, to make satisfaction for the damage. I know not whether he do this on
purpose to weaken the authority of holy Scripture, or not. Let God and his own
conscience be his Triers: But I am sure he has dug a pit for an ox or an
ass, without covering it again, and if they chance to stumble blindfold into
it, their blood will be required at his hands. If a Turk had said so much of
the Alchoran at Constantinople, he were in some danger.

If it were within the compass of the present controversy, I should esteem it
no difficult task to demonstrate perspicuously, that the holy Scriptures can be
no other then the word of God himself; by their antiquity, by their harmony, by
their efficacy, by the sanctity and sublimity of their matter; such as could
not have entered into the thoughts of man, without the inspiration of the Holy
Ghost: By the plainness of their style so full of Majesty, by the light of
prophetical predictions, by the testimony of the blessed Martyrs, by a
multitude of miracles, by the simplicity of the Penmen and Promulgers, poor
fishermen and shepherds, who did draw the World after their oaten reeds; and
lastly, by the judgments of God that have fallen upon such Tyrants and others,
as have gone about to suppr esse or profane the Sacred Oracles. But this is one
of those things de quibus nefas est dubitare, which he that calls into
question, deserves to be answered otherwise than with arguments.

But that which is sufficient to confute him, is the law of nature, which is
the same in a great part with the positive Law of God recorded in holy
Scriptures. All the ten Commandments in respect of their substanrials, are
acknowledged by all men to be branches of the law of nature. I hope he will not
say, that these laws of nature were made by our Suffrages, though he be as
likely to say such an absurdity, as any man living. For he says, the law of
nature is the assent it self which all men give to the means of their
preservation. Every law is a rule of our actions; a mere assent is no rule. A
law commands or forbids, an assent does neither. But to show him his
vanity; Since he delights so much in distinctions, let him satisfy himself
out of the distinction of the law of nature. The law of nature is the
prescription of right reason, whereby thorough that light which nature has
placed in us, we know some things to be done because they are honest, and other
things to be shunned because they are dishonest. He had forgotten what he had
twice cited and approved out of Cicero, concerning the law of nature, which
Philo calls, The law that cannot lie; not moral, made by mortals, not without
life, or written in paper or columns without life, but that which can not be
corrupted, written by the immortal God in our understandings.

Secondly, if this which he says did deserve any consideration, it was before
the Bible was admitted, or assented unto, or received as the word of God. But
the Bible has been assented unto, and received in England sixteen hundred
years. A fair prescription; and in all that time, I do not find any law to
authorize it, or to under-prop heaven from falling with a bullrush. This is
undeniable, that for so many successive ages, we have received it as the law of
God himself, not depending upon our assents, or the authority of our Lawmakers.

Thirdly, we have not only a national tradition of our own Church, for the
divine authority of holy Scripture, but which is of much more moment: we have
the perpetual constant universal tradition of the Catholic Church of Christ,
ever since Christ himself did tread upon the face of the earth This is so clear
a proof of the universal reception of the Bible, for the genuine Word of God,
that there cannot justly be any more doubt made of it, than whether there ever
was a William the Conqueror or not.

But this is his opinion, That true religion in every Country is that which the
Sovereign Magistrate does admit and injoyne. I could wish his deceived
followers would think upon what rock he drives them. For if this opinion be
true, then that which is true religion to day, may be false religion tomorrow,
and change as often as the chief Governor or Governors change their opinions.
Then that which is true religion in one Country, is false religion in another
Country, because the Governors are of different opinions; then all the
religions of the World, Christian, Jewish, Turkish, Heathenish, are true
religions in their own Countries: and if the Governor will allow no religion,
then Atheism is the true religion. Then the blessed Apostles were very unwise
to suffer for their conscience, because they would obey God rather than man,
Then the blessed Martyrs were ill advised to suffer such torments for a false
religion, which was not warranted, or indeed which was for bidden by the
Sovereign Magistrates. And so I have heard from a Gentleman Mr. R. H.
of quality, well deserving credit, that Mr. Hobbes and he talking of
self-preservation, he pressed Mr. Hobbes with this argument drawn from holy
Martyrs. To which Mr. Hobbes gave answer, They were all fools. This bolt was
soon shot: but the primitive Church had a more venerable esteem of the holy
Martyrs, whose sufferings they called palms; their Prison a Paradise, and their
death-day, their birthday of their glory: to whose memory they builded
Churches, and instituted festivalls, whose monuments God himself did honor
with frequent miracles.

He asks why the Bible should not be canonical in Constantinople, as well as
in other places, if it were not as he says? His question is Apocryphal, and
deserves no other answer, but another question, Why a ship being placed in a
stream, is more apt to fall down the stream, than to ascend up against the
stream? It is no marvel if the World be apt to follow a sensual religion,
which is agreeable to their own appetites. But that any should embrace a
religion which surpasses their own understandings, and teaches them to deny
themselves, and to sail against the stream of their own natural corruptions,
this is the mere goodness of God.

He says, That a Conqueror makes no laws over the conquered, by virtue of his
power and conquest, but by virtue of their assent. Most vainly urged like all
the rest. Unjust Conquerours gain no right, but just Conquerours gain all
right, Omnia dat qui justa negat, Just conquerors do not use to ask the assent
of those whom they have conquered in lawful war, but to command obedience. See
but what a pret^y liberty he has found out for conquered persons, They may
choose whether they will obey or dye. Una salus victis, nullam sperare salutem,
What is this to the purpose, to prove that Conquerours make laws by the assent
of those whom they have conquered? nothing at all. And yet even thus much is
not true upon his principle: Conquered Persons are not free to live or die
indifferently, according to his principles; but they are necessitated either to
the one or the other, to live slaves, or dye captives.

He has found out a much like assent of T. H. a fit Catechist for disloial and
unnatural persons.
children, to the laws of their Ancestors, without which he would make us
believe that the laws do not bind. When a child comes to strength enough to do
mischief, and to judgment, that they are preserved from mischief, by fear of
the sword that does protect them, in the very act of receiving protection, and
not renouncing it, they obliege themselves to the laws of their protectours.
And here he inserteth further some of his peculiar errors, as this, That
Parents who are not subject to others, may lawfully take away the lives of
their children, and Magistrates take away the lives of their Subjects, without
any fault or crime, if they do but doubt of their obedience. Here is
comfortable doctrine for children, that their parents may knock out their
brains lawfully. And for Subjects, that their Sovereigns may lawfully hang them
up, or behead them, without any offense committed, if they do but doubt of
their obedience. And for Sovereigns, that their Subjects are quitted of their
allegiance to them, so soon as they do but receive actual protection from
another: And for all men if they do receive protection from a Turk, or an
heathen, or whomsoever; they are obliged to his Turkish, Heathenish,
Idolatrous, Sacrilegious, or impious laws. Can such opinions as these live in
the World? surely no longer ^han men recover their right wits. Demades
^hreatned Phocion, That the Athenians would destroy him, when they fall into
their mad fits. And thee, Demades, (said Phocion) when they return to their
right minds.

He says, That I would have the Judge to condemn no man for a chrime that is
necessitated. As if (says he) the Judge could know what acts are neressary,
unless he knew all that had anteceded both visible and invisible. If all acts
be necessary, it is an easy thing for the Judge to know what acts are
necessey. I say more, that no crime can be necessitated; for if it be
necessitated, it is no crime. And so much all Judges know firmly, or else they
are not fit to be Judges. Surely he supposes there are, or have been, or may
be, some Stoicall Judges in the World. He is mistaken, no Stoic wss ever fit
to be a Judge, either Capital or Civil. And in truth, Stoicall principles, do
overthrow both all Judges and Judgments.

He denies that he ever said, that all Magistrates at first were elective.
Perhaps not in so many words, but he has told us again, that no law can be
unjust, because every Subject chooses his law in choosing his Lawgiver. If
every Lawgiver be elective, then every Sovereign Magistrate is elective, for
every Sovereign Magistrate is a Lawgiver. And he has justified the laws of
the Kings of Egypt, of Assyria, of Persia, upon this ground, because they were
made by him, to whom the people had given the Legislative power.

He adds, That it appears, that I am of opinion, that a law may be made to
command the will. Nothing less, if he speaks of the law of man. My argument
was drawn from the lesser to the greater, thus, If that law be unjust, which
commands a man to do that which is impossible for him to do, then that law is
likewise unjust, which commands him to will that which is impossible for him to
will. He sees I condemn them both, but much more the later. Yet upon his
principles, he who commands a man to do impossibilities, commands him to
will impossibilities, because without willing them, he cannot do them. My
argument is ad hominem, and goes upon his own grounds, That though the action
be necessitated, nevertheless, the will to break the law, makes the action
unjust. And yet he maintains, that the will is as much or more necessitated
than the action, because he makes a man free to do if he will, but not free to
will. If a man ought not to be punished for a necessitated act; then neither
ought he to be punished for a necessitated will.

I said truly, That a just law justly executed, is a cause of justice. He
infers that he has showed that all laws are just, and all just laws are
justly executed. And hereupon he concludes. That I confess, that all I reply
unto here is true. Do I confess that all laws are just? No, I have
demonstrated the contrary: or do I believe that all just laws are justly
executed? It may be so, in Platos Commonwealth, or in Sr. Thomas Mores
Eutopia, or in my Lord Verulams Atlanteis. But among us Mortals, it is rather
to be wished, than to be hoped for. He who builds partly upon his own
principles, and partly upon his adversaries, is not very likely to lay a good
foundation.

He accuses me of charging him falsely for saying, That God having commanded
one thing openly, plots another thing secretly, which he calls one of my ugly
phrases. I did not charge him for saying that God did so, but that he might do
so, without injustice. Whether the charge be true or false, let his own words
bear witness, That which God does, is made just Number, 12.
by his doings: Just I say in him, not always just in us by the example. For
a man that shall command a thing openly, and plot secretly the hinderance of
the same, if he punish him, he so commanded for not doing it, is unjust. I wish
him a better memory.

I said there was never any time when mankind Mankind never without laws.
was without Governors, Laws, and Societies. He answers, That it is very
likely to be true; That since the Creation, there never was a time in which
mankind was totally without Society. And confesses further, That there was
Paternall government in Adam. But he adds, That in those places where there
are Civil wars, there is neither Law nor Commonwealth, nor Society. Why then
does he teach the contrary with so much confidence, That it cannot be denied,
but that the natural state of men, before they en^red into Society, was a war
of all men against all men. Why does he say here, De cive c. i. Number, 12.
That where there is no law, there no killing or any thing else can be unjust.
And that by the right of nature we destroy (without being unjust) all that is
noxious, both beasts and men. Where there was paternall government from the
beginning, there were Laws, there were Societies, there was no war of all men
against all men. Then the natural state of men was never without Society. Does
he call a civil war the natural state of men? neither was Adam alone such a
Governor, but all heads of families. Neither the whole World, nor the tenth
part of the World, was ever since the Creation without Society. The World was
long without war, what need had they to war one upon another, who had the
sharing of the whole World among them? And when there was war, it was not
civil war: And when and where there are civil wars, yet there are laws,
though not so well executed; and a Commonwealth, though much troubled and
disordered. For him to make the natural and primogenious state of mankind to
be a war of all men against all men, to be lawless without government,
barbarous without Societies or civility, wherein it was lawful for any man to
kill another, as freely as a Wolf or a Tiger, and to enjoy whatsoever they
could by force, without further care or conscience, reflects too much, not
only upon the honor of mankind, but likewise upon the honor of God himself,
the Creator of mankind.

He charge me to say, That there never Never lawful for private men
ordinarily to kill one another.
was a time, when it was lawful ordinarily (those were my words) for private
men to kill one another, for their own preservation, I say the same still in
that sense, wherein I said it then, and I think all the world may say the same
with me, except himself.

In cases extraordinary, as when a man is assaulted by Thieves or Murderees, I
said expressly then, and I say the same now, That it is lawful to kill
another in his own defense, cum mother amine inculpatae tutelae, And this is all
which the Laws of God or nature do allow: which Cicero in his defense of M^lo
pleads for, as the words following do abundantly testify, ut si vita nostra
in aliquas insidias, si in vim, in tela aut latronum aut inimicorum in
cidisset, omnis honesta ratio esset expediendae salutis. And again, Hoc and
ratio doctis, and necessitas barbaris, and mos gentibus, and feris natura ipsa
praescripsit, ut omnem semper vim quacunque open possent, a corpore, a capite, a
vita sua propulsarent. I wonder he was not ashamed to cite this place so
directly against himself. He says the same words in general that I say, but in
a quite contrary sense, that by the law of nature any man may kill another
without scruple, if he do but suspect him, or if he may be noisome to him, as
freely as a man might pluck up a weed or any herb, because it draws the
nourishment another way. And this ordinarily, though the other do not offer to
assault him, and though his own life be in no manner of peril. This he makes
to be the first, and to be the natural state of mankind, before they had
entered into any pacts one with another. In this sense I did deny, and do still
deny, that it either is, or ever was, ordinarily lawful for one private man to
kill another, though he plead his own preservation and well-being never so
much: and although T. H. tells us here, without either reason or authority,
that it seems to him, that God does account such killing no sin. An excellent
Casuist.

All creatures forbear to prey upon their own kind, except in case of extreme
hunger, -- Parcit
Cognatis maculis similis fera. Quando leoni
Fortior eripuit vitam leo? Quo nemore unquam
Expiravit aper majoris dentibus apri?
Indica tygris agit valida cum tygride pacem
Perpetuam. Saevis inter se convenit ursis.
And were mankind only made to murder one another promiscuously? That is to
be worse than wild beasts, or savage Cannibals.

We beheld him even now more bold than welcome with the holy Scriptures, saving
only that he abstained from the imputation of Jargon. Now he jests with the
pulpit, as well he may, considering what small benefit he has received from
it. Then he laughs at cases of conscience, not in his sleeve, or thorough his
fingers, although God Almighty was more careful in stating the cases of
bloodguiltinesse punctually. But he loves a distinction Numbers 35.
worse than manslaughter. After the man is killed (says he) the Bishop shall
be Judge, whether the necessity was invincible, or the danger extreme, as being
a case of conscience. If he had writ this defense of wilful murder, as
Demosthenes did the praise of Helene; or Erasmus the commendation of folly,
only to try his wit, it had been too much to jest with the blood of man; but
to do it in earnest, contrary to the Law of God and nature, without any
authority, sacred or profane, without reason, nay without common sense, is his
own peculiar privilege.

And yet before he leave this Subject, he must needs be fumbling once more upon
the old string, That in the natural state of man, every man might lawfully kill
any man whom he suspected, or who might be noisome to him. And so taking this
for granted, he concludes, that he might lawfully resign it up into the hands
of the Magistrate. I was the more sparing in confuting this point, because it
is so absured, that the very repetition of it is a sufficient consutation, it
being an opinion so barbarous, and so brutish, fitter for a bloody Canibal, one
of the African Anthropophagi, than one who has born the name of Christian, or
been a member of any civil Society. Such an opinion, as, if it had not all laws
of God and man against it, yet the horrid consequences of it, if it were once
entertained, would chase it out of the World, with the propugner of it. I would
not cast away one Text of Scripture upon it, but that he admits that proof,
and rejects all humane Fount. of Arg.
authority.

My first reason is demonstrative, because all killing of men by private men
was forbidden to all mankind by the positive law of God, presently after the
flood, before there were ever any such pacts as he imagines in the World.
Whosoever sheddeth man's blood, by man shall his blood be shed; for in the Image of
God made he man. That which he makes lawful in Genesis 9. 6.
the natural state of man, and only prohibited by covenant between man and
man, was declared unlawful by the positive Law of God, to Noah and his
posterity, from whom all the Cities, and Societies, and Commonwealths in the
World, are descended.

Secondly, this Law of God was no new Law then, but a declaration of the law of
nature, which was imprinted in the heart of man from the beginning, as
appears evidently by the reason annexed to the Law; for in the Image of God
made he man. Either in the family of Adam was the natural state of man, or
there never was any natural state of man in the World, before any such
Commonwealths as he imagines could be gathered, or any such pacts or
covenants made. Yet even then the killing of those whom they judged noisome to
them by private persons, was not only esteemed an ordinary sin, but was a
crying sin, for which we have the testimony of God himself to Cain, What have
thou done? the voice of thy brothers blood cries unto me from the ground?

Thirdly, private men never resigned up into Genesis 4. 10.
the hands of the Sovereign Magistrate the power of defending their own lives
in case of extreme necessity, though it were with the death of the assailant,
for that power they hold still. Let him not confound two different powers
together. This power which he challenges, affirming that the people did resign
it to the Magistrate, which we deny with detestation, is a right to destroy
what soever a man thinks can annoy him, (they are his own words in this
place) or a general power of killing their enemies; that is, of killing
whomsoever they will; for all men by their doctrine are their enemies, seeing
he makes it a war of all men against all men. Now if private men had once such
a right and did resign it up into the hand of the Sovereign Magistrate, then
the Sovereign Magistrate may use the same right still, and kill whomsoever he
thinks may annoy him, without sin: But this he cannot do. Saul sinned in
killing the Gibeonites, and the Priests. Wherefore wilt 1 Samuel 19. 5.
thou sin against innocent blood? David sinned in killing Uriah. It is said of
Manasseh, that 2 King. 24. 4.
he filled Jerusalem with innocent blood, which the Lord would not pardon. Ahab
is styled a murderer. Have thou killed, etc.

Lastly, the exaggarations of this sin in holy Scripture, and the incredible
ways which God uses to find it out, and those blind blows and ghastly
horrors of conscience which do ordinarily accompany it, do proclaim to all the
World, that there is more in it than an offense against mutual pacts and
covenants between man and man. He that does violence Prove. 28. Deuteronomy. 10. 11.
Exodus 21. 14. Genesis 9. 6.
to the blood of any person, shall flee to the pit, let no man slay him. The
wilful murderer must be pulled out of the City of Refuge; yea, Gods Altar must
yield him no protection. This sin is a defacing of the Image of God; It
defiles a whole land, and proceeds from the special instigation of the
Devil, who was a murderer from the beginning. O how heavy Joh. 8. 44.
(said one) is the weight of innocent blood? How much do all Authors Sacred
and Civil, inveigh against the shedding of innocent blood? Some have
apprehended a fishes head in the platter for the head of him they had
murdered. Others after a horrid murder had been observed to have their hands
continually upon their daggers. This opinion of his, takes away all difference
between nocent and innocent blood. This inward guilt, these fears of vengeance,
and the extraordinary providence of God in the discovery of murders, do
proclaim aloud, that there is more in bloodguiltinesse, than the breach of
mutual pacts between man and man.

In the next place, he makes us an elaborate T. H. Attorney General for the
brute beasts.
discourse of a Lion, and a Bear, and an Ox, as if he stood probationer for
the place of Attorney General of the brutes. This is evident, he has deserved
better of them, than either of his God, or of his Religion, or of the humane
nature. In the first place, he acquitteth the beasts from the dominion of man,
and denies that they owe him any subjection. He that shall use T. H. his books
as the countrymen did his prognostication, write down every thing contrary,
fair for foul, and foul for fair, true for false, and false for true, if he
could get but a good wager upon each opinion, would have advantage enough. I
hope he does not understand it of a political dominion or subjection, but only
that the other creatures were designed by God for the use and service of men,
in the same sense that Virgil says, Sic vos non vobis veller a fertis oves.
Sic vos non vobis fertis aratra boves.


When God had created man male and female, after his own Image, he gave them
his benediction. Sub due the earth and have dominion Genesis 1. 28.
overthe fish of the sea, and over the fowls of the air and over every living
thing that moves upon the earth. And this very dominion was a part of the
Image of God, wherein man was created. Therefore God brought all the creatures
to man as to their Lord and Master under himself, to give them names, which is
a sign and a proof of dominion. Therefore said the Kingly Prophet, Thou made
him [man] to Genesis 2. 19.
have dominion over the works of thy hands; Thou have put all things in
subjection under his Psalm. 8. 6.
feet: All sheep and oxen, etc. Here is but an harsh beginning of his
Attorny-ship.

Secondly, he maintains, that the Lion has as much right, or, as he calls
it, liberty to eat the man, as the man has to eat the Ox. I hope he will not
deny that the Creator of all things had right to the donation of his own
creatures. Man harh Gods deed of Genesis 9. 3.
gift. Every moving thing that lives shall be meat for you. Even as the green
herb have I given you all things. Can he show such another grant for the Lions
to devour men? When God said, Whosoever sheddeth man's blood, by man shall his blood
be shed; for in the Image of God made he man. Was it intended only that his
blood should be preserved for the Lions? or do not their teeth deface Gods
Image, as much as man's weapons? But the Lion had liberty to eat man long
before. He is mistaken, the creatures did bear a more awful respect to the
Image of God in man, before his fall. But man's rebellion to God, was punished
with their rebellion of the creatures to him. He says, it was impossible for
most men to have Gods license to use the creatures for their sustenance. Why
so? as if all the world were not then comprised in the family of Noah. Or as if
the Commandments and dispensations of God were not then delivered from father
to son by tradition, as they were long after by writing. He asks how I would
have been offended if he should have spoken of man as Pliny does, Then whom,
there is no living creature more wretched or more proud. Not half so much as
now. Pliny taxes only the faults of men, he vilifieth not their humane
nature. Most wretched; What is that but an argument of the immortality of the
soul? God would never have created the most noble of his creatures for the most
wretched being. Or more proud; that is, then some men. Corruption optimi
pessima. The best things being corrupted, turn the worst

But he acknowledges two advantages which man has above other creatures, his
tongue and his hand. Is it possible that any man who believes that he has an
immortal soul, or that reason and understanding are any thing but empty names,
should so far forget himself and his thankfulness to God, as to prefer his
tongue and his hands, before an immortal soul and reason? Then we may well
change the definition of a man which those old dunses the Philosophers left us,
Man is a reasonable creature, into this new one; Man is a prating thing with
two hands. How much more was the humane nature beholden to Tully an Heathen,
who said, That man differed from other creatures in reason and speech. Or to
Ovid, who styles man, Sanctius his animal ment^sque capacius altae. If he have
no better luck in defending his Leviathan, he will have no great cause to boast
of his making men examples.

And now it seems he has played his masterprise. For in the rest of his
Animadversions in this Section, we find a low ebb of matter. Concerning
consultations he says nothing but this, That my writing was caused physically,
antecedently, extrinsecally, by his answer. In good time. By which I see right
well, that he understands not what a physical cause is. Did he think his
answer was so Mathematical to compel or necessitate me to write? No, I confess
I determined my self. And his answer was but a slender occasion, which would
have had little weight with me, but for a wiser man's advice, to prevent his
Prove. 26. 5.
overweening opinion of his own abilities. And then follows his old dish of
twice sodden colewortes, about free, and necessary, and contingent, and free to
do if he will, which we have had often enough already.

His distinction between seen and unseen necessity, deserves more
consideration. The Seen and unseen necessity.
meaning is, that seen necessity does take away consultation, but unseen
necessity does not take away consultation or humane endeavors, Unseen
necessity is of two sorts, either it is altogether unseen and unknown, either
what it is, or that it is; Such a necessity does not take away consultation or
humane endeavors. Suppose an office were privately disposed, yet he who
knows nothing of the disposition of it, may be as solicitous and industrious
to obtain it, as though it were not disposed at all. But the necessity which he
labors to introduce, is no such unseen unknown necessity. For though he know
not what the causes have determined particularly, or what the necessity is, yet
he believes that he knows in general, that the causes are determined from
eternity, and that there is an absolute necessity.

The second sort of unseen necessity, is that which is unseen in particular
what it is, but it is not unknown in general that it is. And this kind of
unseen necessity does take away all consultation, and endeavors, and the use
of means, as much as if it were seen in particular. As supposing that the
Cardinals have elected a Pope in private, but the declaration of the person who
is elected is kept secret. Here is a necessity, the Papacy is full; and this
necessity is unseen in particular, whilst no man knows who it is. Yet for as
much as it is known that it is, it takes away all endeavors and
consultations, as much as if the Pope were publicly enthroned. Or suppose a
Jury have given in a privy veredict: no man knows what it is until the next
Courtday; yet it is known generally that the Jurers are agreed, and the
veredict is given in. Here is an unseen necessity: Yet he who should use any
further consultations, or make further applications in the case, were a fool.
So though the particular determination of the causes be not known to us what it
is, yet if we know that the causes are particularly determined from eternity,
we know that no consultation or endeavor of ours can alter them.

But it may be further objected, that though they cannot alter them, yet they
may help to accomplish them. It was necessary that all who sailed with St. Paul
should be saved from Act. 27. 22. V. 30.
shipwreck: Yet St. Paul told them, that except the shipmen did abide in the
ship, they could not be saved. So though the event be necessarily determined,
yet consultation or the like means may be necessary to the determination of it.
I answer, the question is not whether the means be necessary to the end, for
that is agreed upon by all parties: But the question is to whom the ordering of
the means which are necessary to the production of the event does properly
belong; whether to the first cause, or to the free Agent. If it belong to the
free Agent under God (as we say it does) then it concerns him to use
consultations and all good endeavors, as requisite means to obtain the desired
end. But if the disposition of the means belong soly and wholly to God, (as he
says it does) and if God have ordered all means as well as ends and events
particularly and precisely, then it were not only a thanklesse and superfluous
office, to consult what were the fittest means to obtain an end, when God has
determined what must be the only means, and no other; but also a sauciness,
and a kind of tempting of God, for a man to intrude himself into the execution
of God Almighties decrees; whereas he ought rather to cast away all care and
all thought on his part, and resign himself up wholly to the disposition of the
second causes, which act nothing but by the special determination of God.

Concerning admonition, he says less than If all things be absolutely
necessary, admonitions are all vain.
of consultation. The reason (says he) why we admonish men of understanding
rather than children, fools, and madmen, is because they are more capable of
the good and evil consequences of their actions, and have more experience, and
their passions are more conform to their Admonitors; that is to say, moderate
and stayed. And then after his Bragadochio manner, he concludes. There be
therefore reasons under heaven which the bishop knows not of. My one reason
[because they have the use of reason, and true liberty, with a dominion over
their ownactions, which children, fools, and madmen have not] includes more
than all his three reasons put together. What is it that weighs the good and
evil consequences of our actions? Reason, What is it that preserves us from
being transported with our passions? Reason, And what is experienced of good
and evil? Reason impoproved by observation. So we have gained nothing by the
change of my reason, but three cracked groats fore one good shilling.

But he has omitted the principal part of my answer, that is, the liberty and
dominion over their actions, which men of understanding have much more than
children, fools or madmen. Without which all his capablenesse of good and evil
consequences, all his experience of good and evil, all his calmness and
moderation, do signify just nothing. Let a man have as much capacity as
Solomon, as much experience as Nestor, as much moderation as Socrates; yet if
he have no power to dispose of himself, nor to order his own actions, but be
hurried away by the second causes inevitably, irresistiblity, without his own
willl it is to as much purpose to admonish him, as when Icarus had his wings
melted by the Sun, and was tumbling down headlong into the Sea, to have
admonished him to take heed of drowning. A seasonable admonition may do much
good, but that is upon our principles, not upon his. If all events, with all
their circumstances, and the certain means to effect them, were precisely
determined from eternity, it were high presumption in us to interpose, without
special warrant. Those means which we judge most convenient, are often not
looked upon by God Allmighty, who does use to bring light out of darkness, and
restore sight by clay and spittle, and preserve men from perishing by
perishing. No Perigraph escapes him without some supererogatory absurdities.
As here, that a man may deliberate without the use of reason, that bruit beasts
may deliberate, that madness or frenzy is strength of passion.

He insisteth longer upon moral praise and dispraise, or moral goodness or
badnesse, but speedeth worse, entangling himself in twenty errors, as these
which follow: Metaphysicall A litter of absurdities.
goodness is but an idle term. That is good wherewith a man is pleased. Good
is not of absolute signification to all men. Nothing is good of evil, but in
regard of the action proceeding from it, and the person to whom it does good or
hurt. Satan is evil to us, but good to God. If there were laws among Beasts,
an Horse would be as morally good as man. The difference between natural and
moral goodness, proceeds from the [civill] law. The law is all the right
reason that we have. We make it right reason by our approbation. All actions of
Subjects, if they be conformable to the law of the land, are morally good.
Moral praise is from obedience to the law. Moral dispraise is from
disobedience to the law. To say a thing is good, is to say, It is as I, or
another, or the state would have it. That is good to every man which is so far
good as he can see. All the real good which we call honest and morally
virtuous, is that which is not repugnant to the law. The law is the infallible
rule of moral goodness. Our particular reason is not right reason. The reason
of our Governor whom we have set over our selves is right reason. His Laws
whatsoever they be, are in the place of right reason to us. As in playmorality
consists in not renoncing the trump, So all our morality consists in not
disobeying the law. Is not here an hopeful litter of young errors, to be all
formed out of three penfulls of ink? as if he had been dreaming lately in
errors den. One Antycira will not afford Hellebore enough to cure him
perfectly. I was apt to flatter my self a while, that by the law he understood
the law of right reason. But I found it too evident, that by right reason he
understands the arbitrary edicts of an elective Governoour. I could not choose
but call to mind that of our Laureate Poet, God help the man so wrapped in
errors, endless train.

The Reader might well have expected What is morally good.
matter of more edification upon this Subject. As wherein the formal reason of
goodness does consist, in convenience, or in the obtainining of all due
perfections. As likewise the distinction of good; either subjectively, into the
goods of the mind, the goods of the body, and the goods of fortune. Or
formally, into bonum honestum, utile and delectabile, or honestly good,
profitably good, and delightfully good. That which is honestly good, is
desirable in it self, and as it is such. That which is profitably good, is that
which is to be desired, as conducing to the obtaining of some other good.
Thirdly, delightfully good is that pleasure which does arise from the obtaining
of the other goods desired. But he has quite cashiered the two former sorts of
good, That which is honestly good, and that which is profitably good; and
acknowledges only that which is delightfully good, or that which pleases him
or me. So as if our humors differ, goodness must differ; and as our humors
change, goodness must change; as the Chamaeleon changes her colors. Many
things are good that please not us, and many things please us that are not
good. Thus he has left no real good in the World, but only that which is
relatively good. Thus he has made the Devil himself to become good, and which
is yet worse, good to God. Thus he has made horses to be as capable of moral
goodness as men, if they had but only laws. I wonder why he should stick at
that: laws are but commands, and commands may be intimated to horses, as we
might see in Banks his horse; which we might call (upon his principles) an
honest virtuous and morally good horse. There is a woe denounced against them
who call evil good, and good evil. Isa. 5. 20.


This is not all, he confesses that lawmakers are men, and may err, and
think that law good for the people, which is not: yet with the same breath he
tells us, That there is no other right reason but their law, which is the
infallible rule of moral goodness. So right reason and erring reason; a
fallible rule, and an infallible rule are all one with him. What no other rule
but this one Lesbian rule, the arbitrary dictates of a Governor? What is
become of the eternal law, or the rule of justice in God himself? What is
become of the divine positive law recorded in holy Scriptures? What is become
of the law of nature, imprinted naturally in the heart of every man, by the
finger of God himself? What is become of the law of nations, that is, those
principles which have been commonly and universally received as laws, by all
nations in all ages, or at least the most prudent pious and civil nations?
What is become of that Synteresis or noble light of the soul, which God has
given mankind to preserve them from vices? Are they all gone, all vanished, and
is no rule remaining but only the arbitrary edicts of a mortal Lawgiver, who
may command us to turn Turks or Pagans to morrow, who by his own confession may
err in his law-giving? Then not only power absolutely irresistible, does
justify whatsoever it does, but also the power of mortal man may justify the
violation of the laws of the immortal God. But I have showed him sufficiently,
that there are unjust laws, not only toward God, but likewise toward men:
That unjust laws do not acquit our active obedience to them from damnable Exodus
1. 21
sin: That it is not only lawful, but necessary to disobey them: That God
himself has approved such disobedience, and rewarded it. To conclude, it is
not the pleasing of him or me, or some private benefit that may redound from
thence to him or me, that makes any thing to be truly good, but the meeting of
all perfection in it, whereof that thing is capable. Bonum ex integra causa,
malum ex quolibet defectu; all requisite perfections must concur to make a
thing good, but one only defect makes it evil. Nothing is morally good,
nothing is praiseworthy, but that which is truly honest and virtuous. And on
the other side, nothing is morally bad, nothing is dispraise worthy, but that
which is dishonest and vicious.

To wrangle everlastingly whether those encouragements which are given to
Settingdogs Rewards of bruits and men differ.
and Coyducks and the like be rewards, were a childish fighting with shadows,
seeing it is confessed that they are not recompenses of honest and virtuous
actions, to which the laws did appoint rewards. Swine that run by a determinate
instinct of nature to succor their fellows of the same Herd in distress, do
not desire a civicall crown; like him who saved the life of a Citizen. Nor the
Spiders, whose phancies are fitted by nature to the weaving of their webs,
deserve the like commendation with Arachne, who atteined to her rare arts of
weaving by assidious industry. There is a great difference between natural
qualities, and moral virtues. Where nature has bestowed excellent gifts, the
chief praise redoundeth to the God of nature. And where the bruits have
attained to any such rare or beneficial qualities by the instruction of man,
the chief praise redoundeth unto him that taught them. The Harp was not crowned
in the Olympian Games, but the Harper, nor the Horses, but the Chariotter. And
though the encouragements of men and bruits be sometimes the same thing
materially, yet they are not the same thing formally.

But where he confounds a necessity of specification with a necessity of
exercise, and affirms that the Bees and Spiders are necessitated by nature as
well to all their individual actions, as to their several kinds of works, it
deserves no answer but to be slighted. His opinion does require that he
should say that they are determined to their individual actions, by the second
causes and circumstances (though it be untrue;) but to say they are determined
by nature to each individual act admits no defense.

In the last Paragraph, I am beholden to him, that he would instruct me: but I
am of his mind, that it would be too great a labor for him. For I approve none
of his newfangled principles, and think he might have spent his time better in
meditating upon somewhat else, that had been more proper for him. I see that
where the inferior faculty does end, the superior does begin. As where the
vegetative does end, there the sensitive does begin, comprehending all that the
vegetative does, and much more. So where the sensitive ends, the intellectual
begins. And should I confine the intellectual soul which is inorganical,
immaterial, impassible, seperable, within the bounds of the sensitive, or to
the power and proceedings thereof, when I see the understanding does correct
the sense, as about the greatness of the Sun? Sense has nothing to do with
universalls, but reason has. Even in memory which he mentions, the
intellectual remembrance is another manner of thing than the sensitive memory.
But this belongs not to this question; and therefore I pass by it, and leave
him to the censure of others.

Castigations of the Animadversions, Number. 15.
IN this Section he charge me first with a double breach of promise, yet
there is no promise; and if they had been promises, both are accomplished. One
of my promises was, That I would not leave one grain of his matter unweighed,
yet I leave these words unanswered. Our Savior bids us pray thy will, not our
will be done; and by example teaches us the same; For he prayed thus: Father
if it be thy will, let this cup pass. First this was no promise, but mine own
private resolution, which I might lawfully change at any time upon better
grounds. Secondly, it had been an easy thing to omit two lines in a whole
discourse unwillingly. Thirdly, the intent was only to omit nothing that was
material; but this was merely impertinent. Lastly, without any more to do, it
was fully answered in my defense in these words. [In the last place he urges,
That in our prayers we are bound to submit our wills to Gods will. Who ever
made a doubt of this? We must submit to the preceptive will of God or his
commandments. We must submit to the effective will of God, when he declares his
pleasure by the event, or otherwise. But we deny, and deny again, that God
wills ad extra necessarily, or that it is his pleasure that all second causes
should act necessarily at all times, which is the question. And that which he
aledgeth to the contrary comes not near it. Where were his eyes? That inference
[which seems at least to imply that our prayers cannot change the will of
God] is now first added. And if it had been there formerly, is answered
abundantly in the same Section.

The second breach of promise is this; that I said [here is all that passed
between us upon this subject, without any addition or the least variation from
the original.] But I have added these words [Yes, I have seen those silliest of
creatures, and seeing their rare works, I have seen enough to confute all the
boldfaced Atheists of this Age, and their hellish blasphemies.] What a stir
is here about two lines, which contain neither argument, nor answer, nor
authority, nor anything material. I did not apply these words to him, nor gave
the least intimation of any such thing. If he be wronged, he wrongeth himself.
I am as much offended with the Theists of this Age, as with the Atheists, who
are convinced that there is a God and profess it, yet never do him any service
or worship, not so much as ante focum si frigus erit, by a warm fires side in a
winters day: who when they know God, do not glorify him as Romans 1. 21.
God. But to deal clearly with him; I profess I do not know either when any
such words were added, or that any such words were added: Neither ever had I
any other copy but that original which was sent to the press: and that copy
which was transcribed for him, and sent to him at the first. If the Amanuensis
did omit two lines either in the margent (which is most likely by what he
says) or otherwise, I could not help it: My asseveration (for it was no
promise) was true, that I sent the original it self, as it had lain long by me
without any variation.

When he is afraid to be hard put to it, then he lays in the other scale to
counterballance those new reasons which are brought against him, either
prescience, or what shall be, shall be: Or a man cannot determine to day, what
his will shall be to morrow. All which are impertinent to the question, and
have been abundantly answered in these Castigations. His instance of a debtor
who intended first to pay his creditor, then thought to defer it, and lastly
resolved to do it for fear of imprisonment, is remote from the question. The
determination of the debtor is not antecedent, but concomitant, not extrinsecal
by the creditor, who perhaps never thought on it, but intrinsecal by the
dictate of his own reason, which he calls thoughts, lest he should seem to
attribute any thing to reason. What are thoughts, but intellectus actu circa
res occupatus? The understanding actually employed about something. If he hold
no other necessity but this, which no man opposes; Why does he trouble the
World with his debtor and creditor about nothing?

I did not accuse him for making all piety to consist in the estimation of the
judgment: What it is to honor God.
he still mistaketh; but I did, and do accuse him, for placing all the inward
piety of the heart in the estimation of the judgment. So he says expressly,
That to honor any thing, is nothing else but to think it to be of great power.
If it were nothing else, the Devil honors God as much as the best Christian;
for he believes a God as much as they: and he cannot believe a God, but he
must believe him to be omnipotent. Thou believe there is one God, thou do
well, the devils also believe and tremble. Jam 2. 19.
I showed him that inward piety does consist more in the submission of the
will, than in the estimation of the judgment, But I may not say that it was
too hot for his fingers. He urges, That the devil cannot esteem God for his
goodness: Let it be so. Neither is there any need that he should to make him
devoute, if his ground were true, That to honor God is nothing else, but to
think him to be of great power.

But to make amends for this oversight, he has found us out two sorts of
Devils. The one What are devils in his judgment.
(and indeed all the devils that are in his creed) are wicked men, to whom he
applies the name of diabolus, and Satan, and Abaddon in holy Scripture. The
other are heathen gods, mere phancies, or fictions of terrified hearts; or as
he styles them out of St. Paul, Nothings. What he will do with Heaven, I know
not; but he has emptied Hell at once, and swept away all the devils, except
wicked men. He might do well to acquaint the Judges with it, to save the lives
of so many poor old melancholic women, who suffer as witches for confederacy
with the devil. I desire to know of him, whether those devils which our Savior
cast out of the possessed, or those devils which hurried the swine into the
Sea, or that devil who took our Savior up to the Pinnacle of the Temple, were
heathen gods, or wicked men? Or how a legion of heathen gods or wicked men
could enter into one possessed person, without crowding one another to death?
But this belongs to another speculation. He asks in what classis of
entities I place devils? Will he learn to speak Iargon? I answer, with Angels,
among spiritual substances. He has as much authority to empty Heaven of good
Angels, as to empty Hell of bad Angels.

To cover his former error, that the honor of God is nothing else but the
estimation of his power, he has devised another error, That all the
Attributes of God are included in his Omnipotence. I confess, that the
Attributes of God are transcendents above our capacities, and are not of the
same nature with the same attributes of mortal men. I confess further, that
all the Attributes of God, and whatsoever is in God, is God, or is the Deity it
self. But to confound all these distinct Attributes in one, to no purpose,
without any ground is absurd, and serves only to make those notions which
were piously invented to help our understandings, to be the ready means to
confound our understandings.

In the next place I showed, that to command one thing openly, and to
necessitate another thing privately, destroys the truth of God, the goodness
of God, the justice of God, and the power of God. This is an heavy accusation,
and he had need to acquit himself like a man. But I believe he will fail. Here
he brings in the prescience of God again twice, to seem to stop a gap with
it. But it will not serve his turn. Where the God does not hinder privately
what he commands openly.
soldiers are mustered over and over, it is a sign the companies are but thin.
First to save the truth of God he says, That truth consists in affirmation
and negation, not in commanding. The sense is, That God who is truth it self,
may will onething, and command another, and hinder that act which he
commands. Mark but his reason. The Scripture which is his word, is not the
profession of what he intends, but an indication what those men whom he has
chosen to salvation or destruction, shall necessarily intend. This is the same
which he renounced formerly, as one of my ugly phrases, That God should command
one thing openly, and hinder the same privately or underhand, Reader, if thou
delightest in His opinion destroys the truth of God.
such a god who will command one thing publicly, and hinder it privately,
choose Mr. Hobbes his God. God forbid we should attribute any such double
dealing to our God, who is truth itself. Some contraries, as heat and cold, may
meet together in remiss degrees; but truth and falsehood, an habit and
privation, can never meet together. There is a truth in being; the picture of a
man cannot be the man himself. There is a truth in knowing, if the
understanding be not adaequate to the thing understood, there is no truth in
it. There is a truth in saying, which is a conformity or an adaequation of the
sign to the thing said, which we call Veracity. When one thing is commanded
publicly, and the same is hindered privately, and the party so hindered is
punished for not doing that which was impossible for him to do; Where is the
veracity? where is the conformity and adaequation of the sign to the thing
said? I dare not tell Mr. Hobbes that he understands not these things, but I
fear it very much: If he do, his cause is bad, or he is but an ill Advocate.

Next to reconcile the goodness of God And his goodness.
with his principles, he answers first to the thing, That living creatures of
all sorts are often in torments as well as men, which they could not be without
the will of God. I know no torments of the other creatures but death, and death
is a debt to nature, not an act of punitive justice. The pangs of a violent
death are less than of a natural, besides the benefit that proceeds thence
for the sustenance of men, for which the creatures were created. See what an
Argument here is, (for all his answers are recriminations or exceptions,) from
brute beasts to men, from a debt of nature, to an act of punitive justice, from
a sudden death, to lingering torments, ut sentiant se mori, from a light
affliction producing great good, to endless intolerable pains; producing no
good, but only the satisfaction of justice. Then to the phrase of Gods
delighting in torments: He answers, That God delights not in them. It is
true. God is not capable of passions, as delight or grief; but when he does
those things that men grieving or delighting do, the Scriptures by an
anthropopathy do ascribe delight or grief unto him. Such are his exceptions,
not to the thing, but to the phrase, because it is too Scholastical, or too
elegant. I see he likes no tropes or figures. But in all this, here is not one
word of answer to the thing it self. That, that which is beyond the cruelty of
the most bloody men, is not agreeable to the Father of Mercies, to create men
on purpose to be tormented in endless flames, without their own faults. And so
contrary to the Scriptures, that nothing can be more, wherein punishment is
called Gods strange Work, his strange Act, For God made not death, neither Isa.
28. 21.
has he pleasure in the destruction of the living, Wisd. 1. 13.
but ungodly men with their works, and words, called it unto them. It this
place seem to him Apocryphal, he may have twenty that are Canonical. As I
live, says the Lord God, I have no pleasure in the death of the wicked, but
Ezekiel. 33. 11.
that he turn from his way and live: Turn ye, turn ye from your evil ways, for
why will ye die, O house of Israel?

That his opinion destroys the justice of God, by making him punish others
for his own acts, is so plain, that it admits no defense. And if any further
corroboration were needful, we have his own confession, That Fount of Arg.
there can be no punishment but for crimes, that might have been lest undone.
Yet he keeps a shuffling of terms, afflictions, and bruit creatures, which by
his own confession are not capable of moral goodness or wickedness, and
consequently, not subject to punishment, and quite taking away the proportion
between And his justice.
sin and punishment, only to make a show of answering to them, who do not or
cannot weigh what is said. Among guilty persons, to single out one to be
punished for examples sake, is equal and just, that the punishment may fall
upon few, fear to offend upon all. But to punish innocent persons for examples
sake, is only an example of great injustice. That which he calls my opinion
of the endless tormenrs of hell, I learned from Christ himself, Go ye cursed
into everlasting fire, and from my creed. When Origin and some others, called
the merciful Doctors, did endeavor to possess the Church with their opinion
of an universal restitution of all creatures, to their pristine estate, after
sufficient purgation, it was rejected by the Church. Without doubt, a sin
against infinite majesty, and an aversion from infinite goodness, do justly
subject the offenders to infinite punishment. But he talks as though God were
obliged to do acts of grace, and to violate his own ordinances, that he might
save men without their own wills. God loves his own creatures well, but his own
justice better.

Whereas I showed, That this opinion destroys the omnipotence of God, by
making And omnipotence making the cause of sin.
him the author or cause of sin, and of all defects; which are the fruits of
impotence, not of power. He distinguishes between the cause of sin and the
author of sin, granting that God is the cause of sin. He will say, That
this op^nion makes him [God] the cause of sin. But does not the Bishop think
him the cause of all actions; And are not sins of commission actions? Is
murder no action? Does not God himself say there is no evil in the City which
I have not done: And was not murder one of those evils? But he denies that
God is the author of sin, that is, God does not own it, God does not give a
warrant for it, God does not command it. This is downright blasphemy indeed.
When he took away the devil, yet I did not suspect, that he would so openly
substitute God Almighty in his place. Simon Magus held that God was the cause
of sin, but his meaning was not so bad: He only blames God for not making
man impeccable. The Manichees and Marcionites did hold, that God was the cause
of sin, but their meaning was not so bad; they meant it not of their good
God, whom they called light: but of their bad God, whom they termed darkness.
But T. H, is not afraid to charge the true God, to be the very acter of all
sin. When the Prophet asks, Shall there be evil in a City, and the Lord
has not done it? He Amos 3. 6.
speaks expressly of evil of punishment, not at all of the evil of sin.
Neither will it avail him in the least, that he makes not God to be the
author of sin. For first it is worse to be the physical or natural cause
of sin, by acting it, than to be the moral cause of sin, by commanding it.
If a man be the Author of that which he commands, much more is he the
author of that which he acts. To be an author, is less than to be an
actour. A man may be an author by persuasion, or by example; as it is said of
Vespasian, that he being antiquo cultu victuque was unto the Romans praecipuus
astricti moris author, by his observing of the ancient diet of the country, and
the old fashion of apparel: He was unto the Romans, the principal author of
their frugality. Has not he done God Almighty good service, to acquit him from
being the author of sin, which is less, and to make him to be the proper
cause of all sin, which is more. Thus to maintain fate, he has deserted the
truth of God, the goodness of God, the justice of God, and the power of God.

In the next place I demanded how shall a man praise God, who believes him to
be a A right Hobbist cannot praise God.
greater Tyrant than ever was in the World, creating millions to burn eternally
without their own fault, to express his power. He answers, That the word
Tyrant was sometimes taken in a good sense; A pretty answer, and to good
purpose, when all the world sees that it is taken here in the worst sense. And
when he has fumbled thus a while after the old manner, all his answer is a
recrimination. How can the Bishop praise God for his goodness, who thinks he
has created millions of millions to burn eternally, when he could have kept
them so easily from committing any fault. I do not believe that God created
millions, nor so much as one single person to burn eternally, which is as true
as his other slander in this place, That I withdraw the will of man from Gods
dominion. Both the one and the other are far from me. His principles may lead
him upon such precipices, mine do not. God created not man to burn, but to
serve him here, and to be glorified by him and with him hereafter. That many
men do miss this end, is not Gods fault, who gave them sufficient strength to
have conquered, and would have given them a larger supply of grace, if they had
sought it, but man's. God was not bound to reverse his own decrees, or change
the order of the government of the World, which he himself had justly
instituted, to hold up a man from sinning against his will, when he could by
his Almighty power draw good out of evil, and a greater degree of glory out of
the fall of man. Concerning the number of those who are reprobated for their
sins, I have nothing to say, but that secret things belong unto the Lord our
God, and things revealed to us and to our children. Deuteronomy. 29. 29.


My next demands were, How shall a man Nor hear the Word, or receive the
Sacrament worthily,
hear the Word of God with that reverence and devotion and faith that is
requisite, who believes that God causes his Gospel to be preached to the much
greater part of Christians, without any intention that they should be saved?

Secondly, How shall a man prepare himself for the receiving of the Sacrament
with care and conscience, who apprehends that eating and drinking unworthily,
is not the cause of damnation, but because God will damn a man, therefore he
necessitateth him to eat and drink unworthily. To which two demands, he gives
one answer, That faith is the gift of God, if they have faith, they shall both
hear the Word, and receive the Sacraments worthily: and if they have no faith,
they shall neither hear the Word, nor receive the Sacraments worthily. There
needs no more to be said to evidence to all the World, that he does utterly
destroy, and quite take away all care, all solicitude, all devotion and
preparation of our selves for holy duties. If God give us faith, we can want
nothing; If God do not give us faith, we can have nothing. We use to say truly,
That God does not deny his grace to them who do their endeavors, The kingdom
of heaven suffers violence, and the violent take it by force, and how much
more shall Matthew. 11. 12. Mat. 7. 11.
your father which is in heaven, give good things to them that ask him? St.
Paul makes hearing to be the way to obtain faith, How shall they believe on
him of whom they have not heard? Romans 10. 14.
And exhorts Christians to work out their own salvation with fear and
trembling. Devout prayers, and hearing, and reading, and participating, did use
to be the way to get faith, and to increase faith. As in our natural life. so
in our spiritual life, we must earn our bread in the sweat of our brows. Such
desperate opinions as these, which are invented only to color idleness and
quench devotion, are the pillows of Satan. We believe none are excluded from
the benefit of Christ's passion, but only they who exclude themselves. Absolute
exclusion is opposed to exclusion upon supposition, which useful and necessary
destinction (if he do not, or will not understand) we have no reason to fancy
it one jot the worse, for his supercilious censures.

My next demand was, How shall a man make a free vow to God, who believes
himself Nor vowas he ought.
to be able to perform nothing, but as he is extrinsecally necessitated. To
this he answers, That the necessity of vowing before he vowed, hindered not the
freedom of his vow. This it self is absurd enough, but whether it be his
misapprehension or his cunning to avoid the force of an argument, he comes far
short both of the force and of the hope of this reason, which was this. If a
man be not left in any thing to his own disposition, and have no power over his
own future actions, but is antecedently determined to what he must do, and
must not do, and yet knows not what he is extrinsecally determined to do,
and not to do; then it is not only folly but impiety, for him to vow that
which he knows not whether it be in his power to perform or not, But upon his
grounds every man is antecedently determined to every thing he shall do, and
yet knows not how he is determined. Universal necessity, and free vows
cannot possibly consist together

My last demand was, how shall a man condemn Nor repent of his misdeeds.
or accuse himself for his sins, who thinks himself to be like a watch
wound up by God? His answer is, Though a man think himself necessitated to what
he shall do; yet if he do not think himself necessitated and wound up to
impenitence, there will follow no impediment to repentance. My argument looks
at the time past, his answer regards the time to come; both ways he is
miserably entangled. First for the time past, If a man was wound up as a watch
by God, to all the individual actions which he has done, then he ought not to
accuse or condemn any man for what he has done: for according to his grounds,
neither he nor they did any thing, but what was the secret and irresistible
will of God, that they should do. And when the secret will of God is made known
by the event, we ought all to submit unto it. Much less can any man accuse or
condemn himself without, hypocrisy for doing that, which if his life had lain
a thousand times upon it, he could not have helped, nor done otherwise than he
did. The very same reason holds for the time to come. There is the same
necessity in respect of Gods decree, the same inevitability on our parts for
the future, that is, for the time past. The same submission is due to to the
secret will of God, when it shall be declared by the event. How ill he has
been able to reconcile his principles, with the truth, and goodness, and
justice and power of God, and with those Christian duties which we owe unto
God, as vows, repentance, and praising of Gods Holy Name, the hearing of his
Word, the receiving of his Sacraments, I leave to the judgment of the Reader.

The next thing which I disliked was his What repentance is.
description of repentance. It is a glad returning into the right way, after
the grief of being out of the way. Who ever heard before this, of gladness or
joy in the definition of repentance? he tells us, That it is not Christian
repentance without a purpose of amendment of life. That is true, a purpose of
amendment was comprehended in the old definition of repentance, A godly sorrow
for sins past, with a steadfast purpose to commit no more sins to be
sorrowed for, St. Peter found no great sense of joy, when he went out and wept
bitterly. And some tell us, that so long as he lived, he did the same, so often
as he heard the cock crow. Nor Mary Magdalene, when she washed the feet of
Christ with her tears, and wiped them with her hairs, yet she was a true
penitent, and purposed amendment. Nor David, when he washed his bed night by
night, and watered his couch with his tears. St. Paul reckons all the parts
of the repentance of the Corinthians, Godly sorrow, carfulness, clearing of
themselves, indignation, fear, vehement desires, 2 Cor. 7. 11.
zeal, revenge, here is no word of joy or gladness in all this. Joy is a
consequent of repentance after reconciliation, but it is not of the essence of
repentance, no more than a succeeding calm is of the essence of a storm, or
the prodigals festival joy after his readmission into his fathers house, was a
part of his conversion. He is afraid that this doctrine of fasting and
mourning, and tears, and humicubation, and sackcloth, and ashes, pertains to
the establishment of Romish penance. Or rather they were natural expressions
of sorrow, before Rome was builded. Turn ye to me with all your heart, with
fasting, and weeping, Joel 2. 12.
and mourning. Neither the Ninevits, nor the Tyrians and Zidonians, did learn
their sackcloth and ashes at Rome. But many men love to serve God now adays
with as much ease as they can; as if God Almighty would be satisfied with any
thing, vel uva, vel faba, either with a grape, or with a bean. And with the
same measure they mete to God, he measures to them again.

He charge me that, I labor to bring in a Man's concurrence with Gods grace.
concurrence of man's will with Gods will, and a power in God to give repentance
if man will take it; but not the power to make him take it. Hola. It is one
question utrum possit, what God can do, another, utrum sit, what God will do.
God can determine the will irresistibly, but he does not do it ordinarily. Ye
stiff necked and uncircumcised in heart, ye do always resist the Act. 7. 51.
Holy Ghost. And I have called and ye refused, etc. The concurrence of God and
man in Prove. 1. 24.
producing the act of our believing, or conversion to God, is so evident in
holy Scripture, that it is vanity and lost labor to oppose it. If God did not
concur, the Scripture would not say, It is God that works in us, both the
will and the deed. If man did not concur, the Scripture would not say, Work
out your own salvation with fear and trembling. If our repentance were Gods
work alone, God would not say to man, Turn ye unto me with all your heart: And
if repentance were man's work alone, we had no need to pray, Turn us O Lord, and
we shall be turned. We are commanded to repent and to believe. In vain are
commandments given to them who cannot at Mark 1. 15.
all concur to the acting of that which is commanded. Faith and Repentance are
proposed unto us as conditions to obtain blessedness and avoid destruction, If
thou shall confess with thy mouth, and believe with thy heart, etc. thou shall
be saved. And, except ye repent, ye shall all likewise perish. To propose
impossible conditions, which they to whom they are proposed have no power
either to accept or to refuse, is a mere mockery. Our unbelief and impenitence
is imputed to us as our own fault, Because of unbelief thou were broken off.
And Romans 11. 20. Romans 2. 5.
after thy hardness and impenitent heart, thou treasurest up unto thy self
wrath. Their unbelief and impenitence were not their own faults, if they
neither had power to concur with the grace of God to the production of faith
and repentance, nor yet to refuse the grace of God. The holy Scripture does
teach us that God does help us in doing works of piety. The Lord is my helper:
And the Spirit helps our infirmities. If we did not cooperate at all, God
could not be said to help us. There is, therefore there must be, cooperation,
Neither does this concurrence or cooperation of man, atall, entrench upon the
power or honor of God, because this very liberty to cooperate is his gift,
and this manner of acting his own institution.

Those words, Behold I stand at the door and knock, are not understood only of
the Ministers Rev. 3. 20.
outward knocking at the door of the ear with persuasive words, but much more
of God Almighties knocking at the door of the heart, by his preventing grace.
To what end does he knock to have it opened, if he himself had shut it by an
irresistible decree? God first knocks at the door of our hearts by his
preventing grace, without which we have no desire to open unto Christ: And then
he helps us by his adjuvant or assisting grace, that we may be able to open.
Yet the very name of Gods adjuvant, or assistant, or helping grace, does
admonish us, that there is something for us to do on our parts; that is, to
open, to consent, to concur. Why should our cooperation seem so strange, which
the Apostle does assert so positively? We are laborers together with God. And
I labored more abundantly than 1 Cor. 3. 9.
they all; yet not I, (that is, not I alone) but 1 Cor. 15. 10.
the grace of God which was with me.

The last part of his Section is concerning prayer, which he mesnageth no
better than the rest.

First he accuses me for saying that prayer Confidence in prayer, and the
efficacy of it.
is a signification that we expect that which we pray for from God, which he
calls a presumption in me, and a detraction from the honor of God. But it is
so far from being a presumption, that it is a necessary requisite in prayer. S.
James will have us pray without wavering: Let him ask in faith nothing
wavering. S. Paul Jam. 1. 6.
will have men to lift up holy hands without wrath or doubting. And our Savior
commands, 1 Timothy 2. 8.
What things soever ye desire when ye pray, believe that ye shall receive them,
and shall have Mark. 11. 24.
them.

I cited many Texts of Scripture to prove the efficacy of prayer, whereof he is
pleased to take notice of three; and to deny that helping, means, efficacy,
availing, do signify any causation; contrary both to the words and scope of
those Texts, and contrary to the tenor of the whole Scripture.

The prayer of faith shall save the sick. And I know that this shall turn to my
salvation thorough Jam. 5. 15.
your prayers. Hannah prayed and the Lord Phil. 1. 19.
granted her request. We see the like in Achab, in Zachary, in Cornelius, and
many others. Hezekias prayed, and the Lord said, I have heard thy prayer, I
have seen thy tears, Behold I will add unto thy days fifteen years. Isay 38.
5.
Nothing can be plainer than Solomon's prayer at the dedication of the Temple.
If there be famine in the land, if there be pestilence, etc. If 1 King. 8. 37.
2 Chronicles. 7. 12.
their enemy besiege them in their Cities, whatsoever plague, whatsoever
sicknesses there be, what prayer or supplication soever be made by any man, or
by all thy people Israel, etc. and spread forth his hands toward this house,
hear thou in Heaven thy dwelling Place, and forgive, and do, etc. To all
which, God himself condescended and promised to do accordingly.

His reason to the contrary, That no creature living can work any effect upon
God, is most true; but neither pertinent to his purpose, nor understood by
himself. It is all one as to the efficacy of prayer if it work upon us, as
though it had wrought upon God himself, if it render us more capable of his
mercies, as if it rendered him more merciful. Though the Sword and the Crown
hang immovable, yet prayer translateth us from one capacity to another, from
being under the sword, to be under the Crown.

Lastly, he tells us in great sadness, That though our prayers to man be
distinguished from our thanks, it is not necessary it should be so in our
prayers and thanks to God Almighty. Prayers and thanksgiving are our acts, not
Gods acts, and have their distinction from us, not from God. Prayer respects
the time to come, thanksgiving the time past. Prayer is for that we want,
thanksgiving for that we have. All the ten Lepers prayed, Jesus, Luke 17. 13.
and 18. 2 Cor. 1. 11.
Master have mercy on us; but only one of them returned to give God thanks. S.
Paul distinguishes prayer and thanksgiving, even in respect of God. By
granting the prayers of his people, God puts an obligation upon them to give
thanks. He might as well have said, that Faith, Hope, and Charity, are the same
thing.

He passes over the rest of this Chapter in silence. I think him much the
wiser for so doing; If he had done so by the rest likewise, it had been as much
credit for his cause.

Castigations of the Animadversions, Number. 16.
Here are three things questionable in this Section; First, whether he who
makes all things, make all things necessary to be, or whether it be a
contradiction of me to my self to say so? First, this is certain, there can be
no formal contradiction where there is but one proposition; but here is but one
proposition. Secondly, here is no implicit contradiction; First because there
is a vast difference between making all things necessary to be, and making all
things to be necessary Agents. The most free or contingent Agents in the World
when they are, are necessarily such as they are; that is, necessary to be; But
they are not necessarily necessary Agents. And yet he is still harping upon
this string, to prove such a necessity as no man did ever deny. Thirdly, I told
him that this which he contends for here, is but a necessity of supposition. As
supposing a garment to be made of the French fashion, when it is made it is
necessarily of the French faction. But it was not necessary before it was made,
that it should be made of the French fashion, nor of any other fashion; for it
might not have been made at all.

He excepteth, That the burning of the fire is T. H. Still mistaketh necessity
upon supposition.
no otherwise necessary then upon supposition. That is, supposing fuel be cast
upon the fire, the fire does burn it necessarily. But herein he is altogether
mistaken. For that only is called necessary upon supposition, where the thing
supposed is or was in some sort in the power of the free Agent, either to do it
or to leave it undone, indifferently. But it is never in the power of the fire
to burn or not to burn indifferently. He who did strike the fire out of the
flint, may be said to be a necessary cause of the burning that proceeded from
thence upon supposition, because it was in his power, either to strike fire, or
not to strike fire. And he who puts more fuel to the fire may be said to be a
necessary cause of the continuance of the fire, upon supposition, because it
was in his choice to put to more fuel, or not. But the fire it self cannot
choose but burn whilst it is fire; and therefore it is a necessary cause of
burning, absolutely and not upon supposition. What unseen necessity does
prejudice liberty, and what does not, I have showed formerly. How mean an
esteem soever he has of the Tailor, either he, or his meanest apprentise have
more sense than himself in this cause. The Tailor knows that there was no
necessity from eternity, that he should be a Tailor, or that that man for whom
he made the garment, should be his customer; and much less yet of what fashion
he should make it. But he is still fumbling to no purpose upon that old foolish
rule, as he pleased once to call it, Whatsoever is when it is, is necessarily
so as it is.

The second question is, Whether there be any Agents in the World which are
truly There is more in contingency than ignorance.
free, or truly contingent Agents, according to his grounds? And it is easily
demonstrated, that there are not: Because he maintains that all Agents are
necessary, and that those Agents which we call free Agents and contingent
Agents, do act as necessarily, as those Agents which we see and know to be
necessary Agents: And that the reason why we style them free Agents, and
contingent Agents, is, because we do not know whether they work necessarily or
not. He has told us hitherto that all Agents act necessarily, otherwise there
could not be an universal necessity. Now he tells us that there be sundry
Agents, which we know not whether they work necessarily or not. If we do not
know whether they work necessarily or not, then we do not know whether there be
universal necessity or not. But we may well pass by such little mistakes in
him. That which I deduce from hence is this: That the formal reason of liberty
and contingency according to his opinion does consist in our ignorance or
nescience; and then it has no real being in the nature of things. Hitherto
the world has esteemed nothing more than liberty; Mankind has been ready to
fight for nothing sooner than liberty: Now if after all this, there be no such
thing as liberty in the world, they have contended all this while for a shadow.
It is but too apparent what horrible disorders there are in the world, and how
many times, right is trodden under foot by might, and how the worst of men do
flourish and prosper in this world, whilst poor Hieremy is in the Dungeon, or
writing books of lamentation. If there be true liberty in the world, we know
well whereunto to impute all these disorders; but if there be no true liberty
in the world, free from antecedent necessitation, then they all fall directly
upon God Almighty and his Providence.

The last question is concerning his definition of contingent, That they are
such Agents as work we know not how. Against which I gave him two exceptions in
my defense. One was this. Many Agents work we know not how, as the Loadstone
draws iron, the Jet chaff; and yet they are known and acknowledged to be
necessary, and not contingent Agents. Secondly, many Agents do work we know
how, as a stone falling down from an house upon a man's head, and yet we do not
account it a necessary, but a contingent event, by reason of the accidental
concurrence of the causes. I have given him other instances in other parts of
this Treatise; And if need be, he may have twenty more. And yet though his
definition was showed formerly to halt downright on both sides, yet he, good
man, is patient and never takes the least notice of it: But only denies the
consequence, and over-looketh the proofs.

His objection about the indetermination of the causes, That indetermination
does nothing, because it makes the event equal, to happen, and not to happen,
is but a flash without any one grain of solidity. For by indetermination in
that place, is clearly understood, not to be predetermined to one by
extrinsecal causes, but to be left free to its own intrinsecal determination,
this way, or that way, indifferently. So the first words By reason of the
indetermination, have referrence to free Agents and free Events, And the other
words, Or accidental concurrence of the causes, have referrence to casual
Events. And both together, referendo sigul^ singulis, do include all
contingents, as the word is commonly and largely taken by old Philosophers.

Castigations of the Animadversions, Number. 17.
REader, I do not wonder now and then, to see T. H. sink under the weight of an
absurdity, in this cause. A back of steel were not able to bear all those
unsupportable consequences, which flow from this opinion of fatal destiny. But
why he should delight to multiplle needless absurdities, I do not know.
Almost every Section produces some new monster. In this seventeenth Section,
I demonstrated clearly, that this opinion of universal necessity, does take
away the nature of sin. That which he says in answer thereunto, is that
which follows.

First; it is true, he who takes away the liberty Def. Number. 3. stat. of quest.
cast. Number. 1. and 3. etc.
of doing according to the will, takes away the nature of sin, but he that
denies the liberty to will, does not so. This answer has been sufficiently
taken away already, both in the defense, and in these Castigations. Inevitable
and unresistible necessity does as much acquit the will from sin, as the action.

Again, whereas I urged, That whatsoever proceeds essentially, by way of
physical determination from the first cause, is good, and just and lawful; he
opposes, That I might as well have concluded, that what soever man has been
made by God, is a good and just man. So I might, What should hinder me to
conclude that every man, and every creature created by God is good, qua talis,
as it is created by God: but being but a creature, it is not immutably good as
God himself is. If he be not of the same opinion, he must seek for companions
among those old Heretics the Manichees or Marcionites.

So he comes to his main answer, Sin is not a thing really made. Those things
which at first were actions, were not then sins, though actions of the same
nature with those which were afterward sins. Nor was then the will to any
thing a sin, though it were a will to the same thing, which in willing now we
should sin. Actions became then sins first, when the Commandemens came, etc.
There can no action be made sin, but by the law. Therefore this opinion, though
it derive actions essentially from God, it derives not sins essentially from
him, but relatively, and by the Commandment. The first thing I observe in him
is a contradiction to himself. Now he makes the anomy, or the irregularity and
repugnance to the law to be the sin, before he conceives the action it self
to be the sin. Does not the Bishop think God to be the cause of all actions?
And are not sins of commission actions? Is murder no action? And does not God
himself say, there is no evil in the City which I have not done? And was not
murder one of those evils, etc. I am of opinion, that the distinction of
causes into efficient and deficient is Bohu, and signifies nothing. This might
have been pardoned to him.

But his second slip is worse, That the World was I know not how long without
sin. I did Sin in the world before the civil law.
demonstrate, That upon his grounds, all sins are essentially from God, and
consequently are lawful and just. He answers, That the actions were from
God, but the actions were not sins at the first, until there was a law. What
is this to the purpose? It is not material, when sin did enter into the World
early or late, so as when it did enter, it were essentially from God, which it
must needs be upon his grounds, that both the murder and the law against
murder, are from God. And as it does not help his cause at all, so it is most
false. What actions were there in the World, before the sin of the Angel? He
charged the Angels with folly. And if God spared Job 4. 18. 2 Pet. 2. 4.
not the Angels that sinned, but cast them down to hell; and the Angels which
kept not their first estate. What were those first actions Jude 6.
that were before the sin of Adam? By one man sin entered into the World,
and death by Romans 5. 12.
sin.

Thirdly he erreth most grossly, in supposing that the World at first was
lawless. The World was never without the eternal law, that is, the rule of
justice in God himself, and that which gives force to all other laws, as the
Divine Wisdom says, By me Kings reign, and Princes decree justice. And sin
is Prove. 8. 15.
defined to be that which is acted, said, or thought against the eternal law.
But to let this pass for the present, because it is transcendentally a law.
How was the World ever without the law of nature? which is most properly a law,
the law that cannot lie, not mortal from mortal man, not dead, or written in
the paper without life, but incorruptible, written in the heart of man, by the
finger of God himself. Let him learn sounder doctrine from St. Paul, For when
the Gentiles Romans 2. 14. 1^. 15.
which have not the law, do by nature the things contained in the law, these
having not the law, are a law unto themselves, which show the work of the law
written in their hearts, their consciences also bearing witness, and their
thoughts, the mean while, accusing or excusing one another. I pass by those
Commandments of God, which were delivered by tradition from hand to hand, from
Father to Son. This, That mankind was ever without all law, is the most drowsy
dream that ever dropped from pen.

Whereas he says, That I allow that the nature of sin does consist in this,
that it is an action proceeding from our will against the law, and thence
infers, That the formal reason of sin lies not in the liberty of willing,
he does wrong himself, and mis-inform his Reader; for I never allowed it, nor
never shall allow it in that sense, but said expressly the contrary. My words
were these. [which in our sense is most true, if he understand a just law, and
a free rational will] And then I added further, That the law which he
understands is a most unjust law, and the will which is intended by him, an
irrational necessitated will. Where did he learn to take that for granted,
which is positively denied? He says indeed, if the Reader could trust him,
That he has showed, that no law can be unjust. But I expect arguments, not his
own authority, which I value not. He neither has showed that all laws are
just, nor ever will be able to show it, until the Greek Calends. Likewise where
he seems not to understand what the rational will is, I do think there is
scarcely any one Author, who did ever write upon this subject, but he has
this distinction between the rational and the sensitive appetite. And has
particularly made this main difference between them, that the rational appetite
is free, but the sensitive appetite is necessary. If he alone will not
understand that which is so evident and universally received by all Scholars,
it is no great matter.

It is as unjust to command a man to do that which is impossible for man to do,
as to To command impossibilities is unjust.
command him contradictions. This silly evasion will not serve his turn. Those
things are said to be impossible to us in themselves, which are not made
impossible to us by our own defaults. And those things which we make impossible
by our defaults, are not impossible in themselves. Those impossibilities and
only those which we by our defaults have made, may lawfully be punished. Where
he confesses, That lawmakers not knowing the secret necessities of things to
come, do sometimes injoyne things that are made impossible from eternity, it
comes every way short of the truth. First in limiting it to humane lawmakers,
who only know not the necessities of things to come; for my Argument, That law
which commands impossibilities is an unjust law, does hold as well of Gods
law, as of man's law, not that we believe any law of God can be unjust, God
forbid: but to demonstrate to him undeniably, that all those things which he
conceives to be impossible from eternity, are not impossible from eternity,
because the contrary is commanded from God, and God never commands
impossibilities. Secondly, he comes short of the truth in this also, That he
says human lawgivers do sometimes injoyne impossibilities; for by his leave
upon his grounds, they do always enjoin either absolute impossibilities, or
absolute necessities, both which are equally ridiculous. Lastly, whereas I
argued thus, If the will of man be determined by God, without the will of man,
then it is not man's will, but Gods will, he denies my consequence, because it
may be both Gods will and man's will. I answer, It is Gods will effectively,
because he makes it necessarily; and subjectively, because he wills it; but
upon his grounds it is the will of man only subjectively, because he is
necessitated to will it, but not effectively, because he had no hand in the
production of it, and therefore how faulty soever it may be, yet it cannot be
imputed to man.

Concerning his instance in a civil Judge. Fist I showed that it was
impertinent, because neither is a civil Judge the Judge of sin, nor the law of
the land the rule of sin. To my reasons he answers nothing in particular, but
in general, That whereas I said that the law cannot justly punish a crime that
proceeds from necessity, it was no impertinent answer to say, That the Judge
looks no higher than the will of the doer. Here are so many imperfections,
that I scarcely know where to begin.

First, I never said that the law cannot justly punish a crime that proceeds
from necessity; I always said, and do still say, That if it be antecedently
necessitated, it is no crime, either punishable, or unpunishable. Secondly, he
did make the civil Judge to be the Judge of sin, and the law of the land to
be the rule of sin in express terms, A Judge in judging whether it be sin or
not, which is done against the law. Thirdly, That will which the law and the
Judge do regard, is not his brutish necessitated irrational appetite, but our
free rational will, after deliberation, determined intrinsecally by the Agent
himself.

Secondly I showed, That his instance in a civil Judge was against himself,
because this which he says, That the Judge looks no higher than the will of
the doer, does prove that the will of the doer did determine it self freely,
and that the malefactor had liberty to have kept the law if he would. To this
he answers, That it proves indeed that the malefactor Yet further against his
silly distinction, free to do if he will, not free to will.
had liberty to have kept the law if he would, but it proves not that he had
the liberty to keep the law. Has not this silly senseless distinction been
canvased sufficiently yet, but it must once more appear upon the stage? Agreed.
Thus I argue; first, If the Malefactor had liberty to have kept the law if he
would, then the Malefactor had liberty to have contradicted the absolute will
of God, if he would; then he had liberty to have changed the unalterable
decrees of God, if he would. But he had not liberty to have contradicted the
absolute will of God, if he would; he had not liberty to have changed the
unalterable decrees of God, if he would. The assumtion is so evident, that it
were great shame to question it. The consequence is as clear as the Sun. For
upon Mr. Hobbes his grounds, it was the absolute will of God, and the
unalterable decree of God, that the Malefactor should do as he did, and not do
otherwise. And therefore if the Malefactor had liberty to have kept the law,
and to have done otherwise if he would, he had liberty to have contradicted the
will of God, and to have changed the decree of God, if he would. But this is
too absurd.

Secondly to have liberty to have kept the law if he would, implies
necessarily a conditional possibility. But the will of God and the decree of
God, that the Malefactor should do as he did, and not keep the law, implies an
absolute impossibility. Now it is a rule in Logic, that impossible habet in
se vim Adverbii universaliter negantis. An impossibility has the force of an
universal negative. But an universal negative and a particular affirmative are
contradictory. That it was impossible for the Malefactor to have kept the law,
and yet he had liberty to have kept the law if he would. There is not the least
starting hole for him through which he can endeavor to creep out of this
contradiction, but by making this supposition [if he would] to signify
nothing, and to affirm that it was equally impossible for the Malefactor to
will otherwise, and to do otherwise. Then see what a pretty liberty he has
left us, even a mere impossibility. If the Sky fall, then we shall catch
Larks. Observe further the vanity of this distinction, between liberty to do if
we will, and liberty to will. When both the one liberty and the other are
equally impossible, upon his own grounds. And yet with this mock-liberty which
signifies nothing, he is fain to answer all the texts of Scripture which are
brought against him, and all the absurdities which are heaped upon him.

Lastly, to say a man is free to do any thing if he will, implies that he has
power enough, and there is nothing wanting to the doing of it, but his will.
Otherwise if there be not power enough to do it (as in this case upon his
grounds there is not) it is as ridiculou to say a Malefactor was free to have
kept the law if he would, as to say, a man is free to jump over the sea if he
will, or to fly in the air if he will.

Yet still he says, The will of the Malefactor did not determine it self. Then
by his own confession, the Malefactor had the more wrong to be punished, for
that which was unavoidably and irresistibly imposed upon him. If the Malefactor
was necessitated from God by an essential determination of extrinsecall causes,
both to will as he did, and to do as he did, he was no more a malefactor than
his Judge.

I have no reason to retract any one syllable Of monsters.
of what I said concerning monsters, But he had need to retract his ordinary
falsifying, and dismembring, and misinterpreting of my sayings. I affirmed (as
all sound Philosophers do affirm) That nature never intends the generation of
a monster, but that every monster is a deviation from the law of the first
institution, that every creature should beget another in his own likeness.
Which proceeds sometimes from the defect or inordinate force of the
plasticall or forming virtue, sometimes from the excess or defect of the
matter, sometimes from the fault of the womb, wherein the conception is
perfected, sometimes from other lesser reasons; and therefore that the
universal causes, as God and the Sun, are not to be blamed for monstrous
births, but that particular cause from which the excess or defect, or
distortion did proceed. What was herein to derogate from the God of nature, who
permits and disposes of such irregularities in nature, as he does of sins
in morality, but with this difference, That moral aberrations are culpable and
punishable, but aberrations in nature are only deformities, not sins. When
Philosophers do say that nature intends any end, they do not mean that nature
does deliberate or resolve this or that, but that nature does act for an end,
which no man can deny with any credit. The Spider makes her webs to catch
flies, there is natures end. The Ante gathers provision in Summer, for winter
sustenance. The Be makes Cell^s for a depository for honey, and receptacles for
young bees. The Vine brings forth leaves, flowers, and grapes, one in order to
the production or preservation of another. And lastly follows the wine which
is the end of all the rest, which being the last, was the first or principal
end of nature. It is not the part of a real Scholar to except against evident
truth, upon Grammatical Scruples.

In the last Animadversion of this Section, nothing is contained that is either
new or requires an Answer.

Castigations of the Animadversions, Number. 18.
I cited Lipsius, only to show that the distinction of destiny into Christian
and Stoic destiny was not mine. And though Lipsius incurred some dislike by
reason of some inusitate expressions; yet there is no cause why T. H. should
please himself so much, as to think that Lipsius was of his opinion. He was no
such friend of any sort of destiny, as to abandon the liberty of the will. The
Stoics themselves came short of T. H. his universal necessity. Yet I do not
blame him if he desire to have one partner in such a desperate cause as this is.

That which concerns him in the second distinction, is this; That though he
acknowledge a mock-liberty, that is, a will or an appetite of the object, yet
he maintains that this appetite is neither moved, nor excited, nor determined
to its act or appetibility of this or that, less or more, by the free Agent,
but altogether by extrinsecal causes. And so the pretended free Agent is no
more free, than a bird which a man holds fast in his hand is free to fly
whithersoever she will.

I said, Those things which God wills without himself he wills freely and not
necessarily, which he censureth in this manner. He says rashly and untruly:
Rashly, because there is nothing without God, who is infinite, in whom are all
things, and in whom we live, move, and have our being. And untruly, because
whatsoever God foreknew from eternity, he willed from eternity, and therefore
necessarily. What should I do? What is said to be in deo, and what extra deum.
should I fall down and thank this great Mogull (as the Ethiopian slaves do
their Emperor when they are lashed) for thinking on me? Although I know his
Thrasonical humor very well, that his animal spirits are mere bubbles of
vainglory; and that he knows right well that he cannot reign securely
whilst there is one of a different opinion surviving; yet I am persuaded that
if he had been so well read, or so much versed in the writings of other men, as
to know how many he wounded rashly and untruly, in this rash and untrue
censure, he would have forborne it for his own sake. Has he never heard of a
common rule in Theology, that Opera Trinitatis ad extra sunt indivisa, The
works or acts of the Trinity without it self are undivided? Or has he never
heard of that common distinction between a necessary being, and a necessary
acting? The most perfect manner of being is necessary, and therefore God is a
necessary being, and that which he wills within himself he wills
necessarily, because whatsoever is in God is God; But the most perfect manner
of acting without the Deity is freely, and therefore the Schools do agree,
that God is a free Agent without himself.

These free acts are princially two. The first is the Creation, whereby things
created do pass from a not being to a being. The second is Government, by
which all things created are moved and ordered to their ends. All men
acknowledge that the D^ity fills all places by its Essence, by its Presence,
by its Power, being within all places and things but not included, and without
all places and things, but not excluded. They acknowledge that all things which
have a real being do depend upon God for their being, for their making, for
their conservation. And therefore when we speak of any thing that is without
the Deity, we do not intend, that any thing is without the Essence, or the
Presence, or the Power, or the circumference of it; God is a Circle, whose
Center is every where, the Circumference no where. But by the works of God
without himself, we understand the Creation, and the Government of the World,
which are not terminated in the Deity it self, but in the creatures, which are
from God as their efficient, and for God as their end, and in God or thorough
God in respect of their necessary and perpetual dependence upon him, who is the
Original Essence of all things, I am has sent me unto you: yet they are not of
God as particles of Exodus 3. 14.
the Divine Essence, nor in God in that sense wherein we use to say, Whatsoever
is in God is God. And so they are his works ad extra, without the Deity.

To make good the second part of his censure that it was untruly said, he
produces nothing but his old threedbare argument taken from the prescience of
God, which has been answered over and over. Neither the prescience of God, nor
the will of God upon prescience, do imply any more than a mere hypothetical
necessity, which will do his cause no good.

In the conclusion of this Section he confesses, To will and do in God the
same thing. He wills not all he could will.
That God does not all things that he can do if he will; but he says, God
cannot will that which he has not willed from eternity, understanding by
eternity, an everlasting succession; whereas in eternity, nothing is past or to
come. I have showed often in these Castigations, the falsity, uselessenesse,
and contradiction, of this absurd silly senseless distinction, in respect of
men. But being here applied by him to God, nothing can be imagined more absurd;
for to will efficaciously, and to do, in God are the same thing. What he does,
he does by his will. To imagine that many things are free to God to do, which
are not free to him to will, shows that his meditations upon this Subject
were either none at all, or worth nothing.

But it shall susfice for the present, to show how absurd and how unappliable
this exposition is to the two places by me produced. John Baptist told the
Jews, that they might not flatter themselves with this, that they were the
posterity of Abraham, that though all they should prove impenitent and
unbelievers; yet God was able to raise up children to Abraham of stones. If it
were impossible Lu^. 3. 8.
for God to will the doing of any such thing, How was this truly said? And how
could this afford any supply to the seed of Abraham, in case his carnal
posterity should continue obstinate? In the other place S. Peter drawing his
sword in defense of his Master, Christ reprehended him, and told him that he
could have a better guard to secure him from all the attempts of the Jews, if
it pleased him not to lay down his li^e freely. Think thou that I cannot now
pray to my Father, and he shall give me presently more than twelve legions of
Angels? He says not, I can if I would, but positively, I can. Neither speaks
he of remote possibilities, but he shall give me presently. Christ would show
by these words, that if it had not been his own will freely to suffer for the
Redemption of mankind, he could have prayed to his Father, and he would have
sent him a Guard of more than twelve Legions of Angels, and that presently,
without delay. If it was impossible for God to will any such thing, then our
Saviors plea to S. Peter was but a vain pretense, and had nothing of reality
in it. If T. H. regarded the honor and veracity of Christ, he would not impose
such a juggling delusory sense upon his clear assertion: As if our Savior
should have said, Peter, I have no need of thy endeavors to defend me, for I
could pray to my Father, and he would immediately send me a Guard of twelve
Legions of Angels. But to say the truth, he is not willing to do it, and to say
the whole truth, it is not possible for him to be willing.

Castigations of the Animadversions, Number. 19.
HE professes that he never said the will is compelled, but does agree with
the rest of the World that it is not compelled. But to let us see that he
understands not what the World means in saying, the will is not compelled,
twice or thrice in the same page he makes it to be compelled. Many T. H. make
the will to be compelled.
things (says he) may compel a man to do an action in producing the will. If a
man can be compelled to will, then the will can be compelled. This appears
yet more plainly a little after, where he makes the casting of ones goods into
the sea in a storm, to be a voluntary free elective act: And yet he confesses
that terror was a necessary cause of the election. To which if we add what he
says in his answer, A man is then only said to be compelled, when fear makes
him willing to it, it appears that (according to his grounds) it is a
compulsory action also. If voluntary actions may be compulsory actions, then
the will may be compelled. To help to bear off this blow, he distinguishes
between the compulsion of the will, and the compulsion of the voluntary Agent,
denying the former, but acknowledging the later. That is, not a compulsion of
the will, but of the man. The very same he has again in these words, The
necessitation of the will is the same thing with the compulsion of the man. If
this be not plain Jargon, and Bohu (as he phraseth it,) let him tell me what is
the compulsion of a man to will, but the compulsion of his will. Whether by the
will he understand the soul as it wills, or the faculty of the will, or the
act of willing; every way, he that compels a man to will, compels his
will. Let him call it what he please, either to compel a man to will, or to
compel the will: by his leave, it is a gross contradiction; for to compel
implies reluctance and opposition, and to will implies inclination and
appetition. To necessitate the will (as he does) is to compel the will, so far
as the will in the elicite acts of it is capable of compulsion.

That is properly said to be compelled, which has its beginning from an
extrinsecal cause, Arist. Eth. lib. 3. c. 1.
that which suffers contributing nothing to it, but resisting as much as he
can. But he has devised a new improper kind of compulsion, which is caused
only by fear, which is not properly a compulsion, and such as it is, common to
many other causes with fear: As to persuasion; So Saul's servants compelled him
1 Samuel 28. 23. Est. 1. 8. 2 Cor. 12. 11.
to eat. To command, So the drinking was according to law, none did compel. To
occasion, So S. Paul says, I am become a fool in glorying, ye have compelled
me.

I pass by his uncouth term of creation of the will, in every single act of
willing. And his extravagant exception, If the same individual man who did
choose to throw his goods overboard, might choose not to throw his goods
overboard, then he might choose to throw overboard, and not throw overboard. As
if the liberty to throw or not to throw, and the liberty to throw and not to
throw; that is, the liberty to do either part of the contradiction, or to do
both parts of the contradiction were the same liberty. And secondly, as if a
man who has actually chosen, were as free to choose now, as he was at the same
time when he did choose. I see if he cannot find a knot in a bulrush, he will do
his endeavor to make it. If a man (says he) by force seize on another man's
limbs (as suppose his hand) and move them as himself, not as the other man
pleases, the action so done is not the action of him that suffers, but of
him that uses the force: But if he that uses the force shall give a third
person a box on the ear with that hand which he forces, then it is the action
of both; but with this difference, that it is the voluntary action of the one,
and the forced or compelled action of the other. But supposing the first man
had the will of the second as much in his power as his hand, (as God Almighty
has) and should necessitate him to beat the third person willingly; certainly
the second person being so necessitated, could be no more blamed for willing in
such a case, than for striking unwillingly.

That motions proceeding from Antipathies Motus primo primi, and antipathies.
are primo primi, such as surprise a man and prevent not only all actual
deliberation, but all advertence of reason, there is no doubt. But he who
knows no other motus primo primos but only Antipathies, is like to prove
some such rare Divine or Philosopher, as Megabyses showed himself a Painter by
his ignorant discourse. Whilst thou was silent (said Apelles) thou seemedst to
be some body, but now there is not the meanest boy that grindes oker, but he
laughs at thee. The difference between necessity upon antecedent supposition,
and necessity upon a consequent supposition, has been sufficiently cleared
several times in these Castigations, and in my Defense in this very Section, to
which I remit the Reader. Whosoever shall tell us that he who has chosen to
himself the profession of a Romish Priest, is still no more necessitated to
take the oath of caelibate, than he was before he made choice of that office;
and that the action of him who runs away upon the first view of a Cat, by
reason of an antipathy which he cannot help, before all advertence of reason,
is as free as a man casting his goods into the sea, to save his own life, after
a sad and serious deliberation. And that he who takes Physic out of
wantonness, was as much necessitated to stay within doors, as he who lay
bedrid of an hectic fever. And that Balams blessing of Israel against his
purpose and desire; And by Caiaphas his Prophecy which he spoke not of
himself, but necessarily by the special determination of the Holy Ghost, were
altogether as free as Jacobs blessing of his sons upon election; I say, he who
shall tell us all this in earnest upon his own word without any reason or
authority, had need to meet with very credulous disciples, who judge of Colors
winking.

It is true, we who see but thorough a glass To search too boldly into the
nature of God is a fault.
darkly, do not in this mortality comprehend exactly the nature of God and of
the holy Angels, partly by reason of the weakness of our understanding: The
water can ascend no higher than the Fountains head; and partly for want of
Revelation: Not to know what God has not reve^ed, is a learned ignorance. And
therefore he who searches presumptuously But the greater fault is negligence
into the Majesty of God, is oppressed deservedly by his glory. But the much
greater offense does lie on the other side, that men do not endeavor to know
God so much as they ought, and might by the light of nature, the contemplation
of the Creatures, and the Revelation of Gods holy Word, nor to serve him
according to their knowledge. How shall we serve God if we do not know God at
all? The least means of the knowledge of God is by the contemplation of the
Creatures: yet even that does render men without excuse. No man but himself
would have objected it as a presumption to any man Romans 1. 20.
to have said, That God was freer to do good than mortal man, and incapable of
doing evil. Yet this is that which those dreadful terms employed. We measure
liberty by the degree of rationability, and the power of reason over passion;
he by the largeness or straightness of the prison. Ours is a liberty of men,
his is a liberty of Black-birds. If I were disposed to cavil at words as he
does, I could show him out of Scaliger, That one heat is not more intensive
than another, any Exer c. 12. d. 2.
more than one liberty is more intensive than another. Both phrases are
metaphorical. Intention is properly the drawing out of the two extremes, the
one further from the other, as in the string of a bow by bending it, and in a
coard by stretching it out. But I forbear.

He had said in his first answer, He that can T. H. his liberty omnipotence in
show, in deed nothing.
do what he will, has all liberty possible; And he that cannot, has none at
all; I answered, That he who can do what he will, has not only a liberty, but
omnipotence. To this he replieth, That it is one thing to say a man has
liberty to do what he will, and another to say that a man has power to do what
he will. This is very true, but it helps not him at all. He spoke directly of
power, He that can do what he will, and he that cannot do what he will. Thus I
argue, Either a man can do what he will, or he cannot do what he will, If he
can do what he will, then he is not only free, but omnipotent; If he cannot do
what he will, then he has no liberty at all. So he has made men to be either
Almighty Gods, or senseless logs, both ways he erreth. If he that can do what
he will be not omnipotent (in good english) I have forgot my mothers tongue. He
that is bound hand and foot, may wish that he were loosed; and he that is so
sick that he cannot stand, may wish that he were in health, that they might
both be able to walk; but to elect walking in that state and condition wherein
they are, without supposition of the loosing of the one, or the recovery of the
other, they cannot, for both want power, and election is of things actually
possible. There is only this difference, That in probability the bound man may
be loosed, before the sick man recover his strength. But yet it may so fall
out, that the sick man may be restored to his health, before the other be
loosed from his bonds. Therefore he says amiss, That the sick man wants
power, not liberty, and the bound man liberty, not power. If he understood the
difference between the Elicite and Imperate acts of the will, he would be able
to judge of such cases better than he is. I have only one more Advertisement
to the Reader, that after all this glorious ostentation, He that can do what he
will, has all liberty possible, he leaves man as poor and bare and helpelesse
as a grasshopper in winter, without any liberty to will, and consequently
without any liberty to do.

He names two Schoolmen, I think by the matching of them, they be a great part
of his He dare not refer himself to his own witnesses.
store, Suares and Johannes a Duns. So he is pleased to call that honor of our
Nation, and one of the subtilest writers, that these last ages have afforded:
and four later Divines, Luther, Melancthon, Calvine, Perkins, whom he always
much admired. If he did so, they are the more beholden to him, for a man may
see by his Treatises, That unless he meditated of them sometimes, he has not
been much acquainted with them. He dare not refer his two sorts of devils, or
his temporary pains of hell, or his lawless state of mankind by nature, or his
necessity of active obedience to all human laws, or his inefficacy of prayer,
or his infallible rule of moral goodness, or his universal necessity of all
events, by the physical determination of the second causes; or any one of his
hundreds of Paradoxes, to their determination.

Room for a great Censor, not an old Roman Terms of Art.
Censor, but a new English Censor, who comes armed with his own authority, to
reform not only Authors, but the Arts and Sciences themselves, after he has
been dreaming, I should have said meditating, some years upon the top of
Parnassus, and now comes forth sudainly Grammatticus, Rhetor, Geometres,
Pictor, Alyptes. To stay there were to do him wrong; a Pentametor added will
not contain half his exploites: a Poet, a Logician, a Philosopher Natural and
Moral; an Astronomer, a Mathematician, a Theologian. To what purpose did our
Universities nourish so many little Professors? one great Professor is best, as
the Cat in the Fable said of one great way. But forget not Epictetus his rule,
Remember to distrust. We have seen a Mountebanck, or Quacksalver, or Operatour,
or Charlatan, call him what you will, vapor upon a Stage, and slight the good
old Physicians for poring upon Galen and Hippocrates, to learn a company of
senlesse Aphorisms, whilst they by their own meditation and experience, had
found out remedies more easy, more effectual, more universal. We blame the
Court of Rome for their Index expurgatorius: It is a shrewd sign when
litigants are forced to cut out the tongues of their own witnesses; yet they
purged out but words, or sometimes a sentence; rarely prohibited one of their
own Authors. Here words and sentences and whole Authors, and Arts, go to
wrack together, much like the Mahumetan reformation, when they sacrificed the
most part of their Interpreters of the Alchoran to the fire, without ever
reading them; yet what they did, they did by public authority, and spared some
as Genuine Expositors. But what this our new Censor does, he does upon his own
head, and like death sparing none; so did not they.

Down goes all Astrology and Metaphysics. The Moral Philosopher must quit his
means and extremes in order to virtue, his liberty of contradiction and
contrariety, his necessity absolute and hypothetical, his proportion
Arithmetical and Geometrical, (I hope the Geometrician may have leave to hold
it still) his principia congenita and acquisita, his (...) and (...), and most
of his terms of Art, because Mr. Hobbes has not read them, It is well if Moral
Philosophy escape his censure. For if the law of the land be the only
infallible rule of right reason, then the knowledge of actions, morally good
and morally bad, belongs properly to the common lawyer. The Moral Philosopher
may put up his pipes. The same Arbitrary power he assumeth to himself in
natural Philosophy, rejecting all the common terms used by Philosophers,
euphoniae gratia, because they sound not well in his ears, for other reasons he
has none. Let the natural Philosopher no more mention his intentionall
species, his understanding Agent and Patient, his receptive and reductive power
of the matter, his qualities Symbolicall and dissymbolicall, his temperament ad
pondus and ad justitiam, etc. I would have him fling away his Sympathies and
Antipathies, his Antiperistasis and the like. Whether it was Astronomy or
Astrology in my original, I do not know, nor have means to see, both may
signify the same thing. I am sure, I neither said nor meant Judiciary or
Genethliacal Astrology, as my instances do evidence. The truth is, there are so
many mistakes in that impression, that sometimes I scarcely know my self what
to make of them.

But he is more propitious to the Astronomer. His Apogeum and Perigeum, Artick,
Antarctick, Equator, Zodiac, Zenith, Horizon, Zones, are not so much as terms
of art, but are as intelligible as an hatchet or a saw. What imaginary circles,
and lines, and poles, and points, and an imaginary Axeltree, and Ram, and
Bull, and bears, and Dragon, and yet no terms of art? What are they then, Let
him put it to a Jury of Malmsburians themselves, whether they understand these
so well as an hatchet or a saw, and he is gone.

The like favor he shows to Logicians, Their words of the first and second
intention, their Abstracts and Concretes, Their Subjects and Predicates, Their
Modes and Figures, Their Method Synthetick and Analytick, Their Fallacies of
Composition and Division, are no terms of Art, but plain intelligible words. He
that can say this without blushing, may dispute with any man. Porphyry makes
the five predicables to be five terms of Art. Are not the predicaments and
post-predicaments and demonstrations a priore and a posteriore terms of Art?
who made a Mode and a Figure to signify what they do but Artists? Let all the
world hear them, or read them, who have not learned Logic, and they shall
understand no more of them, then of his Jargon. Why is not an Antecedent and
Hypothetical necessity as intelligible as a Categoricall and Hypotheticall
Syllogism. An Individuum vagum, if it were not a term of Art, should signify
rather an atome, or a Rogue, than an honest person. Though he be so favorable
to Logic here, he is as little beholden to it, as to the other Arts, who knows
no better what are terms of Art. One of the first distinctions which we meet
withal in Logic, is between the first and second notions. The second notions,
such as all these are, are called expressly terms of Art, or Logical Notions,
or Logical Organs, which they define to be images or representations, whereby
the understanding does form to it self real notions. And they compare them to
brazen weights, of no value in themselves, whereby nevertheless, all sorts of
gold are weighed. There can be nothing more certain and evident than this, That
all these Logical and Astronomicall terms, be second notions and terms of Art.

Nay, so extremely blind and partial he is, that he approves of Barbara,
Celarent, Darii, Ferio, which he makes terms of Art, as a good invention to
help the apprehension of young men: and yet with the same breath, rejects
these most excellent and most significant distinctions and expressions, which
have been received in a manner universally, some of them for two thousand
years, all of them for diverse Centuries of years, in the Church, and in the
Schools, as well of Theology, as Philosophy, which were invented for remedies
against confusion, and helps to the clearer, and more distinct understanding of
high and difficult notions, upon this false and slanderous praetext, that they
were invented to blind the understanding, because he presumed to condemn them,
before he took pains to understand them.

He adds, That I cite no terms of Art for Geometry, saying, he was afraid I
would have put in lines, or perhaps equality, and unequality, for terms of Art.
To free him from this fear, I put in their numbers numbering and numbered, their
superficies, concave, and co^vexe, their triangles, ambligone, and oxygone,
their cones, cubes, cylinders, their parallells and parallelogrammes, their
proportions, superpartinent, and superbipartinent, etc. their rules of Algebra
and Helcataim, their Integers, and Numerators, and Divisors, and Denominators,
and fabricall figures, their proportionality Arithmeticall and Geometrical,
continual and discontinuall, direct, conversed, alternative, inversed,
compounded, parted. Geometry has its words of Art and proper expressions, as
well as all other Arts and Sciences. So has Physic, Surgery, Law. So have
Soldiers, Mariners, Hawkers, Hunters.

But of all others he has the least favor for the Divine, whom he will not
permit to use a word in preaching, but such as his Auditors, nor in writing,
but such as his common Readers may understand. I do not like it any more than
he, that a Divine should affect uncouth words, to make his ignorant Auditors
to gape, I had rather speak five words in the Church 1 Cor. 14. 19.
with understanding, etc. than ten thousand in an unknown tongue. But does he
make no distictian between the Church and the Schools? Does he think that
Theology, which has the sublimest subject, does not require as high, as
learned, and as distinct expressions, as any Art or Science whatsoever? All
hearers and readers are not novices, nor of the vulgar or common sort. There
are those who have been brought up at the feet of Gamaliel, and have been
admitted into the innermost Closet of the School learning. The holy Scripture
it self, though it affect plainness, is not always such a stranger, either
to learing or elegance. The only answer I shall give him to this, is, That he
is beyond his Last.

In the last part of this Section, he troubles himself more than he needs
about a testimony, which I cited out of his book De Cive, not out of any esteem
I had for it, for I condemned it; but to let him see his contradiction. A
contradiction.
There he made the Ecclesiastical Doctors to be infallible, here he makes
them to be fallible. There he made their infallibility to be a peculiar
privilege derived to them by imposition of hands from the Apostles, whom they
succeeded, and from the promise of Christ: Here he attributes it wholly to
that power which is committed to them by the civil Magistrate. And what if the
civil Magistrate commit no power to them? then by his doctrine, Christ breaks
his promise, and this privilege cease. Infallibilitatem hanc promis^t
servator noster in iis c. 17. d. 28.
rebus quae ad salutem sunt necessariae Apostolis usque ad diem judicii, hoc
est Apostolis and pastoribus ab Apostolis successive per manuum impositionem
consecrandis. He answers, That the infallability of Ecclesiastical Doctors
does not consist in this, that they cannot be deceived, but that a Subject
cannot be deceived in obeying them, when they are lawfully constituted
Doctors. A pretty fancy, If the blind lead the blind, both fall into the
ditch, Doctor and Subject together. If the Doctors be deceived Matthew. 15. 14.
themselves, they must needs deceive the Subjects, who trust to their
interpretation. Secondly, he waveth now the two grounds of their infallibility,
that is, the promise of Christ, and the privilege conferred by imposition of
hands; and ascribes all their infallibility to the constitution of the civil
power, which may render their expositions legal, according to the municipal
laws, but cannot render them infallible. Thirdly, If Ecclesiastical Doctors
lawfully constituted, be so far infallible, that they cannot deceive the
Subject, why did he vary so much notoriously from their expositions at that
time, as he has done in his book De Cive, when they had both imposition of
hands, and approbation from supreme authority? Why does he now, wanting both
the promise of Christ, and imposition of hands, take upon him to be the tryer
and examiner of the exposition, not only of single Prophets, but of whole
convocations.

Castigations of the Animadversions, Number. 20.
IF Mr. Hobs did understand what true Election and compulsion inconsistent.
election and true compulsion is, it were evident that election of one out of
more than one, cannot consist with antecedent determination to one; much less
with compulsion or force, where he that is compelled opposes and resists as
much as he can. That the same act should be both voluntary that is with our
will, and compulsory, that is, against our will, not in part but in whole, is
impossible. But as the Sepia to preserve her self undiscovered does shed forth
about her a quantity of black inky blood, to hide her self from the fisher; So
T. H. for fear to be catched in palpable errors, does confound and blunder all
things, making a new election, a new compulsion, a new liberty. There is not a
word of moment here that has not been discussed formerly in this Treatise. And
I do not esteem his raw meditations worthy of repetition over and over. What is
new in them I shall cull out from the rest.

He tells us, that when a stone is thrown upwards, the external agent gives
it a beginning of motion: So far we agree, whatsoever gives it the continuance.
He says further, That when the stone falls it is moved downward by the power
of some other Agent, which though it be imperceptible to the eye, is not
imperceptible to reason. Herein we differ, wherein all the world hitherto have
agreed. But it was very meet that he should deny the stone the determination
of its natural motion, who had denied the intellectual soul the determination
of its own will. Yet since he is pleased to conceal his new Agent, I have no
desire to scrape acquaintance with it, especially upon such terms, to
relinquish that intrinsecal principle which all the World hitherrto has
received.

So passing by his spiritual court unsaluted, (he loves to show his teeth,
though he cannot bite) and leaving counterfeiting in hope of quarter, to
himself as a person much more capable of that design; the next new Subject that
presents it self is, Whether there be any mixed actions, partly voluntary,
partly unvoluntary. There are mixed actions.
He denies it positively, upon this ground, That one and the same action can
never be both voluntary and unvoluntary. I answer first to his argument, That
voluntary and unvoluntary are not opposed contradictorily, so as to admit no
mean, but privatively, which do admit a mean, as the dawning of the day, or the
twilight, is a mean between light and darkness, when it may be truly said, it
is, partly light and partly dark. Melancthon has an excellent rule to this
purpose. Privative opposita nequeunt esse in eodem subjecto gradibus
excellentibus. Privative opposites cannot be in the same subject in eminent
degrees, but in remiss degrees they may. As to avoid importunity, a man may do
a free act with reluctance; All reluctance is a degree of unwillingnesse. When
Nero in the beginning of his Quinquennium was to sign the condemnation of a
malefactor, he used to wish that he had never learned to write; to show, that
though he did it willingly to satisfy Justice, for otherwise he might have
pardoned him, yet he did it unwillingly in his own nature. And with this
Aristotle agrees fully. There are some actions which are neither properly
voluntary, Eth. l. 3. c. 1.
nor unvoluntary, but of a middle kind, (or mixed actions) as things done for
fear of a greater evil, or for some honest cause. And he gives two instances.
This is one, of a man who throws his goods into the sea, willingly in respect
of the end to save his life, but the action being simply considered in it self
unwillingly. The other instance of one commanded to do some dishonest act by a
Tyrant, who has his parents and children in his power. And so he concludes
truly, That they are mixed actions, but participate more of the voluntary than
of the unvoluntary.

Whereas I urged that election of one out of more could not consist with
determination to one; he answers, That a man forced to prison may choose
whether he will walk upon his feet or be haled upon the ground. Which as it is
false, as I have showed in my former defense, so it is wholly wide from his
purpose. There is no doubt but he who is necessitated in one particular, may be
left free in another; as he who is appointed the time and place for a Duel, may
choose his weapon. But in that particular wherein he is necessitated he cannot
choose. If they will tie him to an horsetaile, he must be tied: If they will
fasten him to a sled and draw him to prison, he must be drawn. There cannot
possibly be any election, where there is, and so far as there is, an antecedent
determination to one.

He disliketh the term of rational will, saying, There is nothing rational but
God, Angels, Rational will.
and men. I hope he is not in earnest. Surely he believes there is a
reasonable soul, or otherwise he deserts his Athanasian creed; that is, The
soul of a rational man, as a will, is the will of a rational man. Whether he
make the will to be a faculty of the reasonable soul, or to be the reasonable
soul as it wills, I am indifferent. As the appetite of a sensitive creature
is called the sensitve appetite; So the appetite of a rational or intellectual
creature, is called the rational or intellectual will. He says he would not
have excepted against this expression, but that every where I speak of the will
and other faculties, as of men, or spirits in men's bellies. I do not confine
the reasonable soul to the belly: but it is a spirit in a man's body. If it be
not, let him say what it is. The will is either a faculty of the reasonable
soul, or (which is all one) the reasonable soul it self, as it discharges the
duties of such a faculty. Sometimes he confesses as much himself. Indeed as
the will is a faculty or power of a man's soul, so to will is an act of it,
according to that power. He jesteth at my five terrible things, saying, I had
no more reason for five than fifteen. It seems that when he should have been
reading Authors, he was meditating upon a dry Summer. Let him consult with
Aristotle Eth. l. 3. c. 6, 7, 8.
and his Expositors. That which determined the three children, was no
antecedent extrinsecal cause, but conscience and their own judgment, which
dictated to them their duty to their God.

He seems to be troubled at sundry passages in my former defense, as
ex^mpting Passive obedience.
Subjects from active obedience to unjust laws, which (he says) makes it
impossible for any nation in the world to preserve it self from Civil wars.
Whether was it want of memory, or rather subtilty in him, among these passages
to omit that, Whether it be right in the sight of God to hearken unto you more
than unto God, judge ye. Act. 4. 19.
It is hard that we who have formerly been accused to maintain blind obedience,
should now be charged with seditious principles, which our souls abhor. But we
sail securely between this Scylla, and that Charybdis, by steering the ancient
and direct course of passive obedience. We justify no defensive arms against
a Sovereign Prince. We allow no Civil wars for conscience sake. When we are
persecuted for not complying with the unlawful commands of a lawful Sovereign,
we know no other remedy but to suffer or to flee, according to that memorable
example of the Thebaean Legion, consisting wholly of Christians of unmatchable
valor, and such as might in probability have defended themselves from the
Emperors fury. Yet when Maximian commanded them to sacrifice to Idols, they
refused, suffering every tenth man of them to be slain without a blow smitten;
And when the bloody Emperor came among them again to renew his command, and to
see them decimated the second time, they cried out with one voice, Cognosce O
Imperator, etc. Know, O Emperor, that we are all Christians, we submit our
bodies to thy power, but our free souls flee unto our Savior. Neither our
known courage, nor desperation it self, has armed us against thee, because we
choose rather to die innocents, than to live nocents. Thou shall find our hands
empty of weapons, but our breast armed with the Catholic Faith: And so having
power to resist, yet they suffered themselves without resistance to be cut in
pieces. They are T. H. his own principles which make no difference between just
and unjust power, between a sword given by God, and a sword taken by man, which
do serve to involve Nations in Civil Wars.

He says it seems that I call compulsion Compulsion what it is.
force, and he calls it a fear of force. I called it, as all the World called
it, and as it has been defined in the Schools for two thousand years. Yet I
do not believe that it is always necessary to all sorts of compulsion, that
the force be actually exercised, as it is when a man is driven hither and
thither with the wind, (there is no fear in that case) yet there is compulsion.
But it suffices sometimes to compulsion, if the force be present, such as
cannot be resisted, and ready to be put in execution if there be need. As a man
that will not appear freely upon summons, is forced by Pursevants and
Sergeants, although they do not carry him upon their backs, nor drag him upon
the ground. It suffices that they be Masters and able to compel him (...). But
according to his Heterodox principles, every remote fear does make compulsion.
As if a man should say that a child was compelled to run away from a mouse, or
a coward was compelled to wink when a man holds up his hand at him, or a man
is compelled to throw his goods overboard, which he himself confesses to be
freely and deliberately elected.

From this first mistake of what compulsion is, proceeds a second, That the
actions of men compelled, are nevertheless voluntary: And a third, That
compulsion does not justify the party compelled: all which are mere
Logomachies or contentions about words, which he is fallen into, either
ignorantly by not understanding what compulsion is, or cunningly and
deliberately to have a pretext of excepting against former Authors; although
it be but like the dogs barking at the moonshine in the water. Force actually
exercised did acquit Tamar and the betrothed Damosel from all guilt. But Herod's
fear of a successor did not excuse the murder of the innocents; Nor the fear
of his Masters severity, excuse the unprofitable servants hiding of his Talent
in a napkin. But I leave these contentions about words which signify not so
much as the shadow of an ass.

He has plunged himself here into two real errors. The one is, That if the
fear be allowed, the action which it produces is allowed also. Abraham's fear
was just, The fear of Fear of hurt does not abrogate a law.
God is not in this place, they will murder me for my wives sake. But the
action which it produced, that is, the denial of his wife, is not allowed.
Peter's fear was allowed, but the denial of his master was not allowable. The
other and more dangerous error is, That fear does abrogate a law, and make it
to be no law in some cases. Take the larger exposition of this out of his book
De Cive. No man is bound by any pacts or contracts whatsoever, not to Cap. 2.
d. 18.
resist him who goes about to kill him, or wound him, or to hurt his body.
Mortem vel vulnera vel aliud damnum corporis inferenti, nemo pactis suis
quibuscunque obligatur non resistere. So a Scholar may resist his Master when
he goes about to whip him; So a company of traitors or other capital
malefactors may lawfully resist the Sovereign Magistrate. This is seditious
indeed, and opens a large window to civil war. This is directly contrary to
what he said in his book De Cive. In every perfect Commonwealth the right of
the private C. 6. d. 13.
sword is excluded, and no Subject has right to use his power to the
preservation of himself at his own discretion. Judge, Reader, whether we or he
be better Subjects, he who holds that in case of extreme danger a Subject
has no obligation to his Sovereign, or we who hold it better to die innocents,
than to live nocents. His reason because we bind or guard capital malefactors,
shows a distrust of what they may do de facto, not a doubt of what they ought
to do de jure. I alleged, That the omission of circumcision in the Wilderness
was not sin; to show, that though no fear or necessity can justify the breach
of the negative Laws of God or nature; yet in some cases it may justify the
transgression of the positive Law, or the omission of a duty enjoined by
affirmative precepts.

To my instance of two servants, the one spending his Masters money in a
Tavern, the other having it taken away from him by force, or yielding it up
upon just fear, he answers nothing; the scope of them being to show, that
strength of temation does not justify an act, so much as extrinsecal
necessity. If the second causes were as rackets, and men as tennis balls, or
foot balls, To what purpose did God give men reason to govern themselves, and
to bridle their passions, who are tossed to and fro inevitably, irresistibly,
as the rackets please? Reason had been a fitter gift for the rackets, than for
the balls, if his opinion were true. That upon the planting of a Canon against
a wall, the battery is necessary before Natural Agents act determinately.
the bullet arrive, is true, but there is no such necessary connection between
free or contingent Agents and their acts as there is between the Canon and the
Battery, which he might have easily perceived, if he had been pleased to have
enlarged his meditation a little further. It was in the power of the Canoneer
not to have charged the Canon, or to have given it but half a charge, or to
have given no fire, or to have turned the mouth of it another way, higher or
lower, to the right hand or to the left. In all these cases what had become of
his Battery?

If he has such a conceit that no man does or can determine himself, contrary
to the sense of the whole World, let him enjoy it. Some men have conceited
themselves to be Urinals, and suffered none to touch them for fear of breaking
them, but he must not think to obtrude his phlegmatic phancies upon all other
men, who understand themselves better. If he were not resolved to oppose all
the World without any ground, he would never Not voluntary.
have denied a moral efficacy, or metaphorical motion, or have affirmed that
motives, that is to say, persuasives or reasons, weighed in the understanding,
do determine the free Agent naturally. Is the persuading of a man to eat, and
the thrusting of it down his throat the same thing? Do an argument and a Canon
bullet work after the same manner? Did he ever hear a bullet called a motive to
the beating down of the wall, or flowers called motives to the production of
the fruits, or meat a motive to nourishment? Natural efficay is always
necessary, and determinate, and active to the height of its power; But moral
Agents act not necessarily, nor determinately, nor always to the height of
their power. The Lawyer that he speaks of may refuse to plead, or delay his
pleading, or plead better or worse; and when he has done his uttermost, it may
so fall out that he effects nothing for his Client. I am ashamed of such
silly verbal objections, contrary to the known Principles of Arts. He
complains that I put his notions oftentimes into mine own terms. I had
thought I had done him a favor to tender him more intelligible, and put his
sense into the common language of Scholars.

The understanding being the root of liberty, and the will being but
intellectus extensus Seal. exerc. 307. d. 3.
ad habendum aut faciendum quod cognoscit: the understanding extended to enjoy,
or do that which it knows, it must needs be, that the more reason, the less
passion, the less reluctance, and consequently the more liberty. He says,
When we mark not the force that moves us, we think that it is not causes but
liberty, that produces the action. I rendered him thus, The ignornnce of the
true causes and their power, is the reason that we ascribe the effect to
liberty. Where lies the fault? that which he calls force and strength, I
call power: and for that which moves us, I say causes, as he himself does
exexpresse himself in the same place. Where I say the will causes, he says
the man chooses. As if there were any difference between these two, the eye
sees, and the man sees. This and a confounding of voluntas with volitio, the
faculty of willing with the act of willing, and a young suckling contradiction
which he has found out, That the will has power to refuse what he wills,
that is, before it have willed it, not after, is the substance of this
Animadversion, which deserve no other answer, but that a man should change his
risibility into actual laughter.

I produced two reasons to prove that true liberty is a freedom, not only from
compulsion, but from necessity. The former drawn from the nature of election,
or the act of the will which is always inter plura, the later, which I called
a new Argument, because it had not formerly been touched in this Treatise,
taken from the nature of the faculty of the will, or of the soul as it wills,
which is not capable of any other compulsion, but necessitation. And if it be
physically necessitated, it is thereby acquitted from all guilt, and the fault
transferred upon those causes that did necessitate it. This argument indeed
began with a distinction, but proceeded to a demonstration, which was reduced
by me into form in my defense, to which he has given no show of satisfaction,
either in his first answer, or in these Animadversions, except it be a concedo
omnia, or a granting of the conclusion.

The same ground which does warrant the names of Tyrant, Praemunire, Sunday,
Monday, Tuesday, that is, Use, Quem penes arbitrium est, and vis and norma
loquendi, does likewise justify these generally received terms, of the Elicite
and Imperate Acts of the will, there being scarcely one Author, who has
written upon this subject in Latin, that does not use them, and approve them.
In the council of Dort (which he himself mentions) he may find this truth
positively maintained that voluntas elicit actum suum. Where he may likewise
find what moral perswasives or motives are, if he have a desire to learn.

Allthough he be convicted that it follows from his principles, That God is
the cause T. H. makes God the cause of sin.
of all sin in the world, yet he is loath to say so much, for that is an
unseemly phrase to say that God is the cause of sin, because it sounds so
like a saying that God sins; yea, it is even as like it, as one egg is like
another, or rather it is not like it, for it is the very same. Nullum simile
est idem; He that is the determining cause of sin in others, sins himself.
It is as well against the eternal law, that is, the rule of justice which is
in God himself, to make another to sin, as to sin. Yet though he will not avow
such an unseemly phrase, That God is the cause of sin. Yet he does endeavor to
prove it by four texts of holy Scripture, which are altogether impertiuent to
his purpose. The first is that of the Prophet Amos, Shall there be evil in a
City, and the Lord has Amos c. 3. 6.
not done it? But that is clearly understood of the evil of punishment, not of
the evil of sin. To the three other places, That the Lord said unto Shimei,
curse David; and that the Lord 2 Samuel 16. 10. 1 King. 22. 23. 1 King. 12. 15.
put a lying spirit into the mouth of Ahabs Prophets; And that of Rehoboams not
harkening to the people, the Reader may find a satisfactory answer formerly.
But because he seems to ground much upon those words which are added to the
last place, for the cause Fount. of Argu.
was from the Lord, conceiving some singular virtue to lie in them, and an
ovation at least to be due unto himself, (I will not say least the Bishop
exclaim against me) applauding himself like the fly upon the Cart-wheel, See
what a dust I do raise, I will take the liberty to tell him further, That there
is nothing of any cause of sin in the text, but of a cause of Jeroboams
advancement, as he might have perceived plainly by the words immediately
following, The cause was from the Lord, that he might perform his saying, which
the Lord spoke by Ahijah the Shilonite, unto Jeroboam the son of Nebat. Which
saying was this, I will rent the kingdom out of the hand of Solomon, and will
give ten tribes to thee. So he has produced an evil effect of punishment, for
an evil effect of sin; and a cause of advancement, for a cause of sin, and a
permitting or ordering or disposing of sin, for a necessitating or determining
to sin.

Yet he produces six witnesses to prove that Six witnesses for universal
necessity answeted.
liberty is not opposed to necessity but to compulsion. Luther, Zanchy, Bucer,
Calvin, Moulin, and the Synod of Dort. First, Reader, I desire thee to judge of
the partiality of this man, who rejects all humane authority in this cause
(as he has reason) for it were an easy thing to overwhelme and smother him
and his cause, with testimonies of Councels, Fathers, Doctors, of all Ages and
Communions, and all sorts of Classick Authors: and yet to seek for protection
under the authority of a few Neoterick Writers. A double weight and a double
measure, are an abomination. Aut haec illis sunt habenda, aut illa cum his
amittenda sunt,

Harum duarum conditionum nunc utram malis vide.



If he will reap the benefit of humane authority, he must undergo the
inconvenience also. Why may he use the testimony of Calvine against me in this
cause, and I may not make use of the testimonies of all the Ancients, Greek and
Latin, against him? whom Calvine himself confesses to have been for liberty
against necessiry. Semper apud Latinos liberi arbitrii nomen extitit, Graecos
vero Call. Instit. l. 2. c. 2. d. 4.
non puduit multo arrogantius usurpare vocabulum, siquidem (...) dixerunt, acsi
potest as suiipsius penes hominem fuisset. But I am able to give him that
advantage in this cause.

Secondly, a man may see by his citing of these testimonies, that he has taken
them up upon trust, without ever perusing them in the Authors themselves. I
demand therefore, whether he will be tried by his own witnesses, in this case,
in difference between him and me, that is, concerning universal necessity, in
natural, civil, and external actions, by reason of a necessary connextion of
second causes, and a natural determination of the will? If he will not, he does
not deserve to have so much as one of his testimonies looked upon.

Thirdly I answer, That supposing (but not granting) that all his testimonies
were true as he cites them, yet none of them will advantage his cause at all.
Luther his first witness disclaimed it, and recanted what he had said. And the
necessity which he speaks of, is only a necessity of immutability: And the
Visit. Saxon.
Synod of Dort speaks only of a necessity of infillability, both which do
imply no more than a consequent hypothetical necessity, which we also maintain.
Zanchy, Bucer, Calvine, Moulin, speak of a necessity of sinning, in respect of
our original corruption. This concerns not the liberty of the will, whether
it be free or not free, but the power of free will, whether it can without
grace avoid sin, and determine it self to moral or supernatural good, which
is nothing to the question between him and me.

And for an essay what he may expect from his witnesses, Calvine, who is the
least disfavourable to him of them all, says no more but this, Deum quoties
viam facere vult suae providentiae, etiam in rebus externis homiuum voluntates
Call. Instir. l. 2. c. 4. d. 7.
flectere and versare, nec ita liberam esse ipsorum electionem, quin ejus
libertati Dei arbitrium dominetur. That God (not always but) as often as he
will make way for his providence, even in external things, does bow and turn
the wills of men, neither is their election so free, but that the good pleasure
of God has a dominion over their liberty. Calvine did know no universal
determination of all external acts by God, but only in some extraordinary
cases. He acknowledged that the will of man was free to elect in external
things, but not so free as to be exempt from the dominion of God, which two
things none of us does deny. So we may conclude from Calvine, That God does not
ordinarily necessitate external events: that is, as much as to say, there is no
universal necessity.

He will yet have less cause to please himself with the Council of Dort, when
he Iudic. Theol. Lorit de lib. Arb. These. 4.
shall see what was said there by our British Divines, and approved by the
Synod. That God made our wills and endowed them with liberty. That he leaves to
every thing its proper manner and motion in the production of Acts, and to the
wills of men to act after their native manner, freely. That in vain are
punishments threatened to Malefactors by the laws of men, if no man could leave
undone that which he does. They ask, who in his right wits will say, that David
could not but have committed adultery, or after that could not but have
murdered Uriah. They condemn his opinion positively as an error. Hominem non
posse plus boni facere quam facit, nec pluus mali omittere quam omittit, That a
man cannot do more good, or leave more evil undone, than he does.

Still he is about his old quarrel concerning the Elicite and Imperate acts of
the will, not against the thing, for it is as clear as the daylight, that there
is a ground in nature for such a distinction; and that external Agents have
not so much power over the will of man, to make him choose what they think fit,
as over the locomotive faculty and other members, to make a man move them at
their pleasure. But all his contention is still about the words, Imperate, or
commanded Acts; As if (says he) the faculties could speak one to another. I
answered him that there were mental terms as well as vocal, by which the
soul being willing, may express it self to the locomotive, or other inferior
faculties. As the Angels do understand one another, not by speech, but as we
behold one another in a glass. Here he is out again, quite mistaking the plain
and obvious sense of my words, showing that in his long and profound
meditations, he did never meet with this subject. And telling us, That by
mental speech I understand only an Idea of the Mental terms.
sound and of the letters, whereof the word is made. And charging me most
untruely to say, That when Tarquin commanded his son, by striking off the tops
of Poppies, he did it by mental terms. This I said truly, That howsoever a
Superior does intimate his commands to his Inferior, whether it be by vocal
terms, as ordinarily, or by mental terms, as it is among the Angels; or by
signs, as it was between Tarquin and his sons, it is still a command. And in
this case of the souls employing the Inferior faculties, it is without
dispute. But I never said that the striking off the tops of the Poppies with
his rod, was mental language, or the terms of his mind. It seems he has
never heard of mental terms or mental prayer. The conceptions of the mind are
the natural representations of things. Words are Signs or Symbols of the
inward conceptions of the mind, by imposition, What way soever the inward
conceptions are intimated, it is the same that speech is in effect (...), an
instrument or means of Communication. As a sign is an intimation to a
Traveller where he may find an harbor.

He says, No drawing can be imagined but of bodies, and whatsoever is drawn
out, is drawn Metaphorical drawing.
out of one place into another. He knows no drawing, but drawing of wire, or
drawing of water, or drawing of Carres. St. James says, Draw nigh to God, and
he will draw nigh to you; Jam. 4. 8. Joh. 6. 44. Joh. 12. 32.
and no man can come unto me except my father draw him: and if I be lifted up
from the earth, I will draw all men unto me. In all these drawings, here is no
drawing out of one place into another. A fair object draws men's eyes, A good
Orator draws them by the ears. There is metaphorical drawing. Take but one
place more, Counsel in the heart of a man is like Pro. 20. 5.
deep water, but a man of understanding will draw it out.

Castigations of the A nimadversions, Number. 21.
A Paradox is a private opinion of one Paradoxes what [they are.]
man, or a few factious men, assumed or maintained sometimes out of error of
judgment, but commonly out of pride and vain glorious affectation of
singularity, contrary to the common and received opinion of other men. Such
Paradoxes were the Stoical opnions, (Stoics were fruitful in producing
Paradoxes) That all sins are equal, and that a wise man is all things, a good
King. a good Captain, a good Cobbler. I hope he will be better advised, than to
condemn all those of ignorance, who out of civility styled those new fangled
opinions Stoicall Paradoxes, rather than Stoical errors. He says, Christiaen
religion was once a Paradox. Never; A Paradox is a private opinion, contrary to
the common opinion. Points of faith are more than opinions. Faith is a certain
assent grounded upon the truth and authority of the revealer. Opinion is a
certain assent grounded upon the probable conjectures of reason. We do not use
to call Turkish, Heathenish, or Heretical errors by the name of Paradoxes. I
confess there may be opinions, and consequently Paradoxes in religion, that
is, in such points: the truth or falsehood whereof is grounded more upon the
probable discussion of reason, then upon the evidence of divine revelation, but
errors in essentialls of faith, are not Paradoxes. He who disbelieves any
Article of his Creed, is not Paradoxicall, but Heretical. Such another mistake
is his other, That but for Paradoxes we should be now in that savage ignorance,
which those men are in that have not, or have not long had laws and
Commonwealth. Politic precepts, and civil institutions, and practical
instructions which consist not in Theorie or Speculation, but in the
application of practical truths, neither are nor ever were called properly
either opinions or Paradoxes.

But to come to the purpose, I did not, I do not, deny that there may be some
true Paradoxes, and rather in such things as are found out by reason, than in
such as depend upon Revelation, which are delivered from age to age by
universal tradition. An able industrous person by constant meditation, and the
help of other men's experience and observations, may sometimes find out a latent
truth, or vindicate one from the oppressive tyranny of prejudice or custom.
But this is rarely, God and nature do not give all their gifts to one man,
least he should grow proud. But when men are composed of Paradoxes, that as
Ovid could not express himfelf without a verse, so they cannot speak without a
Paradox, when they take upon them to censure all ancient truths in Divinity and
Humanity, and seek to obtrude their brainsick conceptions upon all other men
as Oracles, I think he who tells them only of their Paradoxes, deals gently
with them. Zeleucus was more severe against Innovators, who enacted, That if
any man made a proposition for a change in their policy, he should make it
with an halter about his neck, that if he failed to justify it by reason, he
should justify his attempt by suffering.

I leave his Paradoxes, and come to his Subtlety, That there is hardly any one
action, to the causing whereof concur not whatsoever is in rerum natura: And
that there cannot be a motion in one part of the World, but the same must be
communicated to all the rest of the World. That is to say, in plain English,
That there is nor a Pie that chattereth, nor so much as an Aspine leaf that
waggeth here in England, but it makes some alteration in China and Peru, and
the efficacy of it, like Drake or Cavendish does encompasse the Globe of the
Earth, and mounteth to Heaven, and (if there be any such thing) helps to make
the eighth Sphere tremble. I thought it had been a modest expression to call
this a Paradox.

To prove this, he makes a Narration what a Scholar maintained to him, That
if a Whether a feather make a Diamant yield.
grain or a feather be laid upon an anvil of Diamant, at the first access it
makes it yield, which he demonstrated thus, That if the whole World would do
it, the least part thereof would do its part. Wherewith he rested convinced.
But his relation is doubly impertinent. First, we speak of voluntary Agents,
and he instanceth in a natural Agent, we speak of the yiedling of the will, and
he instanceth in the yiedling of an anvile. Secondly, it does not come home to
his assertion, because when a feather is laid upon an anvile of Diamant, yet it
touches it, and by assiduous touching, something may be done. As we see how
drops of rain do wear the heard stones. And Pliny tells that flints have
been worn with the feet of Ants. But to think the chattering of a Pie, or the
shaking of an Aspine leaf should move the whole World, when the greatest
Earthquakes are not felt many leagues, is incredible.

Neither do I believe that the first touch of his feather does make an anvile
of Diamant to yield. I believe the Scholar put a fallacy of composition and
division upon him. All the parts being conjoined do make the whole, and so have
their proportionable part of the efficacy in the production of all effects,
which are produced to the whole, be it the breaking of an anvil of Diamant, or
whatsoever else. But the parts being divided and subdivided into grains and
lesser quantities, though they still have their proportionable weight toward
the producibility of the same effect, if they were conjoined; yet it is not
necessary that being so divided they shall actually produce the same part or
proportion of the former effect. It is not universally true, that the patient
suffers so much as the Agent acts. The reason is because quicquid recipitur,
recipitur ad modum recipientis; That which receives does not receive according
to the force of that which makes the impression, but according to its own
capacity of receiving. The first drop of water takes away part from a piece of
clay, but an hundred drops fall before a stone does yield, or actually lose the
least particle, though the first drop may affect the stone and prepare it.
Suppose one scale of a balance to have a weight in it of a pound, which
depresseth the scale to the ground: Put into the other scale a weight of two
pounds, it lifts up the other scale and sinketh that down: But take away the
two pound weight, and put into the place of it a feather or a grain, and try if
it will lift up the scale proportionably. Not at all, no more than if it were
nailed to the ground. It were not well argued to say, An Elephant can carry a
Castle a league, therefore a fly can carry it such a proportion of the way;
yet I comend his discretion for choosing such an instance, wherein he cannot be
contradicted by experience. If a man could live until the revolution of Platos
year, and the feather not be consumed in all that time, he might still plead as
he may do now, that the feather had worn the Diamant something, but it was
invisible.

To make his new paradox good, he tells us a tale of a tub, That if a great
tun (suppose Or a falling drop move the whole World.
the great tun at Heydelberg,) were filled with water, one little particle
(suppose a drop, or the hundredth part of a drop) being moved, all the rest
would be moved also, but the greatness of the tun alters not the case. And
therefore the same would be true, if the whole World were the tun. I answer
first, The case is not like. A tun of water is one continued body apt for
motion, but the World is full of contiguous bodies of all sorts, which are more
apt to terminate an easy motion, than to continue it. Secondly, I deny that
the least particle of water, suppose the hundredth part of a drop, falling into
a great tun of water, does move all the water in the tun. The first particle
moves the second, but more weakly than it self was moved, the second moves the
third, yet more weakly, the third moves the fourth still more weakly, and so
successively, until the motive power cease altogether, before the hundredth, or
it may be the thousandth part of the water in the tun be moved. As we see in a
stone thrown upwards, the motion is swifter or slower, of longer or of lesser
continuance, according to the degree of the first impression of force, and the
figure of the thing cast upwards, which ceasing by continued diminution, the
motion cease. Violent motioris are vehement in the beginning, remiss in the
middle, and cease in the end. Lastly I answer, That the case of a great tun and
the whole World, is not the same: The World is too large a Sphere, and
exceeds the activity of poor little weak creatures, which are not able to
leave such an impression of might, as should move upwards to the unequal
superficies of Heaven, and downwards to the center of the Earth, and round
about to the extremities of the World. If this were true, the fly might say
in earnest, See what a dust I do raise. It has been given out that the burning
of our heathes in England did hurt their vines in France. This had been
strange, yet not so strange as his paradox, That the least motions that are,
are communicated to the whole World. But wise men looked upon this pretense as
a mere scarecrow or made dragon: The hurt it did was nearer home, to destroy
the young moorepowtes, and spoil some young Burgesses game.

Castigations of the Animadversions, Number. 22.
HE cannot imagine how the question, Whether Power of objects concerns the
moral Philosopher.
outward objects do necessitate or not necessitate the will; can any way be
referred to moral Philosophy. That is his fault. If the objects do necessitate
the will, they take away both virtue and vice; that is, moral good and moral
evil, which consist in pre-election, and cannot stand with antecedent
necessitation to one. To reform his error, let him consult with Aristotle.
Those things that are fair and pleasant do seem to be violent after a sort,
because being without us, Eth. l. 3 c. 2.
they move and necessitate Agents to act with their beauty and delight; but it
is not so. What he adds that the Principles of moral philosophy are the laws,
is an absurd supposititious obtrusion of the municipal law, in place of the law
of right reason, which error has formerly been sufficiently refelled. And to
his horse that is lame from some cause that was not in his power; I answer,
That the lamenesse is a natural or accidental defect in the horse; but to
instance in an horse as a fit subject of virtue or vice, is a moral defect in
him. If he desire to speak to the purpose, he must leave such impertinencies.

In the next Animadversion, I meet with Still he seeks to obtru de
hypothetical necessity for absolute.
nothing but a mere sawing of the wind, or an altercation about nothing. All
the difference between him and me is, concerning an antecedent necessity, but
of a necessity of consequence, that when a thing is produced it must
necessarily be so as it is, there can be noquestion between us. He himself
confesses as much, If the Bishop think that I hold no other ne Number. 1.
cessity than that which is expressed in that old foolish rule [VVhatsoever is,
when it is, is necessarily so as it is,] he understands me not: And he
confesses that the necessity which he maintains is, an antecedent necessity,
derived from the beginning of time. And yet nevertheless, Number. 3.
a great part of that altercation which he makes in these Animadversions, is
about such a necessity. Socrates confesses that naturally he had vicious
inclinations. This is no more than a proclinity to evil. If by his own
condescension he fall into sin, this is but an hypothetical necessity, yet he
makes it an antecedent necessity. Socrates by his good endeavors reformeth
his vicious propensions, and acquireth the contrary habits or virtues. This is
but an hyothetical necessity, yet he pretends it to be antecedent. Lastly,
Socrates by the help of these habits which he himself had acquired, does freely
do virtuous actions. Still here is no necessity but consequents, and still he
pretends to Antecedent. Either (says he) these habits do necessitate the
will, or the will follows not. If these habits or somewhat else do not
necessitate the will, it may follow freely. But says he, If they do only
facilitate men to do such acts, then what they do they do not. I deny his
consequence, acquired habits are not solitary, but social and adjuvant causes
of virtuous actions.

His next error is yet more gross, making the person of the Preacher, and not
the sound Hearing and speaking all one with T. H.
of his voice, to be the object of hearing: Adding, that the Preachers voice is
the same thing with the hearing, and a fancy of the hearer. Thus (as commonly
their errors spring from confusion) he confounds the images of sounds with
sounds themselves. What then is the report of a Canon, or the sound of a
Trumpet turned to a mere fancy? By the same reason he may say, that the
Preacher himself is nothing but a mere fancy: There is as much ground for the
one as for the other. If he go on in this manner, he will move me beyond
smiling, to laugh outright. In what sense the object of sight is the cause of
sight, and in what sense it is not the cause of sight, I have showed
distinctly. Here he sets down another great paradox, as he himself styles
it out of gallantry, That in all the sens^ the object is the Agent. If he had
not said the Agent, which signifies either the sole Agent, or the Principal
Agent, but only an Agent, we had accorded so far. But the Principal Agent in
all the senses is the creature endowed with sense, or the sensitive soul
perceiving and judging of the object by the proper Organ. The Preachers voice
and the Auditos hearing have two distinct subjects, otherwise speaking should
be hearing, and hearing speaking. I conclude this Castigation with the
authority of as good a Philosopher as himself, That it is ridiculous to think
Eth. l. 3. c. 2.
external things either fair or delightful to be the causes of humane actions,
and not rather him who is easily taken with such objects.

In the later part of this Animadversion his errors are greater, and more
dangerous There are other motions than local.
than in the former. He affirms that the will is produced, generated, and
formed, in such sort as accidents are effected in a corporeal subject; and yet
it (the will) cannot be moved. As if generation, and augmentation, and
alteration, were not kinds of motion or mutation. But the last words, because
it goes not from place to place, do show plainly, that he acknowledges no
motion but local motion. What no other natural motion but only local motion?
no metaphorical motion? that were strange. We read in holy Scripture of those
who have been moved with fear, moved with envy, moved with compassion, moved
with choler, moved by the Holy Ghost. In all these there is no local motion.
Outward persuasives, inward suggestions, are all motions. God moves a man to
good by his preventing grace. The devil moves a man to sin by his
temptations. There are many kinds of motions, besides moving from place to
place. He himself confesses in this Section that we are moved to prayer by
outward objects.

In the next place, supposing there were no Spirits moved as well as bodies.
other motions than local motions, yet he erreth in attributing no motion to
any thing but bodies. The reasonable soul is moved accidentally, according to
the motion of the body. The Angels are spirits or spiritual substances, no
bodies, by his leave, and yet move locally from place to place. Jacob sees the
Angels of God ascending and descending. The Angels came and ministered unto
Christ; The Angels shall gather the elect from the one end of Heaven to the
other. The soul of Lazarus was born by the Angels into Abraham's bosom. God sent
his Angel to deliver Peter out of prison, and every where uses his Angels as
ministering spirits.

Thirdly, he erreth in this also, That nothing Both bodies and spirits move
themselves.
can move, that is not moved it self. If he mean that all power to move is from
God, he speaks truly, but impertinently: But if he mean (as he must mean if
he mean sense) that nothing moves which is not moved of some second cause, he
speaks untruly. The Angels move themselves; all living creatures do move
themselves by animal motion. The inanimate creatures do move themselves, heavy
bodies descending downwards, light bodies ascending upwards, according to their
own natures. And therefore nature is defined to be an internal cause or
principle of motion and rest, etc. And even they who held that whatsoever is
moved is moved by another, did limit it to natural bodies, and make the form to
be the mover in natural motion, and the soul in animal motion.

His last error in this Animadversion (and a dangerous one,) is, That it is
not truly said, Quality infused by God.
that acts or habits are infused by God, for infusion is motion, and nothing is
moved but bodies. I wish for his own quiet and other men's, that he were as
great an enemy to errors and innovations, as he is to metaphors and
distinctions. Affectation of words is not good, but contention about words is
worse. By such an argument a man might take away all Zones and Zodiac in
Astronomy, Modes and Figures in Logic, Cones and Cylindres in Geometry; for
all these are borrowed terms, as infusion is. What Logician almost does not
distinguish between acquired habits and infused habits? If all infusion be of
bodies, then he never infused any paradoxical principles into his Auditors.
When any difference does arise about expressions, the only question is,
Whether there be any ground in nature for such an expression. He himself
tells us, That faith and repentance are the gifts of God. To say they are the
gifts of God, and to say they are infused by God is the same thing, saving that
to say they are infused by God, is a more distinct, and a more significant
expression. I hope he will not control the language of the Holy Ghost, I will
power out my spirit upon all flesh. No, Joel 2.
(says T. H.) that cannot be, nothing can be powered out but bodies. Saint
Peter tells us otherwise, This Jesus being exalted by the Acts 2. 33.
right hand of God, has shed forth this which ye now see and hear. That was
the gift of tongues, an act or habit infused. That which was shed forth or
effused on Gods part, was infused on their part. So says Saint Paul, The love
of God is shed abroad in our hearts Romans 5. 5.
by the Holy Ghost: Again, He saves us by the washing of regeneration, and
renewing of the Tit. 3. 6.
Holy Ghost, which he shed on us abundantly through Jesus Christ, (...), the
word is still the same, signifying an effusion from God, and an infusion into
us. All those graces freely given which were infused by the Holy Ghost, and are
recited by the Apostle to the 1 Cor. 12.
Corinthians, are either permanent Habits, or transient Acts.

In the remainder of this Section, is contained nothing but relapses, and
repetitions of his former Paradoxical errors, still confounding the
intellectual will, with the sensitive appetite, Liberty with Spontaneity, the
Faculty of the will, with the Act of willing, the liberty of reasonable
Creatures, with the liberty of mad men and fools. Before he told us, Number. 9.
That he that can do what he will, has no liberty at all. Now he tells us of
the liberty of doing what we will, in those things we are able to do, Before he
limited the power by the will, now he limitteth the will by the power. I
affirmed most truly, That liberty is diminished by vicious habits; which he
says cannot be unnderstood otherwise, then that vicious habits make a man
less free to do vicious actions. There is little doubt but he would expound it
so, if he were my Interpreter. But my sense and my scope is evident to the
contrary, that vicious habits make a man less free to do virtuous actions. He
will take notice of no difference between the liberty of a man, and the bias of
a bowl.

Yet in the midst of all these mistakes and Paradoxes, he has not forgotten
his old Thrasonicall humor. Where I say liberty is in more danger to be
abused, than to be lost; he tells me, It is a mere shift to be thought not
licenced. I had not thought him such a dangerous Adversary, metuent omnes jam
te, nec immerito, well, if it be a shift, it is such a shift as all
conscionable men do find by experience to be true. And for his silencing of
men, impavidum ferient ruinae. I do not fear silencing by him, except his
arguments have some occult quality, more than he or I dream of. If a fish could
speak, a fish would not be silenced by him in this cause.

Castigations of the Animadversions, Number. 23.
THere is a double question discussed in this Section. First, Supposing that
the will does always follow the last judgment of the understanding, whether
this do take away the liberty of the will. Secondly, Whether the will does
always follow the last judgment of the understanding: both which questions
have formerly been discoursed of in this Treatise. For clearing of the former
question, it ought to be considered, That although men do ordinarily speak of
the understanding, and of the will, as of two distinct Agents, or individual
substances, subsisting by themselves; whereof the one understands, and the
other wills, partly for the eminence of these two powers, and partly for the
clearer and more distinct conception and comprehension of them. And although
the practice of all former Divines and Philosophers do warrant us in so doing,
yet if we will speak properly and in rigor of speech, the understanding and
the will are but two powers, flowing from the reasonable soul. And that the
acts of willing The understanding and will two powers of the reasonablesoul.
and understanding are predicated most properly of the man, whilst the soul
and body are united, Actiones sunt suppositorum, and of the reasonable soul
after its separation. And because he suggesteth that this is done for
advantage: and that it is not without cause, men use improper language, when
they mean to keep their errors from being detected, to let him see that this
is the sense of all men, and that this assertion will advantage his cause
nothing, I am contented to answer his Animadversions upon this subject in the
same phrase that he proposes them.

He pleads that the election of the free Agent does necessarily follow his
last judgment, and therefore his election is not free. My first answer to this
is that determination which he maintains, and which takes away freedom and
liberty, is extrinsecal and antecedent. But the determination of the Agents
election by his judgment, is intrinsecall, made by himself, and concomitant,
being together in time with the election. To this now he replyeth, That the
will and the last dictate of the understanding, are produced in the same
instant; but the necessity of them both was antecedent before they were
produced: At when a stone is falling, the necessity of touching the earth is
antecedent to the touch it self, unless it be hindered by some contrary
external motion, and then the stop is as necessary as the proceeding would have
been.

To this I give three clear solutions. First, That his instance of the stone is
altogether Man's willing is not like a falling stone.
impertinent, the stone is a natural Agent, the man is a voluntary Agent;
Natural Agents act necessarily and determinately; Voluntary Agents act freely
and undeterminately. The stone is determined to its motion downwards,
intrinsecally by its own nature, that is, by the weight or gravity of it, but
he makes the will of the free Agent, to be determined extrinsecally by causes
without himself.

Secondly, There is not the like necessary or determinate connection, between
the will and its antecedent causes, as is between the stone falling, and its
touching the ground. It was in the power of the man to deliberate or not
deliberate, to elect, or not elect, but it is not in the power of the stone, to
fall, or not to fall. So the motion of the stone was determined to one
antecedently in its causes, but the elective will of man is not determined to
one antecedently in its causes, until the man determine himself by his choice.

Thirdly, Though the stone be not such a free undetermined Agent as the man is,
and therefore this concerns not liberty: yet he himself confesses, that
casually it may be hindered from touching the ground, unless it be hindered by
some contrary external motion. So the stones touching of the ground, is
necessary only upon supposition, unless it be hindered. But that necessity
which he maintains, is a necessity antecedent, which cannot possible be
otherwise. But there is this difference between the man and the stone, That the
thing supposed [to deliberate or not deliberate] is in the power of the man,
but the thing supposed [to be hindered or not hindred] is not in the power of
the stone.

He pleads further, That supposing the Absolute necessity admits no
contrary supposition.
stone be hindered, then the stop is necessary. So still there is necessity. Nay
by his favor, if the event be necessary to fall out this way upon one
supposition, and necessary to fall out another way upon a contrary supposition,
then there is no absolute or antecedent necessity at all, for absolute
necessity admits no such contrary suppositions, absolute or antecedent
necessity, being that which cannot possibly be otherwise.

My second answer was negative, That the free Agent in electing does not
always choose what is best or most convenient, in his judgment. He affirms
that I say this is but a probable opinion, nay I said it was probable at the
least: and if he press me further, I say it is A man may will contrary to the
dictate of reason.
but too evident. Otherwise there should be no sin against conscience, for what
is conscience but the practical judgment, or dictate of reason, concerning
things to be done, or to be shunned, here and now, with these or those
circumstances. And such a man is truly (...) condemned by himself. A man who
has two dishes of meat set before him, the one more agreeable to his health,
the other more pleasing to his palate, may, and, many times, does choose the
later and the worse, his judgment at the same time disallowing it. Saint Paul
confesses that he had done that which he Romans 7. 15.
allowed not. He says it is impossible for a man to will any thing which
appears not first in his understanding to be good for him. That is very true,
but it comes not home. If he would speak to the purpose, he should say, It is
impossible for a man to will any thing which appears not in his understanding
to be best for him. But this is false. As suppose one thing appear to a man to
be honest, that is one good: Another thing appears to be delightful, that is
another good. Every man knows in his own judgment and conscience, That that
which is honestly good, is better than that which is delightfully good; yet men
often choose pleasure before honesty, their conscience at the same time accusing
them for it.

I said a man is bound to follow his conscience, as the last practical dictate
of reason. There is no doubt of it. The Scripture is plain, He ihat doubts is
damned if he eat, because To. 14. 23.
he eats not of faith, for whatsoever is not of faith (that is to say, is not
done upon a firm resolution that it is lawful) is sin. Reason is as plain, all
circumstances must concur to make an action good, but one single defect An
erroneous conscience obliges, first to reform it, then to follow it.
does make it evil. The approbation of conscience is required to every good
action, and the want thereof makes it sinful; not simply in it self, but to
that person, at that time. He excepteth That a man ought not to follow the
dictate of his understanding when it is erroneous. That is most true with this
limitation, Wherein it is erroneous, or as it is erroneous. But there is an
expedient for this in Case-divinity, which I easily believe he did never meet
with. He who has an erroneous conscience is doubly obliged: first to reform
it, and then to follow it. The dictates of right reason ought ever to be
followed, and erroneous reason ought ever to be reformed, and made right reason.

I said that reason was the true root of liberty, Reason is the true root of
liberty.
That is plain, The object of the will is good, either real or apparent. And a
man cannot will any thing as good, but that which he judges in his
understanding to be good. Nothing can affect that which it does not know. And
therefore reason must of necessity be the root of Liberty. This he takes to be
contradictory to what I say here, That actions and objects may be so equally
circumstantiated, or the case so intricate, that reason cannot give a positive
sentence, but leaves the election to liberty or chance. How then (says he) can
a man leave that to liberty when his reason can give no sentence? And if by
chance I mean that which has no causes, I destroy Providence; if that which
has causes, I leave it to necessity. So where I say That reason cannot give a
positive sentence, he makes me say, That reason can give no sentence. There is
a great difference between these two. The Judges name three men to the
Sherifwick of of a County, Here is a nomination or judgment, but not yet
positive. The King picks one of these three, then the nomination or judgment
is positive. So reason represents to the free Agent, or the free Agent
judges in his understanding three means to obtain one end, either not
examining, or not determining any advantage which one mean has above another.
Here is an indefinite judgment for three good means, though it be not
positive for any one more than the rest. In this case the will or the free
Agent chooses one of these three means as good, without any further
examination which is best. Reason is the root of liberty in representing what
is good, even when it does give no positive or determinate sentence what is
best. I am neither so vain to think there is any thing that has a being, which
has not causes, nor so stupid on the other side, as to think that all causes
are necessary causes. Chance proceeds neither from the want, nor from the
ignorance, but from the accidental concurrence of causes.

His next charge is, That it is false that Actions may be equally
circumstantiated.
actions may be so equally circumstantiated that reason cannot give a positive
(that is, a determinate) sentence. Yet he confesses, that in these things
elected, there may be an exact equality. If he did not confess it, it is most
evident in it self, as appears in my former instance of two plasters of
equal virtue: Or if he please in two pieces of gold of the same stamp, weight,
and alloy, sent to one man upon condition to choose the one, and leave the
other. He judges them both to be good, and is not such a fool as they are who
say, that he would hang in a perpetual equilibrium, and could choose neither,
for want of determination, which was best. Therefore he chooses one of them,
without more to do. But he says, There may be circumstances in him that is to
elect, that he do not spend time in vain or lose both. It is true there are
reasons to move him to elect, because they are both good, but there are no
reasons to move him to elect the one rather than the other, this rather than
that, or that rather than this, but only the will of him that electeth, all
things being so equally circumstantiated, that reason can give sentence for
them both as good, but not for the one positively and determinately, as better
than the other. Whatsoever is good is the object of the will, though it be not
always the best.

I said that reason does not weigh every individual object or action to the
uttermost grain. He pleads in answer, True, but does it therefore follow, a
man gives no sentence? The will may follow the dictate of the judgment,
whether the man weigh or not weigh all that might be weighed. I acknowledge it,
but he mistaketh the scope of my argument. The less exactly that reason does
weigh actions or objects, the less exactly it does determine the free Agent,
but leaves him as in a case of indifferency, or having no considerable
difference, to choose what he will as being not much material, or not at all
material, whether he choose the one part or the other.

Passions and affections (says he) prevail often against wisdom, but not
against the judgment Passions often pre^ile a^inst rea^.
or dictate of the understanding. The will of a peevish passionate fool does
no less follow the dictate of his nuderstanding, than the will of a wiser man.
He must pardon me, passions prevail not only against wisdom, but against the
dictates of reason. It was Medeas passion which dictated to her, that to
revenge her self upon her husband was more eligible than the lives of her
children: Her reason dictated the contrary. -- Aliudque cupido,
Men's aliud suadet; vidio meliora proboque,
Deteriora sequor. --


It was St. Peter's fear, not his judgment, which dictated to him to deny his
Master. Every man is tempted when he is drawn aside of his own lust, not of his
intellectual Jam. 1. 13.
judgment. Jacob did not curse his misunderstanding of Simeon and Levi, but
their passion. Cursed be their anger, for it was fierce, and their wrath, for
it was cruel. As the law is silent among arms, so is reason silent among
passions. Passion is like an unruly passenger which thrusts reason away from
the rudder for the time. Therefore they use to say that the dominion of reason,
or of a reasonable man, over his sensitive appetite, is not despotical, like
the government of a Master over his slave, but political like that of a
Magistrate over the people, which is often disturbed by seditious tumults and
rebellions. Passion is an eclipse of reason, a short madness, the
metamorphosis of a man into a wild beast that is goared, which runs upon
every thing that comes in her way without consideration, or like a violent
torrent descending down impetuously from a steep hill, which bears down all
respects before it, Divine and humane. Whilst passion is at the height, there
is no room for reason, nor any use of the dictates of the understanding, the
mind for the time, being like the Cyclopian cave, where no man heard what
another said.

The last part of this Section is not concerning the fortunes of Asia, but the
weighing of an horse-load of feathers, a light and trivial subject, wherein
there is nothing, but a contempt of Schoole-termes without any ground, bold
affirmations without any proof, and a continued detraction from the dignity of
the humane nature, as if a reasonable man were not so considerable as a
Jack-daw. When God created man, he made him a Man was created to be Lord of the
creatures. Psalm. 8. 6.
mean Lord under himself, to have dominion over all his creatures, and put all
things in subjection under his feet. And to fit him for this command, he gave
him an intellectual soul. But T. H. makes him to be in the disposition of the
second causes; sometimes as a sword in a man's hand, a mere passive instrument;
sometimes like a top that is lashed hither and thither, by boys; sometimes
like a football, which is kicked hither and thither by every one that comes
nigh it; and here to a pair of scales, which are pressed down now one way, then
another way, by the weight of the objects. Surely this is not that man that was
created by God after his own Image, to be the Governor of the World, and Lord
and Master of the creatures. This is some man that he has borrowed out of the
beginning of an Almanac, who is placed immovable in the midst of the twelve
Signs, as so many second causes. If he offer to stir, Aries is over his head
ready to push him, and Taurus to goare him in the neck, and Leo to tear out
his heart, and Sagittarius to shoot an arrow in his thighs

Yet he tells us boldly, That no man can How the understanding gives to
objects their properweight.
understand that the understanding makes any alteration of weight or
lightness in the object; or that reason lays objects upon the understanding.
What poor trifling is this, in a thing so plain and obvious to every man's
capacity? There can be no desire of that which is not known in some sort;
Nothing can be willed but that which is apprehended to be good either by reason
or sense, and that according to the degree of apprehension. Place a man in a
dark room, and all the rarest objects in the World besides him, he sees them
not, he distinguishes them not, he wills them not. But bring in a light and
he sees them, and distinguishes them, and wills them, according to their
distinct worths. That which light is to visible objects, making those things to
be actually seen, which were only potentially visible, that is, the
understanding to all intelligible objects, without which, they are neither
known nor willed. Wherefore men define the understanding to be A faculty of the
reasonable soul, understanding, knowing, and judging all intelligible things.
The understanding then does not alter the weight of objects, no more than the
light does change the colors, which without the help of the light, did lie hid
in the dark. But the light makes the colors to be actually seen; So does the
understanding make the latent value of intelligible objects to be apprehended,
and consequently makes them to be desired and willed according to their
distinct degrees of goodness. This judgment which no man ever denied to
intelligible creatures, is the weighing of objects, or attributing their just
weight to them, and the trying of them as it were by the Balance and by the
Touchstone. This is not the laying of objects upon the understanding. The
understanding is not the patient but the judge, but this is the representing of
the goodness or badnesse of objects to the will, or to the free Agent willing,
which relatively to the will, gives them all their weight and efficacy.

There may be difference between these two Propositions, Repentance is not
voluntary, and by consequence proceeds from causes; And Repentance proceeds
from causes, and by consequence is not voluntary; if his consequence were well
intelligible, as it is not: All acts both voluntary and involuntary do proceed
from causes. He charge me to have chopped in these words [And therefore.] The
truth is, his words were, and by consequence, which I expressed thus [and
therefore.] Therefore and by consequence are the very same thing, neither more
nor less. Is not this a doughty exception? But the other is his greater
error, That Repentance is not voluntary. No Schooleman ever said that the
faculty of the will was voluntary, but that the Agent was a voluntary Agent,
and the act a voluntary act.

Castigations of the Animadversions, Number. 24.
HE accuses me of charging him witly Blasphemy and Atheism. If he be wronged
in that kind, it is he who wrongeth himself by his suspicion. Blasphmy in the
abstract, and in the concrete differ much.
Spr^ta exolescunt, si irascare, agnita videntur. I accused him not either of
Blasphemy or Atheism, in the Concrete. One may say a man's opinions are
Blasphemous and Atheistical in the Abstract; without charging the person with
formal Atheism or blasphemy. The reason is evident, because it may be, that
through prejudice he does not see the consequences, which other men, whose eyes
are not blinded with that mist, do see, and if he did see them, would abhor
them as well as they. For this reason, he who charge one with speaking or
writing implicit contradictions, or things inconsistent one with another, does
not presently accuse him of lying, although one part of a contradiction must
needs be false, because it may be the force of the consequence is not evident
to Aman may know a truth certainly, yet not know the manner.
him.

A man may know a truth certainly, and yet not know the formal reason or the
manner of it so certainly. I know that I see, and I judge probably how I see;
yet the manner how I see, whether by sending out beams, or by receiving in the
species, is not so evident as ^he thing it self, that I do see. They who do not
agree about the manner of vision, do all agree about the truth of vision. Every
man knows certainly, that he can cast a stone up into the air, but the manner
how the stone is moved after it is separated from the hand, whether it be by
some force, or form, or quality impressed into the stone by the caster, or by
the air; and if it be by the air, whether it be by the pulsion of the air
following, or by the cession of the former air, is obscure enough, and not one
of a thousand who knows the certainty of the thing, knows the manner how it
comes to pass. If this be true in natural actions, how much more in the
actions of God, who is an infinite being, and not comprehensible by the finite
wit of man? The water can rise no higher than the fountains head: A
looking-glass can represent the body, because there is some proportion between
bodies; but it cannot represent the soul, because there is no proportion
between that which is material, and that which is immaterial. This is the
reason why we can in some sort apprehend what shall be after the end of the
World, because the soul is eternal that way: but if we do but think of what was
before the beginning of the World, we are as it were presently swallowed up
into an Abyss, because the soul is not eternal that way. So I know that there
is true liberty from necessity, both by Divine Revelation, and by reason, and
by experience. I know likewise that God knows all events from eternity; the
difficulty is not about the thing, but about the manner, how God does certainly
know things free or contingent, which are to come in respect of us, seeing they
are neither determined in the event it self, nor in the causes thereof. The not
knowing of the manner which may be incomprehensible to us, does not at all
diminish the certain truth of the thing. Yet even for the manner sundry ways
are proposed, to satisfy the curiosities rather than the consciences of men.
Of which this is one way which I mentioned. It were a great madness to reject
a certain truth, because there may be some remote difficulty about the manner;
and yet a greater madness for avoiding a needless scruple, to destroy all the
attributes of God, which is by consequence to deny God himself. His proof of
necessity drawn from Gods eternal knowledge of all events, has been
sufficiently discussed and satisfied over and over.

I pleaded that my doctrine of liberty is an The Doctrine of liberty an ancient
truth.
ancient truth generally received; His opinion of universal necessity, an
upstart Paradox, and all who own it may be written in a ring. So I am an old
possessor, he is but a new pretender. He answers, That he is in possession of
a truth derived to him from the light of reason: And it is an unhandsome thing
for a man to derive his opinion concerning truth by succession from his
Ancestor. I answer, That just possession is either by law, or by prescription.
I have all laws Divine and Humane, Ecclesiastical and Civil, and a prescription
of two thousand years, or at least, ever since Christianity came into the
World, for liberty. His opinion of universal Destiny, by reason of a necessary
connection of the second causes, was never the general, nor the common, nor the
current opinion of the World; and has been in a manner wholly buried for
sixteen hundred years, and now is first conjured out of its grave by him, to
disturb the World. If this be just possession, an Highway robber may plead,
possession, so soon as ever he has stripped an honest Traveller. It is not
only no unhandsome thing, but it is a most comely and commendable thing, for a
man to derive his religion by the universal approbation of the Christian World,
from the purest Primitive Times, throughout all ages, and never to deviate
further, from the steps of his Ancestors, than they had first degenerated from
their predecessors. And where he tells us, That the first Christians did not
derive Christianity from their Ancestors, It is very true, but very
impertinent. For they had not their religion from their own invention or
presumption, as he has his opinions, but by Divine Revelation, confirmed with
miracles. When he is able to produce as authentic proof for his Paradoxes, as
they did for their religion, he says something.

That which he calls my sc^rrilous argumentation, he that drinks well, sleeps
well. etc. is none of mine, but a common example used in Logic, to show the
weakness of such forms of arguings as his is, when the dependence is not
necessary and essential, but contingent and accidental; as it is in his
argument here. All actions are from God by a general power, but not
determinately. The like contingent connection there is between action and sense:
sense and memory, memory and election. This is enough to show the weakness of
his argument. But he has one main fault more, he has put more in the
conclusion than there was in the premises.

He says, If by liberty. I had understood only liberty of action, and not
liberty of will, it had Liberty to will more reconciliable with prescience than
liberty to do.
been an easy matter to reconcile it with prescience and the decrees of God. I
answer first, That liberty of action, without liberty of will, is but a mock
liberty, and a new nothing, like an empty bottle given to a child to satisfy
his thirst. Where there is no liberty to will, there is no liberty to act, as
has been formerly demonstrated. Secondly, The liberty to will is as
reconciliable with the prescience and decrees of God, as the liberty to act.
Gods decrees do extend at least as much to acting as to willing. Thirdly, This
liberty of acting, without a liberty of willing, is irreconciliable, with all
the other attributes of God, his truth, his justice, his goodness, and his
power, and setting the decrees of God in opposition one with another. How
should a man have a liberty to act, and have no liberty to will, when he cannot
act freely, except he will freely, because willing is a necessary cause or
means of acting? That which follows about Gods aspect and intuition, is
merely a contention about words, and such words as are received and approved by
all Authors. Gods intuition is not of the same nature with ours; we poor
Creatures do stand in need of organs, but God who is a pure simple infinite
essence, cannot be made perfecter by organs, or accidents. Whatsoever he sees
or knows, he sees or knows by his essence. The less T. H. understood the
terms of Aspect and Intuition, the more apt he was to blonder them.

He pleads, If liberty cannot stand with How the will of God is the necessity
of all things.
necessity, it cannot stand with the decrees of God, of which decrees necessity
is a consequent. And he cites some body without name, who said, The will of
God is the necessity of all things. I deny his consequence. Liberty is
consistent with Gods decrees, though it be not consistent with universal
necessity. The reason is plain, because liberty is a consequent of Gods decrees
as well as necessity. He who said that the will of God was the necessity of all
things, was St. Austine. I wish he would stand to his Dei. Genesis ad lit. l. 6.
c. 15.
judgment, or to his sense of those words. The meaning of those words is not
that God does will that all things should be necessary. But that whatsoever God
does will, that must necessarily be. If he will have all things necessary, then
all things must be necessary, If he will have all things free, then all things
must be free: If he will have some things necessary, and somethings free, then
some things must be necessary, and some things free. When God formed man of the
dust of the earth, he might have formed him either a child or a man, but
whether he should be formed the one or the other, it was not in the condition
of the Creature, but in the pleasure of the Creator, whose will is the
necessity of things. What does this concern the liberty of man? Nothing. It
concerned him more to have understood St. Austines distinction, between Ibid.
c. 17.
Gods will, and his prescience in the same place, What God wills shall
necessarily be, (that is according to an absolute antecedent necessity) What
God foreknows, shall truly be, (that is only by a necessity of infallability)
I might produce the whole world against him in this cause. But because he
renounced Rumaine authorities, I have been sparing to allege one testimony
against him. But to free Saint Austin from all suspicion of concurring, in such
a desperate cause, I will only cite one place of an hundred, Neither is that
necessity to be feared, which the Stoics fearing, were careful to distinguish
De Civit. Dei c. 5. c. 10.
the causes of things so, that some they subtracted from necessity, some they
subjected to necessity. And in those which they would not have to be under
necessity, they placed our wills, least they should not be free if they were
subjected to necessity. For if that be to be called our necessity, which is not
in our power, but effects what it can all though we will not, such as is the
necessity of death: it is manifest that our wills, whereby we live well or ill,
are not under such a necessity, etc. Here he may find the two sorts of
necessity, which we have had so much contention about, the one in our power,
which is not opposed to liberty: the other not in our power, that is an
antecedent extrinsecal necessity, which destroys liberty: but he says that
it is manifest, that our wills are not subject to such an antecedent necessity.
Here he may see that his friends the Stoics, the great Patrons of necessity,
were not for universal necessity as he is, nor did countenance necessity to
the prejudice of the liberty of the will.

Only to permit, and to permit liberty, do not What it is to permit only, and
to permit barely.
signify the same thing in this place. Only to permit, is opposed to acting,
to permit barely, is opposed to disposing. There are many things which God does
not act, there is nothing which God does not dispose. He acts good,
permits evil, disposes all things both good and evil. He that cutteth the
banks of a River, is the active cause that the water flows out of the
Channel: He that hinders not the stream to break the banks when he could, is
the permissive cause; And if he make no other use of the breaking out, it is
nuda permissio, bare permission, but if he disposes and draws the water that
flows out by furrows, to water the Medows, then though he permit it, yet he
does not barely permit it, but disposes of it to a further good, So God only
permits evil, that is, he does it not, but he does not barely permit it,
because he disposes it to good.

Here he would gladly be nibling at the questions, Whether universals be
nothing but only words, Nothing in the World, says he, is general, but the
significations of words and other signs. Hereby affirming, unawares, that a
man is but a word, and by consequence, that he himself is but a titular, and
not a real man. But this question is altogether impertinent in this place. We
do not by a general influence understand some universal substance or thing, but
an influence of indeterminate power, which may be applied either to good or
evil. The influence is a singular act, but the power communicated is a
general, that is, an indeterminate power, which may be applied to acts of
several kinds. If he deny all general power in this sense, he denies both his
own reason, and his common sense.

Still he is for his old error, That eternity is Eternity is no successive
duration.
a successive everlasting duration. But he produces nothing for it, nor
answers to any thing which I urged against it. That the eternity of God is
God himself, that if eternity were an everlasting duration, then there should
be succession in God; then there should be former and later, past and to come,
and a part without a part in God; then all things should not be present to God;
then God should lose something, namely; that which is past, and acquire
something newly, namely, that which is to come: and so God, who is without all
shadow of change, should be mutable, and change every day. To this he is
silent, and silence argues consent.

He says, Those many other ways which are proposed by Divines for reconciling
eternal prescience with liberty and contingency are proposed in vain, if they
mean the same liberty and contingency that I do, for truth and error can never
be reconciled. I do not wonder at his show of confidence. The declining sun
makes longer shadows; and when a Merchant is nearest breaking, he makes the
fairest show, to preserve his reputation as long as may be. He says he knows
the loadstone has no such attractive power. I fear shortly he will not permit
us to say that a plaster or a plantine leaf draws. What does the loadstone
then, if it does not draw? He knows that the iron comes to it, or it to the
iron. Can he not tell whether? This is worse than drawing, to make iron come or
go. By potentiality he understands power or might: Others understand
possibility or indetermination. Is not he likelely to confute the Schoolmen to
good purpose?

Whereas I said that God is not just, but Why God is said to be justice it
self, etc.
justice it self, not eternal, but eternity it self; He tells me, That they
are unseemly words to be said of God, he will not say blasphemous and
Atheistical, that God is not just, that he is not eternal. I do not fear that
any one Scholar, or any one understanding Christian in the World, should be of
his mind in this. If I should spend much time in proving of such known truths,
approved and established by the Christian World, I should show my self almost
as weak as he does show himself, to talk of such things as he understands not
in the least, to the overthrowing of the nature of God, and to make him no God.
If his God have accidents, ours has none; If his God admit of composition and
division, ours is a simple essence. When we say God is not just, but justice,
not wise but wisdom, does he think that we speak of moral virtues? or that we
derogate or detract from God? No, we ascribe unto him a transcendental justice
and wisdom, that is not comprehended under our categories, nor to be conceived
perfectly by humane reason. But why does he not attempt to answer the reasons
which I brought, That that which is infinitely perfect, cannot be further
perfected by accidents. That God is a simple essence, and can admit no kind of
composition; That the infinite essence of God can act sufficiently without
faculties; That it consists not with divine perfection to have any passive or
receptive powers. I find nothing in answer to these, but deep silence.
Attributes are names; and justice and wisdom are moral virtues: but the
justice, and wisdom, and power, and eternity, and goodness, and truth of God,
are neither names nor moral virtues, but altogether do make one eternal
essence, wherein all perfections do meet in an infinite degree. It is well if
those words of our Savior do escape him in his next Animadversions, I am the
truth, Or St. Paul for making Deum and Deitatem, God and the Joh. 14. 6. Act.
17. 29. Prove. 8. and 9.
Godheads or Deity, to be all one; Or Solomon for personating God under the
name of Wisdom in the abstract.

To prove eternity to be no successive duration, but one indivisible moment. I
argued thus: The divine substance is indivisible, but eternity is the divine
substance. In answer God is indivisible.
to this in the first place, he denies the Major, That the divine substance is
indivisible. If he had not been a professed Christian, but a plain Stoic, I
should not have wondered so much at this answer, for they held that God was
corporal. If the divine substance be not indivisible, then it is materiate,
then it is corporal, then it is corruptible, then the Anthropomorphites had
reason to attribute humane members to God. But the Scriptures teach us better,
and all the World consents to it, That God is a Joh. 4. 24. 1 Timothy 1. 17.
Spirit, that he is immortal and invisible, that he dwells in light which no
man can approach unto, whom no man has seen, nor can see. It is inconsistent
with the nature of God to be finite; It is inconsistent with the nature of a
body to be infinite. The speculations of Philosophors, who had only the light
of reason, were not so gross, who made God to be a most simple essence, or
simplicity it self. All matter which is the original of divisibility: was
created by God, and therefore God himself cannot be material nor divisible.

Secondly he denies the minor, That God is eternity it self.
the eternity of God is the divine substance; I proved it from that generally
received rule, Whatsoever is in God, is God. His answer is, That this rule has
been said by some men, thought by no man; for whatsoever is thought is
understood. Said by some men? Nay, said and approved by all men, that ever had
occasion to discourse upon this subject, and received without contradiction as
a received principle of Theology. They who say against it, do, wittingly or
unwittingly, destroy the nature of God. That which follows is equally
presumptuous, Thought by no man; for whatsoevor is thought is understood. It
was too much to censure all the Shool-men for Pies or Parrots, prating what
they did not understand. But to accuse all learned Christians of all
Communions, throughout all ages, who have either approved it, or not
contradicted it, of not understanding themselves, is too high an insolence. God
being an infinite essence, does intrinsecally include all perfection, and
needs not to have his defects supplied by accidents.

Where I say to day all eternity is coexistent with this day, and to morrow all
eternity will be coexistent with to morrow; he infers, It is well that his
eternity is now come from a nunc stans to be a nunc fluens, flowing from this
day to to morrow. It were better, if he would confess that it is a mere
deception of his sight, like that of fresh water passengers when they come
first to sea, terraeque urbesque recedunt, who think the shore leaves them,
when they leave the shore. It is time that flows and moves, not eternity,

Non tellus Cymbam tellurem, cymba relinquit.

To conclude this point of eternity and this Section, God gave himself this
name, I am Exo. 3. 13.
that I am, to show the truth, the simplicity, the independence, and
immutability of his essence; wherein there is neither fuit, not erit, has
been, not shall be, but only present, I am. Eternity, only eternity is truly
simply, independently, immutably.

Castigations of the Animadversions, Number. 25.
HIs first contradictions have been handled before, whither I refer the Number. 8.
Reader; but because he expresses his sense more clearly here than there, I
will take the liberty to add a few words. I charged him with contradictions,
in making Voluntary to presuppose deliberation, and yet making many voluntary
acts to be without deliberation. He distinguishes between deliberation, and
that which shall be What a Judge judges to be indeliberate is impertinent.
construed for deliberation by a Judge. Some voluntary acts are rash and
undeliberate in themselves; yet the Judge judges them to be deliberate,
because they ought to have deliberated, and had time enough to deliberate,
whether the action were lawful or not. First, This answer is a mere
subterfuge. The question between us is not what actions are punishable by law,
and what are not, but what is deliberation in its own nature, and whether all
voluntary actions be deliberate or not; not in order to a trial before a Judge,
but in order to the finding out of the truth.

Secondly, Many of these rash actions do imply no crime. nor are cognoscible
before a Judge, as tending only to the Agents particular prejudice, or perhaps
no prejudice but advantage. In all these cases, the sentence of the Judge
cannot help to reconcile his contradiction.

Thirdly, The ground of his distinction is not true. The Judge does not always
judge And his assertion false.
of such rash acts to be deliberate acts, but judges them to have been
indeliberate acts, whenever he finds them to have been justly destitute of
all manner of deliberation. From whence did arise the well known distinction
between Manslaughter and Wilful murder in our law. Murder committed upon
actual deliberation is held to be done maliciously, [ex malitia sua] But if it
proceed out of sudden passion, it is found only Manslaughter. The same equity
is observed in the Judicial law. He who did kill another suddenly without
enmity, was allowed the benefit of the City of refuge. Number. 35.


Lastly, In many cases the Judge cannot A man cannot predeliberate perfectly of
contingent events.
judge that the Agent had sufficient time to deliberate, nor that it was his
fault that he did not deliberate, for really he had not sufficient time to
deliberate. And where he talks that the Judge supposes all the time after
the making of the law to have been time of deliberation, he erreth most
pitifully. There needs little or no time to deliberate of the law. All the
need of deliberation is about the matter of fact, and the circumstances
thereof. As for example. A sudain affront is put upon a man, which he did not
expect, nor could possibly imagine, such as he apprehends, that flesh and
blood cannot endure, and conceives himself engaged in honor, to vindicate it
forthwith. This is that which required deliberation, the nature and degree of
the affront; the best remedies how to procure his own reparation in honor, the
inconveniences that may arise from a sudain attempt, and the advantage which he
may make of a little forbearance, with all the circumstances of the accidents.
How could he possible deliberate of all these things, before any of these
things were imaginable? He could neither certainly divine, nor probably
conjecture that ever such an accident should happen. And therefore it remains
still a gross contradiction in him, to say that voluntary always supposes
deliberation, and yet to confess that many voluntary acts are undeliberate.

Whereas he says, That he always used the word spontaneous in the same sense;
He mustexcuse me if I cannot assent unto it. In one place he tells us, That
by spontaneity is meant inconsiderate proceeding, or else nothing is meant Number.
33.
by it. In another place, he tells us, That Number. 8.
to give out money for merchandise is a spontaneous action. All the World
knows that to buy and sell, does require consideration.

He defines liberty to be the absence of all extrinsecal impediments to
action: But extrinsecal causes are extrinsecal impediments, and no man is free
(according to his grounds) from the determination of extrinsecal causes;
Therefore no man is free from extrinsecal impediments.

His answer is, That impediment or hinderance signifies an oppsition to
endeavor; and Endeavor is not of the essence of liberty.
consequently extrinsecal causes that take away endeavor are not to be called
impediments. He is very seldom stable to his own grounds, but is continually
interfereing with himself. Now he tells us that an impediment signifies an
opposition to endeavor; Elsewhere he tells us, That a man that is tied is
not free to walk, and that his bonds are impediments, without any regard to his
endeavor. It were mere folly for him to endeavor to walk, who can neither
stir hand nor foot. This is not all; He tells us further, That an inward
impediment is not destructive to liberty, Number. 29.
as a man is free to go though he be lame. And men do not say, that the river
wants liberty to ascend, but the power, because the water cannot ascend. And is
not want of endeavor intrinsecal, as well as lamenesse? Or did he ever hear of
a river that endeavored to ascend up the channel? It is not true therefore
that endeavor is of the essence of liberty, or that impediment always
signifies opposition to endeavor. Lastly, extrinsecal causes do not always
take away endeavor, but many times leave men free to endeavor to obtain those
things, which they never do obtain. If extrinsecal causes do take away all
endeavors but such as are successeful, then there should never be any labor
in vain. It remains therefore upon his own grounds, that extrinsecal causes
whenever they do not take away endeavors, are extrinsecal impediments and
destroy liberty.

He says, One may deliberate of that which is There may be impediments before
deliberation be done.
impossible for him to do. True, if he apprehend it as possible, and judge it
to be possible; Or otherwise he is stark mad to deliberate about it. The
shutting of the door of the Tennis-court is no impediment to play, until a man
have a will to play, and that is not until he have done deliberating. Yes even
in the act of deliberation, the finding of the door of the Tennis-court shut,
determines the deliberation, changes the will, and may be the only
impediment which hinders a man from playing. One may have a will to play
before deliberation, sometimes more absolute, out of humor, than after. Many
times the last judgment is conditional, as to play if the door be open, and if
the court be not taken up beforehand; And if it be shut, or the place taken up,
then to go to bowls, or some other exercise.

Wheresoever the judgment is so indifferent, And liberty when it is ended.
to do either this or that, or conditional to do this upon such conditions, it
is not the deliberation, or the last judgment that does determine the liberty
of the free Agent, but leaves him free to choose either part, or to suspend his
consent to both parts, pro re nata. So liberty may remain after deliberation is
done. Although he did not use these words, sensitive appetite, rational hope,
rational fear, irrational passions, nor confound the terms of sufficiency and
efficiency, or beginning of being and beginning of working, yet he might
confound the thing whereof these terms are but notions; And so he does.

All men do understand well enough what secret sympathies and antipathies are,
except such as are captious, though men understand not usually why they are, as
why one man gapeth at a custard rather than at a pie, and runs away from a
cat rather than from a mastiff. When, I say, it is thus far true, that the
action does follow the thought necessarily, (namely in antipathies and violent
passions, which admit no deliberation.) He demands how far it is false? I
answer, It is false in ordinary thoughts, which are not accompanied with such
violent passions. A man thinks a thousand things in a day accidentally, which
he never puts in execution, nor so much as thinks them worthy of
deliberation.

No man would have denied that habits do facilitate actions, and render them
less difficult and combersome, and consequently more easy and more free, but
he that meant to make himself ridiculous. He might even as well tell us, That
he who gropeth in the dark for every step, is as free to walk, as if it were
fair daylight, or that a foundered horse that is afraid to stumble every
foot, is as free to go, as he which is sound, and goes on boldly without fear.
But all this abuse grows from the misunderstanding of liberty. I take it for
a power to act or not to act, and he takes it for an absence of outward
impediments. This confounding of words, and the heaping together of
Scholastical terms with scorn, because he never understood them, are the
chiefest ingred ents in his discourse. I am not ashamed of Motus primo primi,
or judicium practice practicum, or actus elicitus and imperatus; But he has
great reason to be ashamed of his sleighting them, which he would not do, but
that he never learned them, and so would make a virtue of culpable necessity.
He says he will not contend with one who can use motus primo primi, etc. He is
the wiser, to have as little to do with Scholars as he can. His best play is
in the dark, where there is no fenceing.

We both agree that some sudden undeliberated Some undeliberated acts may be
punishable.
acts are justly punished. His reason is because the Agent had time to
deliberate from the instant that he knew the law, to the instant of his action.
But I have showed the vanity of this reason, and that it was impossible to
deliberate of sudden affronts and injuries which could not be expected or
foreseen. But if the occurrences or accidents were such as were foreseen, or
whereof the Agent was premonished, and he did deliberate of them; or if it was
his own fault or improvidence that they were not foreseen nor deliberated of,
then he is punishable, because his predeliberation about some such accident as
might probably happen, was a virtual deliberation about this very act, which
did afterward happen, though it were not then acted, but only expected; or
because he refused or neglected to fore-arme himself by deliberation against a
surprise.

Here he cavilleth about terms of actual and virtual deliberation, as his
manner is. Virtual deliberation.
If virtual deliberation be not actual deliberation, it is no deliberation;
Adding that I call virtual deliberation, that which ought to have been and was
not. He mistaketh the matter. I call virtual deliberation a former deliberation
about this very act feared or expected out of providence or premonition, before
it was acted, or about some act of the like nature. So it was an actual
deliberation; yet not about this very act. But it might have served to have
prevented the Agents being surprised, and have had the same virtue as if it had
been an actual deliberation about this very accident. Did he never learn nor
hear of the distinction in Philosophy between contactus verus, and contactus
virtualis, true touching and virtual touching? True touching when the
superficies of two bodies are together, so as they can move and be moved
mutually. And virtual touching, when the virtue of one body does extend it self
to another. As it is between the Sun and the Earth, the Loadstone and the Iron,
the hand of the Caster and the Stone moving upwards in the Air. His argument
holds as much in all the cases as in this of deliberation. If virtual
touching be not true touching, it is no touching: And if virtual motion be not
true motion, it is no motion. I shall find English enough at all times to
answer him.

Concerning my instance which he says, pleasantly, does stink to the nose of
the understanding, I desire him only to read the fifteenth Chapter of
Leviticus. I am sure he Children not punishable with death.
dare not call that a stinking passage.

He says, The Bishop mould make but an ill Judge of innocent children. And
that he hops we shall never have the administration of public Justice in
such hands as his, or in the hands of such as shall take counsel from him;
because I said that if a child before he have the use of reason shall kill a
man in his passion, yet because he wanted malice to incite him to it, and
reason to restrain him from it, he shall not die for it, in the strict rules of
particular justice, unless there be some mixture of public justice in the
case. -- Siego dignus hac contumelia
Sum maxim, at tu indignus qui faceres tamen.


If I deserved a reproof, he was a most unfit man to be my reprover, who
maintains, That no law can be unjust, That in the State of nature it was
lawful for any man to kill another, and particularly, for mothers to expose or
make away their children at their pleasure. Ita ut illum vel educare vel
exponere suo arbitrio and jure possit. De Cive, c. 9. d. 2. That Parents to
their children, and Soverigns to their subjects, cannot be injurious, whether
they kill them or whatsoever they do unto them. But what is it that I have
said? I have delivered no judgment or opinion of mine own in the case. I know
what has been practiced by some persons, in some places, at some times. I know
what reasons have been pretended for such practices. Sovereign dominion, The
law of retaliation, Psalm. 137. 8, 9. The common safety, The satisfaction, or
contentment of persons or families injuried. But if I have delivered any
opinion of mine own, it was on the contrary. Though I affirm not but that it
may be sometimes lawful to punish Parents for acts truly treasonable in their
posterity with lesser punishments, as loss of liberty, or the loss of the
fathers estate, which was at the time of the delinquency in the fathers power
to dispose, that they who will not forbear to offend for their own sakes, may
forbear for their posterities sakes. Though I know the practice of many
Countries, even in this, to be otherwise. But for death, I know no warrant.
Pliny observes of the Lion, that he preyeth first upon men, more rarely upon
women, and not upon children, except he be extremely pressed with hunger.

Private right and private justice, is between particular men; Public right
and public justice, is either between Commonwealths, as in foreign war, or
between Commonwealths and Subjects, as in case of Law-giving or civil war.
Many things are lawful in the way of public justice, which are not lawful in
the way of private justice. But this inquisition has no relation to our
present controversy. My exception, Except there be some mixture of public
justice in the case, is as much as to say, Unless there be some thing more in
the case, that does nearly concern the safety of the Commonwealth. It is not
impossible but before the ordinary age of attaining to the perfect use of
reason, a child may be drawn into very treasonable attempts, so far as to act a
ministerial part. And in such cases there is a rule in law, Malitia supplet
aetatem. He has confessed here enough to spoil his cause, if it were not
spoiled already. That want of reason takes away both crime and punishment, and
makes agents innocent. If want of reason do it, without doubt antecedent
extrinsecal necessity does much more do it. How then has he taught us all this
while, That voluntary faults are justly punishable though they be necessary? A
child's fault may be as voluntary as a man's. How a child may justly be put to
death to satisfy a vow, or to save a great number of people, or for reason of
State, I know not. This I do know, That it is not lawful to do evil, that good
may come of it.

Castigations of the Animadversions, Number. 26.
IT seems by the Animadversion which T. H. has in this Section, wherein he
makes, Consideration, understanding, reason, and all the passions (or
affections) of the mind to be imaginations. And by some other passages in this
Treatise, where he attributes to bees and spiders, not only election, but
also art, prudence, policy, very near equal to that of mankind: And where he
denies to man all dominion over the creatures, making Number. 8.
him like a top, or a football, or a pair of scales, and his chiefest
difference from brute beasts to consist in his language, and in his hand; And
his liberty to consist in an absence He knows no reason but imagination.
of outward impediments, ascribing to brute beasts deliberation, such as if it
were constant, there were no cause to call men more rational than beasts; That
he makes the reason and understanding of men to be nothing else but refined
and improved sense, or the sense of brute beasts to include reason.

It was an old Stoical opinion, that the affections were nothing else but
imaginations; but it was an old groundless error. Imaginations proceed from
the brain, affections from the heart. But to make reason and understanding to
be imaginations, is yet grosser. Imagination is an act of the sensitive
fantasy, Reason and understanding are proper to the intellectual soul.
Imagination is only of particulars, Reason of universals also. In the time of
sleep or some raging fit of sickness, when the imagination is not governed by
reason, we see what absurd and monstrous and inconsistent shapes and phansies
it does collect, remote enough from true deliberation. Does the Physician cure
his Patient by imaginations? or the Statesman govern the Commonwealth by
imaginations? or the Lawyer determine differences by imaginations? Are Logical
arguments reduced into due form, and an orderly method, nothing but
imaginations? Is prudence it self turned to imagination? And are the dictates
of right reason which God has given as a light to preserve us from moral
vices, and to lead us to virtuous actions, now become mere imaginations? We
see the understanding does often contrary and correct the imaginations of
sense. I do not blame the pusled Schoolmen if they dissented from such
newfangled speculations.

And the ground of all these vain imaginations is imagination. As any man may
perceive as easily as he can look into his own thoughts. His Argument may be
thus reduced, That which we imagine is true, but we imagine all these to be
imaginations. I deny both his propositions.

First, Our imaginations are not always true, but many times such as are
suggested to us by our working fantasies upon some slight grounds, or by our
fond or deceitful instructers, or by our vain hopes or fears. For one
Whittington, that found his imagination to prove true, when the Bells rang him
back to his Master, Turn again Whittington, thou shall be Lord Mayor of London,
a thousand have been grossly abused by their vain imaginations.

Secondly, No man can imagine any such thing who knows the difference between
the reasonable and the sensitive soul, between the understanding and the
fantasy, between the brain and the heart, but confident assertions and
credulity may do much among simple people. So we have heard or read of some
who were contented to renounce their eyesight, and to affirm for company, that
they saw a Dragon flying in the air, where there was not so much as a
Butterfly, out of a mannerly simplicity, rather than to seem to doubt of the
truth of that, which was confirmed to them by the testimony and authority of
such persons, whose judgment and veracity they esteemed.

We have had enough of his understanding understands, and will wills, or
too much unless it were of more weight. What a stir he makes every other
Section about nothing? All the World are agreed upon the truth in this
particular, and understand one another well. Whether they ascribe the act to
the Agent, or to the form, or to the faculty by which he acts, it is all one.
They know that actions properly are of Individuums. But if an Agent have lost
his natural power, or acquired habit, (as we have instances in both kinds) he
will act but madly. He that shall say that natural faculties, and acquired
habits are nothing but the acts that flow from them, That reason and
deliberation are the same thing; (he might as well say that wit and discourse
are the same thing) deserves no other answer but to be slighted.

That a man deliberating of fit means to obtain his desired end, does consider
the means singly and successively, there is no doubt. And there is as little
doubt that both the inquiry, and the result or veredict may sometimes be
definite, or prescribe the best means, or the only means, and sometimes
indefinite, determining what means are good, without defining which are the
best, but leaving the election to the free Agent.

Castigations of the Animadversions, Number. 27.
I Do not know what the man would have done, but for his trifling homonymy
about the name of Will, which affoardeth him The faculty of willing is the will.
scope to play at fast and loose between the faculty and the act of willing: We
ended with it in the last Section, and we begin again with it in this Section.
The faculty of the will (says he) is no will, the act only which he calls
volition is the will. As a man that sleeps has the power of seeing and sees
not, nor has for that time any sight, so also he has the power of willing,
but wills nothing, nor has for that time any will. -- Quantum est in rebus
inane?


What profound mysteries he utters, to show that the faculty of willing, and
the act of willing, are not the same things? Did ever any Creature in the World
think they were? And that the faculty does not always act. Did ever any man
think it did? Let him leave these impertinencies, and tell us plainly, whether
the faculty of willing, and the act of willing, be not distinct things; And
whether the faculty of the will be not commonly called the will by all men but
himself; and by himself also, when he is in his lucidae intervalles. Hear his
own confession, To will, to elect, to Number. 20.
choose, are all one, and so to will is here made an act of the will; and
indeed, as the will is a faculty or power of a man's soul, so the will is an act
of it according to that power. That which he calls the faculty here, he
calls expressly the will there. Here he will have but one will, there he
admits two distinct wills. [to will is an act of the will.] Here he will not
endure that the faculty should be the will, there he says expressly, That the
will is a faculty. All this wind shakes no Oats. Whatsoever he says in this
Section, amounts not to the weight of one grain.

If he had either known what concupiscence does signify, which really he does
not, or Of concupiscence.
had known how familiar it is (both name and thing) in the most modest and
pious Authors, both Sacred and profane, which he does not know, he would have
been ashamed to have accused this expression, as unbecoming a grave person. But
he, who will not allow me to mention it once to good purpose, does take the
liberty to mention it six times in so many lines to no purpose. There has been
an old question between Roman Catholics and Protestants, Whether concupiscence
without consent, be a sin or not. And here comes he, as bold as blind, to
determine the difference, committing so many errors, and so gross, in one
short determination, that it is a shame to dispute with him; thrashing those
Doctors soundly, whom he professes to honor and admire, not for ill will,
but because he never read them. He maintains that which the Romanists
themselves do detest, and would be ashamed of: As first, That concupiscence,
without consent, is no sin, contrary to all his much admired Doctors.
Secondly, That there is no concupiscence without consent, contrary to both
parties, which we use to call the taking away the subject of the question.
Thirdly, That concupiscence with consent, may be lawful, contrary to all men.
Though the Church of Rome do not esteem it to be properly a sin, yet they
esteem it a defect, and not altogether lawful, even without consent, much less
with consent. Fourthly, That concupiscence makes not the sin, but the
unlawfulness of satisfying such concupiscence, or the design to prosecute
what he knows to be unlawful. Which last errors are so gross, that no man
ever avowed them before himself. When lust has conceived, Jam. 1. 15.
it brings forth sin, that is, when a man has consented to the suggestion of
his own sensuality. Though he scorn the Schoolmen, yet he should do well to
advise with his Doctors, whom he professes to admire, before he plunge himself
again into such a Whirly-pool.

Castigations of the Animadversions, Number. 28.
IF I should give over the well known terms of the rational or intellectual
will, so well Of the intellectual^ and sensitive appetite.
grounded in nature, so well warranted by the authority and practice of all
good Divines and Philosophers, to comply with his humor or distemperd
imaginations, I should right well deserve a Babble. The intellectual appetite,
and the sensitive appetite, are both appetites, and in the same man they both
proceed from the same soul, but by diverse faculties, the one by the
intellectual, the other by the sensitive; And proceeding from several
faculties, they do differ as much as if they proceeded from several souls. The
sensitive appetite is organical, the intellectual appetite is inorganical; The
sensitive appetite follows the judgment of the senses; The intellectual
appetite follows the judgment of the understanding: The sensitive appetite
pursues present, particular, corporal delights; The intellectual appetite
pursues that which is honest, that which is future, that which is universal,
that which is immortal and spiritual. The sensitive appetite is determined by
the object. It cannot choose but pursue that object which the senses judge to be
good, and fly that which the senses judge to be evil. But the intellectual
appetite is free to will, or nill, or suspend, and may reject that which the
senses say to be good, and pursue that which the senses judge to be evil,
according to the dictate of reason.

Then to answer what he says in particular. The appetite and the will are not
always the same thing. Every will is an appetite, but every appetite is not a
will. Indeed in the same man, appetite and will is the same thing. (secluding
natural appetite which concerns not this question) but the sensitive
appetite, and the intellectual appetite are not the Not the same thing.
same thing, following several guides, pursuing several objects, and being
endowed with several privileges. He demands whether sensual men and beasts
do not deliberate and choose one thing before another, in the same manner that
wise men do? Although he has found out a brutish kind of deliberation; if we
take the word in the right sense, beasts cannot deliberate. Sensual men may
deliberate, but do not deliberate as they ought. And by consequence beasts act
necessarily, and cannot choose: Sensual men do choose, or may choose, but do not
choose as they ought, not as wise men do. He says it cannot be said of wills
that one is rational, another sensitive. Not very properly; but it may be said
of appetites, That one is rational, another sensitive. And why not a rational
will, as well as a rational discourse. The will of a rational Creature,
rationally guided, is a rational will; And so will be when we are dead and
gone.

He concludes, If it be granted that deliberation is always, (as it is not)
there were His deliberation is no deliberation.
no cause to call men rational more than beasts, for it is manifest by
continual experience, that beasts do deliberate. Such a deliberation as he
phancieth is not worth contending for, good for nothing but to be thrown to the
Dogs, or the Swine, An alternate imagination, alternate hope and fear, an
alternate appetite. Here is an heap of alternates, every one unlike another,
and all of them as far distant from deliberation, as reason is from sense.
Imagination is seated in the head, fear and hope in the heart: Appetite is
neither the one nor the other. Yet this is all the deliberation, and all the
reason which he attributes to man; and he attributes the same to bruit
beasts, but not at all times. If they had this deliberation at all times, there
were no cause to call men rational more than beasts. So the difference between
a man and a beast is this, That men, or rather some men, are reasonable
Creatures at all times, thanks to their own industry: and bruit beasts are
reasonable creatures at some times. If he had said that some men are but
reasonable Creatures at sometimes, I should rather have believed him for this
discourse.

He is beholden to his Catachrestical expressions, for all the rest of his
discourse in this Section. I take Liberty to be a power of the rational soul,
or of the free Agent to choose or refuse indifferently, upon deliberation. And
he makes liberty to be no more than the byas of a bowl, a strong inclination
to one side, affixed by deliberation. And by this abusive expression he
thinks to avoid the two arguments which were brought against him in this
Section.

The former argument was this, If every Agent be necessitated to act what it
does His liberty no true liberty.
act by extrinsecall causes, then he is no more free before deliberation, than
after, which is demonstratively true of true liberty, but applying it to his
newfangled acception of liberty; He answers, He is more free, but he is no
less necessitated. Yet withal he confesses that he is necessitated to
deliberate as he does, and to will as he does; That is to say, He is
necessitated to be free. This is a freedom of a free stone, not of a free man.
If this be all the freedom which a man has, we must bid adieu to all election.
Then there is neither freedom of our will, nor of our actions, more than an
inclination extrinsecally necessitated. And then all those absurdities which he
has sought so earefully to avoid, tumble upon his head thick and threefold.

The second argument was this, Deliberation does produce no new extrinsecall
impediment, therefore either the Agent is free after deliberation, or he was
not free before. He answers, That he cannot perceive any more force of
inference in these words, then of so many words put together at adventure. I
wonder at his dullness. He defines liberty to be an absence of extrinsecal
impediments. If this definition be true, then wheresoever there is the same
absence of extrinsecal impediments, there is the same liberty. But if
deliberation produce no new extrinsecal impediments, there is the same absence
of extrinsecal impediments, after deliberation which was before. Therefore upon
his grounds there is the same liberty after deliberation which was before.

What he tells of thoughts that arise in him that deliberateth, is nothing to
the purpose, The last judgment is more than bare thoughts. But this makes but
an intrinsecall determination, and a necessity upon supposition, not an
extrinsecal determination, and an antecedent necessity, of which the question
is between him and me. A man cannot have liberty to do or not to do, that which
at the same time is already done. But a man may do that which he does freely
from all antecedent necessity; and necessity upon supposition, is not
destructive to liberty. He prophaneth the name of God, who makes him to be
corporal and divisible, to be compounded of substance and accidents, to be
mutable, and to aquire and lose daily; not he who argues soberly and
submissively from the attributes or works of God.

Castigations of the Animadversions, Number. 29.
HE has given a proof lately of his Theology, now he pretends to show his
skill in Logic and Philosophy. His definition of liberty.
He needs not to tell us that he acquired his knowledge by his own
meditation, he is so long fumbling and spelling of every word. In the first
place he gives us the definition of a definition. A right definition is that,
(what? a right definition without a Genus?) which determines the signification
of the word defined. This definition agrees as much to a Lexicon, as to a
definition. By his leave, a right definition is an explication of the thing
defined by the essential terms; those are the Genus and the difference.

His definition is but a poor description. He confesses, That the rule is good
in defining to use first some general term, and then to restrain the
signification thereof, etc. He is but learning to spell in Logic, and yet is
already censuring. It is no marvel if he never thrive of the trade. It is not
only good, but a necessary rule, that in every perfect definition there be two
notions; the one more common, wherein the thing defined does agree with other
things, the other more distinct, wherein it differs from all other things. This
was Platos doctrine, and Aristotle's, and received by all Logicians ever since;
and now he takes upon him to be Judge of it, as Midas judged of Apollos music.

He dislikes the terms, Genus and Difference, as too obscure for English
Readers, and fitter for Schoolmen, comprehending all Logicians old and new
under the name of Schole-men. Then why does he himself use the term of Logic,
and not rather witcraft, or definition, and not rather declaring? The vulgar
Reader will understand his General term no better than genus, nor his new
restraint; better than the old difference, but be ready to mistake his
restraint of a general term, for the imprisonment of some Commander in Chief.
But thus it must be done; first to render the people more benevolent to a man
who studieth nothing but their edification, and then to hide his own ignorance.

He pleads, That some words are so general, that they cannot admit a more
general. Yea, has he found out that with his meditation? Every freshman in the
University could have told him that, and much more, That omne quod perfect
definitur est species. He says. I shall give him leave to cite some passages
out of his book, de corpore. And he shall give me leave to slight them and let
them alone. If he will admit of humane authority, I am ready to bury him and
his destiny in an heap of authorities. But for his own authority, I do not
esteem it (more than he produces reason) the value of a deaf nut.

At length he has found us out a Genus and a Difference in his definition of
liberty, but that I am such a beetle that I cannot see them. His genus is
absence of impediments to action. Let him peruse all the tables of the
predicaments and predicables, and if he find any such genus there, either
summum or sub alternum, he shall be my great Apollo. To make a genus of a
privation that is an absence, nay an absence of impediments, was never heard of
before, unless it be true in this case bina venena juvant, unless two
privatives make one positive, and two negatives one affirmative. His difference
or restriction is worse, if worse may be, not contained in the nature of the
Agent. So the essential difference is a negative also. His liberty must needs
be a rare Jewel, which consists altogether of negatives.

He charge me, That I require the matter and the form of the thing in the
definition, but Analogical matter.
matter is a corporeal substance, and cannot be part of a definition.
Whenever he medleth with these things, he does but show his weakness; It
were better for him to let them alone. I do not say that genus and materia are
all one; But I say that genus has a great analogy with the first matter, and
so may be materia analogica, which Porphyry upon the (...). 4. d. 7.
predicables might have taught him. The first matter is indeterminate to any
form, so is the Genus to any difference; The matter is susceptible of opposite
forms, so is the Genus of opposite differences. His reason That matter is
corporeal, is as silly as his exception, and shows what a novice he is in
Logic. There is intelligible matter, as well as sensible. As three lines are
the matter of a triangle, and three propositions of a syllogism.

He tells us confidently, That a very absence is as real as a very faculty.
If he told it twice so confidently, we could not believe it, that a privation
which is nothing, and out of all predicaments, should be as real as a quality.
Potential qualities ought to be defined by their efficients and proper acts,
not by privations. But says he, What if the word (defined) do signify absence
or negation? Then it cannot be defined, but only described. And this
description must not be by heaping together more negatives or privations, but
by mentioning the habits or powers whereof they are privations. What is this to
liberty which is a potential quality?

I urged that by his definition of liberty a stone is tree to ascend into the
air, because By his definition a stone is free to ascend.
there is no outward impediment to hinder it. He answered, That the stone is
stopped by external impediments, otherwise it would either go upwards
eternally, or it must stop it self; but it does not ascend eternally, and I
have confessed that nothing can move it self; And therefore he doubts not but I
will confess that nothing can stop it self. First his memory is very slippery.
I never said that nothing can move it self: But if that will do him any good, I
have often said the contrary. Secondly, he does but flatter himself with vain
hopes to think, that I will say nothing can stop it self. Although there were
no resistance in the air, when the casters force is ceased, the weight of the
stone alone is sufficient to stop it. Thirdly, there have been those who have
thought themselves as good Philosophers as he, who affirmed that the stone did
find no resistance in the air, but was driven forwards by the following air
toward the air before it to prevent a Vacuum: That is far from resistance.
Fourthly, Why might not I say as well, that upon his grounds, a stone is free
to ascend into the air, because there is no outward impedidiment to hinder it,
as he might say, that the water is free to ascend up the channel; Men never say
that the water wants liberty to ascend, but power. Yet the water has greater
impediments to ascend up the channel, than the stone has to ascend in the
air. Lastly, this is without all doubt, that though a stone be not capable of
moral liberty, yet if liberty were such a thing as he imagines, by his
definition, a stone has as much liberty to ascend up the air, contrary to its
natural appetite, as it has to descend downwards according to its natural
appetite, there being no extrinsecal impediment in the one motion more than in
the other, the air being more easily, or at least as easily driven upwards as
downwards. Yet the stone stops in its ascent, but not in its descent,
(except it be accidentally) until it come to the earth.

To the rest of this Section he makes an easy reply, That I talk so absurdly
of the current of Rivers, and of the motion of the Seas, and of the weight of
water, that it cannot be corrected otherwise then by blotting it all out. He
mistaketh but one word. It should have been, It cannot be answered by him
otherwise than by blotting it all out.

Castigations of the Animadversions, Number. 30.
ALthough his Paradoxes be contrary to the opinion of the whole World, yet in
these five last Sections he has not brought one argument to prove them, but
only explained his meaning, as if his own authority were proof sufficient. Now
at last he brings two silly arguments. The first is this. Nothing takes
beginning from it self; Beginning of motion from the mover.
Therefore the will takes not beginning from it self, but from something
without it self. I answered by distinguishing a beginning into a beginning of
being, and a beginning of working or action. No creature takes its beginning
of being from it self, because the being of all creatures is a participated
being, derived from the infinite and original being of God, in whom we live and
move and have our being. But if he understand a beginning of action, it is a
gross error to say, That nothing has a beginning of its own actions or
operations within it self. This is all I said, and this I said constantly. Then
how uningenuously did he charge me in the last Section to have confessed, That
nothing can move it self? And in this Section accuse me of contradiction, for
saying, That when a stone descends, the beginning of its motion is
intrinsecal. Now to justify himself, he says, that from this which I did say,
That finite things cannot be produced by themselves, he can conclude that the
act of willing is not produced by the faculty of willing. If he could do as
much as he says, yet it was not ingenuously done, to feign that I had
confessed all that which he thinks he can prove, and that I contradicted my
self, when I contradicted his conclusions. But let us see how he goes about to
prove it. He that The same faculty wills or nilleth.
has the faculty of willing, has the faculty of willing something in
particular. In good time. This looks not like a demonstration. But let that
pass; And at the same time he has the faculty of nilling the same. How, two
faculties, the one of willing, the other of nilling?. Hola. He has but one
faculty, and that is a faculty of willing or nilling something in particular,
not of willing and nilling. He proceeds, If therefore the faculty of willing
be the cause he wills any thing whatsoever, for the same reason the faculty
of nilling will be the cause at the same time of nilling it; And so he shall
will and nill the same thing at the same time, which is absurd. I deny his
consequence. It does not follow that because the Agent has power to will or
nill indifferently, therefore he has power to will and nill contradictorily.
He may choose indifferently, whether he will write or not, but he cannot choose
both to write and not to write at the same time contradictorily. It does not
follow that because the Agent has power to will or nill indifferently, before
he do actually either will or nill, therefore when he does will actually, he
has power to nill at the same time. Has he forgotten that old foolish rule,
Whatsoever is, when it is, is necessarily so as it is? How often must I tell
him, that in the place of an absolute antecedent necessity, he seeks to
obtrude upon us hypothetical necessity?

He proceeds, It seems the Bishop had forgotten that matter and power are
indifferent to contrary forms and contrary acts. No I had not forgotten it,
but he had fogotten it: To say that the matter is indifferent to contrary
forms, and yet necessitated antecedently to one form, or that power is
indifferent to contrary acts, and yet necessitated antecedently to one act, is
a rattling contradiction. He says, That it is somewhat besides the matter that
determines to a certain form, and something Other causes concur with the will.
besides the power that produces a certain act. I acknowledge it, and it is
the only piece of sense that is in this Section. I made this objection to my
self in my defense, and answered it in these words.

Yet I do not deny that there are other beginnings of humane actions, which do
concur with the will, some outward as the first cause by general influence,
which is evermore requisite, Angels or men by persuading, evil spirits by
tempting, the object or end by its appetibility; some inward, as the
understanding by directing; so passions and acquired habits. But I deny that
any of these do necessitate or can necessitate the will of man by determining
it physically to one, except God alone, who does it rarely in extraordinary
cases; And where there is no antecedent determination to one, there is no
absolute necessity, but true liberty.

Where he makes, The beginning of motion in a stone thrown upwards, and a
stone descending downwards, to be both in the stone; it is but a poor trifling
homonymy, as the most part of his Treatise is. The beginning of motion in a
stone ascending is in the stone subjectively, but not effectively, because that
motion proceeds not from the form of the stone. But in the descent of the
stone, the beginning of motion is both subjectively and effectively in the
stone. And what he tells us of a former motion in the ambient body, air or
water, to make the stone descend, is needless and frustraneous. Let him but
withdraw the pin that holds the slate upon the house against its natural
inclination, and he shall see presently there needs no motion in the ambient
body to make the stone drop down.

He advises me to consider with what grace Necessary causes do not allwaies
act necessarily.
I can say, that necessary causes do not always produce their effects, except
those effects be also necessarily produced. Rather let him consider with what
grace he can mis-recite that which I say, by leaving out the word necessary. I
said necessary causes do not always produce necessary effects; and I can say
that with better grace than he can deny it. When necessary Agents and free
Agents are conjoynt in the production of the same effect, the effect is not
antecedently necessary. I gave him an instance. Protagoras writ a book against
the gods, De dis utrum sint utrum non sint nihil habeo dicere. The Senate
ordered his book to be burned for it. Although the fire be a necessary Agent,
yet because the Senators were free Agents, the burning of his book was not
antecedently necessary.

Where I say that the will is not a necessary cause of what it wills in
particular action^, He infers, That there are no universal actions, and if
it be not a necessary cause of particular actions, it is the necessary cause of
no actions; And again, he would be glad to have me set down what voluntary
actions (not particular) those are which are necessitated. It is scarcely
possible for a man to express himself more clearly than I did, but clearly or
unclearly, all is one to him, who is disposed to cavil. I did not oppose
particular acts to universal acts, but to a collection of all voluntary acts in
general, qua tales, as they are voluntary. It is necessary, That all acts
generally which proceed from the will, should be voluntary; and so the will is
a necessary cause of voluntary acts, that is, of the voluntarinesse of them.
But the will is not a necessary cause of the particular acts themselves. As
upon supposition that a man be willing to write, it is necessary that his
writing be voluntary, because he wills it: But put the case without any
supposition, and it is not necessary that he should write, or that he should
will to write, because it was in his own power, whether he would write or not.
So the voluntarinesse of all acts in general, proceeding from the will, is
necessary, but the acts themselves were not necessary before the free Agent had
determined himself; and then but upon supposition.

His excepting against these common expressions, The will wills, or the will
may either will or suspend its acts, is but seeking of a knot in a bullrush. It
is all one, whether one say the will wills, or the man wills, or the will
may will or suspend its act, or the man may will or suspend his acts. Scaliger
says that volo velle is a proper speech, I will will, and received by the
common consent of all nations. If he had any thing of moment to insert into his
Animadversions, he would not make use of such Leptologies. Canting is not
chargable upon him, who uses common and known terms of art, but upon him who
devises new terms, as Canters do, which die with their inventers. He asks,
How can he that wills at the same time suspend his will? Rather why does he
insert into his demand at the same time. It is enough to liberty, if he that
wills could have suspended his will. All this answer of mine to his second
argument was illustrated by the instance of the election of a Pope, to which he
opposes nothing but It may be, and it does not follow, and I would be glad to
know by what arguments he can prove that the election was not necessitated. I
have done it sufficiently all over in this Treatise. I am now answering to what
he produces, not proving. If he have any thing to demand, let him go to the
Cardinals, and inquire of them, whether they be such fools, to keep such a deal
of needless stir, if they were atecedently necessitated to choose one certain
man Pope, and no other.

Castigations of the Animadversion, Number. 31. and Number. 32.
I Join these two Sections together, because they concern one and the same
thing: namely, Whether every sufficient cause do necessarily effect whatsoever
it is sufficient for: Or which is the same in effect, Whether a free Agent,
when all things are present which are needful to produce an effect, can,
nevertheless, not produce it. Which question may be understood two Two sor^s
of sufficiency.
ways, either inclusively, or exclusively, either including and comprehending
the will of the Agent, under the notion of sufficiency, and among things
requisite to the producing of the effect; so as the cause is not reputed to be
sufficient, except it have both ability and will to produce the effect, and so
as both requisite power, and requisite will, do concur; and then there is no
question but the effect will infallibly follow, Posita causa ponitur effectus;
or else it may be understood exclusively, not comprehending the will under the
notion of sufficiency, or not reckoning it among the necessary requisites to
the production of the effect; so as the Agent is supposed to have power and
ability to produce the effect, but no will. And then it is as infallibly true
on the other side, that the effect cannot be produced. Thus far this question
is a mere Logomachy or contention about words, without any real difference.
And T. H. does but abuse his Readers, to keep a jangling and a stir about
nothing.

But in truth the water stopeth not here. If he should speak to the purpose, he
should leave these shallows. If the will of the free Agent be included under
the notion of sufficiency, and comprehended among those things which are
requisite to the production of the effect, so as both sufficient ability, and
sufficient will, are required to the making a sufficient cause. Then it comes
to be considered in the second place, whether the will in things external be
under God, in the power and disposition of the free Agent himself, which is the
common opinion of all men, who understand themselves. And then the production
of the effect is only necessary hypothetically, or upon supposition, that the
free Agent is willing. Or else, Whether the will of the free Agent be not in
his own power and disposition, but determined antecedently by extrinsecal
causes, which is the paradoxical opinion of T. H. and then the production of
the the effect is, absolutely, and antecedently, necessary.

So still the question is where it was, and all his bustling about sufficiency
and efficiency, and deficiency is but labor in vain. If he would have spoken
any thing at all to the purpose, he should have attempted to prove that, every
sufficient cause (excluding the will) that is, every cause which has
sufficient power and ability, does necessaryly produce whatsoever it is able to
produce, though the Agent be unwilling to produce it; or that the will of the
Agent is not in his own power and disposition. We expect proofs, not words. But
this he could not do, for he himself in this very Treatise, has several times
distinguished between liberty and power; telling us that a sick man has
liberty to go, but wants power; And that a man who is bound has power to go,
but wants liberty. If he that is bound has power to go, then he has
sufficient power to go, for unsufficient power cannot produce the effect. And
so by his own confession an Agent may have sufficient power, and yet cannot
necessarily, nor yet possibly, produce the effect.

I urged, That God is sufficient to produce many Worlds, but he does not
produce them; therefore a sufficient cause dorh not necessarily produce all
those effects which it is sufficient to produce. He answers, That the meaning
is that God is sufficient to produce them if he will. Does he not see that it
follows inevitably from hence, That there may be a sufficient cause without
will? Does he not see likewise from hence plainly, that for those things which
are within the power of man, he is sufficient also to produce them if he will.
So still he would obtrude a necessity of supposition; If a man will, for an
absolute necessity. That which is but necessary conditionally, If a man will,
is not necessary absolutely. And he confesses that without this supposition,
If he will, a man is not sufficient to produce any voluntary action.

I added other instances, as this, That the passion of Christ is a sufficient
ransom for all mankind, and so is acknowledged by all Christians, yet all
mankind shall not be saved by virtue of his passion, therefore there may be a
sufficient cause without production of the effect. This is the language of holy
Luke 14. 28.
Scripture, Which of you intending to build a Tower, sits not down first and
counts the cost, whether he have [sufficient] to finish it? That is, as our
Savior expounds himself in the 2 Cor. 2. 16.
next verse, whether he be able to finish it. So St. Paul says, Who is
sufficient for these things? that is, Who is able for these things? When God
Isa. 5. 4.
says, What could I have done more for my vineyard, that I have not done? God
had given them sufficient means, and could have given them more, if they had
been more capable; but because they were wanting to themselves, these
sufficient means were not efficacious. I looked for grapes, says God; How
could God look for grapes, if he had not given them sufficient means to bring
forth grapes? yet these sufficient means were not efficacious.

These things being premised, do answer whatsoever he says; as this, The
Bishop thinks two Horses may be sufficient to draw a Coach, though they will
not draw, etc. I say they may be sufficient in point of power and ability,
though they will not draw. Many men have sufficient power to do what they will
not do. And if the production of the effect do depend upon their wills, or upon
their contingent and uncertain endeavors, or if their sufficiency be but
conditional, as he makes it, if they be not lame or resty, then the production
of the effect is free or contingent, and cannot be antecedently necessary. For
otherwise all these conditions and suppositions are vain.

Where he charge me to say, That the cause of a Monster is unsufficient to
produce a Monster, he does me wrong, and himself more. I never said any such
thing. I hope I may have leave to speak to him in his own words. I must take it
for an untruth, until he cite the place, where I have said so. I have said,
and I do say, That the cause of a Monster was unsufficient to produce a man,
which nature and the free Agent intended, but it was sufficient to produce a
Monster, otherwise a Monster had not been produced. When an Agent does not
produce what he and nature intend; but produces a Monster instead of a Man, it
is proof enough of his insufficiency to produce what he should, and would have
produced, if he could. Where he adds, That that which is sufficient to
produce a Monster, is not therefore to be called an insufficient cause to
produce a Man, no more than that which is sufficient to produce a man, is to be
called an insufficient cause to produce a Monster, is even as good sense, as if
a man should say, He who has skill sufficient to hit the white, is
insufficient to miss the white.

He pretends that sensus divisus, and compositus is nonsense, (though they be
Logical terms of art) And what I say of the power of the will to forbear
willing, or the dominion of the will over its own acts, or the power of the
will in Actu primo, he says are as wild words, as ever were spoken within the
walls of Bedlam, though they be as sad truths as the founders of Bedlam
themselves could have uttered. And the Authors who used them, the greatest
wits of the World, and so many, that ten Bedlams could not hold them. But it
may be he would have the Scene changed, and have the wisest sort of men thrust
into Bedlam, that he might vent his Paradoxes more freely. So Festus accused
Saint Paul of madness, Paul Paul, much learning has made thee mad.

In the definition of a free Agent, Which when all things needful to the
production of the effect are present, can nevertheless not produce it. They
understood all things needful in point of ability, not will. He tells us
gravely, That Act and Power differ in nothing but in this, That the former
signifies the time present, the later the time to come. As if he should tell
us, That the cause and the effect differ nothing, but that the effect
signifies the time present, and the cause the time to come.

Lastly he says, That except I show him the place where he shuffled out
effects producible, and thrust into their place effects produced, he will take
it for an untruth. To content him I shall do it readily, without searching far
for it. My words were these, [The question is whether effects producible be
free from necessity: He shuffles out effects producible, and thrusts in their
places, effects produced.] Now that he does this, I prove out of his own words
in the Section preceding. Hence it is manifest, That whatsoever is produced, is
produced necessarily: For whatsoever is preduced, has had a sufficient cause
to produce it, or else it had non been. Let the Reader judge if he have not
here shuffled effects producible out of the question, and thrust into their
places effects produced. The question is whether effects producible be
necessarily produced; He concludes in the place of the contradictory, That
effects actually produced, are necessary.

Castigations of the Animadversions, Number. 33.
HE says, That to define what Spontaneity, Our conceptions are not the
touchstone of truth.
Deliberation, Will, Propension, Appetite, a free Agent, and Liberty is, and to
prove that they are well defined; there can be no other proof offered, but
every man's own experience and memory, what he means by such words. I do
readily believe all this to be true, in order to his own opinions; That there
neither is, nor can be any proof of them but imagination. But his reason was
shot at random; For definitions being the beginning of all demonstration,
cannot themselves be domonstrated, that is proved to another man. Does he take
all his particular imaginations to be so many definitions or demonstrations? He
has one conception of Spontaneity, of Deliberation, of a free Agent, of
Liberty, I have another. My conception does not prove my opinion to be true,
nor his conception prove his opinion to be true; but our conceptions being
contrary, it proves either his, or mine, or both to be false. Truth is a
conformity, or congruity of the conceptions of the mind with the things
themselves, which are without the mind, and of the exterior speech as the
sign, with the things and conceptions, as the things signified. So there is a
threefold truth; The first is objective in the things themselves; The second is
conformative in the conceptions of the mind; The third is signative or
significative in speech or writing. It is a good proceeding to prove the truth
of the inward conceptions of the mind, from their conformity with the things
themselves; but it is vain and ridiculous to prove the truth of things from
their agreement, with the conceptions of my mind, or his mind. The Clocks may
differ, but the course of the Sun is certain. A man's words may not agree with
his thoughts, nor his thoughts agree with the things themselves.

But I commend his prudence in this, and in this only, That he has chosen out
a way of proof that cannot be confuted without his own consent, because no man
knows another man's inward conceptions but himself. And the better to secure
himself, he makes his English Reader judge of Latin words, and his ignorant
Readers judge of words of art. These are the fittest Judges for his purpose.
But what if the terms be obscure? He answers, If the words be unusaal, the
way must be to make the definition of their signification by mutual consent.
What mutual consent? The signification of these words was settled by universal
consent and custom; And must they be unsettled again, to satisfy the humor of
every odd Paradoxical person, who could find no way to get himself reputation,
but by blondring all things? He tells us that the Schoolmen use not to argue
by rule, but as Fencers use to handle weapons by quickness of the hand and
eye, The poor Schoolmen cannot rest quietly in their graves for him, but he is
still persecuting their ashes, because they durst presume to soar a pitch
above his capacity. The Scool-men were the most exact observers of rules in the
whole World, as if they had been composed altogether of rules. But they
observed not his rule, That whatsoever any man imagines a word to be, that it
is. Much good may his Lesbian rule do him, which he may bend this way or that
way at his pleasure. It is just such another rule as the Parish Clarks rule of
the time, who preferred the Clock before a Dial, because he set it according to
his own imagination.

He asks me (for he is much better at making knots than loosing them) what I
will answer if he shall ask me how I will judge of the causes of things,
whereof I have no idea or conception in mine own mind? As if there were no
mean, but either a man must want all inward notions and conceptions, or else he
must make his own imaginations to be the touchstone of truth. Nulla lux, and
nimia lux, no light, and too much light, are both enemies to the sight. So to
take away all inward conceptions, and to ground the true being and nature of
things upon our fallible conceptions, are both enemies to the truth.

Albeit, He dare say (as he is bold enough, whilst the danger is but in words)
that if one should ask an ordinary person whether our Antipodes should have
their heads upwards or downwards, they would tell him as significantly as any
Scholar, that their heads were upwards, because they are toward Heaven; And
that when they say there is no body in that room, they mean no more but there
is no body that can be seen; Or when they say that vessel is empty, they do
apprehend it to be full of air: Yet neither I, nor these ordinary persons
themselves do believe him. How should they apprehend such things rightly, until
they be better informed both of the figure of the earth, and the nature of the
air, than they are by their senses. He says, The question is not, Whether such
and such Tenets be true; but whether such and such words can be well defined,
without thinking on the things they signify? I should be glad to find him once
stating of a question truly. The question is not whether such and such words
can be well defined without thinking on the things they signify; but whether
every thought or every imagination of every odd fantastic person, or of the
common people, be a right determination of the true sense and signification of
every word. They who do not understand the distinct natures of things
signified, cannot understand the right significations of words, which are but
signs of things.

Right discipline or learning and good instruction, does not only enable a man
to reason truly in more numerous or various matters, but to reason more truly
and exactly in all matters. Yea, even in those things which we have learned
from our own senses and memories. As I showed him before in the instance of the
Sun, which sense judges to be no greater than a ball, but learning and reason
do convince us that it is many times greater than the Globe of the Earth. If he
will not admit this to be matter of fact, let him try if he can persuade us
that it is matter of right. A man's sense and memory does teach him, that the
lightening is long done before the thunderclap begin, but being better
instructed we know it to be otherwise. In vain were so may rules and precepts
in Logic, if they did not teach us to reason better, as well as to reason in
more numerous and various matters.

He inveigheth against Impostors as bad masters, deceivers or deceived, that
teach for truth all that has been dictated to them by their own interest; And
does not see or will not see, that no man is so much concerned in this
reprehension as himself, who without these Paradoxes had continued still a
cipher and signified nothing. If there be any changlings, it is no other than
himself, not by any enchantment of words not understood, but by his own
overweening and vainglorious conceits. He recites it as a saying of mine that
[matter of fact is not verified by sense and memory, but by Arguments.] I never
said so, And until he produce my words, I must put it into the catalogue of his
untruths. Neither did I, nor any Schooleman ever say, That the testimony of a
witness is the only verifier of matter of fact, or that it does not consist
in sense and memory, or that it does consist in Arguments and Syllogismes.
These are his own collections and consequences, which hang together like ropes
of sand.

He asks, How can an unlearned man be brought to think the words he speaks
ought to signify, when he speaks sincerely, any thing else but that which he
himself means by them? Right, he cannot be brought to think that they do
signify otherwise than they do signify. But although he meant never so
sincerely, he may be brought to think that the signification by him used was
improper, and that which he said according to the right sense of the words was
untrue. As a man might say sincerely enough, that water is moister or more
humide than air, by the seeming warrant of his sense. And yet upon better
instruction reform his judgment, and acknowledge that then he did not
understand truly what moist or humid did signify.

To that which I urged, That to love any thing and to think it good, is not the
same thing; He answers no more but this, That he does not think so: As if he
were some oracle of truth, or some great Lawyer declaring his opinion to his
poor ignorant Clients. Let him reserve his thoughts for his credulous
Scholars. His next mistake is much worse. This was but in a word, but that is
in a thing, eternity. He would have his Reader believe, that some body holds,
That eternity is this His gross mistakes about eternity.
present instant of time; And that the next instant is eternity after this: And
consequently, that there are as many eternities as there be instants in time.
He does but dream waking. Surely never any man since the beginning of the World
did hold any part of this. That eternity should be a part of time; Time is but
the measure of motion, eternity was before motion. Time succeeding does repair
the losses of time passing. But God who is infinite can acquire nothing, can
lose nothing. Suppose a body to be infinite actually, it could have no middle,
no extremities, but every point of it should be a center. So in the infinite
eternity of God, there can be no extremities of past or to come, but a present
interminable possession of life. His ignorance is his best plea^. Let him learn
to cite his Adversaries sayings more ingenuously, or hold his peace for ever,
and keep his Paradoxes to himself. And not show himself like the Athenians, who
being well beaten by the Cretians, and having no other way to revenge
themselves, invented feigned stories of Bulls and Minotaures.

Being taken tripping in an apparent contradiction about Spontaneity, making it
to be considerate proceeding, and inconsiderate proceeding, or nothing, he has
no more mind to meddle with it, but quitteth his hands of it in these terms.
It is no English; But let it signify what it will, provided it be
intelligible, it would make against me. Had not this man need to have credulous
Readers, who before he knows what the word signifies, knows by instinct
that it would make against me. Just like that Mountebanck, who having made a
long Oration to his hearers of the rare virtues of a feather, which he affirmed
to have dropped from the wing of Michael the Archangel; And the feather being
stolen from under his sleeve out of drollery, and a cinder put in the place of
it, to try his humor, he went on confidently with his discourse; telling them
that though it was not the feather which he had mentioned, yet it was one of
the coals which S. Laurence was broiled with, and had all those virtues which
he had formerly ascribed to the feather. So whether Spontaneity be a feather or
a cole, it has still the same virtue. And if it be any thing it would make
against me. If it be all one to consider of the fittest means to obtain a
desired end or object, and consider of the good and evil sequeles of an action
to come, Why did he change the definition generally received, to make a show of
difference where there is none by his own account?

I was willing to have brought him to his right wits, that he might have
acknowledged himself a reasonable man; but seeing he is so peremtory that all
the reason and understanding which man has is but imagination; And weighing
his ground, that he finds it so in himself by considering his own thoughts and
ratiocinations, and, which works with me more than all his confidence,
finding his writings more full of fantasy than of judgment; I begin to
relent, and am contented to come to an accord with him, that he, and such as he
can gain to be of his mind, shall have the privilege of phantasticks, provided
that other men may still retain their old reason. Moreover I confess that when
I left other business to examine his writings, I did meet with greater trifles
than I did before.

I would gladly save his credit, but he plungeth himself into so many gross
errors, that What is his deliberation.
Ipsa si cupi at salus servare prorsus non potest. Now he tells us that
deliberation is nothing else but so many wills alternatively changed, as if
deliberation was but the measuring of a rod by inches, with his thumbs
alternatively; he wills, he wills not, he wills, he wills not, etc. And as the
last thumb-breadth happens, So the Agent either wills or nilleth. Before he
made but one will, now he makes I know not how many alternate wills. Before he
made deliberation to be a consideration of the good or evil sequeles of an
action. The will is an appetite, not a consideration. The will is blind and
cannot consider. Wise men use to look before they leap, and consider before
they will. But he may have the privilege to have his will stand for his
reason, Stat pro ratione voluntas. So whilst the byas of his bowl is changing
from the one side to the other alternatively by extrinsecal causes, the bowl
is deliberating.

I confess I wondered at his definition of a free Agent, He that can do if he
will, and forbear if he will; not that I did not foresee what paradoxical sense
he would give it; but why he should retain the ancient terms. I remember well
his distinction between freedom to do if a man will, and forbear to do if he
will, and freedom to will if he will, and to nill if he will. And have made
bold now and then to represent what a vain, false, useless, contradictory
distinction it is, and I believe it lies at the last gasp. But I might have
saved my labor. I used but one short argument in this place; either the Agent
can will and forbear to will, or he cannot do and forbear to do, and it drives
him into a contradiction. There is no doubt a man can will one thing or other,
and forbear to will it. If a man can will Man is free to will, or he is not
free to do.
and forbear to will the same thing, then he can will if he will, and forbear
if he will. Where he makes the state of the question to be, Whether a man to
day can choose to morrows will? either he feigneth or mistaketh grossly. I will
never trust him with stating of questions, or citing of testimonies.

Although it be his turn now to prove, and mine to defend my self, and my
cause, from his objections, yet he is still calling for proofs; And which is
worse, would have me to prove negatives, when he himself cannot prove
affirmatives. How does it follow He makes a stone as free to ascend as descend,
(says he) that a stone is as free to ascend as descend, unless he prove
there is no outward impediment to its ascent, which cannot be proved, for the
contrary is true? Or how proves he that there is no outward impediment to keep
that point of the Loadstone which places it self toward the North, from
turning from the South? First for the stone the case is clear, there is no
other extrinsecal impediment to the stone ascending or descending, but the
Medium thorough which it passes. Now the Medium is supposed to be the same,
that is, the air equally disposed. The air is as easily driven upwards as
downwards; And therefore though the air give some impediment to the motion
upwards, yet it gives the same impediment at least to the motion downwards;
And therefore the impediment being as vincible upwards as downwards, if the
cause of motion were the same, and the presence or absence of extrinsecal
impediments being the same, it follows clearly upon his grounds, that the
stone is as free to ascend as descend. Next for the Loadstone, I prove that
there is no extrinsecal impediment which holds it from turning to the South,
by sense and reason; both mine own, and all other men's, by the common consent
of the World, and by his silence who is not able to pretend any impediment that
is probable, without the stone, except it be in some other body far distant,
which will render the difficulty the same.

His next passage is ridiculous. An Hawke A Hawke, says he, is free to fly
when her wings are plucked.
wants liberty to fly when her wings are tied, but it is absurd to say, she
wants liberty to fly when her wings are plucked. So she wanted no liberty to
fly when she was naked and newly hatched; So he himself wants no liberty to
fly from hence to China. He says, Men that speak English, use to say when her
wings are plucked, that she cannot fly. So they use to say likewise when her
wings are tied. He demands, Whether it be not proper language to say a bird
or a beast are set at liberty from the cage wherein they were imprisoned? What
it may be at another time, when men are discoursing upon another subject, is
not mateterial at this time, and as to this subject which we are about, it is
most impertinent and improper. He himself as partial as he is, cannot think
that this liberty is any thing to that moral liberty which renders a man
capable of reward or punishment, any more that a Tailors measure is to the
measure of motion.

I said and say again, That nothing can begin to be without a cause, and that
nothing Abegining of being and acting.
can cause it self. Yet I say many things do begin to act of themselves. This
(he says) is to contradict my self, because I make the action to begin without
a cause. This is not the first time that he has noted this for a
contradiction. I shall sooner salve the contradiction, than he save his credit.
As if the Agent and the Action were the same thing? Or as if the Agent was not
the cause of the Action? Or as if there were any consequence in this; The Agent
cannot begin to be of himself, therefore he cannot begin to act of himself? Or
he cannot cause himself, therefore he cannot cause his action. Nothing can
cause it self, but that which is caused by one thing, may cause another.
Whereas he adds, That it has been proved formerly, that every sufficient
cause is a necessary cause, and that is but Iargon to say free causes determine
themselves, it is but a puff of his vain glorious humor. He has made nothing
to appear but his own ignorance and mistakes.

In the later end of this Section, I made His answer to some demands.
bold to make some serious demands to Mr. Hobs, which did not at all reflect
upon him in particular, but at those natural notions which are common to all
mankind.

The first demand was, Whether he does not find by experience that he does many
things which he might have left undone if he would, etc. He answers, Yet if
he would, but he makes it impossible for him to have had any other will. So he
does as good as tell us, that he might have done them upon an impossible
condition or supposition; as he himself might have flown over sea if he had had
a pair of wings. This is a contradiction indeed implied; first to say he might
have done otherwise, and then to add an impossible condition which makes his
proposition negative. I am sure it is not fairly done to avoid the scope and
meaning of the demand.

The second question was, Whether he do not some things out of mere animosity
and will without regard to the direction of right reason, etc. He answers,
This question was in vain, unless I thought my self his confessor. No, it is
enough, I desire not to intrude into his secrets.

My third demand (as he says) was, Whether he writ not this defense of
necessity against liberty, only to show that he will have a dominion over his
own actions. He answers, No, but to show that he had no dominion over his
will, and this at my request. My request was, That what he did upon this
subject, should rather be in writing than by word of mouth. It seems that I
had the dominion over his will. So might I come to be questioned for all his
Paradoxes. The truth is, This was no distinct question, but a Corollary of the
second question.

My third demand was, Whether he be not angry with those who draw him from his
study, or cross him in his desires, and why he is angry with them, (if they be
necessitated to do what they do) any more than he is angry with a sharp winter,
etc. This is wholly omitted by him.

The last demand was, Whether he do not sometimes blame himself, and say, O
what a fool was I, to do thus, or thus; Or with to himself, O that I had been
wise, and why he does this if he were irresistibly necessitated to do all
things that he does. He might as well have wished, O that I had not breathed,
or O what a fool was I to grow old. To this he answers nothing, but subtle
questions, and full of Episcopal gravity; And that he thinks in this question,
I will appear the greater fool; supposing that I meant to put the fool upon
him, which I profess my self to be innocent of; as he might have found by
these words inserted among the questions, Which wise men find in themseves
sometimes. Though I jest sometimes with his cause, or his arguments, I do not
meddle with his person, further than to condemn his vainglorious presumption,
to arrogate so much to himself. Though I have not half so great an opinion of
him as he has of himself, yet I wish his humilility were answerable to his
wit. Thus of four questions he has quite omitted one, neglected another,
refused to answer a third, and answered the fourth contrary to the scope of the
question.

Castigations of the Animadversions, Number. 34.
HIs bragging humor will not leave him, he still forgets Epictetus his
sheep. He says When I shall have read over his Animadversions, Number. 31. I will
think otherwise, whatsoever I will confess. Male ominatis parcito verbis. I
should sooner turn Manichee, and make two Gods, one of good, the other of evil,
than to make the true God to be the cause of all evil. But there is no danger
either of the one or of the other. I have read over his Animadversions, Number.
31. I have weighed them, and I profess I find nothing in them worthy of a
Divine, or a Philosopher, or an ingenious person, who made a sad inquisition
after truth, nor any thing that does approach within a German mile of the cause
in controversy. And so I leave him to the Castigations.

That his two instances of casting ambs ace and raining to morrow, are
impertinent, appears by these two reasons, First the question is of free
actions, these two instannes are of contingent actions. Secondly the question
is of antecedent necessity, these instances are of an hypothetical necessity.
And though I used the beauty of the World as a Medium to prove liberty, wherein
contingency is involved, yet this does not warrant him to give over the
principal question, and to start and pursue new questions at his pleasure. But
let him be of good comfort, be they pertinent or impertinent, they shall not be
neglected.

Because I would not blonder as he does, I distinguished actions into four
sorts. First, The actions of free Agents. Secondly, The actions of free and
natural Agents mixed. Thirdly, The actions of bruit beasts. Fourthly, The
actions of natural inanimate causes. Of these four sorts the first only
concerns the question, and he according to his custom quite omitteth it; yet
it was of more moment and weight, than all he says in this Section put
together. [A man proportioneth his time each day, and allotteth so much to his
devotions, so much to his study, so much to his diet, so much to his
recreations, so much to necessary or civil visit, so much to his rest. He that
will seek for I know not what necessary causes of all this without himself,
(except that good God, who has given him a reasonable soul) may as well seek
for a necessary cause of the Egyptian Pyramides among the Crocodiles of Nilus.]
This distinction of a man's time, is an act of dominion, done on purpose to
maintain his domion over his actions, against the encroachments of sensual
delights.

He says here upon the by, That he knows no action that proceeds from the
liberty of Free to do if he will, yet not free to will is against law and
Logic. Number. 3.
man's will. And again, A man's will is something, but the liberty of his will is
nothing. Yet he has often told us, That a man is free to do if he will, and
not to do if he will. If no action proceed from the liberty of the will, then
how is a man free to do if he will. Before he told us, He is free to do a thing
that may do it if he have the will to do it, and may forbear it if be have the
will to forbear it. If the liberty of the will be nothing, then this
supposition, If he have the will, is nothing, but an impossibility. And here to
all that I have said formerly against that frivolous distinction, I shall add
an undoubted rule both in law and Logic. A conditional proposition, having an
impossible condition annexed to it, is equipollent to a simple negative. He who
is free to write if he will, if it be impossible for him to will, is not free
to write at all, no more than he is free to will. But this Castle in the air
has been beaten down often enough about his ears.

Where I say that [contingent actions do proceed from the indetermination or
contingent concurrence of natural causes] my intention was not to exclude
contingent determination, but necessary determination according to an antecdent
necessity, which he has been so far from proving unanswerably, that he has as
good as yielded the cause, in his case of Ames ace, by making the necessity to
be only upon supposition. Number. 3.


Concerning mixed actions partly free and partly necessary, he says, That for
proof of them, I instance in a tile falling from an house which breaks a man's
head, How often must I tell him, that I am not now proving, but answering that
which he produces? He may find proofs enough to content him, or rather to
discontent him, in twelve Sections together, from the fifth to the eighteenth:
And upon the by thoroughout the whole book. He who proves that election is
always inter plura, and cannot consist with antecedent determination to one,
proves that that man who did elect or choose to walk in that street, at that
very time when the stone fell, though he knew not of it, was not antecedently
necessitated to walk there: And if any one of A necessary effect requires all
necessary causes.
all those causes which concur to the production of an effect be not
antecedently necessary, then the effect is not antecedently necessary, for no
effect can exceed the virtue of its cause.

He says, I should have proved that such contingent actions are not
antecedently necessary, by a concurrence of natural causes, though a little
before I granted they are. First he does me wrong, I never granted it, either
before or after. It is a foul fault in him to mistake himself, or his
adversary, so often. Secondly, it is altogether improper and impertinent to our
present controversy. Let him remember what he himself said. If they (the
instances of casting ambs ace and raining to morrow) be impertinent to his
opinion of the liberty of man's will, he does impertinently to meddle with them.
Not so neither by his leave. Though I refuse to prove them formally, or write
Volumes about them, yet I do not refuse to answer any thing which he does or
can produce. Such is his argument which follows immediately. Whatsoever is
produced by concurrence of natural causes, was antecedently determined in the
cause of such concurrence, though contingent concurrence. He adds, That
though I perceive it not, concurrence and contingent concurrence are all one.
It may be in his Dialect, which differs from the received Dialect of all
Scholars, but not in the Dialect of wiser and learneder men. To his argument,
(pardoning his confounding of natural and voluntary causes) I answer, That if
he speak of the immediate adaequate cause as it is a cause in act, without
doubt he says truth, Causa proxima in actu posita, impossible est non s^qui
effectum. But he told us of a necessary connection of all causes from eternity,
and if he make not this good, he says nothing. If he intend it in this sense,
I deny his assertion, That whatsoever is produced by concurrence of natural
causes, was antecedently determined from eternity. As for instance that the
generation of a monster which nature or the Agent never intended, was necessary
from eternity, or necessary before the contingence was determined.

Concerning the individual actions of brute beasts, that they should be
necessitated to every act they do from eternity; As the be (for example) how
often she shall hum in a day, and how often she shall fly abroad to gather
thyme, and whither, and how many flowers precisely she must suck, and no more,
and such like acts; I had reason to say I see no ground for it. Yet the least
of all these acts is known to God, and subject to his disposition. He tells
us, That he has pointed out the ground in the former discourse. If he have, it
is as the blind Senator (of whom I told him formerly) pointed the wrong way.
All his intimations have received their answers. But whereas I made an
objection to my self, Are not two sparrows sold for a farthing? Math. 10. 29.
and one of them shall not fall to the ground without your father. He does not
deal clearly to urge mine own objection, and conceal my answer. He does not
say, which your father casts not down, or which your father does not
necessitate to fall, but without your father; That is, without your fathers
knowledge, without his protection, without the influence of his power, or which
is exemted from your fathers disposition.

The last sort of actions are the natural actions of inanimate creatures, which
have not the least pretense to liberty, or so much as spontaneity, and
therefore were declined by me as impertinent to this question. Out of my words
concerning these he argues thus. If there be a necessary connection of all
natural causes from the beginning, then there is no doubt but that all things
happen necessarily: But there is a necessary connection of all natural causes
from the beginning.

First I deny his consequence, and by it, he (who is so busy to take other
men's heights in Logic, wherein he never meddled yet but he was baffelled) may
have his own height taken by them that are so disposed. There is scarce a
freshman in the University but could have taught him the difference between
causa efficiens physica, and voluntaria, the one acting by necessity of nature,
the other freely according to deliberation. The former cannot defer nor
moderate its act, nor act opposite actions indifferently, but the later can. So
though a necessary connection of all natural causes were supposed, yet it
infers not a necessary connection of all voluntary causes.

Secondly, I deny his assumption, that there is a necessary connection of all
natural causes from the beginning, for proof whereof he produces nothing, nor
is able to produce any thing. All he says he alleges out of me, That it
deserves further examination. And from thence according to his wild roving
imaginations, he draws consequences from the staff to the corner, that have
not the least grain of salt, or weight in them. As these, Hitherto he knows not
whether it be true or no. And consequently all his arguments hitherto have been
of no effect, nor has he showed any thing to prove, that elective actions are
not necessitated. Thus his pen runs over without time or reason. He that
would learn to build Castles in the air, had best be his Apprentise. The truth
is, I was not willing to go out of mine own profession, and therefore desired
to hold my self to the question of liberty, without meddling with contingency;
But yet with the same reservation that the Romans had in their Military
Discipline; nec sequi, nec fugere, not to seek other questions, nor yet to thu^
them, if they were put upon me.

And now we are come to his two famous His instance of Ambs ace Number. 31, 32.
instances of casting ambs ace, and raining or not raining to morrow. I said
that I had already answered what he produces to prove all sufficient causes to
be necessary causes. Now says he, It seems that distrusting his former
answer, he answers again. O memory! he did not urge them in that place,
neither did I answer them at all in that place. But though he had urged them,
and I answered them there, yet he repeating them, or enforcing them here, would
he not have me to answer him? It is true that in another Section, upon the by,
he has been gravelled about his ambs ace, and therefore he treads tenderly
Number. 3.
still upon that foot. He says, I bring no other argument to prove the cast
thrown not to be necessarily thrown, but this that the caster did not
deliberate. By his leave it is not truly said. I showed undeniably, that the
necessity upon which he builds is only hypothetical. I enumerated all the
causes which were or could be recited to make the necessity, As the dice, the
positure of the casters hand, the measure of the force, the positure of the
table, etc. And showed clearly that there was not the least grain of antecedent
necessity in any of them, which he is not able to answer, and therefore he does
well to be silent.

But if I had urged nothing else, This alone had been sufficient to prove the
caster a free Agent from his own principles. A free Agent (says he) is he that
has not done deliberating. He who never began to deliberate has not done
deliberating. There can be no necessity imaginable why the caster should throw
these dice rather than those other, or cast into this table rather than that,
or use so much force and no more, but the casters will, or mere chance. The
caster never deliberated nor so much as thought, of any one of these things:
And therefore it is undeniably apparent, that there was no necessity of casting
ambs ace, but only upon supposition, which is far enough from antecedent
necessity.

But he pleads further, That from our ignorance of the particular causes that
concurring make the necessity, I infer that there was no such necessity at all,
which is that indeed which has deceived me and all other men in this question.
Whose fault was it then first to make this an instance, and then to plead
ignorance? Before he was bold to reckon up all the causes of the antecedent
necessity of this cast, and now when he is convinced that it is but a necessity
upon suppositon, he is fain to plead ignorance. He who will not suffer the
Loadstone to enjoy its attractive virtue, without finding a reason for it in a
fiddle-string, as Scoggin sought for the Hare under the leads, as well where
she was not, as where she was, is glad to plead ignorance about the necessary
causes of ambs ace. Whereas my reasons did evince not only that the causes are
unknown, but that there are no such causes antecedently necessitating that
cast. Thus, If any causes did necessitate ambs ace antecedently, it was either
the caster, but he thought not of it; or the dice, but they are square, no more
inclinable to one cast than another, or the positure of the table, but the
caster might have thrown into the other table, or the positure of the hand, but
that was by chance; or the measure of the force, but that might have been
either more or less, or all of these together. But to an effect antecedently
necessary, all the causes must be antecedently determined; where not so much as
one of them is antecedently determined, there is no pretense of antecedent
necessity: Or it is some other cause that he can name, but he pleads
ignorance. Yet I confess the deceit lies here, but it is on the other side,
in the ignorant mistaking of an hypothetical necessity, for absolute antecedent
necessity.

And here according to the advice of the Poet, Nec deus inter sit nisi dignus
vindice nodus
Inciderit --
He calls in the fore knowledge of God to his aid, as he does always when he
finds himself at a loss; but to no purpose. He himself has told us, That it
cannot be truly said, that the foreknowledge of God should be a cause of any
thing, seeing foreknowledge is knowledge, Number. 11.
and knowledge depends on the existence of the thing known. God sees not
future contingents in an antecedent certainty which they have in their causes,
but in the events themselves, to which Gods infinite knowledge does extend it
self. In order of time one thing is before another, one thing is after another,
and accordingly God knows them in themselves to be one before another. But
his knowledge is no beginning, no expiring act. Nothing is past, nothing is to
come, but all things present to his knowledge, even those things which are
future, with the manner of their futurition.

His casting ambs ace has been unfortunate His other idstance of raining or
not raining to morrow.
to him, he will speed no better with his shower of rain. In the entrance to
my answer, and as it were the stating of the cause, I showed that rain was more
contingent in our Climate, than in many other parts of the World, where it is
almost as necessary as the seasons of the year. I do not find so much weight in
his discourse, as to occasionme to alter one word, for which I could have
produced authors enough, if I had thought it needful; Deuteronomy 11. 14. Jer. 5. 24.
Hos. 6. 3.
but I alleged only the Scriptures, mentioning the former and the later rain.
And even this is objected to me as a defect or piece of ignorance. I thought
(says he) he had known it by experience of some Travelers, but I see he only
gathers it from that place in Scripture; as if the Scripture alone were not
proof good enough, except it be confirmed by the experience of Travelers.

From this preparatory discourse he frames two Arguments, and puts them into
my Character, as if they were my Reasons. In our Climate, the natural causes do
not produce rain so necessarily at set times, as in some Eastern Countries,
therefore they do not produce rain necessarily in our Climates, then when they
do produce it. Again, We cannot say so certainly and infallibly, it will rain
to morrow, or it will not rain to morrow; therefere it is not necessary either
that it should rain, or that it should not rain to morrow. Such reasons as
these do become him better than me; I disclaim them, and to use his own phrase,
must take them for untruths, until he cite the place where I have made any
such ridiculous inferences, which conclude against hypothetical necessity,
which we our selves do establish.

But I come to his arguments, which I shall set down in his own words, for it
cannot be worse disposed, to let us see the great skill of this new controller
in Logic; It is necessary that to morrow it shall rain or not rain, if
therefore it be not necessary that it shall rain, it is necessary it shall not
rain; otherwise it is not necessary that the proposition it shall rain, or it
shall not rain, should be true. To this I answered, That it was most false,
that the proposition could not be necessarily true, except one of the members
were necessarily true, which is a truth evident and undeniable. This answer I
illustrated thus; A conjunct proposition may have both parts false, and yet the
proposition be true, As if the Sun shine, it is day; is a true proposition at
midnight. Logicians use to give another example, If an Ass fly, then he has
wings: The proposition is true, but both the parts are false: Neither does the
Ass fly, neither has he wings. To my direct answer he replyeth not a word,
either by denial or distinction; and so by his silence yields the
controversy. But to my illustration he excepteth thus. First, What has a
conjunct proposition to do with this in question, which is disjunctive? By his
good favor, there are two propositions in his argument, the former is
disjunctive, which is not questioned at all by either party, either for the
truth of it, or the necessity of it, namely, Either it will rain to morrow, or
it will not rain to morrow. His second proposition is conjunctive, and not
disjunctive, namely, If therefore it be not necessary it shall rain, it is
necessary that it shall not rain. This conjunctive proposition I deny; and I
deny it upon this evident ground, because as in a conjunctive proposition, both
parts of the proposition may be false, and yet the proposition true, or both
parts true, and yet the proposition false, because the truth or falsehood of the
proposition, depends not upon the truth or falsehood of the parts, but only
of the consequence. So in a disjunctive proposition, the disjunction may be
necessarily true, and yet neither member of the disjunction, be necessarily,
because the truth or falsehood of a disjunctive proposition depends not upon
the necessary truth of either member distinctly considered, but upon the
necessary truth of the disjunction. The reason is evident; in a disjunctive
proposition, nothing is affirmed or denied, either of the one member, or the
other, but only the necessary truth of the disjunction. According to that rule
in Logic, In propositione disjunctiva affirmatio and negatio aestimatur ex
sola conjuctione disjunctiva, cui necesse est addi negationem si debet negativa
esse propositio. Now the disjunction of contradictories is most necessary,
Either it will rain to morrow, or it will not rain to morrow, though neither
part of the contradiction be necessarily true. As for example, A man is to pay
a sum of money, Either he will pay it in gold, or he will not pay it in gold, is
necessarily true, but it is not necessary that he shall pay it in gold, neither
is it necessary that he shall not pay it in gold. Seeing he has it in his
choice to pay it in gold or in silver, or any other coin which is current.
This is so clear, that no man can seriously oppose it, without his own
discredit.

Secondly he says that a conjuctive proposition is not made of two
propositions, as a disjunctive is. What then? First this is altogether
impertinent, and nothing to his purpose. Secondly it is also false. Every
compounded proposition (such as a conjunct proposition is) does either actually
or virtually include two propositions. Indeed, an hypothetical proposition may
sometimes be reduced to a cathegorical, that is, when there are but three
terms; for when there are four terms, it is hardly reducible. What is this to
the question, or to any difference between us? Just which is the way to London?
A sack full of plums. He might do well for his reputation sake, to reduce his
argument into any Scholar like form, either Cathegorical, or hypothetical, or
disjunctive, or any thing. But then the ugliness of it would straight appear.
This is the nearest to his sense that I can contrive it; Either it is necessary
that it shall rain to morrow, or it is necessary that is shall not rain to
morrow; Or this proposition, Either it will rain to morrow, or it will not rain
to morrow, is not necessarily true. I deny the disjunction. Pono quartum, Or
the one of these two (raining or not raining) will happen contingently. The
disjunction is always necessarily true, before either of the members be
determinately or necessaly true.

Whether this proposition, I know that either it will rain to morrew, or it
will not rain to morrow, be a disjunctive proposition, or not, is not material.
It includes a disjunctive proposition in it; and shows plainly that the
certainty of a disjunctive proposition does not depend upon the certainty of
either of the members determinately, but upon the certainty of one of them
indifferently.

He takes great exception at my manner Gods decree consideredactually and
passively.
of expression, that God made his own decrees freely, because whatsoever was
made had a beginning, but Gods decrees are eternal. Besides, Gods decree is his
will, and the Bishop said formerly, that the will of God is God. Although God
being a simple and infinite essence (to speak properly) is not capable of any
manner of composition, or of being perfected any further than he is: Yet to
help our conception, we use to attribute to God such acts and qualities and
perfections, which being spoken after the manner of men, are to be underood
according to the Majesty of God. Such is the notion of Gods decrees. More
particularly, the decrees of God may be taken, and is taken in the Schools two
ways, actively or passively. Actively as it is an act immanent in God: and so
the decree of God is nothing else but Deus decernens, God decreeing. Or else
the decree of God may be taken passively for the execution of this decree, or
the order set by God for the government and disposition of the World, which is
an act done in time, and ad extra, or without the Deity. This executive decree
was that which I intended, as he might easily have perceived if he had pleased.
He himself Number. 11.
says the same, which he dislikes in me; This concourse of causes, whereof
every one is determined to be such as it is, by a like concourse of former
causes, may well be called (in respect they were all set and ordered by the
eternal cause of all things, God Almighty) the decree of God. What difference
is there, whether one say this decree was made, or it was set and ordered, as
he himself says? My argument holds as well the one way as the other. God was
not necessitated to set this order, and yet this distinctive proposition was
always necessarily true, either God will order it thus, or he will not order
it thus.

To my last argument used in this Section, God knows all future possibilities.
he answers nothing but this, If God had made either causes or effects free
from necessity, he had made them free from his own prescience, which had been
imperfection. Which reason besides all the inconsequences thereof, and all the
other absurdities which flow from it, does deny to the infinite knowledge of
God, the knowledge of possibilities and future contingents: Whereas it is most
certain, That God does perfectly know, not only all future contingents, (not
in their causes only, but in themselves) but also all possibilities, upon
supposition of a condition, such as were never to be actually produced, Woe
unto thee Chorazin, Math. 11. 21.
Woe unto thee Bethsaida, for if the mighty woks which were done in you, had
been done in Tire and Sydon, they would have repented long ago in sackcloath
and ashes. To know certainly future possibilities which shall never come into
act, is more than to know future events, though never so contingent, and void
of necessity. Take another instance, Will the men of Keilah deliver me up? Will
Saul come 1 Samuel 23. 11.
down? He will come down, they will deliver thee up: And again, He was speedy
by taken away, least wickedness should alter his understanding.

Castigations of the Animadversions, Number. 35.
HIs first endeavor in this Section is to reduce his argument into better
form; His argument to prove universal necessity answered.
and when all is done, it proves but a Sorites. The only commendation that I
can give it, is this, That the matter and form are agreeable, both stark
naught. Thus he argues, That which is an Agent, works; That which works,
wants nothing requisite to produce the action; and consequently is therefore
a sufficient cause, and if a sufficient cause then also a necessary cause. I
deny his first proposition, That every Agent works. There are causes and
Agents in power as well as in act: But it may be he means an Agent in act;
then he proves the same by it self, That which acts works; and when they
returned, then they came home again. He takes pains to prove that which no man
in his right wits can doubt of.

His second proposition contains such another sublime point of Apodeictical
learning, called idem per idem, the same by the same; That which works
wants nothing requisite to produce the action or the effect it produces. It
may want truth that is requisite to the production of that which it ought to
produce. But it can want nothing to produce that which it does* produce.
Whatsoever acts when it acts does necessarily act what it does act. He is
still stumbling upon that old foolish rule. What is all this to his antecedent
necessity?

His third proposition follows, And consequently is thereof a sufficient cause.
Yes in his canting language, which makes deficience and sufficience to be all
one. Whereunto tends all this? Hitherto he has not advanced one hairs
breadth. But now he uniteth all his force to pull down the Castle of Liberty.
And if a sufficient cause, then also a necessary cause. I denied his
consequence: And gave him a reason for it; otherwise God himself should not be
allsufficient. He replieth, That Gods allsufficience signifies no more than
his omnipotence, and omnipotence signifies no more than the power to do all
things that he will. Yes Gods infinite power and sufficience ought not to be
limited to those things which he does actually will, or which have actual
being; No more than his eternity is commensurable by time. He was sufficient to
raise up children to Abraham of stones, which he never did, and probably never
will do. If God did all which he could do, and could justy do, who was able to
abide it? we were in a wretched condition. A covetous person may have more than
sufficient for his back and his belly, and yet no will to bestow it upon
himself. So he has proved himself a sufficient Agent, sufficient to make this
Sorites, though very unsufficient to prove his intention.

But I took pity on him to see him toil himself to no purpose, and was
contented out of grace and courtesy to admit these two things. First that every
effect in the World has sufficient causes. Secondly, that supposing the
determination of the free and contingent causes, every effect in the World is
necessary, that is necessary upon supposition. But this will do him no good.
Necessity upon supposition is far enough from antecedent necessity. He
objecteth, That necessity is only said truly of somewhat in future. I deny i^.
He proves it thus. Necessary is that which cannot possibly be otherwise. And
possibility is always Possible and impossible all one with T. H.
understood of some future time. Good: Where are his eyes that he cannot
distinguish between possible and not possible? If necessary had been that which
could possibly be otherwise: or if impossibility had always reference to the
future as well as possibility, he had said something. By this argument he might
prove that yesterday is not past, but to come, because it is not possible to
bring back yesterday, and possibility is always understood of the time to come.

But out of pure necessity he is contented to make use of my courtesy. Seeing
he grants so favorably that sufficient causes are necessary causes, I shall
easily conclude from it, that whatsoever those causes do cause are necessary
antecedently. He may easily prove it, if he can make possible and impossible
all one. I gave him an inch, and he takes an ell. I admitted that every effect
in the World is necessary upon supposition, and he takes it for granted, that
they are necessary without supposition. But that is more than I can yield him.
If that be his meaning, he had best stick to his own grounds: But they will
afford him no more relief than my concession. Howsoever thus he argues.

If the necessity of the thing produced, when Remote causes are not together
with the effect.
produced, be in the same instant of time with the existence of its immediate
cause, then also that immediate cause was in the same instant with the cause by
which it was immediately produced. The same may be said of the cause of this
cause, and backward eternally. From whence it will follow, that all the
connection of the causes of any effect from the beginning of the World, are
altogether existent in one and the same instant. It is well that I meet with a
beginning of the World, for I was afraid of those words and so backwards
eternaly. If his Mathematical engines be such as these, he will never prove so
terrible an enemy as Archimedes. He proves that all immediate causes and their
particular distinct effects successively, were together in time at the very
instant of their causation successively since the beginning of the World. But
he lets the question alone, as bad Archers do the But; Whether the first cause
did determine the second to every individual act which it does, necessarily and
without any supposition, and the second the third, and so downward to the last?
Of this he says not a word. Where there is no need of proof he swells with
arguments, where the question is, he is silent. I will show him the palpable
absurdity of his argument in an instance. When Mr. Hobs made his Leviathan, his
Leviathan, and he were necessarily coexistent in the same instant of time: So
likewise when his father did beget him, his father and he were necessarily
coexistent in the same instant of time. The like may be said of his
grandfather, and his great grandfather, and so upwards to the beginning of the
World. Therefore Adams begetting of Seth, had a necessary connection with his
writing of his Leviathan, so as to necessitate him antecedently and inevitably
to write it, and stuff it with Paradoxes. Or thus, A man kindles a fire to warm
himself, The fire and he are necessarily coexistent, and there is necessary
connection between them; Another man steals part of the fire and burns an house
with it, the fire and the conflagration are together, and have a necessary
connection; therefore the kindling of the fire had a necessary connection with
the burning of the house, to render it inevitable. See with what doughty
arguments they use to catch Dotterels.

From hence he concludes, That consequently all the time from the beginning of
the Nor does all time make one instant.
World, or from eternity to this day, is but one instant. Better and better.
Why does he not infer likewise that the sea burns? His premises will sustain
the one, as well as the other. Why will he lose his cause for want of
confidence? If God who is an infinite Essence be free from all variableness
and succession of time, Must he who is but a turning shadow upon the old
Exchange of this World, challenge the same privilege? Because eternity is a
nunc stans, must successive parts of time make one instant or nunc stans? But
he adds, That by this time I know it is not so. He has been spinning a fair
thread, and now like a cursed Cow casts down his meal with his foot. First to
endeavor to prove that it is so, and then confess that it is not so. Neither
can he say, that he proceeds upon my grounds, whilst his own grounds are so
much higher than mine. I make but an hypothetical necessity, which implies
only an accidental connection; He makes an absolute antecedent necessity,
which implies a necessary connection of the whole conjoinct series of causes
and effects.

Castigations upon the Animadversions, Number. 36.
I Cited his sense, that he could add other arguments if he thought it good
Logic. He complains that I mis-recite his words, which are I could add if I
thought it good Logic, the inconvenience of denying necessity, as that it
destroys both the Decrees and Prescience of God Almighty. And are not these
reasons drawn from the Decrees and Prescience of God Arguments? or are they not
his prime arguments? How glad would this man be to find any little pretense of
exception? He distinguishes between absurdities and inconveniences:
Absurdities (he says) are impossibilities, and it is a good form of reasoning
T. H. admits no absurdities but impossibilities.
to argue from absurdities, but not from inconveniences. If all absurdities be
impossibilities, then there are no absurdities in rerum natura, for there can
be no impossibilities. This it is to take the sense of words not from Artists
in their own Arts, but from his own imaginations. By this reason there never
was an absurd speech or absurd action in the World, otherwise absurdities are
not impossibilities. But he has confuted himself sufficiently in this
Treatise. One absurdity may be greater than another, and one inconvenience may
be greater than another; but absurd and inconvenient is the same thing. That is
absurd which is incongruous, unreasonable, not fit to be heard. Truth it self
may accidentally be said in some sense to be inconvenient to some persons at
some times. But neither absurdities nor inconveniences in themselves do flow
from truth. Now let us see what are those incoveniences which he mentions
here. To destroy the decrees and prescience of God Almighty. There can be no
greater absurdities imagined, than these things which he calls
inconveniences. He himself has at the least ten several times drawn arguments
in this Treatise from the prescience of God. Where was his Logic then? or his
memory now? And in this very place where he condemns it as no good form of
reasoning to argue from inconveniences, yet he himself does practice it, and
argues from inconveniences. But he has worn this subject so threed-bare,
without adding either new matter or new ornament, that I will not weary the
Reader with a needless repetition, but refer him to my defense, which I dare
well trust with his Animadversions.

Castigations of the Animadversions, Number. 37.
IT is vain to talk any longer of keeping this controversy secret. Neither do
I regard whether it was made public by his fault or his friends, or who it was
that hanged out the Ivie-bush before it, to beg custom, and procure utterance
for his first fardel of Paradoxes. He thinks it is great confidence in me to
say, that the edge of his discourse was so abated, that it could not easily
hurt any rational man, who was not over much possessed with prejudice. But I
have much more reason to wonder at his transcendent confidence. The people of
China did use to brag that they only had two eyes, The Europaeans one eye, and
all the rest of the World no eyes. But he makes himself to be a very Argus,
all eye, better sighted than either Eagle or Serpent, and all the rest of the
Europaean World to be as blind as Moles or Beetles, like so many changlings or
enchanted persons that had lost their senses. For my part I am more confident
since I see his Animadversions than before. And why should I not be confident
in this cause? Grant me but that there is a God, that he is just, and true, and
good, and powerful, that there is an Heaven, and an hell, and a day of
judgment, that is, rewards and punishments; That good and evil, virtue and
vice, holiness and sin, are any thing more than empty names, That there is any
election in the World, That admonitions and reprehensions, and praises and
dispraises, and laws and consultations do signify any thing, That care and
good endeavors are to be cherished; That all motives to godliness and
religious piety are to be maintained, and I cannot fall in this cause. There is
no doubt Abuses do not flow essentially from good doctrines, as from universal
necessity.
but the best doctrines may be abused, as the doctrine of Gods providence to
idleness, and his patience to procrastination, and his mercy to presumption.
But such abuses do not flow necessarily and essentially from good doctrines, as
they do from universal necessity. He tells us how God deals with those whom
he will bring to a blessed end, and how he hardens others: but he tells us
of nothing that is in man's power under God to do, either to prevent this
hardening, or to attain this blessed end. He talks of a man's examining his
ways, but he teaches withal that a man is either necessitated unresistibly
to examine his ways, or otherwise it is impossible for him to examine them. He
mentions some who reason erroneously, If I shall be saved, I shall be saved,
whether I walk uprightly or no. But he teaches also that they are necessitated
to reason erroneously, and to walk uprightly, and that they cannot avoid it by
all the endeavors which are in their power. For according to his principles,
nothing at all is in their power, either to do, or to leave undone, but only
to cry patience, and shrug up their shoulders, and even this also is determined
antecedently and inevitably to their hands.

So he makes man to be a mere footbal or tennis ball, smitten to and fro by
the second causes, or a top lashed hither and thither. If the watch be wound up
by the Artist, what have the wheels to do to be sollicitous about any thing,
but only to follow the motion which it is impossible for them to resist? When
he first broached this opinion, he did not foresee all those absurd
consequences which did attend it, which might easily happen to a man, who
builds more upon his own imaginations, than other men's experience, and being
once engaged, he is resolved to wade through thick and thin, so long as he is
able.

Castigations of the Animadversions, upon the Postscript. Number. 38.
WE are now come to his last Section, which is as full of empty and
unsignificant vaunts, as any of the former. True real worth uses not to send
forth so many bubbles of vainglory. The question is not whether persons once
publicly engaged in the defense of an opinion, be more tenacious of their
errors, than those who have no such prejudice; which his own example does
confirm sufficiently, and no rational man can doubt of; but whether solid
substantial proofs do work sooner Solid reasons work soonest upon solid
judgments.
upon persons of wit and learning, then upon those who are ignorant, whose
judgments are confused and unable to distinguish between feigned shows, and
real truths. How should he who understands not the right state of the
question, be so likely to judge what reasons are convincing, and what are not,
as he who does understand it? Or he who knows not the distinction between
that necessity which is absolute, and that which is only upon supposition; be
a competent Judge, whether all events be absolutely necessary? He might even as
well tell us that a blind man is more likely to hit the mark, or judge rightly
of colors, then he that has his sight.

He himself does half confess as much, I confess the more solid a man's wit
is, the better will solid reasons work upon him. What is it then that
disgusteth him? It is the addition of that which I call learning, that is to
say, much reading of other men's doctrines, without weighing them with his own
thoughts. When did either I or any man else ever call that learning, to read
Authors without weiging them? Such extravagant expressions become none but
blunderers, who are able to say nothing to the question when it is truly
stated. But I wonder what it is which he calls learning. Nothing but a
fantastic opiniastratie, joined with a supercilious contempt of all other men
that are wiser or learneder than himself, making the private thoughts of
ignorant persons to be the standard and public seal of truth. As the Scholar
thinks, so the bell clinketh. If there were nothing else, this alone (to
except against them who should be both his Jurers and his Judges) were enough
to render him and all his Paradoxes suspected. Let him remember who said,
Learning has no enemy, but ignorance.

If he had ever read those Authors whom he condemns, namely, The Fathers and
Doctors of the Church, his presumption had been somewhat more tolerable,
though too high, But to condemn them all before he ever read any of them,
requires a prophetical light, to which he is no pretender. In the mean time
he would have his Readers believe that what is done by him upon design, merely
to hide his own ignorance, is done out of depth of Judgment. Like the Fox in
the Fable, which having lost his tail by mischance, persuaded all his fellows
to cut of theirs, as unprofitable burdens. The Philosopher divided them into
three ranks: Three sorts of men.
Some who knew good and were willing to teach others, these he said were like
Gods amongst men. Others, who though they knew not much, yet were willing to
learn, these he said were like men among beasts. And lastly, some who knew not
good, and yet despised such as should teach them. These he esteemed as beasts
among men.

Whereas he talks of such as requite those who endeavor to instruct them at
their own entreaty, with reviling terms, although he dictate more willingly
than dispute, where no man may contradict him; yet neither do I take him to be
of the rank of Instructers, before he himself has first learned; nor is he
able to bring so much as one instance of any reviling, or so much as
discourreous language throughout my defense. If his back was galled before, and
that make him over-sensible, and suspicious of an affront, where none was
intended, who can help it? But now he himself having showed so much scorn and
pe^lance in his Animadversions, though I have abstained from all reviling
terms, yet I have tempered my style so, as to let him plainly see, That he is
not so much regarded, not half so formidable an adversary, as he vainly
imagines.

In the next place he sets down eight conclusions which he dreameth that he
has proved in this Treatise. It is good beating of a proud man. Though he be
thrown flat upon his back at every turn, yet he has the confidence to proclaim
his own achievements with a silver trumpet, when they do not deserve to be
piped upon an oaten reed. I will make him a fair offer, If he have proved any
one of them, or be able to prove any one of them, I will yield him all the
rest. Besides the notorious falsehood of them all, the two last are apparently
ridiculous, That the doctrine of liberty is an error that makes men, The
doctrine of liberty makes no ^man careless or thanklesse.
by imagining they can repent when they will, neglect their duties; and
moreover makes them unthankful for Gods graces, by thinking them to proceed
from the natural ability of their own will. The doctrine of liberty from
superstoical necessity, does neither make men truncos nor sacrilegos, neither
stupid blocks void of all activity, nor yet sacrilegiously to rob God of his
honor. We know and acknowledge, that both free will, and the good use of free
will in repentance and all other acts of gratitude toward God, is from God,
and proceeds from grace. These inferences which he makes are no consequences
of our doctrine, but his own drowsy dreams. All men that are not blinded with
prejudice, do see clearly, that it is his desperate doctrine of inevitable
necessity, which makes men to neglect their duties, by teaching them to
belive, that though they be impenitent or unthankful, yet it was not at all in
their power to have been otherwise, they are as they must be, and as God has
ordained and necessitated them to be.

He takes me up for saying unskilfully, that God has no faculties.
they who dispute philosophically of God, ascribe unto him no proper faculties.
Indeed I do not wonder if he who ascribes to God potentialities Number. 24. Q. and
1. Levi. c. 38.
and successive duration, who denies that the divine substance is indivisible,
and says that actus simplicissimus signifies nothing, who makes an
incorporeal substance to be a contradiction, do make him likewise to be
compounded of substance and faculties. But they who penetrate deeper into the
ugly consequences of these bold and blind assertions, who considered that
whatsoever is truly infinite, is not capable of any variation or shadow of
turning by change; and that whatsoever is infinitely perfect in it self, cannot
be further perfected by the supplimental addition of any faculties or
accidents, will not judge my assertion to be unskilful, but his paradoxes to be
dishonorable to the divine nature, and derogatory to the Majesty of God.

His reason of this reprehension is, Because to dispute philosophically is to
dispute by natural reason, and from principles evident from the light of
nature, and to dispute of the faculties and proprieties of the subject whereof
they treat. What, whether they have any faculties or no? that were very hard.
It seems that Christian Philosophers are not Philosophers with him. And why
may not a Philosopher make use of Divine Revelation? but let him not trouble
himself about this. This truth has been sufficiently cleared already by the
light of natural reason. Either the divine essence is infinitely perfect in it
self, or God is not God. And if it be infinitely perfect in it self, it cannot
be further perfected by any faculties.

He says he would fain know of me what improper faculties I ascribe to God, I
ascribe no faculties at all to God, except it be anthropopathetically, as the
Scripture ascribes eyes and hands to God, which must be understood as is
beseeming the Majesty of God. He adds, That I know not how to make it good
that the will and understanding of God are faculties, and yet will have these
words [his understanding and his will are his very essence] to pass for an
axiom of Philosophy. It is true, I know not how to make them faculties in God,
speaking properly; and yet I doubt not of this truth, that Gods understanding
and his will are his very essence. And this very objection shows clearly,
that he neither understands me, nor himself. This axiom that the will and
the understanding of God are his very essence, is a fit medium to prove they
are no faculties, not to prove they are faculties. Quicquid est in Deo est ipse
Deus, Whatsoever is in God, is God; If he have any thing to say against it, why
is he silent?

That God is incomprehensible, and that God is incomprehensible.
his nature can neither be expressed nor conceived perfectly by mortal men, is
a truth undeniable, not to be doubted of. How should finite reason be able to
comprehend an infinite perfection? And therefore they who do search too
curiously into the Majesty of God, or define his nature too sawcily and
presumptiously, are justly to be reprehended. The pipe can convey the water no
higher than the fountains head. But on the other side, seeing the invisible
things of him, that is, his eternal power and Godhead are clearly seen Romans 1.
^0.
from the creation of the world. And seeing he Psalm. 119.
has given us his word to be a light unto our Yet so far as we can, we are
obliged to search after him.
feet, and a lanthorn unto our paths, not to endeavor soberly and humbly to
know God, so far as he is represented to us by the Creatures, and revealed unto
us in the Scriptures, to the end we may glorify him as God, and help others to
know him and glorify him aright, is inexcusable ingratitude. It is not then
simply the inquiring into, or discoursing of the nature of God, but the
transgressing of the right manner and due bounds of our enquiry, which is
unlawful. The fathers disputed well from the nature of God against the
Anthropomorphites. So did St. Paul against the idolotrous Athenians, For as
much as me are the off spring of God, and live Act. 17. 24.
and move and have our being in him and from him, we ought not to think that
the Godhead is like unto gold and silver, or stone graven with art. I
acknowledge that though all possible perfection ought to be ascribed to God,
yet the To admit that God is infinite, is enough to confute T. H.
safest way to express him is by negative attributes. Admit but one negative
attribute, which all men must admit, and do admit, that believe a God; and I
will easily evince all the rest from thence, that is, That he is actually
infinite, or an indivisible unity of infinite perfection. If Gods being be
infinite, then it is not by successive duration. In successive duration,
something is added every minute; but to that which is infinite, nothing can be
added. Again, if God be actually infinite, then he is not divisible nor
materiate, nor corporal, nor has parts without parts: An aggravation of finite
parts, cannot make up an infinite being. If God be actually infinite, then his
understanding and his will are not distinct faculties, then his goodness and
his wisdom, and his justice, and his truth, are not distinct qualities. For if
his will be without his understanding, or his justice without his wisdom, then
his understanding and his wisdom are not infinite, for that only is infinite,
without which nothing is or can be. It is not therefore enough to ascribe unto
God whatsoever is honorable, unless we do it in an honorable manner, that
is, infinitely; and that we can never do, but by making him an indivisible
unity of infinite being and perfection. Not accidental, but essential, or
transcendent perfection. He who calls God most perfect, (though T. H. see it
not) comes short of that honor which is due to God. Most perfect is but a
degree of comparison. But he who calls him perfection it self, acknowledges
that all the perfection of the Creatures is by participation of his infinite
perfection. Such errors as these formerly recited, do deserve another manner
of refutation; and when he is in his lucide intervalles, he himself
acknowledges what I say to be true, That God is incomprehensible and
immaterial. And he himself proves so much from this very attribute of God,
that he is infinite, Ci. c. 15. s. 14. Figure is not attributed to God, for
every figure is finite. Neither can he be comprehended by us, for whatsoever we
conceive is finite; nor has he parts, which are attributed only to finite
things; nor is be more than one, there can be but one infinite.

Whereas I called hell the true Tophet, he tells us gravely, That Tophet was
a place Tophet.
not far from the walls of Jerusalem, and consequently on the earth; Adding
after his boasting manner, That he cannot imagine what I will say to this in my
answer to his Leviathan, unless I say that by the true Tophet in this place,
is meant a not true Tophet. Whosoever answers his Leviathan will be more
troubled with his extravagancies, than with his arguments. Does he not know
that almost all things happened to them as figures? There may be a true
mystical Tophet as well as a literal; And there is a true mystical Gehenna or
Valley of Hinnon, as well as a literal. He that should say that Christ is the
true Paschal Lamb, or the Church the true Jerusalem, or John Baptist the true
Elias, may well justify it, without saying, That by the true Paschal Lamb is
meant no true Paschal Lamb, or by the true Jerusalem, no true Jerusalem, or
by the true Elias, no true Elias. What poor stuff is this?

And so he concludes his Animadversion with a rapping Paradox indeed. True
religion True Religion consists not in obedience to Princes.
consists in obedience to Christ's Lieutenants, and in giving God such honor
both in Attributes and actions, as they in their several Lieutenancies shall
ordain. That Sovereign Princes are Gods Lieutenants upon earth, no man
doubts, but how come they to be Christ's Lieutenants with him? who teaches
expressly, that the Lev. c. 42.
kingdom of Christ is not to begin till the general Resurrection? His errors
come so thick, that it is difficult to take notice of them all; yet if he had
resolved to maintain his Paradox, it had been ingenuously done to take notice
of my reasons against it in this place.

First, what if the Sovereign Magistrate shall be no Christian himself? Is an
Heathen or Mahumetan Prince the Lieutenant of Christ, or a fit infallible Judge
of the controversies of Christian Religion? Are all his Christian subjects
obliged to sacrifice to idols, or blaspheme Christ upon his command? Certainly
he gives the same latitude of power and right to Heathen and Mahumetan Princes
that he does to Christian. There is the same submition to both, I authorize and
give up my right of governing my self to this man, whom he Lev. c. 17, 18.
makes to be a mortal God. To him alone he ascribes the right to allow and
disallow of all doctrines, all forms of worship, all miracles, all
revelations. And most plainly in the 42. and 43. Chapters of his Leviathan,
where he teaches obedience to infidel Princes in all things, even to the
denial of Christ, to be necessary by the Law of God and nature.

My second reason in this place was this. What if the Magistrate shall command
contrary to the Law of God? must we obey him rather than God? He confesses,
That Christ ought to be obeyed rather than his Lieutenant upon earth. This is a
plain concession, rather than an answer. But he further adds, That the
question is not who is to be obeyed, but what be his commands? Most vainly. For
if true Religion do consist in obedience to the commands of the Sovereign
Prince, then to be truly religiou^ it is not needful to inquire further than
what he commands. Frustra fit per plura quod fier^ potest per pauciora.
Either he must make the Sovereign Prince to be infallible in all his commands
concerning Religion, which we see by experience to be false, and he himself
confesses, that they may command their subjects Lev. c. 42.
to deny Christ; or else the authority of the Sovereign Prince does justify to
his subjects whatsoever he commands, and then they may obey Christ's Lieutenant
as safely without danger of punishment as himself.

My third reason was this. If true Religion do consist in obedience to the
commands of the Sovereign Prince, then the Sovereign Prince is the ground and
pillar of truth, not the Church. But the Church is the ground and pillar of
truth, not the Sovereign Prince. These things write I unto thee, etc. that thou
1 Timothy 3. 14.
may know how thou oughest to behave thy self in the house of God, which is
the Church of the living God, the power and ground of truth. What the Church
signifies in this place may be demonstratively collected, both from the words
themselves, wherein he calls it the house of God, which appellation cannot be
applied to a single Sovereign, much less to a Heathen Prince, as their
Sovereign then was. And likewise by the things written, which were directions
for the ordering of Ecclesiastical persons.

The last Argument used by me in this place, was ad hominem, Why then is T. H.
of a different mind from his Sovereign and from the laws of the Land concerning
the Attributes of God, and the religious worship which is to be given to him?
The Canons and Constitutions and Articles of the Church of England, and their
Discipline and form of Divine Worship, were all confirmed by Royal authority.
And yet Mr. Hobbes made no scruple to assume to himself, that which he denies
to all other subjects, the knowledge of good and evil, or of true and false
religion, And a judgment of what is consonant to the Law of Nature and
Scripture, different from the commands of his Sovereign and the judgment of
all his fellow Subjects, as appears by his book De cive, printed in the year
1642. Neither can he pretend that he was then a local Subject to another
Prince, for he differed more from him in Religion, than from his own natural
Sovereign.

This Paradox has been confuted before, Number. 14.
and some of those gross absurdities which flow from it represented to the
Reader, to all which he may add these following reasons.

First, true Religion cannot consist in any thing which is sinful; But
obedience to Sovereign Princes may be sinful. This is proved by the example of
Jeroboam, who established idolatry in his kingdom. And the Text says, this
thing became a sin. It may be he will say, 1. King. 12. 30.
this idolatrous worship was a sin in Jeroboam, not in the people, who obeyed
him. But the Text takes away this evasion, branding him ordinarily with this
mark of infamy, Jeroboam the son of Nebat who made Israel to sin. 1 King. 22.
52.


Secondly, true Religion cannot consist in obedience to contradictory commands.
But the commands of Sovereign Princes are often contradictory one to another.
One commands to worship Christ, another forbids it. One forbids to
offer sacrifice to idols, another commands it. Yea the same person may both
forbid idolatry in general, and yet authorize it in particular. Or forbid it by
the public laws of the Country, and yet authorize it by his personal commands.

Thirdly, true Religion is always justified in the sight of God. But obedience
to the commands of Sovereign Princes is not always justified in the sight of
God. This is clearly proved out of his own express words. Whatsoever is
commanded by the Sovereign power, is ^ev. c. 22.
as to the Subject, (though not so always in the sight of God) justified by
their command. Whence it is evident by his own confession, that the wicked
commands of Sovereign Princes are not justified by their Royal authority, but
are wicked and repugnant to the Law of God. And consequently that of the
Apostle has place here, Whether it be right Act. 4. 19.
in the sight of God to hearken unto you more than unto God, judge ye. True
Religion has always reference unto God.

Fourthly, true Religion does not consist in obedience to any laws whatsoever
which are repugnant to the Moral Law of God, or to the law of Nature. This
Proposition is granted by himself. The laws of nature are immutable De Cive e.
3. Number. 29. and 31. Lev. c. 29. etc. 26.
and eternal. And all Writers do agree that the law of nature is the same with
the moral Law. Again Sovereigns are all Subjects to the law of nature, because
such laws be Divine, and cannot by any man or Commonwealth be abrogated. And
in all things not contrary to the moral Law, that is to say, to the law of
nature, all Subjects are bound to obey that of Divine Law, which is declared to
be so by the laws of the Commonwealth. But the commands of a Sovereign Prince
may be repugnant not only to the Moral Law, or the law of nature, but even to
the laws of the Commonwealth. This assumption is proved four ways. First by
his own confession, It is manifest enough that when a man receives two
contrary commands, and Leviath. c. 34.
knows that one of them is Gods, he ought to obey that and not the other. If
there can be no such contrary commands, then it is not manifest, nor yet true.
Secondly, this is proved by his resolution of two queres. The fist is this;
Whether the City (or the Sovereign Prince) be to De Cive c. 15. Number. 18.
be obeyed if he command directly to do any thing to the contumely of God, or
forbid to worship God. To which he answers directly; non esse obediendam,
that he ought not to be obeyed. And he gives this reason, Because the subjects
before the constitution of the Commonwealth had no right to deny the honor
due unto God, and therefore could transfer no right to command such things to
the commonwealth. The like he has in his Leviathan, Actions which do
naturally C. 31.
signify contumely, cannot by humane power be made a part of Divine Worship.
As if the denial of Christ upon a Sovereigns command, (which he justifies)
were not contumelious to Christ, or as if subjects before the constitution of
the commonwealth had any right themselves to deny Christ. But such palpable
contradictions are no novelties with him. How does true Religion consist in
obedience to the commands of a Sovereign, if his commands may be contumelious
to God, and deny him that worship which is due unto him by the eternal and
immutable law of nature, and if he be not to be obeyed in such commands?

His second question is, If a Sovereign Prince should command himself to be
worshipped with Divine Worship and Attributes, whether he ought to Ibidem.
be obeyed? To which he answers, That although Kings should command it, yet
we ought to abstain from such attributes as signify his independence upon God,
or inmortality, or infinite power, or the like; And from such actions as do
signify the same. As to pray unto him being absent, to ask those things of
him which none but God can give; as rain, and fair weather, or to offer
sacrifice to him. Then true Religion may sometimes consist in disobedience to
the commands of Sovereign Princes.

Thirdly, that the commands of Sovereign Princes in point of Religion may be
contrary to the law of nature, (which needs no new promulgation or reception)
does appear by all those duties internal and external, which by his own
confession nature does enjoin us to perform toward God, and all which may be,
and have been, countermanded by Sovereign Princes, as to acknowledge the
existence of God, his unity, his infiniteness, his providence, his creation of
the World, his De cive, c. 15.
omnipotence, his eternity, his incomprehensibility, his ub quity, To worship
him, and him only with Divine worship, with prays, with thanksgivings, with
oblations, and with all expressions of honor.

Lastly, this is proved by examples. Nebuchadnezar Dan. 3. 4.
commanded to worship a golden image. And Darius made a decree that Dan. 6. 7.
no man should ask any petition of any God or man for thirty days, save of the
King only. Yet the transgression of both these commands of Sovereign Princes
was justified by God as true Religion.

Fifthly, Christ will deny no man before his Father for true Religion; But those
who deny Christ before men, to fulfill the commands of an earthly Prince, he
will deny before his father which is in Heaven. And therefore Christ Math. 10.
33. and 27.
encourages his Disciples against these dangers, which might fall upon them by
disobedience to such unlawful commands. Fear not them which kill the body, but
are not able to kill the soul; but rather fear him which is able to destroy
both body and soul in hell. But Mr. Hobs has found out an evasion for such
Renegadoes. Whatsoever a Subject is compelled to, in obedience to his
Sovereign, and does it not in order to his own mind, but in order to the laws
of his country, that action is not his, but his Sovereigns, nor is it he that
in this case denies Christ before men, but his Governor, and the law of his
Country. If this Fig-leafe would have served the turn, Shedrach, Meshach and
Abednego, needed not to have been cast into the fiery Furnace. For though they
had worshipped the golden image, by this doctrine they had not been idolaters,
but Nebuchadnezar only and his Princes. If this were true, Daniel might have
escaped the Lions Den: If he had forborne his praises to God, Darius had been
faulty, and not he. But these holy Saints were of another mind. I hope though
he might in his baste and passion censure the blessed Martyrs to be fools,
(which were so many, that there were five thousand for every day in the Hierome
Epist. ad Chromat.
year, except the calends of January, when the Heathens were so intent upon
their devotions, that they neglected the slaughter of the poor Christians,) yet
he will not esteem himself wiser than Daniel. Behold thou art Ezekiel. 28. 3.
wiser than Daniel, was an hyperbolical, or rather an ironical expression. With
the heart man believes unto righteousness, and with the Romans 10. 10.
mouth is confession made unto salvation. If a man deny Christ with his mouth,
the faith of the heart will not serve his turn.

Sixthly, Christ denounces damnation to all those who for saving of their
lives do deny their Religion, and promises eternal life to all those who do
seal the truth of their Christian faith with their blood, against the commands
of heathenish Magistrates. Whosoever will save his life shall lose it, and
whosoever will lose his life for my sake shall find it. Christ does not promise
eternal life for violation of true Religion.

Lastly, no Christian Sovereign or Commonwealth did ever assume any such
authority to themselves; Never any subjects did acknowledge any such power in
their Sovereigns; Never any Writer of Politics, either waking or dreaming, did
ever fancy such an unlimitted power and authority in Princes, as this which
he ascribes to them, not only to make, but to justify all doctrines, all
laws, all religions, all actions of their Subjects by their commands; as if God
Almighty had reserved only Sovereign Princes under his own Jurisdiction, and
quitted all the rest of mankind to Kings and Commonwealths. In vain ye worship
me, teaching for doctrine the commandments of men, that is to say, making true
religion to consist in obedience to the commands of men. If Princes were
heavenly Angels, free from all ignorance and passions, such an unlimited power
might better become them. But being mortal men, it is dangerous, least
Phaeton-like, by their violence or unskilfulnesse, they put the whole Empire
into a flame. It were too too much to make their unlawful commands to justify
their Subjects. If the blind lead the blind, both fall into the ditch. He who
imposes unlawful commands, and he who obeys them, do both subject themselves
to the judgments of God. But if true religion do consist in active obedience
to their commands, it justifies both their Subjects and themselves. True
religion can prejudice no man.

He takes upon him to refute the distinction of obedience, into active and
passive, As De Cive c. 14. Active and passive obedience.
if a sin against the law of nature could be expiated by arbitrary punishments
imposed by men. Thus it happens to men who confute that which they do not
understand. Passive obedience is not for the expiation of any fault, but for
the maintenance of innocence. When God commands one thing, and the sovereign
Prince another, we cannot obey them both actively; therefore we choose to obey
God rather than men, and yet are willing for the preservation of peace to
suffer from man, rather than to resist. If he understood this distinction well,
it has all those advantages which he fancieth to himself in his new platform
of government, without any of those inconveniences which do attend it. And
whereas he intimates that our not obeying our Sovereign actively is a sin
against the law of nature, meaning by the violation of our promised obedience,
it is nothing but a gross mistake; no Subjects ever did, nor ever could make
any such pact, to obey the commands of their Sovereign actively, contrary to
the law of God or nature.

This reason drawn from universal practice was so obvious, that he could not
miss to make it an objection, The greatest objection is that of the practice,
when men ask where and when Lev. c. 20. Universal practice against him
such power has by Subjects been acknowledged. A shrewd objection indeed, which
required a more solid answer, then to say, That though in all places of the
World men should lay the foundation of their houses on the sand, it could not
thence be inferred that so it ought to be. As if there were no more difficulty
in founding and regulating a Commonwealth, then in distinguishing between a
loose sand and a firm rock, or as if all Societies of men, of different
tempers, of different humors, of different manners, and of different
interests, must of necessity be all ordered after one and the same manner. If
all parts of the World after so long experience do practice the contrary to
that which he fancieth, he must give me leave to suspect that his own grounds
are the quicksands, and that his new Commonwealth is but a Castle founded in
the air.

That a Sovereign Prince within his own The just power of Priences.
dominions, is custos utriusque tabulae, the keeper of both the Tables of the
Law, to see that God be duly served, and justice duly administered between man
and man, and to punish such as transgress in either kind with civil
punishment; That, he has an Architectonical power to see that each of his
Suctjects do their duties in their several callings, Ecclesiastics as well as
Seculars; That the care and charge of seeing that no doctrine be taught his
Subjects, but such as may consist with the general peace, and the authority to
prohibit seditious practices and opinions do reside in him; That a Sovereign
Prince owes no account of his actions to any mortal man; That the Kings of
England in particular have been justly declared by Act of Parliament Supreme
Governors in their own kingdoms, in all causes, over all persons, as well
Ecclesiastical as Civil, is not denied, nor so much as questioned by me.
Otherwise a kingdom, or a Commonwealth should be destitute of necessary means
for its own preservation. To all this I do readily assent, all this I have
vindicated upon surer grounds than those desperate and destructive principles
which he supposes.

But I do utterly deny that true religion does consist in obedience to
Sovereign Magistrates, or that all their injunctions ought to be obeyed, not
only passively, but actively, or that he is infallible in his laws and
commands, or that his Sovereign authority does justify the active obedience of
his Subjects to his unlawful commands. Suppose a King should command his Judges
to set Naboth on 1 King. 21. 9.
high among the people, and to set two sons of Belial before him, to bear
witness against him, saying, Thou did blaspheme God and the King, and then
carry him out and stone him, that he may dye. The regal authority could neither
justify such an unlawful command in the King, nor obedience in the Judges.
Suppose a King should set up a golden Image, as Nebucadnezar did, and command
all his Subjects to adore it, his command could not excuse his Subjects from
idolatry, much less change idolatry into true religion.

His answer to the words of Peter and John do signify nothing. The High Priest
Acts 4. 19.
and his Council commanded the Apostles not to teach in the name of Jesus. Here
was sufficient humane authority, yet say the Apostles, Whether it be right in
the sight of God to hearken unto you more than unto God, judge ye. The question
was not what were the commands, that was clear enough, what God commanded, and
what man commanded, but who was to be obeyed, which could admit no debate. He
asks What has the Bishop He confesses that Ecclesiastical persons have a
privilege above himself.
to do with what God says to me when I read the Scriptures, more than I have
to do with what God says to him when he reads them? unless he have authority
given him, by him whom Christ has constituted his Lieutenant. First I answer
his question with a question, What if the Bishop have such authority, and he
has not? He cannot deny but the Bishop had such authority, when he had not.
And yet he doubted not even then to interpret the Scriptures contrary both to
the Bishop, and to Christ's Lieutenant. Secondly I answer, That by his own
confession there is a great difference between him and me in this particular,
Our Savior has promised this infallability in those De Cive. c. 17.
things which are necessary to salvation to the Apostles, until the day of
judgment, that is to say, to the Apostles and to Pastors to be consecrated by
them by imposition of hands. Therefore the Sovereign Magistrate, as he is a
Christian, is obliged to interpret the holy Scriptures, when there is question,
about the mysteries of faith by Ecclesiastical persons rightly ordained.
Unless he have such ordination by imposition of hands, I am better qualified
then he is for the interpretation of Scripture, by his own confession.

But he supposes that a Bishop or a Synod of Bishops, should be set up for our
civil Sovereign. A likely thing indeed. Suppose the sky fall, then we shall
have Larks. But to gratify him, let us suppose it. What then? Then that which
I object against him, he could object in the same words against me. So he
might, if I should be so fond as to say that true religion did consist in
obedience to that single Bishop, or that Synod of bishops, as he says that it
does consist in obedience to the Sovereign Prince. He deceives himself, and
mistaketh us, if he think that we hold any such ridiculous opinions. If he
could show that Bishops do challenge an infallability to themselves by divine
right, and which is more than infallability, a power to authorize all their
commands for true religion, he said something to the purpose.

He tells us that he remembers there have been books written to entitle the
Bishops to a divine right underived from the Civil Sovereign. Very likely if
the law of nature do make a divine right. Perhaps a locomotive faculty, or a
liberty of respiration, which all other men do challenge as well as Bishops.
But he means no religion, Why not? They have their holy orders by succession
from the Apostles, not from their civil Sovereigns. They have the power of the
keys by the concession of Christ, Whose sins yet remit they are remitted, whose
sins ye retain they are retained. None can give that to another, which they
have not themselves. Where did Christ give the power of the keys, to the civil
Magistrate?

I was far enough from thinking of Odes, when I writ my defense of liberty.
That which he calls my Ode, was written about a thousand years before I was
born. I cited it only to show the sense of the primitive Christians,
concerning obedience to the unlawful commands of Sovereign Princes, that we
ought to obey God rather than them. And to that it is full. Iussum est Caesaris
ore Gallieni,
Princeps quod colit ut colamus omnes,
Aeternum colo principem dierum;
Factorem dominumque Gallieni.
This put him into such a fit of versifying, that he could not forbear to make
a Parode, such as it is, wherein out of pure zeal (if it were worth taking
notice of) he retains the errors of the press.

And so confounding Regal Supremacy with a kind of omnipotence, and the
external Regiment of the Church with the power of the keys, and jurisdiction in
the inner court of conscience, and foreign usurpations with the ancient rights
and liberties of the English Church, and a stipendiary Schoolmaster (who has
neither title nor right, but the mere pleasure of the master of the family)
with Bishops, who are the successors of the Apostles in that part of their
office which is of ordinary and perpetual necessity, and the Kings proper
council in Ecclesiastical affairs. He concludes his Animadversion with this
fair intimation to Doctor Hamond and me, That if we had gone upon these his
principles, when we did write in defense of the Church of England, against the
imputation of Scisme, quitting our own pretenses of jurisdiction and jus
divinum, we had not been so shrewdly handled, as we have been by an English
Papist. I hope neither the Church of England, nor any genuine son of the
English Church, has complained to him, that the Church has suffered any
disadvantage by our pains; nor our adversaries in that cause boasted to him of
any advantage they have gained; I do rather believe that it is but his own
imagination, without ever reading either party. Why should he interrupt his
sadder meditations with reading such trifles? But for his principles (as he
calls them) I thank him, I will have nothing to do with them, except it be to
show him how destructive they are both to Church and Commonwealth. But this I
believe in earnest, that if we had gone upon his principles, we should not have
made our selves the object of our adversaries pity, but well of their scorn.

In his conclusion, or in his postscript (choose whether you will call it) first
he sets down his censure of my defense, with the same ingenuity and
judgment that he has showed hitherto, that is none at all, which I esteem no
more than a deaf nut. Let the book justify it self. And to the manner of
writing, he bites first, and whines; does an injury and complains. The Reader
will find no railing in my Treatise, nor any of those faults which he
objecteth; I rather fear that he will censure it as too complying with such an
adversary. But he had not then given me so much occasion, as he has done
since, to make him lose that pleasure in reading which he took in writing.

In the next place he presents to the Readers view a large muster of terms
and phrases, such as are used in the Schools, which he calls nonsense, and
the language of the kingdom of darkness, that is all the confutation which he
vouchsafes them. He has served them up often enough before to the Readers
loathing. Let him take it for a warning, wheresoever he renews his complaint,
I shall make bold to renew my story of old Harpaste, who complained that the
room was dark, when the poor Beldam wanted her sight. There is more true
judgment and solid reason in any one of the worst of those phrases which he
derides, then there is in one of his whole Sections.

Thirdly, he cavilleth against a saying of mine which he repeateth thus, He
has said that his opinion is demonstrable in reason, though he be not able to
comprehend how it consists together with Gods eternal prescience, and though
it exceed his weak capacity, yet he ought to adhere to that truth which is
manifest. Whence he concludes after this manner. So to him that truth is
manifest and demonstrable by reason, which is beyond his capacity. Let the
Reader see what an uningenuous adversary he is. In my first discourse of
Liberty I had these words, [we ought not to desert a certain truth because we
are not able to comprehend the certain manner] To which he answers, And I say
the same. In my defense I repeat the same words, adding these, [Such a truth
is that which I maintain, That the will of man in ordinary actions is free from
extrinsecal determination. A truth demonstrable by reason, received and
believed by all the World. And therefore though I be not able to comprehend or
express exactly the certain manner how it consists with Gods eternal
prescience and decrees, which exceed my weak capacity, yet I ought to adhere
to that truth which is manifest.] So first he quarrelleth now with that truth
which formerly he yielded. Secondly, that which I spoke upon supposition
[though I be not able,] he sets down positively in his collection, which is
beyond his capacity. Thirdly, he leaves out the word [exactly.] A man may
comprehend truly that which he does not comprehend exactly. Fourthly, he
omitteth fraudulently these words [the certain manner] A truth may be certain
and demonstrable, and yet the manner of it not demonstrable, or a man may know
several ways of reconciling two truths together: And yet fluctuate in his
judgment to which of them certainly and expressly he ought to adhere. It is
certain that by the force of a man's arm a stone is thrown upwards; And yet the
certain manner how to reconcile this with another truth, That whatsoever acts
upon another body, acts by a touching, is not so easily found out. The
incarnation of Christ is certain, yet the certain manner passes both my
capacity and his. Lastly, I do not say (as he suggesteth,) that that truth
which is demonstrable by reason passes my capacity, but the certain and exact
manner how to reconcile this truth with another truth. Yet there are sundry
ways of reconciling of them; And I have showed him one in the same Section,
which he is not able to refute. See how his discourse hangs together like ropes
of sand. The prescience and decrees of God pass the capacity of mortal man,
therefore the liberty of the will is not demonstrable by reason.

From the hard words and nonsense of the Schools, he passes to my little
Logic and no Philosophy. It skilleth not much what he says, unless he were a
greater clerk. He has passed over a great part of my defense untouched; But I
have not omitted one sentence thoroughout his Animadversions, wherein I could
find any one grain of reason. And among the rest, have satisfied his silly
censures, or ignorant exceptions, in their proper places, and the splinters of
those broken reeds stick in his own fingers.

Before he concludes, he draws up a summary of what he and I have maintained,
very confusedly, most imperfectly, and in part falsely. Methinks it resembles
that unskilful Painter who durst not leave his pictures to the free judgment
of the beholders, unless he writ over their heads, This is a dog, and this is a
bear; we had such a summary or draught of the Controversy in his Fountains of
Arguments, before his Animadversions, as a Proeme. And now we have such another
breveate in the conclusion by way of Epilogue after his Animadversions. He is
very diffident of his cause who stands in need of such Proemes and Epilogues,
and dare not trust the indifferent Reader to choose his own diet, unless he do
first choppe it and chew it for him, and then thrust it down his throat. The
last word may be efficacious with an ignorant multitude, who are like a ship at
Hulle, every wave puts it into a new positure. But more accurate palates do
naucitate and loath such thrice sodden coleworts. I leave the Reader to compare
plea with plea, and proof with proof. And let truth overcome.

Thus he concludes with a short Apology, least the Reader should think that he
has not used me with that respect which he ought, or might have done without
disadvantage to his cause. His only reason is, because divens in their books
and sermons, without answering any of his arguments, have exclaimed against
him, and reviled him for some things delivered by him in his book De Cive. What
does this concern me? No more than the man in the Moon. Yes he says, whereof
the Bishop of Derry is one. Most falsely. I never preached against him, nor
write against his book De Cive, but privately to himself, and then with more
respect than either he or it deserved. But his meaning was not by this Apology
to make me any reparation, but to deter others from meddling with him, least
he should make examples of them as he boasts that he has done of me. Beware
Reader he bears hay on his horn^. If he have gained any thing by his
disrespect, much good may it do him. I do not envy him. Let the Reader judge.
And if he have any spark of ingenuity left in him, let himself judge, whether
he has made an example of me or of himself. Or if he like it better, let him
thrust his head into a bush, and suppose that no body sees his errors,
because he is not willing to take notice of them himself.

The catching OF LEVIATHAN, OR THE GREAT WHALE.

Demonstrating, out of Mr. Hobs his own Works, That no man who is thoroughly an
Hobbist, can be a good Christian, or a good Commonwealths man, or reconcile
himself to himself.

Because his Principles are not only destructive to all Religion, but to all
Societies; extinguishing the Relation between Prince and Subject, Parent and
Child, Master and Servant, Husband and Wife: and abound with palpable
contradictions.

By John Bramhall, D. D. and Bishop of Derry.

Prove. 12. 19. The lip of truth shall be established for ever, but a lying
tongue is but for a moment.

London, Printed by E. T. for John Crook, at the sign of the Ship in Paul's
Churchyard. 1658.

TO THE Christian Reader.
CHristian Reader, this short Treatise was not intended, or sent to the Press,
as a complete Refutation of all Mr. Hobs his errors in Theology and Policy:
but only as an Appendix to my Castigations of his Animadversions, to let him
see the vanity of his petulant scoffs and empty brags, and how open he does
lie to the lash, whenever any one will vouchsafe to take him in hand to
purpose.

But some of my good friends have prevailed with me to alter my design, and to
make this small Treatise independent upon the other. He who clasheth ordinarily
with all the Churches in the World, about the common principles of Religion: He
who swerveth so often, so affectedly, from the approved rules, and healthful
constitutions of all orderly Commonwealths: He who does not only disturb, but
destroy all humane society, and all relations between man and man: He who
cannot preserve unity with himself; but ever and anon is inferring, and
tripping up his own heels by his contradictions, needs no just confutation,
or single, or other Adversary than God, and himself, and all mankind.

If he did ground his opinions upon any other authority than his own dreams; If
he did interpret Scripture according to the perpetual tradition of the
Catholic Church, and not according to his private distemperd fantasies: If
his discourse were as full of deep reasons as it is of supercilious confidence,
so that a man might gain either knowledge or reputation by him, a great volume
would be well bestowed upon him, Digna res esset ubi quis nervos intenderet
suos. But to what purpose is it to draw the coard of contention with such a
man, in such a cause, where it is impiety to doubt, much more to dispute? Quid
cum illis agas qui neque jus, neque bonum aut ^quum sciunt?

Melius pejus, profit obsit, nihil vident, nisi quod lubet.



For mine own part, as long as God shall furnish me with ability and
opportunity, I will endeavor to bestow my vacant hours upon a better subject,
conducing more to the advancement of primitive Piety, and the reunion of
Christendom, by disabusing the hoodwinked World, then this does tend to the
increase of Atheism and destruction of ancient truth; unless the importunity
of T. H. or some other divert me to look to my own defense. I desire thy
Christian prayers, that God who has put this good desire into my mind, by his
preventing grace, will help me by his assisting grace, to bring the same to
good effect.

The Preface.
HItherto I have made use only of a buckler to guard my self from Mr. Hobbes
his assaults. What passed between him and me in private had been buried in
perpetual silence, if his flattering Disciples (not without his own fault,
whether it were connivance or neglect is not material to me) had not published
it to the World to my prejudice, And now having carved out mine own
satisfaction, I thought to have desisted here, as not esteeming him to be a fit
adversary, who denies all common principles, but rather to be like a pillar of
smoke breaking out of the top of some narrow chimny, and spreading it self
abroad like a cloud, as if it threatened to take possession of the whole Region
of the air, darkening the sky, and seeming to pierce the heavens. And after
all this, when it has offended the eyes a little for the present, the first
puff of wind, or a few minutes, do altogether disperse it.

I never nourished within my breast the least thought of answering his
Leviathan, as D R. C. P. I. S.
having seen a great part of it answered before ever I read it, and having
moreover received it from good hands, that a Roman Catholic was about it: but
being braved by the author in print, as giving me a title for my answer,
Behemoth against Leviathan. And at other times being so solicitous for me what
I Qu. p. 20. ibid. p. 340.
would say to such a passage in my answer to his Leviathan, imagining his silly
cavils to be irrefragable demonstrations; I will take the liberty (by his good
leave) to throw on two or three spadefulls of earth, toward the final
interrement of his pernicious principles and other mushrome errors, And,
truly, when I ponder seriously the horrid consequences of them, I do not wonder
so much at his mistaken exception to my civil form of valediction, [So God Qu.
p. 20.
bless us,] miscalling it A buffonly abusing of the Name of God to calumny. He
conceived me amiss, that because in times less scrupulous and more
conscientious, men used to bless themselves after this form at the naming of
the devil; therefore I did intend it as a prayer for the deliverance of all
good Christians from him, and his blasphemous opinions.

I do believe there never was any Author Sacred or Profane, Ancient or
Modern, Christian, Jew, Mahumetan, or Pagan, that has inveighed so frequently
and so bitterly against all feined phantasmes, with their first devisers,
maintainers, and receivers, as T. H. has done, excluding out of the nature of
things the souls of Men, Angels, Devils, and all incorporeal Substances, as
fictions, phantasmes, and groundless contradictions. Many men fear the meaning
of it is not good, that God himself must be gone for company, as being an
incorporeal substance, except men will vouchsafe by God to understand nature.
So much T H. himself seems to intimate. This concourse of causes, whereof
every one is determined to be such as it is by a like Qu. p. 80.
concourse of former causes, may well be called (in respect they were all set
and ordered by the eternal cause of all things, God Almighty) the Decree of
God. If Gods eternal Decree be nothing else but the concourse of natural
causes, then Almighty God is nothing else but nature. And if there be no
spirits or incorporeal substances, he must be either nature or nothing. T. H.
defieth the Schools, and therefore he knows no difference between immanent,
and emanant or transient Actions, but confounds the eternal Decrees of God
before all time, with the execution of them in time, which had been a foul
fault in a Schooleman.

And yet his Leviathan, or mortal God, is a mere phantasme of his own devising,
neither Leviathan a mere phantasme.
flesh nor fish, but a confusion of a man and a whale, engendered in his own
brain: not unlike Dagon the Idol of the Philistims, a mixture of a god and a
man and a fish. The true literal Leviathan is the Whale-fish. Can thou Job
41. 1. Psalm. 104. 25.
draw out Leviathan with an hook? whom God has made to take his pastime in the
great and wide sea. And for a metaphorical Leviathan, I know none so proper to
personate that huge body as T. H. himself. The Levia T. H. The true Leviathan.
than does not take his pastime in the deep with so much freedom, nor behave
himself with so much height and insolence, as T. H. does in the Schools, nor
domineer over the lesser fishes with so much scorn and contempt, as he does
over all other authors; censuring, branding, contemning, proscribing
whatsoever is contrary to his humor; bustling and bearing down before him
whatsoever comes in his way, creating truth and falsehood by the breath of his
mouth, by his sole authority without other reason; A second Pythagoras at
least. There have been self conceited persons in all Ages, but none that could
ever King it like him over all the children of pride. Ruit, agit, rapit, tundit
and prosternit. Job 41. 34.


Yet is not his Leviathan such an absolute Sovereign of the Sea as he
imagines. God 1 Cor. 1. 27.
has chosen the weak things of this world to confound the mighty. The little
mouse steals up thorough the Elephants trunk to eat his brains, making him
die desperately mad. The Indian rat creeps into the belly of the gaping
Crocodile, and knaweth his bowels asunder. Leviathan no Sovereign of the sea.
The great Leviathan has his adversaries; the sword-fish which pierces his
belly beneath, and the thrasher-fish, which beats his head above: and
whenever these two unite their forces together against him, they destroy him.
But this is the least part of his Leviathans sufferings. Our Greenland fishers
have found out a new art to draw him out of his Castle, that is, the deep,
though not with a fishhook, yet with their harping-irons, and by giving him
line and space enough to bounce and tumble up and down, and tire himself right
out, and try all his arts, as spouting up a sea of water out of his mouth to
drown them, and striking at their Shallops with his tail to overwhelm them: at
last to draw this formidable creature to the shore, or to their ship, and slice
him in pieces, and boil him in a Cauldron, and tun him up in oil.

I have provided three good harping-irons for my self to dart at this monster,
and am resolved to try my skill and fortune, whether I can be as successeful
against this fantastic Leviathan, as they are against the true Leviathan.

My first dart is aimed at his heart, or Theological part of his discourse, to
show that his principles are not consistent either with Christianity, or any
other Religion.

The second dart is aimed at the chine, whereby this vast body is united and
fitted for animal motion, that is, the political part of his discourse; to show
that his principles are per nicious to all forms of Government, and all
Societies, and destroy all relations between man and man.

The third dart is aimed at his head or rational part of his discourse; to show
that his principles are inconsistent with themselves, and contradict one
another. Let him take heed, if these three darts do pierce his Leviathan home,
it is not all the Dittany which grows in Creet that can make them drop easily
out of his body, without the utter overthrow of his cause.

-- haerebit lateri lethalis arundo
CHAP. 1.
That the Hobbian Principles are destructive to Cristianity and all Religion.

THe Image of God is not altogether Nature dictates the existence and worship
of God.
defaced by the fall of man, but that there will remain some practical notions
of God and goodness; which, when the mind is free from vagrant desires, and
violent passions, do shine as clearly in the heart; as other speculative
notions do in the head. Hence it is, That there never was any Nation so
barbarous or savage throughout the whole World, which had not their God. They
who did never wear clothes upon their backs, who did never know Magistrate, but
their father, yet have their God, and their religious rites and devotions to
him. Hence it is, That the greatest Atheists in any sudain danger do
unwittingly cast their eyes up to Heaven, as craving aid from thence, and in a
thunder creep into some hole to hide themselves. And they who are conscious to
themselves of any secret crimes, though they be secure enough from the justice
of men, do yet feel the blind blows of a guilty conscience, and fear divine
vengeance. This is acknowledged by T. H. himself in his lucid intervalles. That
we may know what worship of God natural reason does C. c. 15. s. 14.
assign, let us begin with his attributes, where it is manifest in the first
place; That existency is to be attributed to him. To which he adds
infiniteness, incomprehensibility, unity, ubiquity. Thus for attributes, next
for actions. Concerning external actions, wherewith God is to be worshipped,
the most general precept of reason is, that they be signs of honor, under
which are contained Prayers, Thanksgivings, Oblations, and Sacrifices. Yet to
let us see how inconsistent T. H. no friend to religion.
and irreconciliable he is with himself; elsewhere reckoning up all the laws of
nature at large, even twenty in number, he has not one word that concerns
religion, or that has the least relation in the World to God. As if a man were
like the Colt of a wild Ass in the wilderness, without any owner or
obligation. Thus in describing the laws of nature, this great Clerk forgets
the God of nature, and the main and principal laws of nature, which contain a
man's duty to his God, and the principal end of his creation. Perhaps he will
say that he handles the laws of nature there, only so far as may serve to the
constitution or settlement of a Commonwealth. In good time, let it be so. He
has devised us a trimne Commonwealth, which is neither founded upon religion
toward God, nor justice toward man' but merely upon self interest, and self
preservation. Those rays of heavenly light, those natural seeds of religion,
which God himself has imprinted in the heart of man, are more efficacious
toward the preservation of a Society; whether we regard the nature of the
thing, or the blessing of God, then all his pacts, and surrenders, and
translations of power. He who unteacheth men their duty to God, may make them
eye-servants, so long as their interest does oblige them to obey, but is no fit
master to teach men conscience and fidelity.

Without religion, Societies are but like soapy bubbles, quickly dissolved. It
was the judgment of as wise a man as T. H. himself, (though perhaps he will
hardly be persuaded to it) that Rome ought more of its grandeur to religion,
than either to strength or stratagems. We have not exceeded the Spaniards in
Cic. Har. Respons. Orat. in P. Clod.
number, nor the Galls in strength, nor the Carthaginians in craft, nor the
Grecians in art, etc. but we have overcome all nations by our piety and
religion.

Among his laws he inserteth gratitude to C. c. 3. s. 8.
man as the third precept of the law of nature, but of the gratitude of mankind
to their Creator, there is a deep silence. If men had sprung up from the earth
in a night like mushromes or excrescences, without all sense of honor,
justice, conscience, or gratitude he could not have vilified the human nature
more than he does.

From this shameful omission or pretetition of the main duty of mankind, a man
might easily take the height of T. H. his religion. But he himself puts it
past all conjectures. His principles are brim full of prodigious impiety. In
these four things, opinions of ghosts, ignorance of second causes, devotion to
what men fear, and Le. p. 54.
taking of things casual, for prognostics, consists the natural seed of
religion; the culture and improvement whereof, he refereth only to Policy.
Humane and divine politics, are but politics. And again, Mankind has this
Ci. c. 16. s. 1.
from the conscience of their own weakness, and the admiration of natural
events, that the most part of men believe that there is an invisible God, the
maker of all visible things. And a little after he tells us, That
superstition proceeds from fear without right reason, and Atheism from an
opinion of reason without fear; making Atheism to be more reasonable than
superstition. What is now become of that divine worship which natural reason
did assign unto God, the honor of existence, infiniteness,
incomprehensibility, unity, ubiquity? What is now become of that dictate or
precept of reason, concerning prayers, thanksgivings, oblations, sacrifices, if
uncertain opinions, ignorance, fear, mistakes, the conscience of our own
weakness, and the admiration of natural events be the only seeds of religion?

He proceeds further, That Atheism it self, though it be an erroneous
opinion, and therefore Excuses Atheism. Ci. c. 14. s. 19.
a sin, yet it ought to be numbered among the sins of imprudence or ignorance.
He adds, that an Atheist is punished not as a Subject is punished by his
King, because he did not observe laws: but as an enemy by an enemy, because he
would not accept laws. His reason is, because the Atheist never submitted his
will to the will of God, whom Ci. c. 15. s. 7.
he never thought to be. And he concludes that man's obligation to obey God,
proceeds from his weakness. Manifestum est obligationem ad prestandum ipsi
(Deo) obedientiam, incumbere hominibus propter imbecilitatem. First it is
impossible that should be a sin of mere ignorance or imprudence, which is
dirictly contrary to the light of natural reason. The laws of nature need no
new promulgation, being imprinted naturally by God in the heart of man. The law
of nature was written Qu. p. 137.
in our hearts by the finger of God, without our assent; or rather the law of
nature is the assent it self. Then if nature dictate to us that there is a God,
and that this God is to be worshipped in such and such manner, it is not
possible that Atheism should be a sin of mere ignorance.

Secondly, a rebellious Subject is still a Subject, de jure, though not, de
facto, by right, though not by deed: And so the most cursed Atheist that is,
ought by right to be the Subject of God, and ought to be punished not as a just
enemy, but as a disloyal traitor. Which is confessed by himself, This fourth
sin (that is, of those who do not by word and deed confess one God the supreme
King of Kings) in Ci. c. 15. s. 19.
the natural kingdom of God is the crime of high treason, for it is a denial of
divine power, or Atheism. Then an Atheist is a traitor to God, and punishable
as a disloial Subject, not as an enemy.

Lastly it is an absurd and dishonorable assertion, to make our obedience to
God to depend upon our weakness, because we cannot help it, and not upon our
gratitude, because we owe our being and preservation to him. Who planteth a
vineyard, and eats not of the fruit thereof? Or who feeds a flock and 1
Cor. 9: 7.
eats not of the milk of the flock? And again, Thou art worthy O Lord to
receive glory, and honor, and power, for thou have created all things, Rev. 4.
11.
and for thy pleasure they are and were created. But it were much better, or at
least not so ill, to be a downright Atheist, than to make God to be such a
thing as he does, and at last thrust him into the devils office, to be the
cause of all sin.

For T. H. his god is not the God of Destroys Gods ubiquity.
Christians, nor of any rational men. Our God is every where, and seeing he
has no parts, he must be wholly here, and wholly there, and wholly every
where. So nature it self dictateth. It cannot be said honorably of Ci. c. 15.
s. 14.
God that he is in a place, for nothing is in a place; but that which has
proper bounds of its greatness. But T. H. his God is not wholly every where. No
man can conceive that any thing is all in this Le. p. 11.
place, and all in another place at the same time, for none of these things
ever have or can be incident to sense. So far well, if by conceiving he mean
comprehending; But then follows, That these are absurd speeches taken upon
credit, without any signification at all, from deceived Philosophers, and
deceived or deceiving Schoolmen. Thus he denies the ubiquity of God. A
circumscriptive, a definitive, and a repletive being in a place, is some
heathen language to him.

Our God is immutable without any shadow His eternity.
of turning by change, to whom all things are present, nothing past, nothing to
come. But T. H. his god is measured by time, losing something that is past, and
acquiring something that does come every minute. That is as much as to say,
That our God is infinite, and his god is finite, for unto that which is
actually infinite, nothing can be added, neither time nor parts. Hear himself,
Nor do I understand what derogation it can be to the divine perfection, to
attribute to it potentiality, Qu. p. 266.
that is in English, power, (so little does he understand what potentiality is)
and successive duration. And he charge it upon us as a fault; that will not
have eternity to be an endless Le. p. 374.
succession of time. How, successive duration, and an endless succession of
time in God? Then God is finite, then God is elder to day, than he was
yesterday. Away with blasphemies. Before he destroyed the ubiquity of God, and
now he destroys his eternity.

Our God is a perfect, pure, simple, indivisible, His simpl^city.
infinite essence; free from all composition of matter and form, of substance
and accidents. All matter is finite, and he who acts by his infinite essence,
needs neither organs, nor faculties, nor accidents, to render him more
complete. But T. H. his god is a divisible god, a compounded god, that has
matter, and qualities, or accidents. Hear himself. I argue thus, The divine
substance is indivisible, but eternity is the divine substance. The Major is
evident because God is Actus simplicissimus; The minor is confessed by all men,
that whatsoever is attributed to God, is God. Now listen to his answer, The
Major is so far from being evident, that Actus simplicissimus Qu. p. 267.
signifies nothing. The Minor is said by some men, thought by no man,
whatsoever is thought is understood. The Major was this, The divine substance
is indivisible. Is this far from being evident? Either it is indivisible or
divisible. If it be not indivisible, then it is divisible, then it is
materiate, then it is corporeal, then it has parts, then it is finite by his
own confession. Habere parts, aut esse totum aliquid, sunt uttributa
finitorum. Upon this silly conceit, he Ci. c. 15. s. 14.
charge me for saying, That God is not just, but justice it self, not
eternal, but eternity it self, which he calls unseemly words to be said Qu.
p. 266.
of God. And he thinks he does me a great courtesy in not adding blasphemous
and atheistical. But his bolts are so soon shot, and his reasons are such vain
imaginations, and such drowsy fantasies, that no sad man does much regard
them. Thus he has already destroyed the ubiquity, the eternity, and the
simplicity of God. I wish he had considered better with himself, before he had
desperately cast himself upon these rocks.

But paulo maiora canamus, my next charge is, That he destroys the very being
of God, His existence.
and leaves nothing in his place but an empty name. For by taking away all
incorporal substances, he takes away God himself. The very name (says he) of
an incorporal substance, is a contradiction. And to say that an Angel or Spirit
is an incorporeal substance, is to say in effect, that there is no Angel or
Spirit at all. Le. p. 214.
By the same reason to say, That God is an incorporal substance, is to say
there is no God at all. Either God is incorporal, or he is finite, and consists
of parts, and consequently is no God. This, That there is no incorporal spirit,
is that main root of Atheism, from which so many lesser branches are daily
sprouting up.

When they have taken away all incorporal spirits, what do they leave God
himself to be? He who is the fountain of all being, from whom and in whom all
creatures have their being, must needs have a real being of his own. And what
real being can God have among bodies and accidents? for they have left nothing
else in the universe. Then T. H. may move the same question of God, which he
did of devils. I would gladly know in what classis of entities, the Bishop
ranketh God? Infinite Qu. p. 160
being and participated being are not of the same nature. Yet to speak
according to humane apprehension (apprehension and comprehension differ much,
T. H. confesses that natural reason does dictate to us, that God is infinite,
yet natural reason cannot comprehend the infiniteness of God) I place him
among incorporeal substances or spirits, because he has been pleased to place
himself in that rank, God is a spirit. Of Joh. 4. 24.
which place T. H. gives his opinion, that it is unintelligible, and all
others of the same nature, and fall not under humane understanding. Le. p. 208.


They who deny all incorporeal substances, can understand nothing by God, but
either nature, (not naturam naturantem, that is, a real author of nature, but
naturam naturatam, that is the orderly concourse of natural causes, (as T. H.
seems to intimate) or a fiction of the brain without real being, cherished
for advantage and politic ends, as a profitable error, howsoever dignified
with the glorious title of the eternal causes of all things.

We have seen what his principles are concerning the Deity, they are full as
bad or The Trinity. Le. p. 268.
worse concerning the Trinity. Hear himself. A person is he that is
represented, as often as he is represented. And therefore God who has been
represented, that is, personated thrice, may properly enough be said to be
three Persons, though neither the word Person nor Trinity be ascribed to him in
the Bible. And a little after, to concludethe doctrine of the Trinity as far as
can be gathered directly from the Scripture, is in substance this, that the God
who is always one and the same, was he person represented by Moses, the person
represented by his Son incarnate, and the person represented by the Apostles.
As represented by the Apostles, the holy spirit by which they spoke is God. As
represented by his son that was God and Man, the Son is that God. As
represented by Moses, and the High Priests; the Father, that is to say, the
Father of our Lord Jesus Christ is that God. From whence we may gather the
reason why those names; Father, Son, and Holy Ghost, in the signification of
the Godhead, are never used in the Old Testament. For they are persons, that
is, they have their names from representing, which could not be, till diverse
men had represented Gods person, in ruling or in directing under him.

Who is so bold as blind Bayard? The emblime of a little boy attempting to lade
all the water out of the sea with a Coccleshel, does fit T. H. as exactly as if
it had been shaped for him, who thinks to measure the profound and
inscrutable mysteries of religion, by his own silly, shallow conceits. What is
now become of the great adorable mystery of the blessed undivided Trinity? it
is shrunk into nothing. Upon his grounds there was a time when there was no
Trinity. And we must blot these words out of our Creed, The Father eternal, the
Son eternal, the Holy Ghost eternal. And these other words out of our Bibles,
Let us make man after our image. Unless we mean that this was a consultation
of God with Moses and the Apostles. What is now become of the eternal
generation of the Son of God, if this Sonship did not begin until about four
thousand years after the creation were expired. Upon these grounds every King
has as many persons as there be Justices of Peace, and petty Constables in his
kingdom. Upon this account God Almighty has as many persons as there have been
Sovereign Princes in the World since Adam. According to this reckoning each one
of us like so many Gerious, may have as many persons as we please to make
procurations. Such bold presumption requires another manner of confutation.

Concerning God the Son, forgetting what he had said elsewhere, where he
calls him God and man, and the Son of God incarnate, he doubts not to say
that the word, hypostatical, Le. p. 21.
is canting. As if the same person could be both God and man without a
personal, that is, an hypostatical, union of the two natures of God and man. He
allows every man who is commanded by his lawful Sovereign, to deny Le. p. 271.
Christ with his tongue before men. He deposes Christ from his true kingly
office, making his kingdom not to commence or begin before the Ci. c. 17. s. 5.
6.
day of judgment. And the regiment wherewith Christ governs his faithful in
this life, is not properly a kingdom, but a pastoral office, or a right to
teach. And a little after, Christ had not kingly authority committed to him by
his Father in this World, but only consiliary and doctrinall.

He takes away his Priestly or propitiatory office; And although this act of
our redemption Le. p. 248.
be not always in Scripture called a Sacrifice and oblation, but sometimes a
price, yet by price we are not to understand any thing, by the value whereof he
could claim right to a pardon for us from his offended father, but that price
which God the Father was pleased in mercy to demand. And again, Not that the
death of one man, though without sin, can satisfy for the offenses of Le. p.
261.
all men in the rigor of justice, but in the mercy of God, that ordained such
Sacrifices for sin, as he was pleased in mercy to accept. He knows no
difference between one who is mere man, and one who was both God and man;
between a Levitical Sacrifice, and the all-sufficient Sacrifice of the Cross;
between the blood of a Calf, and the precious blood of the Son of God.

And touching the Prophetical Office of Christ, I do much doubt whether he do
believe in earnest, that there is any such thing as prophecy in the World. He
makes very little difference between a Prophet and a madman, and a demoniack.
And if there were nothing Le. p. 36.
else (says he) that bewrayed their madness, yet that very arrogating such
inspiration to themselves, is argument enough. He makes the pretense of
inspiration in any man to be, and always to have been, an opinion pernicious
to peace, and tending to the dissolution of all civil Le. p. 169.
government. He subjecteth all Prophetical Revelations from God, to the sole
pleasure and censure of the Sovereign Prince, either to authorize them, or to
exauctorate them. So as two Prophets prophesying the same thing at the same
time, in the dominions of two different Princes, the one shall be a true
Prophet, the other a false. And Christ who had the approbation of no Sovereign
Prince, upon his grounds, was to be reputed a false Prophet every where. Every
man therefore ought to consider who is the Sovereign Prophet, Le. p. 232.
that is to say, who it is that is Gods Vicegerent upon earth, and has next
under God the authority of governing Christian men, and to observe for a rule
that doctrine which in the name of God he has commanded to be taught, and
thereby to examine and try out the truth of those doctrines which pretended
Prophets, with miracle or without, shall at any time advance, etc. And if he
disavow them, then no more to obey their voice; or if he approve them, than to
obey them as men, to whom God has given a part of the spirit of their
Sovereign. Upon his principles the case holds as well among Jews and Turks
and Heathens, as Christians. Then he that teaches transubstantiation in
France, is a true Prophet, he that teaches it in England, a false Prophet. He
that blasphemeth Christ in Constantinople, a true Prophet, he that does the
same in Italy, a false Prophet. Then 1 Samuel 15.
Samuel was a false Prophet to contest with Saul a Sovereign Prophet: So was
the man 1 King. 13.
of God who submitted not to the more divine and prophetic spirit of Jeroboam.
And 1 King. 18. 2 Chr. 18.
Elijah for reproving Ahab. Then Micaiah had but his deserts, to be clapped up in
prison, and fed with bread of affliction, and water of affliction, for daring
to contradict Gods Vicegerent upon earth. And Jeremiah was justly Jer. 38.
thrown into a Dungeon, for prophesying against Zedekiah his Liege Lord. If his
principles were true, it were strange indeed, that none of all these Princes,
nor any other that ever was in the World, should understand their own
privileges. And yet more strange, that God Almighty should take the part of
such rebellious Prophets, and justify their prophesies by the event, if it
were true that none but the Sovereign in a Christian (the Le. p. 250.
reason is the same for Jewish) Commonwealth can take notice what is or what
is not the word of God.

Neither does he use God the holy Ghost more favorably than God the Son. Where
S. Peter says Holy men of God spoke as they were moved by the holy Spirit; He
says By Lev. p. 214.
the Spirit, is meant the voice of God in a dream or vision supernatural, which
dreams or visions, he makes to be no more than imaginations, which they had in
their sleep, or in an ecstasy, Lev. p. 227.
which in every true Prophet were supernatural, but in false Prophets were
either natural or feined, and more likely to be false than true. To say God
has spoken to him in a dream, is no more than to say, He dreamed that God
spoke to him, etc. To say he has seen a vision, or heard a voice, is to say.
That he has dreamed between sleeping and Lev. p. 196.
waking. So S. Peter's holy Ghost is come to be their own imaginations, which
might be either feined, or mistaken, or true. As if the holy Ghost did enter
only at their eyes, and at their ears, not into their understandings, nor
into their minds; Or as if the holy Ghost did not seal unto their hearts the
truth and assurance of their Prophesies. Whether a new light be infused into
their understandings, or new graces be inspired into their heart, they are
wrought, or caused, or created immediately by the holy Ghost, And so are his
imaginations, if they be supernatural.

But he must needs fall into these absurdities, who makes but a jest of
inspiration. They who pretend Divine inspiration to be a supernatural entering
of the holy Ghost into a man, are (as he thinks) in a very dangerous dilemma;
for Lev. p. 361.
if they worship not the men whom they conceive to be inspired, they fall into
impiety; And if they worship them, they commit idolatry. So mistaking the holy
Ghost to be corporeal, something that is blown into a man, and the graces of
the holy Ghost to be corporeal graces. And the words, empowered or infused
virtue, and, inblown or inspired virtue, are as absurd Lev. p. 17.
and insignificant, as a round qnadrangle. He reckons it as a common error,
That faith and sanctity are not attained by study and reason, but by
supernatural inspiration or infusion. And lays this for a firm ground: Faith
and sanctity are indeed not very frequent, but yet they are Lev. p. 169.
not miracles, but brought to pass by education, discipline, correction, and
other natural waeyes. I would see the greatest Pelagian of them all fly higher.

Why should he trouble himself about the holy Spirit, who acknowledges no
spirit but either a subtle fluide invisible body, or a ghost, or other idol or
phantasme of the imagination; who knows no inward grace or intrinsecal
holiness. Holy is a word which in Gods kingdom answers to that which men in
Lev. p. 220.
their kingdoms use to call public, or the kings. And again, wheresoever the
word holy is taken properly, there is still something signified of propriety
gotten by consent. His holiness is a relation, not a quality; but for inward
sanctification, or real infused holiness, in respect whereof the third person
is called the holy Ghost, because he is not only holy in himself, but also
makes us holy, he is so great a stranger to it, that he does altogether deny
it, and disclaim it.

We are taught in our Creed to believe the Catholic or Universal Church. But
T. H. teaches us the contrary, That if there be more Christian Churches than
one, all of them together De Cive, c. 17. s. 22.
are not one Church personally. And more plainly, Now if the whole number of
Christians be not contained in one Commonwealth, they are Le. p. 206.
not one person, nor is there an Universal Church, that has any authority over
them. And again, The Universal Church is not one person, of which it can be
said, that it has done, or decreed, or ordained, or excommunicated, or
absolved. This does quite overthrow all the authority of general Ci. c. 17.]
(...). 26.
Councils.

All other men distinguish between the Church and the Commonwealth: Only T.
H. makes them to be one and the same thing. The Commonwealth of Christian men
and the Church of the same, are altogether the same thing, called by two names,
for two reasons. For the matter of the Church and of the Commonwealth is the
same, namely the same Christian men; And the form is the same, which consists
in the lawful power of convocating them. Ci. c. 17. s. 21. Ci. c. 18. s. 1.
And hence he concludes, That every Christian Commonwealth is a Church
endowed with all spiritual authority. And yet more fully, The Church if it be
one person, is the same thing with the Commonwealth of Christians, called a
Commonwealth, because it consists of men united in one person their
Sovereign; And a Church Le. p. 205.
because it consists in Christian men united in one Christian Sovereign. Upon
which account there was no Christian Church in these parts of the World, for
some hundreds of years after Christ, because there was no Christian Sovereign.

Neither is he more orthodox concerning the Holy Scriptures, Hitherto, that is,
for the books of Moses, the power of making the Scripture Le. p. 283.
canonical, was in the civil Sovereign. The like he says of the Old Testament,
made canonical by Esdras. And of the New Testament, That it was not the
Apostles which made their own writings canonical, but every convert made them
so to himself. Yet with this restriction, That until the Sovereign ruler had
Le. p. 284.
prescribed them, they were but counsel and advise, which whether good or bad,
he that was counseled might without injustice refuse to observe, and being
contrary to the Laws established, could not without injustice observe. He
makes the Primitive Christians to have been in a pretty condition. Certainly
the Gospel was contrary to the Laws then established. But most plainly, The
word of the Interpreter of the Scripture is the word of God. And the same is
the Interpreter of the Scripture, and the Sovereign Judge of all Doctrines,
that is, the Sovereign Magistrate, to whose authority we must stand no less,
Ci. c. 17. s. 18.
than to Theirs, who at first did commend the Scripture to us for the canon of
faith. Thus if Christian Sovereigns, of different communions, do clash one with
another, in their interpretations, or misinterpretation of Scripture, (as they
do daily) then the word of God is contradictory to it self; or that is the word
of God in one Commonwealth, which is the word of the the devil in another
Commonwealth: and the same thing may be true, and not true, at the same time:
which is the peculiar privilege of T. H. to make contradictories to be true
together.

All the power, virtue, use, and efficacy, which he ascribes to the holy
Sacraments, is to be signs or commemorations. As for any Le. p. 22^. Ci. c.
17. s. 7.
sealing, or confirming, or conferring of grace, he acknowledges nothing. The
same he says particularly of Baptism: upon which grounds a Cardinals red hat,
or a Sergeant at arms his mace, may be called Sacraments as well as Baptism,
or the holy Eucharist, if they be only signs or commemorations of a benefit.
If he except, that Baptism and the Eucharist, are of divine institution: but a
Cardinals red hat, or a Sergeant at arms his mace are not: he says truly, but
nothing to his advantage or purpose, seeing he deriveth all the authority of
the Word and Sacraments, in respect of Subjects, and all our obligation to
them, from the authority of the Sovereign Magistrate, without which these Le.
p. 133.
words repent and be baptized in the Name of Jesus, are but counsel, no
command. And so a Sergeant at arms his mace, and baptism, proceed both from
the same authority. And this he says upon this silly ground, That nothing is a
command, the performance whereof tends to our own benefit. He might as well
deny the Ten Commandments to be commands, because they have an advantageous
promise annexed to them, Do this and thou shall live; And cursed is every one
that continues not in all the words of this Law to do them.

Sometimes he is for holy orders, and gives to the Pastors of the Church the
right of ordination and absolution, and infallibility, too much for a
particular Pastor, or the Pastors Ci. c. 17. s. 24.
of one particular Church. It is manifest, that the consecration of the
chiefest Doctors in every Church, and imposition of hands, does pertein to the
Doctors of the same Church. And it cannot be doubted of, but the power of
binding and loosing was given by Christ to the future Pastors, after the same
manner as to his present Apostles. And Ibid. l. 28.
our Savior has promised this infallibility in those things which are
necessary to salvation, to his Apostles, until the day of judgment, that is to
say, to the Apostles and Pastors, to be consecrated by the Apostles
successively, by the imposition of hands.

But at other times he casts all this meal down with his foot. Christian
Sovereigns are the supreme Pastors, and the only persons whom Le p. 323.
Christians now hear speak from God, except such as God speaks to in these
days supernaturally, What is now become of the promised infallibility?

And it is from the civil Sovereign, that all other Pastors derive their right
of teaching, Le. p. 296.
preaching, and all other functions pertaining to that office, and they are but
his Ministers in the same manner as the Magistrates of Towns, or Judges in
Courts of Justice, and Commanders of Armies. What is now become of their
Ordination? Magistrates, Judges, and Generals, need no precedent
qualifications. He makes the Pastoral authority of Sovereigns to be jure
divino, of all other Pastors jure civil. He adds, neither is there any Judge
of Heresy among Subjects, but their own civil Sovereign.

Lastly, The Church excommunicateth no man but whom she excommunicateth by the
authorty of the Prince. And the effect of excommunication has nothing in it,
neither of Ci. c. 17. s. 26. Le. p. 277.
damage in this World, nor terror upon an Apostate, if the civil power did
persecute or not assist the Church. And in the World to come, leaves them in no
worse estate, than those who never believed. The damage rather redoundeth to
the Church. Neither is the excommunication of a Christian Subject, that obeys
the laws of his Le. p. 288
own Sovereign, of any effect. Where is now their power of binding and loosing?

It may be some of T. H. his disciples desire to know what hopes of heavenly
joies they have upon their masters principles. They may hear them without any
great contentment, There is no mention in Scripture, Le. p. 240.
nor ground in reason, of the coelum empyreum, that is, the Heaven of the
blessed, where the Saints shall live eternally with God. And again, I have not
found any text that can probably be drawn to prove any ascension of the Saints
Le. p. 241.
into Heaven, that is to say, into any coelum empyreum. But he concludes
positively, that salvation shall be upon earth, when God shall reign at the
coming of Christ in Jerusalem. And again, In short, the Kingdom of God is a
civil Kingdom, etc. called also the Kingdom of Heaven, and the Kingdom of
Glory. All the Hobbians can hope for, is, to be restored to the same condition
which Adam was in before his fall. So says T. H. himself, From whence may be
inferred, Le. p. 345. p. 30.
that the Elect, after the resurrection, shall be restored to the estate
wherein Adam was before he had sinned. As for the beatifical vision he defines
to be a word unintelligible.

But considering his other principles, I do not marvel much at his extravagance
in this point. To what purpose should a coelum empyreum, or Heaven of the
blessed, serve in his judgment, who makes the blessed Angels that are the
inhabitants of that happy mansion, to be either idols of the brain, that is in
plain English, nothing, or thin, subtle, fluid bodies, destroying the
Angelical nature. The unvierse being the aggregate of all bodies, Le. p. 207.
there is no real part thereof that is not also body. And elsewhere, Every part
of the universe is Le. p. 371.
body, and that which is not body, is no part of the universe. And because the
universe is all, that which is no part of it, is nothing, and consequently no
where. How? by this doctrine he makes not only the Angels, but God himself to
be nothing. Neither does he salve it at all, by supposing erroneously Angels to
be corporeal spirits, and by attributing the name of incorporeal spirit to God,
as being a name of more honor, in whom we consider not what attribute best
expresses his nature, which is incomprehensible, but what best expresses our
desire to honor him. Though we be not able to comprehend perfectly what God
is, yet we are able to comprehend perfectly what God is not, that is, he is not
imperfect, and therefore he is not finite, and consequently he is not
corporeal. This were a trim way to honor God indeed, to honor him with a lie.
If this that he say here be true, That every part of the universe is a body,
and whatsoever is not a body, is nothing. Then by this doctrine, if God be not
a body, God is nothing; not an incorporeal spirit, but one of the idols of the
brain, a mere nothing, though they think they dance under a not, and have the
blind of Gods incomprehensibility, between them and discovery.

To what purpose should a coelum empyreum serve in his judgment, who denies
the immortality of the soul? The doctrine is now, and has been a long time far
otherwise; namely, that every man has eternity of life by nature, in as much
as his soul is immortal. Who supposes Le. p. 339.
that when a man dies, there remains nothing of him but his carkase; Who
makes the word soul in holy Scripture to signify always either the life, or
the living creature? And expounds the casting of body and soul into
hellfire, to be the casting of body and life into hellfire. Le. p. 340.
Who makes this Orthodox truth, That the souls of men are substances distinct
from their bodies, to be an error contracted by the contagion of the
demonology of the Greeks, and a window that gives entrance to the dark doctrine
of eternal torments. Who expounds these words of Solomon, [Then shall the
dust return to the earth as it was, and the spirit shall return unto Eccl. 12.
7.
God that gave it.] Thus, God only knows what becomes of a man's spirit, when
he expireth. He Le. p. 344.
will not acknowledge that there is a spirit, or any substance distinct from
the body. I wonder what they think does keep their bodies from stinking.

But they that in one case are grieved, in another must be relieved. If
perchance T. H. has given his disciples any discontent in his doctrine of
Heaven, and the holy Angels, and the glorified souls of the Saints, he will
make them amends in his doctrine of hell, and the devils, and the damned
spirits. First of the devils; He fancieth that all those devils which our
Savior did cast out, were phrensies, and all daemoniacks, (or persons
possessed,) no other Le. p. 38. 39.
than madmen. And to justify our Saviors speaking to a disease as to a
person, produces the example of inchanters. But he declares himself most
clearly upon this subject, in his Animadversions upon my reply to his defense
of fatal destiny. There are in the Scripture two sorts of things which are in
Qu. p. 160.
English translated devils. One is that which is called Satan, Diabolus,
Abaddon, which signifies in English an enemy, an accuser, and a destroyer of
the Church of God, in which sense the devils are but wicked men. The other sort
of devils are called in the Scripture daemonia, which are the feigned gods of
the heathen, and are neither bodies nor spiritual substances, but mere phansies
and fictions of terrified hearts, feigned by the Greeks, and other heathen
people, which St. Paul calls nothings. So T. H. has killed the great
infernal devil, and all his black Angels, and lest no devils to be feared, but
devils incarnate, that is wicked men.

And for hell he describes the kingdom of Satan, or the kingdom of darkness,
to be a confederacy of deceivers. He tells us that the places which set forth
the torments of hell in Le. p. 333.
holy Scripture, do design metaphorically a grief and discontent of mind, from
the sight of that eternal felicity in others, which they themselves, Le p. 244.
through their own incredulity and disobedience have lost. As if metaphorical
descriptions did not bear sad truths in them, as well as literal, as if final
desperations were no more than a little fit of grief or discontent; and a
guilty conscience were no more than a transitory passion, as if it were a loss
so easily to be borne, to be deprived for evermore of the beatifical vision:
And lastly, as if the damned, besides that unspeakable loss, did not likewise
suffer actual torments, proportionable in some measure to their own sins, and
Gods justice.

Lastly for the damned spirits, he declares himself every where, that their
sufferings are not eternal, The fire shall be unquenchable, and the torments
everlasting: but it cannot be thence inferred, that he who shall be cast into
that fire, or be tormented with those torments, shall endure and Le. p. 245
resist them, so as to be eternally burnt and tortured, and yet never be
destroyed nor dye. And though there be many places that affirm everlasting
fire, into which men may be cast successively one after another for ever: yet I
find none that affirm that there shall be an everlasting life therein, of any
individual person. If he had said, and said only, that the pains of the damned
may be lessened, as to the degree of them, or that they endure not for ever,
but that after they are purged by long torments from their dross and
corruptions, as gold in the fire, both the damned spirits and the Devils
themselves should be restored to a better condition, he might have found some
Ancients (who are therefore called the merciful Doctors) to have joined with
him, though still he should have wanted the suffrage of the Catholic Church.

But his shooting is not at rovers, but altogether at random, without either
president or partner. All that eternal fire, all those torments which he
acknowledges, is but this, That after the resurrection, the reprobate shall be
in the estate that Adam and his posterity were in, after the sin committed,
saving that God promised a Redeemer to Adam and not to them: adding, that they
shall live as they did formerly, Le. p. 345. 346.
marry, and give in marriage; and consequently engender children perpetually
after the resurrection, as they did before, which he calls an immortality of
the kind, but not of the persons of men. It is to be presumed, that in those
their second life's, knowing certainly from T. H. that there is no hope of
redemption for them from corporal death upon their well doing, nor fear of any
torments after death for their ill doing, they will pass their times here as
pleasantly as they can. This is all the damnation which T. H. fancieth.

In sum I leave it to the free judgment of the understanding Reader, by
these few instances which follow, to judge what the Hobbain principles are in
point of religion. Ex ungue leonem.

First, that no man needs to put himself to any hazard for his faith, but may
safely comply with the times. And for their faith it is internal and invisible.
They have the license that Le. p. 231.
Naaman had, and need not put themselves into danger for it.

Secondly, he allows Subjects, being commanded by their Sovereign, to deny 2.
Christ. Profession with the tongue is but an external thing, and no more than
any other gesture, whereby we signify our obedience. And wherein a Christian,
holding firmly in his heart the faith of Christ, has the same liberty which
the Prophet Elisha allowed to Naaman, etc. Who Le. p. 271.
by bowing before the idol Rimmon, denied the true God as much in effect, as if
he had done it with his lips. Alas why did St. Peter weep so bitterly for
denying his Master, out of fear of his life or members? It seems he was not
acquainted with these Hobbian principles. And in the same place he lays down
this general conclusion. This we may say, that whatsoever a Subject is
compelled to, in obedience to his Sovereign, and does it not in order to his
own mind, but in order to the laws of his Country, that action is not his, but
his Sovereigns; nor is it he that in this case denies Christ before men, but
his Governor and the law of his Country. His instance in a mahumetan commanded
by a Christian Prince to be present at divine service, is a weak mistake,
springing from his gross ignorance in case-divinity, not knowing to
distinguish between an erroneous conscience, as the Mahumetans is, and a
conscience rightly informed.

Thirdly, if this be not enough, he gives license to a Christian to commit
idolatry, 3.
or at least to do an idolatrous act, for fear of death or corporal danger. To
pray unto a King voluntarily for fair weather, or for any Le. p. 360.
thing which God only can do for us, is divine worship, and idolatry. On the
other side, if a King compel a man to it by the terror of death, or other
great corporal punishment, it is not idolatry. His reason is, because it is not
a sign that he does inwardly honor him as a god, but that he is desirous to
save himself from death, or from a miserable life. It seems T. H. thinks
there is no divine worship, but internal. And that it is lawful for a man to
value his own life or his limbs more than his God. How much is he wiser than
the three Children, or Daniel himself? who were thrown, the first into a fiery
furnace, the last into the Lions den, because they refused to comply with the
idolatrous decree of their Sovereign Prince.

A fourth aphorism may be this, That which is said in the scripture, it is
better to obey God, 4. Lev. p. 193.
than men, has place in the Kingdom of God by pact, and not by nature. Why?
nature it self does teach us that it is better to obey God, than men. Neither
can he say that he intended this only of obedience, in the use of indifferent
actions and gestures, in the service of God, commanded by the commonwealth, for
that is to obey both God and man. But if divine law and humane law clash one
with another, without doubt it is evermore better to obey God than man.

His fifth conclusion may be that the sharpest and most successful sword, in
any war whatsoever, does give sovereign power and authority to him that has
it, to approve or reject all sorts of Theological doctrines, concerning the
Kingdom of God, not according to their truth or falsehood, but according to
that influence which they have upon political affairs. Hear him, But because
this doctrine Le. p. 241.
will appear to most men a novelty, I do but propound it, maintaining nothing
in this or any other paradox of religion, but attending the end of that dispute
of the sword, concerning the authority (not yet amongst my Countrymen decided)
by which all sorts of doctrine are to be approved or rejected, etc. For the
points of doctrine concerning the Kingdom of God, have so great influence upon
the Kingdom of man, as not to be determined, but by them that under God have
the sovereign power. Careat successibus opto, Quisquis ab eventu facta notanda
putat. Let him evermore want success who thinks actions are to be judged by
their events. This doctrine may be plausible to those who desire to fish in
troubled waters, But it is justly hated by those which are in Authority, and
all those who are lovers of peace and tranquillity.

The last part of this conclusion smells ranckly of Jeroboam, Now shall the
Kingdom return to the house of David, if this people go up to 1. King. 12. 26.
do sacrifice in the house of the Lord at Jerusalem, whereupon the King took
council, and made two calves of gold, and said unto them. It is too much for
you to go up to Jerusalem, behold thy Gods O Israel, which brought thee out of
the land of Egypt. But by the just disposition of Almighty God, this policy
turned to a sin, and was the utter destruction of Jeroboam and his family. It
is not good jesting with edg-tooles, nor playing with holy things: where men
make their greatest fastness, many times they find most danger.

His sixth paradox is a rapper, The civil laws are the rules of good and
evil, just and unjust, honest and dishonest, and therefore what the Ci. c. 12.
s. 1.
lawgiver commands that is to be accounted good, what he forbids bad. And a
little after, before empires were, just and unjust were not, as whose nature is
relative to a command, every action in its own nature is indifferent. That it
is just or unjust proceeds from the right of him that commands. Therefore
lawful Kings make those things which they command, just by commanding them,
and those things which they forbid unjust by forbidding them. To this add his
definition of a sin, that which one does, or omitteth, says or wills
contrary to the reason of the commonwealth, that is the [civil] laws. Where by
the laws he Ci. c. 14. s. 17.
does not understand the written laws, elected and aproved by the whole
commonwealth, but the verbal commands or mandates, of him that has the
sovereign power, as we find in many places of his writings. The civil laws are
nothing else but the commands of him that is endowed with sovereign power in
the Ci. c. 6. s. 9.
commonwealth, concerning the future actions of his subjects. And the civil
laws are fastened to the lips of that man who has the sovereign Le. p. 109.
power.

Where are we? in Europe or in Asia? Where they ascribed a divinity to their
Kings, and, to use his own phrase, made them mortal gods. O King live for
ever. Flatterers are the common moaths of great palaces, where Alexanders
friends are more numerous than the Kings friends. But such gross palpable
pernicious flattery as this is, I did never meet with, so derogatory both to
piety and policy. What deserved he who should do his uttermost endeavor to
poison a common fountain, whereof all the commonwealth must drink? He does the
same who poisoneth the mind of a sovereign prince.

Are the civil laws the rules of good and bad, just and unjust, honest and
dishonest? And what I pray you are the rules of the civil law it self? even the
law of God and nature. If the civil laws swerve from these more authentic
laws, they are Lesbian rules. What the lawgiver commands is to be accounted
good, what he forbids bad. This was just the garb of the Athenian Sophisters,
as they are described by Plato. Whatsoever pleased the great beast [the
multitude,] they called holy, and just, and good. And whatsoever the great
beast disliked, they called evil, unjust, profane. But he is not yet arrived
at the height of his flattery. Lawful Kings make those things which they
command just by commanding them, And those things which they forbid unjust by
forbidding them. At other times when he is in his right wits he talks of
suffering, and expecting their reward in heaven. And going to Christ by
martyrdom. And if he had the fortitude to suffer death he should do better.
B^t I fear all this was but said in jest. How should they expect their reward
in heaven, if his doctrine be true, that there is no reward in heaven? Or how
should they be Martyrs, if his doctrine be true, that none can be Martyrs but
those who conversed with Christ upon earth? He adds, Before Empires were,
just and unjust were Le. p. 272.
not. Nothing could be written more false in his sense, more dishonorable to
God, more inglorious to the humane nature. That God should create man and leave
him presently without any rules, to his own ordering of himself, as the Ostridg
leaves her eggs in the sand. But in truth there have been empires in the
world ever since Adam. And Adam had a law written in his heart by the finger of
God, before there was any civil law. Thus they do endeavor to make goodness,
and justice, and honesty, and conscience, and God himself, to be empty names
without any reality, which signify nothing, further than they conduce to a
man's interest. Otherwise he would not, he could not say, That every action as
it is invested with its circumstances, is indifferent in its own nature.

Something there is which he has a confused glimmering of, as the blind man
sees men walking like trees, which he is not able to apprehend and express
clearly. We acknowledge, that though the laws or commands of a Sovereign Prince
be erroneous, or unjust, or injurius, such as a subject cannot approve for good
in themselves; yet he is bound to acquiesce, and may not oppose or resist,
otherwise than by prayers and tears, and at the most by flight. We acknowledge
that the civil laws have power to bind the conscience of a Christian, in
themselves, but not from themselves, but from him who has said, Let every soul
be subject to the higher powers. Either they bind Christian subjects to do
their Sovereigns commands, or to suffer for the testimony of a good conscience.
We acknowledge that in doubtful cases semper praesumitur pro Rege and lege, the
Sovereign and the law are always presumed to be in the right. But in plain
evident cases which admit no doubt, it is always better to obey God than man.
Blunderers whilst they think to mend one imaginary hole, make two or three
real ones. They who derive the authority of the Scriptures or Gods Law from
the civil laws of men, are like those who seek to underprop the heavens from
falling with a bullrush. Nay, they derive not only the authority of the
Scripture, but even of the law of nature it self from the civil law. The laws
of nature (which need no promulgation) in the condition of nature are not
properly laws, but qualities which Le. p. 138.
dispose men to peace and to obedience. When a Commonwealth is once settled,
then are they actually laws, and not before. God help us into what times are we
fallen, when the immutable laws of God and nature are made to depend upon the
mutable laws of mortal men, just as if one should go about to control the Sun
by the authority of the clock.

But it is not worthy of my labor, nor any part of my intention, to pursue
every shadow of a question which he springs. It shall suffice to gather a
posie of flowers (or rather a bundle of weeds) out of his writings, and present
them to the Reader, who will easily distinguish them from healthful plants by
the rankness of their smell. Such are these which follow.

1. To be delighted in the imagination only, of being possessed of another
man's goods, servants, or Le. p. 151.
wife, without any intention to take them from him by force or fraud, is no
breach of the law which says, Thou shall not covet.

2. If a man by the terror of present death be compelled to do a fact against
the law, he is totally excused, because no law can oblige a man to abandon his
own preservation. Nature compels him to the fact. The like doctrine he has
elsewhere. Le p. 157.
When the Actor does any thing against the law of nature by command of the
Author, if Le. p. 81.
he be obliged by former covenants to obey him, not he, but the Author breaks
the law of nature.

3. It is a doctrine repugnant to civil Society, that whatsoever a man does
against his conscience Le. p. 168
is sin.

4. The kingdom of God is not shut, but to them that sin; that is to them who
have not performed Ci. c. 18. s. 2.
due obedience to the Laws of God; nor to them if they believe the necessary
Articles of the Christian Faith.

5. We must know that the true acknowledging Ci. c. 17. s. 25.
of sin is repentance it self.

6. An opinion publicly appointed to be taught cannot be heresy, nor the
Sovereign Princes that Le. p. 318.
authorize the same heretics.

7. Temporal and spiritual government, are but two words to make men see
double, and mistake Le. p. 248.
their lawful Sovereign, etc. There is no other government in this life,
neither of State nor Religion, but temporal.

8. It is manifest that they who permit (or tolerate) a contrary doctrine to
that which themselves Ci. c. 13. s. 5
believe, and think necessary, do against their conscience and will, as much as
in them lies, the eternal destruction of their subjects.

9. Subjects sin if they do not worship God according to the laws of the
Commonwealth. Ci. c. 15. s. 19. Ci. c. 18. s. 10.


10. To believe in jesus [in Jesum] is the same as to believe that Jesus is
Christ.

11. There can be no contradiction between the Laws of God, and the laws of a
Christian Commonwealth. Le. p. 330.
Yet we see Christian Commonwealths daily contradict one another.

12. No man gives but with intention of good to himself, of all voluntary acts
the object is to Le. p. 75.
every man his own good. Moses, St. Paul, and the Decii were out of his mind.

13. There is no natural knowledge of man's Le. p. 74.
estate after death, much less of the reward which is then to be given to
breach of faith, but only a belief grounded upon other men's saying, that they
know it supernaturally, or that they know those, that knew them, that knew
others, that knew it supernaturally.

14. David's killing of Uriah, was no injury to Le. p. 109.
Uriah, because the right to do what he pleased was given him by Uriah himself.

15. To whom it belongs to determine controversies which may arise from the
diverse interpretation Ci. c. 18. s. 14.
of Scripture, he has an imperial power over all men which acknowledge the
Scriptures to be the word of God.

16. What is theft, what is murder, what is adultry, and universally what is an
injury, is Ci. c. 6. s. 16.
known by the civil law; that is, the commands of the Sovereign.

17. He admits the incestuous copulations of the Heathens according to their
heathenish Ci. c. 14. s. 10.
laws, to have been lawful marriages. Though the Scripture teach us
expressly, that for those abominations the land of Canaan spewed out her
inhabitants, Exodus 18. 28.

18. I say that no other Article of faith besides this that Jesus is Christ, is
necessary to a Christian Ci. c. 18. s. 6.
man for salvation.

19. Because Christ's kingdom is not of this world, therefore neither can his
Ministers, unless Le. p. 269. 270.
they be Kings, require obedience in his name. They had no right of commanding,
no power to make laws.

20. I pass by his errors about oaths, about vows, about the resurrections,
about the kingdom of Christ, about the power of the keys, binding, loosing,
excommunication, etc. His ignorant mistakes of meritum congrui, and condigni,
active and passive obedience, and many more, for fear of being tedious to the
Reader. His whole works are an heap of misshapen errors, and absurd paradoxes,
vented with the confidence of a Jugler, the brags of a Mountebanck, and the
authority of some Pythagoras, or third Cato, lately dropped down from heaven.

Thus we have seen how the Hobbian principles do destroy the existence, the
simplicity, the ubiquity, the eternity, and infiniteness of God, the doctrine
of the blessed Trinity, the Hypostatical union, the Kingly Sacerdotal and
Prophetical Offices of Christ; the being and operation of the Holy Ghost,
Heaven, Hell, Angels, Devils, the immortality of the Soul, the Catholic, and
all National Churches; the holy Scriptures, holy Orders, the holy Sacraments,
the whole frame of Religion, and the Worship of God; the laws of Nature, the
reality of Goodness, Justice, Piety, Honesty, Conscience, and all that is
Sacred. If his Disciples have such an implicit faith, that they can digest all
these things, they may feed with Oestriches.

CHAP. 2.
That the Hobbian Principles do destroy all relations between man and man, and
the whole frame of a Common wealth.

THe first Harping-iron is thrown at the heart of this great Whale; that is,
his Religion; for with the heart a man believes unto righteousness. Now let
him look to his chine; that is, his Compage or Commonwealth. My next task is
to show that he destroys all relations between man and man, Prince and
subject, Parent and child, Husband and wife, Master and servant, and generally
all Society.

It is enough to dash the whole frame of his Leviathan or commonwealth in
pieces, That he confesses it is without example; as if the molding of a
Commonwealth were no more than the making of gunpowder, which was not found
out by long experience, but by mere accident. The greatest objection (says T.
H.) is that of practice, when men ask when and Le. p. 107.
where such power has by subjects been acknowledged. It is a great objection
indeed. Experience the Mistrisse of fools, is the best, and almost the only
proof of the goodness or badnesse of any form of government. No man knows
where a shoe wringeth, so well as he that wears it. A new Physician must
have a new Churchyard, wherein to bury those whom he kills. And a new
unexperienced Politician, commonly puts all into a combustion. Men rise by
degrees from common soldiers to be decurions, from decurions to be Centurions,
from Centurions to be Tribunes, and from Tribunes to be Generals, by
experience, not by speculation. Alexander did but laugh at that Orator who
discoursed to him of Military affairs. The Locrian law was well grounded, that
whosoever moved for any alteration in the tried policy of their Commonwealth,
should make the proposition at his own peril with an halter about his neck.
New Statesmen promise golden mountains, but like fresh flies they bite deeper
than those which were chased away before them. It were a strange thing to hear
a man discourse of the Philosophers Stone, who never bestowed a groatsworth of
charcole in the inquiry. It is as strange to hear a man dictate so
magisterially in Politics, who was never Officer nor Counselor in his life,
nor had any opportunity to know the intrigues of any one state. If his form of
government had had any true worth or weight in it, among so many Nations, and
so many succeeding Generations from the Creation to this day, some one or other
would have light upon it. His Leviathan is but an idol of his own brain.

Neither is it sufficient to say, That in longlived Ibid.
Commonwealths the subjects never did dispute of the Sovereigns power. Power
may be moderated, where it is not disputed of. And even in those kingdoms
where it was least disputed of, as in Persia, they had their fundamental laws,
which were not alterable at the pleasure of the present Prince. Whereof one was
as we find in the story of Esther, and the book of Daniel, that the law of the
Medes and Persians altered not: much less was it alterable by the only breath
of the Princes mouth, according to T. H. his Principles.

He urges, That though in all places of the World men should lay the
foundations of their houses Ibid.
on the sand, it could not thence be inferred, that so it ought to be. He was a
ashamed to make the application. So suppose all the world should be out of
their wits and he only have his right understanding. His supposition is a
supposition of an impossibility, which makes an affirmative proposition to
turn negative, much like this other supposition, If the sky fall we shall have
larkes; that is in plain English, We shall have no larkes. His argument had
held much more strongly thus, All the world lay the foundation of their houses
upon firm ground, and not upon the sand; Therefore he who crosses the practice
of the whole world, out of an overweening opinion that he sees further into a
millstone than they all, is he that builds upon the sand, and deserves well
to be laughed out of his humor.

But he persisteth still, like one that knows better how to hold a Paradox,
than a Fort. The skill of making and maintaining Commonwealths consists in
certain rules, as does Arethmatick and Geometry, and not as Tennis-play, on
practice only; which rules neither poor men had the leisure, nor men that have
had the leisure, have hitherto had the curiosity or the method to find out. O
excellent, how fortunate are we if we knew our own happiness, to have this
great discovery made in our days? What pity it is that this new Mercury did
not live in the days of the old Mercury, Qui feros cultus hominum recentum
voce formavit catus, That the art of preserving the world in perpetual
tranquillity, should not be discovered until the evening of the world. May we
not hope (since he pleased to tell us that after the Resurrection, mankind
shall be eternally propagated) Le. p. 346.
that these monuments of his may escape the last fire, as well as some others
are supposed to have escaped the general Deluge, for the good of those
successive generations, they being his own invention, as well as this frame of
government.

Yet his argument is most improper, and most untrue. State Policy, which is
wholly involved in matter, and circumstances of time, and place, and persons,
is not at all like Arithmetic and Geometry, which are altogether abstracted
from matter, but much more like Tennis-play. There is no place for liberty in
Arithmetic and Geometry, but in policy there is, and so there is in
Tennis-play. A game at Tennis has its vicissitudes, and so have States. A
Tennis plaier must change his play at every stroke, according to the occasion
and accidents: so must a Statesman move his rudder differently, according to
the various face of heaven. He who mesnageth a Commonwealth by general rules,
will quickly ruin both himself, and those who are committed to his government.
One man's meat is another man's poison; and those which are healthful Rules for
one Society at one time, may be pernicious to another Society, or to the same
society at another time. Some Nations are like Horses, more patient of their
riders than others; And the same Nations more patient at one time than at
another. In sum, general rules are easy, and signify not much in policy.
The quintessence of policy does consist in the dexterous and skilful
application of those rules to the subject matter.

But I will not rest in presumptions. Concerning foreign States, and first
such as are not only Neighbors but Allies, of a Commonwealth, such as have
contracted friendship and confederated themselves together by solemn oaths,
with invocation of the holy name of the great God of Heaven and earth: He
teaches, That such an oath does Ci. c. 2. s. 22.
bind no more than nudum pactum, a naked Covenant. It is true, that every
Covenant is either lawful or unlawful. If it be unlawful, an oath cannot be the
bond of iniquity: If it be lawful, it binds in conscience, though it were
never confirmed by oath. It is true further, That he who can release a naked
promise, can release the same promise confirmed by an oath, because it was not
made or intended as a vow to God, but as a promise to man. But yet to say that
a naked Covenant binds no less than an oath, or that an oath adds nothing
to the obligation, or that the mere violation of a Covenant is as great a
sin, as perjury and covenant breaking twisted together, is absurd, and
opens a large gap to foreign war.

Secondly he teaches, That in all times Kings and persons of Sovereign
Authority, because Le. p. 63.
of their indepency, are in continual jealousies, and in the state and posture
of gladiatours, having their weapons pointing, and their eyes fixed on one
another. It is good for a Sovereign Prince to have his sword always by his
side, to be ready to protect his Subjects, and offend those who dare invade
him: but to put Princes in the posture of gladiators, watching continually
where they may hit one another, or do one another a mischief, is dangerous.
There can be no firm amity, where there is no mutual confidence. T. H. his
perpetual diffidence and causeless jealousies, which have no ground, but an
universal suspicion of the humane nature, (much like the good woman's fear, that
the log would leap out of the fire, and knock out the brains of her child) do
beget perpetual vexations to them that cherish them, argue a self-guiltinesse,
teach them who are suspected, often to do worse than they imagined, and
ordinarily produce hostility and war. The state of Commonwealths among
themselves is natural, that is, Ci. c. 15. s. 7.
hostile. Neither if they cease to fight, is it peace, but a breathing space;
wherein the one enemy observing the motion or countenance of the other, does
esteem his security not from pacts, but from the forces and counsels of his
adversary. He makes confederacies to be but empty shows without any realty.

But for all other neighbor Commonwealths, which are not confederates, but
exercise commerce one with another, by the Law of Nations; he reckons them all
as enemies, and in a state of nature, (the Hobbian nature of man, is worse than
the nature of Bears, or Wolves, or the most savage wild beasts) and makes it
lawful to destroy them, nocent or innocent, indifferently. All men that are not
Subjects, are either enemies, or Le. p. 165.
else they have ceased from being so, by some precedent Covenants. But against
enemies, whom the Commonwealth judges capable to do them hurt, it is lawful,
by the original right of nature, to make war wherein the sword judges not, nor
does the victor make distinction of nocent and innocent. Here is no precedent
injury supposed, no refusal to do right, omnia dat qui justa neg at, nor the
least suspicion of any will to wrong them, but only that the Commonwealth
(that is, the Prince) judge them capable to do them hurt.

Neither does he hold it needful to denounce war in such cases, but makes it
lawful to suppress them, and cut their throats without any warning. From this
[natural] Le. p. 61.
diffidence of one another, there is no way for any man to secure himself so
reasonable as anticipation, that is, by force or wiles to master the persons of
all men he can, so long till he see no other power great enough to endanger
him. And this is no more than his own conservation requires, and is generally
allowed. For in the state of mere Ci. c. 5. s. 2, 1.
nature, the laws of nature are silent, as to the actual exercise of them. And
this he may do, vel palam vell ex insidiis, either by force or treachery. What
is now become of the law of Nations? How much were the old Romans better
neighbors than these new Hobbians? They did not so easily fall to the shedding
of humane blood, but sent their Legate first to demand justice, and after three
and thirty days expectation in vain, to proclaim aloud upon the confines of
the enemies Country, Hear O Jupiter, and thou Juno, Live.
Quirinus thou, and all ye hods, that this people is unjust, etc. And then the
Herald or Faecial lanced his Javeline into the enemies Country, as a defiance,
and beginning of war.

Thus destructive are his principles to the public peace and tranquillity of
the World, but much more pernicious to the Commonwealth it self. He did
prudently to deny that virtue did consist in a mean, for he himself does never
observe a mean. All his bolts fly over or under, but at the right mark it is in
vain to expect him. Sometimes he fancieth an omnipotence in Kings, sometimes he
strippeth them of their just rights. Perhaps he thinks that it may fall out
in politics, as it does sometimes in physic, Bina venena invant, Two contrary
poisons may become a Cordial to the Commonwealth. I will begin with his
defects, where he attributes too little to Regal power.

Fist he teaches, that no man is bound to go to warfare in person, except he
do voluntarily undertake it. A man that is commanded as a Soldier to fight
against the enemy, may nevertheless in many cases refuse without injustice. Of
these many cases, he sets down only two. First, when he substituteth a
sufficient Le. p. 112.
soldier in his place, for in this case he deserteth not the service of the
Commonwealth. Secondly, there is allowance to be made for natural
timorousness, or men of feminine courage. This might pass as a municipal law,
^tc exempt some persons at some time in some places. But to extend it to all
persons, places and times, is absurd, and repugnant to his own grounds, who
teaches that justice and injustice do depend upon the command of the
Sovereign, that whatsoever he commands, he makes lawful and just by
commanding it. His two cases are two great impertinencies, and belong to the
Sovereign to do, or not to do as Graces, whosoever is Judge. 7. 3.
timorous or fearful, let him depart, not to the Subjects as right. He
forgets how often he has denied all knowledge of good and evil to
Subjects, and subjected their will absolutely to the will of the Sovereign, The
Sovereign Ci. c. 6. s. 13.
may use every man's strength and wealth at his pleasure. His acknowledgement
that the Sovereign has right enough to punish his refusal with death, is to no
purpose. The question is not whether his refusal be punishable or not, but
whether it be just or not. Upon his principles a Sovereign may justly enough
put the most innocent Subject in the World to death, as we shall see presently.
And his exception when the defense of the Commonwealth requires at once the
help of all that are able to bear arms, is no answer to the other case, and it
self a case never like to happen. He must be a mortal god indeed, that can
bring all the hands in a Kingdom to fight at one battle.

Another of his principles is this, Security is the end for which men make
themselves subjects to Ci c. 6. (...). 3.
others, which if it be not enjoyed no man is understood to have subjected
himself to others, or to have lost his right to defend himself at his own
discretion. Neither is any man understood to have bound himself to any thing,
or to have relinquished his right over all things, before his own security be
provided for. What ugly consequences do flow from this paradox, and what a
large window it opens to sedition and rebellion, I leave to the readers
judgment. Either it must be left to the sovereign determination, whether the
subjects security be sufficiently provided for, And then in vain is any man's
sentence expected against himself, or to the discretion of the subject, (as the
words themselves do seem to import,) and then there need no other bellows to
kindle the fire of a civil war, and put a whole commonwealth into a
combustion, but this seditious Article.

We see the present condition of Europe what it is, that most sovereigns have
subjects of a different communion from themselves, and are necessitated to
tolerate different rites, for fear least whilst they are plucking up the tares,
they should eradicate the wheat. And he that should advise them to do
otherwise, did advise them to put all into fire and flame. Now hear this
merciful and peaceable Author, It is manifest that they do against conscience,
and wish, as much as is in them, the eternal destruct on of their subjects,
who do not cause such doctrine and such worship, to be taught and exhibited to
their subjects, as they themselves do Ci c. 13. s. 5
believe to conduce to their eternal salvation, or tolerate the contrary to be
taught and exhibited. Did this man write waking or dreaming.

And howsoever in words he deny all resistance to the sovereign, yet indeed he
admits it. No man is bound by his pacts whatsoever Ci c 2. s. 18.
they be, not to resist him, who brings upon him death or wounds, or other
bodily damage. (by this learning the Scholar if he be able, may take the rod
out of his masters hand, and whip him) It follows. Seeing therefore no man is
bound to that which is impossible, they who are to suffer death or wounds or
rather corporal damage, and are not constant enough to endure them, are not
obliged to suffer them. And more fully. In case a great many men together have
already resisted the sovereign power unjustly, or committed Le. p. 112.
some capital crime, for which every one of them expects death, whether have
they not the liberty to join together, and assist and defend one another?
certainly they have, for they do but defend their lives, which the guilty man
may as well do, as the innocent. There was indeed unjustice in the first breach
of their duty. Their bearing of arms subsequent to it, though it be to
maintain what they have done, is no new unjust act. Why should we not change
the name of Leviathan into the Rebels catechism? Observe the difference
between the primitive spirit, and the Hobbian spirit. The Thebaean Legion of
known valor in a good cause, when they were able to resist, did choose rather
to be cut in pieces to a man, than defend themselves against their Emperor by
arms, because they would rather die innocent, than live nocent. But T. H.
allows Rebels and conspirators to make good their unlawful attempts by
arms: was there ever such a trumpetter of rebellion heard of before? perhaps
he may say that he allows them not to justify their unlawful acts, but to
defend themselves. First this is contrary to himself, for he allows them to
maintain what they had unjustly done. This is too much and too intolerable, but
this is not all. Secondly, If they chance to win the field who must suffer for
their faults? or who dare thenceforward call their Acts unlawful?

Will you hear what a casuist he is? And for the other instance of attaining
sovereignty by rebellion, it is manifest that though the event follow, Le. p.
73.
yet because it cannot reasonably be expected; but rather the contrary, and
because by gaining it so, others are taught to gain the same in like manner,
the attempt thereof is against reason. And had he no other reasons indeed
against horrid Rebellion but these two? It seems he accounts conscience or
the bird in the breast to be but an Idol of the brain. And the Kingdom of
heaven (as he has made it not valuable enough to be balanced against an
earthly Kingdom. And as for hell he has expounded it and all the infernal
fiends out of the nature of things, otherwise he could not have wanted better
arguments against such a crying sin.

Another of his theorems is, that no man is obliged by any pacts to accuse
himself. Which Ci. c. 2. s. 19.
in some cases is true, but in his sense, and in his latitude, and upon his
grounds it is most untrue. When public fame has accused a man before hand, he
may be called upon to purge himself or suffer. When the case is of public
concernment, and the circumstances piegnant, all nations do take the liberty to
examine a man upon oath in his own cause, and where the safety and welfare of
the commonwealth is concerned, as in cases of high treason, and for the more
full discovery of conspiracies, upon the rack. Which they could not do lawfully
if no man was bound in any case to discover himself. His reason is silly, For
in vain do we make him promise, who when he has performed we know not whether
he have performed or not. And makes as much against all examination of
witnesses as delinquents. In vain do we make them give testimony, who when they
have testified, we know not whether they have given right testimony or not.

But his next conclusion will uncase him fully, and show us what manner of man
he is, If the commonwealth come into the power of its enemies, so that they
cannot be resisted, he who had Ci. c. 7. s. 18.
the sovereignty before, is understood to have lost it. What enemies he
means, such as have the just power of the sword, or such as have not, what he
means by the commonwealth the whole Kingdom, or any part of it, what he
intends by cannot be resisted, whether a prevalence for want of forces to
resist them, or a victory in a set battle, or a final cenquest, And what he
means by losing the sovereignty, loosing it de facto, or de jure, losing the
possession only, or losing the right also, he is silent. It may be because he
knows not the difference, Qui pauca considerat facile pronuntiat, He that
considers little, gives sentence more easily than truly, we must search out
his sense some where else. The obligation of subjects to the sovereign is
understood to last as long, and no longer, than the power lasts by which he
is able to protect them, etc. Wheresoever a man sees protection either in his
own or in another Le. p. 114.
sword, nature applies his obedience to it, and his endeavor to maintain it.
By his leave this is right dogs play, which always take part with the stronger
side. But yet this is general.

The next is more particular, when in a war foreign or intestine the enemies
get a final victory Le
so as the forces of the commonwealth keeping the field no longer, there is no
farther protection of subjects in their loyalty, then is the commonwealth
dissolved, and every man at liberty to protect himself, by such courses as his
own discretion shall suggest unto him. Yet these words final victory are
doubtful. When David's forces were chased out of the Kingdom, so that he was
not able to protect his subjects in their loyalty, could this be called a final
victory?

The next place is home, He who has no obligation to his former sovereign, but
that of an ordinary subject has liberty to submit to a Conqueror, when the
means of his life is within the guards and garrisons of the enemy, for it is
then Le. p. 190.
that he has no longer protection from him, [his soveraign] but is protected
by the adverse party for his contribution. And he concludes that a total
submission is as lawful as a contribution. Which is contrary to the sense of
all the world. If a lawful sovereign did give a general release to his
subject, as well as he gives him license to contribute, he said something. And
to top up all these disloyal paradoxes he adds, That they who live under the
protection of a Conqueror openly, are understood to submit themselves to the
government. And that in the very act of receiving protection openly, and not
renouncing it openly, they do oblige themselves to obey the laws of their
protector, to which in receiving Q. p. 137
protection they have assented.

Where these Principles prevail, adieu honor, and honesty, and fidelity, and
loyalty: all must give place to self-interest. What for a man to deserte his
Sovereign upon the first prevalence of an enemy, or the first payment of a
petty contribution, or the first appearance of a sword, that is more able to
protect us for the present? Is this his great law of nature, pactis standum, to
stand to what we have obliged our selves? Then Kings from whom all men's right
and property is derived, should not have so much right themselves in their own
inheritance as the meanest subject. It seems T. H. did take his Sovereign for
better, but not for worse. Fair fall those old Roman spirits who gave thanks
to Terentius Varro, after he had lost the great battle of Cannae by his own
default, because he did not despair of the Commonwealth. And would not sell
the ground that Hannibal was encamped upon, one farthing cheaper than if it had
been in time of peace, which was one thing that discouraged that great Captain
from continuing the siege of Rome.

His former discourse has as many faults as lines. First all Sovereignty is
not from the people. He himself acknowledges, That fatherly Empire or Power
was instituted by God in Ci. c. 10. s. 3.
the Creation, and was Monarchical. Secondly, where the application of
Sovereign power to the person is from the people, yet there are other ends
besides protection. Thirdly, protection is not a condition, though it be a
duty. A failing in duty does not cancel a right. Fourthly, protection ought to
be mutual. The subject ought to defend his King, as well as the King his
subject. If the King be disabled to protect his subject, by the subjects own
fault, because he did not assist him as he ought, this does not warrant the
subject to seek protection elsewhere. Fifthly, he does not distinguish between
a just Conqueror who has the power of the sword, though he abuse it, and him
that has no power at all. I will try if he can remember whose words these are;
They that have already instituted a Commonwealth, being thereby bound by
covenant to own the actions and judgments of one, cannot lawfully Le. p. 88.
make a new covenant among themselves to be obedient to any other, in any thing
whatsoever without his permission. And therefore they that are subjects to a
Monarch, cannot without his leave cast off Monarchy,, nor transfer their person
from him that bears it, to another man. This is home both for right and
obligation.

Sixthly, there are other requisites to the extinction of the right of a
Prince, and the obligation of a subject, than the present prevalence or
conquest of an enemy. Seventhly, nature does not dictate to a subject to
violate his oaths and allegiance, by using his endeavors to maintain
protection wheresoeve he sees it, either in his own sword or another man's.
Eighthly, total submission is not as lawful as contribution. Ninthly, actual
submission does not take away the Sovereigns right, or the subjects obligation.
Tenthly, to live under the command or protection of a Conqueror does not
necessarily imply allegiance. Lastly, much less does it imply an assent to all
his laws, and an obligation to obey them.

These are part of T. H. his faults, on the one hand against Monarchs, opposite
enough to peace and tranquillity, which none can approve who either have a
settlement, or wish one. But his faults are ten times greater and grosser for
Monarchs, on the other hand, in so much as I have thought sometimes that he
observed the method of some old cunning Parliament men, who when they had a
mind to cross a bill, were always the highest for it in the House, and would
insert so many and so great inconveniences into the act, that they were sure it
could never pass. Tuta frequensque via est per amici fallere nomen.


So he makes the power of Kings to be so exorbitant, that no subject who has
either conscience or discretion, ever did or can endure, so to render Monarchy
odious to mankind.

I pass by his accommodating of the four first Commandments of the Decalogue
to Sovereign Princes, which concern our duty to Almighty God. Let his first
Paradox of this kind be this. A Monarch does not bind Le. p. 177.
himself to any man by any pacts, for the Empire which he receives. And it is
vain to grant Sovereignty Ci. c. 7. s. 11
by way of precedent covenants. The opinion that any Monarch receives his
power by covenant; that is to say, on condition, (learnedly expounded)
proceeds from want of understanding Le. p. 89.
this easy truth, that covenants being but words and break, (mark that) have
no force to oblige, etc. but from the public sword. What is now become of all
our Coronationoathes, and all our Liberties and great Charters?

Another Paradox is this. Every Monarch may make his Successor by his last
will, and that Ci. c. 15. s. 19.
which one may transfer to another by testament, that he may by the same right
give or sell whilst he is living. Therefore to whomsoever he disposes it
either for love or money, it is lawfully disposed. And there is no perfect form
of government where the disposing of the succession is not in Le. p. 99.
the present Sovereign. The whole body of the kingdom of England were of
another mind in King John's case; and if he had disposed the Sovereignty to a
Turk, as some of our Historiographers relate that he made an overture, it is
not likely that they would have turned Turkish slaves.

Hear a third Paradox. The Sovereign has so much power over every subject by
law, as every Ci. c. 6. s. 18.
one who is not subject to another has ever himself; that is, absolute, to be
limited by the power of the Commonwealth, and by no other thing. What neither
by the Laws of God, nor Nature, nor Nations, nor by the laws of the Land,
neither co-actively nor directively? Would not this man have made an excellent
guide for Princes? But more of this anon.

I proceed. When the Sovereign commands any thing to be done against his own
former law, the command as to that particular fact, is an abrogation Le. p. 157.
of the law. Parliaments may shut up their shops, there is no need of them to
repeal former laws.

His fifth excess is a grievous one, That before the institution of a
Commonwealth, every Le. p. 161.
man had a right to do whatsoever he thought necessary to his own preservation,
subduing, hurting, or killing any man, in order thereunto. And this is the
foundation of that right of punishing which is exercised in every
Commonwealth. And his sentence in brief is this; That if the Magistrate do
examine and condemn the Delinquent, then it is properly punishment, if not, it
is an hostile act, but both are justifiable. Judge Reader, whether thou will
trust St. Paul or T. H. St. Paul tells us, that the Magistrate is the
ordinance of God, the Minister To. 13. 2, 4.
of God, the Revenger of God, the Sword Bearer of God to execute wrath upon him
that does evil.

No says T. H. punishment is not an act of the Magistrate as he is a
Magistrate, or as he is an Officer of God to do justice, or a revenger of evil
deeds; but as he is the only private man who has not laid down his natural
right to kill any man at his own discretion, if he do but suspect that he may
prove noisome to him, or conceive it necessary for his own preservation. Who
ever heard of such a right before, so repugnant to the Laws of God and Nature?
But observe Reader what is the result of it, that the Sovereign may lawfully
kill any of his subjects, or as many of them as he pleases, without any fault
of theirs, without any examination on his part, merely upon suspicion, or
without any suspicion of the least crime, if he do but judge him to be hurtful
or noisome, as freely as a man may pluck up a weed, because it hinders the
nourishment of better plants. Before the institution of a Commonwealth every
one may lawfully Ci. c. 10. s. 1.
be spoiled and killed by every one, but in a Commonwealth only by one, that
is the Sovereign. And by the right of nature we destroy without being unjust,
all that is noxious, both beasts and men. He makes no difference between a
Christian and a wolf. Would you know what is noxious with him, even
whatsoever he thinks can annoy him. Who would Qu. p. 116. and 140.
not desire to live in his Commonwealth, where the Sovereign may lawfully kill
a thousand innocents every morning to his breakfast? Surely this is a
Commonwealth of fishes, where the great ones eat the lesser.

It were strange if his Subjects should be in a better condition for their
fortunes, than they are for their life's, no I warrant you: do but hear him. Thy
dominion and thy property Ci. c. 12. s. 7.
is so great, and lasts so long, as the Commonwealth (that is, the
Sovereign) will. Perhaps he means in some extraordinary cases? Tush, in all
cases, and at all times. When thou did choose a Sovereign, even in choosing him
thou made him a deed of gift of all thou have, Et tu ergo tuum jus civitate
concessisti, and therefore thou have granted all thy right to the
Commonwealth. Ibid.


Yet some may imagine that his meaning is only that property may be transferred
by Laws or Acts of Parliament from one to another. As the Lacedaemonians, when
they permitted children to steal other men's goods, they Ci. c. 14. s. 10.
transferred the right from the owners to the children. No, no, T. H. is not
for general laws, but particular verbal mandates. The Kings word is sufficient
to take any thing from any subject, Le. p. 106.
if there be need, and the King is judge of that need. If by need he did
understand extreme necessity, for the preservation of the Commonwealth, it
might alter the case. But his need is like Ahabs need of Naboths vineyard.
There is neither necessity, nor Commonwealth in the case. The Lacedemonian
thefts were warranted by a general law, not only consented to universally, but
sworn unto. And if it had been otherwise, the value was so small, and the
advantage apprehended, to be so great to the Commonwealth, that no honest
Subject would contradict it.

Right and Title may be transferred by Law, and there can be no wrong, where
consent is explicate and universal; such consent takes away all error. But if
the consent be only implicit, to the making or admitting of just laws, and
unjust laws be obtruded in the place of just: the Subject suffers justly by his
own Act: but he or they that were trusted sin. And if he be a Sovereign,
owes an account to God, if subordinate, both to God and man. But he justifies
the taking away of men's estates, either in part, or in whole, without president
Law, or president necessity, or subsequent satisfaction. And maintains, that
not only the Subject is bound to submit, but that the Sovereign is just in
doing it.

I cannot pass by his good affection to the Nobility of Europe: In these parts
of Europe, it has been taken for a right of certain persons, Le. p. 184.
to have place in the highest Council of State by inheritance, but good council
comes not by inheritance. And the politics is an harder study than Geometry. I
think he mistakes the Council of State for the Parliament. And who more fit to
concur in the choice of Laws, than they who are most concerned in the Laws,
than they who must contribute most, if there be occasion, to the maintenance of
the Laws. No art is hereditary more than politics. A Musician does not beget a
Musician. Yet we see the fathers eminence in any Art, begets a propension in
his posterity to the same. And where two or three successive generations do
happily insist in the steps one of another, they raise an Art to great
perfection. I do easily acknowledge that Politics are an harder study than
Geometry, and the practice more than the Theorye, gained more by experience
than by study. Therefore our Parliaments did prudently permit the eldest sons
of Barons, to be present at their consultations, to fit them by degrees, for
that person which they must one day sustein. But he had a mind to show the
States men his teeth, as he had done to all other professions.

There are many other errors and mistakes in his Politics, as this, That
Sovereignty cannot be divided, or that there cannot be a mixed Ci. c. 7. s. 4.
Le. p. 170. etc.
form of government, which is a mere mistaking of the question. For though it
be sometimes styled a mixed monarchy, because it does partake of all the
advantages of Aristocracy and Democracy, without partaking of their
inconveniences: yet to speak properly, it is more aptly called a temperated or
moderated Sovereignty, rather than divided or mixed. Neither did any English
Monarch communicate any essential of Sovereignty to any Subject or Subjects
whatsoever. All civil power, legislative, judiciary, military, was ever
exercised in the name of the King, and by his authority. The three Estates of
the Kingdom assembled in Parliament, were but suppliants to the King, to have
such or such Laws enacted. What is it then that has occasioned this mistake?
though the King has not granted away any part of his Sovereign power: yet he
has restrained himself by his Coronation Oath, and by his great Charters, from
the exercise of some part of it in some cases, without such and such requisite
conditions, (except where the evident necessity of the Commonwealth, is a
dispensation from Heaven for the contrary) So he has restrained himself in the
exercise of his legislative power, that he will govern his Subjects by no new
Laws, other than such as they should assent unto. It is not then any
legislative power, which the two Houses of Parliament have either exclusively
without the King, or inclusively with the King, but a receptive, or rather a
preparative power, sine qua non, without which no new laws ought to be imposed
upon them: and as no new laws, so no new taxes or imposition; which are granted
in England by a Statute Law.

But this it is evident how much his discourse of three souls animating one
body, is wide from the purpose, and his supposition of setting up a supremacy
against the Sovereignty, Canons against Laws, and a ghostly authority against
the civil, weighs less than nothing, seeing we acknowledge, That the civil
Sovereign has an Archirectonicall power, to see that all Subjects within his
dominions do their duties in their several callings, for the safety and
tranquillity of their Commonwealth, and to punish those that are exorbitant
with the civil sword, as well those who derive their habitual power immediately
from Christ, as those who derive it from the Sovereign himself. Then the
constitution of our English policy was not to be blamed, the exercise of the
power of the keys, by authority from Christ, was not to be blamed; but T. H.
deserves to be blamed, who presumes to censure before he understand.

Another of his whimsies is, That no law can be unjust; by a good law I mean,
not a just law, Le. p. 182.
for no law can be unjust, etc. It is in the Laws of the Commonwealth, as in
the laws of gaming. Whatsoever the Gamsters all agree on, is injustice to none
of them. An opinion absurd in it self, and contradictory to his own ground.
There may be laws tending to the contumely of God, to Atheism, to denial of
Gods providence, to Idolatry, all which he confesses to be crimes of high
treason against God. There may be Laws against the Law of nature, which he
acknowledges to be the divine Law, eternally, immutable, which God has made
known to all men, by his eternal word born Ci. c. 14. s. 4.
in themselves, that is to say, natural reason. But this question, whether any
law can be unjust, has been debated more fully between him and me, in my
answer to his Animadversions. The true ground of this and many other of his
mistakes, is this, That he fancieth no Nu. 14.
reality of any natural justice or honesty, nor any relation to the Law of God
or nature, but only to the Laws of the Commonwealth. So from one absurdity
being admitted, many others are apt to follow.

His Oeconomicks are no better than his Politics. He teaches parents that
they cannot be injurious to their children, so long as they are in Ci. c. 9. s.
7.
their power. Yes, too many ways, both by omission and commission. He teaches
mothers that they may cast away their infants, or Ci c. 9. s. 2.
expose them at their own discretion lawfully. He teaches parents
indifferently, that where they are free from all subjection, they may take away
Qu. p. 137.
the life's of their children, or kill them, and this justly.

What horrid doctrines are these? It may be he will tell us, that he speaks
only of the state of mere nature, but he does not, for he speaks expressly
of Commonwealths, and paralleth Fathers with Kings and Lords, to whom he
ascribes absolute dominion, who have no place in his state of mere nature.
Neither can he speak of the state of mere nature, for therein, according to his
grounds, the children have as much privilege to kill their Parents, as the
Parents to kill their children, seeing he supposes it to be a state of war of
all men against all men,

And if he did speak of the state of mere nature, it were all one. For first
his state of mere nature is a drowsy dream of his own feigning, which looks
upon men as if they were suddenly grown out of the ground like mushroms. Ci. c.
8. s. 1.
The primigenious and most natural state of mankind, was in Adam before his
fall, that is, the state of innocence. O^ suppose we should give way to him to
expound himself of the state of corrupted nature, that was in Adam and his
family after his fall. But there was no such state of mere nature as he
imagines. There was Religion, there were Laws, Government, Society: and if
there ever were any such barbarous savage rabble of men, as he supposes, in
the World, it is both untrue and dishonorable to the God of nature, to call it
the state of mere nature, which is the state of degenerated nature. He might as
well call an hydro^ical distemper, contracted by intemperance, or any other
disease of that nature, the natural state of men. But there never was any such
degenerate rabble of men in the World, that were without all Religion, all
Government, all Laws, natural and Civil, no, not amongst the most barbarous
Americans, (who except some few criminal habits, which those poor degenerate
people, deceived by national stome, do hold for noble) have more principles of
natural piety, and honesty, and moralty, then are readily to be found in his
writings. As for the times of civil war, they are so far from being without
all pacts and governors, that they abound overmuch with pacts and governors
making policy not only to seem, but to be double.

This evident truth may be demonstrated from his own grounds. All those places
of holy Ci. c. 4. s. 4.
Scripture by which we are forbidden to invade that which is another man's, as,
thou shall not kill, thou shall not steal, thou shall not commit adultery, do
confim the last of distinction of mine and thine. For they suppose the right of
all men, to all things to bt taken away. How can that be, when he confesses
every where that these are the eternal laws of God and nature. But that which
is much more true, they both suppose and demonstrate that there never was any
such right of all men to all things. Let him call them laws or theorems, or
what he please, they confute that state of mere nature which he makes the
foundation of his commonwealth

Hitherto he has been too high for the parents. Now they must expect a cooling
card. The question who is the better man has no place in the condition of mere
nature, where all men are equal. Are the parent and child equal? Yes, they
are equal who can do equal things one against another, But they who can do
the greatest things, that is to kill, can do equal things. Therefore all men
by nature are equal among themselves. If the son have as strong an arm, and
as good a cudgel as his father, he is as good a man as his father.

Another of his aphorisms is, paternall dominion is not so derived from
generation, as if Le. p. 102.
therefore the parent had dominion over his child, because he begat him, but by
the child's consent, either express, or by other sufficient arguments declared.
And will you see how this consent is gained? The attaining to sovereign power
is by two ways, one by natural force, as when a man makes his children
submit themselves and their children to his government, as being able to
destroy Le. p. 88.
them if they refuse. These principles are so false that the very evidence of
truth does extort the contrary from him at other times. The Bishop saw there
was paternall government in Adam, which he might do easily, as being no deep
Qu. p. 139.
consideration. And again, To kill ones parent, is a greater crime than to kill
another, For the parent ought to have the honor of a sovereign, though he have
surrendered his power to the civil law because he had it originally by nature.
Great is Le. p. 160.
truth, and prevails.

If this were no deep consideration, the more he deserves to be blamed, who at
sometimes robs both parents of their honor, some some other times the man
only, as by the right of nature the dominion over an infant does belong first
to him who has him first in his power. And it is manifest that he that is born
is sooner in the power of his mother than of any other, so that she might
either bring him up, or cast him out, at her Ci. c. 9. s. 2.
pleasure, and by right. Never without the fathers license, again, in the state
of nature it cannot be known who is father of an infant, but by the relation of
the mother. Therefore he is his, whom the mother would have him to be, and
therefore the mothers. Does this man believe in earnest Ibid. s. 3.
that marriage was instituted by God in Paradise, and has continued ever since
the creation, He might as well tell us in plain terms, that all the obligation
which a child has to his parent, is because he did not take him by the heels
and knock out his brains against the walls, so soon as he was born. Though
this be intolerable, yet there is something of gratitude in it, and in that
respect it is not altogether so ill as his forced pacts.

How repugnant is this which he says of the mothers dominion over her
children, to the law of nations? By the law of the twelve tables a father might
sell his child twice, bis vaenum dicat. The mother had no hand in it. Neither
does the judicial law of the Jews, dissent from this, If a man sell his
daughter is Exodus 21. 7. Number. 30. 4.
be a maid servant. So likewise a child's vow might be invalidated by the
authority of a father, but not of a mother.

He abounds every where with such destructive conclusions as these, as to
generation God has ordained to man an helper, and there be always two that
are equally parents, The dominion therefore over the child should belong
equally to both, and he be equally subject to both, which is Le. p. 102.
impossible, for no man can obey two masters. Whether had he forgotten the
commandment, Honor thy father and thy mother, or thinks he that obedience
is not a branch of honor?

In the next place his principles destroy the subordination of a wife to her
husband. The inaequality of natural strength is less than that a man can
acquire dominion over a woman without Ci. c. 9. s. 3.
war? And he gives this reason why the contrary custom prevails, because
commonwealths were constituted by fathers of families, not Ibid. s.
by mothers of families, and from hence it is that the domestical dominion
belongs to the man. The scriptures assign another reason of the subjection of
the woman, and the rule of the man, namely the ordinance of Almighty God. Genesis
3. 16. And St. Paul secondeth it, Women are commanded to be under obedience, as
also says the law. 1. Cor. 14. 34. I trow that law was not made by fathers of
families. Wives submit yourselves unto your own husbands, as unto the Lord.
Ephesians. 5. 22. Why, because of the civil law? No such thing for the husband is
the head of the wife, even as Christ is the head of the Church, v. 23. And the
man is the image and glory of God, but the woman is the glory of the man, for
the man is not of the woman, but the woman of the man, neither was the man
created for the woman, but the woman, for the man. 1. Cor. 11. 7. 8. 9. He
would not suffer a woman to usurp authority over a man. 1. Tim. 2. 12. much
less over her own husband. I might cite St. Peter to the same purpose, but I
am afraid lest he should accuse both S. Peter and St. Paul of partiality, as
well as the first founders of commonwealths.

Upon his principles no man is sure of his own wife, if the sovereign please to
dispose her to another. For although the law of nature do prohibit theft, or
adultery. etc. Yet if the civil law command a man to invade any thing, that is
not theft or adultery. And what is the civil law in his sense? the command of
the lawgiver. Ci. c. 14. s. 10.
And his command is the declaration of his will. So if the lawgiver do but
declare his pleasure that any one shall enjoy such a man's wife, or Ibid. s. 13.
that she shall no longer be his wife, according to his grounds, husband and
wife must both obey. What is theft? what is murder? what is adultery? is known
by the civil law, that is by the commands of him that is Sovereign in the
commonwealth. And without the Sovereigns Ci c. 6. s. 16.
command, if either party do but suspect one another, the party suspected is
disobliged, for there is no pact, where credit is not given to him that makes
the pact, neither can faith be violated where it is not had.

The next political relation is between the Master and the servant, which the
Hobbian Ci. c. 8. s. 9.
principles do overthrow as well as the rest. One of these principles is, that
a Master cannot do any wrong to his servant, because the servant has subjected
his will to the will of his Master. In all such submissions there is evermore
either expressed or implied a salvo, or Ci. c. 8. s. 7.
a saving of his duty to God, and his allegiance to his Prince. If his master
shall punish him for not doing contrary to these, or by menaces compel him to
do contrary to these, he does him wrong. No man can transfer that right to
another, which he had not himself. The servant before his submission to his
master, had no right to deny due obedience to god, or due allegiance to his
Prince.

Another of his Paradoxesis, that whosoever is obliged to obey the commands of
any other, before he know what he will command, is bound to all his commands
simply, and without restriction. Now he that is obliged, is called a servant,
he to whom he is bound, a Master. What if the masters Ci. c. 8. s. 1.
command be contrary to the laws of God or nature? Or the laws of the
commonwealth. In the presence of a greater authority, a lesser authority
cease. Such implicit obligations are ever to be understood, quantum jus
fasque fuerit, according to law and equity.

Hitherto servants have been grieved, but now they shall be relieved, if T. H.
his authority can do it. Servants who are holden in bonds are not comprehended
in the definition of servants, because they serve not by pact, but to avoid
beating, And therefore if they fly away, or Ci. c. 8. s. 4.
kill their master, they do nothing contrary to the laws of nature. For to
bind them is a sign that the binder did suppose them not sufficiently bound by
any other obligation. His consequence is infirm, because the Master binds his
servant therefore he distrusts him, therefore there were no pacts. A man may
give his parole for true imprisonment, and having given it to a just enemy, is
obliged to hold it, what if his conqueror or master did spare his life, upon
condition that he should be true prisoner, until he could find out a fit
exchange for him. This was a lawful pact. Then does not T. H. instruct the
prisoner well, to cut his Conquerours throat, who spared his life, upon a
lawful condition.

But to dispell these umbrages, he teaches that a servant who is cast into
bonds, or any way Ibid. l. 9.
deprived of his corporal liberty, is freed from that other obligation which
did arise from his pact So as according to his principles, If a servant, (that
is more than a captive,) having not only had his life spared by a just
Conqueror, but also contracted and engaged himself to be a loyal servant, as
firmly as may be, shall nevertheless be cast into any bonds by his master, or
be restrained of his corporal liberty, upon delinquency, or just suspicion, he
is acquitted of all his pacts and obligations, and as free to run away, or cut
his masters throat, as if he had never pacted or engaged at all.

His defaults come so thick, I am weary of observing them. Take an hotchpotch
together.

1. In the state of nature profit is the measure of right. Ci. c. 1. s. 10 Ci.
c. 9. s. 3.


2. Every one is an enemy to every one whom he neither commands nor obeys.

3. Not only to contend against one, but even this very thing not to consent,
is odious; for not to Ci. c. 1. s. 5.
consent with one in some thing, is tacitly to accuse him of error in that
thing, as to dissent in many things, is to hold him for a fool. In the name of
God what does he hold the whole World to be? I am sure he dissenteth from them
all in many things.

4. It is not reasonable that one perform first, if it be likely that the other
will not perform afterward, Ci. c. 2. s. 11.
which whether it be likely or no, he that fears shall judge. It is true he
adds, That in the civil state, where both parties may be compelled, he who is
to perform first by the contract, ought to perform first. But what if the civil
power be not able to compel him? What if there be no witnesses to prove the
contract? then the civil power can do nothing. May a man violate his faith in
such cases upon general suspicions of the fraud and unfaithfulness of mankind?

5. If a people have elected a Sovereign for term of life, and he die, neither
the people before election, nor he before his death, having ordained Ci. c. 7.
s. 16.
any thing about a place of meeting for a new election, it is lawful for every
one, by equal, that is natural right, to snatch the Sovereignty to himself if
he can. His opinion of the state of nature is a very bundle of absurdities.

6. When a Master commands his servant to give money to a stranger, if it be
not done, the injury is done to the Master, whom he had before Le. p. 74.
covenanted to obey, but the damage redoundeth to the stranger, to whom he had
no obligation, and therefore could not injure him. True according to his
Principles, who makes neither conscience nor honesty nor obligation from any
one to any one, but only by pacts or promises. All just men are of another
mind.

7. Those men which are so remisly governed, that they dare take up arms to
defend or introduce Le. p. 91.
a new opinion, are still in war, and their condition not peace, but only a
cessation of arms, for fear of one another. Why is the fault rather imputed to
the remissness of the Governor, than to the sedition of the people, and a
state of war feigned, where none is? The reason is evident, because he had no
hand in the government, but had a hand in the introduction of new opinions.

8. In a Sovereign assembly, the liberty to protest is taken away, both because
he that protests there, denies their Sovereignty, and also whatsoever Le. p.
117.
is commanded by the Sovereign power, is as to the subject, justified by the
command, though not so always in the sight of God. That is not taken away
which all Sovereigns do allow, even in the competition for a Crown, as was
verified in the case of the King of Spain and the House of Braganza, about the
kingdom of Portugal. It is no denial of Sovereignty, to appeal humbly from a
Sovereign misinformed, to himself better informed. The commands of a Sovereign
person or assembly are so far justified by the command, that they may not be
resisted; but they are not so far justified, but that a loyal subject may
lawfully seek with all due submission, to have them rectified.

9. If he whose private interest is to be debated and judged in a Sovereign
Assembly, make as Le. p. 122.
may friends as he can, it is no injustice in him. And though he hire such
friends with money, unless there be an express law against it, yet it is no
injustice. It is to be feared that such provacations as this, are not very
needful in these times. Is it not unlawful to blind the eyes of the wise with
bribes, and make them pervert judgment? Others pretend expedition, or an equal
hearing; but he who knows no obligation but pacts, is for downright hiring of
his Judges, as a man should hire an hackney-coach for an hour. There is no
gratitude in hiring, which is unlawful in the buyer, though not so unlawful as
in the seller of Justice. If any man dug a pit, and did not cover it, so
that an ox or an ass fell into it, Exodus 21 33.
he who dug it was to make satisfaction. He that hireth his Judges with
money to be for him right or wrong, diggeth a pit for them, and by the equity
of this Mosaical-Law, will appear not to be innocent.

Thus after the view of his Religion, we have likewise surveighed his
Politics, as full of black ugly dismal rocks as the former, dictated with the
same magisteral authority; A man may judge them to be twins upon the first cast
of his eye. It was Solomon's advice, Remove not the ancient land marks which thy
fathers have set. But T. H. takes a pride in removeing Pov. 22. 28.
all ancient landmarks, between Prince and subject, Father and child, Husband
and Wife, Master and servant, Man and Man. Nilus after a great overflowing,
does not leave such a confusion after it as he does, nor an hog in a garden of
herbs. I wish he would have turned probationer a while, and made trial of his
new form of government first in his own house, before he had gone about to
obtrude it upon the Commonwealth. And that before his attempts and bold
endeavors, to reform and to renew the policy of his native Country, he had
thought more seriously and more sadly of his own application of the fable of
Peleus his foolish daughters, who desiring to renew the youth of their decripit
father, did by the counself Medea cut him Le. p. 177.
in pieces, and boil him together with strange herbs; but made not of him a
new man.

CHAP. 3.
That the Hobbian Principles are inconsistent one with another.

MY third Harping-Iron is aimed at the head of his Leviathan, or the rational
part of his discourse, to show that his Principles are contradictory one to
another, and consequently destructive one of another. It is his own
observation. That which takes away the reputation of wisdom in him that
forms a Religion, or adds Le. p. 58.
to it when it is already formed, is an enjoining a belief of contradictories,
for both parts of a contradiction cannot possibly be true. And therefore to
enjoin the belief of them, is an argument of ignorance. How he will free
himself from his own censure, I do not understand; let the Reader judge.

He affirms that an hereditary kingdom is the best form of government; We are
made Ci. c. 10. s. 18.
subjects to him upon the best condition, whose interest it is that we should
be safe and sound. And this comes to to pass when we are the Sovereigns
inheritance, (that is in an hereditary kingdom) for every one does of his own
accord study to preserve his own inheritance. Now let us hear him retract all
this. There is no perfect form of government where the disposing of the
succession is Le. p. 99. Ci. c. 9. s. 13. Le. p. 193.
not in the present Sovereign. And whether he transfer it by testament, or give
it, or sell it, it is rightly disposed.

He affirms, That which is said in the Scripture, It is better to obey God
than man, has place in the kingdom of God by pact, and not by nature. One can
scarcely meet with a more absurd senseless Paradox, That in Gods own kingdom of
Nature, (where he supposes all men equal, and no Governor but God,) it should
not be better to obey God than man, the Creator than the creator, the
Sovereign rather than a fellow-subject. Of the two it had been the less
absurdity to have said, that it had place in the kingdom of God by nature, and
not by pact, because in the kingdom of God by pact, Sovereigns are as mortal
gods.

Now let us see him Penelope like, unweave in the night what he had woven in
the day, or rather unweave in the day, what he had woven in the night. It is
manifest enough, that when man receives two contrary commands, and knows that
one of them is Gods, he ought to obey Le. p. 321.
that, and not the other, though it be the command even of his lawful
Sovereign. Take another place more express, speaking of the first kingdom of
God by pact with Abraham, etc. He has these words, Nor was there any contract
which could add to, or strengthen the obligation, Le. p. 249.
by which both they and all men else were bound naturally to obey God Almighty.
And Ibid.
before any such Kingdom of God by pact, As the moral law they were already
obliged, and Ci. c. 16. s. 2. s. 1.
needed not have been contracted withal. He fancieth that God reigns by pact
over Adam and Eve, but this pact became presently void. And if it had stood
firm, what Kingdom of God by nature could have been before it? But he reckons
his Kingdom of God by pact from Abraham, from him the Kingdom of God by pact
takes its beginning. But in Abraham's time, and before his time, the World was
full of Kings: every City had a King; was it not better for their subjects to
obey God than them? yet that was the Kingdom of God by nature, or no Kingdom of
God at all.

Sometimes he says the Laws of nature are Laws, whose Laws (such of them as
oblige all mankind) and in respect of God, as he is the God Le. p. 185.
of Nature, are natural, in respct of the same God, as he is King of Kings, are
Laws; and right reason is a Law. And he defines the Ci. c. 2. s. 1.
Law of nature, to be the deictate of right reason. Where by the way observe,
what he makes to be the end of the Laws of nature, The long conservation of our
lives and members, so much as is in our power. By this the Reader may see what
he believes of honesty, or the life to come. At other times he says that they
are no laws. Those which we call the Laws of nature, being nothing else but
certain conclusions understood by reason of things to be done; or to be left
undone. And a law, if we speak properly and accurately, is the speech of him
that Ci. c. 3. (...). 33.
commands something by right to others, to be done, or not to be done,
speaking properly, they are not laws, as they proceed from nature.

It is true, he adds in the same place, That as they are given by God in holy
Scripture, they are most properly called Laws, for the holy Scripture is the
voice of God ruling all things by the greatest right. But this will not salve
the contradiction, for so the Laws of nature shall be no Laws to any but those
who have read the Scripture, contrary to the sense of all the World. And even
in this he contradicts himself also. The Bible is a Law? to whom? to all the
World; he knows it is not: How came it then to be a Law to us? Did God speak
Q. p. 136.
it viva voce to us? Have we any other warrant for it than the word of the
Prophots? Have we seen the miraoles? Have we any other assurance of their
certainty, than the authority of the Church? And so he concludes, That the
authority of the Church is the authority of the Commonwealth, the authority of
the Commonwealth, the authority of the Sovereign, and his authority was given
him by us. And so the Bible was made Law by the Ibid.
assent of the Subjects. And the Bible is their only Law, where the civil
Sovereign has made it so. Thus in seeking to prove one contradiction Le p. 332.
we have met with two.

He teaches that the Laws of nature are Ci. c. 3. s. 29. Ci. c. 5. s. 2.
eternal and immutable, that which they forbid can never be lawful, that which
they command never unlawful. At other times he teaches, that in war, and
especially in a war of ast men against all men, the Laws of nature are silent.
And that they do not oblige as Laws, before there be a Commonwealth
constituted. When a Common-wevlth is once settled, then are they Le. p. 138.
actually Laws, and not before.

He says true religion consists in obedience to Christ's Lieutenants, and in
giving God such Q^. p. 334. p. 341.
honor, both in attributes and actions, as they in their several
Lieutenancies, shall ordein. Which Lieutenant upon earth is the supreme civil
magistrate. And yet contrary to this he excepteth from the obedience due to
sovereign Princes, all things that are contrary to the laws of God, who rules
over rulers. Adding Ci. c. 6. s. 13.
that we cannot rightly transfer the obedience due to him upon men. And more
plainly, If a sovereign shall command himself to be worshipped with divine
attributes and actions, as such as imply an independance upon God, or
immortality, or infinite power, to pray unto them being absent, or to ask those
things of them which only God can give, to offer sacrifice, or the like.
Although Ci. c. 15. s. 18.
Kings command us we must ab stein. He conefesseth that the subjects of Abraham
had sinned, if they had denied the existence or providence of God, or done any
thing that was expressly against the honor of God, in obedience to his Ci. c.
16. s. 7. Le. p. 192.
commands. And actions that are naturally signs of contumely, cannot be made
by humane power a part of divine worship, cannot be parts of divine worship,
and yet religion may consist in such worship, is a contradiction.

He confesses, That if the Commonwealth should command a Subject to say or do
something Ci. c. 15. s. 18.
that is contumelious unto God, or should forbid him to worship God, he ought
not to obey. And yet maintains that a Christian holding firmly the faith of
Christ in his heart, if he be commanded by his lawful Sovereign, may deny
Christ with his tongue, alleging, That profession with the tongue is but an
external thing. And that it is not he in that case, who denies Christ before
men, but his Governor, and the law of his Country. Has he so soon forgot
himself? Le. p. 271.
Is not the denial of Christ contumelious to God?

He affirms that if a Sovereign shall grant to a Subject any liberty
inconsistent with Sovereign power, if the Subject refuse to obey the Sovereigns
command, being contrary to the liberty granted, it is a sin, and contrary to
his duty, for he ought to take notice of what is inconsistent with Le. p. 157.
Sovereignty, etc. And that such liberty was granted through ignorance of the
evil consequence thereof. Then a Subject may judge not only what is fit for his
own preservation, but also what are the essential rights of Sovereignty, which
is contrary to his doctrine elsewhere. It belongs to Kings to discern what is
good and evil; and private men, who take to themselves Ci. c. 12. s. 1.
the knowledge of good and evil, do covet to be as Kings, which consists not
with the safety of the Commonwealth; which he calls a seditious doctrine,
and one of the diseases of a Commonwealth. Yet such is his forgetfulness,
that he Le. p. 168.
himself licenseth his own book for the Press, and to be taught in the
Universities, as containing nothing contrary to the word of God or good
manners, or to the disturbance of public tranquillity. Le. p. 395.
Is not this to take to himself the knowledge of good and evil?

In one place he says that the just power of Sovereigns is absolute, and to be
limited by the strength of the Commonwealth, and nothing else. Ci c. 6. s. 18.
In other places he says his power is to be limited by the Laws of God and
nature. As there is that in Heaven, though not on earth, Le. p. 167.
which he should stand in fear of, and whose Laws he ought to obey. And though
it be not determined in Scripture, what Laws every King shall constitute in his
dominions, yet it is determined, what Law he shall not constitute. And it is
true, that Sovereigns are all subject to the laws of Le. p. 199. p. 169.
nature, because such laws be divine, and cannot by any man or Common-woalth be
abrogated.

In one place hemaintaineth that all men by nature are equal among themselves.
In another place, that the father of every man was originally his Sovereign Ci
c. 1. s. 3.
Lord, with power over him of life and death. Le. p. 178.


He acknowledges that God is not only good, and just, and merciful, but the
best. That nature does dictate to us that God is to be honored; and that to
honor, is to think as highly of his power and goodness as is possible, and
that nothing ought to be attributed Ci c. 15. s. 9. Le. p. 188.
to him, but what is honorable. Nothing can be more contrary to this
goodness, or more dishonorable to God, than to make him to be the cause of
all the sin in the World. Perhaps he will say that this opinion makes God
the cause of sin: But does not the Bishop think him the cause of all actions?
And are not sins of Qu. p. 175.
commission actions? Is murder no action? And does not God himself say, Non est
malum in civitate quod ego non feci? And was not murder one of those evils? The
like doctrine he has. Qu. p. 108. and 234.

I chanced to say, that if a child, before he have the use of reason, shall
kill a man in his passion; yet because he had no malice to incite him to it,
nor reason to restrein him from it, he shall not die for it in the strict rules
of particular justice, unless there be some mixture of public justice in the
case, showing only what was the law, not what was my opinion. An innocent
child for terror to others, in some cases may be deprived of those honors and
inheritances, which were to have descended upon him from his father, but not of
his life. Amazia slew the murderers of the King his father, but he 2 Chro. 25.
4. Deur. 24. 16.
slew not their children, but did as it is written in the Law, in the book of
Moses, The fathers shall not dye for the children, nor the children for the
fathers, And he presently taxed me for it, The Bishop would make but an ill
Judge of innocent children. And the same merciful opinion Qu. p. 277. Le. p.
165.
he maintains elsewhere. All punishments of innocent Subjects, be they great
or little, are against the law of nature. For punishment is only for
transgression of the law, and therefore there can be no punishment of the
innocent. Yet within few lines after he changes his note. In Subjects who
deliberately deny the authority of the Commonwealth established, the vengeance
is lawfully extended, not only to the fathers, but Ibid.
also to the third and fourth generation. His reason is, because this offense
consists in renouncing of subjection: so they suffer not as Subjects, but as
enemies. Well, but the children were born subjects as well as the father, and
they never renounced their subjection, how come they to lose their birthright,
and their lives for their fathers fault, if there can be no punishment of the
innocent, so the contradiction stands still.

But all this is but a copy of his countenance, I have showed formerly
expressly out of his principles, That the foundation of the right of
punishing, exercised in every Commonwealth, is not the just right of the
Sovereign for crimes committed, but that right which every man by nature had to
kill every man. Which right he says every Subject has renounced, but the
Sovereign by whose authority punishment is inflicted, has not. So if he do
examine the crime in justice, and condemn the delinquent, then is properly
punishment. If he do not, then it is an hostile act, but both ways just and
allowable. Reader, if thou please to see what a slippery memory he has: for
thine own satisfaction, read over the beginning of the eight and twentieth
Chapter of his Leviathan. Innocents cannot be justly punished, but justly
killed upon his principles.

But this very man, who would seem so zealous sometimes for humane justice,
that there can be no just punishment of innocents, no just punishment, but for
crimes committed, how stands he affected to divine justice? He reguardeth it
not at all, grounding every where Gods right to afflict the Creatures upon his
omnipotence: and maintaining that God may as justly afflict with eternal
torments without sin, as for sin. Though God have power to afflict a man, and
not for sin, without in justice: Shall we think God so cruel, as to afflict a
man, and not for sin, with extreme and endless torments? Is it not cruelty?
No more than to do the same for sin, when he that afflicts Q. p. 13.
might without trouble have kept him from sinning. Whether God do afflict
eternally, or punish eternally; whether the Sovereign proceed judciially, or in
an hostile way, so it be not for any crime committed; it is all one as to the
justice of God and the Sovereign, and all one as to the sufferings of the
innocent. But it may and does often happen in Commonwealths, that a Subject
may Le. p. 109.
be put to death by the command of the Sovereign power, and yet neither do the
other wrong; that is to say, both be innocent, for that is the whole scope of
the place. It is against the law of nature to punish innocent Subjects, says
one place, but innocent Subjects may lawfully be killed or put to death, says
another.

Sometimes he makes the institution of Sovereignty to be only the laying down
the right of Subjects, which they had by nature. For he who renounceth or
passes away his right, gives not to any other man, a right which he had not
before, because there is nothing to which every man had not right by nature,
but only stands out of his way, that he may enjoy his own original right,
without hinderance from him, Le. p. 65.
not without hinderance from another. And elsewhere, The Subjects did not give
the Sovereign that right, but only in laying down theirs, strengthened him to
use his own, etc. So it was Le. p. 162.
not given, but left to him, and to him only. And the translation of right does
consist only in not Ci. c. 2. s. 4.
resisting. He might as well have said, and with as much sense, the
transferring of right does consist in not transferring of right. At other times
he makes it to be a surrender, or giving up of the subjects right to govern
himself to this man. A conferring of all their power and strength upon one man,
that may reduce all their wills by plurality of voices to one will. An
appointing Le. p. 87.
of one man to bear their person, and acknowledging themselves to be the
authors of whatsoever the Sovereign shall act, or cause to be acted in those
things which concern the common safety; a submission of their wills to his
will, their judgments to his judgment. And David did no injury Le. p. 109.
to Uriah, because the right to do what he pleased, was given him by Uriah
himself. Before we had a transferring without transferring, now we have a
giving up without giving up, an appointing or constituting, without appointing
or constituting, a subjection without subjection, an authorizing without
authorizing What is this?

He says that it cannot be said honorably of Ci. c. 15. s. 14.
God, that he has parts or totality, which are the attributes of finite
things. If it cannot be said honorably of God, that he has parts or totality,
then it cannot be said honorably of God that he is a body; for every body has
parts and totality. Now hear what he says, Every part of the Universe is body;
And Le. p. 371.
that which is no body, is no part of the Universe. And because the Universe is
all, that which is no part of it, is nothing. Then if God have no parts and
totality, God is nothing. Let him judge how honorable this is for God.

He says, We honor not God but dishonor him by any value less than
infinite. And how Le. p. 357. Qu. p. 266.
does he set an infinite value upon God, who every where makes him to subsist
by successive duration. Infinite is that to which nothing can be added, but to
that which subsisteth by successive duration, something is added every minute.

He says, Christ had not a Kingly authority committed to him by his Father in
the World, but Ci. c. 17. s. 6.
only consiliary and doctrinal. He says on the contrary, That the kingdom of
Iudaea was his hereditary right from King David. etc. And when it pleased him
to play the King, he required entire obedience, Math. 21. 2. Go into the
village over against you, and streightway ye shall find an assetied, and a colt
with her, loose them and bring them unto me. And if any man say ought Ci. c.
11. s. 6.
unto you, ye shall say, The Lord has need of them.

He says, The institution of eternal punishment was before sin. And if the
command be such as Ci. c. 4. s. 9. Le. p. 321.
cannot be obeyed without being damned to eternal death, then it were madness
to obey it. And what evil has excommunicatien in it, but the consequent, Ci.
c. 17. s. 25.
eternal punishment? At other times he says there is no eternal punishment. It
is evident that there shall be a second death of every Le. p. 245.
one that shall be condemned at the day of Judgment, after which he shall die
no more. He who knows no soul nor spirit, may well be ignorant of a spiritual
death.

He says, It is a doctrine repugnant to civil society, that whatsoever a man
does against his conscience is sin. Yet he himself says, It is a sin Le. p.
168.
whatsoever one does against his conscience, for they that do that, despise the
Law. Ci. c. 12. s. 2.


He says, That all power secular and spiritual under Christ, is united in the
Christian Commonwealth; Ci. c. 18. s. 1.
that is, the Christian Sovereign: Yet he himself says on the contrary, It
cannot be doubted of, that the power of binding and loosing; that is, of
remotting and retaining sins, (which we call the power of the keys) was given
by Christ to future Pastors in the same manner as to the present Apostles. And
all power of remitting sin which Ci. c. 17. s. 25.
Christ himself had, was given to the Apostles. All spiritual power is in the
Christian Magistrate. Some spiritual power (that is the power of the keys) is
in the successors of the Apostles, that is not in the Christian Magistrate, is
a contradiction.

He confesses, That it is manifest that from the ascension of Christ until the
conversion of Kings, the power Ecclesiastical was in the Apostles, and so
delivered unto their successors by Le. p. 267.
imposition of hands. And yet straight, forgetting himself, he takes away all
power from them, even in that time when there were no Christian Kings in the
World. He allows them no power to make any Ecclesiastical laws or
constitutions, or to impose any manner of commands upon Christians. The office
of the Apostles was not to command, but teach. As Schoolmasters, not as
Commanders. Ci. c. 17. s. 24. Le. p. 269.
Yet Schoolmasters have some power to command. He suffers not the Apostles
to ordain, but those whom the Church appoints, nor to excommunicate, or
absolve, but whom the Church pleases. He makes the determination of all
controversies to rest in the Church, not in the Apostles. And resolves all
questions into the authority of the Church. The election of Doctors and
Prophets did rest upon the authority of the Church of Antioch. And if it be
inquired by what authority it came to pass that it was received for the
command of the Holy Ghost, which Ci. c. 17. s. 24.
those Prophets and Doctors said proceeded from the Holy Ghost, we must
necessarily answer, By the authority of the Church of Antioch. Thus every where
he ascribes all authority to the Church, none at all to the Apostles, even in
those times before there were Christian Kings. He says not, tell it to the
Apostles; but tell it to the Church, that we may know the definitive sentence,
whether sin, or no sin, is not left to Ci. c. 17. s. 25.
them, but to the Church. And it is manifest, that all authority in spiritual
things, does depend upon the authority of the Ci. c. 18. s. 1.
Church

Thus not contented with single contradictions, he twisteth them together; for
according to his definition of a Church, there was no Christian Church at
Antioch, or in those parts of the World, either then or long after. Hear him. A
Church is a company of men professing Christian Religion, united in the person
of Le. p. 248.
one Sovereign, at whose command they ought to assemble, and without whose
authority they ought not to assemble. Yet there was no Christian Sovereign in
those parts of the World then, or for two hundred years after, and by
consequence, according to his definition, no Church.

He teaches, That when the civil Sovereign is an infidel, every one of his own
subjects that resists him, sins against the Laws of God, and rejects the
counsel of the Apostles, that admonishes all Christians to obey their Princes,
and Le. p. 330.
all children and servants to obey their Parents and Masters in all things. As
for not resisting, he is in the right, but for obeying in all things, in his
sense, it is an abominable error. Upon this ground, he allows Christians to
deny Christ, to sacrifice to idols, so they preserve faith in their hearts. He
tells them, They have the license that Naaman had, and need not put
themselves into danger for their faith. That is, they have liberty to do any
external acts, which their infidel Sovereigns shall command them. Now hear the
contrary from himself. When Sovereigns are not Christians, in spiritual things;
that is, in those things which pertain to the manner of worshipping God, some
Ci. c. 18. s. 13.
Church of Christians is to be followed; Adding, that when we may not obey
them, yet we may not resist them, but eundum est ad Christum per martyrium, we
ought to suffer for it.

He confesses, That matter and power are indifferent to contrary forms and
contrary acts. Qu. p. 292.
And yet maintains every where that all matter is necessitated by the outward
causes to one individual form; that is it is not indifferent. And all power by
his Principles is limited and determined to one particular act. Thus he
scoffeth at me for the contrary, very learnedly, as if there were a power that
were not a power to do some particular act, or a power to kill, and yet to kill
no body in particular. Nor does power signify any thing actually, but those
motions Qu. p. 108.
and present acts, from which the act that is not now, but shall be hereafter,
necessarily proceeds. If every act be necessary, and all power determined to
one particular act, as he says here, how is power indifferent to contrary
Acts, as he says there?

He acknowledges, That though at some certain distance the real and very
object seem invested with the fancy it begets in us, yet still the Le. p. 4.
Qu. p. 245.
object is one thing, the image or fancy is another. And yet affirms the
contrary, That the Preachers voice is the same thing with hearing, and a
fancy in the hearer. Even so he might say, that the color or the sight, is
the same thing with seeing. Men utter their voice many times, when no man
hears them.

He says, Inspiration implies a gift supernatural, and the immediate hand of
God. On the contrary he says, To say a man speaks by supernatural Le. p. 324.
Le. p. 196.
inspiration, is to say he finds an ardent desire to speak, or some strong
opinion of himself, for which he can allege no natural and sufficient reason.
He reckons this opinion, that faith and sanctity are not to be attained by
study and Le p. 169 Le. p. 214.
reason, but by supernatural inspiration, among the diseases of a
Commonwealth. And lastly he acknowledges no proper inspiration, but blowing
of one thing into another, nor metaphorical, but inclining the spirit.

He says, Ordinary men understand the word body and empty, as well as learned
men; And when they hear named an empty vessel, the learned as well as the
unlearned, mean and understand the same thing, namely, that there is nothing in
it that Qu. p. 307.
can be seen, and whether it be truly empty, the plowman and the Schoole-man
know alike. Now hear him confess the contrary. In the s^se of common people
not all the Universe is called body, but only such parts thereof as they can
discern by the sense of feeling to resist the force, or by the Le. p. ^07
of their eyes to hinder them from a farther prospect, therefore in the common
language of men, air and aeriall substances, use not to be taken for bodies.

He holds that no law may be made to command the will. The style of law is,
Do this, Qu. p. 138.
or do not this; or if thou do this thou shall suffer this. But no law runs
thus. Will this, or will not this; or if thou have a will to this, thou shall
suffer this. And yet he defines sin to be that which is done, or left undone,
or spoken, or willed De Ci. c. 14. s. 17.
contrary to the reason of the Commonwealth. Then the laws of men are made to
bind the will, if that which is willed contrary to the laws be a sin.

He says, Necessary is that which is impossible to be otherwise, or that which
cannot possibly be, Qu. p. 26. and p. 36.
and possible and impossible have no signification in reference to the time
past, or time present, but only time to come. Yet in the very same paragraph
he asserteth a necessity from eternity, or an antecedent necessity, derived
from the very beginning of time.

He says, There is no doubt a man can will one thing or other, or forbear to
will it. If a man Qu. p. 310.
can both will and forbear to will the same thing, then a man is as free to
will as to do. But he teaches the contrary every where, That a man is free to
do if he will, but he is not free to will. Qu. p. 54.


He says, Though Ged gave Solomon his choice, that is, the thing which he
should choose, it does not follow that he did not also give him the Qu. p. 75.
act of election; that is, determine him to that which he should choose. To give
a man choice of two things, and determine him to one of them, is contradictory.

He confesses, That it is an absurd speech to say the will is compelled, And
yet with the Qu. p. 208.
same breath he affirms, That a man may be compelled to will. The reason why
the will cannot be compelled is, because it implies a contradiction.
Compulsion is evermore against a man's will; How can a man will that which is
against his will? Yet says T. H. Many things may compel a man to do an action
in producing his will. That a man may Ibid.
be compelled to do an action, there is no doubt, but to say he is compelled to
do that action which he is willing to do, that is when a new will is produced,
or that a will to do the action is produced then when the man is compelled, is
a contradiction.

He makes the sovereign Prince to be the only authentic interpreter of
Scripture, and to Ci. c. 17. s. 27. Le. p. 296.
have Pastor all authority jure divino, which all other Pastors has but jure
civili, yet in all questions of faith, and interpretation of the word of God,
he obliges the sovereign to make use of Ecclesiastical Doctors, rightly
ordained by imposition of hands, to whom he says Christ has promised an
infallibility, His gloss that this infallibility is not such an infallibility,
that they cannot be deceived themselves, but that Ci. c. 17. s. 24.
a subject cannot be deceived in obeying them, is absurd, for such an
infallibility (upon his grounds) the Sovereign had without their Qu. p. 214.
advise. To pass by his confused and party colored discourse, how does this
agree with his former objection? which I shall insert here mutatis mutandis.
That the right interpretation of scripture should depend upon the infallibility
of Ecclesiastical Doctors, many incommodities and absurdities which must
follow from thence, do prohibit, the chiefest whereof is this, that not only
all civil obedience would be taken away, contrary to the precept of Christ,
but also all society, and humane peace would be dissolved, contrary to the
laws of nature. For whilst they make the Ecclesiastical Doctors the
infallible Judges, what pleases God, and what displeases him, the subjects
cannot obey their Sovereigns, before the Doctors have judged of their commands,
whether they be conformable to Scripture or not. And so either they do not
obey, or they obey for the judgment of their Doctors, that is they obey their
Doctors, not eheir Sovereign, Thus civil obedience is taken away. These are
his own words with a little v^iation, only putting in the Doctors for the
subjects. I consider not what is true or false in them for the present, but
only show the inconsistency of his grounds, how he builds with one hand, and
pulls down with the other.

He says it is determined in Scripture what laws every christian King shall
not constitute in his dominions. And in the next words, Sovereigns Le. p. 199.
in their own dominions are the sole Legislators. And that those books only are
canonical in every nation, which are established for such by Le. p. 169.
the sovereign authority. Then the determinations of Scripture upon his grounds
are but civil laws, and do not tie the hands of Sovereigns. He teaches us
every where that the subsequent commands of a Sovereign contrary to his former
laws is an abrogation of them. And that it is an opinion repugnant to the
nature of a commonwealth, that he that has the sovereign power is subject to
the civil laws. The determinations of Scripture upon his grounds do bind the
hands of Kings, when they themselves please to be bound, no longer.

To conclude sometimes he does admit the soul to be a distinct substance from
the body, sometimes he denies it. Sometimes he makes reason to be a natural
faculty, sometimes he makes it to be an acquired habit. In some places he
allows the will to be a rational appetite, in other places he disallowes it.
Sometimes he will have it to be a law of nature, that men must stand to their
pacts, Sometimes he makes covenants of mutual trust in the state of nature to
be void. Sometimes he will have no punishment but for crimes that might have
been left undone, At other times he makes all crimes to be inevitable.
Sometimes he will have the dependence of actions upon the will to be truly
liberty, At other times he ascribes liberty to rivers, which have no will.
Sometimes he teaches that though an action be necessitated, yet the will to
break the law makes the action to be unjust, at other times he makes the will
to be much more necessitated than the action. He tells us that civil
lawmakers may err and sin in making of a law, And yet the law so made is an
infallible rule. Yes to lead a man infallibly into a ditch. What should a man
say to this man? How shall one know when he is in earnest, and when he is in
jest. He sets down his opinion just as Gypsies tell fortunes, both ways,
that if the one miss the other may be sure to hit, that when they are accused
of falsehood by one, they may appeal to another. But what did I write in such
a place.

It was the praise of John Baptist, that he was not like a reed shaken with the
wind, bending or inclining, hither and thither, this way and that way, now to
old truths, then to new errors. And it is the honor of every good Christian.
St. Paul does excellently describe such fluctuating Christians by two
comparisons, the one of little children, the other of a ship lying at Hull,
Ephesians. 4. 14. That we henceforth be no more children tossed too and fro, and
carried about with every wind of doctrine, as a child wavers between his love
and duty, to his parent or nurse on the one hand, and some apple or other toy
which is held forth to him on the other hand, or as a ship lying at anchor
changes its positure with every wave, and every puff of wind. As the last
company leaves them, or the present occasion makes them, so they vary their
discourses.

When the time was T. H. was very kind to me, to let me see the causes and
grounds of my errors. Arguments seldom work on men of wit and learning, when
they have once engaged themselves in a contrary opinion. If any thing will do
it, it is the showing of them the causes of their errors. One good turn
requires another. Now I will do as much for him. If it Q. p. 334
do not work upon himself: Yet there is hope it may undeceive some of his
disciples. A principal cause of his errors is a fancying to himself a
general state of nature, which is so far from being general, that there is
not an instance to be found of it in the nature of things, where mankind was
altogether without laws and without governors, guided only by self interest,
without any sense of conscience, justice, honesty, or honor. He may search all
the corners of America with a candle and lanthorn at noon day, and after his
fruitless pains, return a non est invent us.

Yet all plants and living creatures are subject to degenerate and grow wild by
degrees. Suppose it should so happen that some remnant of men, either chased by
war, or persecution, or forced out of the habitable world for some crimes by
themselves committed, or being cast by shipwreck upon some deserts, by long
conversing with savage beasts, lions, bears, wolves and tigers, should in time
become more brutish (it is his own epithet,) than the bruites themselves,
would any man in his right wits make that to be the universal condition of
mankind, which was only the condition of an odd handful of men, or that to be
the state of nature, which was not the state of nature, but an accidental
degeneration?

He that will behold the state of nature rightly, must look upon the family of
Adam, and his posterity in their successive generations from the creation to
the deluge, and from the deluge, until Abraham's time, when the first Kingdom
of God by pact is supposed by T. H. to begin. All this while (which was a great
part of that time the world has stood) from the creation lasted the Kingdom of
God by nature, as he phraseth it, And yet in those days there were laws and
government, and more Kings in the world, then there are at this present, we
find nine Kings engaged in one war, and yet all their dominions Genesis 14.
but a narrow circuit of land. And so it continued for diverse hundreds of years
after, as we see by all those Kings which Joshua discomfited in the land of
Canaan. Every City had its own King. The reason is evident, The original right
of fathers of families was not then extinguished.

Indeed T. H. supposes that men did spring out of the earth like Mushromes or
Mandrakes. That we may return again to the state Ci. c. 8. s. 1.
of nature, and consider men as if they were even now suddenly sprouted and
grown out of the earth, after the manner of Mushroms, without any obligation of
one to another. But this supposion is both false and Atheistical, howsoever it
dropped from his pen. Mankind did not spring out of the earth, but was created by
God, not many suddenly, but one to whom all his posterity were obliged as to
their father and ruler.

A second ground of his his errors is his gross mistake of the laws of
nature, which he relates most impersectly, and most untruly. A moral Heathen
would blush for shame, to see such a catalogue of the laws of nature.

First he makes the laws of nature to be laws and no laws: Just as a man and
no man, hit a bird and no bird, with a stone and no stone, on a tree and no
tree: not laws but theorems, laws which required not performance but
endeavors, laws which were silent, and could not be put in execution in the
state of nature. Ci. c. 14. s. 9.
Where nothing was another man's, and therefore a man could not steal, where all
things were common, and therefore no adultery, where there was a state of war,
and therefore it was lawful to kill, where all things were defined by a man's
own judgment, and therefore what honors he pleased to give unto his father:
and lastly, where there were no public judgments, and therefore no use of
witnesses. As for the first table he does not trouble himself much with it,
except it be to accommodate it unto Kings. Every one of these grounds here
alleged, are most false, without any verisimilitude in them, and so his
superstructure must needs fall flat to the ground.

Secondly he relates the laws of nature most imperfectly, smothering and
concealing all those principal laws, which concern either piety, and our duty
toward God, or justice, and our duties toward man.

Thirdly, sundry of those laws which he is pleased to take notice of, are
either misrelated, or misinterpreted by him. He makes the only end of all the
laws of nature to be the long conservation of a man's life and members, most
untruely. He makes every man by nature the only judge of the means of his own
conservation, most untruly. His father and Sovereign in the weightiest cases,
is more judge than himself. He says that by the law of nature every man has
right to all things, and over all persons, most untruely. He says the natural
condition of mankind is a war of all men against all men, most untruely. And
that nature dictateth to us to relinquish this feigned right of all men to all
things, most untruely. And that nature dictateth to a man to retein his right
of preserving his life and limbs, though against a lawful magistrate, lawfully
proceeding, most untruely. I omit his uncouth doctrine about pacts made in the
state of nature: and that he knows no gratitude, but where there is a trust,
fiducia. These things are unsound, and the rest of his laws, for the most part,
poor trivial things, in comparison of those weightier dictates of nature,
which he has omitted.

All other Writers of Politics do derive Commonwealths from the sociability
of nature, which is in mankind, most truly. But he will have the beginning of
all humane society to be from mutual fear: as much contrary to reason as to
authority. We see some kind of Creatures delight altogether in solitude,
rarely, or never in company. We see others, (among which is mankind) delight
altogether in company, rarely, or never in solitude. Let him tell me what
mutual fear of danger did draw the silly Bees into swarms; or the Sheep and
doves into flocks; and what protection they can hope for, one from another? and
I shall conceive it possible, that the beginning of humane society might be
from fear also.

And thus having invented a fit foundation for his intended building, y^leped
the state of mere nature, which he himself first devised for that purpose, he
has been long moduling and framing to himself a new form of policy, to be
builded upon it: but the best is, it has only been in paper. All this while
he has never had a finger in mortar. This is the new frame of absolute
Sovereignty, which T. H. knew right well would never stand, nor he should be
ever permitted to rear it up in our Europaean Climates or in any other part of
the habitable World, which had ever seen any other form of civil government.
Therefore he has sought out for a fit place in America, among the Savages, to
try if perhaps they might be persuaded, that the Laws of God and nature, the
names of good and evil, just and unjust, did signify nothing but at the
pleasure of the Sovereign Prince.

And because there has been much clashing in these Quarters about Religion,
through the distemperd zeal of some, the seditious orations of others, and some
pernicious principles, well meant at first, but ill understood, and worse
pursued: to prevent all such garboiles in his Commonwealth, he has taken an
order to make his Sovereign to be Christ's Lieutenant upon earth, in obedience
to whose commands true religion does consist. Thus making policy to be the
building, and religion the hangings, which must be fashioned just according to
the propertion of the policy; and (not as Mr. Cartwright would have had it)
making religion to the building, and policy the hangings, which must be
conformed to religion.

Well the law is costly, and I am for an accommodation, that T. H. should have
the sole privilege of setting up his form of government in America, as being
calculated and fitted for that Meridian. And if it prosper there, then to have
the liberty to transplant it hither: who knows (if there could but be some
means devised to make them understand his language) whether the Americans might
not choose him to be their Sovereign? But all the fear is, that if he should put
his principles in practice, as magistrally as he does dictate them, his
supposed subjects might chance to tear their mortal God in pieces with their
teeth, and entomb his Sovereignty their bowels.

FINIS.
An Advertisement to the READER.
BEcause I know but of one Edition of Mr. Hobs his Leviathan, and of his
Questions concerning Liberty; therefore I have cited them two by the page. Le.
standing for Leviathan, and Qu. for Questions. But because there are suudry
editions of his book De Cive, I have cited that by the Chapter and Section,
according to his Paris Edition.


