The Excellency of the Christian Revelation, as it promises Assistance, and
complete Salvation to Sinners.

A SERMON Preached in the Cathedral Church of St. PAVL, November the 6th. 1699.

Being the Eighth, for this Year, of the Lecture founded by the Honorable
Robert Boil, Esquire;

By SAMVEL BRADFORD, Rector of St. Mary le Bow, Chaplain in Ordinary to His
Majesty.

LONDON: Printed for Tho. Parkhurst, at the Bible and Three Crowns in
Cheapside, near Mercers Chapel, 1699.

1 TIMOTHY 1.15. This is a faithful saying, and worthy of all acceptance, that
Christ Jesus came into the World, to save Sinners. --


IN discoursing of the Method, in which the great Mediator between God and Man,
Christ Jesus, has undertaken to save Sinners, I proposed to consider the
Necessities of fallen Men, and thereby to evince both that we had very great
need of the assistance of a Mediator, and that no Method, which we can possibly
think of, could have so fully answered the end of providing for our
Necessities, as that which our blessed Savior, by his coming into the World
has been pleased to take.

The Necessities of Men I reduced to four Heads.

First, A suspicion and jealousy of Mind concerning God, and an Alienation from
him, as consequent thereupon. Secondly, A gross ignorance of God, of
themselves, and of the several particulars of their Duty. Thirdly, An
indisposition and inability to comply with the Divine Will, although it should
be fully and clearly revealed. Fourthly, After all, an incapacity of removing
those other evil and mischievous Consequences, to which their sins had exposed
them, and of obtaining for themselves that complete Salvation, which they stood
in need of.
The two former of these I have considered at large, and now proceed to those
two which remain, which I shall treat of with greater Brevity, what I have to
offer upon these Heads, not requiring so much inlargment, as on the former.

Thirdly therefore, The next Difficulty which fallen Men are under, is this,
That they find themselves indisposed and unable to comply with the Divine Will,
even when it is fully and clearly revealed to them.

Whosoever will impartially consider what I have offered, touching the Precepts
and Example of our Blessed Savior, and will seriously study the Writings of
the New Testament, in which a particular account of each of them is contained,
must acknowledge, that a professed Christian cannot want sufficient
Instruction, in all the particulars of his Duty: But there is still something
farther necessary, viz. to be both able and willing to comply with the
Precepts, and to imitate the Example thus set before him. Christians themselves
confess, and complain with the Apostle, Romans 7.23.
that they see another Law in their Members, warring against the Law of their
Minds, which, antecedently to the Grace of the Gospel, brings them into
Captivity. And the Adversaries of Christianity make this a great Objection
against our holy Profession, and I doubt not but that it is, at the bottom, the
principal ground of their Infidelity, that the Precepts of our Lord are too
strict, and his Example too exact, to be complied with and imitated by humane
Nature. And this is evidently the Reason, why so many professed Christians act
disagreeably to their Profession, viz. That their Appetites and Passions are
too strong for their Understanding and Reason: they know the Will of God, and
inwardly approve it, but cannot prevail with themselves to obey it: to Will,
that is to have some faint and imperfect inclination to act according to the
conviction of their Judgments, is present with them; Verse. 18, 19.
but how to perform that which is good, they find not: So that the good which
they would, they do not; but the evil which they would not, that they do, as
the same Apostle emphatically expresses it. And all this is but one of those
evil Consequences, which, as I observed in a former Lecture, Lect. ij. p. 20.
21.
naturally follow our apostasy from God.

My present Business therefore is to show, what Provision our Mediator has
made in this case; and this I shall do, in the three following Particulars.

I. Our Blessed Savior has provided in this instance, by annexing such
Sanctions to his Precepts, as do naturally tend most powerfully to influence
our Minds.

II. By promising the assistance of the Divine Spirit, for the enabling us to
do what of our selves we cannot.

III. By settling such institutions to be constantly observed and used in his
Church, as are both in their own Nature proper to excite us, and are moreover
designed as Means of conveying the Grace of the Holy Spirit to us.

I. By annexing such Sanctions to his Precepts, as do naturally tend most
powerfully to influence our Minds.

The Precepts of Christianity are all of them so perfectly good in their own
Nature, and so thoroughly agreeable to the Understanding of a reasonable
Creature, that every Man to whom they are made known, would readily comply with
them, if it were not for the seeming Pleasures of Sin, and the difficulties
with which some instances of Virtue seem to be attended; seem, I say; for after
all, the Experience of every good Christian fully satisfies him, that the
present Pleasure, which attends a faithful compliance with the Precepts of the
Gospel, greatly preponderates all its difficulties; as the uneasiness and the
remorse, which attend a sinful Course of Life, do on the other hand render its
Pleasures very inconsiderable. Prove. 3.17.
The ways of Wisdom are ways of Pleasantness, and all her Paths are Peace; and
to him that is become a through Christian, the Commandments of God are not
Grievons. 1 John 5.3.
But nevertheless, thus it falls out, through the Error and Corruption of
Mankind, that Men are frequently misled by a present Pleasure, which they feel
in complying with their sensual inclinations; and that the practice of
Christian Piety and Virtue, forasmuch as it thwarts such inclinations, becomes
difficult and irksome to them. Now to balance this, our Blessed Savior has by
his Gospel proposed, over and above the present satisfaction and Pleasure which
are to be found in compliance with his Laws, future rewards for our Obedience,
and future Punishments for our Disobedience.

The Passions of Hope and Fear were implanted in our Nature by him who made us,
to be a check upon our present Sense; and they are of especial Use to us,
during this state of our Trial, to preserve us from being influenced by the
false and deceitful appearances of present and sensible Objects. And although
we cannot be said to have arrived at a Christian Frame and Constitution of
Spirit, till we heartily approve the Precepts of our Religion, and choose to
comply with them, on account of their own intrinsic reasonableness and
goodness; yet it is usually by the hope of Rewards, and the fear of Punishments,
that our Minds are at first awakened, and our thoughts become duly fixed; and
even after we have attained to a sincere and prevalent love of Piety and Virtue
upon their own account, yet still our hopes and fears are of great use to us,
to excite our Minds, to quicken our Endeavors, and to turn the Scale, upon all
Emergencies, against the temptations of Sense.

And by how much the more considerable the Objects of our hope and fear are, by
so much the greater is the influence which they will have upon us. For which
reason, the Gospel has proposed to us such Rewards and Punishments in the life
to come, as to those who thoroughly believe and consider them, will appear
infinitely to outweigh all the present Pleasures by which foolish Sinners are
courted, and the present difficulties by which they are apt to be discouraged.
For it promises on the one hand, all that Happiness, which humane Nature
completed by the union of a purified Soul with an incorruptible Body, and
restored to the favor of Almighty God, is capable of; and on the other hand, it
threatens all that Misery, that Men composed of Soul and Body reunited, but
unregenerated, and abandoned by God, are obnoxious to; the particulars of which
states are (...) such as we cannot have a full conception of in this Life; but
from the general view which the Gospel has given us, both of the Quality, and
the Duration of this future Happiness and Misery, we have all the reason in the
World to infer, that nothing, but either downright disbelief of these things,
or the want of representing them duly to our Minds, by frequent and serious
consideration, can render them ineffectual to excite our hope and fear to that
degree, as will serve to influence our tempers and our lives.

For the farther promoting of which ends, the Gospel has fully and clearly
asserted the Reality and Certainty of these future Recompenses, not speaking of
them, as of what may possibly be, or what is only probable; but as of what we
may as surely depend upon, as upon any other Truths which it has revealed to
us, leaving no room for any professed Christian to doubt or hesitate concerning
them.

And herein it must be granted, that the Method taken by the Christian
Institution, for exciting our hope and fear, and by consequence for moving us
effectually to comply with its Precepts, altogether surpasses what has been
done by any other institution of Religion. It would be ridiculous to compare
the dreams of Pagan Poets, or the Mohammedan Fables, concerning the Rewards and
Punishments of the life to come, with the Promises and Threatenings of the
Gospel. As to the Mosaical Institution, which we Christians acknowledge to have
been Divine, it looked no farther in its Promises and Threatenings, at least not
in plain and express terms, than to the good and evil things of the present
life. Not but that wise and good Men amongst the Jews, looking beyond the
Letter of their Law, did see, though obscurely, into the other World.

The notion of the Soul's Immortality was indeed from Nature and Reason,
generally embraced by the considering part of Mankind: but yet the wisest and
best Philosophers expressed themselves very dubiously with respect to a future
State, of which sufficient Evidence might be produced both from Socrates
amongst the Greeks, and Tully amongst the Romans, who seem to have gone as far
as any others in the Expectation and Hope of Immortality; but yet could not say
enough powerfully to excite the hopes of good Men, or the fears of the Wicked,
to such a degree, as might suffice to balance the Temptations of the present
Life, at least with the vulgar and unthinking part of Men, which is by far the
greater number. Whereas the Gospel speaks so plainly, and so positively of
these matters, as may be sufficient to influence all sorts of Men by whom it is
believed.

To conclude this Particular; The belief of the Recompenses of the Life to
come, as revealed by the Gospel, is that which has made so wide a difference
between the Christian and the Pagan World. What the State of the Heathen was,
before the publishing of Christianity, I have observed in a former Lecture.
Lect. ij. p. 23.
Men were almost universally and totally fallen from the Divine, and sunk into
the Animal Life, estranged from God, and enslaved by the Devil and their own
Lusts: But when the Gospel was Published, it awakened their Minds, causing them
to look forward toward another Life, and to consider the consequences of their
present behavior.

There are indeed in this degenerate State of the Christian Church, abundance
of Men professing themselves Christians, who are yet as unreform'd as the worst
of Infidels: But then, it is because they do not heartily believe, or at least
do not at all consider the Principles of Christianity. But as this is certain,
that where Christianity is Professed, there are far greater numbers of all
Ranks of Men, who are persuaded to the practice of Piety and Virtue, than there
are in other parts of the World; so it is as evident, that this is in great
measure owing to the Principles which I am now speaking of. It Is the belief of
a future Life, which keeps bad Men in the Christian World, from being much
worse than they are: It Is that which first awakened and excited most of those,
who are reclaimed from an evil Course: And it is that, which those who are
become Christians in good earnest, hearty lovers of Piety and Virtue, are
forced often to have recourse to, seriously representing to their own Minds,
those future Recompenses which the Gospel assures them of, in order to the
strengthening their good Resolutions, and the fortifying themselves against the
many Temptations they meet with in this evil World. By all which, we may
perceive the great Usefulness, and even Necessity of these Motives, which the
Gospel has offered to our Consideration. But this is not all; for

II. Our Blessed Savior has made farther Provision against the Indisposition
and Inability of Men, by promising the assistance of the Divine Spirit, for the
enabling us to do what of our selves we cannot.

Every created and finite Spirit must be supposed necessarily and constantly to
depend upon that Spirit which is uncreated and infinite, ever standing in need
of Influences from him. A state of Innocence and Integrity cannot exempt a
Creature from such dependence. This, Lect. ij. p. 27, 28.
as I have formerly observed, results from the Nature and Condition of a
Creature, to be of it self mutable and fallible, insomuch that it can by no
other means preserve its Integrity, than by adhering to its Maker, and deriving
Influences from him. Much more then, upon the degeneracy of such a Creature,
some special influence from God must be necessary in order to its Recovery.

It was, as I have taken Notice, Ibid.
from neglecting to adhere to God and depend upon him, that our first Parents
apostatized, whereby they and their Offspring became, not mutable and
fallible; that they were before; but, as Experience too plainly proves, very
much disordered and weakened in all their Faculties, having contracted an
Indisposition to that which is Good, together with strong Habits of Sin. The
Spirit, having once given way to the Flesh, lost its Authority and Government,
which it cannot easily reassume.

In order therefore to a recovery from this state, to effect which is the great
design of Christianity, there must be a supply of new strength, some
extraordinary influences from the Divine Spirit, to reduce the Soul into good
Order, and to preserve it, when so reduced. And for this we are beholden to the
Undertaking of our great Mediator.

It Is true, good Men in all Ages of the World, such I mean as have had a
becoming sense of God, and of natural Religion, have professed their reliance
upon God, and there hopes of his assistance; and I question not, but they have
in some measure partaken of what they thus hoped for; which was in truth,
though not clearly understood by them, the effect of God's Mercy and Grace
through Jesus Christ; whose Undertaking, as we Christians believe, had its
effect for the benefit of Mankind, ever since the first Promise made to Adam
after his Fall. But, as the greater part of Man were left to the suggestions of
Nature, and the conjectures of Reason in this case, having no express
Declaration or Promise, which they knew of, upon which they might depend; so
the Pious and good Men amongst the Jews themselves, who enjoyed the Divine
Oracles, yet believed and hoped for the assistance of the Divine Spirit, rather
upon the grounds of natural Religion, than of their own Law, the Promises of
which, as I before observed, were chiefly of the good things of this life, what
was beyond this being rather obscurely hinted to them, than plainly expressed.
For which reason St. Paul, who very well understood the Jewish Law, and was
thoroughly acquainted with the sense in which his Countrymen generally
understood it, says, Romans 7, 8, 10.
That sin taking occasion by the Commandment, wrought all manner of
Concupiscence; and again, That the Commandment, which was ordained unto Life,
was found to be unto Death; and again, That the Law, chapter 8.3, 4.
in that it was weak through the Flesh, could not effect that Righteousness in
us, which it aimed at. By all which he plainly asserts, that the Law of Moses,
as such, only declared Men's Duty, but brought no assistance along with it to
enable them to perform it; and consequently, left them in a worse state, than
it found them, without the addition of Gospel Grace.

The Prophets indeed uttered many Predictions of a plentiful Effusion of the
Divine Spirit: Is. 44.3. Ezekiel. 36.26, 27. Joel 2.28.
But this was to be in the Days of the Messiah, as the Jews did, and we
Christians now do understand those Prophecies to import. And they were
accordingly fulfilled in the days of our Blessed Savior; there having been a
very plentiful Effusion of the Divine Spirit upon the Apostles, and first
Preachers, and Professors of Christianity, to enable them to do extraordinary
Works, and to capacitate them to discharge and undergo their Employments and
their Sufferings: And not only so, but we have moreover, both from our Lord and
his Apostles, express and clear Promises of the Communication of the same
Spirit, to enlighten and assist the Minds of Christians in every succeeding Age.

Our Lord to this purpose did in general declare the readiness of Almighty God,
to give his Holy Spirit to all those who should ask it of him, Luke 11.13.
arguing from the goodness of God, and his fatherly care of Men, infinitely
exceeding that of any earthly Parent.

More particularly, our Lord has given a promise of the Divine Spirit, to all
such as shall come to him, and believe in him. At a Solemn Festival of the
Jews, John 7.37, 38, 39.
Jesus stood and cried, saying, If any Man thirst, let him come unto me and
drink. He that believes on me, as the Scripture has said, Out of his belly
shall flow Rivers of living Water. And this, as the Evangelists adds, He spoke
of the Spirit, which they that believe on him should receive: For the Holy
Ghost was not yet given, (not in that plentiful manner, as afterward,) because
that Jesus was not yet Glorified. And indeed it was after the glorification of
Jesus, that this Spirit was given, first in so wonderful a manner, as on the
day of Pentecost, as a pledge of his being thenceforward to direct and assist
the Church of Christ in all succeeding Ages, a Promise to that purpose being
given to all the Members of the Christian Body. For so St. Peter, discoursing
to the Jews upon that occasion, Acts 2.38, 39.
solemnly declares. Repent, says he, and be Baptized every one of you, in the
Name of Jesus Christ, for the remission of Sins; and ye shall receive the Gift
of the Holy Ghost. For the Promise is unto you, and to your Children, and to
all that are afar off, even as many as the Lord our God shall call.

It Is upon this account, that St. Paul declares so amply the Power which
Christians received by the Gospel, to enable them to do what, neither by the
Abilities of Nature, nor by the Assistance of the Law of Moses, they could have
done. When, in the place before-cited, he had complained of the Law in the
Members whereby Men are Captivated, Romans 7.23, 24.
and thereupon expressed very pathetically his Sense of the Wretchedness of
Men, by reason of the Body of Death which they carry about with them, he
concludes with triumphing in the Grace of the Gospel, v. 25.
I thank God, through Jesus Christ our Lord; farther explaining himself in the
following Words; chapter 8.1, 2, 3, 4.
There is therefore now no Condemnation to them which are in Christ Jesus, who
walk not after the Flesh, but after the Spirit. For the Law of the Spirit of
Life in Christ Jesus has made me free from the Law of Sin and Death. For what
the Law could not do, in that it was weak through the Flesh, God sending his
own Son in the likeness of sinful Flesh, and as a Sacrifice for Sin, condemned
Sin in the Flesh; that the Righteousness of the Law might be fulfilled in us,
who walk not after the Flesh, but after the Spirit; as much as to say, that by
embracing the Gospel of Christ, he was not only freed from Condemnation, on
account either of his past Faults, or his present unavoidable Infirmities; but
moreover received strength through the assistance of the Spirit of Christ,
which would enable him sincerely, though not without all impersection, to obey
the Laws of God, and to attain to that Righteousness, which through the
inordinacy of the Flesh, and the weakness of the Mosaical Institution, he could
not attain to before.

For the same reason elsewhere comparing the Law with the Gospel, he gives the
preference to the latter, in very significant terms. The Law he styles the
Ministration of the Letter, 2 Cor. 3.3, 6, 7, 8, 9.
which kills; the Gospel, the Ministration of the Spirit, which gives Life:
One, the Ministration of Death, and of Condemnation, written and engraven in
Stone; the other, the Ministration of Righteousness, written in fleshly Tables
of the Heart, with the Spirit of the living God.

But it is needless to recite more Passages, the New Testament is full of them;
this being the great Promise of the Gospel, declared throughout the Sacred
Writings, that the Divine Spirit should be imparted in a free and plentiful
manner to those, who should embrace the Christian Religion.

And this certainly is a sufficient Provision against the indisposition and
inability of Men's Minds to comply with the Divine Will, when revealed to them.
Romans 7.12, 14.
The Law of God, as St. Paul expresses it, is Holy, and the Commandment Holy.
Just and Good; the Precepts of the Gospel are Spiritual, and Divine; whereas we
are Carnal and sold under Sin: But the Spirit of God can rescue us from this
Slavery, by enlightening our Minds, fixing our Thoughts, inclining our Hearts,
and spiritualizing our Affections, making us not only to delight in the Law of
God after the inner Man; but to walk also not after the Flesh, but after the
Spirit. The Example of our Lord was exact, and altogether perfect, and we must
not hope in this life to attain to the same exactness and perfection: But as it
was upon account of its Perfection fit to be proposed to our imitation; so the
same Spirit which dwelt in our Lord, without measure, can form us by degrees
after his likeness, and make us in our measure to resemble him both in our
Tempers and Practices.

If it be objected, that we want instances amongst the Professors of
Christianity, to verify this Doctrine, that the Divine Spirit is thus imparted
by the Gospel; the Answer is easy. The primitive times of Christianity abounded
with instances of this kind. Such were the Apostles, who could every one of
them have said, as St. Paul did, Be ye followers of me, 1 Cor. 11.2.
even as I also am of Christ. And such were abundance of the Members of the
Christian Body, which lived in and near those times. Nay such, thanks be to
God, even since the degeneracy of the Christian Church, there have been and are
to be met with in every Age; though, God knows, too few, to the great scandal
of Unbelievers, who are not willing to consider this matter thoroughly, but are
forward to catch at any seeming advantage, for justifying their Insidelity. In
a word, we might all of us be instances of this kind, to the honor of our
Lord, and to the credit of our Holy Profession, if we would diligently use the
means appointed for the attaining this Divine Spirit, and faithfully improve
all his kindly motions upon our Minds; which brings me to the next particular I
named, viz.

III. That our Blessed Savior has made farther Provision in this Case, by
settling such Institutions to be constantly observed and used in his Church, as
are both in their own Nature proper to excite us, and are moreover designed as
Means of conveying the Grace of the Holy Spirit to us.

The excellency of the Precepts and Example of our Lord will not engage us to
Obedience and Imitation, unless we have them much in our view: The powerful
Motives of the Gospel will not affect us, unless they be seriously and
frequently considered by us: And the Grace of the Divine Spirit it self, though
freely offered, yet will prove ineffectual, unless it be thankfully and
carefully entertained and improved. Now as the indisposition of Men's minds is
great, so experience teaches, that either the Business, or the Pleasures of
Life are moreover apt to employ or divert them to that degree, that unless some
farther course be taken to turn the Stream of their Thoughts the right way, all
that we have hitherto mentioned may be lost upon them. Besides that the Spirit
of God being invisible, and his influences, suitable to his Nature, secret and
indiscernible to sensual and worldly Men (which is the reason our Savior
assigns, why the World cannot receive him, viz. John 14.17.
because it sees him not, neither knows him;) it may therefore be very fit,
nay necessary for us, who are used so much to converse with sensible Objects,
to have some stated, external, and sensible Means, for the deriving his
internal Grace to our Spirits. Our blessed Savior therefore knowing this to be
our Case, has kindly and bountifully provided for us in this instance also.

To this purpose, he has not only caused his Word to be Written by those who
Conversed with him, and were Commissioned and Inspired by him, which we may at
all times have free recourse to our selves; but he has farthermore appointed
certain Institutions, to be constantly observed in his Church, and settled an
Order of Men as his Ministers, to see them observed, and to perform their part
in the observance of them. Thus he ordered the Apostles and their Successors in
the work of the Ministry, to receive into the number of his Disciples, all such
as should profess their Repentance and Faith in him, by the external Rite of
washing them with Water, in the Name of the Father, the Son, and the Holy
Ghost, thereby listing and enrolling them, as Servants of the Blessed Trinity,
and engaging them by a solemn and public Profession to declare themselves such.

He has farther ordained, That all his Disciples, thus initiated, shall not
only perform acts of Christian Devotion by themselves, but moreover that they
shall frequently meet together, to join in the more public Worship of God
through Jesus Christ, and mutually to exhort and encourage each other;
particularly, that on a certain Day, every Week, besides other occasional
Assemblies, they shall meet in most solemn manner, to offer up the sacrifice of
Praise and Prayer to the great Father of all, in the Name of his only begotten
Son; and that at the same time his Word shall be Read and Preached amongst
them, in order to the improving their Understandings, and the awakening their
Consciences, and the causing them to remember and consider the great Truths
which they profess to believe.

He has farther appointed, That in these solemn Assemblies, they shall
frequently commemorate the great Sacrifice which he made of himself upon the
Cross, by partaking of that Entertainment which he has assigned them at his
own Table, thereby not only professing themselves all Members of the same Body,
but at the same time also representing to God, to themselves, and to one
another, the infinite love of God to Sinners, through a Mediator, and solemnly
engaging themselves afresh to continue the Disciples of Jesus Christ.

Now these Institutions, howsoever they may be despised by the profane,
unthinking, or supercilious sort of Infidels, whosoever seriously considers
them, cannot but see, that they have a natural and strong tendency to engage
the Thoughts, and awaken the Minds of those that use them, and thereby to
render both the Precepts, and the Example, and the Motives of the Gospel useful
to the ends for which they were designed.

And if we will yet farther look into the design of them, we shall find, that
they are moreover appointed by our Lord, as means of deriving and conveying the
Grace of his Holy Spirit to our Souls.

Thus, Matthew. 28.19, 20.
when our Lord commissioned his Apostles to make Disciples out of all Nations,
baptizing them, and teaching them to observe all things whatsoever he had
commanded them, he immediately subjoyns, And lo, I am with you always, even
unto the end of the World; which can import no less, than his assisting and
blessing them and their Successors, in the faithful discharge of their
Ministry. He elsewhere declares in general, Matthew. 18.20.
that where two or three are gathered together in his Name, there is he in the
midst of them, viz. by the presence and assistance of his Holy Spirit.

As to the Sacrament of Baptism, St. Peter is very express, in the place before
cited, where exhorting his Hearers to Repent and be Baptized, Acts 2.38, 39.
he encourages them by proposing the Benefits which they should receive
thereby, namely, remission of Sins, and the Gift of the Holy Ghost, the promise
of which, he says, was not to that Generation only, but to their Children, and
to all that were afar off, even as many as God should call. John 3.5.
For which reason our Savior himself, in his discourse with Nicodemus joined
together Regeneration by Water and by the Spirit; and St. Paul, speaking of the
same Rite, says, that Christians were saved, Tit. 3.5, 6.
according to the Mercy of God, by the laver of Regeneration, and the renewing
of the Holy Ghost, which was shed upon them abundantly, through Jesus Christ
our Savior; implying, that Baptism with Water was the way of entitling
Christians to that Divine Gift, and a means of conveying it to them.

And so likewise as to the Sacrament of the Lord's Supper, it is intended not
only to exhibit to Christians the Elements of Bread and Wine in Memory of our
Savior's Passion; 1 Cor. 10.16.
but according to St. Paul's Expression, the Cup of Blessing, then blessed is
the Communion of the Blood of Christ, the Bread then broken is the Communion of
the Body of Christ, viz. a Communion or Participation of all the Benefits
purchased by breaking the Body and shedding the Blood of Jesus, of which a
principal one is, the Grace of the Divine Spirit to strengthen our Souls.

To conclude this particular; The Gospel is styled, Romans 8.2.
as I before observed, the Law of the Spirit of Life; 2 Cor. 3.6.
the Ministers of the New Testament are said to be Ministers not of the Letter,
but of the Spirit. When they perform the Offices of their Function, one is said
to Plant, and another to Water, 1 Cor. 3.5, 6.
whilst God gives the increase, viz. by the Operation of his Holy Spirit
accompanying these external Ministrations; and finally the Church is said to be
the Temple of God, forasmuch as the Spirit of God dwells amongst and in the
Members of it; all which passages do evidently import, that the external
Ministrations of Religion in the Christian Church, are designed as so many
means of deriving the internal Grace of the good Spirit to those who faithfully
make use of them.

And as to this, I may presume that it will not be pretended that any other
institution of Religion has afforded the like means. The Jews indeed abounded
in external Ordinances; which they were commanded to observe, as the Prophets
themselves intimate, and the Apostles more fully assure us, not as good in
themselves, but as suited to their temper and present circumstances; which to
free and generous Minds were indeed unpleasant and burdensome. Nor were they
attended with that Promise of internal Grace and Assistance, which is annexed
to the Christian Institutions. For as the Author to the Hebrews at large
Discourses, Heb. 9.10.
The Jewish service stood only in Meats and Drinks, and diverse Washings and
carnal Ordinances, imposed on them until the time of Reformation; all which
were only Examples and Shadows of heavenly things: chapter 8.5.6.10.
But Jesus has obtained a more excellent Ministry, by how much also he is the
Mediator of a better Covenant, which was established upon better Promises, viz.
such as these, that God would put his Laws into their Mind, and write them in
their Hearts; and that he would be to them a God, and they should be to him a
People.

Every other Profession of Religion had likewise its external Rites and
Ordinances belonging to it; but I think I may fairly leave it to the Judgment
of any serious Deist, whether the Christian Institutions already mentioned, are
not much more rational, decent, easy, and every way better adapted to the ends
for which they are designed, than those of any other Religion, and
consequently, whether in this instance also our Blessed Savior has not made
the best Provision for us.

There remains yet one farther Difficulty which fallen Men lay under, which I
am to consider in the last place, and to show that our Lord has in that
instance likewise made due Provision for us, viz.

Fourthly, An incapacity of removing those other evil and mischievous
consequences, to which their Sins had exposed them; and of obtaining for
themselves that complete Salvation which they stood in need of.

The remaining Consequences of our Apostasy from God, which I took notice of in
a former Lecture, Lect. ij. p. 21, 22.
are all the Calamities of this present life, concluded at last with a
Separation of Soul and Body by Death, and followed in a future state with all
those Evils, to which an immortal Soul separated from its Body is there liable,
which are more than we are able to enumerate, or so much as to conceive in the
state in which we now are.

That Men were of themselves altogether unable either to avoid these Evils, or
to deliver themselves from them, is evident. No humane Wit or Power, as
Experience proves, can ward off abundance of those Calamities to which all Men
are obnoxious from the present state of things in this lower World; nor can the
wealth of the richest Man upon Earth purchase an Exemption from them. The wise
Man must die, as certainly as the Fool; the Prince, as the Peasant; and the
Rich Man, as the Beggar. Nor have any of these the least power to dispose of
their Souls, when they are dismis'd into the World of Spirits.

Much less are they able to obtain for themselves that Salvation, which will
complete their Happiness. All that is done for us in this life, even by our
Blessed Savior himself, is but the beginning of our Salvation; we are by him
put into a sttate of Salvation, and guided in the way which leads directly and
surely to the completion of it: But we cannot be said to be saved, till every
evil disposition be perfectly rooted out of our Souls; till our Spirits are
restored to their perfect Health, and all the Habits of Piety and Virtue are
confirmed in them; nor indeed till our Bodies also shall be raised again and
united to our Souls.

For although the wisest of Philosophers, and the best of Christians have
justly complained of these Bodies of Flesh, as clogs to their Spirits, and
therefore may have desired and chosen to be delivered from them, in order to
have their Spirits set at liberty from their present encumbrance; yet the
natural abhorrence which all Men have of the separation of their two essential
parts made by Death, and that ardent desire of life which is implanted in
humane Nature, seem plainly to intimate, that we cannot be completely happy
without consisting of Soul and Body united. And the Gospel consirms this Notion
to us, by causing us to wait for our complete Salvation till the Resurrection
of the Body. Romans 8.19, 20, 21, 22, 23.
Thus St. Paul, having mentioned the earnest expectation which the whole
Creation has of being delivered from Vanity, and that bondage of Corruption to
which it is at present subjected, he adds, And not only they, but our selves
also, which have the first fruits of the Spirit, even we our selves groan
within our selves, waiting for the Adoption, to wit, the Redemption of our
Body. And to the same purpose again; 2 Cor. 5.4.
We that are in this Tabernacle do groan, being burdened; not for that we would
be unclothed; but clothed upon; that mortality might be swallowed up of life;
intimating, that Christians will not be completely happy, till their Bodies
shall be redeemed from Corruption; and till their Souls shall be clothed with
such Bodies as shall be prepared for them at the Resurrection; till which time,
they will not be delivered from all the effects of the Divine Displeasure, nor
clearly manifested to be the Children of God.

Now it is apparent, past all dispute, that we can do nothing of all this for
our selves; and that no other Institution of Religion, besides the Christian,
has discovered to us, how it shall be done for us.

But in this instance also, our Blessed Savior has made abundant Provision.
The Gospel has assured us, and we Christians do firmly believe, as fundamental
Articles of our Faith, that as our Lord died to made Expiation for our Sins, so
he rose again from the dead; and that then, according to his own Declaration,
Matthew. 28.18.
All power was given unto him in Heaven and in Earth; Ephesians. 1.20, 21, 22.
that God, having raised him from the dead, has set him at his own right hand
in the heavenly places, far above all Principality and Power, and Might and
Dominion, and every Name that is named, not only in this World, but also in
that which is to come; and has put all things under his feet; and given him to
be the Head over all things to the Church: as also, that he will according to
his Promise come again to perfect the great Work which he has undertaken, and
which he has been carrying on by all the Methods I have hitherto mentioned.

Now allowing all this to be true, we have a plain account, how we shall be
delivered from all the remaining evil Consequences of our Fall, and be made
perfectly happy, to the utmost of our desires and capacities.

For hereby we are assured, That we have now a powerful Friend in Heaven in our
own Nature; Heb. 4. 15, 16
One who can be touched with a feeling of our Infirmities, having been in all
points tempted like as we are; and One who has such an Interest in the Father
of all, that by him we may go freely to the throne of Grace, obtaining Mercy
and finding Grace to help in time of need: who although he does not think fit
to deliver us at present from all the Calamities of this Life, Romans 8.28.
yet will cause all things to work together for our good; 1 Cor. 10.13.
not suffering us to be tempted above that we are able, but with the temptation
also, making a way to escape, that we may be able to bear it; 2 Cor. 12.9.
affording us such a Measure of his Grace, as shall be sufficient for us, and
causing his strength to be made perfect in our weakness: Who, although he
permits us to remain liable to Death, as the just Reward of our Transgression,
Romans 14.9.
yet being Lord both of the Dead and the Living, will receive our Souls at the
hour of Death, and take care of them during their state of Separation, reviving
them with his Insluences, and filling them with the comfortable Expectation of
their more complete Happiness. Finally we are assured, that as he will obtain
of the Father, and confer upon his faithful Servants, all that is truly good
and fit for them, during this state of their Trial, and preserve their Spirits
which they have committed to his Custody, till his second Appearance; so that
he will come again in Person, redeem their dead Bodies, and perfect their
Souls, reuniting them, and fully instating them in the favor of God, and
bestowing upon them the Inheritance of Children; of all which he has given
them at present his Spirit, as the sure Pledge and Earnest.

This is that Provision, which our Blessed Savior, according to the
Declaration of his Gospel, has graciously made, in this last instance of our
Necessity; after which I need add no more, this being the completion of our
Felicity, and of our Mediator's Undertaking.

And thus I have finished what I at first proposed, with respect to the
intrinsic Evidence of Christianity, showing its Credibility from considering
the Persons whom Christ Jesus came to save; the Nature of the Salvation which
he proposes; and the Method in which he has procured it.

If in doing this, I have laid down a true Scheme of our holy Profession (as I
am verily persuaded I have) according to the Doctrine of the Holy Scriptures,
and the general sense of the Christian Church; and if through this whole Scheme
there is nothing but what is highly worthy of God, and extremely beneficial to
his Creatures; nay if according to this Representation of Christianity, it not
only infinitely excels all other Institutions of Religion, but is such, as that
we are not able to frame an Idea of any Institution comparable to it, (as I
firmly believe upon impartial consideration it will appear to be) it must then
be granted that This is a faithful saying, and worthy of all acceptance, that
Christ Jesus came into the World, to save Sinners.

This therefore I heartily offer to the serious thoughts of all such Men, as
have a just sense of God and of natural Religion upon their Minds, and have
accustomed themselves to think seriously of matters of importance.

The external attestation, which God has given to the Gospel, by Prophecies,
Miracles, and an wonderful Success in its Propagation, will tend, where duly
observed, not only farther to confirm this intrinsic Evidence, but also to
awaken and excite the minds of those, who are not used to serious thinking; or
are strongly prejudiced against Religion in general, through the violence of
their corrupt inclinations. But when all is done, here we must fix; being
assured, that as no Revelation can be from God, which is not worthy of him; so
whatsoever is so highly worthy of God as the Christian Revelation is, must be
credible upon its own account.

May we, who profess to believe the Gospel, both on account of its intrinsic
Evidence, and the external attestation it has had, and to be sensible of the
excellent Method therein proposed for the Salvation of Sinners, prove to the
World the reality and the stedfastness of this our Faith, by its influence upon
our Spirits and our Lives. Then shall we our selves yield a farther attestation
to the truth of our Blessed Savior's Religion, by demonstrating its Virtue and
its Excellency to the unbelieving World.

And may Almighty God, who has thus graciously revea'ld himself to Mankind, by
his Son Jesus Christ our Lord, send forth his holy Spirit, to accompany the
preaching of this his Gospel, so that it may be more universally received, and
more thoroughly obeyed in all the Nations of the Earth, to the Glory of his
Holy Name, and the Salvation of Sinners.

Now to the One God and Father of all, and to our Lord Jesus Christ, the only
begotten Son of the Father, with the Eternal Spirit; our great Creator,
Redeemer, and Sanctifier, be ascribed, as is most due, all Honor, Praise, and
Glory, sorever. Amen.

FINIS.
Advertisement.
THE Author of these Lectures, having in the Second of them taken notice of an
Objection, which he has not been able to consider, within the compass of these
Eight Discourses, without interrupting the Order which he had proposed to
himself, designs, God willing, to publish a Ninth by way of Appendix to these,
as a reply to the said Objection.


