Imprimatur.

Edm. Diggle, S. T. P. Reverendissimo in Christo Patri, ac Domino, Domino
Richardo Achiepiscopo Ebor. a Sacris Domesticis.
Datum Episcopa-Thorpae October. 17 1665.
THE Eye of Faith, Looking at Eternity.

Being the Sum and Substance of a SERMON, Preached in the Cathedral Church of
YORK, the sixth Sunday after Trinity, July the second, 1665.

By Christopher Bradley, Master of Arts of Peter-House in Cambridge, and now
Rector of Thornton in Pickering-Lyth.

Augustinus de Trin. Fides, licet ad aeternitatem perducat, temporalis tamen
est: and eum ad aeternitatem ventum fuerit, e^ssatura.

Seneca Epist. In omnibus rebus aeternitatem propone.

1 Pet. 1.9. Receiving the end of your faith, even the salvation of your Souls.

YORK, Printed by Stephen Bulkley, and are to be sold by Francis Mawbarne, 1666.

To the honorable, Sir William Strickland Knight, and Baronet, his first
Patron, Eternal Happiness.
Much Honoored Sir,
IT has pleased God since I presented my last Book unto you, to take out of
this Life my immediate Patron, Sir William Cholmley, your Nephew, to whom that
Book was principally Dedicated. And through Gods goodness, your self being my
only surviving Patron; I am not only obliged in Duty, but in a manner
necessitated to reflect upon your worthy Self. I desire ever thankfully to
remember, and acknowledge your Goodness and Kindness to me, from my first
coming to live near you; and I must ingeniously confess that it was no little
encouragement to me in the study of Divinity, that you were pleased to be the
first Patron that opened a Door for my initiating, and entrance into the
Ministry. I need not make a Recapitulation of those Christian Virtues, which
are conspicuous in your sober, and Religious Conversation: nor of those
gracious abilities wherewith God has been pleased to endue you, being well
known, to as many as know you. I hate both Flattery, and Ingratitude. As for
this small Piece, which I now make bold to Dedicate to you; having a
disposition for the satisfaction of some Learned and worthy Friends, to copy a
draught of it, I thought I might with one Labor do a public, good, and give
them their private contentment: and insinuate my thankfulness to your self. Be
pleased to afford this small Present your favorable Aspect and Patronage: the
Subject is Grave and Ponderous, and of great concernment to all true
Christians, who desire Eternal Happiness, as for my manner of handling it, I
leave to the Censure of Gods Church and People. Thus praying for your Temporal
and Eternal welfare: I commit you, and yours to the grace of God in Christ
Jesus, and rest

Your Honors to love and serve you in the Lord. Christopher Bradley.

To the Right Worshipful Doctor John Neile, Archdeacon of Cleaveland; and the
Worshipful Christopher Hildiard Esquire. Grace and Peace.
Much endeared S^^s.
AS this Sermon was preached at the desire, and in the Course of the first of
you: and is now penned and presented to your reading, and perusal, at the
desire of the second of you, who was an Auditor, amongst diverse other persons
of Learning, and Quality: that I may satisfy some judicious friends, and
gratify your selves: I now present it unto your kind Acceptance, and
Approbation. The Subject is Eternity, which is the end we should all look at,
it is panis quotidianus, a Doctrine for every day, in season all the Year long,
never out of season: be pleased to accept this poor Service of mine, as a token
of that thank-fulness I owe unto you, for your continued Favor toward me: if
my poor Endeavors may be useful to the Church and People of God, I have my
end. Deo Gloria, mihi venia. I hope you will pardon my Defects in the manner of
handling so weighty a Subject, and that you will remember what you read 1 Kings
5.15. that at the building of Solomon's Temple, there was room as well for
Burden-bearers, as for other more curious Artificers: and Exodus 25.4, 5. at the
first making of the Tabernacle, not only the Bringers of Blew-silk, and Purple,
and Scarl^t: but even the poorest sort, which brought Goats-Hair, and
Rams-Skins, were accepted. Thus praying that we all may so pass through things
Temporal, that we finally lose not the things Eternal. I commit you to Gods
gracious protection, and rest,

Your Worships to be commanded in the Lord Christopher Bradley.

A Sermon Preached in York-Minster, the second day of July, 1665.
2 Cor. 4.17.18. For our light affliction, which is but for a moment, works
for us a far more exceeding and eternal weight of Glory.

While we look not at the things which are seen, but at the things which are
not seen: for the things which are seen, are temporal, but the things which are
not seen, are eternal.


OF these two Verses which I have read unto you, the first is the Context, the
second is the Text. I shall climb no higher for the coherence and connection of
the Text, then the Context; wherein is laid down an antidote, or sovereign
Remedy of the Church and People of God, against the afflictions of this present
Life. And therefore to clear a passage to the Text, I shall a little open the
Context; though the words in both verses seem to be plain and easy; yet if we
look into the Original, we shall find something that is not obvious to every
eye. I shall therefore briefly descant upon the plain-song, by way of a
Paraphrastical exposition, and that according to the Origin^l: (...) ^^^o (...)
n^^^r (...).
Waters are sweetest and safest that are drunk from the fountain. In the
Context we may observe two Parts. 1. A Bitter Pill, Affliction. 2. A sweet
Cordial of Comfort, and that is Glory. 2. We may observe the Qualifications of
this Pill, by which it is alleviated, and mitigated. 1. It is light affliction
2. It is but for a moment. 3. We may observe the operation of this Pill:
Affliction works Glory; light Affliction, a weight of Glory; light Affliction
for a moment, an eternal weight of Glory. Unto which the Apostle makes an
Hyperbolical addition, a far wore exceeding, and eternal weight of Glory. (...).
Affliction, the Greek word is a Metaphor taken from crowdding, or pressing in
a multitude or throu^g of People: and it is any trouble or pressure that
befalls the Soul, Body, or Estate, which God is pleased to inflict upon his
Church, or any Member of it: and that for three causes especially, (...)
the 1. is for Correction of sin past; The 2. (...)
is for Prevention of sin to come; The 3. (...).
is for the Probation, or Trial of our Faith, and other Graces: that as Stars
shine brightest in the darkest night, so the Graces of Gods People shine
brightest in the darkest night of Affliction. 2. Light Affliction, (...).
in the Original it is lightness of Affliction, that is very light; but this is
to be understood Comparatively, for Affliction in it self is often heavy, and
no chastening for the present seems to be joyous, but grievous: Heb. 12.^^
yet in these respects it is light affliction.

1. In regard of the demerit of sin, which deserves the heavy wrath of God to
all eternity. 2. In regard of the shortness of it, it is but for a moment. 3.
In regard of the operation of it, it works an eternal weight of Glory; the
consideration of which made the Apostle say, Romans 8.18.
I reckon that the sufferings of this present time, are not worthy to be
compared with the Glory which shall be revealed in us.

4. In regard of that Patience and Support, Levius fit patientia quicquid
c^r^^g^re es^ n^s^s.
which God is pleased to give his People under their afflictions, and in his
good time a happy issue and deliverance out of them.

^. This affliction is but for a moment, (...)
a very little time and presently past, as the Greek word imports: so that
though our affliction be long in it self, yet it is but for a moment, compared
to eternal sufferings, seeing there is no proportion between the longest time,
and eternity.

The third thing to be opened, is, the Operation of it, though Affliction be
bitter, yet here is the comfort of it, ^^^is da^ medus anabil^tatem.
it works Glory. The end gives amability and sweetness unto the means; we
take a bitter Potion willingly for healths sake, it works Glory. Glory is the
excellency or eminency of any thing resulting and arising from its Perfection.
Glory in the Greek signifies that high opinion or estimation of another Worth
or Excellency; (...)
For example, Glory in God is the Excellency of his Divine nature, and
Attributes above the Creatures: Glory in the Creatures is the Excellency God
puts upon them, so that to glorify God, is not to make him more glorious than
he is, for God is infinite in all Perfection, not capable of addition or
diminution. To glorify God is to give him the praise of his Glory, according
to that of the Psalmist, Ps. 50. ult.
Who so offers Praise glorifieth me: so that to glorify God is to divulge,
and publish abroad to others what eminent Attributes, and what transcendent
excellencies there are in God: Gloriosum dicere
to glorify God, is to declare him to be Glorious; to glorify the Creature is
to make him glorious. Gloriosum ^^cere.
But why is it called a weight of Glory? The Apostle (as Interpreters agree)
alludes to the Hebrew word, which signifies both weight, and glory. Glory is a
grave and weighty thing, whom we honor, are of great weight with us, and
highly esteemed in our minds: and Glory, as it were, loads the beholder with
admiration; and this is also amplified, by being an eternal weight of Glory. As
for the Apostles addition, a far more exceeding weight of Glory. I shall not
trouble you with the various expositions of Interpreters, they are very
Rhetorical, and sublime: (...).
the Apostle heaps one Hyperbole upon another, so that neither Cicero nor
Demosthenes had ever so elegant a strain of Rhetoric. And therefore I shall
acquiesce in the judgment of a learned Doctor of our Church, who tells us, that
no words devised by the best wit, and uttered by the most eloquent tongue of
man, are able to express that surpassing weight of Glory: and well may it be
so, when both the Prophet, Esa. 61.4. 1 Cor. ^.9
and Apostle tell us, that Eye has not seen, nor ear heard, neither have
entered into the heart of man, the things which God has prepared for them that
love him. But for whom will Affliction thus work? even for such, as by the eye
of Faith look at eternity; for such as consider the redundancy of retribution
and compare present things with future things, as Oecumenius well observes. And
so you see the connection of the Text, with the Context, while we look not, etc.
Now for the opening, and applying of the words. because method is the Mother of
memory. I shall propound this method unto your Christian consideration: 1.
Explication. 2. Observation. 3. Application. 1. I shall give you a brief
Exposition of the words, and that according to the Original. The parts of the
Text are two. 1. An intimation of a Duty. 2. The Reasons to enforce that Duty.
1. Of the Duty, While we look not, etc In the Greek it is, (...).
we not looking, the participle signifying the continuation of the Action: that
is, we look not with a transient eye, a glance and away, but with a constant
steady eye, that is, we must make it our main business to look at Eternity; the
Greek word contains in it an elegant Metaphor, taken from one that shoots at a
Mark: to teach us, that things of a spiritual, and eternal nature must be the
mark and scope at which we do collime and aim. 2. Observe the eye with which we
look, else that will seem a Paradox, which indeed i^ a Divine Truth: how can we
look at the things which are not seen? this is to be understood, not of a
natural or carnal eye, but of the spiritual eye of Faith; else there will be a
disproportion between the faculty, and the object. And that this Exposition is
true, the Apostle testifies in that Definition, or rather Description of Faith:
( Heb. 11.1.) Now Faith is the substance of things hoped for, the evidence of
things not seen: and in the 27. verse of that Chapter, Moses is said by Faith
to have seen him, who is invisible. Now to illustrate this a little, the
natural eye is like the sight of the Owl, she cannot look upon the Sun,
Excellen^ s^^ sibil^ struis s^^sum. (...). 1 Cor. 2.14.
the weakness is in the faculty of sight: so the natural man, or as it is in
the Greek, the Animal man (for he is a mere Animal in spiritual things)
receives not the things of the spirit of God, for they are foolishness unto
him, neither can he know them, because they are spiritually discerned. But the
spiritual eye is like the sight of an Eagle, (...).
she is said to be sun-proof, looking intently upon the Sun without being
dazzled; and by that property makes proof of her young ones: so Believers by the
eye of Faith can look upon the Sun of Righteousness, Jesus Christ, Mal. 4.2.
and at spiritual and eternal things. And so I come to the second part of the
Text, the Reasons to enforce the Duty, and they are two. 1. The things that are
seen, (...).
are temporal, the Greek word signifies for a season, a very little time. The
second Reason is, but the things which are not seen, (...).
are eternal, the Greek word signifies that which is always in existence, in
being: and the Hebrew word gned, being added to eternity, or ever, increases
the duration of it, that is, ever being added to ever, for ever and ever, notes
unto us all Eternities. Now Eternity is either a part ante, or a part post:
God is eternal both ways, Psalm. 90.2. From everlasting to everlasting thou art
God. God had no beginning, and shall have no end, he is, and was, and is to
come: and so much the Hebrew word Jehovah does import, which comes from a root
which signifies He was: Angels and the Souls of Men are eternal the last way, a
part post: they had a beginning but shall have no end, they must live ever,
either in joy, or misery. And so I come to the second thing in the method
propounded, Observe.
and that is the Observation, which is this, That it is the Duty of all true
Christians in all their doings and their sufferings, to look through and beyond
those things which are Temporal, unto those thing which are spiritual and
Eternal.

For the confirmation of this Proposition, take two or three instances. 1. Of
Christ, Looking unto Jesus, Heb. ^^.^
the Author and finisher of our Faith: who for the joy that was set before him,
endured the Cross, despising the shame, and is set down at the right hand of
the Throne of God, 2. Moses, Heb 1^ ^4, 25, ^6.
By Faith Moses when he was come to years, refused to be called the Son of
Pharaohs Daughter. Choosing rather to suffer affliction with the people of God,
than to enjoy the pleasures of sin for a season: esteeming the reproach of
Christ greater riches than the Treasures of Egypt: for he had respect unto the
recompense of reward.

The third instance is in Mary, Luk 10 41 42
who sat at Jesus feet, and heard his word: when Martha was cumbred about much
serving, she made a worthy choice, she had chosen that one thing necessary, the
spiritual and eternal welfare of her Soul.



The 1. Reason, why we should look at Eternity, is, because the things which
are seen are temporal: that is, they abide but for a season, they are
transient, and fluent, not durable, nor permanent; and therefore Solomon who
knew well the vanity and instability of all worldly things, asks this question,
will thou set thine eyes upon that which is not? Prove. ^^.5.
What is his meaning? not that earthly things, as riches, etc. are non entia,
and have no being: but that they are not the things which they seem to be, they
are not so lasting, nor so satisfactory as men expect; and therefore Solomon
subjoyns in the same verse, for riches certainly make themselves wings, they
fly away as an Eagle toward Heaven. Here the flight of Riches is compared to
the sudden flight of an Eagle; as one property of the Eagle, is, that she is
quick-sighted (as you have heard) so another property is, that she is quick
flighted: so are all earthly things, fading and quickly vanishing. Meteors in
the Air, (...)
are called Apparitions, because they presently appear, (...)
and as presently dis-appear; so are all things that are seen, they are but
Meteors, Vapors, Apparitions; and well may it be so, J^. 4.14.
when St. James asks this question, What is your life? it is even a vapor
that appears for a little time, and then vanishes away. So that all our
Creature Comforts may quickly either be taken from us, or we from them, our
life it self-being so uncertain. Hence it is that St. Paul gives that Epithet
unto Riches, Trust not in uncertain Riches, 1 (...)
but in the living God: Riches are uncertain, 1. In the getting, 2. In the
Keeping, 3. In the leaving: in the Original, it is uncertainty, (...).
in the abstract, that is, nothing is more uncertain, being uncertainty it
self: and yet there is something more in the word to be observed, (...)
in the Composition of it, it signifies it is not manifest, or evident: that
is, no demonstration, or determination can be made from outward things, whether
a man be in the favor of God, or no; whether a man be in the state of Grace,
and Salvation, or no; God being pleased to use a promiscuous dispensation of
outward things, so that all things fall alike, in that respect, to all men, as
Solomon well observes. Hence also it is that St. Paul urges the Corinthians to
moderation in all outward things, and that by two cogent, and convincing
Arguments: that, they that have Wives, be as though they had none: 1 (...) 3^,
3^
and they that weep, as though they wept not: and they that rejoice, as though
they rejoiced not: and they that buy, as though they possessed not: and they
that use this world, as not abusing it: the first argument is antecedent, and
it is this, the time is short, (...).
in the Greek, the season is contracted: that is, very short. The second
Argument is consequent, for the fashion of this world passes away: (...).
in the Greek it is the Scheme of this world; it is but a Scheme, a Figure, a
Pageant, a Show, a Fashion, and that quickly passes away. Rev. 12.1.
In the Revelation, we read of a Woman clothed with the Sun, and the Moon under
her feet: this Woman is the Church of God, clothed with the rich Robes of Jesus
Christ, the Sun of Righteousness, and the Moon, that is, all sublunary and
earthly things under her feet. God has given us the earth to set our feet upon,
and not to set our hearts upon. But eternal things are durable, Prove 8.18.
Riches and Honor are with me, says Wisdom, yea durable Riches and
Righteousness: and that leads me to the second Reason, But the things that are
not seen are eternal. It is worth our observation, that eternity being added to
any estate, or condition, makes it infinitely good, or infinitely bad: as for
Example, to have the favor of God, the light of his countenance, his blissful
presence, the society of Saints and Angels, for a day, a year, etc. were very
good: but to enjoy this happiness to all eternity, makes it infinitely good. So
on the contrary to feel horror of Conscience, a separation from God, to burn
in fire and brimstone for a day, or a year, etc. were very bad: then what is it
to endure these to all eternity? this makes the misery to be infinitely evil.
Thus you see the Reasons why Christians should look beyond this present life,
unto those things which are spiritual and eternal: And so I come to the third,
and last thing in the method propounded, and that is Application.

Eccl. 12.7. Luke 23.46. and not only the ancient Fathers, but the learned
Gentiles by the light of Nature, and dull spectacles of Philosophy, have
asserted this Truth. If I were to speak to Heathens, I might imitate St. Paul,
who confuted the Athenians, Cretians, and others, out of their own Greek Poets:
but seeing (thanks be to God) I speak to Christians, I need not tell you, what
opinion Plato, Pythagoras, Aristotle, and others held of the Souls
immortallity: seeing it is a received Axiom in Philosophy, Anima rationalis est
immortali^
that the rational Soul is immortal.

And if the Soul be immortal, and shall be reunited to the body at the
Resurrection, then it must have an Vbi, a place of eternal bliss, or misery.
And not only the Scriptures, but the Greek and Latin Poets, do make mention of
Heaven, and Hell, their Elysian fields, and Tartarean Dungeon, and the like.
Mat. ^.8.
Blessed are the pure in heart, for they shall see God. In thy Presence is
fullness of joy, Ps. 16. ult.
and at thy right hand there are pleasures for evermore, says the Psalmist.
And St. Austin tells us, Visio Dei beatifica sola est summum bonum nostrum.
that only the beatifical vision of God, is our chiefest good. As for the
miseries of the life to come, they consist in a separation from the Presence of
God: as St. Paul intimates 2 These. 1.9. Rev. 20.6.
this is called the second Death, not properly, but Analogically: for as the
death of the body, is the separation of the Soul from the body: so the death of
the Soul, is the separation of the Soul from God. Poena damni est p^^talior,
quam poeta sensus. Mortem sine morte. (...).
And this Divines call the punishment of loss, which they say, is greater than
the punishment of sense. Hence it is that some of the Fathers call this second
Death, a death without death, or a never-dying death; it is a liveless life:
such is the miserable condition of the second Death.

2. This Doctrine reproves and condemns those that mind only earthly things:
Phil. 3.19. Whose end is destruction, whose God is their belly, whose glory is
in their shame, who mind earthly things. Sensual Atheists, Epicures, Epicuri de
grege porci.
Libertines, called not only in Scripture, but in profane Authors, swine, and
dogs. Heb. 12.16.
Profane Esau sold his birthright for one morsel of meat: and profane men
sell Heaven for a little earth, the joys of eternal life, for the pleasures of
sin which are but for a season. Whence is it, that any should hold the Soul to
be mortal? but from a principle of Epicurism: when (for ought that I could ever
read) the immortality of the Soul, was never positively denied by any Sect of
Philosophers, except the Epicures; who placing the chief happiness, or summum
bonum, in corporal pleasures, were, as it were, engaged to cry down the Soul.

Peter, 1 Pet. 4.4, 5.
they think it strange: speaking evil of you, who shall give account to him
that is ready to judge the quick and the dead. They look at the reckoning-day,
they look at eternity, they consider how they may get through this troublesome
world with good Consciences. 2 Pet. 1.5, 6, 7, 8, 9. (...)
They give all diligence to add to Faith, Virtue; to Virtue, Knowledge, etc.
but he that lacks these thingr, is blind, and cannot see afar off: he cannot
look at Eternity: but the other labor to grow in Grace, that they may be
prepared for the Kingdom of Glory.

to live by faith, 2 Cor. 5.^
and not by sense. Let us not so much consider what shall become of us in this
Life, as what shall become of us to all Eternity. And let us always remember,
that eternal life is begun in this life, called the life of Grace; Grace and
Glory differ only in degrees. Grace is the imitation of Glory, and Glory the
consummation of Grace: none can live the life of Glory, but such as live the
life of Grace here: without Regeneration, there is no salvation. Christ told
Nichodemus, Jo. ^.3.
Except a man be borne again, he cannot enter into the Kingdom of Heaven. So
that while this life lasts, eternal life must be acquired, or lost for ever-.

Heb. 13.^1.
and I beseech you Brethren, suffer the word of Exhortation, by a particular
Application. 1. You that are Magistrates, and Governors either in Church or
State, let all your actings be for the glory of God, the honor of the King,
the Good, Peace, Welfare, and Tranquillity of the places where you live: fulfill
the end of Magistracy, which is to suppress sin, and vice, and to encourage
virtue and piety: that people may lead under you, 1 Timothy 2.2.
a quiet, and a peaceable life in all godliness and honesty. And may more
cheerfully and willingly, 1 Pe^ ^.13, 14
Submit themselves to every Ordinance of man for the Lords sake, whether it be
to the King as supreme, or unto Governors, as unto them that are sent by him,
for the punishment of evil doers, and for the praise of them that do well. That
so you may give a good account at the last day, and may receive the Crown of
life.

Eternity. Let the Glory of God and the salvation of Souls, be our chief aim,
let conviction, conversion and edification be the end and scope of our
teaching. Dan. 12.3. they that be wise, shall shine as the brightness of the
firmament, and they that turn many unto righteousness, as the stars for ever
and ever: but who are they that are wise? Intellig^nte^ Err^a^nt^^.
the Hebrew word, which is translated wise, is also rendered teaching, or
Teachers, as it is in the Margent of our Bibles. They that are wise, are such
as by their painful teaching, turn many unto righteousness. Let us see another
excellent place, Prove. 11.30. The fruit of the righteous is a tree of life, and
he that wins Souls is wise. The Tree of Life was a type of immortallity, and
you see here again who is wise, he that wins Souls; the Hebrew word
signifies to take, or catch, and it is a Metaphor taken from Fowlers, or
Fishers who use all art and industry to catch birds or fish. The Devil is very
busy to catch Souls from us, let us be very industrious to catch Souls from
him: the wiles of the Devil, (...) Epa. (...).
are in the Greek called Methods: let us use all our method to recover Souls
from him, and let us often read, and meditate upon that counsel which St. Paul
gives to Tymothy, 2 Timothy 2.3 last verses: thus doing, when the chief Shepherd
shall appear, we also may receive a Crown of Glory. That ye be no more
Strangers and Foreigners, Ephesians. 2 19.
but Fellow Citizens with the Saints, and of the household of God.

Phil. 3.20.
Let your Conversation be in Heaven, go about earthly business with Heavenly
minds; the Greek word translated Conversation, (...).
signifies Citizen-ship: (...). 13.14.
therefore remember, that you have here no continuing City, but must seek one
to come.

the Kingdom of Heaven is like unto a Merchant man, Mat. ^3.45, 46.
seeking goodly Pearls, who when he had found one Pearl of great price, he went
and sold all that he had and bought it. This Pearl is Jesus Christ with all his
benefits, which you should diligently seek: wise Merchants when they go beyond
Sea, use to buy such Commodities as are cheap there, but are vendible at home,
at a good rate; even so while you are here, not at home, but Strangers and
Foreigners, buy such Commodities as will give a good rate, when you come at
home, in Heaven: the benefits of Christ, Grace, and the New Creature are cheap
here, in regard of the paucity and fewness of men that look after them: but
they will be of great price in Heaven, which is our home, our own Country. Let
no worldly profit hinder your care for your Souls; What will it profit a man,
Mat. ^6.26.
if he shall gain the whole world and lose his own Soul; says our Savior. Be
not so careful how to lay a foundation of greatness for Posterity, as how to
lay a good foundation against the time to come, that ye may lay hold on eternal
Life. 1 Timothy 6.19.
It was a complaint of devout Salvian, that men, Salvian. ad Eccl. Cathol. Lib.
2.
to leave others rich for a short time, did often condemn themselves to eternal
poverty.

Jo. 6.27. Labor not (so much) for the meat which perishes, as for the meat
which endures to eternal Life. And remember for your comforts, that if you be
true Believers in Christ, and look at Eternity, that God has chosen the poor
of this world, rich in Faith, and Heirs of the Kingdom which he has promised
to them that love him, James 2.5.

Now that I may give you some few Motives and encouragements to this Duty:



strait is the Gate, Mar. 7.14. (...).
and narrow is the Way (or as it is in the Greek, full of Affliction) which
leads unto Life, and few there be that find it: and that if we suffer with
Christ, 2 Timothy 2.12.
we shall reign with him.

Ps. 37.1, 2.

Heb. 9.27.
but because, it is appointed for all men once to dye: and after that comes
Judgment; and after that Eternity: Why is death so comfortable to the godly?
But because their temporal death, is a passage to Eternal Life; when they can
say believingly, we know that if our earthly House of this Tabernacle were
dissolved: 2 Cor. 5.^
we have a building of God, an House not made with Hand, eternal in the
Heavens. is for Caution, to take heed of all sin, even the least sin is of an
eternal guilt, being committed against an eternal God, and must have an eternal
expiation by the Blood of Christ, or else an eternal punishment.

David, 2 Samuel 7.18, 19, 20. Read the place, I pray you, we may apply it thus:
Lord who am I, that thou have brought me hitherto, that thou have preserved me
to this day: but thou have spoken of thy Servants House for a great while yet
to come: thou have appointed me to happiness to all Eternity. And what can
David say more? this surpasses the speech of all created Eloquence. This
should mightily affect us, we should be so ravished with the Contemplation of
the gloryes of the life to come, that we should not only praise God with our
lips (see. Ps. 103.1, 2.) but also with our lives: that so glorifying him a few
days upon Earth, we may be glorified with him, and by him, to all eternity in
Heaven. Now let us turn our praise into prayer, that through the Grace and
Guidance of Gods Holy Spirit, we may so pass through things temporal, that we
finally lose not the things eternal: through Jesus Christ our Lord. Amen.

FINIS.

