Elijah's nunc Dimittis. OR The Authors own Funeral SERMONS, In his
Meditations upon 1 Kings 19.4. It is now enough: Lord take away my Soul, for I
am no better then my Fathers.

Where also is Treated; Of the immortality of the Soul. Of the state of it,
when separated from the Body. Of the Destruction of this lower World by Fire.
Of Locall-Hell, with the graduall Torments thereof. Of the Heavens, of the
Superior World, and the Inhabitants of them, their happiness and glory.


By Thomas Bradley, D. D. one of his late Majesty's Chaplains, and Praebandary
of York; and Preached in the Minster there, and in his Rectory of Ackworth,
1669. Aetatis suae, 72. Oxon. Exon.

Lord now let thy Servant depart in peace, that mine Eyes may see thy Salvation.

Sic sic juvat ire sub umbras.

YORK, Printed by Stephen Bulkley, 1669.

Elijah's Nunc Dimittis; Or, The Authors own Funeral Sermon, In his Meditation
upon the 1 Kings 19.4. the latter end of the Verse, It is now enough, Lord take
away my Soul, for I am no better then my Fathers.
THese Words are the Complaint, or the Petition, or the Suite, the Wish, or
Request, (call it what you will) of the Prophet Elijah, now weary of his Life,
and desiring he might dye; The causes and occasion of it, you may read in the
context, and in the Chapter immediately precedent, where ye have the whole
narration of the business, the sum of all you find in the 14th. verse of this
Chapter: I have been very zealous for the Lord God of Hosts, because the
Children of Israel have forsaken thy Covenant, cast down thine Altars, and
Slain thy Prophets with the sword, and I only am left, and they seek my life
to take it away. That wicked woman Jezabell, (in revenge of her Chaplains, the
Priests of Baal, which he had lately so clearly, and so powerfully convinced
and silenc't, and proved to be false Prophets) had sworn his death, Warrants
are sealed, and Pursuivants sent out to take him: Upon this, the Prophet flies
for his life as far as to Beersheba, the utmost border of all Israel on the
South, as Dan was on the North; yet not thinking himself secure there neither,
though at so great a distance, he takes a farther flight, a days Journey into
the Wilderness, supposing happily he might find more kindness there among the
wild beasts, then amongst men in Samaria more savage then they: But here he
meets with another enemy, as dangerous as any of the rest, Hunger and Thirst,
in danger to pine and perish through famine, his fear and have, not allowing
him either time or means to furnish himself with viaticum for such a Voyage,
nor the barren wilderness affording him supplies of sustenance in such a want.
The Prophet now compast about with so many deaths and dangers, and not knowing
which way to turn himself, hungry and thirsty, faint and weary, lays him down
under a Juniper Tree, wishing, That might might be the end of his Pilgrimage,
and with his Pilgrimage, of his Life too. Here in this Wilderness he makes his
Will; Wherein, first, He bequeaths his soul to God that gave it; Lord take
away my soul, his body to the Earth from whence 't was taken, wishing, That
spot of ground upon which he lay, might be his Grave, the Juniper Tree over him
his Monument, with no other Inscription upon it, but only this instead of an
Epitaph, I am no better then my Fathers. It is now enough, Lord take away my
soul, for I am no better then my Fathers.

In the Division of the Text, I shall not use any curiosity at all, the words
neither require, nor admit it. For the sum of them, you may call them if you
please, in old Simeons Language, The Prophet Elijah's nunc Dimittis; Or in St.
Paul's, his Cupio dissolvi. In it these Parcels.

First, The Dimittis it self, in these word, Lord take away my Soul.

Secondly, Two Reasons persuading him to make this his Suite at this time: The
one prefixed, and set before the Dimittis, in these words, Nunc satis est, It is
now enough. The other annexed, and following after it, in these words, Nam non
sum melior majoribus meis, For I am no better then my Fathers.

In all reason, we must begin first with the former Reason, both because it
stands first in the Text; and because it stands in our way to the Nunc
Dimittis; and because it is a motive ushering it in, therefore of it first, of
Nunc satis est, before of Nunc Dimittis: It is now enough.

And Elijah's satis est, may be reasonably grounded upon these four
Considerations; or in four respects might he well say, It is now enough.

1. In respect of what he had seen. 2. In respect of what he had suffered. 3.
In respect of what he had done. 4. In respect of the years he had lived.
In all these respects, the Prophet might reasonably say, Nunc satis est, It is
now enough; As if he should say, Lord I have seen enough to make me weary of
this World; And I have suffered enough to make me weary of my Life: And I have
done enough in the faithful discharge of my duty in the Office of a Prophet,
whereunto I was called: And I have lived long enough, even to desire to live no
longer in this wretched World; therefore now Lord, I beseech ye dismiss me,
Lord take away my Soul. So here are four enoughs, and they are all grounded in
the 14. verse of this Chapter, and in this Text. For first, He complains there,
The Children of Israel have forsaken thy Covenant, broke down thine Altars, and
Slain thy Prophets with the Sword: There Is his Satis Vidi, I have seen enough.

Secondly, He complains, That he only is left, and they seek his Life to take
it away: There Is his Satis Tuli, I have suffered enough.

Thirdly, I have been Zealous for the Lord God of Hosts: There Is his Satis
Feci, I have done enough.

Fourthly, Those three things before mentioned, which he had Seen, which he had
Suffered, and which he had Done, were not the work of a short time; they were
the work of many years; he was now grown old under his sufferings, and doing
his Duty, and so willing to follow the Generation of his Fathers, For I am no
better then my Fathers: There Is his Satis Vixi. And in all these respects he
concludes, It is now enough, and begs for a dismission, Lord take away my Soul.

To all these enoughs, we shall speak something briefly, with the inferences
from them: And first of his Satis Vidi, I have seen enough: That is, (as
himself Interprets himself, ver. 14.) of the wickedness, irreligion,
profaneness, and Idolatry of the times and places that he lived in, to make him
weary of the world, and of his life: And that is the first ground of this his
request to Almighty God, to take away his Soul.

The inference from hence is this:

That to live in evil times and places where iniquity does abound, is to pious
Souls, and to such as fear God, matter of great grief and sorrow of heart,
even enough to make them weary, not only of those times and places, but even
of their Lives too. St. Peter tells us of Lot dwelling in Sodom, That his
righteous Soul was vexed from day to day with their unlawful doings, 2 Pet.
2.7.8. The holy Prophet David complains in this case, and bewails his hard
condition in this respect, even in passionate expressions, Woe is me that I am
constrained to dwell in Mesech, and to have my habitation among the Tents of
Kedar. And the Prophet Habakkuk, as passionately as he, in the same case, Hab.
1.2, 3, 4. O Lord, how long shall I cry, and thou will not hear! yea, even cry
out of violence, and thou will not help? Why do thou show me iniquity, and
cause me to behold sorrow? for the Law is dissolved, and judgment does not go
forth: the wicked does compass about the righteous: therefore unjust judgment
does proceed. Thus we see how righteous souls are affected in these cases, and
afflicted with grief and sorrow under the sense of the wickednesses, and
abominations that are committed under the Sun, in the times and places where
they live. Reasons.

1. Because hereby God is dishonored, whose glory is dear unto them.

2. The Church is scandalized, holy Religion reproached, the Gospel of Jesus
Christ aspersed, and the way of God evil spoken of, especially if these things
be done, and suffered in a Christian Church, or Commonwealth.

3. It gives so great offense to many weak ones, that it causes them to
withdraw themselves from the society of the faithful, to abhor the
Sacrificer of the Lord, to despise the standing Ordinances of the Church, and
for those evils, which we see, to forsake that which is good, to throw up all,
and to make separation.

4. Hereby they destroy their own souls, of which others fearing God, are more
sensible then they themselves: Christ beholding Jerusalem, and foreseeing the
calamity that hung over it, Wept for it, they did not so for themselves.

5. They provoke wrath, and draw down judgments upon the place where they
live, both upon themselves and others for their sakes: For these things sakes
comes the wrath of God upon the Children of disobedience, Ephesians. 5.6.

Upon these Considerations, pious souls, men fearing God, are sensible of the
sins of others, as well as of their own; and of the iniquity of the times and
places where they live, and they are unto to them matter of great sorrow and
grief of heart: I beheld the transgressors, and was greived, Psalm. 119.158.

1. It should teach men wisdom, where they can, and as far as they can, to
use prudence in the choice of the places of their habitation, and when to make
this one of their respects among all other, that they may seat themselves in
such a place where the fear of God is amongst them. Lot made but an ill choice
(though he lighted on the (...) the Land) when he chose the plain of Sodom to
pitch his Tent in: Abraham might well be afraid to sojourne in Gerar, when he
perceived the fear of God was not in that place, Genesis 20.11. When we match our
Sons, or Daughters, we enquire diligently, what Portion, what Parentage, we
enquire after the fatness of the Land, fruitfulness of the Soil, convenience
of situation, and the like, and all this with good discretion too; but among
all the rest, we should not leave out this as a maine consideration, whether we
dispose of them to such a place where the fear of God is among the people the
Inhabitants there, whether they live under a good Ministry, a good Majestracy,
a good Government, where wickedness and vice is punished, were Religion and
godliness is set up, countenanc't, and encouraged, whether the fear of God be
in the place? a very considerable blessing, and a great part of their happiness.

2. Try your zeal and love to God and his truth to holy Religion, and the
Gospel by this Touchstone, by your hatred of sin, as well in others, as in your
selves, and by your grief and sorrow of heart, when you see it reign and abound
in the Land, and in the times and places where you live. Beloved, we live in
evil times, and in places bad enough, where you have occasion enough given you
to exercise your zeal, and to show your love, and grief, and anger, if you
have any in this case, you may see as our Prophet did, the Law forsaken, the
Covenant broken, the Worship of God neglected, the Ordinances despised, the
Sabbath profaned, the Sacraments slighted, etc. if we can see these things,
and not be sensible of them, and sorry for them, at least where we cannot help
them, surely our zeal is cold, and our love but small; Set a Mark (says the
Lord) upon the Foreheads of all those that Mourn for the aboninations that are
done in the City, Ezekiel. 9.4. It Is an Argument of a gracious heart, to take to
heart the iniquities of the times, to sigh and mourn for them, to be displeased
with them, and troubled at them.

3. Here Is an object and opportunity for such as are in place and power, to
exercise their authority in suppressing sin, in punishing the wickedness of the
times and places where they live, in stopping the course and current of
iniquity prevailing: If Magistrates, they must be clothed with zeal as with a
cloak, they must put on Justice as a Robe, and Judgment as a Crown or Diadem,
they must be girt about with the Sword of vengeance, and let proud and insolent
offenders know, they do not bear that Sword in vain: If Ministers, they must
cry aloud, and not spare, and never leave crying out against the prevailing and
reigning sins of the times and places where they live, till they have cried
them down, and take heed they do not by their silence and connivence, make
themselves partakers of other men's sins: Parents of Children, Masters of
samilies, they are in those lesser societies which they are set to Govern; both
Kings, Priests, and Prophets, all which Offices they must execute in the
Government of their little Commonwealth, every one in the several Sphere
wherein he moves, and Calling wherein he is set, according to his place and
power is to endeavor the suppressing of sin, the punishment of wickedness, and
the maintenance and encouragement of true Relion and virtue.

4. Here Is occasion and opportunity (in such evil times as here we speak of)
for the Saints and servants of the most high, the favorites of Heaven, to
stand up, and to show themselves, to make intercession for the People, and
Places where they are, for the diverting of those Judgments which these sins
call for, to use the Interest which they have in God, to entreat for the rest,
that God would spare them, to stand in the Gap (as Moses did) to make Atonement
for the People and Places where they are, as Aaron did, to divert, stay,
suspend, or remove Judgment denounc't against them, when wrath is gone forth,
and the Plague begun; and happy those Places which have such as these are in
them, though but a few favorites of Heaven, to make in to God, to use their
interest in him, to entreat for the rest, great things has God done at their
request in the behalf of others, and even those that despise them, are more
beholden to them then they are aware of.

5. In such evil times and places as we speak of, we are to be admonished to
walk warily for fear of Infection, for fear of seduction, least we come to be
corrupted and infected by them, and so while we complain the times are evil,
we our selves make them worse; so St. Paul argues, Ephe. 5.15. Walk
circumspectly, because the days are evil; By no means to have any fellowship
with the unfruitful works of darkness, but rather reprove them, (Ephesians. 5.11.)
to show our dislike of them by avoiding them, to reprove them by a sober,
righteous, and godly conversation, the most real reproof to the lewd and
loose carriage and behavior of wicked men that can be; by this opposition, the
holy conversation of godly men becomes more illustrious; thus does their light
come to shine before Men, so that they seeing their good works, are moved to
glorify the Father which is in Heaven; this is to walk as Children of the
light, and to shine as lights in the midst of a froward, and a dark Generation,
which will be the great conviction and condemnation of those wicked men they
live amongst, and their own high praise and great reward another day: This was
the high praise of Noah, Genesis 6.9. Noah was a just Man in his Generation: Why,
what Generation was that? it was an evil Generation; When all Flesh had
corrupted their ways before the Lord, Noah still kept his integrity, he was a
just Man in his Generation. For Abraham in Caldea, Lot in Sodom, Job in Vz,
Noah in his Generation to hold fast his integrity, was their high praise.

And so we have done with Elijah's first Satis est, the first of his enoughs,
In respect of the evil he had seen.

We come now to consider of the second, which respects the evil that he had
Suffered, Satis Tuli, I have suffered enough; and this arises out of those
words in the latter end of the 14. ver. They have Slain thy Prophets with the
edge of the Sword, and I only am left, and they seek my Life to take it away:
By this, you may gather in what condition he was in respect of sufferings, by
Persecution, Banishment, Hunger, and Thirst, and variety of dangers, threatening
even Death it self.

The inference from hence is this;
That it is no news to see the best of Saints to suffer the worst things that
the world can do unto them: To see Joseph in the Prison, Job upon the
Dunghill, Jeremy in the Dungeon, Jonah in the Whales belly, Isay under the Saw,
Paul under the Axe, Stephen under a storm of Stones, and all this under the
hands of wicked men; and more then this, when such wicked and ungodly men live
at ease, and in peace, prosper, and flourish, Come in no misfortune like other
men; neither are they plagned like other men, as the Prophet David observes,
Psalm. 73.5. These things may seem strange to humane apprehension, and do; but
they are no news to those that are well read in the ways of Providence, nor
strange neither, when wisely weighed, and rightly considered: And to help you
in those Considerations, I commend you to two of David's Psalms, the 37. and
the 73. both spent wholly upon this subject, to take away the scandal of the
Cross; In both which, he first rayses the Objections, and then brings in full
answers to them for the clearing of Gods Justice in this cross dispensation of
Providence, and for the satisfying of himself and others in this matter: I
shall therefore wave what the Prophet has there delivered, and only show you
very briefly some Reasons why and how it comes so to pass, and what profitable
Use we may make of this Meditation, and so pass on to the next.

Reasons.
If you ask me then, How it comes to pass that the best men should suffer the
worst things here in this world? I Answer:

1. This proceeds from the malice of Satan, ever contriving mischief against
the Church, even to the utter ruin of it, if it were possible, that the gates
of Hell should prevail against it; There is an enmity between the Woman and the
Serpent, which will never be reconciled.

2. From the hatred that wicked men (well nigh as bad as himself) bear against
it; his very Instruments and Agents are ready to execute his will upon it; the
enmity is not only between the Woman and the Serpent, but between their Seed
also: Wicked men are the very Seed of the Serpent, and do as naturally malign
and hate the Church, and Children of God, as the Serpent does a man.

3. From their own folly, which by sin lay themselves open to their malice:
Balaam knew he could have no power over the Israelites to hurt them, except he
could devise some way how to draw them to sin against God. But when he had
contrived a way to make them commit Fornication with the Daughters of Moab, he
knew he had his purpose on them in exposing them to wrath and judgment, Numb.
25.

4. This comes to pass by the just and wise Providence of God, not only
permitting, but ordering it so, for holy ends, and good purposes.

1. For trial of their Faith, that they may come out of them as Gold refined.

2. For exercise of their Graces, Vt probentur, approbentur, improbentur; that
they may be proved, approved, improved.

3. For purging out and mortifying of their corruptions, crucifying of their
lusts, and inordinate affections.

4. For holding of them close to Duty, as of Repentance, Prayer, and a constant
dependence upon God.

5. For the weyning of them from this present evil world, that they might seek
and affect better things in a better world, and mind the things that are
above, Colos. 3.1.

6. That they may have nothing to suffer hereafter, they are chastised in the
world, that they may not be condemned with the world.

Uses.
1. Are these the ends why God suffers his Saints to suffer? Then welcome
sufferings by the grace of God; Welcome Afflictions by the will of God, they
shall be a benefit unto us, a greater advantage then the Ease, Peace, and
Prosperity of wicked men can be unto them; nay, then these could have been unto
our selves, if we had had them: Ease slays the foolish, and the prosperity of
Fools destroys them, Prove. 1.32. Standing Pooles gather mud and dirt, when
running Streams keep pure and clear; Wind and Thunder purge the Air, and the
Fire does not consume, but refine the Gold that is cast into it: and such are
the sufferings of the Saints and servants of God to those that are exercised
under them.

2. Think not strange of those fiery trials, and that the best men are so
often under them, it were strange if it were not so; Christianus Crucianus, the
Cross is the Christians badge, the Cognizance of a Disciple, our Lord himself
the Captain of our salvation, was made perfect through sufferings, he carried
the Cross upon his own shoulders up Mount Calvary, upon which himself was
Crucified; and we may not think much that come after him, with Simon the
Cyrenian to carry one end of it: Show me the man of any standing in the
profession of Christianity, that has been constantly free from sufferings, and
I will say, He is either a Miracle, or a Monster in Religion.

3. Think not the worse neither of your selves, nor others in this case;
Crosses are not Curses, nor the greatest Sufferers (therefore) the greatest
Sinners: The sufferings of the Saints are so far from being Arguments of Gods
displeasure toward them; that clean contrary, they are rather evidences of his
love and favor: So St. Paul Argues, Heb. 12.6. Whom he loves he chasteneth,
and corrects every son whom he receives. St. Jerome never feared his estate
worse, then when for three years together he lived in peace, and was free from
all trouble and adversity. If thou faint in the time of adversity, thy strength
is small: Remember, all promises of blessings and good things made to Gods
Children, are made with exception of the Cross, against which, even grace and
goodness, piety and obedience, holiness it self is no protection: Sanctity and
suffering may stand together. They were holy ones of whom God spoke, Ps.
89.32.33. Their iniquity will I visit with the rod, and their sins with
scourges: but my loving kindness will I never take from them, nor suffer my
truth to fail.

4. Beware of murmuring, by no means suffer your hearts to break out in any
evil thoughts against God and his Providence, even in his most severe
proceedings against you, as if he dealt too hardly with you, this were to
charge God foolishly; But let him be ever justified in his sayings and doings,
and clear when he is judged; and to silence all clamor, murmurings, and
mutinous thoughts. In this case take with you these two considerations. First,
See sin in all, let the means by which you suffer be what it will, and the
Instruments of it what they can, do but look well into it, and you shall
find, Sin lies at the bottom: David saw this, Psalm. 25.18. Look upon my
adversity and my trouble, and forgive me all my Sin. Jeremy saw it in his
Lamentations, cap. 3.39. Why does living man complain, man suffering for his
Sins? as if he should say, There is no reason for it, let him consider well
of it, and he shall find, his Sins are greater then his sufferings, his
sufferings less then his deservings. Secondly, See God in all, though sin be
the cause of all, it is God that is the Judge of all: Is there any evil in the
City, and the Lord has not done it? And if it be the Lord, let him do what he
will, he neither can, nor will do unjustly? When Moses told Aaron in a
grievous Affliction that befell him, Levit. 10. That it was from the Lord; The
Text says, Aaron held his peace, ver. 3. he had no more to say. If it be the
Lords doing, let him do what is good in his eyes; his will be done at well
upon us, as by us, and as well in taking away, as giving: Ever say with holy
Job in the like case, Blessed be the Name of the Lord, Job 1.22.

5. In the sufferings of the Saints and servan^s of God here in this world, let
wicked and ungodly men read their own doom, and certainly conclude, That they
have a heavy reckoning to make to God in the day of account, that great is the
wrath of the Allmighty against them, and fearful the Judgments that do
await them. Behold (says the Lord) I visit the City upon which my name is
called, and do you think to escape? you shall not escape. And if the righteous
be scarely saved, where shall the ungodly and the Sinner appear? Surely if he
do so severely scourge his own Children with Scourges, he will torment them
with Scorpions. Solomon observed in his time, Eccles. 8.11. That because
Judgment was not speedily executed upon evil doers; therefore the hearts of
the sons of men were wholly set upon wickedness. But there is no reason for
it, if they knew all; alas! they see not that their day is coming, they may
make a Covenant with the Grave, and with Hell be at agreement, but that
Covenant will not stand; they may cry, ^^ace, peace unto themselves, where
there is no peace, and so sleep a while in their security, but their damnation
sleeps not; they may sing Requiems to their souls, Ede, bibe, lude, Eat,
drink, and be merry, but they see not the handwriting on the Wall, Mean, Mean,
etc. Thou art weighed in the balance, and art found too light: they hear not
the dreadful noise, Stulte hac nocte, This night shall they fetch away thy
soul. With what derision does the wisdom of God speak to such, Eccles. 11.9.
Rejoice, O young man, in thy youth, and let thy heart cheer thee in the days
of thy youth, and walk in the sight of thine eyes, and the ways of thine
heart; but remember, that for all these things God will bring thee into
judgment. But the Lord speaks terror to them by his royal Prophet David,
Psalm. 50.21. Thus and thus have thou done, and I held my tongue, and thou
thoughtest me such a one as thy self: but I will reprove thee, and set thy
sins in order before thee. Beloved, take this for a most certain
observation, It Is the most dangerous state in the world for a man to go on in
sin, and prosper, to live in sin, and to live at ease, free from adversity
and affliction: Ephraim is given unto Idols: let him alone, says the Lord by
the Prophet Hosea, c. 4.17. Nolo istam misericordiam, (says St. Jerome) Lord
let me have none of that mercy, to be let alone in my sin: Scinde, ure, seca
ut in aeternum parcas: Let me suffer any thing in this life that thou shall
please to lay upon me, that I may be spared in the life to come, and have
nothing to suffer in the other world. Let all secure sinners know, There is a
Pit digging up for them, a very significant expression of the Prophet, Psalm.
94.13. Until the Pit be dug for the ungodly: Now the longer the Pit is in
digging, the deeper it will be; and the deeper it is, the greater will be the
fall into it, and the more impossible the recovery out of it, and so deep it
may be, that it may let the sinner down into Hell it self. I conclude this
Point with that Advertisement of Saint Paul which he gives to all such secure
sinners, Romans 2.4. Know ye not that the patience and long suffering of God
should lead to Repentance? But thou out of thine hardness, and heart that
cannot repent, treasurest up unto thy self wrath against the day of wrath, and
the declaration of the righteous judgment of God. And what a miserable thing
is this, for a man to treasure up unto himself wrath against the day of wrath,
and all his days to be carrying fuel to that fire in which himself is
eternally to burn?

Lastly, From this truth, let all men certainly conclude a Judge to come; for
he that is the Judge of all the world has said it, That he will render to
every man according to his works, Romans 2.6. But we see, that is not done in
this life; in this life here are cross dispensations of Providence, by which it
falls out often times clean contrary. Solomon observed this in his time, Eccles.
8.14. That there be righteous Men to whom it comes according to the working of
the wicked: and there be wicked Men to whom it comes according to the work of
the righteous. The royal Prophet David before him observed the same, ^sal. 73.
and complineth of it, That the wicked flourish, when the righteous perish; they
live at ease, and have all things that their hearts can wish: When the
righteous are under the Cross, and under the Rod, chastised every Morning, and
visited every moment, Hic pietatis honos? Is this the reward of piety? Is this
to render to every man according to his works? surely no, and if things should
rest thus, then well might Saint Paul complain, That of all men, the Saints and
servants of God were most miserable: If in this life only we have hope, then
are we of all men most miserable: But say not so, and think not so, but
possess your souls with patience for a time, and mark the end, and you shall
find, it is not so. Remember that of St. Paul, Acts 17.31. That God has
appointed a day wherein to Judge the world in righteousness, by his Son Jesus
Christ, when he will make all these cross reckonings right and straight,
wherein he will render tribulation to them that have troubled his, and to those
that have been troubled, rest with him; when he will say to all those secure
and sensual sinners, (as to the rich Epicure in the Gospel,) Sons, remember
you in your life time received pleasure, and these my servants received pain:
now they are comforted, and you are tormented: that is the day wherein this word
shall be made good, That he will render to every Man according to his works,
therefore called, The day of refreshing, Acts 3.19. The day of restoration:
The day of the righteous judgment of God, Romans 2.5. Gods Judgments are
always righteous, but they are not always declared to be so: but then they
shall be declared to be so, in the sight of all the world, men, and Angels, and
they shall all confess and say, as in the Psalm, Verily there is a reward for
the righteous: doubtless there is a God that judges the earth.

And so we have done with the Prophets second Satis est, the second of his
enoughs spoken in reference to what he had suffered, Satis Tuli, I have
suffered enough. We now pass to the third, spoken in reference to what he had
done.

3. Satis Feci, I have done enough: And this arises out of the first words of
the 14. verse, I have been very jealous, or zealous, for the Lord God of Hosts:
this word is very significant and comprehensive, it contains in it much; as
the faithful discharge of his duty in the Office of a Prophet whereunto he was
called, his care to maintain the true Religion and Worship of God, his courage
in reproving the sins of the ten Tribes, even in the greatest, Ahab himself
not excepted; his zeal in convincing and silencing the Priests of Baall in
those perilous times, when they had the protection and countenance of
Authority on their sides, and much more; and that he did not these things
coldly, negligently, perfunctorily; but with all earnestness and fervency, (as
the word imports) for it comes from (...), to hiss, as Iron does, when being
red hot it is dipped in Water, such was his activity in the performance of these
his duties, and fervency of affection: Quicquid egit, valide egit, as the
Italians are said to do, The zeal of Gods House did even consume him, as
another Prophet speaks: he did these duties with zeal as hot as fire: neither
in this testimony did he arrogate to himself any thing at all more then due,
nor commend himself above his measure, the Story of his Life and Actions
evidently declares the truth of what he here asserts, That he had been very
zealous for the Lord God of Hosts, in doing his Will, in seeking his Glory, and
in upholding and maintaining his true Worship against all opposers, etc.

The Inferences from hence are these three.

The first, Those that are for God, must do the will of God.

The second, It is not enough to do, Oper^ operato; but they must do it as
they should be done, in due manner, with due affections, and they must do it
home, or else it will never reach to Elijah's Satis est, It is enough.

The third, It shall be their greatest comfort in the evil day, that they have
done so: the illation of these is clear out of Elijah's Satis est in the Text,
compared with the first words of the 14. v.

First, Those that are for God, must do the will of God in that Place,
Calling, and Condition of Life wherein God has set them: They must do his
will, whether it be Prophet, or Apostle, or a common Christian, Magistrate, or
Minister, or common Believer, every one must in his Place, do the will of God:
It is our daily Prayer, That his will may be done in Earth, as it is in Heaven:
And in this Prayer, Is it fit that we should overlook our selves? No, as it is
our daily Prayer, so it should be our daily practice to do his will: Not every
one that says unto me, Lord, Lord, shall enter into the Kingdom of Heaven, but
he that does the will of my Father which is in Heaven. Not the hearers, but the
doers of the Law shall be justified: If you know these things, blessed are you
if you do them. Christianity calls for Action; it is not Logical, but Moral;
not speculative, but practique: it consists not in saying, nor in knowing, nor
in professing, but in working; there must be a Feci in it: Regnum Dei non datur
otiosis, (as St. Bernard speaks) the Kingdom of God is not given to idle
professors, and pretenders; the Calling of a Christian is a laborious Calling,
a Building, a Husbandry, a Warfare, all these call to work, there is something
to be done whereby we may bring glory to God, good to men, and comfort to our
own souls: The very Heathen were sensible of this, That they were bound to do
some good in the Generation wherein they lived; and they that did not so, they
were reproach't, as In utile pondus terrae, an unprofitable burden to the
Earth. Fruges consumere nati: as if they were borne only to devour the good
things of the Earth. He was an honest Moralist that spoke it, Mortem non
timore, quia ita vixi, ut frustra me natum non existimem; I am not afraid to
dye, because I have so lived, as that no man may think that I was born in
vain: a testimony that may shame many Christians that so live and dye as if
they were born in vain, improfitable burdens to the Earth: Terrible is the
doom of the unprofitable servant in the Gospel, Take the unprofitable servant,
bind him hand and foot, and cast him into utter darkness: He does not charge
him as being an hurtful servant, but as an unprofitable servant; not with
wasting his Talent, but with not improving it. Beloved, God looks we should be
profitable servants, that we should bring glory to his name, honor to the
Gospel, and that we should do good in our Generation, that the world should be
the better for our coming into it, not the worse: Can any man imagine, or can
it stand with reason to think, That the most holy God, and wise Creator of all
things, should Create such a Creature as Man is for naught, and not look for
service from him, and glory out of him? Why there is no Creature that he has
made, though never so mean and despicable, but he looks for glory by it, and
service out of it, in it is kind; Natura nihil facit frustra, The God of Nature
has made nothing in vain: And shall Man, the most excellent piece of the
Creation (next unto the Angels) be unserviceable, and bring in nothing to the
glory of the Creator? Man, endued with such rare gifts and abilities to do
good withal, both to himself and others, Did the Creator endue him with such
rare excellencies above the rest of the Creatures, such as Understanding, Will,
Memory, Affections, Reason, Judgment, Knowledge, Conscience, for naught? No
surely, To whom much is given, of him much will be required: great receipts
will make men liable to great accounts: A time will come when they shall give
an account both of their Time, and of their Talents, how they have used and
improved them, what good they have done with them. Beloved, That man shall
never dye comfortably, which has not in his life time, in some sort, answered
the end of his Creation; The end of his Creation is, to glorify God, to do
good to men in his Generation, and to further the salvation of his own soul:
Blessed is that servant whom when his Master comes, he shall find so doing.

Uses.
1. It reproves all carnal, careless, and secure Christians, if I may call
them such, and not rather Epicure, or Atheist, that make no Conscience at all
of doing good; sure they think salvation will come of course, and God will drop
down happiness into their laps, while they sit still, and never look after it:
What shall we eat, or what shall we drink, or where withal shall we be
clothed, are the things that take up their care and thoughts? but the Vnum
necessarium, that one thing that is necessary, wholly laid aside: Surely a
great part of the world are very Atheists, they either think there is no heaven
at all, or they are much mistaken in the way to it, and the means of attaining
it; We must work, walk, run, fight the good fight of Faith; Strive to enter
in at the straight gate: through many tribulations, many sufferings, many
cumbatings; there are corruptions to be mortified, Lusts to be crucified,
Temptations to be resisted, afflictions to be suffered, spiritual wickednesses
to be wrastled withal: Qui cupit optatam cursu contingere metam, multa tulit
fuitq pius sudovit and alsit: Christianity is no idle Calling, it will take up
the whole man, and the whole time, it will keep us doing in the practice of all
Christian duties, and the exercise of all Christian graces.

2. This reproves the Sc^pticks and ^nosticks of these times, whose Religion
lies all in their Brain, and in their Tongue, the Practique part of
Christianity they lay by, and place it all in Theory and speculation, they have
found out a nearer way to Heaven then ever our Fathers knew, an easier, and a
cheaper, they can talk themselves thither, and dispute themselves thither, and
all this while sit still, and neither work, nor walk for it at all; the good
works which Christianity calls for, they pay with good words; their devotion is
turned into disputing, their faith into faction, and their charity into
contention; the main of Religion they place in hearing of Sermons. Pliny
writes of a certain Serpent, Aure concepit, Ore parit, That it conceives in the
Ear, and brings forth at the Mouth: as fit an Emblem for such professors as
can be: They conceive by the Ear, in an insatiable desire of Hearing; and
bring forth at the Mouth, by endless disputing, and discoursing. But as to the
Hand by working, or the Foot by walking, their Religion reaches not, without
which, all the rest is but vain, as St. James tells us. Therefore, Set me as a
Seal upon thine heart, and as a Bracelet upon thine Arm, says the Church to
Christ, Cant. 8.6. Upon which, St. Bernard thus Glosseth, In cord sunt
cogitationes, in brachiis sunt operationes, ergo super cor, and super brachium:
The heart is the seat of affections, the Arm the Instrument of actions: Set me
therefore as a Seal upon thy heart, and as a bracelet upon thine arm, that
with the one I may ever affect, and with the other effect the things that
please thee. Beloved, Not only the Law, but the Gospel, every where calls for
good works at our hands: Be zealous of good works, Titus 2.14. Fruitful in
good works, Col. 1.10. And let ours also learn to show forth good works: What?
though they be not Causa Regnandi, The cause why we shall reign; yet they are,
Via Regni, The way to the Kingdom, and the way which God has appointed we
should walk in thither: What though they do not justify, nor merit? yet they
are profitable for necessary uses: By them is our Heavenly Father glorified,
the Gospel of Jesus Christ honored and adored; they are evidences of the
soundness of our Faith, the sincerity of our profession; they bring comfort to
the Conscience here, and there is a certain reward for them in Heaven; though
not, Propter opera; yet Secundum opera, according to our works to be given unto
us. Blessed are the dead which dye in the Lord, even so says the spirit, for
they rest from their labors, and their works follow them: And happy is he
which has store of them in that day to praise him in the gates.

And thus much of the first inference, drawn from Elijah's third Satis est,
that is, I have done enough: Those that are for God, must do the will of God.

2. The second follows, and it is this, That it is not enough to do the will of
God, Opere operato: but they must do it as it should be done, or else it will
never reach to the Satis est in the Text: Now this Satis: est, has respect to
two things in doing the will of God. First, The manner of doing it. Secondly,
The extent of it. The first requires, that it be done well. The second, that it
be done home, they both are included in the Word Zealous: I have been Zealous
for the Lord God of Hosts. Zeal is a vehement affection, composed of Love and
Anger, and Actions flowing from these two, are ever done in earnest, they are
done home and thoroughly, and so ought we to do all things that we do for God:
The Opus operatum, the work done will not serve the turn, but it must be
rightly qualified in all the circumstances of it, and done in a right manner:
If we love the Lord our God, we must love him with all our heart, with all our
soul, with all our mind, and with all our strength: If we serve him, we must
serve him with reverence and godly sear: If we worship him, we must worship
him in Spirit, and in Truth Luther said well, That God loves Advers, rather
then Verbs, the manner of doing, more then the work done, the will more then
the deed, the mind more then the matter, we must not serve God negligently, nor
we must not serve him by halves, either of these make our obedience fall short
of Elijah's Satis est in the Text: To say, we believe in God, we love God, and
we fear God, and not to obey him, to show our faith by our works, and our fear
by our worship, Non satis est, it is not enough; but to our faith to join our
obedience, and to our fear to join our worship, and to our love our care to
keep his Commandments, Satis est, it is enough: To profess that we know God,
to confess his Name, to draw near unto him with our lips, and in all outward
deportment to have a form of godliness, Non satis est, it is not enough; but
to know God in Christ, reconciling the world unto himself, to draw near unto
him with our hearts, and dearest affections, and with the form of godliness to
show forth the power of it, Satis est, it is enough: To cry Lord, Lord, as in
the Gospel, and Templum Domini, Templum Domini, The Temple of the Lord, The
Temple of the Lord, as the Jews did in Jeremy, Non satis est, it is not enough:
but to do the will of our Father which is in Heaven, and in his Temple to
speak of his Honor, and to worship him aright, Satis est, it is enough. To
make our boast of God, and of his Law, to hear every day a Sermon, to know the
Mystery of the Gospel, to have a mouth full of Scripture ready at all times to
throw at an adversary in dispute or discourse, Non satis est, it is not enough:
but to know the truth as it is in Jesus, to receive the truth with the love of
the truth, to answer the end of the Evangelicall Law, which is Love out of a
pure heart a good Conscience, and Faith unfeigned, Satis est, it is enough. To
bring multitudes of sacrifices and oblations unto the Lord, to stretch out our
hands before him, and to make many Prayers, Non satis est, it is not enough:
but to wash us, to make us clean, to take away the evil of our works from
before his eyes, to cease to do evil, and learn to do well, Satis est, it
is enough. To come before the Lord with thousands of Rams, and ten thousand
Rivers of Oil, to give the fruit of my body for the sin of my soul, (Micha
6.6.7.) Non satis est, it is not enough: but to do Judgment, to love Mercy,
and to walk humbly before the Lord, Satis est, it is enough. To conclude this
point, to be admitted into the visible Church, to be matriculated into it by
Baptism, to live in a professed subjection to the Gospel of Christ, to come to
Church, to hear Sermons, to sit out the Service, and at the appointed times to
receive the Sacrament of the Lords Supper, (though this be more then we can
gain of many among you,) Non satis est, it is not enough: but to make it our
care all the days of our life, to make good the Covenant which we made in our
Baptism, to become Members of the invisible Church, incorporated into it, and
united unto it by the bonds of faith and of the spirit, to express the power of
the Word, Sacraments, and Spirit working by them in a constant holy walking
before the Lord, as becomes the Members of that holy Society, Satis est, it is
enough: And so we have made good the second Inference drawn out of Elijah's
third Satis est, in reference to what he had done, Satis Feci, I have done
enough. But stay a little, before we take our leave of this Satis est, it is
necessary we should answer an Objection that lies in our way, and must be
removed before we can proceed any further.

Obj. Quid audio? What is that I hear? Satis feci, I have done enough: Who can
say so? be he a Prophet, be he an Apostle, an Evangelist, be he the holiest of
Saints that ever lived, can he say of himself, Satis feci, I have done enough?
Is there a Satis in our obedience unto which we may arrive, and then say, It is
enough? Our Savior tells us, That when we have done all that we can, we are
unprofitable servants: How then can any say, It is enough? or I have done
enough?

Sol. To this I answer by a double distinction.

First thus, There is a Satis ad Justificationem; and there is a Satis ad
Testificationem: there is a Satis as to Justification; and there is a Satis as
to Testification. As to the former, there is no man can say, He has done
enough. Enter not into judgment with thy servant, O Lord, for in thy sight
shall no man living be justified. Psalm. 143.2.

But as to the later, there is a Satis ad testificationem, to testification,
that is, To testify the truth of our faith, the sincerity of our obedience,
and the uprightness of our hearts in the Service of God. When Abraham was so
ready, upon Gods command, to offer up his Son Isaac in sacrifice to him, as
to bring him to Mount Moriah, there to build an Altar, to lay the Wood in order
upon it, and bind his Son to the Wood, to take the Knife in his hand, and to
stretch forth his hand to Slay him: God stays his hand, bids him hold his
hand, proceed no further, Satis est, It is enough, for now I know that thou
love me, seeing thou have not refused to offer up thine only Son in
sacrifice to me at my command, Genesis 22. Here Is a Satis ad testificationem,
enough to testify his love and obedience; and so, though none of Gods Saints
and servants can reach to a Satis in reference to justification; yet as to the
testification of the soundness of their faith, the sincerity of their
obedience, and the uprightness of their hearts in his Service, there is a Satis
which they may reach to, and of which God himself will testify, and say,
Satis est, It is enough.

The second distinction in Answer to this Objection, is this: There is another
twofold Satis: First, Satis ad perfectionem. Secondly, Satis ad acceptationem.
First enough, In reference to perfection. And,

Secondly enough, In reference to acceptance.

As to the former, Nunquam satis est, we can never arrive enough as to
perfection; Our Savior has set us a Copy, that we can never come near, Mat
6. Be you perfect as your heavenly Father is perfect. Alas! our highest
perfection, is to acknowledge our imperfection: and the best of us all, when we
have done our best, to acknowledge, We are unprofitable servants: To confess,
with the Centurion, Domine non sum dignus, O Lord I am not worthy the least of
thy mercies: and with the Publican, to pray, Lord be merciful to me a sinner:
so that if we look at perfection, Nunquam satis est, we shall never arrive to
that degree, or height of obedience, as to say, Nunc satis est, It is now
enough. But if we look at acceptance, blessed be God, there is a Satis,
whereunto the Saints and servants of Almighty God may, and do arrive, even in
this life, through the mercy of God, and the indulgence of our Heavenly Father,
which, where he sees a willing mind, accepts of the will for the deed, and of
what we can do, instead of what we should do, which accepts according that a
man has, and not according to that he has not: And so this rubb being
removed, we pass to the third Inference, which is this:

That thus to have so done, the will of God will be our greatest comfort in an
evil day, when we shall stand in most need of it. Hezekiah found it so, when
the Message came to him by the Prophet Isay from the Lord, That he should set
his house in order, for he must dye. O Lord remember, I have walked before thee
with an upright and a perfect heart, and have done that which was good in thy
sight, Isay 38.1, 3. Nehemiah found it so, who having done worthily for the
people of God in obteining Commission from the King of Persia for the redeeming
of the Jews out of the Babylonish Captivity, and building the Walls of
Jerusalem, often comforts himself with the remembrance of it, Nehemiah 13.14.
Remember me, O my God in this, and blot not out the kindness that I have showed
to thy house. And verse the 22. Remember me, O my God, concerning this also,
and pardon me according to thy great mercy. And again verse 31. Remember me, O
my God, in goodness Indeed he needed not have put God in mind to remember him,
the Lord would have remembered him, and his kindness showed to his people,
though he should forget it: God is not unfaithful that he should forget the
labor and love showed unto his Saints. We see in Matthew 25 how he did
remember it, when they had forgotten it that showed it, ver. 42.43. When I was
hungry, you gave me to eat: when I was thirsty, you gave me to drink: when I
was naked, you clothed me: sick, and in prison, you visited me, and ministered
unto me: this they had forgotten, and therefore asked, Lord, when saw we thee
hungrty, or thirsty or naked, or sick, and in prison, and ministered unto thee?
he remembered it, when they had forgotten it, and does not only remember it,
but reward it too, and now they find the comfort of it. With such a
remembrance does Saint Paul comforts himself, 2 Timothy 4.7. I have fought the
good fight, I have finished my course, I have kept the faith. Henceforth is
laid up for me a crown of righteousness: He was not afraid to sing out his
Cupio dissolvi, I desire to be dissolved. Nor our Prophet in the Text, to make
it his suite to the Lord, To take away his soul, when he remembered, how
zealous he had been for the Lord God of Hosts, while he was in the body. The
very Heathens were sensible of this, and it was a great incitement to them to
justice and honesty, and all moral virtue: Conscientia been acta vitae,
multorumque benefactorum recordatio jucundissima est: The Conscience of a life
well spent, and the remembrance of much good done in his life time; O what a
Cordial it is to an old man, a dying man. And so is the contrary, the
remembrance of a life ill spent, and of much evil done in a man's life time, as
great a corrasive at such a time: Thou writest bitter things against me, and
make me to possess the sins of my youth, says J^b, cap. 12.25. and he none
of the worst of men. Beloved, there will come a time when Conscience awakened,
and enlightened, will be serious with us, in calling us to account for things
done in our life time, how we have spent our life, our time, and our Talents;
what good we have done with them ever since we came into the world: And what a
sad account is this, when a man can give no better account to God, nor his own
Conscience, but thus, That he has lived upon earth forty, or fifty, or sixty,
or seventy years, or more, to do nothing, but eat, and drink, and sleep, and
play, or worse, and spent his life, Aut nihil agendo, in doing nothing; Aut
aliud agendo, in doing things impertinent, which is as good as nothing; Aut
male agendo, or in doing evil, which is worse then nothing, and now is going
out of the world, before ever he has thought of his errand, wherefore he came
into it: If this be not to be an unprofitable servant, what is? and what his
doom is, we have heard, and may read, Matthew 25. Beloved, Let this
Meditation teach us wisdom, so to lay out our selves while we live in this
world, so to improve our time, and our Talents, as that we may be able to give
some account of them to God, and to our own Consciences, so to live that we
need not be afraid to dye, to be doing some good here in our life time, the
remembrance whereof may yield us comfort in our sickness, and hope in our
death, so to lay out our selves in this world, that we may have somewhat to
take to in the other world, when we shall leave this, and all that we have in
it, and so shall we be great gainers by the change.

And so we have done with this third Inference also, deduced out of the
Prophets third Satis est, It is enough, spoken in reference to what he had
done, Satis feci, I have done enough. We now come to the fourth, as spoken in
reference to his Age, and the years of his Life, Satis vixi, I have lived long
enough.

In all likelihood, the Prophet was now an old man, and there are five things
which persuade us to think so.

First, He was President of the College of the Prophets, and the Prophets
Children, such as were bred up in an Academicall, or Studious way, whereby they
might be fitted for that Office, when called unto it; he was President over
them, and that was not a Charge for a Novice or a Neophite to undertake.

Secondly, He had wrought many great Miracles, and done great and signal
services among the people of God, (as his story testifies,) which were not the
work of a short time, and he could not be less then thirty years old when he
was first Anointed unto the Office of a Prophet, for that was, Aetas
Sacerdotalis, as St. Jerome calls it; and if it were so still, the Church would
receive no damage by it.

Thirdly, He was now commanded to Anoint Elisha Prophet to succeed in his
room; an Argument, that he had finished his course in Prophesying, and was now
ready to resign.

Fourthly, The last words of this Verse seems to import as much, For I am no
better then my Fathers; they had their time here on earth, and are now dead and
gone. I have had my time too, and what should I do now, but follow after them,
and be gathered unto them, For I am no better then my Fathers.

Fifthly, Because he makes it his request, To be dissolved, which if he were in
his best Age, and strength, and fit and able to serve God and his people in
that high Office, he would not have done, nor could without sin; in all these
respects we may rationally conclude, he was now an old man. And although there
be nothing in this world so desirable as that it should make a man in love
with it in any state of his life, and in his best years; yet much more when his
best days are gone and past, when he is entering into that state of life of
which David says, It is but labor and sorrow, and those years approach of
which he shall say, I have no pleasure in them, may he with good reason be
content to leave the World, and make it his request, That the Lord would take
away his soul. When the keepers of the house tremble, and the strong men bow
themselves; when the grinders cease, because they are few, and they wax dark
that look out at the windows: When the Almond Tree shall flourish, the
Grasshopper shall be a burden, and all the daughters of singing shall be abased:
When the Silver cord is lengthened, and the Golden Ewer broken, when the
Pitcher is broken at the Well, and the Wheel broken at the Cisterne, etc. as
that great Master of Wisdom elegantly describes old Age, Eccles. 12.3. etc.
then for an old Barzillai, to refuse the pleasures of the Court: Or an old
Simeon, to sing his Nunc dimittis. Or an aged Paul, To desire to dissolved: Or
an old Elijah, to beseech the Lord, To take away his soul, is no wonder, and
all this as old Age merely considered in it self, without any other grievances
added to it to make it burdensome, and irksome, it is a burden to it felfe; but
who ever saw it come, but attended with a world of infirmities to make it more
tedious, Catarrs Rhumes, Aches, Palsies, akings in the Bones, Gouts, Dropsies,
and in all these, inability to help it self; Senex bis puer, it is a second
Childhood, and it is a question whether the second be not worse then the first.
Upon these, and some other considerations, it has often been my Prayer to the
Lord God, and is at this instant, That he would not detain this soul of mine
in this Tabernacle of Clay wherein it has now lodged these seventy years and
upward, unto extremity of old Age. But farther, If to all these there should be
added any external grievances, poverty, and want, discontent in the Family,
disobedience in prodigality of Children, divisions among Brethren, vexatious
Suits, or the like, these were enough, not only to make an old man desire
dissolution, but to hasten it, and to bring his gray baires with sorrow to the
Grave.

Another discouragement to old Age that helps to take away the comfort of it
is, That they are very apt to be despised, though it should not be so, God has
stamped such a reverend aspect in the very face and gray hairs of an old man,
as should command reverence from the younger sort, if they were not
unreasonably uncivil; and has commanded it too, Thou shall rise up before the
boary head, and honor the person of an old Man; Age is honorable, a Crown of
glory, (says Solomon,) the gray hairs are the silver Crown and Image of Gods
eternity, who is described to have his head and his hair white as Wool, or
Snow, Revel. 1.14. where he is pleased so far to honor old Age, as to take a
simile from the gray hairs, to shadow forth his own Eternity: yet such is the
corruption and vitiousness of men, to make that the matter of their reproach,
which should be of their honor: what more ordinary, then call such, Old
dotard, old fool, old any thing, that may sound reproachfully: Honor thy
Father that begat thee, and despise not thy Mother when she is old, (says
Solomon,) Prove. 23.22. implying, that she is never more subject to be despised,
then when she is old.

I will add but this one discouragement more which helps to take away from old
men the comfort of their lives, and that is this, That they see the world grows
weary of them, although they have deserved never so well of it, yet, now they
have done what good they can, and they see they can get no more good out of
them, they grow weary of them, and would be shut of them. I have read of a
barbarous Country, where, when men come to that extremity of old Age, that they
grow useless, they knock them on the head, and bury them. We are not grown to
that barbarism in England, but surely I do believe, there are some that could
wish it were so, some of their very near relations, so their hand were not upon
them, especially if while they live they be any way troublesome or chargeable
to them; or at their death they look for some benefit by them: A strange
ingratitude, and most unreasonable, that those which receive most benefit from
them, should afford them least respect, and be most weary of them; but these
are great discouragements to old Age, which may make them as weary of the
World, as the World is of them, and wish with all their hearts, with our
Prophet in the Text, That the Lord would take away their soul. I will conclude
this Point, with my Advice to such, though they need not be put in mind that
their day is far spent, and the night closing upon them, their Sun is set,
and they but as a Candle spent to the end, and blinking within the socket,
their gray hairs and wrinkled cheeks, their dim eyes, trembling hands, and
weak knees, read unto them continual Lectures of mortality, and advise them
to withdraw out of the tumultuous Sea of this troublesome World, and to put in
to the Haven of quiet rest, and repose; to give themselves to Prayer and
Meditation, to meditate upon the vanity of the time past, the shortness of the
time present, and Eternity to come; to set their House and their Heart in
order, and to prepare for a change at hand, and all the few days of their
appointed time to wait till that change do come, that so it may be unto them
a happy change, and they may with hope and comfort resign their souls into
the hand of their Creator, and not be afraid to say with our Prophet in the
Text, Lord take away my soul, which is the request it self, which in old
Simeons Language, I call the Prophets Nunc dimittis: In which are these three
things; First, The Person, The Lord. Secondly, The Act, take away. Thirdly, The
Object, my soul.

From the first note, He might not take it away himself, his soul was not his
own, he might not of his own head dismiss it himself, though it were in him in
never so much bitterness; but he must stay the time till God that gave it him
remands it again, in the mean time, In his p^tience possess his soul, and all
the days of his appointed time, wait until his change should come. It is the
refore a desp^rate course of desperate men, to antedate this Act of God by
offering violence to themselves, and so letting out their own souls, as
Achitophel and Judas did; such think thereby to rid themselves of some present
grief, or discontent, by ridding-themselves of their lives; but it is a
delusion of Satan to tell them so, herein they do but leap out of the Frying
Pan into the Fire, as the Proverb is; for if this life did scourge them with
scourges; that other, without the extraordinary mercy of God, will torment them
with Scorpions. It was said of Hanniball, That he always carried three or
four drops of strong poison enclosed under the stone of his Ring, that at any
time if he were hard set, (as Saul once was upon the loss of the day in a
Battle against the Philistines,) he might sup them out, and prevent his
falling into his enemies hands, as Saul then, upon the same occasion, fell upon
his Spear, and with the help of the fugitive Amalekite, Slew himself. And
that stout hearted Prince, which being taken Prisoner, and carried about by the
Conqueror in a silver Cage, impatient of his Captivity, and not having where
withal to make away himself, beat our his brains against the bars of the
Cage. We could instance in too many such (God knows) which by hanging,
drowning, poisoning, and other kinds of death, have made away themselves; these
our Law calls, Felones de se, Felons of themselves, and inflicts upon them as
grievous a punishment as they are capable of being dead, by an ignominious
burial: And yet I dare not say peremptorily of all such, that they are
certainly and eternally damned, though there be nothing visible to us whereby
we may judge otherwise of them; yet who can limit the mercies of the most high,
or know what secret communication of spirit there may be in them, between the
beginning of the act, and the end of it, Inter pontem and fontem, between the
bridge, and the brook; between the stirrup and the ground, mercy I ask't, mercy
I found. Judas was not damned for hanging himself, but for his I reason; but
to leave them to their own Master and Maker to stand or fall.

But Secondly, There are more Felones de se, self murderers, or which at least
are accessory to their own deaths then these, though the Law do not call them
so. As first, All lewd and ungodly persons, which having not the fear of God
before their eyes, take wicked courses, commit robberies, burgleries, rapes,
^elones treasons, murders, and other such capital Crimes, such as that the
Laws of the Land take hold of them, and ^ut them off as not worthy to live upon
the Earth, not among the Society of men: The cruel and blood thirsty man shall
not live out half his days: all such are at least accessory to their own
deaths.

Secondly, All luxurious and intemperate persons, which by surfeiting,
drunkenness, and riotous living destroy themselves, fill their bodies with
noxious humors, which breed in them mortal diseases, Sur^ets, Fevers,
Dropsies, dead Palsies, and the like, by which they shorten their days. The
Philosopher observed (...) long ago, That Plures gula quam gladio: There were
more dyed by intemperance, then by the sword.

Lastly, All quarrelsome Persons, such as are apt to give offense to others,
and to provoke others to give offense to them, and so from words they fall to
blows, or to challenge one another to fight Duells, in which, both parties are
guilty of Murder by the sixth Commandment; and as well he that is killed, as
he that kills, is at least accessory to his own death: In none of these cases
can a man say confidently, That the Lord does take away his soul, he throws
it away himself, and destroys himself.

2. From this the Prophets request unto the Lord, To take away his soul; we
may infer, That though a man may not take away his own soul, yet in some
cases, he may make it his Suit to Almighty God, that he would do it: So did
old Simeon before mentioned: So did St. Paul, 2 Timothy 4.6. So did Moses Numb
11.15. So did Job, cap. 6.8.9. So did Jeremiah, cap. 20. So did Jonas, Jonah
3.3. So did our Prophet in the Text: I dare not justify, nor excuse all these
which I have mentioned in this their request; I suppose that in some of them it
proceeded from passion, and impatience, and so it was their infirmity, and
blameworthy; yea, in this our Prophet himself, if there were not in this his
request a tacit submission to the will of God, it could not be excused, but it
proceeded from infirmity in him; but this does not infringe the truth of my
inference,

That in some cases the Saints and Servants of Almighty God, may without sin
make it their Suite to him, That he will take away their souls, that is, by
death and dissolution, separate them from their bodies.

First, That so he may be taken out of a wicked world: Oh what a Hell is it to
a pious foul to be engaged in a wicked world? For a Lot to live in Sodom: A
David in Meshech: It was a far greater mercy which God showed to Enoch, in
taking him out of the world from the Flood at hand, then that he showed to Noah
in preserving him in it.

Secondly, In case of long and lasting, sharp and griev^us Affl^ctions: Oh
death, how sweet is the^r membrance of thee to the soul that lives in
bitterness? I do not think the Lord did impute it for sin to Job, or Jeremy,
that they were so weary of their bitter Lives, and did so often wish, That
their change might come. Or, that King Edward the sixth did sin, when in his
death bedsickness, he prayed so earnestly, Lord take me out of this wretched
World. Nor Dr. Hamond, who under the tortures of the Stone, whereof he dyed,
was so often heard to say, Lord, make have: though I doubt not but in all
these, there was employed a tacit submission to the will of God.

Thirdly, That a man may be taken away from the evil to come: This was a mercy
promised to Josiah upon his humiliation, (2 Kings 22.19.20.) as it was the
misery of his surviving Son Zedekiah, to see the evil which his Father was
taken from, and to suffer in it. Wise men foresee evil to come, in the causes
of it, and in the ^ore-runners of it: And the Lord mentions it as a mercy, That
he will take them away from those evils: and they may without sin Pray for
that mercy, Isay 57.1.

Fourthly, That they may be freed from the burden of the flesh, and the bondage
of corruption inherint in it; that Ground Ivy in the Wall, which will never be
plucked out root and branch, till the Wall be thrown down: It was under the
sense of this that St. Paul cries out, Romans 7.24. O wretched man that I am: who
shall deliver me from the body of this death? this will never be done, but by
the death of this body.

Fifthly, In extremity of old age, when a man becomes a burden to himself, and
others; when he is fallen into those years of which David says, His life is
nothing but labor and sorrow, and the years of which he shall say, I have no
pleasure in them: when not only his body grows weak, but his mind also, and
his intellectual faculties fail, his understanding weak, his apprehension
dull, his memory unfaithful, his affections Childish, and he becomes
unserviceable, not able to do that good which he has done, and should do;
when a man becomes thus superannuate, he may doubtless without sin, make it his
suite to Almighty God, To take away his soul.

Use.
This Meditation is useful to comfort, and to confirm us against the fear of
death, either of our selves, or our friends; why should we make that the object
of our fear, which others have made the object of their hope and desire? Holy
men, wise men, good men, men that have had a great interest in the world, have
been willing to lay down all, and to leave all, and made it their suite, that
they might dye, in assurance of a change for a better life. To help us to pass
through this Gulf with comfort and courage, weigh well but these two things:
1. What a world we leave behind us, the Terminus a quo. 2. What a world we have
before us, the Terminus ad quem: And these two considerations will make the
passage through that medium easy.


First, For the Terminus a quo, the world we leave behind us, a very sink of
sin, a du^ghill of uncleanness: (...), The whole World lies in wickedness, as
St. John speaks, nothing in it but sin, and sorrow, and travail, and
trouble, and malice, and mischief, and that which may well make any wise man
out of love with it, and even weary of it: The best things in it which men make
most account of, have been weighed to our hands by the wisest of the Sons of
Men, and upon the trial found, To be lighter then vanity it self; not only
vanity, but vexation of spirit. For first, They are all transitory. Secondly,
They are not all satisfactory. Thirdly, All embittered with so many cross
Ingredients, that there is no true contentment in them, nor true comfort to be
taken out of them. We could show you examples of the greatest of men, Kings,
Emperors, Lords of the world, such as have had as much of the glory of it, and
all other worldly good in it, as the world could give or lend; yet have seen so
far into the vanity and emptiness of it, as to despise it, to lay down all,
and take themselves unto a private and monastical life, which is a death to
the world, and the shadow of death it self.

Secondly, For the Terminus ad quem, Consider what a world (in dying) we are
going to, it would require a world of time, and words to describe it; the best
description of it is to describe it to be such (for the transcendency of the
glory of it) as that it cannot be described, For neither has the eye seen, nor
the ear heard, nor can the heart of Man comprehend the great things that God
has prepared for them that love him, 1 Cor. 2.9. St. Paul shaddows it out in
part, Heb. 12.22. where he shows the happiness of the Church militant, in their
communion with the Church triumphant, thus: But you are come to Mount Sion, and
to the City of the living God, the Caelestiall Jerusalem, and to the company of
in^numerable Angels: And to the Assembly and Congregation of the first borne,
whose names are Written in Heaven, and to God the Judge of all, and to the
spirits of just Men made perfect: And to Jesus the Mediator of the new
Testament, and to the blood of sprinkling, which speaks better things then
the blood of Abel. Here Is a description in part of the Place, and Society which
we shall go to, when we shall come to be joined with the Church triumphant in
glory; now be you well assured, that all things else there, are suitable to
these, which must needs render it transcendently joyous, and glorious. O! if we
could but draw the Curtain of Heaven, and look in the Sanctum Sanctorum, to
see the joy, and glory that is there, we would never care for this world more,
the most precious things in it would be despised in our eyes, our whole life
would be nothing, but a Cupio dissolvi, and esse cum Christo: I desire to be
dissolved, and to be with Christ; and we would long for the time, when the Lord
would take away our soul, that we might be translated thither. I read of one
Cleombrotus, that hearing Plato discoursing of the immortality of the soul, and
the happiness of the other life to come, Threw himself headlong off from a high
Rock to quit himself of this life, that so he might enter into that other life,
that Plato so much commended: And if a Heathen man could be so sensible of
advantaging himself by his change into the other life, upon those weak grounds
which Plato's Philosophy could give, as to hasten his own death upon the hope
of it: Surely we that are Christians, and have better grounds to build our
faith and hope upon, then any Plato's Philosophy could give; may with much more
Comfort think on Death, with much more hope and confidence wait for it: and
when it comes, bid it welcome, as our friend that comes to free our soul out of
the prison of the body, the sole impediment of it is perfection, and to open the
door to let us into a better world, and into a better life. Thus of the Person
to whom he makes his suit, The Lord.

2. Now we are to consider of the Act, Take away my soul. How does the Lord
take away souls?

Not by annihilation, or reducing them to nothing, as at the first Creation:
Nor by laying them a sleep together with their bodies, till the Resurrection,
the Opinion of the Arabians: Nor by a Metempsuchosis, transmitting them into
some other body, to inform them: Nor by fixing them, as Stars in the
Firmament: Nor by sending them into purgatory, as the Papists teach: But thou
that gave it me, take it unto thy self, either by thine own immediate power
and grace, who art a Spirit, and the God of the spirits of all flesh; or by the
Ministry of thy good Angels, let them be ready to receive it, at the parting
of it out of my body, as they did the soul of Lazarus, and to carry it up to
rest and glory: Thus, Lord take away my soul.

From hence, note first, That our souls are immortal, they dye not with the
body; but when the body at the dissolution returns to the earth, from whence it
was taken the soul returns to God that gave it: All the expressions of holy men
dying, imports as much: Lord Jesus receive my spirit, says St. Stephen.
Father, into thy hands I commend my spirit, says our Savior: Lord take away
soul, says our Prophet; all expressing their faith in this truth, That their
souls were immortal. Fear not them that can kill the body, and are not able to
kill the soul, says our Savior: So then, the soul cannot be killed. Our
blessed Lord disputing with the Sadduces concerning the Resurrection, Mat. 22.
tells them out of the Scriptures, That God was the God of Abraham, the God of
Isaac, and the God of Jacob, who were dead and buried a thousand years before;
and from thence concludes, the immortality of the soul, inasmuch, as God was
not the God of who dead, but of the living, ver. 32. their spirits did never
dye, their souls were still alive, and in being, and he was their God.

Uses. First, It is of Use to quiet our spirits, and to satisfy our minds,
sometimes troubled upon the consideration of the perplexities of Providence, in
the cross dispensation of evil and good, to the good and the evil here in
this world; the unravelling of this Clue, of the souls immortality from the
beginning to the end, will guide us through this Labyrinth, so that in the end,
we shall say, The ways of the Lord are right: when a day shall come, when it
shall be said to the Epicures of this world, which have had their portion in
this life, as in Luke 16.25. Son, Rentember you have had your pleasure in
your life time, and my servants received pain: now they are comforted, and you
are tormented.

2. This Meditation is of Use to comfort, and to confirm us against the fear
of death, either our own, or our friends, inasmuch, as believing in the Lord,
me shall live, though we dye: And he that lives, and believes in him, shall
never dye eternally: Indeed, we shall not dye at all, totally; for though we
lay down our bodies into the earth to sleep; yet our spirits shall not dye at
all, but being delivered from the burden of the flesh, shall live with the
Lord, and be translated into a state of joy and feli^ity, Et meliore sui part
superstes^ erit, The better part is still living, and therefore the Scripture
will hardly call it a death, but a Sleep, a Change, a Dissolution, a Departure,
a Translation.

3. It is of use for the contempt of this world, in which we have no surer
footing, and of the best things of this world, of which we have no better hold,
nor longer enjoyment, but for this short and uncertain life.

4. This Meditation of the immortality of the soul, is of special use, to
teach and to admonish to prepare, and to provide for that our future condition,
to lay up for our selves treasure in Heaven, that we may have something to take
to, when we come into the other world, when we shall leave this, and all that
we have in it behind us, to make us friends of the Mammon of iniquity, that
when time comes, they may receive us into the everlasting habitations, to lay
here a good soundation against the time to come, that seeing our fouls are
immortal, and shall have an eternal being, it may be in well being; that
seeing they shall live eternally, it may be in bliss and happiness, now is the
time to provide for it: O how miscrable will be the condition of those souls,
which having lost their time here, when this life is ended, shall be swallowed
up into eternity, and all that while shall live in woe and misery, in pain and
torment, easeless, endless, and remediless? How much better had it been for
such if they had never been born? Or being born, that their souls had dyed with
their bodies? or living after them, there had been some period of time wherein
they might have been extinguished? But when they must so continue for ever,
That the worm shall never dye, nor the fire never go out, that they shall
continue in torment to all eternity: Who can conceive the misery of it? That
word eternity, into what a deep bottomeless gulf does it swallow up the mind
that thinks upon it? Great wonder it is, and a miracle indeed, that a point of
such great importance, and high concernment, should be no more heeded and
regarded: Some live, as if they had no souls at all; or if they have any, that
they are but as the souls of bruits, which perish with their bodies; and well
were it with them if they did so: they live, as if they never thought to dye,
and dye, as if they never thought to rise again; they have no hope in their
death, nor any care of their immortal souls ever after. To these I say no
more but this, Lord have mercy upon their poor miserable souls, they will have
time enough hereafter, when it is too late, to see their error, and to repent
of this their stupidity and security.

Secondly, Note here the holy and heavenly expressions of the Saints and
Servants of the Lord at their departure out of this life: O Lord, I have waited
for thy salvation, says the Patriarch Jacob upon his death bed, Genesis 49.18.
Lord now let thou thy servant depart in peace, (said old Simeon, Luke
2.29.) for mine eyes have seen thy salvation. Saint Stephen the holy Martyr,
with these words breathed out his soul, Lord Jesus receive my spirit, Acts
7.59. Our Lord himself upon the Cross, giving up the ghost, with these words
breathed his last, Father, into thy hands I commend my spirit, (Luke 23.46.) in
sense the same with the Prophet in the Text, Lord take away my soul. With such
holy expressions as these, did holy Men dying take their leave of the World,
and breathe out their spirits. I could instance in many more, Bishops, Martyrs,
Confessors, and other holy men and Women dying, some in my own hearing; others
in the hearing of other Men, and recorded in the stories of their Lives and
Deaths, with the gracious expressions uttered by them in their deathbeds, in
words full of faith, full of hope, full of comfort, much to the edification of
all that were present; and it is a great advantage to be present with such men,
at such a time, for then are they most serious, then are their souls loosing
from the prison of their bodies, and are prominentes, (as it were looking out
before they take their flight) then have they clearer Vision of things then
they had before, when they were in the close prison of their bodies, the light
breaks in at the chinks, and at the doors and windows opening to let out the
soul; then have many of the Saints had rare Discoveries, and Revelations, by
which they have Prophesied of things to come; and the words of dying men, are
much to be heeded and regarded. But if you would have the Lord to draw near
unto you in these ways when you are dying, you must draw near to God in his
ways while you are living; You must acquaint your self with God, and be at
peace with him, as Eliphas speaks in Job, cap. 22.21. you must live in
communion with him, you must call upon his Name, praise him, and give him
thanks, worship him, and do his will, then will he own you; and be merciful
to you at that time, and draw near unto you, and have a care of your soul that
it shall not miscarry: but he himself will take it away.

But secondly, If you would have the Lord to take away your soul, you must
keep your soul with all diligence, and preserve it pure, and undefiled, that
the Lord may own it, and accept it, and place it among the holy souls of his
Saints, and his redeemed ones. The Lord our God is a holy God, of pure eyes,
which cannot behold any thing that is impure, but with indignation; and there
is nothing more odious to him then sin and corruption, nor which renders us
more abominable in his sight: Compared therefore to Leprosy, to the Leopards
spots, to menstruous pollution: If therefore our souls shall be presented unto
him stained with sin, polluted with uncleanness, defiled with spiritual
leprosy of corruption, spotted with noisome lusts and pleasures; Will the Lord
look at them? will he own them? will he accept them? Can we desire the Lord, or
hope that he will take away such souls? or employ his good Angels to fetch
them, as he did to receive the soul of Lazarus and carry it into Abraham's
bosom? No, there are other soule-gatherers ready to take away such souls, even
those which were employed to fetch away the soul of the covetous rich Man in
the Gospel, Luke 12.20. If we would have the Lord to take away our souls, we
must present them pure unto him, without spot, and blameless: They must be
washed clean in the blood of the Lamb, and cleansed by the sanctifying virtue
of the holy Ghost; our Consciences, the highest faculty of the soul, Must be
purged from dead works, to serve the living God. We must purge our selves from
all filthiness of flesh and spirit, and grow up in true holiness in the fear
of the Lord: The Place which our souls are to go to it holy, the Company holy,
the exercises holy, and so must our souls be also, that they may be suitable to
all the rest, and then the Lord will take away our souls, and place them
amongst them in joy, happiness, and glory. Thus of The Act. The Object
follows, [My soul.]

2. Branch. The soul is the spiritual part of Man, the principal and
essential part whereof Man does consist, the fountain of life, sense, and
motion, which by the spirits vital, natural, animal, the souls cursitors
running into all the parts of the body, actuates and informs it, and uses it
as an Organ or Instrument whereby to perform it is several operations. This
soul of man is precious in these seven respects.

First, In respect of the Fountain of it, it proceeds originally from the
immediate breathing of God himself: For when God had made Man of the dust of
the earth, he breathed into him the breath of life, and Man became a living
soul, Genesis 2.7.

Secondly, In respect of the rare faculties of it, the Understanding, the Will,
the Memory, the Affections, Reason, Judgment, Wisdom, Knowledge, Conscience,
the highest of all the rest, considered in both the parts of it, (...), and
(...), the one, The Treasure; the other, The Souls Controuller, etc.

Thirdly, In respect of the immortality of it, it dies not with the body; but
being taken out of the body is preserved unto Eternity.

Fourthly, In respect of the Image of God once stamped upon it, which though
miserably defaced since by the fall, yet not so utterly razed out, but there
are goodly lineaments of that Image yet left upon it: Neither is it so
irrecoverable, but that by the spirit of grace, and the grace of
sanctification, it may be so repaired and renewed, as that the soul may be,
and is said still, Thereby to be made partaker of the Divine Nature, 2 Peter
1.4. not in the substance of the Deity; but in holiness, and righteousness,
wisdom, knowledge, goodness, love, and light, which are as the beams of the
Image of God shining upon it.

Fifthly, In respect of the purchase of it, It is the price of blood, not of
Bulls, and Goats, but of the Divine blood of Jesus Christ our Redeemer, 1 Peter
1.19.

Sixthly, The pretiousness of souls may appear, by the pains and cost that
Satan and his Instruments will be at to gain a soul; they will compass Sea
and Land to gain a soul; give a Kingdom for a soul. Mat. 4.8. All the
Kingdoms of the world, with the glory of them, Omnia haec tibi dabo, All these
things will I give thee, if thou will fall down and worship me, ver. 9.

Seventhly, By the great care that Almighty God has taken to preserve souls,
and to save them from perishing; he has given his Word to direct them, his
Ministers to instruct them, his Sacraments to confirm them, his Spirit to
guide them, and his Angels to guard them, and all this to preserve them, and to
save them from perishing.

In all these respects, it appears that souls are precious: Our blessed Lord,
which well knew the price of souls, lays one soul in one balance, and the
whole world in the other against it; and upon the trial, tells us, That one
soul weighs down the whole world in the other scale: What shall it profit a
Man to win the whole world, and to lose his foul?

Use.
1. It should teach all men to value their souls according to the worth of
them, and not to destroy them, nor to pass them away so carelessly, and
inconsiderately, as ordinarily men do to their eternal undoing: Some
desperately wound them to death, by desperate, wilful, and presumptuous sins:
Heal my soul, for I have sinned against thee: implying, that by sin he had
wounded it: Some sell their souls, and that for triflles, that are worth
nothing; for pleasures of sin, which are but for a season; for treasures of
wickedness, which profit nothing; for satisfying some sinful lusts, which are
worse then nothing: Some give away their souls for naught, for sins in which
there is neither pleasure, nor profit; as Cursing, Swearing, idle and lewd
Communication, and the like, these make the worst bargains of all: Others pawn
their souls, they will give themselves liberty to walk in the sight of their
own eyes, and in the ways of their own heart, and to serve their lusts but for
such a time, and then they will take up, and repent, and recover themselves,
and their souls again, as if it were in their own will, and power, to come in
when they will: All these make ill bargains, and pass away their precious souls
for a thing of naught, which all the Kingdoms of the world cannot buy again: We
see this, we hear it, and we condemn them for it; yet are there daily amongst
us that are guilty of the same folly, and by Covetousness, Voluptuousness,
Ambition, Malice, Perjury, and the like, sell themselves, and their souls for
less, and pass them away upon worse terms then they have done: Adam sold
himself for an Apple: Esau for a Mess of Pottage: Achan for a Wedge of Gold:
Ahab for a Vineyard: Judas for thirty pieces of silver. How many are there to
be found amongst us which for less matters will lie, will swear, will
forswear, will steal, deceive, cheat, and cosen, and what not? That to
satisfy their base, sinful, and unreasonable lusts, and humors, will part
with a good Conscience, forfeit the favor of God, their hope of Heaven, their
interest in Christ, and in the Gospel, sell themselves, and souls, and all for
less then a Mess of Pottage. The resolution of Balaam was good and honest, just
and religious, if he had kept it as well, Numb. 24.13. If Balak would give me
his house full of silver and gold, I would not go beyond the Word of the Lord,
to do more or less: Let it be the resolution of every soul, and God give us
grace and power to keep it.

2. Are souls so precious? Then let us look to them carefully, preserve them
charily, as we would do our chiefest Jewels; Keep thy soul with all
diligence, examine the state of it, see it want nothing of that which should be
for the happiness, and the prosperity of it: Our care is much for the body,
What shall we eat, what shall we drink, wherewithal shall we be clothed? in
the mean while the soul is neglected, set by, and least looked after; but as
our Savior says in a like case, Mat. 6.25. Is not the body better then the
raiment? So say I, Is not the soul better then the body? Is there any
comparison between the Jewel and the Cabinet that it is laid up in? It was
Martha's reproof, That she cared for many things more then she needed: And for
the one thing that was more necessary, less. It is our just reproof in this
case; We enquire after the health and welfare of our friends, and after their
prosperity, how they thrive in this world; but without any regard to their
spiritual estate, and the welfare and prosperity of their souls. St. John, in
his Epistle to Gaius, with a more spiritual salutation, has a more special
eye to the prosperity of his soul; Beloved, I wish chiefly that thou do
prosper, as thy soul prospers, 3 John 1.2. David did more rejoice in the
good the Lord had done for his soul, then for all the good he had done to him,
and for him in his body, in his estate, or in any other his relations: Hearken
to me (says he) all you that fear God, and I will tell you what the Lord has
done for my soul: The Lord had done great things for him otherwise, and he
could have given them a large narrative of them; but in his remembrance of his
great favors to him, he passes by all these, and mentions the other, as far
greater then all the rest, I will tell you what the Lord has done for my soul:
So the care of all those holy men dying, which I have mentioned, was chiefly
for the safety of their souls, Lord Jesus receive my spirit, Acts 7.59. Father
into thy hands I commend my spirit. And in the Text, Lord take away my soul:
Though the bodies of the Saints dying, are not to be neglected, but decently to
be interred, as in hope and expectation of a blessed Resurrection, as the body
of St. Stephen was, and the body of our blessed Lord; yet the care they had of
their souls, swallowed up all the care of their bodies, so that it is not so
much as mentioned by them, nor by our Prophet in the Text, but only his soul,
Lord take away my soul.

3. Are souls so precious? Then this is a severe admonition to us (that have
undertaken, Curam animarum, the care of souls) to look well to our charge, as
such as must give an account of the greatest trust in the world, even the souls
of Gods people committed to our charge. I cannot but tremble, when I read St.
Paul giving up his account to God, to his Peoplae, and to his own Conscience in
this matter, Acts 20.26. I am free from the blood of all Men. What blood does
St. Paul here speak of? he was no Sword Man, there was no fear of his shedding
any man's blood by violence: How comes he to clear himself from blood? (Bell.)
the blood here meant is more precious then the lifeblood of man can be, it is
the blood of souls: implying, That if he had not faithfully, and conscionably
performed the duties of his Pastoral charge amongst them, he had been guilty
of the blood of souls. Oh let this sink deep into our hearts, that we may not
become guilty of the blood of souls: How earnestly ought we to endeavor the
salvation of our people, as of our selves? and at the hour of death to Pray,
That the Lord would be merciful to them, and take away their souls.

Quest. But here now arises a great question, a grand inquiry, not without
great caution and sobriety to be resolved, Touching the state of souls
separated, and taken out of the body, What becomes of them afterward? Whether
upon their separation they do presently enter into that state in which they
are to remain, and continue during this vast space of Eternity, without all
change or alteration of their condition?

Ans. I answer no; For the soul of man from the time of it is first being in
him, whether by Creation, or by infusion, or by traduction generation I dispute
not; nor of the praeexistence of it before, an Opinion that has great Patrons
too, especially among the Philosophers, the Gymnosophists of Egypt, the
Brachmans of India, the Magi of Persia, and the Jewish Cabalists, and among
them, some Christians also, Origin for one; but I wave that dispute too: But I
date my discourse from the souls first being in the body, from that beginning
it passes it is immortality under three conditions, or a threefold estate,
every one of them different from other. The first is the state of the foul
during the time of it is being in the body, which it does actuate and inform.
The second is the state of it between the time of the separation of it from the
body, by dissolution, and there union of it again with the body at the
Resurrection, and the day of Judgment. And the third is from that day to
Eternity, and for ever after: That these three states of the soul are
different one from the other is evident enough: Of the first of these we have
experience in this life, while our souls are in our bodies, which are given
unto us to actuate, and inform them, and to use them as Organs, or Instruments
for glorifying God by them, and doing good: Glorify God in your bodies, and in
your spirits, for they are his, 1 Cor. 6.20. this is done, by giving up the
faculties of the one, and the parts of the other: Not as members of
unrighteousness to unrighteousness, but as instruments of righteousness unto
holiness, and accordingly as we have so done, shall we give an account unto
God, in the day of account: For we must all appear before the judgment seat of
Christ, to render an account for the things done in the body, whether they be
good or evil, 1 Cor. 5.15. Therefore now is the time of working, now is the
time of doing our selves good, now is the time of laying a good foundation for
the time to come, now is the time of laying up that, which may be for the
furtherance of our account then; now in this first estate of the soul, while
it is in the body, must we provide for the well-being of it in the second
estate, and in the third, and to Eternity: Now as this first estate of the
soul in the body is different from the second estate of it, as it is separated
from the body; so is that second estate of it out of the body different from
the third estate of it, when it shall be reunited to the body again, and put
into that estate in which it shall remain for ever, and to all Eternity. It is
the general Opinion of men, but withal, a general mistake, That as soon as
ever the soul is separated from the body, it passes immediately into that
estate either of joy and glory, or of misery and torment, in which it shall
remain for ever, without any alteration. True it is, That at the separation of
the soul from the body, there is a particular judgment passes upon it, by
which it is made known to it, what shall become of it Eternally, and is
presently put into the beginnings, either of the one, or the other, and into a
state previous to that third estate, in which it is to remain for ever, without
alteration: but that either the souls of wicked men are immediately upon their
separation from the body cast into that extremity of misery and torment which
is prepared for them: Or that the souls of the just do then pass into that
height of joy and glory which God has prepared for them, I do confidently
deny, and shall prove the contrary in both the parts of it. And first for the
souls of wicked men, that they are not upon their separation from the body cast
into that extremity of torment which is prepared for them: I prove by an
Argument a Majori, thus: The very Devils themselves are not yet cast into that
extremity of torment that they are condemned unto. Therefore the souls of
wicked men are not immediately upon their separation cast into those torments.

The Consequence of this Argument is clear, for no man will judge the state of
wicked men to be worse then the state of Devils. The Antecedent I prove by two
clear testimonies of Scripture; The first out of St. Mat. 8.29. where those
fierce Devils which had possessed two men among the Gergesens, seeing Christ
coming toward them, are stricken with terror at his presence, and cry out,
What have we to do with thee, Jesus thou Son of God? Art thou come to
torment us before the time? They knew they were condemned to torment, but there
was a time set when they should be cast into it, but that time was not yet
come; and therefore seeing him coming toward them, they cry out against him,
as if he came to antedate their misery, by casting them into it before the
time, Art thou come to torment us before the time? The other proof is both a
confirmation of the truth in hand, and an illustration of this Text: It is in
the Epistle of Jude, ver. 6. The Angels also which kept not their first estate,
but left their own habitation, he has reserved in chains of darkness, unto the
Judgment of the great day; where you have the time when they shall be cast
into that extremity of torment unto which they are condemned, at the judgment
of the great day; and the estate that they are in, in the mean time, they are
reserved in chains of darkness, the chains noting, the safe keeping and
securing of them, that thus can no ways make their escape: And the darkness,
noting their dismal and uncomfortable condition all that while: They are
reserved in chains of darkness, unto the Judgment of the great day; an
expression borrowed from the state of condemned prisoners, which after they are
condemned, are secured in chains or fetters, and cast into the dungeon, and
there reserved unto the day of Execution. And this is a sufficient proof of
the truth of this assertion in the first part of it, as touching the souls of
wicked men, That the state of their souls, from the day of their separation
from their bodies, until the day of Judgment, is not the same that it shall
be after that day, though it be a woeful estate too, as will farther appear in
the sequel of this discourse. We are now to make good this Proposition in the
other part of it, Concerning the souls of the just, that they enter not
presently upon their dissolution into the fullness of joy and glory intended
them, and prepared for them. And for that I allege, Rev. 6.9.10.11. where at
the opening of the fifth Seal, St. John sees under the Altar, the souls of
them that were killed for the Word of God, and for the testimony which they
maintained. And they cried with a loud voice, saying, How long Lord, how long,
holy and true, do thou not Judge, and avenge our blood on them that dwell on
the Earth? And long white robes were given to every one, and it was said unto
them, that they should rest for a little season, until their fellow servants,
and their brethren that should be killed, (even as they were) were fulfilled.
This Scripture makes for our purpose all along; For first, Who are they that
here complain? the Text says, They were Martyrs, and those are Saints of the
first lift; and if their souls were not received into the fullness of joy and
happiness at their dissolution, what souls are? But that they were not, it
appears, First, By their complaint, How Long Lord? how long? Secondly, By the
answer given unto them, persuading still to wait for a season, and to possess
their souls with patience, til the rest of the number of their brethren were
accomplished, without whom they could not be made perfect, and that could not
be till the Resurrection, and the General Judgment at the great day. Aquinas
does excellently describe Summum bonum or the highest felicity to be, Quies
Mentis; or Acquiescentia Mentis in ultimo fine; the rest, or acquiescence of
the mind in the last end, beyond which nothing can be desired to make it more
happy: But those souls which yet cry, How long Lord? how long? do declare,
That they have not yet attained their ultimate end; and therefore they do not
perfectly acquiesce, but are in expectation of a farther degree of fuller
happiness yet to be given unto them. And thus I have made good this
Proposition, in both the Parts, That the souls separated from the body by
Death, are not in the same state from the time of their separation, to the time
of their reunion again at the day of Judgment, that they shall be in, after
that day, to all eternity.

But then, me thinks I hear you ask me, In what state are they then during
that time? Where are they? Or what becomes of them?

And to this Quaerie, I shall endeavor to satisfy you too, and that, Ad
parts, to both the parts of it, both as it concerns the souls of the just, and
the souls of the unjust and wicked men. And first, as to the souls of wicked
men; If you ask me where? or in what state they are? I answer, They are in the
same state, and in the same places that the evil Angels are in, and what that
was, you heard even now out of Jude 6. they are secured in prison, they are
with them reserved in chains unto the judgment of the great day. For proof of
this, take these two Scriptures; the first in 1 Pet. 3.19. The second in Luke
12.20. In the first, St. Peter speaking of the death of Christ, says thus,
ver. 18. Christ also suffered for sinners, the just for the unjust, that he
might bring us to God, who was put to death as concerning the flesh, but was
quickened in the Spirit. By which spirit also, he went and Preached to the
spirits in prison, v. 19. If ye ask, What spirits? he tells you, ver. 20. Those
spirits which in time past were disobedient: In what time? In the times of
Noah, and before the Flood, for so it follows; When once the long suffering
of God abode in the days of Noah, while the Ark was preparing: wherein few,
that is, eight persons were saved from perishing in the waters. There you have
St. Peter plainly interpreting himself, that the spirits here mentioned, are
the spirits of the sinners of the old world, which perished in the Flood, but
their spirits perished not, neither were they presently sent to the Lake of
everlasting Burnings, but they are secured in Prison, as the evil Angels are,
and so reserved unto the Judgment of the great day. That place in St Luke,
speaks the same thing, where the Voice is heard speaking to the secure Epicure,
singing a requiem to his own soul, Soul, take thine ease, eat, drink, and be
merry, thou have goods laid up for many years: Alas! he dreams of many years,
when he has not many hours to live: Stulte hac nocte, Thou fool, this night
shall they fetch away thy soul: then whose shall these things be? Nay, Whose
shall thou be? This night shall they fetch away thy soul: Which they? The
evil Angels. When good men dye, the good Angels are ready to receive their
souls, as they did the soul of Lazarus, Luke 16. and carry them into Abraham's
bosom. But when wicked men dye, the evil Angels fetch away their souls, Thou
fool, this night shall they fetch away thy soul: And whither (think you) were
they to carry it? but to their own Quarters, to those Prisons in which
themselves are secured, as in chains unto the judgment of the great day.

But then here arises another Question, What those Prisons are? Or, Where it
is, that they are secured unto that day?

And to this I Answer. There are three vast, large, and spacious Prisons, in
which the evil Angels are secured, and with them the souls of wicked men,
unto the Judgment of the great day. And they are, 1. The Air. 2. The Earth.
3. The Sea.


First, The Air, with all the several Regions of it, into which the Apostate
Angels were banished: When for their rebellion against their Creator, they
were expelled out of Heaven. For this, see St. Paul, in his Epistle to the
Ephesians, cap. 6.12. You wrestle not against flesh and blood, but against
Principalities and Powers, and spiritual wickednesses in high places: And
what? or who are those spiritual wickednesses, but those evil spirits? And
what are those high places, but the Regions of the Air? And therefore is the
Principal of the Devils, called, The Prince that rules in the Air; for even
amongst them there is Order, and subordination: We read of a Prince among
Devils, Ephesians. 2.2.

The second of those Prisons, is, The Earth; and therein first, The vast and
howling Wildernesses, and Places uninhabited, where no foot does tread, but
where Ostriches do dwell, where Ziim does boade, and the Satyrs dance.

Secondly, The vast caverns and concavities within the earth, amongst which the
hollow mountains of Aetna, Vesuuius, and in Ireland that hollow vault, called,
Saint Patriarchs Purgatory, famous in story: But in America many such, and more
evident dens of Demons: But above all these, the vast hollowness in the very
heart, and Center of the Earth; for who knows what vast and spacious
receptacles there may be for such spirits? It is not unreasonable, nor against
any Article of Faith, or of Scripture to conceive, That there is in the very
heart and Center of the Earth, such a vast hollowness, both for a fit
receptacle for such spirits, and by which that vast and weighty body is buoyed
up that it sink not any way toward the Circumference on any side, though no
way supported, neither by Poasts, nor Pillars. What is it that sustains the
vast and weighty Ships in the Sea, with all the Anchors, Ordnance, and Fraught
in them, but the hollowness of them? What is it that sustains the Clouds in the
Air, infinitely greater, and more weighty then they, so as they fly to and
fro, but as bottles in the Air, as Job speaks, or like bladders full of wind,
that they fall not down in great dashes, enough to make another Deluge, but the
hollowness of them? That such a hollowness there is in them, appears by the
Lightning, the Thunder, and the Thunderbolts, and the spiritual vapor that
proceeds out of them, when they break of such force, that it penetrates, and
burns, and breaks, and tears in pieces all that it lights upon: And who can
deny, but it is agreeable to reason, that there may be such a hollowness in the
heart of the earth, whereby it may, by the power and providence of the Creator,
be sustained in the place which he has appointed for it; and also be a fit
receptacle of evil spirits, where they may be secured as in a Prison, and
reserved unto the Judgment of the great day. In the Apostolical Creed, we
profess to believe, That Christ descended into Hell. And St. Paul tells us, He
descended (...), into the lower parts of the Earth: This cannot be understood
of the descent of his body by his burial, that scarce went into the Earth at
all, but was laid in the Sepulcher which Joseph of Arimathea had made for
himself in his Garden, which was above the ground, or, at least, the most part
of it, if any part at all of it were under, or within the ground, it was not so
low, as that we may say of it, It was in the lower parts of the Earth. How then
will you understand this Article of our Lords descent into Hell, except you
understand it of his Soul, and of his Spirit? And where will you find this
Hell more agreeable to Scripture, and Reason, then as I have described it? and
that by his Spirit, he went to Preach to the spirits in prison there.

The third vast Prison wherein the evil Angels are secured unto the day of
the general Judgment, is, The Sea; for there are Sea Spirits, as well as Land
Spirits, or Aeriall Spirits. When the Disciples, being in a Ship, saw Christ
coming toward them walking upon the Sea, the Text says, They were troubled,
and thought they had seen a Spirit, Mat. 14.26. whereby it appears, That there
were Spirts that did appear in the Sea, as well as on the Land. And in St.
Matthew 8. we read, That the Devils being cast out of the man which they had
possessed, entered into an Heard of Swine, and carried them headlong into the
Sea: by which it seems, there was their abode. And in Mark 5. which by many
circumstances seem not to be the same story, with this of St. Matthew: we
read, Of a whole legion of Devils, entering into a Heard of no less then two
thousand Swine, and carrying them with great violence into the Sea: these were
Sea Spirits, whose abode was in the Sea, which is the third Prison wherein
these evil Angels are secured, and confined unto the Judgment of the great
day, and with them, the souls of wicked men, both to be brought in, and judged
at that general Assizes, which though they be not till then cast into the Lake
of everlasting burnings; yet is their condition in the mean time woeful, and
miserable: It Is miserable to consider how wilfully they have forsaken their own
mercy, and what opportunity they have lost of preventing this their misery,
never to be recovered, nor recalled: It Is miserable to lie in Prison, in such a
Prison, and for such Crimes of which they know themselves they shall be found
guilty at that day, and condemned to suffer the vengeance of everlasting sire:
It Is miserable to see Hell open before them, and ready to receive them: It Is
miserable in the mean time to lie under the wrath of the Almighty, and under
the torments of a wounded soul: Yet neither are the torments of the souls of
wicked men, during this time of their separation from their bodies all aequall;
as neither shall they be after the general Judgment, as shall be showed in
the sequel of this Treatise; but in the mean while, (having showed you the
state of the souls of wicked men) It now rests that I should show you, What is
the state of the souls of just men, from the time of their separation from
their bodies, till the time of their reunion again with their bodies at the
day of the Resurrection.

And in answering to this inquiry, the Scripture gives us some light in four
expressions; When the body returns to dust from whence 'twas taken, the spirit
returns to God that gave it, says Soloman, Eccles. 12.7. The Angels receive
it, and carry it into Abraham's bosom, says St. Luke, cap. 16.22. It is laid
under the Altar, says St. John, Rev. 6.9. It is carried into Paradise, says
our Savior to the penitent these upon the Cross, Luke 23.43. All these are
most comfortable, and heavenly expressions, setting forth the blessed and happy
estate of the souls of the just which they enter into, when they are delivered
from the burden of the flesh, the great impediment of their perfection; yet
they do not all amount to this, That upon their separation they pass into the
highest Heaven, and into the fruition of the immediate vision of God, and that
fullness of joy and glory, that they shall enter into at the last day, when it
shall be said unto them, Come ye blessed of my Father, enter into the
inheritance of the Kingdom prepared for you from the beginning of the world.
For we cannot imagine that these words are spoken only in reference to the
bodies, then newly raised out of their graves; but to the whole man, body and
soul united together, and so to the entire persons of them, Come ye blessed,
enter into the Kingdom. For that of Solomon, That the soul returns to God that
gave it, it is true; that is, It is taken up into the higher Heavens, and is in
nearer communion with God then it was before, it is admitted nearer into his
presence, it is taken into his more immediate care to dispose of it, in a place
and state of bliss and felicity, of joy and glory, even presently upon the
separation of it from the body: For that of Saint Luke, That the Angels
received the soul of Lazarus: the meaning is, That he was gathered unto the
rest of the faithful, of which Abraham is said to be the Father, and carried
to a place of rest, intimated by Abraham's bosom: Sinus Patriarcharum
recessus, quidam est quietis aeternae, Ambr. For that of St. John Rev. 6. Where
he sees the souls of the Martyrs under the Altar: the meaning is, That they
were in a place of security, where no evil should touch them, as in the third
of the book of Wisdom, The souls of the righteous are in the hand of God, and
no evil shall touch them, v. 1. The Altar was an Asylum, a place of refuge and
protection, 1 Kings 2.28. The souls of these Martyrs were seen under the Altar,
to intimate their security, their safety, no evil might touch them.

As to that saying of our Lord, to the penitent thief upon the Cross, This day
shall thou be with me in Paradise: I give these two answers. First, That
Paradise is not so limited to the highest Heaven, where the Throne of God is,
but that it may comprehend some other place adjacent to it, where he might be
in joy and felicity with Christ, who as to his Divine Nature is every where;
the word signifies, A place of pleasure: and such are the places assigned to
be the receptacles of the souls of the just, when they are separated from their
bodies. I answer secondly, That for the souls of Enoch before the Law, and of
Elijah under the Law, and of this penitent thief under the Gospel: I do not
deny, but they might have special privilege in the translation of them, that
the Lord in their examples might give good assurance to all believers, and to
all the just that ever have, or shall live in any Age of the World, whether
before the Law, under the Law, or since the Law, as well of their ascension,
and glorification, as of their resurrection: As to this penitent thief in
particular, dying with him upon the Cross, that he might show a specimen of
the power of his death, in saving, justifying, and glorifying penitent sinners,
though never so great offenders; but then we must remember withal, that these
were peculiar privileges of singular persons: And, Privilegia sunt paucorum,
the Civil Law will tell us, That Privileges are the portion but of few: This
does not weaken the truth of my ascertion, That the souls of just men dying,
do not immediately upon the separation of them from the body, pass into the
highest Heaven, nor to the highest glory, nor to that fullness of joy, which
they shall enter into at the Resurrection, when they shall be reunited to
their bodies, and so both together shall be taken into the everlasting
habitations, and shall stand in the presence of God, and enjoy the beatificall
Vision, in whose light they shall see light, when they shall see God face to
face, in whose presence is fullness of joy, and at whose right hand there are
pleasures for evermore. This the Royal Prophet by his spirit of Prophecy
foresaw long ago, and rejoiced under the hope of it, Psalm 17.15. I shall
behold thy face in righteousness: and when I awake, I shall be satisfied with
thy Image: When I awake, that is, in the morning of the Resurrection, then I
shall be satisfied with thine Image, then, and not till then, shall I be fully
satisfied with thine Image.

But then here arises another Question, as there did of the souls of wicked
men, Where are the souls of the just in the mean while, between the time of
their separation from the body by death, and the reunion of them with the body
at the Resurrection? Where are they? What becomes of them? In what state and
condition have they their being? What is their employment? What is their
enjoyments? To all these four Quaeries, I shall endeavor to give you some
satisfaction, as touching the Place, the State, the employment, and the
enjoyments of souls separated.

And as to the first of these, The place of the souls separation. I shall not
send you to the Elysan fields of the ancient Poets to seek them: Nor to the
Gardens nor Orchards of the Hesperides: Nor to the Mohammedan Paradises; all
these conceived and believed, That the souls of virtuous and just men, as soon
as they were separated from the body, did pass into some place of rest and joy,
wherein they were not deceived; but for want of a more distinct knowledge of
the Place where they had their being, and their state in it, they set it forth
by comparing it to the being in those places which they conceived to be most
happy, pleasant, and joyous. But certainly, that which is most agreeable to
reason in this case, and is no way repugnant to any Article of Faith, nor to
any discovery in Scripture made to the contrary, is this, That the souls of the
just being separated from the bodies, do pass into those high Heavens which
are above the Starry Firmament, as the souls of wicked men do pass into the
Regions of the Air below it. For that there are Heavens above the Starry
Firmament, it cannot be denied: two we read of before we come to the Empyrean
Heavens, where the Throne of God is, and where the Lord of Hosts, with all his
holy Angels keeps his Court in Majesty and Glory: The lower-most of these is
called, Caelum aqueum, The watery Heaven, from the clearness, and the
transparancy of it: The other above that is called, Caelum Crystallinum, The
Crystal Heaven, from the purity, and the pellucidity of it, for still the
higher the Heavens are, and the nearer they approach to the Empyrean Heaven,
where the Throne of God is, the more glorious are they, and the more noble the
Inhabitants of them. Now between every of these Heavens, there is a vast space
of infinite capacity; and it must needs be so, by reason of the greatness of
their circumference, the least and lowest of them is of greater capacity and
comprehension, then all this space that is between the Earth and the Starry
Firmament, and the rest greater then it proportionably. Now I would ask, Of
what use these vast and comprehensive Heavens are, if this be not one, to be
the receptacle of the souls of the just, when they are taken out of their
bodies? Natura nihil facit frustra, The God of Nature, the Creator of all
things, has made nothing in vain: There is no part of the world which he has
made, but he has stored, and stock't it with Inhabitants suitable to it: The
Earth he has stored and stock't with Beasts and Cattle; the Sea with Fishes,
the Air with Foul, and with Aeriall Inhabitants; every of the Spheres above
it, with Stars and Planets, which by their light, hear, influence, and motion
divide the times, and Govern this inferior world: The Starry Firmament that
is spread out as a veil between this inferior, and the superior world,
between these lower and the higher Heavens, it is peopled (as it were) with
innumerable Golden Stars of several magnitudes, specious to behold, and
precious for their use and influence: The Empyrean Heavens, the highest of all
the rest, is stored and Inhabited with Angels, and Arch-Angells, Cherubims,
and Seraphims, and the other Orders of those Heavenly Courtiers that stand in
the presence of God, waiting his pleasure, and ready to execute his will, and
to fulfill his Word: Thus the whole Universe is replenished with Inhabitants
suitable to the places which the Great Creator and high disposer of all things
has appointed for them. And do these beautiful Heavens, the Aqueall and
Chrystalline Heavens, so specious, and so spacious between the Starry Firmament
and the Empyrean Heaven, stand void and empty without Inhabitants? No, it
cannot be, but they have their Inhabitants too, and they are the souls of the
Just, when they are separated from their bodies by death and dissolution, who
being next unto the Angels in holiness, are placed in receptacles next unto
them in glory. The Chrystalline Heaven next and immediately under the Empyrean
Heaven; and the Aqueall, or Watery Heaven next immediately under it; and as they
have atteined to the degrees of purity here in this life, so are they disposed
of into the one, or into the other of them, nearer or farther off from the
Throne of glory; for as after the Resurrection, there shall be several and
different degrees of glory; so in this state of separation, the souls
separated, shall be in several and different degrees of joy and happiness,
according as they are prepared for it, and have atteined to several degrees of
holiness and purity in this life, while they were in the body.

Secondly, If you enquire into the state of those souls separated, it must
needs be blessed and glorious, suitable to the glory of those Heavens wherein
they are? Where first, They are delivered from the burden of the Flesh, the
body, the very prison wherein they were detained, and sole impediment of their
perfection. Secondly, They are freed from all sin, and sorrow, concupiscence
and corruption, from all temptations and solicitations from the world, the
devil, and the flesh, and from all the evil of this lower world which they
have left behind them; and which now, As that glorious Woman, Rev. 12.1. they
trample under their feet, all tears are wipt from their eyes, all sorrow, and
grief, and pain are flowne away, they dyed in the Lord, they are blessed, they
rest from their labors, and so they are in Abraham's bosom. They are in the
hand of God, as Solomon speaks, Wisdom 3.1. so that no evil shall touch them;
they are got above the reach of the malice of men or Devils, (...) (as the
Greek Proverb has it) out of the danger of the dart: And so their state
agrees with that which St. John says of them, Rev. 6. That he saw them under
the Altar; yet all this is but their privative happiness, consisting in their
freedom from all evil, and their security from all danger; but they are in
present possession of a positive blessedness too in a great measure, and high
degree of present joy and glory: Their very employment is a part of their
blessedness, which is no less then Angelical, to laud, and praise, and
magnify the living Lord, to sing Hosanna to Hosannah's in the highest, and
Hallelujahs to him that sits upon the Threne; to admire the glory, and the
greatness, and the goodness, and the power, and the holiness of the mighty Lord
God, of which they have now a clearer sight and apprehension then before; and
in particular, his singular, and unspeakable grace and goodness unto them,
which has done such great things for them, as to bring them thither to triumph
in the apprehension of it, and to rejoice and glory in the sense of it. I know
not whether I should rather rank these things under their employments, or
their enjoyments, they are blessed duties which are both: With what sweet
contentation, and self satisfaction do they converse together in pure love
and light? With what joy and comfort can they now remember the difficulties,
and the dangers which they have past through in their coming thither? What
temptations? what afflictions they have met withal? What strong corruptions
they have wrestled with? What importunate lusts they have denied and subdued?
What solicitations from the World, from the Flesh, and from the Devil, they
have resisted and rejected, and how now they bless themselves that they have
done so, and God that gave them grace and strength to do it? With what joy and
praise do they congratulate one another in their happy victories over sin and
Satan, Death and Hell, and all the enemies of their salvation, and in their
safe passage through all the dangers and difficulties that stood between them
and Heaven; and that having escaped all the corruption that is in the world
through Lust, they are at length arrived to the Place where they would, even to
the top of Mount Syon, the Place of their rest and joy, where now they are
taken into nearer Communion with God, then they could be, before they have more
clear manifestation of him, sweet influences from him, and union with him; they
converse with Angels, congratulating them in their happiness, and with Euges of
joy and praise, well-coming them into those Heavens, the habitations of their
happiness, the Paradise of their joy and glory. And now, their Charity invites
them to Pray for the whole estate of Christ's Church militant here on Earth,
That the Lord would guide them, and keep them in the way of Truth, that he
would bring them safe through all the dangers and difficulties that stand in
the way between them and Heaven; that the Gospel may have free passage through
the world; that it may run, prosper, and be glorious; that by it, he would
call in all that are yet uncalled; that he would shortly accomplish the number
of his elect, and hasten his Kingdom; that they with them, and all others that
shall depart out of this life in the faith and fear of his holy Name, may have
their perfect consummation, and bliss, both in body and soul in his eternal
and everlasting glory:

Which is the third estate, in which immortal souls do pass their
immortality, which begins from the day of the general Judgment, and lasts
from thence to all eternity.

Of which, though we had the Tongue of Men, or Angels, it is impossible to
speak to the full, and as the subject requires: O Aeternity, Aeternity, How is
the Heart astonished, and the Mind swallowed up, that enters into the thoughts
of it! with the state of the just, and the unjust in it; the joy and glory of
the one, and the misery and torment of the other: both which being
unexpressible, I shall forbear to enter into the description of them, and in
stead thereof, only referr you to the words of the sentences at the great day
to be given upon them both; the sentence of absolution to the just on the right
hand, and of condemnation to the wicked on the left, both which the Judge
himself that shall pronounce them, has told us before hand, and left us in
terminis upon record, Mat. 25.

And first, The sentence of absolution, because that shall be first pronounc'c,
that the wicked on the left hand may see Heaven opened, and have a sight of the
joy and glory of the Celestial Paradise, and see the just taken into it, and
set down with Abraham, Isaac, and Jacob in the Kingdom of Heaven, and
themselves cast out; that they may see what happiness they have lost, by
wilfully forsaking their own mercy, and putting from them the Kingdom of Heaven
offered unto them; and what happiness, joy, and glory the servants of God are
arrived unto, whom they despised, to the greater aggravation of their sorrow
and misery: Therefore shall the sentence of Absolution be first pronounced in
these comfortable words, Come ye blessed of my Father, enter into the
Inheritance of the Kingdom prepared for you from the foundation of the world:
Every word carries in it life and glory: Come ye blessed ones, take possession
of a Kingdom; Who? and what are we, that the Lord should do so much for us
(may they well say) as to give us a Kingdom? That Is the day of which St. Paul
writing to the Thessalonians, tells them, Jesus Christ shall be admired in all
them that believe, 2 These. 1.10. not only by them, but in them, by Men and
Angels, to see that the Lord has exalted his poor, humble, and despicable
servants to so high honor, that he has brought them hitherto: Then shall the
righteous shine as the Sun in his brightness, (Wisdom 5.1, 2, 3, 4.) in the
Kingdom of their Father.

After this shall the Judge turn himself to the wicked, on the left hand, and
pronounce against them the sentence of condemnation, in these words, Ite
maledicti, Go ye cursed into everlasting fire, prepared for the Devil and his
Angels: Every word full of death and terror; Go, and go ye cursed, and go
into fire, and fire everlasting, and fire prepared, (Isay 30.33.) and prepared
for the Devil and his Angels: so these shall go into everlasting torments,
and the righteous into life eternal. And this is the third estate of of
immortal souls, and in this they shall abide for ever, without alteration,
without end. And so I end my Discourse upon this Subject, in which, I may
truly say with Moses, I have set before you life and death, blessing and
cursing, Heaven and Hell, that so you may choose the better, and that you may
do it in time, while remedy may be had, That you may live, and not dye; that
you may be blessed, and not cursed; that your Portion may be in Heaven, and not
in Hell, Amen.

IT tests now, that I should speak something (...) the third part of the Text,
in these words.

For I am no better then my Fathers.
But an intervenient occasion makes me interpose a few Lines for the
satisfaction of some, of whom I hear they should say, That in the former
Discourse concerning the state of souls separated from their bodies, I Preached
New Doctrine; And ask't whereunto is was useful? Which exception has two
parts in it: The first, Concerning the newness of it. And the second,
Concerning the uselesness of it. To both which I must say something in way of
vindication. And as to the first, The newness of it, To pass by all that has
been Written by the Learned Schoolmen, of the Romish persuasion, because they
were of the Romish persuasion, (and yet, if we should reject all that is
written by the learned of the Romish persuasion, because they were of the
Romish persuasion) we shall do our selves as much wrong as them; but to wave
them, I could fill up my Page with the testimonies of Learned, and holy men
unexceptionable, which have declared themselves of the same Judgment in this
matter, That neither the souls of the just, nor the unjust, do immediately
upon the separation of them from the body, (...) the state of their ternall
being, but into a state intermediate, and different from the third state, at
least in degree, in which they do remain until the Resurrection, and the
general Judgment: The one in Prison, the other in Paradise: The one amongst
the evil Angels, the other among the good Angels: The one in the mouth of
Hell it self, and in the beginnings of woe and torment in a great degree, and
the other in the very entrance into the highest Heaven in bliss and joy, and
happiness unspeakable, and glorious. I should make a long business of it here
to cite, and to recite the testimonies of the Ancients in this matter; but to
save my self and Reader that labor, let me entreat him to consult the
Writings of an eminent Divine, well known and approved of in the Evangelicall
Churches for Learned and Orthodox, and Professor of Divinity in the University
of Lausanna, I mean Bucanus, a man as directly opposite to Purgatory and
Popery, as Light is to Darkness, in his Common Places, Loc. 39 under the Title,
De Vita aeterna, he proposes this very Question in these words. First of the
souls of the faithful;

Anne anunae piorum nunc a corporibus separate perfecta, and tonsummata
beatitudine fruantur? Whether the souls of the faithful separated from their
bodies, do presently enjoy perfect bliss, and consummate happiness.

Unto which he makes this Answer:

Satis sit nobis scire illico a discessu e corpore, spiritum redire ad Deum,
qui dedit illum, Eccles. 12.7. Esse cum Christo, Philip. 1.23. In Paradiso,
Luke 23.43. In pace, Sapien. 3.3. In requie, Heb. 4.3. In consolatione, Luke
16.25. In refrigerio, Sap. 4.7. In securitate, Job 11.15. In manu Dei, ut
minime attingit eum cruciatus, Sapien. 3.1. In glorificatione, Wisd. 5.1. Thus
Englished:

Let it be enough for us to know, That presently upon the departure of it out
of the body, the spirit returns to God that gave it; that it is with Christ,
that it is in Paradise, that it is in Peace, in rest, in comfort, in a place of
refreshment, in security, in the hand of God, so that no evil shall touch it;
that it is in glory, all glorious expressions, setting forth the happy state of
the souls of the Saints which they pass into, presently upon the separation of
them from the bodies. But then, mark what follows, he comes in upon all this
with an adversitive tamen, notwithstanding, which in answer to the Question
here proposed, has the force of a negative, for thus it follows;

Quia tamen resurrectionem corporum expectant, and fruitionem plenissimam
omnium bonorum quae Deus promisit diligentibus ipsum, non in perfecta, and jam
consummata, sed inchoata beatitudine versari dici possunt. Englished thus:

Yet notwithstanding, because they expect the resurrection of their bodies, and
the most full fruition of all those good things, which God has promised to
them that love him, they may be said to be not in the full fruition of their
perfect and consummate happiness, but in the beginning of it, or their
happiness inchoated; and begun. Thus Bucanus Com. Loc. 39. page 447.

And for proof of this, he alleges the same Text of Scripture, that I have
done, Rev. 6.9, 10, 11. Vsque quo Domine? How long Lord, how long?

Aquinas brings in a another Scripture for proof of this truth, 2 Timothy 4.8.
From henceforth is laid up for me a Crown of righteousness, which the Lord the
righteous Judge shall give unto me at that day. At what day? At the day of his
glorious appearing, as it follows in the same Text, When Christ shall appear in
flaming fire to render vengeance. 2 These. 1.7. When the Son of Man shall come
in the Clouds, with power and great glory, and all his holy Angels with him:
That Is the day of his appearing; at that day shall St. Paul receive his Crown,
not before; till then, it is laid up for him. At that day shall those souls
under the Altar, before mentioned, receive their Crowns of Martyrdom also; for
the present, there were white Robes given to every one of them; but not the
Crowns till that day. The same also does he affirm of the state of the souls
of wicked men separated from their bodies; Sic puniri ut etiam reserventur in
diem judicii long aliis asperioribus paenis aeternis, videlicet, in corpore,
and anima cruciandi: That they are so punished here, during the time of their
separation, that they are also reserved unto the Judgment of the great day,
then to be tormented in body and soul with far more sharp and grievous
punishments for evermore.

But if you would see more of Antiquity in these matters, and will be at the
pains of it, do but consult Athanasius, in an Epistle of his, cited by
Epiphanius, Haeres. 77. and in his Book, De Incarnatione Verbi. St. Cyrill, De
r^^ta side ad Theodosium. Oe^cumenius, and diverse others, who in their
Expositions of that Text in St. Peter, 1 Pet. 3.19. Who was put to death as
concerning the Flesh, but quickened by the Spirit. By which Spirit, he went and
Preached to the spirits which are in Prison. We prove first, Christ's descent
into Hell; and upon the words following, That he Preached unto the spirits, or
souls detained in that Prison. As Saint Jude says of the evil Angels, That
they are in prison, and bound in chains of darkness, reserved unto the
judgment of the great day: The evil Angels, and the souls of wicked men,
both in the same condition, both secured in Prison, both in chains, both
reserved unto the judgment of the great day: And it will follow by the rule of
opposits, That if the souls of the Saints and Martyrs be not yet in the
fruition of their perfect and consummate happiness; then neither are the souls
of wicked men in that exquisite torment, which they are condemned unto, and
into which they shall be cast at the judgment of the great day: but that there
is an intermediate estate, though that very wretched and miserable, under which
they lie, until that day: And, I think, this is sufficiently proved in both
the branches of it by Scriptures, strong and clear for it, and by the
jugdements of holy and learned men, commenting upon them; and so is a
sufficient answer to the first Part of the exception, and enough to free me
from Preaching New Doctrine, and to declare that I am not alone in this
Opinion, Of the intermediate estate of souls separated from the body, both of
the just, and the unjust, nor walk in an untroden path, where no foot is gone
before me.

The second Part of the exception lies in this, That it is useless: That
admitting these tenants be true, yet they are useless: It demands therefore
Whereto they are useful? To which I Answer.

Sol. The knowledge of them is useful to many special purposes; particularly
to these:

First, It is very satisfactory to the mind of every man (I think) that has a
soul, to know the state of it, both present and future; yea, to know as much
of it, as is knowable: Knowledge is precious, and a great delight unto the
soul; When wisdom enters into thy heart, and knowledge delights thy soul,
says Solomon, Prove, 2.10. So knowledge is a delight unto the soul, and the
more high and excellent the object is, about which it is conversant, the more
excellent and precious is the knowledge. But what more high and precious object
can there be, next unto God, and the Angels, then the spirits and souls of
men? What more worthy to take up our most serious thoughts, and diligent
studies, then the disquisition of those high things that do concern them?
What more satisfactory then the attaining of them in all those things that are
knowable.

Secondly, It Is useful for preserving of men against Atheism, that brutish
sin, which does so spread it self in the world, and invaded so great a part
of the Sonns of men; for though they do not speak out plainly with their
Tongues, yet how many of them say in their hearts and lives, There is no God,
nor Devil, nor Heaven, nor Hell, nor Angels, nor Spirits, nor souls of Men?
and all through their ignorance of this Point, That they cannot satisfy
themselves what becomes of the souls of men separated from their bodies,
through so long a tract of time as two, three, four, or five thousand years
intermediate between the time of their dissolution by Death, and their reunion
again at the Resurrection.

Thirdly, It Is useful to confirm men in the assurance of the Immortality of
the soul, while it informs them what becomes of it, where it is, and what it
does or suffers, where is the place of it, what the state of it, what the
employments, what the enjoyments: Concerning all which, being before ignorant,
and in the dark, they could not tell what to think of the souls of men, more
then of bruits, of which Solomon takes notice, Eccles. 3.20, 21. speaking in
their Language, Who knows whether the spirit of Man ascend upward? and the
spirit of a Beast descend downward? All go to one place, etc. and therefore
rann away in their own fancies, and vain imaginations, into diverse errors,
concerning the souls of men dying; some imagining they were annihilated, and
altogether extinguished: Some, that they were laid asleep, as the bodies were,
till the Resurrection: Some, that they were transmigrated out of one body into
another: Some one thing, some another; in the midst of these doubtful
varieties, they began to question, whether there were any difference between
the souls of men, and of bruits, as Solomon here intimates; and for want of
some more distinct knowledge in this matter, lived at a venture. Against all
these errors and evils, the truths here delivered are a sure and sovereign
remedy; the vain imaginations in which men rann away in the variety of their
own fancies, concerning the extinction, annihilation, sleeping, transmigration,
etc. of the souls of men dying, all dye before these truths here delivered, and
vanish away, and men's minds are settled and confirmed in the assurance of the
immortality of the souls, while they do distinctly inform them, what becomes
comes of them, into what receptacles they are received upon their separation,
and in what several states they pass their immortality.

Fourthly, It is useful for admonishing of all men while they are in the body,
to take care of their souls, and to provide for their future condition, to
preserve them pure, that upon their separation, they may be taken up into those
pure habitations, into which no unclean thing may enter, not to defile, or clog
them with sin and guilt, whereby they may be pressed down, and hindered in
their flight and passage into the higher Heavens, the glorious receptacles
appointed for them.

Fifthly, It is useful for the overthrowing of that Limbus Patrum, Limbus
Infantum, and other rooms and spacious places in the Fabric of the Popish
Purgatory, which they have erected in their own imaginations for receptacles,
wherein they would lodge the souls of men, when they are separated from their
bodies, there to remain for a long tract of time in prison, and in pain, till
they be sufficiently purged and punished, except there be some extraordinary
means used for the relief, or release of them, or for the mitigating of their
pain, either first, by a multitude of Masses daily said and sung for them. Or
secondly, By the suffrages of the living, praying for the dead, from whence all
these Epitaphs upon their Graves and Tombs, Orate pro anima, Pray for the
soul of such a one. Or thirdly, By some munificence, or eminent works of
Charity done upon their account. Or fourthly, By applying unto them some of the
works of supererogation, taken out of the Treasury of the Church, and by the
Popes special favor conferred upon them, etc. These imaginations (before the
truth in this Discourse declared) fall to the ground, while it teaches, That
there is no such Limbus Patrum as they pretend to, nor need there any; but that
their souls presently upon the separation of them, pass into the Etheriall
Heavens, where they are in rest, and peace, in bliss, happiness and glory, that
the blood of Christ shed in due time, that was in the fullness of time, was as
effectual to the purging, washing, saving, and sanctifying of the souls of the
Fathers that lived in the first generation of the world, before his coming in
the flesh, as it is now, for the purging, washing, saving and sanctifying of
the souls of believers since his coming, and will be to the end of the world,
that as to the virtue of his Death, Passion, Resurrection, and Ascension, He
was a Lamb slain from the beginning of the world, and whose going out have
been from the beginning, and from everlasting, as the Prophet Micah tells us;
and as the Apostle declares him, Jesus Christ yesterday, and to day, and the
same for ever.

Lastly, It is useful for the answering of that great question, with which we
are so frequently, and so importunately urged by inquisitive people, to show
them, where Local Hell is: They cannot satisfy themselves where Local Hell
is; and therefore they are apt to believe, there is none at all: This Discourse
satisfies them where it is; for the present, it is where the evil Angels are
confined, and secured in chains of darkness. It is where the souls of wicked
men are imprisoned, both reserved to the Judgment of the great day: And where
that is, this Discourse tells; and not this Discourse, or Treatise, but the
Apostle St. Jude, ver. 6. St. Paul, Ephesians. 6.12. Ephesians. 2.2. St. Peter, 1 Pet.
3.19. Those places where those evil Angels, and where the souls and spirits
of wicked men are imprisoned, and secured until that day, are the Local Hell
for the present. If you ask further, Where Local Hell shall be, after that
great day? I Answer, What need you look any further for it, then the vast space
containing this wretched and wicked inferior world wherein we now dwell. You
know what St. Peter has Prophesied concerning it, with all the Elements in it,
all the Creatures, and works upon it, all the visible Heavens over it, that
they shall be consumed by fire, 2 Peter 3.10. The Heavens shall pass away with
a noise, and the Elements shall melt with fervent heat, and the Earth, with the
works therein shall be consumed by fire: Now, when these things shall be
destroyed, consumed, annihilated, what need we look any further for a Local
Hell then this vast space which these mighty bodies took up, when they were in
being? When there shall be no Sun to rule the day, nor Moon, nor Stars to
govern the Night, nor to divide the times; there shall be no distinction
between day and night, but all shall be night without day, when the Sun shall
be no more, the Sea shall be no more, time shall be no more, the Earth shall be
no more, all these visible Heavens within the reach of the conflagration shall
be no more, there is space enough for the Local Hell so much enquired after. I
have described to you before the present Hell, the Prisons in which the evil
Angels, and souls of wicked men with them are secured unto that day, and so
are already in the beginnings of that Hell (...) kept for fire; they shall be
burnt up; they shall pass away with a great noise, melt with fervent heat, be
dissolved; and all this while, and amongst them all, not one word of purgation,
purifying, or refining, or reserving the substance of it: It is clear, St.
Peter himself speaks not of a refining, in respect of the qualities; but an
utter abolition of the substance it self of this old world: As the Pageant
being finished, the Stage is taken away; so all the Tragedies which are Acted
upon the Stage of this world, being ended, the Stage shall be pulled down,
broken in pieces, burnt with fire, as an Engine or Fabric of which there is no
more use, it shall be no more.

But what shall we say to the other Objection, raised out of the words of St.
Peter, ver. 13. But we look for new Heavens, and a new Earth, according to his
promise, wherein dwells righteousness.

Which words seem to import, That though this present old World shall then be
dissolved, consumed, burnt up; yet (if there do not spring up (as a Phoenix)
out of the Ashes of it another World, yet) God will Create another new World in
the room of it, and then we are but where we were, in respect of the space, and
place, and room we should have for Local Hell, these new Heavens and Earth
will take it up.

To this I Answer, That indeed, we do look for new Heavens, and a new Earth,
according to his promise, and according to St. Peter's words, and shall enjoy
them too, and dwell in them. But what are those Heavens? but those highest
Heavens, the Celestial Paradise, the glorious habitations of the Saints, and
of Gods Elect, which he has prepared for them from the beginning of the world,
and into which he will receive them at that day, when he shall say unto them,
Venite benedicti: Come ye blessed, enter into the Kingdom prepared for you from
the beginning of the world: and these are called New; not in respect of their
new making, but in respect of our new taking possession of them (by a most
happy change) for our new habitations: So that, New Heavens, and New Earth, in
this place signifies no more, but a New Habitation, far more glorious then
this that we now have in this lower world; that as now, the Earth under us, and
the Heavens over us, are the place of our Habitation; so, after these shall be
destroyed, that we may not fear we shall want a habitation, he tells us, We
shall have another, and a better Habitation, far more excellent and glorious
then this is, which in allusion to these, he calls, New Heavens, and New Earth,
to make us know, we shall be no losers by the change: And for this exposition,
I might quote you Authors enough, Ireneus, Hilary, Hypolitus, and others; but I
will cite you a whole Library of Fathers and Schoolmen, and all in one, who
was himself a living Library, I mean the late Learned and Reverend Lord
Bishop of Worcester Doctor Prideaux, Regius Professor in the University of
Oxford, and Rector of Exeter College, in which I lived under his Government
some years: He Preached at the Court upon this very Text, 1 Peter 3.13. his
Sermon is in Print, and entitled, The Christians expectation; where all along,
he proves, The New Heavens, here mentioned, to be no other, but the highest
Heavens, appointed for the Habitations of the Saints in glory.

But what need we trouble our selves to search the Libraries of the Fathers and
Schoolmen, to ask their Judgment and Consent in this matter? St. Peter
himself has cleared the Point in question to our hands, That the Heavens, in
the Text, though here called New, can be no other, but those glorious Heavens
above, now in being: For thus he further commends them to us, That they are
Heavens wherein dwells righteousness: he does not say, wherein shall dwell
righteousness, in the future; but wherein now dwells righteousness, in the
present Tense. We cannot say of Heavens hereafter to be Created, That
righteousness now dwells in them, before they are in being: But the Apostle
says expressly of the Heavens which we look for, That righteousness now
dwells in them, therefore they are now in being, long since Created from the
beginning. That which is in expectation, and the newness here mentioned, is not
to be understood in respect of the making of them, or the future being of them,
as if they were not yet in being; but in respect of our entrance into them, our
taking Possession of them, and Habitation in them, so they shall be new to us.
I know there are of the other Opinion, not a few, for the new Creation of a new
World, new Heavens, and a new Earth in the room of this present World, when it
shall be abolisht and dissolved: But see how weakly they prosecute that fancy,
when they would confirm themselves, and others in it: They tell us of what
excellent use it shall be; As first, For a Monument of what has been.
Secondly, For a receptacle of such as had deserved neither Heaven nor Hell;
such as they thought were not capable of the one, and they thought it pity
they should be condemned to the other; such as Infants, dying without Baptism,
Idiots, and ignorant people, that wanted capacity to understand the truth;
honest moral men, which never had the way of Gospel-salvation made known unto
them, such as Plato, Aristotle, Plutarch, Cato, etc. Thirdly, That it might be
an outlet, or as it were, a Country House for the Saints and Angels to come
down into, where to solace themselves for their recreation, and the like; all
but Rabbinicall fancies, and Jesuiticall surmises, without any ground any
where, but in their own imaginations: As if the Lord had not room enough
wherein to dispose of his Saints and Angels, and all his respectively, except
he should make another new World to entertein them in. Whereas our Savior
tells us, Their receptacles were prepared for them from the beginning of the
world, Mat. 25. Known to the Lord are all his works from the beginning; and he
will not have so many supernumeraries in the end of the World, as that the
Fabric made in the beginning for the reception of them, should not serve the
turn. But to satisfy the doubtful in this scruple, let it be well minded
what St. Peter says further here in this Text, We look for new Heavens, not
for a new Heaven, in the singular; but for new Heavens, in the Plural number:
By which it appears, there are more Heavens then one in the World above, for
the Lord to dispose of his Saints and Angels in; a justification to what I
have said in the former Part of this Treatise, wherein I affirmed, That there
are more Heavens then one above the Starry Firmament. I named two between it,
and the Empyrean, or fiery Heaven, where the Throne of God is; and who knows
how many more there may be? Let no man object against this, what St. Paul says
of his Rapture into the third Heaven, and therefore there are no more; that
does not follow, A man is taken up into a third place,; therefore there is not
a fourth, nor a fifth: It would follow rather the contrary, that there were:
For, Non dicitur primus nisi in ordine ad secundum: A first is not said to be
so, but in order to a second, and so forward; In numeris ordinalibus, in
numbers of order, till you come to the last. I say farther, that in such
accounts, a respect is to be had where you begin to number, according to which
the same place may fall in account to be first, or second, or third, or fourth.
Thirdly, The Heavens are said to be more, or less, as they are distinguished
and divided. So Aristotle numbers but eight, Ptolomie nine, Purbacchius ten,
Maginus eleven, and this distinction they make from the distinct motions they
have observed in the wandering and fixed Stars. Our Christian Divines generally
number but three, and that from Saint Paul's rapture, mentioned before: Yet a
Reverend and Learned Bishop of ours, I mean Bishop Bilson, in his Survey of
Christ's sufferings, numbers four, and that fourth to be that which is called,
The Heaven of Heavens: For, That Christ is said to have ascended far above all
Heavens, Ephesians. 4.10.

Thus you see here are great varieties of Opinions touching the number of the
Heavens, and the Celestial Orbs: And yet in the midst of all this variety, the
difference is not so great, but it may be fairly reconciled, so as there shall
be found no contradiction at all betwixt them: as thus, Be they as many as they
will, they may all conveniently be divided, or sorted into these three Heavens,
or compages of Heavens (if you will:) The Aeriall, the Sydereall, and the
Etheriall Heavens: Under the first of these is comprehended all that space,
which from the Earth upwards, reaches unto the Moon, the lowest of the
Luminaries of Heaven, Fowls flying in it, are called, Fowls of Heaven, Mat.
6.26. Under the second is comprehended all those Orbs and Spears wherein the
Stars are placed, whether the fixed, or the wandering Stars: The Stars are
called, Stars of Heaven. And under the third is comprehended all that infinite
space, which is above the Starry Firmament, and the Sydereall Heavens, be it
never so great, or the Heavens in it never so many; and so in this threefold
division of the Heavens, into Aeriall, Sydereall, and Etheriall, we shall
easily reconcile Astronomy and Divinity together, the Mathematical Account,
with the Theological. In it St. Paul may find his third Heaven, Bishop Bilson
his fourth, Aristotle may find his eight, Ptolomy his nines, Purbacchius his
tenn, and Maginus his eleven, and neither of them wrong other in the reckoning,
so they seek them while they are there in being; but that must be before the
Conflagration here in this Text Prophesied of by St. Peter. For in the great
burning here spoken of, the two former, the Aeriall, and the Sydereall Heavens,
with the whole compages of them, will be destroyed, burnt up, dissolved, they
all fall under the fury of the Conflagration. St. Peter has expressed the manner
of it in tragical expressions, filling the heart with terror and astonishment
to think on: The burning of a House, a Town, a City, is a lamentable sight. At
the burning of Jerusalem, and the Temple, Titus himself, which was the
executioner of it, lamented greatly, and was sore grieved, and troubled at so
lamentable a spectacle^: But what was that, in comparison to this, not so much
as the burning of a Cottage in comparison of it self? The burning of Sodom and
Gomorrah, Admah, and Zeboim, four Cities in the Plain, with fire and
brimstone from Heaven, was a Type of this burning, but slenderly representing
it, as so many bonfires to a mighty burning. The Prophet Isaiah, foretelling
the horrible destruction of the King of Assyria, shadows it forth under the
type and title of Tophet, or Hell, Isay 30.33. in terrible terms as before
remembered, For Tophet (...) prepared of old: yea, even for the King it is
prepared, (meaning the King of Assyria, which in his close siege against
Jerusalem, lay there with his Army, and went off with the loss of one hundred
fourscore and five thousand men) he has made it deep and large: the pile
thereof is fire, and much wood: the breath of the Lord, as a stream of
brunstone, does kindle it. This Tophet was a Valley on the South side of
Jerusalem, (Josh. 18.16.) in which the Idolatrous Jews did burn their Children
in the fire, to offer them up in sacrifice unto Moloch, contrary to the express
command of God, Levit. 20.1. It was called Tophet, from Toph, which in the
Hebrew signifies a Drum; from whence Tophet the diminutive of it signifying,
a little Drum, or Tabret; because, while these Children were burning; the
Idolatrous Priests beat upon these Drumms, and played on these Tabrets, partly
for the solemnity of the service, and partly to drown the crying, and
shreeking of the poor Innocents in the flames: It was the Land of one Hinnom,
therefore called, The Valley of Hinnom; and in the New Testament, Gehenna, and
taken for Hell, Matthew. 5.21. Matthew. 8.9. Josiah had such indignation against
this Idolatrous place, that in his great Reformation, 2 Kings 23.10. He defiled
it, he made it the very sink, and dunghill of the City, a place for the
execution of Malefactors, and where those which were denied burial, were cast
out, and lay unburied, a place where to carry and cast all the noysom Carrion
of the City, where the Fowls of the Air, and the beasts might Prey upon them;
yet, for fear they should corrupt the Air, and cause infectious diseases,
there were continual fires kept all-wayes burning, to consume the bones, and
putrified Carcasses, whether of men or beasts, which were cast out there: And
for the loathsomness of the place, and the continual burnings in it, it was
called Gehenna, Hell, and Hell fire: Unto which, it is probable, our Savior
alludes, when describing Hell, he says, The Worm never dies, nor the Fire
never goes out: The Worm that is bred out of those putrefactions, which
farther gnawing, causes farther putrefaction, never cease to administer
matter of burning to the fire, nor the fire ever goes out, or cease to feed
it self upon it: Yet, as there are diverse degrees of heat in the fire, and
the fiery furnace into which the three Children were cast, was heat seven times
hotter, then at other times: So it is clear by the Scriptures, That the
torments of the damned, are not all equal.

We read of the Servant, That knew his Masters wilt, and did it not: And of
another, That knew it not, and did it not. The former was to be beaten with
many stripes: The latter was to be beaten too, but with fewer stripes. The
Stoics were ^^rr out in their Moralls, when they taught; Peccata esse
aequalia, That all sins were equal. Our Savior his exposition of the sixth
Commandment, has taught us otherwise, Matthew. 5.22. when he says, That
whosoever is angry with his brother unadvisedly, shall be in danger of the
judgment: and whosoever says unto his brother, Racha, shall be worthy to be
punished by the Council: but whosoever shall say unto his brother, Thou fool,
shall be in danger of Hell fire. Where under the form of these three Courts
among the Jews: First, The Court of three, or the Triumviri, here called, The
Judgment, which had the hearing and punishing of smaller matters. Secondly,
The Court of three and twenty, here called, The Council, which had the hearing
and punishing of crimes of a higher nature. And thirdly, Of the highest Court
of all, consisting of threescore and eleven, which they called their Sane drim,
which Judged the highest matters, and punished by death it self, whether by
hanging, beheading, stoning, or burning in Gehenna, before mentioned; he
clearly shows, that there are great differences of sin, and sinners; and so
there shall be also of punishments proportionably, under which the damned shall
be held, and tormented in Hell for evermore. Unto which, the enlargement of
Tophet, by the destruction of this world, in the great Conflagration, shall be
much conducing, in giving convenient room for it. And as the punishment, and
torment of the damned in Hell shall be of diverse, and different measures, and
degrees; Potentes potenter cruciabuntur: Mighty men shall be mightily
tormented; so, that the joy and glory of the Caelestiall Inhabitants, shall be
as different, in measure, and degree, is clearly revealed in Scripture. They
that be wise, shall shine as the brightness of the Firmament, and they that
turn many to righteousness shall shine as the Stars for ever and ever, Daniel
12.3. Which Saint Paul in 1 Cor. 15. further confirms, and more clearly
explicates this, There is one glory of the Sun, another of the Moon, and
another glory of the Stars: for one Starr differs from another Starr in
glory, ver. 41. And then to prevent all mistakes, and disputes about it, he
applies it to this very purpose, verse 42. Even so is the Resurrection from the
dead. And to this does this Text of Saint Peter well agree, where it says, We
look for new Heavens, in the Plural Number, (who knows how many) Ethereall
Heavens, but he that made them? but Heavens they are, therefore more then one,
and this necessary for two Reasons: First, for the vast spaces that are
required to dispose of the Caelestiall Inhabitants in, spaces which no man can
measure for multitudes, which no man can number.

Secondly, For the orderly disposing of them in those Heavens according to the
dignity, and glory; the purity, and holiness of those that shall be placed in
them. For as one Starr; so, one Heaven, differs from another in glory. In my
Fathers House are many Mansions; those Mansions not of equal beauty and
magnificence; variety of Mansions for variety of Inhabitants; to some are
reserved Crowns, to other Laurells; some are clothed in White, the immediate
pedissequae of the Lamb, which follows him whethersoever he goes: others
attend at a farther distance. In the second and third Chapters of the
Revelation, there are seven several rewards assigned to them that overcome. In
the nineteenth of Saint Luke, we see, upon the Account given by the servants of
the improvement of the Talents committed to their trust, One is made Ruler over
ten Cities: another over five: every one has his reward (according to his care
and faithfulness) proportioned unto him. But what need we multiply words, in a
case so clear; consider but the present state of the Caelestiall Inhabitants,
the holy Angels, now in glory; and from thence you will easily collect, what
the state of the Saints shall be after the Resurrection: you will find them
distributed into several Classes, or Orders of Angels, in dignity and glory,
one above another. For we read of Angels, and Arch-Angells, of Cherubims, and
Seraphims, of Thrones, Dominions, Principalities, Powers, etc. all which are so
many Orders, and several Degrees of Angels excelling one another in dignity
and glory. And if there be such graduall distinctions now, of the Angels
divided, and distributed into so many Orders, one above another in the
Caelestiall Hierarchy; certainly much more must it needs be so, after the
Resurrection, when the number of the Caelestiall Inhabitants shall be so
infinitely augmented by the access of all the Saints, and elect people of God,
which have been from the beginning of the world, and shall be to the last man
that shall stand upon the Earth at that day. And it were strange, That all
these should be limited to one Heaven to be disposed in, which is all that some
of you seem to allow: but that Saint Peter has better informed us in the Text,
when he says, We look for new Heavens, Heavens in the Plural, Heavens enough
for the Creator to dispose of all his people in, and to sort them so, as that
they shall all be in those Heavens, which are most convenient for them, and
suitable to them, and for them to be Inhabitants in, and all these new too; not
because then newly Created: but because we shall then newly take Possession of
them, and so they shall be new to us; not in themselves, For they were Created
of old, from the beginning, from the foundation of the World. Let our Saviors
own words, giving possession of them, satisfy, and silence all further
dispute, or questionings in this matter, Mat. 25.34. with which I shut up this
Discourse, Come ye blessed Children of my Father, enter into the Inheritance of
the Kingdom prepared for you, from the foundation of the World.

FINIS.

