A MODERATE SHORT DISCOURSE CONCERNING Tenderness of Conscience.

By JOHN BRADSHAW Rector of Ettchingham in Sussex.

Acts 10.14. Not so Lord. Faelix Conscientia, in qua miscericordia and veritas
obviaverunt sibi, justitia and pax osculatae sunt. St. Bern. de interiori domo.
-- Ego nec tumultum
Nec mori per vim metuam, Te habente
Carole terras. Hor. Car. lib. 3. od. 14.
LONDON, Printed by John Best for Andrew Crook at the Green Dragon in Saint
Paul's Churchyard.

PErlegi hunc tractatum de Tenera Conscientia in quo nihil reperio aut sanae
doctrinae aut bonis moribus contrarium quo minus Imprimatur.

Dan. Nicols R. P. D. Arch. Cant. Capel. Domesticus.
In Aedibus Lambethanis Mart. 26. 1663.
AMen qui dicitur, qui Alpha and Omega, quaerentibus qui via est, credentibus
veritas, viventibus vita, inutilem me servum suum dirigat ne errem extra viam,
regat ne agam contra veritatem, erigat ne cadam infra vitam, Amen.

THE PREFACE.
HAving provided upon that dark and gloomy day Januar. 30. last, some
meditations upon that scripture 1 Samuel 24.5. After I had showed how a
self-smiting heart, or a tender conscience is ever most tender of offering the
least injury to the Lords Anointed, and how much the implacable enemies of his
late Majesty of ever glorious memory had cut off from him, I thought it might
be no ill office to any, but possibly serviceable to the desires of many who
have desired to be acquainted with the meaning of that, to which so many for
many years have pretended, if I took a brief Survey of a self-smiting heart or
tenderness of conscience in general. The subject is purely Theological, and
therefore not unsuitable to a Church man's search: nor know I of any, either at
home or abroad, that have written professedly and directly of that subject. I
handle it only as thema simplex; not taking upon me to define how far our
governors may or may not bear with or yield to tender, dubious, or scrupulous
consciences. I have ever been very tender and wary of dealing in any State
affairs, whether purely political, or mixed, as partly theological, partly
political. I leave that to the Higher powers, only begging of God to guide them
in all things for the best. Four things I have aimed at, and endeavored in
this discourse: First truth, that I may not deceive: Secondly clearness, that I
may not confound: Thirdly moderation, that I may not offend: Fourthly brevity,
that I may not tire. Blessed be the King of Kings, that has not only restored
us our King again, but a King so gracious, so earnestly and constantly desirous
of the welfare of the souls, consciences, and external prosperity of his
people. God give to all his people hearts to make a dutiful and grateful return
of Love, Loyalty, and Obedience, Amen.

Jam fides, and pax, and honor pudorque Priscus, and neglecta redire virtus
Audet, etc. Hor. carm. saecul. Errata.
Page 1. l. 15. r. expressing, p. 3. l. 15. r. cold, p. 4. in mar. r. as, p. 4.
l. 18. r. plainness, p. 4. in mar. r. audeo dicere, p. 6. l. 14. r. vegetative,
p. 6. l. 26. r. intentions, p. 6. l. 28. r. intention, p. 11. in mar. r.
ponderant, p. 16. l. 32. r. expected, p. 16. in mar. r. 1, 2. p. 17. l. 3. r.
and knows, p 19. in mar. r. vel, p. 21. l. 11. r. in our callings.

OF TENDERNESS OF Conscience.
CHAP. I.
HOwever the phrase or Taken from the most tender parts of the body, as the
eye, and or rom some part newly healed.
expression of tenderness of Conscience, is not to be found in Holy Scripture,
totidem verbis, yet the thing it self is both in precepts and examples. In Tim.
5.22. keep thy self pure, Eccles. 9.2. as he that fears an oath.
precepts 1 Timothy 3.9. holding the mystery of faith in a pure Conscience. 1
These. 5.22. abstain from all appearance of evil, or (as it may be read) from
all kind of evil. Besides these and many other precepts, we have Genesis 44.17.
God forbid I should do so, 2 Samuel 24.10. David's heart smote him, 1 Chro. 11.19.
my God forbid it me that I should do this thing.
examples many: Of David 1 Samuel 24.5. troubled for cutting of his Sovereigns
Skirt; of Paul Act. 23.1. and Act. 24.16. and elsewhere. Other examples there
are, which for brevity I pretermit. That of Josiah usually alleged, is not so
clearly pertinent 2 Chronicles. 34.27. the tenderness of his heart expresses it
self in humiliation.

2. Tenderness of Conscience, or a tender Conscience, is a gracious mean
betwixt a scrupulous Conscience on the right hand, and a wide, sluggish or
seared Conscience on the left hand; whereby we are quickly and deeply sensible
of having done, and wary of doing any evil God has clearly forbidden, or of
omitting any good he has clearly commanded.

3. A mean or mediocrity is that which lies betwixt two extremes, and is
ordinarily twofold: Medium per participationem, seu secundum formam per
negationem utriusque extremi seu per privationem Jandun^s.
1. Of Participation, so a gray color is a mean betwixt black and white, as
partaking of both. 2. Of Abnegation, so moral virtues are a mean betwixt two
vicious extremes, as denying to share with either, but rather receeding from,
and opposing both. The former I may not unfitly term, Medium compositionis vel
oppositionis.
Medium compositionis; the latter Medium oppositionis.

4. These means are of several sorts, Natural, Artificial and Moral. Not to
speak of the 2. former, a Moral mean is twofold, 1. A Virtue, 2. A thing
Indifferent. A Virtue is a medium, whose two extremes (...), etc. Aristot.
Ethic. lib. 2. c. 6.
are both evil. A thing Indifferent, whose two extremes are one evil, the other
good in general.

5. All moral virtues, however for their quality they are an (...), and for
their degree, yet as to their essence they are (...), ibid.
a (...). Thus valor lies betwixt rash venturousness on one hand, and
cowardice on the other; liberality betwixt prodigality and covetuousness,
magnificence betwixt wast and parcimony, magnanimity betwixt Rebus augustis
animosus atque fortis appare, sapienter idem, contrahes vento nimium secundo,
turgida vela, Hor.
pride and pusillanimity, modesty betwixt ambition and contempt of honor,
meekness betwixt wrath and over much lenitude or sheepishness, etc.

6. As it is in Moral virtues, so it is in Christian graces, As polling the
head is a mean betwixt letting the hair grow at full length, and shaving it
quite off. So Ezekiel. 44.20. Neither shall they shave their heads, nor suffer
their locks to grow long, they shall only poll their heads, spoken of the
Jewish Priests.
they are seated between two extremes, which yet are not only by defect and
excess, but by a contrary deviation also from a just intermediate rectitude.
Deuteronomy. 5.32. you shall observe to do what the Lord your God has commanded you;
you shall not turn aside to the right hand nor to the left. Mat. 7.14. Strait
is the gate, and (...). Aristot. ubi supra, sed tendit in ardua virtus. Ovid.
narrow is the way.

Contrition for sin is a mean 'twixt hardness and no sorrow, 1 Cor. 5.2. on one
hand, and being overwhelmed with over much sorrow on the other, 2 Cor. 2.7.
Justifying faith is a mean betwixt works, as pretending to justification on one
side, and a dead faith void of works on the other. Hope is seated 'twixt
desperation and presumption; Charity 'twixt jealous, rash suspicion on one
side, and blind affection on the other; Zeal 'twixt a cooler or (which is
worse) a lukewarm temper on this side, and a phrenetical furious distemper on
that side; Temperance is a keeping the body in subjection between pining and
pinching on one part, Sicut inter aquam, and ignem tenenda est via, ut nec
exuratur homo nec demergatur; ita inter apicem vitiorum in excessu and inter
voraginem eorundem in defectu, iter nostrum temperare debemus ne vel ad dextram
vel sinistram declinemus Augustine.
and glutting and pampering it on the other. Timothy being infirm was advised
to drink no longer water, but a little wine for his stomachs sake and his often
infirmities, 1 Timothy 5.23. And Amnon had done well (of whom we read 2 Samuel
12.28) if he had drunk no longer wine, but a little water for his souls sake
and filthy lustfulness. Patience is betwixt repining and raging on the left
hand, and a stupefied senslesness on the right. Self denial 'twixt self love,
resolving to lose nothing though God call for it; and self neglect or injury,
in giving up all when we need not, as in the vow of poverty. Spiritual joy
'twixt a drooping heavy spirit, and a carnal wanton profuse joy.

The fear of God is a narrow path, between a Qui solo timore facit quod jubetur
licet bonum facit non tamen been facit. Sanctus Aug. de spir. and litera. Nemo
invitus been facit, etiamsi bonum est quod fa^t, invitus facit qui solo timore
facit, lib. confess. 1. c. 12.
slavish fear on one side, and a want of all fear on the other; between the
spirit of bondage, Romans 8. Heb. 2. where love has not predominion above fear
and fearlesness, where fear has not predominion above security.

7. As Christian graces, so Christian duties are fenced within the same narrow
path. Before thou prayest prepare thy self, and be not one that tempts the
Lord, Eccles. 18.23.
To come without preparation to them, is to offer indignity to them; to spend
over much time in it, is to incroach upon them. In hearing, we walk upon a
narrow bridge, and must take heed how we hear; for we must neither
superciliously or irreverently hear, because it is Luke 10.16. Non sum
propheta, non sum Apostolus; and prophetae and apostoli (audeo dicent) vice
fungor: and quibus non aequor mer it is, little implicor curis, Bern. super
Cantic. Sermon. 42.
God that speaks by man; nor must we blindly and carelessly swallow all we hear,
because it is but Man by whom God speaks. In the duty of Preaching, we are
neither on one hand, so to Preach the law and damnation as to drive men to
desperation; nor on the other, so to manage the Gospel and the sweet promises,
as to draw them to presumption: we must speak as the oracles of God, and yet
use plains; minister milk, and yet strong meat. In reception of the Lords
Supper I must strike a middle path, betwixt profane irreverence and
superstitious adoration. Non se misceat conscientiae tuae laudis humanae
appetitus cum in cleem osyna facienda d^vinum praeceptum contendis implere. Aug.
In giving alms I must pass between the right hand and the left.

8. To him that impartially and diligently searches into the most dark and
difficult disputes, Disputes and controversies are the Churches convulsion fits.
that do at this day trouble the Church, it will I think be apparent, that the
truth lies in a mean betwixt two unsafe extremes. This I humbly conceive might
be made appear in the difficulties concerning Gods infallible foresight, and
yet his permission of what is not pleasing to him. Auream quisquis
mediocritatem diligit, tutus, etc. Hor. lib. 2. od. 10.
We need neither deny or impair Gods purity or holiness, nor yet his
providence; neither the freedom of his grace, nor yet that freedom of will
which is necessary to a rational creature. The same may be said of the
controversies concerning unbelief, perfection in this life, the virtue and
efficacy of the Sacraments, original sin, Christ's mediation, Tene medium, si
non vis perdere modum, locus medius tutus est, medium seeds modi, and modus
virtus, Bern. de consid. lib. 3. cap. 10.
Gods justification of a sinner, assurance of salvation, perseverance in grace,
the Lords day, and all the disputes about worship and discipline. The middle
path in all which and several others, though as to my private satisfaction I
have tracted in some measure, yet here I must not do it, having already been
too large upon the genus of a tender Conscience, contrary to the rules of short
and positive discourses; only my entire love to moderation (of which I crave
pardon, if it keep not a mean also) has drawn me out so far, nor can I pass
from it, till I have observed one thing more, viz.

9. Sancta ecclesia consistit unitate fidelium, sicut corpus unitate membrorum,
Gregor. Mo^. lib. 29.
That amongst all those several ways of Christian Religion (oh that there were
but one way, though upon condition I forfeited and lost my life as often as
there are several ways) that seems the truest that stands in the middle betwixt
what is idolatrous and what profane, what is toyish and superstitious, and what
is naked and rude; holding to the Scriptures against the one, ^odicis rebus
longius aevum est, Senec. Trag. in Agamem.
and to judgment and practice of venerable antiquity, where the Scriptures are
dark, against the other. And for this, view one of the pearls that dropped from
the rich Pen of our late dear and dread Sovereign King Charles the Martyr, in
his (...), a book so exeellent for Wisdom, Judgment, Piety, Charity, Elegancy,
that it is worthy to be in the Hands, Head, and Heart of all Christians; In his
Farewell Letter to the Prince of Wales, now our Gracious King, speaking of the
Religion established in the Church of England, his Majesty gives it this Elogium.

I have tried it, and after much search and many disputes, have concluded it to
be the best in the world, not only in the community as Christian, but also in
the special notion as reformed, keeping the middle way between the pomp of
Superstitious Tyranny, and the meaness of Fantastic Anarchy.

Kings standing higher, see farther then other men in matters of Church and
State.

CHAP. II.
Virtutibus homo disponitur ad act^ones suas quatenus a ratione movetur, donis
vero quatenus movetur a Deo, Aquinas. Virtus theologica.
I. THis tenderness of Conscience is a gracious mean, which distinguishes it
from a bare moral virtue: For however there is a Conscience in every man, as
having the law of nature in his heart, so that a mere natural man or Heathen,
may have some kind of tenderness of Conscience; yet here I speak of it as it is
a Christian virtue, and therefore call it a gracious mean.

2. Christian graces do eminently contain under them all moral virtues, as the
reasonable soul contains the sensitive and vigetative. Possunt aliqua bona
fieri non benefacientibus a quibus fiunt, August. contra Julian. Hypocritae
sunt simulatores mali adjungentes se ficta charitate captantes omnes motus
omnia verba sanctorum, in omnibus ^aqueos inquirentes. St. Aug. in Psalm. 40.
Moral virtues being also as the stock, and graces as the grafts: for as the
stock may bring forth fruit, yet harsh, not pleasing, sower, not acceptable
till it be grafted; so a moral man may bring forth much fruit, yet not pleasing
to God, till grace be grafted on him.

3. Therefore that tenderness which an hypocrite or carnal man pretends to, is
not true tenderness, nor pleasing to God: Yea the more tender such a person
makes himself, the more seared is his conscience through hypocrisy. Absalom 2 Samuel 15.6. pretended much tenderness about his vow in Hebron, when his
intention, were to dethrone his father. The graceless Pharisees did pretend a
tenderness of the Sabbath, but their intentions was to accuse our Savior.

4. Whence it follows, that the more sound and well grown grace is in the
heart, Mat. 12.20.
the more tender is the conscience; and contrariwise the less grace, the less
true tenderness. And for a graceless person to pretend to it, is as absurd as
for a Dwarf to pretend to stature, or a lame man to agility.

5. This therefore being a gracious disposition, must necessarily have God for
the Author, or efficient cause, Quicquid sanctum cogita veris Dei munus est,
Dei inspiratio, Dei gratia, Ambr. de Abel and Cain cap. ult.
which I did not explicitly lay down in the definition, as supposing that it is
sufficiently understood in the Genus: James 1.17. Every good gift, and every
perfect gift is from above, and comes down from the father of lights, etc.
Dicendum quod Deus operator in voluntate and natura sicut causa prima in
secundis, Aquin. in Distinct. 24. lib. 2.

6. The final cause also may here be taken in, Jer. 32.40. Paenam semper ante
oculos versari putant, qui peccaverunt. Cicer. pro milone.

Nudabitur pectoris mei conscientia, and aperto cord videbuntur literae
peccatorum, Orig. hom. 12


which is to keep us from sinning against him. The conscience being Gods
Commissioner in the soul, to examine what we do, keeping therein a petty
Sessions, whereby preparation is made for the great Assize. The tender
conscience is a faithful judge, the scrupulous conscience a foolish, the wide,
seared conscience a corrupt bribed judge. If natura nil agit frustra, much less
the God of nature, who has put this principle of nature into the soul of man.

CHAP. III. Of the right hand extreme, viz a scrupulous conscience.
SCrupulous is a diminutive of scrupus, Scrupulus diminutivum a scrupus proprie
est lapillus brevis and asper qui in calceo lateus plerunque nos laedit, nam
pressus pede sollicitudinem creat Altenst. vocab.
which is a little sharp piece of a stone; from whence somewhat forcedly some
would have a scrupulous conscience so called, because as a small stone in the
shoo causes a man to go in pain so a scruple in the conscience is irksome to
him that acts and scruples at what he acts.

Dubia plus torquent mala, Sen. Trag. in Agamem.
But more probably it seems so termed from scrupulus, which is one of the least
weights, because such a conscience stumbles at things of the least weight or
moment, not worth our while to trouble our thoughts with it.

2. A scrupulous conscience is that which sticks at small and trivial things,
upon small and trivial reasons.

Res mediae dicuntur, quae per se sive ex sua natura simpliciter aestimatae,
nec bonae nec malae sunt ut esca, and potus, and similiae, Beza epist. ad
peregrinarum in Anglia ecclesiarum fratres.
3. I call those things small and trivial, which are in their own nature merely
indifferent; or if they have some degree of evil or good, are not discovered so
to be in a clear way to him that scruples at them: in which reguard if not in
themselves, yet as to him they are trival.

4. Those reasons or arguments I call trivial, which in the judgment of common
reason (not elouded with passion) together with common illumination, have no
force or strength in them.

5. Common reason is that which every man is endowed with, who is compos
mentis, and grown up to years of discretion; and that common illumination,
which every Christian is endowed with, who may be thought fit to partake of the
Lords Supper, as to matter of knowledge.

To scruple to set our foot cross over a straw in the high way for fear of
making the figure of the Cross. Eo demum veniet, ut super transversam (qu^d
dicitur) festucam incedere nefas ducat Calv. Instit. lib. 3. c. 19. Sect. 7.
6. Instances of a scrupulous conscience many may be given; these few may serve
for a taste. To scruple in extreme thirst to drink in that cup, which another
has drunk in to excess; to scruple to go a mile to the Church on the Sabbath,
because there is labor in it. To stick at eating fish on a fasting day,
because some refuse to eat flesh on that day; to stick at uncovering the head
or bowing the knee to a superior, because we give such worship to God.

In like manner for a candidat or inceptor to scruple at putting on, suppose, a
Master of Arts Cap, Gown, Hood or Habit, because some such like habiliments
were in use before the Reformation; nor can I think that many of the
Presbyterian way, do really scruple at a white garment in Divine Service: for
if there were any color of sin in a color (which in truth there is not) red
should have more of sin in it then white, to which the deepest died sins are
compared, Isa. 1.18. Rev 17.3. Justification being compared to the whiteness of
wool and snow; and sanctification to linen pure and white, Rev. 19.8.

Yet the chief and leading men of that way, did at certain times in the fight
of many thousands, wear Skarlet Gowns and Hoods in the Universities, not only
at Disputations and Congregations, but at sermons, yea (if I mistake not) did
preach ad Clerum in their scarlet Copes, one of the gravest habits in the
world, and much used in one of the Universities at solemn times. Wherein a man
may wonder, as why they should not scruple as much at scarlet as as at white;
so much more, why they should stumble more at white of linen, then at the
white of miniver wherewith that habit is largely indorsed.

Of School-writers, none that I know speaks more to the purpose then Antoninus,
from whom some Modern Writers seem to borrow that little that they have upon
that subject. A quibusdem vocatur erronea conscientia, ab aliis timor consc
entiae, ab aliis pusillanimitas, Anton. Sum. part. 1. Tract. 3 c. 10. Sect. 9.
First he shows the several names given to scrupulosity: some call it (says he)
pusillanimity, some fear of conscience, some an erroneous conscience; and gives
this definition. Est vacillati^ quaedam consurgens cum formidine ex aliquibus
conjecturis debilibus and incertis. i. e. A wavering of mind rising in us, with
fear upon some uncertain and weak conjectures.

He after distinguishes betwixt fides, scientia, opinio, Secundum Albertum in
libro de quatuor c^aevis, differentia est inter scientiam, s^dem; opinionem;
dubitationem, and s^rupulum seu fusp cionem -- Demum scrupulus ex levibus
conjecturis seu mediis, and multum debil bas movetur ad unam partium, ibid.
dubitatio, and scrupulus; and tells us that a doubting conscience, is
pendulous betwixt both parts; but a scrupulous fastens upon one part drawn by
weak reasons. I see but little difference betwixt vacillatio and dubitatio, nor
is it necessary either to conceive of a dubious conscience as not fastening,
because when it does so it may be doubting, nor does a scrupulous conscience
seem always to close with one part. Having after laid down the effects of
scrupulosity, Causatur quandoque ex complexione ad timorem idonea, viz.
frigida: quandoque ex agritudine manica, vel melancholica -- per quam laeditur
imaginatio -- causatur ex tentatione diabolica, and ex societate timidorum.
he proceeds to the causes, viz. melancholy hurting the brain; temptation from
Satan stirring up the melancholy humors, and he produces Avicenna so teaching;
sometimes overmuch fasting and watching, sometimes the society of scrupulous
persons, one being apt to possess another with scruples. Non debent scrupulosi
dure corr^pi sed animari ad deponendum pusillanimitatem and scrupalum.
Next he proceeds to the remedies of it: As 1. That they should not be over
harshly reproved: he should have added Of which danger our governors are
Judges.
except the scruple be dangerous to Church or State. 2. That they should be
persuaded to lay it aside, 3. Debita ad gratiam Dei praeparatio, Solli^ta
sacrae Scripturae in dagatio: orationis devota continuat^o opinionis alicujus
tuta electio: obedientiae humilis imitatio: scrupulorum animosa abjectio,
discreta praeceptorum interpretatio.
Diligently search the Scriptures, Jam. 1. If any man lack wisdom, etc. 4. By
Godly sorrow to prepare for the receiving the grace of God. 5. By subjecting
their understanding and judgments to their superiors in wisdom and office,
Prove. 3. Lean not to thine own understanding: He cites to this purpose the
words of the learned Chancellor of Paris, Vnum hoc damus generale documentum,
viz. facile, credere sapientium and bonorum judicio, and contra communes eorum
sententias non leviter sibi formare scrupulos anxios and timidos. We give this
general instruction, easily to yield to the judgment of wise and good men, and
not lightly to frame to our selves troublesome scruples against their common
judgment. And if a scrupulous person shall say, Vtinam talis esset praelatus
noster qualis Bernardus, crederem faciliter imperanti, and acquiescerem
consulenti. If our Church-governour were such a one as Bernard, I would believe
easily what he should tell me, and rest in what he shall counsel me. He
answers, Erras, debes illi obedire non ut homini sed ut Deo, cujus vices gerit:
nam Christus dicit qui vos audit me audit. Thou errest, for thou ought to
obey him not as man, but as God, in whose stead he is; thus far Antonine
Archbishop of Florence.

8. By what he writes, or others from him, themselves, or others, it is
manifest there is such a thing as a scrupulous conscience; that this conscience
is anxious, and no doubt in some degree dubious, there being little difference
betwixt dubitatio and vacillatio; that this scrupulosity is a sin in whomsoever
it is, as proceeding from evil causes, viz. ignorance, error, Say to them that
are of a fearful heart be strong, Isa. 35.4.
or instability of mind, or pride, some affecting and professing scrupulosity.
For by this they make that to be sin, which else had been none; faciunt sibi
peccata, ubi non sunt peccata, says one, It proceeds also from other ill causes
aforesaid.

9. There is a kind or rather show of conscience, Disc. de temp. -- Conscientia
mala est conscientia perversa, quam habent qui peccata parva ponderunt,
magnanon curant: minima observatis, maxima contemnitis. Aug. quaest. evang.
lib. 1. qu. 35.
which some call a perverse or preposterous conscience; such was that of the
Pharisees Mat 23.23. who paid tithes of mint, annis, etc. and neglected, etc.
who strained at a Gnat and swallowed a Camel, Mat. 23.24. Or to give a more
modern, and too well known an instance, to be so narrow throated as to strain
at the Churches Prayers, and to be so wide throated as to swallow the Churches
Lands; to scruple to give a penny to the building or repairing of a Church, a
thing laudable, pious, and necessary, and to stick at no cost toward the
dethroning and destroying of their Sovereign, a thing unnatural and impious.
But this being but an hypocritical pretense of conscience, cannot be referred
to this head, which treats of real scrupulosity.

CHAP. IV. Of the left hand extreme, viz. a wide, loose, and seared conscience.
Conscientia dilatata quam habent illi qui non ponderant crassiora peccata --
and de communibus non curant. Disc. de temp. Ser. 9.
1. A Wide or loose Conscience, is that which is not tenderly sensible of having
done, nor tenderly wary of doing what is clearly and manifestly evil, out of an
inward principle.

2. If a man forbear evil to be done, or is troubled for evil done, only
because it is punished or punishable by humane laws, this is not tenderness. And
therefore looseness of conscience is chiefly seen and discerned in the
commission and admission of such sins, Romans 13. wrath and conscience are
distinguished.
without remorse or regard, which conscience and the fear of God should
restrain, and are not punished by humane laws, or if so, do not easily or
speedily come to humane cognizance.

3. Whence it follows, that looseness of conscience is most discovered in secret
sins, and consequently more discernible to a man's self then to another, till it
break out into open enormities without open signs of a wounded or troubled soul.

4. That which some Divines call a sleepy or dull conscience; is but a farther
degree of a loose conscience; for when men have inured themselves to sin
against conscience, this Si autem vince^e and imperare consueverunt laboriosa d
fficultate superantur. Aug. de civ. Dei lib. 21. c. 16.
custom takes away quickness of sense. Yet is not a stupefied conscience
without some degree of feeling when God awakens it either with a powerful word
Act. 2.37. they were pricked in their heart, and said men and brethren what
shall we do? or with a powerful work, as in Pharaohs case Exodus 9.27. I and my
people are sinful. For as such who are Lethargical are not easily awakened, but
by some great noise, so neither is a sluggish conscience without a powerful
word or work of God.

5. The seared conscience seems to be the highest degree of a loose or wide
conscience, Ephesians. 4.19. who being past feeling, etc. 1 Timothy 4.2. having their
conscience seared with an hot iron. For as that which has been seared feels
nothing, so neither does a seared conscience, till it feels hell fire; and it
is commonly the effect of an hypocritical profession of the faith, or of a
wicked departure from the faith.

6. The cauterized conscience as it is of the same species with a wide and
loose conscience may be called a degree of it, yea the highest degree:
Cauterium est corruption in carne per g^em, ex qua egreditur continua putredo.
Aquinas in 1 Timothy 4.
as it proceeds from looseness it may be an effect of it; as it increases
looseness and widens the conscience, it may be a cause of it.

7. Of all the judgments of God in this life, it is the greatest to be given up
to such a searedness or reprobate sense. For however Desperation continued in,
cuts off from all mercy, yet is a seared conscience no less desperate, keeping
off a sense of sin, and therein any due sense of mercy. From which miserable
estate the Lord deliver us.

CHAP. V. Of the difference of a tender conscience from other graces nearest
and likest to it.
1. IT thus differs from the fear of God, that this properly respects the Job.
1.1. feared God and eschewed evil. Qu^ hanc habet omnem odit iniquitatem -- per
hunc timorem Dei universa deserimus, mundo abrenunciamus, nosque ipsos (sicut
Dominus ait) abnegamus nobis. Bern. de don. sp. sancti ser. 3. c. 1.
future Jer. 32.40. I will put my fear into their heart, that they shall not
depart from me; but tenderness of conscience respects as well the time past as
the future. The fear of God seems to be the cause of a tender conscience,
Ecclesiastic. 1.21. The fear of the Lord drives away sin.
Genesis 39.9. how can I do this great wickedness and sin against God?

2. It differs from penitential contrition, as this respects actions past, but
tenderness things also future; and (as in the former) contrition seems to be
some cause of tenderness, 2 Cor. 7.11. that ye sorrowed after a godly sort what
carefulness it wrought in you.
the heart never being truly tender, till it be a broken and a contrite heart.

3. It differs from vigilance, this being principally exercised about our
temptations, and such other dangers, but tenderness about the good or evil of
our actions.

4. It differs not only from a scrupulous conscience, but from a dubious; this
haesitating betwixt assent and dissent, that firmly bent against any manifest
evil.

CHAP. VI. Of the quick sense of a tender conscience, being the formalis ratio
of it.
A distinction somewhat like is in Aristot. lib. 7. Ethic. c. 10. (...). Solum
dicitur practicus, dum ad factibilia and agibilia inferiora convertitur. Gerson.
1. THis sensibility is a quick motion of the practical understanding in a
sudden cheek of something done, or a sudden stop at something to (...) done.

2. The practical understanding is a power of the soul, which apprehends things
in ordine ad opus, in order to some operation, as the speculative understanding
in ordine ad scientiam, in order to something to be known. For example, the
speculative understanding considers, of herbs, as having such virtues and
operations in them, the practical, whether I should for such purposes use such
simples, and in what manner to use them. The theorical intellect considers of
marriage as it is the ordinance of God, as a great mystery, as a means of the
propagation of mankind: the practical intellect, considers of entering or
refusing such or such a marriage. A Judge upon the Bench makes use of his
theorick intellect, when he discourses of the Laws and Statutes what they allow
or forbid; he makes use of the practick power, when he examines and condemns
malefactors by the law.

3. Whence it is a rule in Philosophy, Intellectus theoricus conquiescit in
notitia principiorum, intellectus practicus in notitia singularium. Upon which
is grounded the distinction of a Vita humana in activam and contemplativam
dividitur, quae quidem attenditur secundum intellectum. Intellectus autem d
viditur per activum and contemplativum. Aquin. 22. qu. 179. art. 2.
contemplative and an active life.

4. The quick motion of this practical understanding is imperated by the will
truly sanctified, which lays a general charge upon all the faculties, above all
things what ever they do to keep all sin out of the soul.

-- Cum magna horreas
Quoe posse fieri non putes metuas tamen.
Senec. trag. in OEdip.
CHAP. VII. Of the immediate object of a tender Conscience.
1. THe object of this sensibility or tenderness, is about Conscientia est
actus quo scientiam nostram ad ea quae agimus applicamus. Aqu. 1. part. q. 79.
art. 13.
doing or having done any thing which is clearly evil, and consequently of
omitting or having omitted any thing which is truly good.

2. The absolute and primary rule of evil and good to a tender conscience, is
the express and clear Word of God rightly understood; for every thing in some
particular places forbidden or commanded is not the rule.

3, I call Gods Word the primary and absolute rule, because other rules there
are which bind the conscience, but they do it by the virtue of the absolute
rule.

4. Those secondary rules of conscience, as some Divines both lately and
formerly have noted, are 1. The Laws, Orders, and Mandates of our Superiors.
2. Our own spontaneous vows and promises. 3. The consideration of offense
toward a weak Brother, which in some cases is a direction to conscience.

5. Whereas the late Reverend and Judicious Bishop Sanderson (who does not deal
in his Cases upon this my subject save only upon the rule of conscience in one
place) asserts that the Scripture is not the adaequate rule of conscience, but
the will of God in what way soever revealed to men; that I may not seem to
leave out any thing necessary to the definition of the rule, nor to thwart what
that worthy Casuist has written, I conceive I have both fully and fitly
comprised all under those words, The Word of God rightly understood. For
speaking only of the tender conscience of a Christian, and not a mere natural
man, I have no occasion to take in the Lex vetus distinguitur a lege naturae
non tanquam ab ea omnino aliena, sed tanquam ei aliquid super. addens. Sicut
enim gratia praesuppon^t naturam, ita oportet quod lex div^na praesupponat
legem naturalem. Aquin. 12. qu. 99. art. 2.
law of nature by it self, as one way of revelation; there being nothing
commanded or prohibited in the law of nature, which is not more explicitly and
excellently to be found in the Scripture, which does eminently contain in it
the law of nature. And whereas extraordinary, particular, private revelations,
are not to be expressed, but Non dicat ideo verum esse -- quia ille frater
noster, vel illa s^ror nostra tale visum vigil^ns aut dormiens somniavit. Aug.
de unitate ecclesiae.
suspected when pretended, I make them no certain part of the rule. But as to
the way of revelation, which is by instructions and consequences drawn out of
Scripture, I have couched it under these words: Rightly understood. For he that
rightly understands a Text, knows the scope of it, and he that knows what that
Text truly and properly teaches, by what means soever.

6. One of the secondary rules of evil and good to the conscience, is the Laws
and Mandates of our Rulers and Governors; these Omnis leg^slativa potestas
descendit a potestate suprema i. e. divina -- quicquid igitur committitur
contra legem humanamidem etiam fit contra legem ei. -- Qui hoc etiam praecipit
ut illi potestati obediatur. -- Non enim fingi potest prae^ipiendi potestas
sine obligatione obediendi. Tit. 3.1. Estius in Sentent. lib. 2. did. 36.
bind by the power and virtue of the primary rule, 1 Pet. 2.13. Submit your
selves to every ordinance of man, for the Lords sake: (...) to every humane
creature, as it sounds in the Greek. Estius thus, to every man being Gods
creature, as Mark. 6. preach the Gospel to every creature, i. e. to every man;
yet as there is a restriction there to be understood, not to infants or
distracted persons, so here is a restriction; for we are not bound to submit to
every man, but to such as are in authority. But Heinsius a Protestant and a
learned Critic, tells us, That it is very properly rendered to every humane
ordinance. For the Hellenists Ecclesiasticus 38.12. write thus; (...), Give
place to the Physician, for God has ordained him. Though we use not the
Apocryphal Books as a ground of faith, yet there are many excellent things in
them; and besides the Greek Apocrypha gives light to diverse dark places in the
New Testament, being a kind of Hebraizing Greek; and therefore to distinguish
it from other Greek, called by Jos. Scaliger, and some other Critics, the
Hellenists Greek, as is also the LXX. of the Canonical Books in the Old
Testament. Nor shall a man ever come to the true meaning of some of the darkest
places of the New Testament, that is not well versed in the Hellenists. Another
Text is in Romans 13.5. Wherefore ye must needs be subject, not only for wrath,
but for conscience sake.

7. They therefore that are still opposing these subordinate rules one to
another, submit to neither; for opposition is not to be made, Vbi hoc jubet
pater quod contra Deum non sit, sic audiendus est quomodo Deus quia obedire
patri jussit Deus. Aug. conc. 1. in Psalm. 70.
but when man commands or ordains something contrary to the ordinance and
commandments of God, and then the rule holds Act. 5.19. we ought to obey God
rather then man: Or when men thrust out Gods laws, and place their own in their
room, as Mat. 15.9. They taught doctrines, the commandments of men, that is,
they shut out the fifth Commandment, and brought in their Corban into the room
of it, v. 4, 5, 6. Or lastly, when they shall bring in any thing as of God
directly and immediately which is not, Quicquid vice Dei Praelatus praecipit,
quod non sit certum displicere Deo, haud secus ac^ipiendum, quam si praecipiat
ipse Deus. Bern. de praecept. and disp. c. 12.
or as an essential part to his worship which he has not prescribed. In which
sense Tertullian is to be understood, Nobis nihil ex nostro arbitrio indulgere
licet, sed nec eligere quod aliquis ex arbitrio suo induxerit.

Ad secundum praeceptum (verius ad tertium) reducitur omnis v olatio voti.
Estius lib. 3. did. 39.
8. The second secondary rule of evil or good, is a lawful vow. This also binds
by virtue of the absolute and primary rule. Deuteronomy. 23.21. When thou shall vow a
vow to the Lord thy God, thou shall not slack to pay it. See Psalm. 76.11.
Eccles. 5.4, 5. Act. 5.4.

9. The third secondary rule is in case of offense, but it is, when the things
are such as neither Gods Law nor Man's ties us to: we having liberty to leave or
use them 1 Cor. 8.9. But take heed this liberty of yours become not a stumbling
block to them that are weak.

CHAP. VIII. Of the clearness of the primary rule.
1. THis rule I have asserted in the former Chapter to be the express and clear
Word of God.

2. Those portions of Gods Word I call express and clear, which if they concern
us that are Christians, are not obnoxious to diverse interpretations or
criticisms invalidating any certain sense.

3. Therefore where a text admits of diverse probable interpretations, or is by
critical observation carried beside the vulgar sense, there can be no rule of
good or evil to the conscience.

4. The reason is, because that which becomes the true object of the
speculative intellect, which searches what is true or false, cannot be the
object nor rule of the practical intellect, till the speculative has resolved
it.

5. Not that I think the maxim of the Canon Law applicable to this: Quae in
testamento ita scripta sunt ut intelligi non possunt, perinde sunt ac si
scripta non essent; because, however it be in man's Testament, in Gods
Testaments, it is Scripture still, though the meaning be not certainly known.

6. In places therefore dubious and difficult, it is not good sense to say, my
conscience tells me this or that is the sense of such a Text, because
conscience is manifestly seated in the practical intellect, whose work is not
to find out true or false in any matter.

7. Yet where the But the house of Israel will not hearken unto thee, for they
will not hearken to me, Ezekiel. 3.7.
Church has authoritatively given the interpretation of dubious places, a
tender conscience should be tender of rejecting it, as both charitably and
dutifully hoping that the Church would not give an interpretation, either
contrary to other express Scriptures, the Analogy of faith, or to the consent
of the Universal Church in the most pure and ancient times of it.

8. Nor is it less then equity, that if the people trust the Church first in
setting out the bounds of Canonical Scripture against such as would The
Romanists.
add or Si and Petrus accedat -- locus ex epistola ejus priore, quae sola
genuina est, etc. Petrus quoque vetus auctor epistolae posterioris quae sub
Petri nomine jam olim vulgata est etc. Walo Messalinus (alias Salmasius) de
Episcopis, and Presbyteris, and others besides him.
substract: Secondly, in translating it against such as would lock it up, they
should also cheerfully and gratefully receive the Churches interpretation, it
being not imaginable to an ingenuous and charitable man, that they who have
been faithful and industrious in fixing the Canon and translating it, would be
careless and deceitful in the interpretation.

9. I do therefore (but with humble submission to the judgment of the Church)
affirm that a tender conscience being guided in her rule by the Churches
translation, may also be guided by her interpretation.

10. But besides ambiguous places there is clear Scripture enough to show us
what is good and what is evil. Deuteronomy 30.15. See I have set before thee this day
life and good, and death and evil. But more pregnantly Mic. 6.8. He has showed
thee, O man! what is good, etc.

11 Yet may clear places be obscured by unsound interpretations, and by none
more then by over lax and large synechdoches. For of all places, the moral law
is most clear, yet are the synechdoches some make, so large, that a man knows
not when he breaks them or keeps them.

12. Above the rest of the moral law, none seems more clogged with the trope
aforesaid, then the second Commandment. So that as they are guilty of one gross
extreme, who expunge it out of the decalogue, so they in some degree of
another, that have overmuch enlarged it. For if it must be extended to all
inventions of men, whereby they cloth the worship of God with fitting
circumstantials, we cannot stir a foot, but we must stumble over some graven
image. Then is the tolling a Bell, the turning a Glass, the tuning a Psalm, or
almost any thing else, not expressly commanded, a graven image. Then is every
Christian Congregation in the world a Congregation of Idolaters, which is
grossly absurd.

13. By what therefore has been said in this and the former Chapters it is
manifest, that the object of the tender conscience is clear or manifest evil or
good.

14. Therefore bare resemblances of evil, are not the object of tenderness. Nor
is that place 1 These. 5.22. Abstain from every appearance of evil, so to be
understood. Because if that were the sense, man's life should be a perpetual
thraldom; (...) also is as well kind as appearance: and Estius says well, it
is the same with that Chapter 4.12. to walk honestly toward them without: many
good things carry a resemblance of evil, as diligence in callings of
covetuousness; cheerfulness of levity; reservedness of anger, lawful
recreations of voluptuousness; and commonly all virtues and graces of some one
extreme.

15. The restrictions are these. 1. It must be clearly evil of which it is an
appearance. 2. Such an appearance it must be as does necessarily infer us
guilty, or that we love or like that evil 3. Such an appearance as we have
freedom to forbear.

16. Yet is the tender Conscience tender of another man's conscience, 1 Cor.
10.29. conscience I say not thine own, but of the others. Vid. page ult. Gal.
6.4. But let every man prove his own work.
There is but one consideration more in the object, viz. that a tender
conscience is conversant about the evil and good of our own actions, and not of
other men's; for however grief may arise in our hearts for the misdoings of
others, yet can it not be called trouble of conscience, but sorrow of mind.

CHAP. IX. Of the subject of a tender conscience.
THe remote subject is (as has been showed) the practical intellect in the
soul and the will, but more approximately, a regenerate and sanctified soul.
For if the fear of God and true softness of heart, are only subjected in a
regenerated soul, so likewise is this.

2. Tenderness therefore is not only the adjunct of such a soul, Tit. 1.15. But
to them that are defiled and unbelieving is nothing pure, but even their mind
and conscience is defiled.
but the adaequate adjunct of it, and therefore is reciprocated with the
subject, so that there is no regenerate man without a tender conscience, no
tender conscience but in a regenerate man, as it is a gracious disposition.

3. Hence it is as ridiculous for a wicked man as a theif, a perjured person,
or traitor, to pretend to tenderness of conscience, as for a beast to pretend
to rationality. If two thieves should rob a man, and one persuade to murder
him, and the other refuse and hinder, it is not tenderness of conscience
properly in him, but either some degree of good nature, or Gods restraining
grace, or fear of a divine hand of punishment, that frequently finds out
murderers. Conscience is as truly tender of theft, as of murder, Genesis 37.22.
when Reuben said, shed no blood, it cannot be thought such a tenderness in him,
who was not afraid to defile his fathers bed.

4. To conclude this, the sanctified soul in regard of this adjunct, is not
only subjectum recipiens ad se, but in se. Tenderness has an inherence in such
a soul, and cannot be severed from it, how ever at some times it may be more
dull then at other.

CHAP. X. Of the adjuncts of a tender Conscience.
THe adjuncts, properties, or the effects of this holy disposition will serve
for the marks or characters of it by which it may in some sort be discovered
where it is.

1. A proportionality to the object. The greater the evil, the more tender the
conscience: Those evils especially it most checks us for and keeps us from,
which are, 1. Most dishonorable to God and his Gospel. 2. Such as most wound
the conscience. Those that most dishonor God and his Gospel, are sins against
the Laws of Nature, Nations, and Humane Society, such as are breach of our
faith and promises, And after that King Nebuchadnezzar had made him to swear by
the name of the Lord he forswore himself and rebelled. 1 ^sdr. 1.48.
(especially when it is public) perjuries, and above all, treasons. In the
late times, when men saw no punishment, but rather encouragement to all
disloyalty, conscience should have restrained them, for the actions of those
times were dishonorable to Christ in the sight of unbelievers, to the reformed
religion in the sight of other professions, to the English Nation in the sight
of all Nations. 2. The sins that most wound the conscience are breach of vows,
oaths, when lawful for the matter, and imposed by lawful authority, such as
the oaths of Allegiance and Supremacy were, but the Covenant was not.

2. Tenderness is ever joined with a propensity to Gods public worship.
Christiana libertas non est vaga and effraenis licentia qua qui quid lubet, pro
nostro arb trio agamus aut omittamus -- sed est l beratio a maledictione legis,
and a jugo legalium ceremoniarum per Christum. Beza Epist. 24.
I never in all my life knew a conscientious person, but did love Gods worship
in his house, and the more conscientious the more constant in it and to it. Is
abutitur Christianae libertatis beneficio, vel potius adhuc venundatus est sub
peccato, qui vel suis magistratibus ve praepositis sponte non paret in Domino.
Thed. Beza. ibid.
They that can sit at home without necessity whole Lords days, nay many months
together, show from the coldness of their affections to their God that their
consciences are not tender but benumbed, or rather seared.

It is no argument, Jactabi musne libertatem conscientiis permittendam esse?
minime ut haec quidem libertas intelligitur, i. e. quo quisque modo volet eum
colat. Est enim hoc mere d^abelicum dogma, sinendum esse unumquemque ut si
volet pereat. Beza epist.
but a pitiful shift in too many to cover idleness, pride, disdain of the
ministerial office, and perhaps something worse, to say, I cannot come to
Church: I understand not the meaning of such a ceremony, I approve not of such
prayers, I like not the calling, gifts, or disposition of such a minister, I
like not joining in assembly with profane persons.

Doctor Ames, a known enemy of the Church Government here, and something
inclining to the New England mode, in his Book de conscientia, Chap. 4. speaks
thus: If any through error of conscience should judge it unlawful to be
present at the Church assembly, Si quis per conscientiae errorem, illi eitum
judicaret interesse caetui ecclesiae, cui alias tenetur adesse, quia ministrum
illius ecclesiae improbum hominem esse novit, and se communicaturum putat cum
ejus improbitate, ille magis peccat abstinendo, quam si adesset, quia gravius
est peccatum negligere cultum Dei quam communicare cum alterius improbitate
personali in illo cultu. Ames. de consc. cap. 4.
because he knows the Minister to be a bad-man, and imagines he shall by his
presence there partake with his improbity, he sins much more by keeping away,
then by being present; because it is a far greater sin to neglect the worship
of God, then to communicate with another improbity, except a man by being
present were forced to commit idolatry. Thus Amesius.

But no man in our assemblies is forced to practice or behold any such thing as
idolatry. Nor does he that is present where sinners are at Gods worship,
communicate therefore with them in their sins, any more then by living in the
same Parish with them. The ancient non-conformists were all of this judgment,
and so are generally if not totally the Divines of the Presbyterian judgment at
this day. Fearful no doubt is their sin, and so it will appear at the last day,
to refrain Gods public Ordinances upon such pretenses; much more upon pride,
laziness, and hatred of Churchmen and Church Government.

Atheists.
No greater contemners of God, then such as contemn his public worship and
service, who give not unto the Lord the glory due unto his name, 1 Chronicles. 16.29.
that bring not an offering, nor come before him to worship the Lord in the
beauty of holiness: Who worship not the Lord in his sanctuary, Psalm. 29.12.
nor delight to give thanks to him in a great congregation or praise him among
much people: Psalm. 35.18.
more Atheism and contempt of the divine Majesty they cannot show, except they
should proclaim it in every Market, or write it upon every Wall, that there is
no God. And if it be not timously prevented, a deluge of Heathenism and Atheism
will quickly rush in upon us. Diverse there are that have not been at Church for
many years, nor do they at all use or frequent the Sectarian Assemblies or any
other, but sit at home following their own occasions. Others not so bad, come
to the public Assemblies, but very rarely, very unconstantly. Some come
reasonable duly, but it is only as hearers; they never partake of the Lords
Supper, though never so earnestly invited and persuaded; they are so bold as to
plead against it, as a thing needless and unprofitable; they commonly urge the
danger of unworthy participation, and the difficulty of self-examination as a
reason of Non-Communion. They would make the world believe that Christ has
given some dangerous law to his Church, whose yoke is easy and burden is
light. And some of this sort, the younger sort especially come (as by their
carriage it appears) partly to gaze, to feed their wanton senses, to talk and
discourse of vanities, even then whilst God is speaking to them in his Word;
yea, which is worse, to manifest and make known to all how little they regard
the oracles of God: such an heap of libertinism have the late Anarchical
confusions left still behind them. Insomuch that what with the Atheistical
practices of some who own no Church; the cold and loose dealing of others that
own it at their leisure; and the dividing practices of a considerable number
who frequent none but such as are private; the public worship of God, the
glory and strength, the beauty and security of a Nation is sadly eclipsed. But
I hope it is but in an eclipse, and so will again recover. Lord let not the
Gates of Sion mourn, which thou love more then all the dwellings of Jacob! If
it be thy goodness to thy Church, Isa. 30.20.
that her Teachers shall not be removed into a corner, but her eyes shall
behold them, it is no less, that her people shall not remove into corners, but
that her Teachers eyes shall behold their people.

I deny not but such may be the Churches exigency, as that she may for some
time and in some degree, bear with such as are erroneous and scrupulous, when
it is for the good and safety of the sound part of the Church; but this I
presume not to deal upon. All that I presume to say (and none can blame me for
it) is this: They that own our rule, but not our principles and discipline,
have less to plead for their separation; and they that own both our rule,
principles and discipline, have nothing to plead; abhorring Sectarian
principles, Atheists and Libertins.
yet shrowding themselves under their practices.

3. However such a conscience is tender of all divine laws, yet is it in a more
peculiar and remarkable manner tender of Christ's new and great Commandment of
Love, and consequently of his injunction so earnestly and frequently inculcated
by the Apostle, to beware of making Schisms, Divisions, and Separations. He
has no tender conscience that is not tender and fearful of making breaches and
parties in the Church of God.

4. A tender conscience is tender of another man's conscience. Some that former
years professed tenderness about a White Garment, about Kneeling and Standing
Gestures, etc. when they had got the power into their own hands, It was mine
own lot to have the Covenant tendered me so soon as Printed, and upon my
absolute refusal, to be exiled from my Flock, March 2. 1643. and put to sad
exigencies.
had no mercy on the consciences of their brethren that had a thousand times
more cause to be tender and wary of taking the Covenant; but they who had
strained at the former gnats, did not only swallow the Covenant Camel, but did
endeavor to cram and ram it down the throats of their brethren, wrenching open
their jaws with the cold and harsh key of poverty and ruin; and which was
worse, making such scandalous that should refuse it, how unwarrantable soever
from the imposers and composers, how unsuitable soever for the matter to sound
and sworn principles, and how pernicious soever in the ends and effects of it.

5. It is tender of both Tables of the Law. If it will not admit of profaness,
neither will it of unrighteousness. If it be tender of an idle and vain oath,
it is no less of detraction; if of neglecting the Sabbath, so also of
neglecting the Poor; if it abhorrs Idols, which are a breach of the first
Table, it abandons Sacrilege, which is a breach of both Tables.

6. It is troubled if it has admitted any thing against the clear rule, be it
never so little, be it but in a thought, Deuteronomy. 15.9. Beware there be not a
thought in thy wicked heart, Isa. 35.4. He is of a fearful heart, Eccle. 10.20.
Curse not the King, no not in thy thought. 2 Cor. 8.20. Avoiding this, that no
man should blame us, etc. Dua res sunt conscientia and sama. propter nos
conscientia nostra nobis sufficit: propter alios fama necessaria est:
conscientiatibi, fama; proximo. August. Sermon. priore de vita com. suorum
clericorum.
They dare not let any spot of guilt cleave to them; Their conversation shows
they do exercise themselves to have always a conscience void of offense toward
God and toward Men, Act. 24.16.

7. Above all men to be void of offense toward the Magistrate. He is not apt
by any intemperate speeches, much less, otherwise to fly upon the Law or the
Magistrate, yea though they should require what he cannot do. His prayers are
as many for him, his good speeches as frequent of him, and his fidelity as
great toward him, as if he had never received any difficult law from him. He
translates those precepts out of OEconomicks into Politics, which are given us
Ephesians. 6.3. Col. 3.22. 1 Pet. 2.18. He bears meekly the will and suffers meekly
the anger of the Magistrate.

To what he may yield he is the forwarder if he cannot yield to every thing. He
is first most tender of provoking God, and next of provoking Gods Vicegerents.
It is the grief of his soul if he cannot come up to every thing the Magistrate
expects of him.

8. He is willing to be informed, and to hear what may be said. As he is tender
of doing any thing contrary to his judgment, so is he tender of judging
contrary to the truth. He is not self-willed, but will hear what may be said
against his way and his interest. Eli knew Samuel had a sharp message, yet says
he, God do so to thee, and more also if thou hide, etc. 1 Samuel 3.17

Gal. 2.13. And the other Jews dissembled likewise with him, in so much that
Barnabas also was carried away with their dissimulation
9. He is not apt to be censorious, he considers that a good man may fall by
temptation, and he rejoices not at the fall of his brother, Prove. 24.16. A just
man falls seven times a day, v. 17. rejoice not when thine enemy falls. He
scoffs not at, nor triumphs over his enemy much less his neighbor and friend
when he is down, but seeks his restoring, considering himself lest he also be
tempted, Gal. 6.1.

10. Conscientia tenera non est temeraria. In doubtful cases it will seek and
ask for information before it acts; though it is not scrupulous, it is wary,
considerate and watchful; Seek ye out of the books of the Lord and read. Isa.
34.16.
it takes counsel concerning the ways of God in Gods way, it goes to the Law
and to the Testimony, Isa. 8.20. and if it want understanding in that, is goes
to the Interpreter, Job 33.23. to the Priest, whose lips should preserve
knowledge, at whose mouth they should seek the Law: Mal. 2.7.
if He cannot satisfy, it inquires what the Church in her Synods and Councils
has universally determined; not building its faith on the Church, which is
built upon the faith it self, See for this Ecclesiast. 6.33. -- 36. and chapter
8.8, 9.
Mat. 16. but in doubtful cases choosing public interpretation before private,
and acquiescing therein, though not as a ground of faith, yet as the safest and
probable means of knowledge and instruction.

These are the adjuncts and properties of a true tender conscience.

But all this while what shall we say to a doubting conscience? Romans 4.23. He
that doubts is damned or judged if he eat, because whatsoever is not of faith
is sin.



religion and not about civil matters. So that if a man should doubt in civil
matters, this Text will give no sure footing for forbearance upon doubting; as
if a man should doubt whether he might lawfully undertake the office of a
Constable or Headborough, or whether he might pledge his friend when he drinks
to him, or in a thousand instances more.

i. e. does not so much value eating or forbearing meats or drinks, but
righteousness, peace, and joy in the Holy Ghost: the Apostle therefore making a
clear distinction, betwixt things uncertainly good and things absolutely good;
I say, those things that he has put asunder let no man join together, as if
they were the same matter of doubting.

and days which he distinguishes from manifest good, verse. 17.

Thou have despised my holy things, and have profaned my Sabbaths, Ezekiel. 22.8.
If therefore the thing be clearly good, as to receive the holy Supper, to join
in public prayer, to hear the holy Word read, interpreted and applied, though
the conscience should stick at these good things expressly commanded (which
surely must need be some strange fashioned exotic conscience) yet are we bound
to perform the aforenamed duties, or any other of the like nature.



Joh. 3.20. God is greater then our conscience. Conscience must not regulate
the Word of God, but that must regulate the conscience.

Nulla est obligatio ad illicita. Gods law obliges not to sin, therefore
conscience which is to be ruled by that, must not. Error is a sin, and how can
it bind? And if we are bound to lay down error of judgment, then also error
of conscience, both being part of the old man to be put off Ephesians. 4.22. as is
observed both by Amesius and Perkins.

reluctance, so that conscience in such cases if pleaded is but a fond and weak
pretense.

ordinances of God may lie unfrequented and disused, neglected and affronted,
Yea what mischiefs may not be acted upon pretext of conscience? One neighbor
may plunder, pillage, yea, So it was here at home, of which times I might truly
say as Synes. him. 1. (...), But blessed be God, I may say what he adds, (...).
and murder another upon this pretext; Servants may make away their Masters
goods and them too; Children may butcher their Parents, and which is more,
Subjects their King; what Et quando uberior vitiorum copia? Juvenal Satyr. 1.
villainies and outrages were they that were not committed of later years upon
pretense of conscience and reformation? and upon those tragical actings how
well did the words of the Poet agree to us?

-- Quod mare nam Anglicae, Hor. lib. 2. od. 1.

Non decoloravere caedes?
Quae caret Ora cruore nostro?
Res alioqui per se mediae mutant quodammodo naturam, quum aliquo legitimo
mandato vel praecipiuntur, vel prohibentur -- Beza epist. 24. ad fratres
peregrinarum ecclesiarum in Anglia.
though we know not the good or the end of the ordinance, the conscience is
bound to yield to it; otherwise we take away from the Magistrate the power of
making laws and ordinances, and give him only a power to confirm them that are
made already in Scripture contrary to 1 Pet. 2.13.

If the Magistrate make a law about meats, Etsi conscientias propri^ solus Deus
ligat: tamen quatenus vel magstratus qui Dei minister est judicat ^nt^resse
reipublicae, ut quippiam alio qui pro se licitum non fiat: vel Ecclesia ord^nis
and decori adeoque aedificationis rationem habens, leges aliquas de rebus
mediis rite condit, illae leges a pijs omnino sunt observanda. Beza ibid.
which are in themselves and so acknowledged by him to be but indifferent, let
it be out of civil ends for the good of the commonwealth, or out of religious
ends, viz. charitably and christianly to comply with the ancient Churches of
Christ, however a subject may plead matter of health or want, yet the plea of
conscience in this case is unwarrantable and ridiculous.

1 Cor. 8.8.
and no obligation from the Governor lies upon me, Leges Magistratus, eatenus
conscientias ligant ut nemo sciens and prudens rebellandi animo, possit absque
ptccato vel facere quae ita prohibentur, vel omittere quae fic praecipiuutur.
Beza ibid.
I am then left to follow the light of mine own conscience, and to take care I
do nothing against mine own persuasion, for of such things are the Apostles
instances, and not of things commanded by God or man, or forbidden.

1 Cor. 10.29. Nulla ratione committere debeo, nec occasionem dare ut alius
erroneam and infirmam habens conscientiam, Iudicet, i. e. damnet libertatem
meam qua possum indifferenter quidvis ^eder^ Estius in locum.
1. Not judge or despise him that is not just of my persuasion, Romans 14.3. 2.
Not lay a stumbling block in our brothers way, verse. 13. Nor to give him
occasion to think ill of me. 3. Not to grieve or afflict our brother with our
liberty, verse. 25.4. Not to occasion any brangling or disputing, but rather to
forbear that, how lawful soever that may occasion it, v. 19. Let us therefore
follow after the things which make for peace, and things wherewith we may
edify one another, Gal. 5.13. For brethren ye have been called unto liberty,
only use not your liberty for an occasion to the flesh, but by love serve one
another.

Domine Deus, da nob^s celeriter audire, frequenter legere, diligenter
attendere, recte intelligere, tuto agere, been and inculpate vivere, per Jesum
Christum Dominum and salvatorem nostrum. Amen.
FINIS.

