THE Second Adam; BEING The Second Part, or Branch of the Comparison between
the first, and the second Adam, in these Words, So by the Obedience of One,
shall many be made Righteous.

By Thomas Bradley Doctor of Divinity, Chaplain to His late Majesty King
CHARLES the First, and Praebend of York.

And there Preached at Lent Assizes holden there, 1667/8. Oxon. Exon.

YORK, Printed by Stephen Bulkley, and are to be sold by Richard Lambert, 1668.

Imprimatur,

Joh. Garth wait, Reverendissimo in Christo Patri, ac Dom. Dom. Richardo
Archiepis. Eboracensi, a Sacris Domesticis.
Datum Episcopo-Thorpae, Jun, 11.1668.
Romans 5.19. So by the obedience of one, shall many be made righteous.
IN opening of which words, we will observe the same Method which we did in our
Discourse upon the former, in these four particulars. By considering first,
Who was this One?

Secondly, What was this his obedience?

Thirdly, How the benefit of it comes to be communicated to so many?

Fourthly, What Righteousness that is which they gain by it?

These four particulars clearly offer themselves to our consideration upon the
first view of the Text: and so, they are an apt Reddition to the four
particulars we considered in the first Adam, in the former branch of the
comparison between them.

To the first then, Who was this One? What, Has he no Name? Yes, The Prophet.
Isay tells you his Name, Isa. 9.6. His Name shall be called wonderful,
Counselor, the mighty God, the everlasting Father, the Prince of Peace, etc.
Yea, he had a Name assigned him by the Father before he was borne, Math. 1.21.
His Name shall be called Jesus: For though he was borne in time, in the
appointed time, in the fullness of time, Gal. 4.4. yet he had a being before
all time; His goings out were from the beginning, and from everlasting, Micha
5.2. Jacobs Shiloh, Balaams Starr, Daniels Messiah, David's Branch, out of the
Root of Jesse they all meet in this One: All along throughout the whole
Scripture from end to end: There is a Vein, a Master Vein, wherein his blood
does run, and whereby he was made known to the Church in all the Ages and
Generations of the World; in the Promises, and Prophesies, Types, and Figures,
Sacraments, and Sacrifices, until he came himself in Person to fulfill them
all, and by his holy Birth, Life, and Death, Resurrection and Ascension, to
make them good, and to purchase unto us the righteousness in the Text
mentioned. This is that One in the Text; in this One do all these things meet,
and concenter: The Apostle both frugally, and prudently set him forth unto us
in this short expression of one word, one syllable, and that an indefinite too,
for two reasons, he had a double reach in it.

First, To put us upon a farther inquiry after him, that so we might come to be
better acquainted with him, and to know him more distinctly in his Person, in
his Natures, in his Offices, in his Works, in his Miracles, and in the fruits
and benefits of them all, as they are sparsedly set forth in the holy
Scriptures: Search the Scriptures, for in them you think to have eternal
life, and they are they which testify of me, says himself of himself, John
5.39.

Secondly, To teach us the singleness, the singularity, the Oneness (if you
will) of this our Mediator; he is One and he is but One, he is alone, there is
not another with him, he has no partner in this great undertaking.

And this Oneness in order to this great atchieument consists principally in
these three things, he is One in these three respects.

First, In respect of his Filiation.

Secondly, In respect of the Union of the two Natures, the Divine, and the
Humane, in his One Person.

Thirdly, In respect of the performance of this great work of the Mediatorship.
In all these respects he is One, and he is alone.

First, In respect of his Filiation; he is the only begotten Son of the
Father: God has many Sons indeed; Angels are his Sons, Job 1. they are his
Sons by Creation: The Saints are his Sons too, they are his Sons by Grace, by
the Grace of Adoption. But this One in our Text, is a Son after a more
peculiar manner; he is his Son by eternal Generation; His only begotten
Son, so St. John 1.14. The Word was made Flesh, and dwelt amongst us, and we
saw his glory, as the glory of the only begotten Son of God, full of grace
and truth: So we profess in the Apostolical Creed, and confess, To believe in
Jesus Christ the only begotten Son of God: so in John 3.16. In all which
places, this addition, of the only begotten Son, is not vain, it is full of
emphasis, and does exceedingly magnify the transcendent love of the Father to
the lost Sons of Adam, that for the restoring of them, would part with his own
Son, his only Son, and give him up to such hard conditions as he did, for
their recovery. No marvel, if the Evangelist reporting this, set it forth
with a Note of admiration, John 3.16. God so loved the World, that he gave his
only begotten Son, to the end that whosoever believes in him should not
perish, but have life everlasting. Those four circumstances in it, of Tantus,
Tantillos, Tales, and Tanti, that so great a Majesty should look upon such
inconsiderable creatures, and those so grievous sinners, enemies, and
disobedient to do so much for them, raisses his love and goodness to that
height, that is beyond the comprehension of Men, or Angels. When God, for the
trial of Abraham's Faith, laid so hard a Task upon him, as to command him to
offer up his only Son in sacrifice to him, and saw he was so ready to obey
him, as to build the Altar, to bind his Son to the Wood upon it, and to
stretch forth his hand to kill him, he stays his hand, It is enough (says he)
hold thy hand, for now I know that thou love me, seeing thou were willing to
offer up thy only Son in Sacrifice in obedience to my Word. If that were a
sufficient evidence of Abraham's love to God? upon how much stronger evidence
may we conclude the love of God to the lost Sons of Adam, which did not only
offer to offer up, but offered up indeed his One, and only begotten Son a
Sacrifice for their ransom?

Secondly, This Oneness respects the Unity of his Person, consisting of two
Natures, the Divine, and the Humane, yet both by hypostaticall union so united,
as that they make up but one Christ, one Person, (...), God Man, to be a fit
Mediator between God and Man, and all this was necessary in all the particulars
of it. First, That he should be God. Secondly, That he should be Man. And
thirdly, That both these should be so united, as to become One. It was
necessary that he should be Man, that so he might punctually satisfy Divine
Justice, answering for sin in that Nature that had committed it. And it was
necessary he should be God, that by the Dignity of his Person, he might add
value to his sufferings, and obedience, to make them satisfactory for the sins
of the whole World. It was necessary that he should be Man, that he might have
what to offer up to God in sacrifice for us, a body capable of death and
sufferings, with blood to shed, without which there is no Redemption; and the
Godhead is impateible: Therefore says he in Psalm. 40.6. A body have thou
prepared me, Heb. ^0.5. And it was necessary that he should be God, that so by
the Power of his Deity, he might sustain the Humanity, under the great burden
of his Fathers wrath, and death the consequence of it, and by his own Power
rescue himself by a Glorious Resurrection, and a Triumphant Conquest over all
the powers of darkness. It was necessary that he should be Man, that so he
might be a compassionate High Priest, sensible of our miseries, and
infirmities, and so become a more earnest Advocate and Mediator for Man. And it
was necessary that he should be God, that so he might be fit to mediate with
God for us: If one Man sin against another, the Advocate shall plead for him:
But if a Man sin against God, who shall plead for him? Who, but One, that is
God, like unto him? Therefore it was necessary that he should be both, both God
and Man, and both in One: Neither as mere Man, so compassionating the decayed
Estate of the lost Sons of Adam, as to neglect the Honor of the Deity wronged
and offended; nor as mere God, so tendering the Honor of the Deity injuried
and offended, as to neglect the deplorable Estate of Man kind lost, and
undone; but as One that was both, that did partake of both, was near and dear
to both, and both to him, he might lay an indifferent hand upon both, and so
become between them, an equal and indifferent Mediator. In this Union we have
that great Mystery of godliness so much magnified by S. Paul, 1 Timothy 3.16. Of
God manifested in the Flesh; that stupendous Mystery, which the Angels
themselves do with so great admiration and astonishment pry into, Of God in
Christ, reconciling the World unto himself, 2 Cor. 5.19. In this Union of the
Divine and Humane Nature of the Mediator thus met together in this One Person,
was that great Marriage made up in Heaven, the Banes whereof were so long
before Published on Earth by the Royal Prophet David, Psalm. 85.10. Mercy and
Truth are met together: Righteousness and Peace have kissed each other. In this
Union did Isaiahs Twinns meet, the Child, and the Son; Isa. 9.6. Unto us a
Child is borne, unto us a Son is given: The Child was borne; but the Son
was given; the Child without a Father, the Son without a Mother; both in
One, and both but One, this One in the Text, (...), the God Man, or Man God,
Jesus Christ.

Thirdly, He is here styled One, in respect of the great Work he was to
perform in the great Office of the Mediatorship, to make peace between God and
Man, to make an atonement, that is, to set them at One, which were before at
such a distance one from another, in which work he was alone, he had no
partners to assist him. There is but One Mediator between God and Man, the Man
Christ Jesus. It Is true, Moses was a Mediator, when he stood in the gap between
the living and the dead, to turn away wrath when it was gone forth, and the
Plague was begun, Exodus 32. So are all the Saints and faithful servants of the
Lord, favorites of Heaven, which use the interest they have in God, for the
good of the World, to intercede for them, to appease his wrath, and to
deprecate the evils which God threatens to bring upon them for sin, and for
transgression, for whose sakes and Prayers, God is often prevailed with, to
divert, or to suspend, or to mitigate the Judgments which their sins have
called for; but these are Mediators of Intercession, not of Redemption: Of it
the Prophet tells us, Psalm. 49.7. No man can deliver his brother, nor pay a
Ransom to God for him. Nor amongst the Angels is there found a Mediator;
Alas! they stood in need of a Mediator, as well as we, but found none: For he
took not upon him the nature of Angels: but he took upon him the seed of
Abraham, Heb. 2.16. yea, even the good Angels stood in need of a Mediator,
though not to recover them out of a lost estate, yet to establish them in that
estate wherein they stand. No, nor among the sacred Trinity is there found a
Mediator besides him: For although it be true, Omnia opera Trinitatis ad extra
sunt indivisa, as the Schools speak; and in the continuance of this great
Gospel design, the wisdom of the whole Trinity was set on work, and every
person in it did contribute to the laying of the plot: yet when it came to
execution, by Divine dispensation, it fell to the Sons share to execute it,
to transact it, and in his Person to undertake, and go through with it. Of this
the Prophet puts us in mind, or rather the Lord himself by the Prophet, Isa.
63. I have trodden the Wine press alone, and of the people there was none to
help me, ver. 3. and again, ver. 5. And I looked, and there was none to help:
and I wondered that there was none to uphold: therefore mine own arm helped me,
and my wrath sustained me. This is again remembered by St. John in the fifth of
the Revelations, under the notion of receiving, and opening a book with seven
Seals: First exclusively, verse 3. None was found that could open it but he.
Secondly inclusively, ver. 5.6.7. Where he takes the Book, loses the Seals,
and opens it, to the great joy and jubily of the Church, both Militant, and
Triumphant: This the Church Triumphant presently testifies, by breaking forth
into his praise, in that their new Song, ver. 9. and by their Angelical
Doxology, verses 11. and 12. Worthy is the Lamb that was killed, to receive
power, and riches, and wisdom, and honor, and glory, and praise. And the
Church Militant join with them, ver. 13. Praise, and honor, and glory, and
power, be unto him that sits upon the Throne, and unto the Lamb for
evermore. And let all those that look for benefit by his Mediatorship, say
Amen; and join with this Angelical Choyre in their Heavenly Hallelujahs, and
say, Glory be to God on high, for this Peace on Earth purchased by the
Mediator, and for the good will showed to the Sons of Men.

2. And so we have done with this One in the Text, the Person by which our
deliverance is wrought: We now come to consider of the way and means by which
he has wrought it; and the Text tells us, it was by Obedience, So by the
Obedience of One.

But was this the only way for the Mediator to work deliverance for the Sonns
of Adam? Or was it suitable to the state of so great a Person, of whom so
glorious things are spoken, to submit himself to suffering, and Obedience? Had
he come down in State and Majesty, with Power and great Glory, Riding upon the
wings of the wind, attended with Legions of Angels and Archangels, in flaming
fire rendering vengeance to his enemies; treading upon the necks of Kings and
Kesars; by strong hand vanquishing the powers of darkness, and bearing down
before him all opposite Power that did advance it self against his Kingdom;
this had been an equipage well becoming the Prince of Glory, the King of
Kings, and Lord of Lords? But for such a Person so far to lessen himself, as
to de-throne himself, to strip himself of all those Robes of Majesty and
Glory, which he enjoyed at the right hand of the Father, and to take upon
himself the form of a servant, of an Infant, and to come down from God to
Man, from commanding Angels, to submit to the commands of vile sinners, and
from thundering in Heaven, to cry in a Cradle, was such a condescension, as may
well afford matter of admiration and assonishment to Men and Angels. Yet so it
was, and so it must be, or we had been all Children without Adoption, Gal.
4.4.5. It was the disobedience of the first Adam, and ours in him, that he came
to answer for: And what better way to answer for disobedience, then by
obedience? every evil is best expelled by 'its contrary: Will the first Adam
in the pride of his heart aspire to the very Zenith of Dignity, the Apex of
Majesty, and being but a man, will needs be like unto God? The second Adam to
expiate this sin, must come down to the very Nadir of humility, and being God
must become Man, that so he might make a recompense unto God for that his
inordinate ambition, and so make his peace. Did the first Adam offend by
Eating? By Fasting must the second Adam expiate that his intemperance, Matthew.
4. Did the first Adam abuse his liberty and privileges in Paradise? The second
Adam must make amends for it, by his Heremiticall hardship in the Wilderness.
Did the first Adam so pusillanimously betray himself, and his, by yielding to
the suggestions and temptations of the Devil? The second Adam to repair that
loss and dishonor, must encounter the Devil, and in fair cumbating vanquish
him again and again, and so fully revenge the quarrel of the first, Matthew. 4.
Did the first Adam offend by disobedience? By obedience must the second Adam
satisfy for it, and so he did; for so says the Text, By the Obedience of One.

There are two things in this great transaction well worth our Observation.
First, How the second Adam has trac't the first all along step by step; and
where ever he found the first Adam had endamag'd us, there does he make a
stand, and not pass by till he has repaired us: As Ezekiel. 16.6. As I passed by
thee, I saw thee in thy blood, etc. The second, How in this reparation, he
provides for us all along a remedy suitable to our malady, a salve proper for
the cure of the sore, a satisfaction punctually answering the Justice of God
for that sin, by which we had offended it, as in the passages above in timated:
See it farther more clearly and distinctly in this his obedience.

There are three branches of this his obedience, by which he has set us free,
and wrought out righteousness for us. First, The Obedience of his Birth.
Secondly, The Obedience of his Life. Thirdly, The Obedience of his Death.
First, the Obedience of his Birth, in his holy Conception and Incarnation.
Secondly, The Obedience of his Life, in his holy and unblameable Conversation.
Thirdly, The Obedience of his Death, in his bitter Passion and Crucifixion; and
these were all necessary, none of these three could have been spared: For three
ways we stood obnoxious unto Divine Justice.

First, For our Original sin, the sin of our Nature, wherein we were conceived
and borne.

Secondly, For all our sins of Omission; and particularly, for failing in
performing the condition of the Covenant of Works, and of obeying the
Commandment given in Paradise, in the mandatory part of it, upon which, Life,
and Salvation was made over to us, in these words, Do this, and thou shall
live.

Thirdly, For all our sins of Commission, and particularly, for breaking his
Commandment given in Paradise, in the minatory part of it; which said, In the
day that thou Eats thereof, thou shall dye the Death. In all these three
respects, we were obnoxious to Divine Justice; We lay under Wrath, and under a
sentence of eternal Death; and from all these three, by these three parts of
this his Obedience, are we set free. First, By this Obedience, and Merit, of
his holy Conception and Incarnation, are we delivered from our Birth-sinne,
wherein we are conceived and borne; the holiness of his Humane Nature
conceived, and borne without sin, being imputed unto us, that so by it, the
impurity of ours, conceived and borne in sin, may be cured, and healed, and
done away.

Secondly, By his Active Obedience in his most holy Life, which he led here on
Earth, in the days of his flesh, perfectly fulfilling the Law for us, has he
delivered us from all our sins of Omission, which was the second way, by which
we stood in danger of Divine Justice: For thus speaks the Law, Cursed is every
one that continues not in every thing that is Written in the Book of the Law
to do it: This had we made impossible to be done by us; but done it must be
for us, or we all undone. And this is done in the Active Obedience of this our
Mediator, and for this purpose was it, that he stayed so long upon Earth, among
the Sons of Men; He dwelt among us, as St. John speaks, John 1.14. full three
and thirty years; some say more, near fifty, grounding their conjecture upon
those words of the Jews, spoken to him, John 8.57. Thou art not yet fifty years
old, and have thou seen Abraham? But thirty we are sure he was, when he entered
upon his Ministry, what time ever he continued afterward; and this was
necessary, that he might have a competent time to fulfill the Law, in all the
parts and branches of it; and so, by performing the condition of the Covenant
of Works for us, to restore us again to our right, to the Kingdom of Heaven,
made over to us upon that condition.

Thirdly, By his Passive Obedience has he freed us from all our sins of
Commission, answering the Law in the minatory part of it, which said, The soul
that sins shall dye: And, In the day that thou eatest, shall thou dye the
death. By suffering death, he has taken off that sentence of death, that was
gone out against us; and by becoming a curse for us, has taken off that curse
that was upon us. And thus has the Lord laid upon him the iniquities of us
all, thus has he borne our iniquities. By these three parts of his obedience,
has he answered for our disobedience, and set us free from the danger of
Divine Justice, in all those three ways in which we stand obnoxious to it,
though it cost him dear.

By his Original Righteousness, he has freed us from our Original sin: By
his Active Obedience, from all our sins of Omission: By his Passive Obedience,
from all our sins of Commission. By his Active Obedience, he has freed us, a
poena damni, from the punishment of loss. By his Passive, a poena sensus, from
the punishment of pain. By his Passive Obedience, he has rescued us out of
the jaws of Hell: And by his Active Obedience, he has opened unto us the Gates
of Heaven. This Active Obedience was satisfactory: And his Passive meritorious.
And thus you see how he is become unto us a perfect Savior, and has by these
three parts of his obedience, wrought out for us plentiful redemption. Had any
of these three been wanting, he had not wrought out for us plentiful
redemption. Had our Mediator only dyed for us, been crucified, dead, and
buried, he had not wrought out for us plentiful redemption; he had only
satisfied the Law in the minatory part of it, and by this his Passive
Obedience, so taken off the sentence of death, that lay upon us; but he had not
thereby restored us unto life, nor to our right, and title to our forfeited
Inheritance, he had still left us obnoxious to divine Justice, for the breach
of the Commandment in the mandatory part of it; which said, Fac hoc, and
vives: do this, and thou shall live. Had the Mediator by his Active Obedience
satisfied the Law, and fulfilled it in the mandatory part of it; and so by his
holy Life, fulfilled, and performed the condition of the Covenant of Works for
us; yet he had not wrought out for us plentiful redemption, he had still left
us open to the Justice of God, for the sin of our Nature, our Original sin,
wherein we are conceived, and borne. But that he might work out for us
plentiful redemption, it was not enough for him, nor for us, that he should be
made a Man, as the first Adam was by Creation; but he must become a Child, an
Infant, conceived in the Womb, and borne into the World, after the same manner
as other Children are (sin only excepted) that so he might begin the Cure of
our Disease, where the Disease it self begins in the very Womb, and that by
the purity, and merit of his holy Conception and Incarnation, imputed unto us,
the impurity of our Nature may be healed, and our Infants sanctified, and
purified in the Womb, and from the Womb, by the virtue and merit of the
Conception, and Incarnation of the holy Child Jesus: And therefore we do with
as much comfort confess and believe, That he was Conceived by the holy Ghost,
and borne of the Virgin Mary: as, That he suffered for us under Pontius Pilate,
was crucified, dead, and buried. They that lay all the stresse of our
redemption, upon the death, and blood of Christ, do not fully deliver the
Doctrine of our redemption, they overlook the greatest part of it, in the
Active Obedience of his Life, and the Obedience of his Birth and Incarnation.
They that lay it wholly upon his Active and Passive Obedience, do not yet
deliver the Doctrine of our Redemption fully, they overlook an essential part
of it, in the Obedience of his Conception, and Incarnation. But the Apostle
does not overlook it, Phil 2. when he says, That being in the form of God,
and thinking it no robbery to be equal with God: He took upon himself the
form of a man, of a servant, of a child, of an Infant, which was in his
Incarnation. And the Church does not over look it, when it celebrates the
praise of it with Admiration, in these words (of her despised Liturgy,) When
thou tookest upon thee to deliver Man, thou did not abhor the Virgins
Womb. There did the work of our Redemption begin, which was prosecuted all
along, throughout his whole life, his death, burial, and resurrection: out of
which, for a believer to draw out of all the parts, and passages of it that
comfort that they do afford, and to apply them to those several wants and
maladies of his soul, for the supply and cure whereof they are most proper, is
a point of high wisdom, and gives unto the foul strong consolation, and full
satisfaction. It is something to know Christ Crucified in gross, That Jesus
Christ came into the World to save sinners: This gives the Faith of adherence.
But to know Christ more distinctly, in his Person, his Natures, his Offices,
and the executions of them, in all the parts of the precious Redemption he has
wrought out for us, and take out that merit and virtue, which they do afford,
and rightly to apply it to the several wants of our souls, for the relief
whereof they are most proper; is much more comfortable, and speaks the Faith of
assurance, when we are able to Read in his Original Righteousness, the
discharge of our Original sin; in his Incarnation, the purification of our
Natures; in his birth, our new birth; in his Active Obedience, satisfaction for
all our sins of Omission; in his Passive Obedience, a satisfaction for all our
sins of Commission; in his stripes, our healing; in his condemnation, our
absolution; in his death, our life; in his burial, our mortification; in his
Resurrection, and Ascension, our Resurrection, and Glorification. In the 2
Kings 4.32. we read, how Elisha going to revive the Shunamites Son, went
into the Chamber where he lay, and there cast himself upon the Child, and laid
his face to the child's face, and his eyes to the child's eyes, and his hands to
the child's hands, and so applied himself unto the Child, part by part; and
after a little space, the Child neesed seven times, and revived: So if we can
by Faith, thus distinctly apply our selves unto this holy Child Jesus, and him
to us, in all the branches of this his Obedience, by which he has wrought out
deliverance for us; not the Child, but we, which before were dead in sins and
trespasses, by virtue and grace derived from him, shall revive and live, the
life of grace here, and of glory hereafter with him in Heaven for overmore.

And so we have done with the second branch in the Reddition, to the first part
of the comparison between the two Adams, showing the means, by which he has
satisfied for the disobedience of the first Adam; That was, By Obedience. We
now come to the third, wherein we are to consider, The Persons that are
benefited by it, and the Text says, They are many. So by the Obedience of One,
shall many be made Righteous.

And here do arise three Questions.

First, How the obedience of one, can satisfy for the disobedience of another?
What Justice there is in this? Or how it can stand good in Law?

Secondly, If it do so? yet how the obedience of one, should stand good, to
answer for the disobedience of so many?

And thirdly, How man they are, that are to be benefited by it?

To the first, I answer, The obedience, and righteousness of one, may stand
good for another, where these three things concur; or in these three cases.

First, With the consent of all persons concerned, where all parties concerned
are agreed. Secondly, Where there is such a Union between the one and the
other, that what is done to, or for, or by the one, is done by the other also.
Thirdly, Where there is a proportion between the offense of the one, and the
satisfaction of the other.
For the first, There are but thee Persons concerned, The Father, the Son,
and Adam, with his Progeny. That the Father is agreed, it is clear, John 3.16.
He gave his Son. Gal. 4.4. He sent his Son. That the Son is agreed, is as
clear, John 10.15. I lay down my life for my sheep. And again, ver. 18. more
fully, No man takes it from me, I lay it down of my self. And that Adam, and
his Sons are agreed, is beyond all question, whose case it is, and who only
receive the benefit of it. And thus it is good even in Law, That the obedience
of one, may stand good for another, upon this first consideration; and if it
were not good in Law, it is good in Gospel.

The second consideration upon which it is good, is this, If there be such a
neerness, and union between him that performs this obedience, and those for
whom it is performed, that what is done by him, may be reputed as done by
themselves. We read of a King of the Locrenses, which made a Law, That
whosoever of his Subjects was found guilty of Adultery, should have both his
eyes put out. It so fell out, that the first that was deprehended in that
crime, was his own Son; it was grievous to him that his Son should lose
both his Eyes; and as grievous, that he should not execute Justice upon the
transgression of his own Law: For mitigating between both, he put out one of
his Sons Eyes, and one of his own; and this was accounted good Justice; and is
the very case in the Text; only with this difference, That he took upon
himself but half the punishment; our Mediator took it all, and wholly to
himself, to set us free; and Christ, and we, are one. Lord have mercy upon me,
(says the Canaanitish Woman, Matthew. 15.22.) my Daughter is grievously vexed
with a Devil; implying, That the mercy which was showed unto her Daughter, was
showed unto her self, her Daughter, and she, were one: Such is the Union
between Christ, and those that are Christ's; so near, that it amounts rather to
an Identity, then an Union. If Saul be travailing to Damascus, to persecute the
Members; the Head looks down from Heaven, and complains, Saul, Saul, why
persecuteth thou me? Acts 9.4. As the Husband with the Wife, the Branches with
the Vine, the Members with the Body, are one; even so is Christ, with all that
belong unto him: Take it in the Apostles words, 1 Cor. 12.12. As the Body is
one, and has many Members, and all the Members of the Body, which is one,
though they be many, yet are but one body: even so is Christ. Where note, That
the word Christ here, is not personally to be understood, as representing the
Person of Christ; but it is, Nomen collectivum, a collective name, and takes in
to it, together with Christ, all the Saints, all believers, the whole Church of
Christ under Christ their Head; all which together with him, make up but one
body, one Christ, unto whom he vouchsafes his own name, together with himself,
even so is Christ.

And there are three ties, by which this Union is made up, and they are brought
so near together. First, By the bond of Faith. Secondly, By the bond of the
Spirit. Thirdly, By the bond of Love. By these three bonds, are they united
together, as by a threefold cord, not easily broken. First, By Faith we ascend
up to Heaven, and lay hold on Christ. Secondly, By the Spirit, Christ descends
from Heaven to Earth, and lays hold on us. And thirdly, By Love, we meet, as
it were, between Heaven and Earth, and there close with mutual embraces.
Christ in his Incarnation took our Nature upon him, and so was made partaker of
the Humane Nature. Then he renews us by his Grace, and so in our Regeneration,
we are made partakers of the Divine Nature, 2 Pet. 1.4. And that is another way,
by which this Union is made up, and we are brought so near. And this is a
Doctrine full of Grace and Truth, and worthy by all means to be received. For
from this Union, there flows a Communion between Christ, and his; our sins are
laid upon him, and he has satisfied for them; his righteousness is laid upon
us, and we are justified by it, being thus united unto him, and he to us; we
draw Virtue from him, as the branches do from the root, and Influence, as the
Members do from the Head, whereby we are able to live that life, that is
according to godliness, and walk in some conformity to him. By virtue of this
Union, we derive Grace from him: Out of his fullness we all receive, and Grace
for Grace, 1 John 16. By virtue of this Union, Christ is ours, and with him all
his merit, righteousness, and obedience, as in the Text; And so, By the
obedience of One, are many made righteous.

Thirdly, It is not unreasonable, That the odedience of one, should benefit
another; if the disobedience of one, may prejudice another: but we see, the
disobedience of the first Adam, did prejudice others: It is therefore but
equitable, That the obedience of the second Adam should benefit others,
depending upon him: Alter in semine, alter in sanguine: and as the one by his
seed brought in death; so the other by his blood, might restore to life; that
the blood of the second Adam, should be as sovereign to salve, and to save, as
the seed of the first was to wound, and to destroy: And let this suffice for
satisfying the first Query.

2 But the second enquires furrher; How the obedience of one, should answer for
the disobedience of so many? How so many should be justified, and made
righteous by the obedience of this One? And that is answered in these two
reasons. The first drawn from the Dignity of the Person obeying, which was of
that high excellency, that it made his obedience, and suffering of that value,
that was sufficient for the satisfyings of the sins, and ransoming of the
souls of the whole world; the obedience which he performed, was the obedience
of that Person which was God, as well as Man, and thought it no robbery to be
equal with God: That blood which was shed for us, was the blood of that
Person, which was God, as well as Man: Of this Circumstance, St. Peter puts us
in mind, 1 Pet. 1.18. Knowing that you were not Redeemed with corruptible
things, us silver and gold: but with the precious blood of Christ, as of a
Lamb unspotted, and undefiled. To which, if you add, the strangeness of his
obedience, humiliation, and sufferings, with the freeness of them, He became
obedient, Phil. 2.8. obedient unto death, even the death of the Cross. In his
Incarnation, He did not abhor the Virgins Womb. In his Crucifixion, He was
in the form of a servant for our sakes; yea, of a Malefactor: He was numbered
among transgressors: He was wounded for our transgressions: The chastisement of
our peace lay upon him, that by his stripes, we might be healed. All these
circumstances add still to the price, and value of his sufferings, and
obedience, to make it infinitely satisfactory, and meritorious, for the
remission of the sins, and the ransomeing of the souls, of the whole World. The
second Reason is drawn from the consideration of the capacity in which the
Mediator stood, when he performed this obedience, and wrought out righteousness
for us: In this great transaction, he stood not as a single Person, but as a
representative; he acted not for himself, but for all believers, for the whole
body of the Church, whereof he is the Head. Remember the Title of this
Treatise, wherein he is styled, The Stock, and Root of all his Race, the Head
of his body, the Church, from which part every branch, every member deriveth,
and receives grace, virtue, strength, and influence, righteousness and life,
there being abundantly sufficient for all, and in whom, and with whom,
whatsoever he does, and suffers for them, in this capacity, they do it, and
suffer it also. Hence are those frequent expressions in the Scripture, wherein,
we are said to be in him, and he in us, John 10. We are elected in him, Ephesians.
1.4. Adopted in him, ver. 5. Circumcised in him, Col. 2.12. Suffer with him,
Romans 8.17. Buried with him, Col. 2.13. Risen with him, Col. 3.1. Complete in
him, Col. 2.10. Suffer with him, Col. 1.24. Yea, Crucified with him, Gal. 2.20.
When Christ did, and suffered those things as Mediator for us; we did, and
suffered them in him, and so the obedience is imputed unto us, as ours, and is
ours, Quo ad usum, and fructum, as to the use, and fruit of it, as well as if
all had been done and suffered in our own persons, and better too. And thus you
see, how it may stand with Reason and Justice, That one may be Justified, by
the obedience of another, and, By the obedience of One, many made righteous.

3. And this brings in the third Query, How many there may be?

Ans. Even as many as believe in his name, John 3.16. As many as do receive
him upon Gospel terms, John 1. As many as come in unto him, that they may have
life: The offer of grace is made to all, without exception, though to none
without condition; Ho, every one that thirsts, let him come, Isa. 55.1. God
is no acceptor of persons: but in every Nation, he that fears God, and
works righteousness, is accepted of him, Acts 10.34. God would have all Men
to be saved, and to come to the knowledge of the truth, 1 Timothy 2.4. He is the
Savior of all, especially of them that believe, 1 Timothy 4.10. Thus generally
the Promises run, in universal terms, that no man should despair; yet
generally with some intimation too, of some duty on our parts, that no man may
presume. You may expect here, that I should fall upon the point of Universal
Redemption; but I shall forbear it in this place, especially having Treated
more largely upon that Subject, in a Discourse upon it out of Isa. 9.6. and
Printed at Oxford in 1650. unto which I refer. In the interim, thus much I
will here declare of my Judgment in this matter, That I am persuaded, that
when the second Adam took our Nature upon him, and in it, wrought our
righteousness for us, there was no Son of the first Adam but he did something
for him, so much, as that he shall never perish eternally, in the lake of
everlasting burnings, unless he forfeit his salvation a second time. What think
you of that of St. Peter? 2 Pet. 2.1. There shall be false teachers among you,
which shall bring in damnable Heresies, even denying the Lord that bought them,
and so bring upon themselves swift damnation. There are false Teachers that
bring in Heresies, damnable Heresies, that brings upon themselves damnation,
swift damnation; and yet the Text says, even of these, That the Lord had
bought them. How could this be? but that they sold themselves again, and
forfeited their salvation a second time; and therefore are truly said, To
bring upon themselves damnation. These are they of which the Apostle says,
They are twice dead, plucked up by the roots, Jude 12. once in the first Adam,
and now in the second too, and so plucked up by the roots, never to grow again.
Again, we are to be advertised, That though the second Adam then did something
for all, and all Nations; yet he did not do for all alike. What is the meaning
of that Parable in the Gospel, of the Kings taking a far Journey, and
committing his Talents in trust to his servants, or Factors, delivered them to
them, in such a different proportion, To one, but one Talent; to another two;
to another five? Who is he that has the one Talent, but the Heathen, which
has nothing to traffic withal, but the Law, and light of Nature? Who is he
that has the two Talents, but the Jew, which besides it, has the Law of
Moses? And who is he, that has the five Talents, but the Christian, which to
both those, has the Law of Grace, the glorious Gospel of Jesus Christ? It
cannot be imagined, that the Kings returning to take their Accounts, will
require an equal account of them all, but according to their Receipts. To whom
much is given, of him much shall be required: and to whom less is given, of him
less shall be required. God is a merciful Creditor, and will require according
to what a man has, and not according to what he has not.

3. Again, We are to be informed, That there are degrees of salvation, and of
damnation too, though all are concluded under two names, of Heaven and Hell, of
salvation and damnation; yet in both these, there are infinite degrees, and
different proportions: There is one glory of the Sun, another of the Moon,
and another glory of the Stars; for one Starr differs from another in glory,
1 Cor. 15. And in respect of punishment, There are, that shall be beaten with
fewer stripes; and there are that shall be beaten with more stripes. And
although the highest degree of Gospel-Salvation, be but the portion of a few,
as our Savior tells us, in comparison of those that perish; yet there are many
more, that attain to some degrees of salvation, both in respect of the evil
they are delivered from, and of the happiness they are translated too, which
coms far short of the highest degree of happiness, in the Kingdom of Heaven.
And although our blessed Lord, which best knew it, tells us, That the way that
leads to life is narrow, and the gate straight, and so, few they be that find
it: yet himself there declares himself, that he spoke it comparatively; in
comparison of the wide gate, and broad way, that leads to destruction, and of
the multitude of passengers that travail thither in it: but otherwise, if they
be considered in themselves, they are so many, as it is beyond all Arithmetic
to number them. The Evangelicall Prophet Isay, speaking of the calling of the
Gentiles, sees as in a Vision, the multitudes of the Nations, from all
quarters, making in to the standard of Christ, and thronging in to Mount Sion,
the emblem of the Church, with great zeal and earnestness, Isa. 60. Who are
these that come as a cloud, and as doves to the windows of the Sanctuary? v. 8.
The multitude of the Sea shall be converted, ver. 5. He resembles the
multitude of the converts to the Sea, to Clouds, to flocks of Sheep, to
Caravans of Camels, etc. from Midian, from Kedar, from Nebaioth, from Arabia,
from Sheba, from all quarters, coming in to Christ. And suitable to this
Vision of the Prophet, is that Doxology of the Church Triumphant, which they
Sing in the honor of Christ, and giving glory to him, in Rev. 5.9. Thou art
worthy to take the Book, and to open the seven seals of it: because thou wast
killed, and have redeemed us unto God by thy blood, out of every Kindred, and
Tongue, and People, and Nation. Neither does it stand with the glory of the
Prophesies of old, nor suits with the famous promises made unto the Fathers of
the glory of the Christian Church; nor with the price of Christ's blood, nor is
it answerable to his purchase made by it, nor with the abundance of Gods free
grace, nor with the spatiousness of the Heavens, appointed for the habitations
of the blessed; spaces, that no man can measure for multitudes, that no man can
number, that the number of the Sons of Adam that return, should be so small,
as some would persuade us. But for that, we may not take upon us to measure the
bounds of the Caelestiall Paradise, nor to tell the mansions that are in our
Heavenly Fathers House and Kingdom, which Christ has prepared for his redeemed
ones. It shall be our wisdom, to make it our care, to secure unto our selves a
room among them, that we may be in the number of those many in the Text, that
we may fill up the places of the Apostate Angels, and that the number of the
redeemed ones may be so much the greater, by so many souls, at least, as are
here present. And so we have done with the third particular, in the Reddition
to the first branch of the comparison, between the first, and the second Adam,
wherein was considered the number of those which are benefited by the obedience
of this One Man: And the Text says, They were many.

We come now to the fourth, and last particular: Wherein we are to consider,
What that benefit is, which by this his obedience, they do reap, and receive:
And the Text says, That by it they are made righteous.

Where Note, That they do not leap from sin to salvation immediately, and at
one jumpe; but from sin to righteousness, they must take that in their way,
before they come to happiness. In Rome there were two Temples of much note, the
Temple of Honor, and the Temple of Virtue; but they were so placed, that no
man could go into the Temple of Honor, but he must pass through the Temple of
Virtue to it. Virtue is the way to Honor, so is Grace to Glory, Holiness to
Happiness, Righteousness to Life: Whom he justified, them he also glorified,
Romans 8.30. but first justified, before glorified, they must pass through that
door, before they can enter into Glory.

Note secondly, That the Text says, They shall be made righteous; they were
not so before, we are not righteous of our selves, we cannot make our selves
so, we must be made so, if ever we be so: Alas! of our selves we are grievous
sinners, altogether borne in sin, John 9. Full of sin, full of corruption,
children of wrath by nature, Ephesians. 2.2. Neither in this case can we help our
selves, neither are we willing to help our selves, because it is natural to us,
and in us, we please our selves in it, it is sweet unto us, We hugg it in our
bosoms, and hide it under our tongues, as Zophar speaks in Job: Much power and
grace is there required, and put forth to part us, to take us off from our sins
and corruptions, and them from us, to change our natures, and to renew us; It
is no less than another Creation, yea, a greater work to make us righteous,
then was at first to make us men; you see here what strange obedience was
performed to the effecting of it, and how much the second Adam has done for
us, in making us by such his obedience righteous, (Tantae molis erat.)

And there is a three fold righteousness, which by this his threefold
obedience he has wrought out, and purchased for us, and obtained to us.

First, The righteousness of Justification.

Secondly, The righteousness of Sanctification.

Thirdly, The righteousness of Glorification.

For there is a Justifying righteousness: And there is a Sanctifying
righteousness: And there is a Glorifying righteousness. The first of these is
perfect, but not inherent. The second is inherent, but not perfect. The third
is both perfect, and inherent. The first of these, is the perfect, pure, and
unspotted righteousness of Christ imputed unto us by grace, and received by
Faith, with which the believer being clothed, as Jacob, in the Robes of his
elder brother, appears in the sight of the Father, acceptable, and amiable:
This is that righteousness which Saint Paul so highly magnifieth, Phil. 3.8. I
esteem all to be but loss, and dross, that I may win Christ, and be found in
him, not having mine own righteousness which is by the Law, but that which is
through the Faith in Christ, even the righteousness which is of God by Faith.
This is the righteousness, which the same Apostle writes of to the Romans, Romans
1.16. I am not ashamed of the Gossel of Christ, for it is the power of God unto
salvation. How come's it to be so? Because therein is the righteousness of God
revealed, by which believers are justified, and saved. Of this righteousness,
do I understand that, of which Elihu speaks in Job, and to Job, 33.23. and of
Job too, or any other in Jobs case, So sick and so weak, that his soul draws
near to the pit, and his life to the buriers, (so some Translations read it)
then for an interpreter, a wise and faithful Pastor, to comfort, and to
counsel him, to take his Confession, and to give him Absolution, for so much
do the words import: If there be an interpreter, one of a thousand, to declare
unto Man his righteousness; then will he have mercy upon him, and will say:
Deliver his soul from the pit, I have accepted of a ransom: that is, in the
righteousness of Christ, here called Man's righteousness; as in the place before
mentioned, it was called, The righteousness of God, and very truly both: It is
the righteousness of God, because it was wrought out in the Person of the
Mediator, which is God: And it is, The righteousness of Man too; because being
imputed unto him by Grace, and received by Faith, it becoms his own. This is
the first righteousness which we do obtain, by the merit of the obedience of
our Mediator; and this is the righteousness we must build upon, for our
Justification, Life, and Salvation, and well may: for this righteousness is
perfect, pure, absolute, and complete: this righteousness will hold out; this
righteousness will abide the trial, and present us with boldness, not only
before the Throne of Grace, but before the Throne of Justice; being clothed
with it, we shall appear unblameable, without spot or wrinkle. The Lord will
have nothing to charge us withal; but in this righteousness, we shall find
wherewith to answer him: In this righteousness we have all that we should have,
we are all that we should be, we have done all that we should do, we have
suffered all that we should suffer. In him we are complete, Col. 2.16. We stand
in his sight, as holy, as innocent, as pure, as perfect, as righteous, as the
first Adam did in his Creation, before the Fall: Nay, may I not say more, as
the second Adam in his humanity, in whose righteousness it is that we shall
appear?

Hold fast this Gospel Truth, and lay it up against an evil day, when thou art
cast down with sense of sin, and fear of wrath, when stingings of
Conscience affright thee, and the terrors of the Almighty make thee afraid;
which way will thou turn thee for relief? where will thou look for peace? If
in thy righteousness of Sanctification, there shall thou never find it; the
holiest Saint on Earth, in this case, if he seek for peace in the righteousness
of his Sanctification, he shall never find it, so weak is our Sanctification
at the best, so strong our corruption, so many the infirmities, so frequent the
faylings, yea, and fallings too, even of the best, that in their
Sanctification, they can never find peace, but the farther they seek for it
there, the farther shall they be from finding that which they seek for. When
the soul turns, and asks, What peace? The Conscience answers, What peace,
while these thy sins and corruptions remain in such abundance? It looks for
peace, but behold trouble; for security, but behold disquietness, and fear.
But then have recourse to your Justification, to this righteousness of Christ
imputed unto you by free grace, and received by Faith, and there you will find
it, thence will follow peace; Being justified by Faith. we have peace with God,
Romans 5.1. and peace with our own Consciences too. There is nothing can still
the crying, nor stop the bleeding of a wounded Conscience, but only th^^ That
Christ is the Lord our Righteousness: and that by his Obedience, not by our
own, we are made righteous, and this will do it: This, this alone will answer
all objections, that can be cast in, to disturb our peace, That the
chastisement of our peace was laid upon him: This is the first righteousness we
gain by the obedience of our Mediator, The righteousness of Justification;
this is perfect, but not inherent.

The second is, The righteousness of Sanctification; this is inherent, but not
perfect: When God is pleased by his spirit of Grace, to sanctify and renew us,
to change our natures, to take us out of the first Adam, and to Plant us into
the second, to take us out of the state of Nature, and to set us into a state
of Grace, by mortifying our corruptions, subduing our lusts, and inordinate
affections, destroying that body of sin that dwells in our Members, fireing
out all those carnal lusts and affections, that are in us by the spirit of
Judgment, and the spirit of burning: and then in the room of them, to infuse
into our hearts holy habits, gracious dispositions, propensions, and
inclinations, which is our habitual holiness, which remaining in us as
principles of Lise, from them there do daily flow gracious actions, suitable
to them, expressed in our Works, our Words, our Walkings, our Dealings, and daily
Conversation, which is our actual holiness, both concurring to make up this
our righteousness of Sanctification.

Whom he justifies, them he sanctifies, Romans 8.30. Where ever God bestows
his Son to justify, there he bestows his Spirit to sanctify, sooner or
later, more or less. In the I'emple, there was a Laver, as well as an Altar;
the Altar for Sacrifice, pointing out our redemption by the blood of Christ:
The Laver, for Washing, pointing out our Sanctification by the Spirit of
Christ. We must be Washed in the one, if we will be Sprinkled by the other.
Christ at his Crucifixion, being pierced by Longinus with a spear, shed out of
his precious side, both Water and Blood. There was a Mystery in it, the Blood
signifying our Redemption by the Blood of our Redeemer: The Water, our
Sanctification, by the Spirit of holiness: There was water for our ablution;
blood for our absolution: water for our cleansing; blood for our redeeming: he
is not redeemed by that blood, which is not washed by that water; If I wash
thee not, thou have no part in me, John 13.8. Out of that Fountain, the side
of Christ, did spring both the Sacraments of the Christian Church, Baptism,
and the Lords Supper: The former is unto us, as the Laver in the Law; the
latter, as the Altar: The former, the Sacrament of our regeneration; the latter
of our redemption: The former, sealing up unto us our washing, and cleansing,
in the Laver of regeneration; the latter, our atonement upon the Altar of our
Redemption, (let not the word offend you) by way of allusion, at least, you may
allow it: but you must not pass by the former, if you look for benefit by the
latter: All the washings, cleansings, purgings, and purifyings under the Law,
did but typically teach, and declare, the washing, cleansing, and sanctifying
of Believers, under the Gospel, so much called for every where, Wash your hands
ye sinners, and purge your hearts, ye wavering minded, James 4.8. This is the
will of God, even your sanctification, 1 These. 41 3. Cast off the old man, with
his corrupt lusts, and put on the new man, which after God is created, in true
holiness and righteousness, Ephesians. 4.22. Be ye holy, as I am holy, 1 Pet. 1.16.
Follow peace and holiness, without which, no man shall see the Lord, Heb.
12.14. Our God is a holy God: Jerusalem is a holy City: the Inhabitants that
dwell there are holy Saints: the exercises there used, are holy exercises. Into
it may no unclean thing enter. All things call for holiness at our hands, if
ever we hope to come to Heaven. The Apostle in his Epistle to the Collessians,
Gives thanks to the Father, that he had made them meet to be partakers of the
Inheritance with the Saints in light, Col. 1.12. implying, That as we are in
the state of nature, and in the first Adam, we are not meet for it. Before we
be meet to be partakers of the Inheritance, with the Saints in light, we must
be children of the light, and walk in the light. If ever we mean to inhabit in
that holy City, we must here get into the Suburbs of it, and learn the
Language of Canaan, which there they speak. If ever we mean to bear a part in
that Heavenly Choyre, in singing Hallelujahs to him that sits upon the
Throne; we must here set our Harps, and our Hearts in Tune to it: We must get
grace, before we can come to glory; righteousness, before we can attain to
blessedness, even the righteousness of Sanctification, before we can attain to
the righteousness of Glorification, and so we shall be meet for it: That makes
us capable of it, that leads to it, even at the next remove: Which is the next
particular, and the last to be spoken of; showing the third sort of
righteousness, of which, by the obedience of the Mediator, believers are made
partakers:

The righteousness of Glory: And this shall be both perfect and inherent, when
all sin, as well as sorrow, shall flee away, all corruption shall be abolished:
There shall be no more Devil to tempt, nor world to allure, nor flesh to
withdraw; but we shall with free, and full consent of heart and will, serve,
and laud, and magnify the living Lord, and rejoice in his presence for
evermore: where we shall arrive at the end of our hopes, the full fruition of
God in the beatificall vision, in whose light we shall see light, and we shall
shine in the Kingdom of the Father, with Angelical brightness, and perfection,
our souls shall acquiesce, In ultimo fine, in the fruition of the chiefest
good, beyond which, there is nothing to be attained, nothing to be desired,
where God shall be to our understanding a Sun of light, to our affections a
Sea of love, to our wills abundance of peace: We shall drink of the pleasures
of the Celestial Paradise, as out of a River, and be filled with those joys,
which are in his presence unspeakable, and glorious: We shall leave the
dunghill of this inferior world, with all the corruptions which are in it
through lust, and be taken up into the third Heavens, and to the City of the
living God, the Celestial Jerusalem; and to the company of innumerable Angels;
and to the Assembly, and Congregation of the first borne, whose names are
written in Heaven; and to God the Judge of all; and to the spirits of just men
made perfest* and to Jesus Christ the Mediator, whom though we have not seen we
love; but then we shall see him face to face, and our love and joy shall abound
and we shall attain to the end of our hopes, in the beginning of our
happiness, that never shall have end. Quando erit ille dies, quando erit illa
dies? When will the day be, when that day shall be? How should we love, and
long for this appearance, and rejoice even under the hope of this glory? Who
that has this hope, would not with St. Paul, Desire to be dissolved, that be
may be with Christ? Phil. 1.23. Oh, if we should but let loose our souls, and
turn them out, as Noah did his Dove, by divine contemplation, to sore up to the
third heavens, and there take a view of the joys and glory of the Celestial
Paradise; how would it take us off from these vile things here below? How would
it draw up our thoughts, to the seeking, and affecting of the things that are
above? from the sollicitous care of seeking after the treasures of wickedness,
which profit nothing; to the laying up of treasures in Heaven, where neither
moth nor rust can corrupt, nor thieves break through to steal; from seeking
after the pleasures of sin which are but for a season, to seek after those,
which are at the right hand of God, where is fullness of joy, and pleasures for
evermore. Oh, if we could but draw the curtains of Heaven, and look into the
Sanctum Sanctorum, and see the joys, and the glory that there is laid up for
those that seek it, we would never care for the earth more, we would never care
for this world more; the very pleasures of the Court would seem vile unto us,
the treasures of wickedness we would trample under our feet; all our thoughts
would tend upward, all our care, and study in the seeking of those things that
are above, where Christ sits at the right hand of God, and where we hope one
day to sit on the right hand of Christ. St. Paul had that happiness that never
man had but he, To be rapt up into the third Heavens, and there saw those
things, which here we Preach of, and to return again. But see what effect it
wrought upon him, it took him clear off of the world, his life ever after was
nothing, but a Cupio dissolvi, and esse cum Christo: Cupio dissolvi and esse
cum Christo: I desire to be dissolved, and to be with Christ: I desire to be
dissolved, and to be with Christ. All the honor of his Apostleship, the glory
of his miracles, the high reputation that he was in amongst the Nations, for
his great learning and wisdom; for his works, miracles, and powerful
Preachings, were all nothing, all these could not satisfy him; nothing could
now content him, but Cupio dissolvi, and esse cum Christo: I desire to be
dissolved, and to be with Christ. And why was this high favor vouchsafed to
this Apostle, to be thus rapt up into the third Heavens, and after he had seen
those glorious things, then to return again; but that he might be an
experimental Preacher to the world of all those things that there he saw, and
here we speak of? No marvel if the Fathers of old, St. Augustine, St. Jerome,
St. Ambrose, St. Bernard, etc. were so much and often in contemplation,
heavenly meditations, spiritual ejaculations, as witness their Manuels,
Enchiridions, Soliloquies, Monuments of their Devotion left among us; by these
did they live in communion with God; upon these did their souls sweetly feed,
and feast, as upon meat to eat, which the world knew not of: By these they even
lived in Heaven, while they were on Earth, and in stead of Men, conversed with
Angels: Beloved, we have souls, as well as bodies, and consist as well of
celestial, as of terrestrial substance; why should our earthly part be more
powerful to draw us downward to the vile things here below, then our heavenly
part to carry us up to the precious things that are above? where our hopes are,
where our Inheritance lies, where our happiness is, where our Christ is, and
where we hope shortly to be with him in Glory. Whither the Almighty of his
infinite mercy bring us, through the Merit and Obedience of this One in my
Text, our Mediator: To whom therefore be all Honor, Power, and Praise for
evermore: Amen.

FINIS.

