A LETTER TO Mr THOMAS PIERCE RECTOR OF BRINGTON: Containing amongst other
things, a Brief state of the Question about Gods Decrees.

To which is annexed An Exercitation in Latin Concerning FREE WILL.

By Edward Bagshawe, St. Chapter Chapter

LONDON, Printed by A. M. in the Year, 1659.

FOR Mr THOMAS PIERCE, RECTOR of BRINGTON.
SIR:
THe Dispute between your self and Me, is now become so Personal, and would be,
if I should imitate your Style, so Passionate, that, till you can recover a
calmer Temper, and quietly consider how little your wrath does either advance
Gods Honor, or your own, it is very requisite I should lay aside any farther
handling of that weighty Question, which first engaged us: For as I ought to
pity your weakness, and not pour strong liquor into so crazy a Vessel; so
lought likewise to have a greater regard unto those Sacred and amazing Truths,
then to venture them upon that scorn which they are like to meet with, whilst
you are in this your Fit of Anger and Impatience.

Yet, Sir, That I may for the future prevent your approaching so near to
Blasphemy, as to charge, what ever Faults I either have been or may be guilty
of, upon the account of my Principles (since I hold nothing, but what I solely
deriv^^^om, and am always ready to make good by, Scripture) I shall briefly
discover what my Principles are; that so it ever you offend in the like kind of
censure again, your Malice may then be as Apparent, and as Inexcusable, as now
your ^olly is.

Therefore to undeceive you, I profess firmly to believe, with the rest of
those Excellent Writers whom you have so disingeniously traduced, that, God
alone is to have the honor of all the good which his Creatures do; But, All
the Guilt and shame of their Actions they are to take wholely unto themselves;
And, That they ought to look no higher for a Cause of their defilement, then
unto the impure spring within them.

How these two Positions of mine (which you must needs acknowledge very Pious,
since, as I take it, they are yours too, though you infer them from much
different Principles) can consist with Absolute Predestination, is not my
Business to resolve you, no more then it would be yours to explain and unfold
all the Mysteries of the Trinity against the Cavils of a Socinian; For those
who profess a strict adherence to the Letter, and, to their best understanding,
the sense of Scripture, need not regard the Consequences which such vain
Persons can urge against them; and amidst so many difficulties, more then you
have yet alleged, which my own Reason does daily suggest to me, and solicit
me with, I have only this, with which I satisfy and quiet my Spirit, that I
desire fully to acquiesce in the revealed will of God, and to be wise, as not
above, so nor besides, what is written.

And therefore, Sir, If it should follow from this Tenet, not that I affirm,
but that in some sense I cannot deny God to (...) the (...) of sin, You have
as little reason to revile me for Blasphemy (since I do in my very thoughts
abhor it;) as I should have to reproach you with folly and weakness, for
asserting Conditional Election, though it be a thing not only utterly
unscri^tural, but, in an Absolute and Independent Agent, impostable to be
conceived: Yet since herein I believe you speak in the Integrity, as well as in
the Simplicity of your Heart; I dare not charge upon you those odious
Inferences, which I am able to deduce from that Doctrine.

So that when I first ventured to declare my own Opinion in those Points, and
to write something against yours; I must Profess that it was not your Opinion
(which, how irrational soever I think it, yet I know consistent with a Pious
Life) that I was mainely concerned against; but rather at your unjust and
unhandsome confidence, whereby you was not only content to discover your own
Judgment, (which yet is no more then to rake up and revive an almost decayed
Error) but did proceed so virulently to asperse and censure all those who
could not concur with you: This, Sir, did diserve, from every one that
dissented from you, much sharper Language then I either then did, or now do,
though provoked, intend to use. For let your own Convictions, in this Point, be
as great and as clear, as it is possible, yet why should you deny others that
liberty, of abounding in their own sense, which you did so needlessly assume
unto your self? Or, with what Color of reason can you excuse your bitter
invectives at those Famous Pillars of the Protestant Cause, who, as they lived
long before you, so, they writ nothing but what they thought evident and
convincing Truth, and therefore could do nothing to provoke that usage? But had
they been as really mistaken, as now by you they are only supposed to be; it
would have become your piety rather to have hid, then, herein exceeding the sin
of Cham, first to uncover, and then to Proclaim their Nakedness.

And to make your Guilt herein a little more Black and C^^minal, I must remind
you, for your Passion has spoiled your Memory, that what those, our Primitive
Worthies, maintained, was once the Uniforme and established Doctrine of our
Church, till some of your Party departed from it; amongst whom none have done
so desperately as your self, who seem to have cast off, not only all Filial and
Pious esteem for those who delivered this Doctrine, but likewise all manner of
Civility, as well as Charity, for us, who still retain it. Thus, Sir, you see I
can easily justify my first Attempt, which was to set upon you as the common
Enemy, and to do my part in striking at him, who had so boastingly defied and
Challenged All; But for the second, I mean, my mistaking you to be the Author
of those Reflections, and my proceeding so sharply upon that mistake, I
acknowledge it an Error; so that without daring to retract any thing in my
N^rrative (which I cannot do so long as I love Truth above all things) I
heartily beg your pardon for the Preface.

I might alledg in my excuse, that common Fame did voice those reflections to
be yours long before I saw them; which thing alone, as I remember, in a Case of
a much greater Man then you, D. of Buckhin, 3. Caroli, H. of Common.
and by much wiser Persons then my self, was judged to be a sufficient ground
of Accusation. But besides, I had the particular Testimony of a Friend of yours
to Warrant me; to which I might add the likeness of the Style, and the
unlikelyhood that any else, and unprovoked too, should venture to defame me
first, and then endeavor to confute me after (which is your known method of
Arguing.) All these Circumstances agreeing, together with my never once looking
upon the Title Page of that Book, but only reading so much as concerned me,
might, if I would enlarge upon them, serve, if not to justify, yet, to
extenuate my fault: For a Fault I am content to call it, and more I think you
cannot make of it: Especially since it did not proceed from any anger at my
being neglected by you, as you pleasantly insinuate (for this I could easily
have interpreted to my advantage, and have concluded that you did not Answer me
because you could not) much less was it any Malicious design against your fame
or person, but merely a mistake, grounded upon those Presumptions, which made
me handle you, as I then thought you deserved, and that was very scurvily.

And had you been pleased, in your late Vindication, so far to have moderated
your Choler, as meekly to have acquainted me with my Error, I should presently
have made you an Acknowledgment, as Public and as Humble, as your own Pride
could wish; For I do not only know it to be more Christian, but likewise hold
it a more generous thing to ask Forgiveness, then to persist in an Injury. But
in your last Pamphlet, you have made your self so liberal amends, and Carved
out so much of my Reputation, where with to repair the Ruins of your own, that
you have almost ensorced me to forbear my Courtesy; since by your rude taxing
me with want of Modesty, Humanity, Religion, Cerscience, and what not? by your
recharging upon me those very Crimes of Treachery and Ingracitude to Mr Busby
(which every one but you think I have already sufficiently wiped off.) You have
made that nameless, because worthless, Gentleman's Reflections your own, and so
have given me a just occasion to abide by that Character which I have already
made of you; and, instead of retracting any thing in the Preface, I might look
upon it only as an Anticipated Revenge.

Yet, Sir, since you so perfectly disown the having any hand in the writing, of
that unknowing and unknown Apologist; and because much of what you say, is only
Responsum and non dictum, not a beginning, but only a return of unkindness, it
is fit that as I struck the first Blow, though ignorantly and in the dark, so,
now you have opened my eyes, I should first offer to shake hands, and not
wilfully prosecute what I unwittingly began.

I shall not therefore make any return to those many unhandsome expressions,
wherein you have endeavored to set me out; only give me leave a little to
wonder at the largeness of your Talent, that after you had emptied such a
Treasure of ill Language upon Mr. Baxter, and Mr. Hickman, you should still
have a fresh Spring and reserve for me; and continue to rail in your last
Page, with as good a grace as if you were but then beginning. This, Sir, as it
shows the greatness of your stock, which can maintain you at so large an
expense, and in so much fine variety of reproachful sayings, so I am content
to let it pass for your greatest commendation.

But, Sir, Had your expressions of me been much worse then they are, I was
prepared to Forgive you, and now think my self obliged to thank you for them;
since after so many Tragical exclamations, wherein your Anger is more
conspicuous then your Art; and after so scrupulous an enquiry into my life and
manners, you can only accuse me of two things, the mistake of my Preface, and
my supposed Ingratitude to Mr. Busby; of which if I can clear my self, you have
done enough, as to all other things, to assert and to proclaim my Innocence.
And for the first of these, I have already asked your Pardon; as for the other,
I am sure I need none; concerning which if my Narrative has not already given
you satisfaction, it is not because that is not clear and convincing enough,
but because you came prepared to contradict it. And though you uncivilly, as
meddling with a difference which concerns you not, bring Mr. Busby again upon
the Stage, yet I will not now be provoked to say more of him then only this,
that I am sorry I cannot say less then I have done.

I pass by therefore your zealous commending Mr. Busby, and (out of my respects
to him, notwithstanding his Injuries) wish, that you had not so soon confuted
and discredited your own Testimony, by professing in the same Page you do not
know him: Nor am I willing to insist upon your great indiscretion, or rather
undoing design, that you should so much praise Mr. Busby, and yet in the same
Book, much more rail at the Long Parliament, that is, to mention no more, upon
all his Governors: Wherein, Sir, you may be thought, not so much to praise Mr.
Busby, as to dicover him; not to set him off, but to lay him open, and to
betray him to the suspicion of his Judges, of whose favor he may stand in
need. But these things I let pass as Incongruities, which as your have made you
commit, so I hope Mr. Busby has already paid you for them accordingly.

That which I am most concerned to take Notice of, is that prodigious vein of
Wit, which runs through your Epistle; as when you call me Mr. Edward, when you
miscall me by the name of Usher, and that profound one of Censuring the saucy
Censor, which is a Jest that this Year few will understand, and in the next,
none can: These, Sir, are the flowers of your Rhetoric, and what the phrases
are, I have not had leisure to gather, but may from hence easily be guessed at.

But certainly Sir, Durst we poor despised Calvinists take the liberty which
you do, as well, or ill to abuse the party we dispute with; or could we think
it pious to defend our Cause, not by disarming, but, by disgracing the
Adversary, you long ere this had met with that kind of entertainment. But who
would not blush and be ashamed to be counted a Wit, when you, who have so long
labored to deserve that childish Name, are content to take up with such poor
things to credit you. Trust me, Sir, if the goodness of your Pack, may be
guessed at by the smallness of the wares you produce, you may be heavily, but
you cannot be richly laden; And I would not have your Back, for your Burden.
Were I foolish enough to be witty by your example, might not I call you Mr.
Thomas, or, which is somewhat more answerable to your present Phrenzie, Plain
Tom? Could not I vililie you by the Name of Vicar? And at last spend some
dreadful Quibbles upon Pierce? And I would fain know, Whether such dry bobs as
these, would not provoke as much laughter, and, which is your main end, make as
good sport among your Lay and Female Readers, as any of those offers at
Smartnesse and Satyr, which you have ventured to show upon me?

As you love, Sir, to preserve that little Credit you have got, I would advise
you to put up your Trinkets in time; for your kind of Play with Small money,
will not hold out with all sorts of Gamesters. Though I am the meanest of those
you have undertaken, yet, if I would take you for my subject, and rather strive
to be sharp than serious, I should find it no hard matter, to dress you up in
your Cap and Cassock, and so show you to the world, not like those Innocent
Creatures, the Rats and Mice, to which you have merrily, or rather, to show
what value you put upon your self, triumphantly compared us: But like some
greater, and more ravenous Beast of prey, which is not content to nibble at
Books, but tears and devours the Authors, and when he should confute their
Arguments, wounds and assassinates their Reputations.

Were you cool enough, I need go no farther than your self for a testimony to
confirm this; for is not this your constant practice? Hastily concluding the
truth to be on your side (as if you had a Privilege to be infallible) and
striding over the knot, lest it should stop your Career, you get as far as
you can from the Question, and at that distance Bark at your dissenting
Brethren, call them all Fools and Madmen, who dare not be so Peremptory and
unreasonable as your self; load them with bitter invectives, and blasphemous
Inferences; and what you want in Argument, you make up in Noise and Outcry:
Much like that silly Stoic in Lucian Jup. rag.
(an Author I am sure you are Versed in, and, because he jeers Predestination,
well approve of) who when he was driven to a Non plus, cries out (...), which
is the very Greek for your English, when you so opprobriously call Mr. Hickman
Wretched Caitiff.

You see, Sir, how much you lie at my Mercy, and from what I have said, you may
judge how favorable I am, in that I say no more: Now I have put you into a
Fright, and showed you your danger, I must pity your frailty, and comfort you
again, by acquainting you, that I hope I am perfectly cured of that looseness,
and what levity I dislike in your writings, I shall not willingly practice in
my own; and though it is to be feared, that your Poetry has spoiled your
preaching, yet, for your profession's sake, I heartily wish you would a little
forget that you are Rector of Brington, which is your Law Term; that so you may
the better remember your self to be a Preacher of the Gospel, which is your
Proper Title, and with the gravity of which, your present empty and trivial way
of writing, does as little agree, as a feather would do with your habit. Much
more might be said upon this subject, but I am too young to countenance the
good Advice I could give; and you are too old, and too wise too, at least in
your own conceit, to take it.

Andhere, Sir, if you please, we will end all Personal Quarrels; at least for
my part I shall, since I cannot think it worth my while there to contend for
the victory, where I should be ashamed to Triumph. And that I may not wholly
loose this Letter, which I should do if I discoursed of nothing in it but you,
I shall conclude with something more material, viz. the Ground of our former
and present difference.

The difference between your self and me, (that you may not be so confident of
your own opinion) is neither more nor less, then what has employed the Wits,
and divided the Judgments of all the learned men that ever were, or will be in
the world, viz. concerning Gods Decrees, whether they be Absolute or
Conditional. You, in the rear of many great Names which I could reckon, because
you cannot otherwise understand the Importance of those several precepts and
comminations in Scripture, nor Free God from being the Author of sin, affirm
Gods Decrees to be Conditional, i.e. That God chooses Peter, etc. because he
foresees that he will Believe and Persevere to the end. But I, who can as
little understand how God can consider any condition in the creature as a
ground of his Election, since he is the sole Author of whateser conditions the
creature can be supposed to have: And because I understand less, how those who
acknowledge Gods Prescience can free him from being in some sense the Author of
sin, since what ever God foresees, and does not prevent, he may justly be said
to cause, when he knows that nothing but his interposing can hinder the
producing of it, therefore I affirm, with many Thousands of others, as Learned
men as the World ever had, That all Gods Decrees are, like his Nature,
Absolute, i.e. That God chooses Peter, etc. because he will choose him, and to
make good his act of Election, he gives him Faith, and by his power preserves
him to the end.

To understand which of these two opinions be the most sober and Rational (for
as to Scripture, the last without dispute has the better) it will be first
necessary to consider the Nature of Man's Will, in what manner, and how far
it is Free; and to resolve this, however, Sir, you take the whole for granted,
requires a more than ordinary knowledge in the Depths of natural Philosophy;
which you have not now leisure, nor ever seem to have had settled judgment
enough to enquire into: and therefore it may perhaps be news to tell you that
those Axioms, Nothing can move it self; and, Every thing has a Cause; and,
Whatever the will chooses now, it can give a Reason, why it chooses it, which
Reason was sufficient to move it, and therefore Necessary. These Axioms I say,
when urged as Objections, have in all Ages puzzled the most Acute and subtle
Disputers; and though many, amongst whom the Reverend and Learned B. Bramball,
have said as much in the point, as the Question is capable of, yet when all is
done, I must profess for my own part, that my Religion, and not my Reason, has
satisfied me, and I am content to believe I have Free Will, though I cannot
understand it: and concerning this, not as presuming to solve the Difficulties,
but only to show them, I have sent you an Exercitation in Latin, which you may
either Answer, or, which is far more easy, slight as you see occasion.

When this Difficulty is passed over, which alone is enough to choke the
keenest Disputers appetite, Another of much greater importance remains behind,
viz. upon supposition that man has Free Will, that is, Liberty to choose, not
his actions only, but his will too (as who is so Mad to deny this, in his
Actions I mean, though many do in their writings?) then how can this freedom of
Will in man be reconciled to the Absoluteness of the Will of God; since that,
as it is the prime Cause, so it does always actually concur with, and
therefore is necessarily productive of, every Action of the Creature? To say
here that God concurres with every Creature according to their several
respective natures, that is to say, with necessary Agents, so as to make them
act necessarily; with Free Agents, so as to let them act Freely; this, I humbly
conceive, is not so much to untie the knot, as to beg the Question, since Gods
concourse is urged as an Argument to take away all manner of Freedom, because
his influence does Act, though in a secret, yet in an irresistible manner.

These Intricacies, Sir, which do accompany the Question about Gods Decrees
(not to urge any thing from the consequences of either, which is not a solid
nor a rational way of searching out Truth) do make this controversy so
unintelligible, so almost incapable of Solution, that they did at first
disquiet, but at last, through the blessing of God, they drove me out of the
fluctuations of Reason, into the Shelter and Sanctuary of the Apostle Paul: and
that Question of his, Who art thou, O man, etc? I have experimentally found to
be the most effectual charm, wherewith to compose and settle a soul in the
midst of its shakings. From thence I did resolve, and hope shall ever be
preserved in the same mind, to acquiesce in the Letter of Scripture, in spite
of all the Tumultuatings and Agitations of my Thoughts against it; for should I
ever let go my hold, and put out to Sea again, I have just Cause to Fear, that
this depth will sooner swallow me up, then be Fathomed by me. You did
therefore, Sir, very Prudently, to slight my late Treatise upon this Subject,
and at all adventure to style it Weak and Shallow, that thereby you might
discourage your Followers, from receiving thence that satisfaction, which none
of your Thin and Aerie Discourses can give them.

But I will not again repeat, what I before mentioned, and promised to Forgive
you for, concerning your Raw and Unseasoned way of Arguing; but I appeal to the
Consciences of all the Sober men of your Persuasion, whether the Doubts in
Prescience will not as much Perplex a Disputing Christian, as the Mysteries of
Predestination; and if you indeed have escaped those Plunges, if you alone have
been altogether Freed from those Entanglements, I dare pronounce, it is not
because you are Wiser, or understand Boethius 5. l. de consol. Philos.
better than other men, but because you have not Patience, I might say Depth,
enough, to take in the whole compass of your Tenet.

Thus, Sir, I have briefly discovered my own Opinion, and withal pointed you
out a way how you may correct yours; and if not your Opinion, yet at least your
Temper; which if you shall observe, there is some hope, that there may be, if
not a Friendly agreement, yet a fair and Scholar-like contention between us: In
Order to which, I shall, when ever you please, undertake to Maintain these two
Theses.

1o. That all Gods Decrees are Absolute.

2o. That the Arminians, I mean those who assert Conditional Election, do as
much make God the Author of Sin, as those who hold it to be Absolute.

These two Positions, Sir, contain the Substance of all that either is, or can
be, said in this Argument, and if in either of them, you please, suitably to
your declared Doctrine, to hold the Negative, the Controversy may come to a
speedy Issue; if you please withal briefly to State your Opinion, and, without
impertinent Declaiming by the By (with which you may please, but never satisfy
a curious Reader) give in the Reasons of your Assertion. Upon the view of
which, if I find your Arguments so New, so Clear, and so Convincing, that I,
though far the weakest of your Adversaries, cannot Answer them; I shall,
notwithstanding Our present Distances, forthwith become, something more than
your Friend, your Convert, and endeavor to draw in others by my Example. And,
because I foresee I am not like to make this change in haste, you shall however
always find me,

Sir, Your very humble and Ready Servant Edw. Bagshawe.
Chapter Chapter Aug. 1o. 1659.
Exercitatio Philosophica de Libero Arbitrio.
NIhil est quod magis hominem commendet quam Arbitrii Libertas; nihil tamen de
quo Philosophi minus consensere; Annal. lib. 6.
Siquidem ut Taciti verbis utar, fuere semper, qui Fatum congruere rebus
putarent, licet non e vagis stell is, sed apud principia and nexus naturalium
causarum, primo cuinsque ortu ventura destinantur.

Opinio ista de Fato vel inevitabili rerum omnium eventu, sive a Chaldaeis, uti
placet Diodoro Siculo, Lib. 2.
sive ab aliis orta, a Stoicis avide arrepta est, and ita demum propagata,
utistius Sectae habita sit Nota propemodum peculiaris; quae alii Fortuita, illi
Necessaria vocant; nec incidere ea, sed venire aiunt, certaque, licet
inobservabili, lege decurrere. Hinc Seneca, Scio, inquit, Lib. de Provid.
omnia certa and in aeternum dicta lege decurrere; Fata nos ducunt, and quantum
cuique restat, prima nascentis hora disposuit: Ca^sa pendet ex Causa, privata
and publica longus ordo rerum trahit. Unde Chrysippus (...) sive Fatum, Apud A.
Gel.
definit esse (...) -- h.e. Fatum est invariabilis rerum compages, sic
concatenata ut dissolvi alterarique non possit. Eodem facit illa Homeri (...),
sive Aurea Catena, quae omnia sic a Deo pendere facit, ut continuo
imperceptoque nexu ab Ipso ad nos usque pertingant; adeo ut licet nunquam non
agamus libere, videamurque, saltem nobis ipsis, Actionum nostrarum undequaque
Domini; nunquam tamen inquiunt, quicquam sic libenter facimus, ut non prius
illud idem collibuerit Deo; nec plus minusve operari est, quam ille olim
decreverit. Imo tam rigide ha ex part egeunt Stoici, ut nec Diis ipsis ullam
reliquerint Libertatem: Sic enim omnium nomine proclamat Seneca -- Eadem
necessitas and Nos and Dees alligat; Lib. 2. Quest. Nature.
irrevocabilis divina pariter and Humana cursus vehit; ille ipse omnium
Conditor and Rector, Scripsit quidem Fata, sed sequitur; Lib. 2.
semel jussit, semper paret; unde and Lucanus non tantum Poetice de Deo loquens
Scripsit in aeternum causas, qua cuncta coercet,
Sequoque lege tenens --
Numen scilicet Decreto suo dum stat, videtur parere; quia alias confessio
erroris fuerit, si mutanda fecerit.

Sen. Oed. Act. 5. Fatis agimur; --
Quicquid patimur mortale Genus,
Quicquid facimus, venit ex alto:
Non illa Deo vertisse licet
Quae nexa suis currunt causis.
Cum vero norint multa passim provenire mala, quorum aliqua facimus ipsi,
aliqua and patimur; a Bono autem Deo omnem Malignitatis suspicionem solicit
amoverint; Malorum itaque omnium Originem Materiae ascripserunt, quam vagam and
Inconditis Motibus ultro aberrantem coerceri and in ordinem redigi non posse
autumarunt, sed Tumultu irregulari abreptam Pestes spargere, vitia accendere,
ruinam undique moliri, seseque quasi contagii vastationisque fomitem ubique
in^^^tare; Quest. Not. 1.
uti Seneca, a magno, inquit, artifice formant^r prava multa, non quia cessat
ars, sed quia id, in quo exercetur, inobsequens Arti est; and explicatius
alibi, quaerens cur Deus Bonis Tristia immittat, respondet, Artifex non solet
mutare Materiam; haec passa est.

Concesso autem, singula Fato volvi, nec Actionem ullam, ut ut Levem ac
Minutam, extra praescriptum olim ordinem edi posse, cum inde promptum foret
objicere, neminem tum ob Probitatem laudandum, nec ob vitia culpandum quempiam
(nullo etemin encomio dignus est is, qui Probitati, quam habet, succumbit
potius quam studet; nec illius malitia serio detestanda est, qui nequitia, cui
resistere non potest, securus fruitur) hujusmodi Instantiis occurrit Manilius,
Astrom. lib. 4.
innuendo istam doctrinam non liberare paena nocentem, nec praemio merentem
fruadare; sed potius virtutis valorem, vitii enormitatem intendere: tanto enim
impensius, inquit, laudandus est Probus -- Quod caelo gaudente venit, rursusque
nocentec
Oderimus magis in paenam culpamque creatos.
Uti enim nemo escam minus probaverit, licet sapor ejus non sua sponte sed
irresistibili Naturae vi, gratus proveniat; nec noxias lethalesque herbas minus
refugimus, licet succum suum aliunde trahere cogantur, nec ultro fiunt
mortifetae; sic and cum Hominibus agendum censet, quorum Probitas si Deo ac
Fato imputetur, gratulandum est iis, quod propriori eos cura numen dignetur; si
vero Mali Sceleratique sint, non culpa sua sed Fati Perversitate, eo sunt
culpandi magis, quod jam olim Diis exosi, in terras veniunt quasi damnati.

Atque Stoicorum Doctrinae de Fato and Necesitate haec fere Summa est.

Peripatetici autem and Platonici, paulo humilius, and ad vulgarem captum
accommodatius, Philosophati, cum observarent (...) illud sive Liberum
Arbitrium, and in Legibus Praesumi, and Notitiis Hominum ita Naturaliter
infigi, ut citius quis sensum illis, quam Electionem extorserit; hinc etiam and
Illi huic Opinioni consenserunt, quam, praeterquam quod in Religione omni sit
persuasissima, argumentis insuper a Ratione ductis, confirmare sunt annixi.

Primo Arguunt ex Animantium Divisione, quorum quidam spontaneo and caeco
impetu feruntur, Acti potius quam Agentes; alii autem, suo arbitratu perpensis
prius and exammatis rerum agendarum circumstantiis, vel faciunt vel omittunt
consulta prout ipsis libitum fuerit. Qualis est omnium hominum Natura, qui,
nisi isto privilegio gauderent, Brutis forent long infeliciores; cum, iisdem
necessitatibus constricti sint, legibus tamen parere cogantur, quasi Liberi.

Cum autem instarent Stoici, omnino eos qui consultant, id approbare solum quod
ipsis placet, and proinde videri etiam Homines rapi visis aeque ac caetera
Animalia, licet aliquanto lentius consentiant; respondent, eum, qui consilio
ductus imaginatione visorum percelli videatur, non servum ideo sed Dominum
dicendum; cum, si voluerit, in alteram partem consensisse poterat; quisquis
enim, inquiunt, ob collectionem, quam apud se consultans facit, aliquid
approbet, reputandus est ipse sibi istius Approbationis causa. ^epar. Eing.
lib. 6.
Quae Alexandri Aphrodisaei defensio est apud Eusebium.

Deinde cum urgerentur isto Effato, Deus praenovit omnia, ergo certo i. e.
destinato eveniunt; vel enim Numen nullam habet de rebus dubiis perceptionem,
quod probabile non est ut Author nesciret motus conatusque Creaturae, quam ipse
produxit; vel cognitionem habet certam and infallibilem, adeoque res illae,
quas eventuras praescivit, inevitabiliter h. e. Necessario and fato cogente
producentur.

Cum isto potissimum Argumento se munirent Stoici, respondebant Platonici,
verum quidem esse quod Deus omnia praenoverit; atqui cum quaedam Necessario
quaedam fortuito eveniant, proinde Deum praescire Necessaria certo; reliqua,
prout ipsorum Natura erat, scilicet ut Dubia and Indeterminata; nempe,
inquiunt, si Deus id quod dubium Ancepsque est, certo sciret, falleretur; quia
Dubium id est quod forte non continget; itaque cum Futura Ancipitia talem
praesensionem non admittant, ne Dii quidem ipsi credi debent nosse, quae nosci
nequeunt; atque Hunc in modum respondent Chalcidius Ia Timaeum.
, Plotinus Enn. lib. 1.
, Ammonius (...). c.9.
, Tyrius aliique; imo non Philosophi solum, sed eodem responso se tuentur hodie
quotquot Socinus Crellius, etc.
Theologi inconcessam sibi, veluti e Dei manibus, extorquent Libertatem.

Denique cum instarent Stoici voluntatem Humanam, si non Appetitus aestu
abripiatur, semper tamen Intellectus imperio duci, cum Rationis dictata nunquam
non sequatur; and proinde non mags Libera censenda sit, quam ille non habendus
est captivus, qui nunquam for as exit nisi addito custode.

Huic Instantiae vary respondent Platonici,

1. Fatendo voluntatem ab Intellectu moveri and allici semper, at nunquam cogi.
Cum enim voluntas sit caeca Potentia, oi, facis instar, praelucet Ratio, ne,
cum omnia libere possit, quaedam etiam and male faciat; atque eo, funestissimo
licet argumento, libertatem suam maxim prodat Anima, quod quandocunque lubet,
imperio Rationis reniti queat. Hinc querela illa. -- Video meliora proboque
Deteriora sequor -- omnibus quotidie in ore est Fatalis adeo and noxia
Libertas, vel ex erroribus nostris, and quod quaedam mala quasi nolentes
facimus, comprobatur.

2. Respondent urgendo Incommoda quae Stoicam istam Necessitatem sequantur,
nempe

1. Si Homo ad Actiones suas vi aliqua ita impelleretur, ut omittere eas ipsi
liberum non fuerit, cur Trophaea victoribus, victis solatia conquirimus?
quorsum Praemia Paenaeque? cui usui inserviunt encomia and vituperia? quis enim
illum laudabit improbabit ve, quem stimuli and flagra in facinus
praecipitavere? Been scilicet non agunt, qui aliter agere non possunt: Nemo
nauem celeri and aequabili cursu immensum aequor pervolantem, ideo laudabit,
quod Magistro dirigente and Ferente vento una feratur; and aliquando Pelagi
minis, nescia obtemperet. Majore encomio non est dignanda virtus, quam ignari
recipimus; and fato impressam signatamque animo Probitatem non magis
jactaremus, quam equus Phaleras.

Cur itidem Malos castigamus, aut supplicia decernimus iis qui legem violant,
quam, nisi fata velint, observare non possint; nemo Hirci nequitiam, aut
violentiam Tauri punivit; si abstineant Bruta, in istam Probitatem ducuntur,
quasi captiva: sin peccent, non est istorum sed Naturae error. Innocens plane
est quem necessitas excusat, and ille quem ad scelera praefinivit Fatum,
Infaelix dici potest, non Improbus: Quaeso qui, ut de Brutis taceam, a stipite
vel saxo differremus Homines, si ita essemus comparati; Inanimata quaeque
motorem nacta moventur; nimirum and gravis Terra projicitur, and iners saxum,
si manum adhibeas, in Gyrum rotatur: Sic and Homo, si Actiones non suas edat,
sed necessitate motus operetur, nihil videtur esse aliud, quam paulo agilior
and magis versatilis Fabrica.

Concludunt itaque animam Humanam Privilegiis suis and Honor natalitio
privari, nisi regat corpus; corpus autem illa regere non potest, nisi in
seipsam habeat Imperium, juxta illud carmen Sit liber, Dominus qui velit esse.
Atque sic fere pro Arbitrii Liberate arguunt Platonici. Et siquis
controversiam illam before examinare velit, legate eximias utrinque
dissertationes R. P. Bramhalli affirmantis, and Th. Hobbaei, plus quam Stoice,
negantis Libertatem.

Quod ad me attinet, etsi e sacra Scriptura edoctus sciam quid Christiano
tenendum sit, nempe ununquemque libere velle malum and libere nolle bonum, quae
sola nobis miseris jam demum restat libertas; tamen si omnino Philosophice
agendum sit, non dubitaverim affirmare Liberate Absoluta and Plena nihil esse
vel quod magis credam, vel quod minus probari posse putem: Cum enim omnia quae
videmus, ex causis certis determinatisque oriantur and fiant, unicam voluntatem
Humanam ista lege eximere videtur plane iniquum.

1. Quia ut detur aliquid, quod seipsum moveat idque propria vi, cogitatu
prorsus impossible est.

2. Quod nemo non advertat, and si rogetur, rationem reddere queat, cur hoc
potius quam illud eligat: causa autem illa qualiscunque, quae voluntatem sive
impellit sive inclinat, perinde facit Actionem Necessariam.

Ultimo quod quomodo Libertas humana cum Praescientia divina consistat, salvo
utriusque jure, explicare adhuc nemo poterit; quicquid enim certo praenoscitur,
ut eveniat necesse est, non quasi ipsa praescientia magis quam scientia,
quicquam ad movendam voluntatem contribuat, sed quod Causae istae, e quarum
cognitione Praescientiae certitudo and Infallibilitas dependet, effectum
praecognitum necessario and inevitabiliter producent.

Alia sunt quae objici possunt verum cum Liberate sublata, simul and virtus
perear; cum Pietas and Politia omnis una concidant; and praeterea cum nemo non
experiatur se, quando velit, non actionem modo sed and voluntatem immutare
posse; refragetur licet ratio scrupulosque injiciat, nemo tamen vereatur
asserere sibi eam, cujus vim quotidie sentit and actionem exserit, Arbitrii
Libertatem.

FINIS.

