THE Continuation of the Complete History of ENGLAND, by Robert Brady Dr. in
Physic. 1700.
Printed for S. Lowndes, and A. and I. Churchill.

portraits of Edward I, Edward II, Edward III, and Richard II

A CONTINUATION OF THE Complete History OF ENGLAND: CONTAINING The LIVES and
REIGNS OF Edward I. II. and III. AND Richard the Second.

By ROBERT BRADY, Doctor in Physic.

In the SAVOY, Printed by Edward Jones, for Sam. Lowndes, over against
Exeter-Exchange in the Strand; and Awnsham and John Churchil, at the Black Swan
in Paternoster Row, 1700.

A CONTINUATION Of the Complete etc.
King EDWARD the First.
KIng Henry the Third died on the 16th of November, 1272. and was buried at
Westminster the 20th of the same Month; and so soon as he was buried, John Earl
of Waren, and Mat. Westminster fol. 401. n. 40. 50. A. D. 1272. The Nobility and
Clergy swear Fealty to Edw. I. when beyond Sea, after the Death of his Father,
and appoint Guardians of the Kingdom. The Guardians Names. They enter upon the
Government; all Writs and Instruments issued by them in the King's Name.
Gilbert Earl of Gloucester, with the Clergy and Laity, went to the great Altar,
and swear Fealty to his Firstborn Son Edward, who was then in the Holy Land,
not knowing whether he was living; afterward the Nobility of the Nation met at
the New Temple, London, and a new Seal having been made, they appointed
faithful Ministers and Guardians that might keep the King's Treasure, and the
Peace of the Kingdom. Postmodum ad novum Templum Londini nobillores Regni
pariter convenerunt, and facto sigillo novo constituerunt fideles ministros and
custodes qui Thesaurum Regis, etc.

These Guardians were, Walter Giffard Archbishop of York, Edmond Plantagenet,
Son to Richard Plantagenet Brother to King Henry the Third Earl of Cornwall, and
Gilbert de Clare Earl of Gloucester, who entered upon the Exercise of the
Government, by the Advice and Appointment of the Nobility, without any possible
Privity or Knowledge of the King; yet all the Writs, Proclamations, and
Instruments concerning the Government were Issued in the King's Name; as
appears by the Append. n. 1. A Writ to proclaim the King's Peace.
Writ directed to all the Sheriffs in England, to proclaim the King's Peace
throughout their Cities, Burghs, Fairs, Mercates, and other Places: Which was
in this Form; Edward by the Grace of God King of England, Lord of Ireland, and
Duke of Aquitan, etc. Whereas our Father King Henry of Famous Memory being
Dead, the Government of the Kingdom is come to us by Hereditary Succession,
etc. We command the, etc. Witness, W. Archbishop of York; Ed. of Cornwall, and
G. of Gloucester, Earls; at Westminster the 23d of November, in the First Year
of Our Reign: But three

There was also a Writ of almost the same Tenor in the King's Name, directed to
the Abbats of Door and Hagenham to Receive the Oath of Fidelity from Append. n.
2. Leulin, Prince of Wales summoned to take the Oath of Fealty.
Leulin Son of Griffin Prince of Wales: Dated by the Hand of Walter de Merton,
then Chancellor, (and at least a great Assistant to the Guardians) on the 29th
of November, in the First Year of Our Reign; but he appeared not, sent any
answer to the Abbats, as by the Return from them, and the Constable of
Montgomery Castle annexed to the Writ it self, is manifest.

Writs likewise for keeping the Peace in Ireland, were Directed Pat 1 Ed. I.
Part. 2. M. 20. De Conservatione pacis in Hibernia. A Writ for the Conservation
of the Peace in Ireland.
to Maurice Fitz-Maurice, Justiciary of that Nation, inhibiting Pain of Life
and Member, and Disheriting, That they presumed not to infringe the Public, or
King's Peace, with Promise to Maintain all People of that Land in their Rights,
Goods, and Estates, and do them full Justice against great and small; Ib. M.
20. De fidelitate, Archiepiscopor. Episcop. etc. Regi facienda.
With Command to the Archbishops, Bishops, Abbats, Priors, Earls, Barons,
Knights, and Freemen of Ireland, to take the Oath of Fealty before
Commissioners there appointed. Both these Records Dated by the Hand of Walter
de Merton, Chancellor, December, at Westminster.

Besides these, they Issued other Writs in the King's Name, one for Assessing
of Append. n. 3. 4. A Writ to the Sheriff of Surry and Sussex, to Suppress the
Rabble, and Plunderers.
Tallage, dated Jan. 27. and to the [6] Sheriff of Surry and Sussex; another to
raise the Posse Comitatus, for suppressing the Rabble, who were up there,
Plundering, Robbing, and Murdering the King's Subjects, dated the 6th of June,
both in his First Year; so that they took upon them the Whole Administration
Government in his absence: and he was so far pleased with the Proceedings of
his Chancellor, (especially against the Bishop of Carlisle for Excommunicating
the Sheriff of Cumberland, because he Bundel Brov. 1 Ed. I. n. 14. in the Tower.
Distreined the Goods of an Abbat in his Diocese for the King's Debt,
prohibiting him to put in Execution the Excommunication, or Prosecute him in
Court Christian, for that the Correction and Pleas concerning the Transgression
of the King's Officers belonged to himself, according to the Custom of the
Kingdom) that he wrote him a Letter of Append. n. 5.
Thanks when he was acquainted with them, for his Diligence in the Dispatch of
his, and the Kingdom's Business, Directing and Encouraging him to go on as he
had begun, promising to Ratify whatever he should do in Ways of Justice,
Commanding him not to spare any of what State or Condition foever, but to
proceed against them by Rigor of Justice, if otherwise he could not restrain
their Excesses. This Letter is dated August the 9th, in the First Year of
Melun, upon the River Seyn in France.

Upon the News of his Father's Death he set all things in order, and disposed
them as well as he could, and came from the Holy Land into Sicily, and was
received by the Mat. West. f. 402. n. 10, 20, 30, 40, 50. The King came from
the Holy Land into Sicily, from thence to Rome, and so into France, where he
did Homage to that King for Aquitan.
King thereof with great Honor, who Conducted him to the Roman Court, where he
spent some time with Pope Gregory the Tenth, his Friend, Familiar, and
Acquaintance in the Holy Land; From Burgundy, where at the foot of the
Mountains, some English Bishops, Abbats, Earls, and Barons met him, from whence
he came into France, where he was Honorably received by King Philip the Hardy
his Cousin German, and did Homage to him for the Hereditary Lands he held of
him, who thereupon granted him the possession of them.

After this he took his Leave of the King and Peers of France, Ibm. f. 403. n.
10. A. D. 1273. He receives the Homage and Service of his Vassals there.
and went into Aquitan to Receive the Homage and Service of his Vassals there,
in which he found much difficulty from several that Refused to do their Feudal
Duties to him, but chiefly from Ibm. n. 20. and Mezer. Fr. Hist. f. 315. A. D.
1272/3. The Viscount of Bearn denies his Homage. He is forced to do it.
Gaston Monaco Viscount of Bearn, who because a Predecessor or two had done
Homage and Sworn Fealty to the King of Aragon, and he had been much obliged to
Alphonso the Second then King, denied his Homage; King Edward seized upon his
Person, and kept him Prisoner among his Retinue, from whence making his Escape,
he was driven out of his Country; And upon an Appeal to King Philip, as
Sovereign Lord of Aquitan or Guyenne, in favor of King Edward, He compelled
Gaston to hold his Lands of him.

In the Second year of his Reign, having settled his Affairs beyond Mat. West*
f. 467. n. 20. A. D. 1274. The King comes for England.
he took Ship at Bologn in Picardy, and landed in England on the 25th of July;
At his landing Gilbert Earl of Gloucester, and John Earl of Warren, received him
more Honorably then other Nobility, conducting him to their Castles of
Tonebridge in Kent, and Rigate in Surrey, where they Treated and Feasted him
with great Jollity many days. On the 19th of August he and his Queen Elianor
were Ibm n* 30. He and his Queen Crowned at Westminster.
Crowned at Westminster by Robert Kilwarby Archbishop of Canterbury, Alexander
King of Scots, and John Britan, being present.

Toward the middle of October following, he issued out Pat. 2 Ed. I. M. 6. He
makes inquiry after the Rights of his Crown, his Military Tenants, and Civil
Officers, etc. whether they had done their Duties.
Writs of Inquiry by the Oaths of Twelve Legal Men, to Two Commissioners in
every County, to Inquire what his Royalties, and the Liberties and Prerogatives
of his Crown were, who were his Tenants in Capite, and Military Service, and
how many, and what Fees they held of him; Of his Tenants etc. The whole Inquiry
containing 34 Articles.

About the beginning of November the King of France sent to King of England, to
Append. n. 6. A. D. 1275. The King summoned as a Peer of France.
appear in his Parliament to be holden on the Morrow of the Quindene of the
Feast of St. Martin in Winter (that is November 26.) to be at the Trial of a
Case between Robert Duke of Burgundy on the one part, and Robert Earl of
Nevers, and Yobend his Wife on the other part, concerning the Dukedom of
Burgundy, and the Appurtenants. Who by reason of his Weighty Affairs in his own
Kingdom, sent Maurice He sends his Excuse.
de Credome, Otto de Grandison, and Roger de Cliff, to make his Commission or
Letter of Credence, dated at Westminster, November 11. He was summoned as a
Peer or great Vassal of France.

By his Writ dated at Cl. 3. Ed. I. M 21. Dors. A. D. 1275. The Parliament
Prorogued before meeting.
Woodstock the 27th of December following, he Prorogues his General Parliament
he propounded to have holden 15 days after the Purification, to the Morrow of
the Octaves of Easter. Quia Generale Parliamentum nostrum, Quod cum Prelatis
and Magnatibus Regni proposuimus habere London, ad Quindenam Purificationis
Beatae Mariae Virginis proximo futur. Quibusdam certis de causis prorogavimus
usque in Crastinum claus. Paschae proxim. sequent. etc. Test Rege apud
Woodstock 27 die December. Directed to Robert Archbishop of Canterbury.

In which Parliament holden upon the Monday after Easter in Stat. at Large, 3
Ed. I. A. D. 1276. Excellent Laws made both for Church and State.
These be the Acts (in French, the Establishments) of King Edward, Son to King
Henry, made at Westminster, at his first Parliament General, after his
Coronation on the Monday of Easter Vtas, (in French, on the Morrow of the Close
of Easter, which was the same day) the 3d year of his By his Council, and by
the Assent of Archbishops, Bishops, Abbats, Priors, Earls, Barons, and all the
Commonalty of the Realm, being thither summoned, because our Sovereign Lord the
King had great Zeal (in the French, Will) and Desire to Redress the State of
the Realm, in such things as required Amendment, for the common Profit of Holy
Church and the Realm, and because the State of the Realm, (so in the French)
and of Holy Church, had been evil kept, and the Prelates and Religious People
of the Land, grieved many ways, and the People otherwise Entreated then they
ought to be, and the Peace less kept, and the Laws less used, and the Offenders
less punished then they ought to be, by reason whereof the People of the Land
feared the less to offend; The King has Ordained and Established these Acts,
(in the French, Things) underwritten, which he intends (in the French,
understands) to be necessary, and profitable for the whole Realm.

First, the King Wills and Commands, That the Peace of Holy Church, and of
the Land, be well kept and maintained in With a saving to the King of the
Rights of the Crown.
all Points, and that common Right be done to all, as well Poor as Rich,
without Respect of Persons. This Statute is called Westminster the First, and
contains 51 Chapters, and the 50th was, A In Tottel's Magna Charta it is Chap.
49. in Mag. Charta Printed 1602, it is Chap. 50.
saving to the King of the Rights of his Crown, notwithstanding these Grants
were made, to the Honor of God, and Holy Church, for the common Good of the
People, and the Ease of such as were Grieved. Thomas Wickes says, this Statute
was made by the Advice of the Lawyers, Jurisperitorum Chronic. 1. 102.
Regni sui co-operante Consilio, by which he gained the Hearts and Affections
of the Plebesans, Quo corda plebeiae multitudinis, inaestimabili sibi
Dilectionis sincertitate conjunxit.

Toward the latter end of July Ib. f. 103. Gasto de Bearn submits himself.
Gasto de Bearn. (beforementioned) King of France, who submitting himself, and
giving Security, after a short Imprisonment, was permitted to go into his own
Country.

About Ib. f. 104. Simon Montfort's Daughter, and Prince Lewellin's Mistress
made Prisoner.
Candlemass this year, Aelionara, Daughter to Simon Montfort, who had been
Contracted to Lewellin, Prince of Wales, in her Father's Lifetime, was sent
from France to be Married unto him, and taken in the Severn not far from
Bristol, and imprisoned.

Nothing of Moment to be found from this time until after Michaelmas following,
when there was a Parliament Totel's Mag. Charta, Printed 1576. p. 39. B. A. D.
1276. The Statute of Bigamy.
holden, in which the Constitutions, called the Statute of Bigamie, that had
been recited in the presence of certain Bishops of England, and other of the
King's Council; at which time all the King's Council, as well Justices, as
others, did agree they should be put in Writing, and published for perpetual
Memory, and that they should be firmly observed, Ib. in fine Status.
were confirmed, or, as it is said in the Close of this Statute, were made. The
Fifth Constitution, or Canon of the Second Council of Lions, holden on the
First of May 1274, and the Second of this King under Pope Gregory X. in these
Words; Labbe, Tom. 11. Part. 1.
Alteroationis antiquae Dubium, presentis Dubitationis Oraculo Decidentes.
Bigamos omni privilegio Clericali Declaramus nudatos, and coereitioni fori
saecularis addictos, consuetudine contraria non obstante. Ipsis quoque sub
anathemate prohibemus Defer Tonsuram vel habitum Clericalem.

Certain Prelates or Ordinaries, did take the meaning of this Canon to extend
only to such as were Bigami, or had been twice Totel's Mag. Charta ut supra, p.
40. a. b. The Reason of the Statute.
Bigamists, whom the Pope in his Council of Lions, deprived of all Privilege of
Clercs, by a Canon therein made, seeing certain Prelates demanded such as had
been so, before that Bigamists as well before as after the making of it, for
the time coming, should not be delivered to the Prelates, but should have
Justice done them as Laymen.

In this Parliament, the Clergy and Laity Granted to the King The. Wike's Chron.
f. 103.
the Pope had ordained in the Council of Lions, That the Tenth of all
Ecclesiastic Revenues should be paid to the support of the Holy Land, and that
the Clergy, had courteously given him and his Brother Two years Tenths since
his Father's Death, he urged them not to pay this Fifteenth, but Treated with
the Bishops, and greatest of them, for a Voluntary Contribution as they should
think fit; What this Contribution or Aid was, it is not said, but it was not to
be drawn into Example or Custom, as appears by the King's Protestation in his
Letters.

Rex omnibus, etc. salutem Pat. 4. Ed. I. M. 6. A. D. 1276.
Licet Comites, Barons, ac alii Magnates, and Communitas, regni nostri
Quintam-decimam Omnium Bonorum suorum, and etiam Venerabilis pater R. Cantnar.
Archiepiscopus, and sui Suffraganei propter urgentia negotia nostra subsidium
de Bonis suis nobis sponte and gratiose concesserunt, etc. That is, the King to
all, etc. Greeting. Whereas the Earls, Barons, other great Men, and the
Community of our Kingdom, Granted us a Fifteenth of all their Goods, and the
Venerable Father the Archbishop of Canterbury, and his Suffragans, for our
urgent Occasions, on their own free Will and Courtesy, granted us an Aid of
their Goods. We by these our Letters do Protest, That this Gift proceeded only
from their free Good Will, and not in the Name of a Fifteenth, and that it
shall not be urged as an Example, or as a Due, or Drawn into Custom by us, or
our Heirs. Witness the King at Westminster the First of November.

Leolin Prince of Wales was Mat. West. f. 408. n. 10. Leolin Prince of Wales
refuses to come to the Parliament at Westminster.
called to this Parliament, as he had been to others, but would not appear; yet
sent Meslengers that he might have Peace, and for the Daughter of the Earl of
Leicester, whom he intended to Marry, and to obtain this, offered a great Sum
of Money. Which the King Refused, neither would he Consent to the Matrimony,
unless he would Restore the Lands which he had seized and invaded in the
Marches, to the just Proprietors, and Repair the Castles in England which he
had destroyed. But the Prince not Complying with these Terms, he sent Forces to
secure the Marches and English Borders from the Irruptions, Rapin, and
Devastations of the Welsh, which proved English. And therefore the King, in the
Fifth year of his Reign, issued out his Writs, to all the Noblemen and others
that held of him by Military Service, dated at Ro^. Scut^ Ed. I. M. 8. A. D.
1277.
Windsor, December the 12th, for the Summoning his Army to meet at Worcester 8
days after St. John Baptist next coming, which were to this Effect.

Whereas Ibm. The King summons his Army against him.
Lewelin the Son of Griffin, Prince of Wales, and his Accomplices, our Rebels,
have invaded our Lands, and the Lands of our Subjects in the Marches, and do
daily invade them, and commit Murders and other Wickednesses, and the same
Lewelin refuses to obey us as he ought, to the great Prejudice and Contempt of
us, and to the manifest Disinheritance and great Damage of you (the Person to
whom the Writ was directed) and other of our Subjects, for which we have now
cansed our Army (Exercitum Nostrum) to be summoned, A. D. 1278.
that it be at Worcester Eight days after St. John Baptist, to Repress the
Rebellion of the said Lewelin and his Assistants. We Command you, to be ready
with your Horses and Arms, and with your Service due to us, to go with us from
thence against the foresaid Lewelin, etc.

With this Army the King marched from The. Wikes, Chron. f 105. Flint and*
Rethelan Castles built.
Chester toward Wales; in his way there was a great Wood, and so thick as his
Army could not pass it; part of which was cut down, and a very large and wide
Way made into Lewelin's Country, where he Built the two Castles of Flint and
Rothelan; seized the Welshmen's Lands, and Goods, and wasted their Country,
drove them into their usual place of Retreat, the Mountains of Snowdon;
Anglesey taken.
Isle of Anglesey.

The Prince of Wales finding himself not able to resist the Force of the
English, desired Peace, which was Walsingham, f. 48. n. 10, 20.
Granted unto him upon the following Articles.

1. That all English Prisoners should be Released freely, without Peace granted
to the Prince of Wales, and the Articles.
claiming any thing from them. 2. That for this Peace, and the King's Good
Will, he should pay at the King's pleasure, 50000 l. Sterling. 3. That Four
Cantreds, and all the Lands Conquered by the English, (except Anglesey) should
be and remain to the King and his Heirs for ever. And for Anglesey, the Prince
was to pay to the King 1000 Marks every year. The first Payment to begin at
Michaelmass then at hand; and for his Ingress or Entry upon it 5000 Marks; and
if the 4. That he should come into England to the King at Christmas to do his
Homage. 5. That all the Homages in Wales, should be to the King, except of Five
Barons that lived in the Confines of Snowdon, because he could not be called
Prince unless he had some Barons under him, for his Life, but after his Death,
the Homages of those Five Barons, should remain to the King and his Heirs for
ever.
For the Security and Observation of these Articles, he delivered to the King
Ibm. Security for the performance of Articles.
Ten Hostages of the best Persons in Wales, without being restrained, or
disinherited. And the best Men of every Cantred, and of Snowdon, by Consent of
the Prince, were to Swear upon the Holy Relics, That whenever the Prince
broke any of these Articles, unless upon Admonition he corrected himself, they
would Estrange themselves, (abalienarent se ab eo)

Also, besides these things, Ibm.
he was to satisfy his Brothers for the Injuries he had done them, they were
Three, Owen, and Roderic, whom he had put into Prison, and David, whom he had
forced to fly into England. The Laity as an Aid toward this War, Ibm. n. 20,
30.
gave the King the 20th part of their Goods.

If the Reader desires to be better informed, or to see this Welsh Affair in a
clearer light, let him look back into the Life of Hen. III. fol. 578, 579, 580.
and fol. 663. D. E. F. etc.

Upon this Peace Ibm. n. 30. Leolin Marries the Daughter of Simon Montfort.
Eleanor, the Daughter of Simon Montfort, was given in Marriage to Lewelin by
the King, whose Prisoner she had been: The Solemnity was performed at his
Charge, and He with his Queen was present at it.

About this time Ibm. n. 40. A. D. 1279. The Earldom of Pontieu the Inheritance
of the Queen of England.
the Countess of Pontieu, the Queen's Mother, died, who had been Queen of
Castile; whose Inheritance, the Earldom of Pontieu, descended to her Daughter;
with whom the King passed the Seas about the Feast of Ascension, and was
Honorably Received by his Cousin Philip King of France, and Amiens, Alezer. f.
319. A. D. 1279. The King and Queen do Homage for several Countries in France.
The King gives up his Right in Normandy.
who there received the Homages of the King and Queen of England, for the
Countries of Agenois, Limosin, Perigord, Xantoigne in Aquitan, and the Earldom
of Pontieu in Picardy, and other Lands, and delivered unto them the Perpetual
Possession of them. For this King Edward gave up all his Right in the Duchy of
Normandy, only reserving 30 Livers of Paris, to be paid Annually out of the
Exchequer.

It was in this year, that so great a number of Jews were Hanged and Fined for
Clipping and Falsifying the King's Coin, as appears by some Writs about this
Matter; though the Story is placed by Math. Westminster in the year before. He
says F. 409. n. 20. Jews Hanged for Clipping and Counterfeiting the King's Coin.
in the Month of November all the Jews in England were taken and imprisoned in
one day for Clipping and Counterfeiting the King's Money, who accused many
Christians as guilty of the same Crime; They were Legally Tried and Convicted
before Special Justices appointed Walter Heliun and John Cobham) as the Writs
inform us, as Pat. Roll. 7. Ed. 1. M. 1. de domibus A. D. 1279.
Judaeorum suspensorum vendendis, for the Sale of the Jews Houses that were
Hanged, as Escheated; and Pat. 7. Ed. 1. M. 11. de potestate vendendi Domus and
Redditus Judaeorum Dampnatorum, Power given to sell the Houses and Rents of the
Condemned Jews. Also Pat. 7. Ed. 1. M. 1. de finibus a Judaeis recipiendis, for
the Receiving Fines of the Jews, such as Compounded for their Ibm.
There were no less then 280 of both Sexes Hanged in London, and in other
Cities of England, ( Maxima multitudo) a very great number, besides such as
were Fined.

The Friars Preachers in England, who desired to Preach to the Preachers to
Convert the Jews.
Obstinate Jews, thereby to Convert them to the Christian Faith, and turn them
from their Wicked Practices and Unbelief; applying themselves to the King,
obtained a Pat 8. Ed. I. M. 27. A. D. 1280.
Writ to all Sheriffs, Bailiffs, and other Liege People, to admonish and induce
the Jews in all Places to come and hear their Preaching without Blasphemy or
Disturbance, at such times as the Friars Preachers should direct. The Title of
the Writ in the Margin of the Roll De praedicando Judaeis, about Preaching to
the Jews. And to promote their Conversion, and for their Support when
Converted, Ibm. Part. 1. M. 15. Dors orintus. Maintenance granted to the
Converted Jews.
the King granted, that toward their Maintenance they should have half the
forfeited Estates of the Jews distributed for their Maintenance, Converts, (now
the Rolls in Chancery Lane, London) for the Support of Converts there; and
further, that the Moiety of the forfeited Estates of the Jews, and all
Deodands, be distributed in Alms according to the Patent pro sustentatione
Judaeorum Conversorum, for the Sustentation of the Converted Jews.

Yet for all this Encouragement the Preachers made no Work of They remain
obstinate and unconverted.
it, the Jews remained so still, they were the same Usurers, and Brokers,
(accounted then Wicked People) as before, and the same Infidels; Only some Poor
Jews, rather to get a Livelihood, then out of Affection to Christ or
Christianity, pretended to be Converts; for about Ten years after they were all
Banished the Kingdom, as appears by these Writs, De Judaeis Regno Angliae
Exeuntibus, England. Claus. 18 Ed. I. M. 6. And De passagio and conductu
Judaeorum Angliae, for the Passage and Conduct of the Jews of England. Pat. 18
Ed. I. M. 14.

In the Tenth of this King, Mat. West. f. 410. n. 50. A. D. 1282. The Welsh
surprise the King's Justitiary.
Lewelin Prince of Wales, and his Brother David, on Palm Sunday night,
surprised the Lord Roger de Clifford, the King's Justiciary there, killed many
of his Servants, wounded, bound, and sent him Prisoner to the Mountain Snowdon,
committing great Ravages, killing the People, and destroying a great part of
the Marches.

The King scarce believing the News at first, upon better Information, sent the
Barons of the Exchequer, and Justices of the Bench, (Justiciarios de Banco) to
Shrewsbury, to put the Laws in Execution, and followed them with an Army, built
a large Bridge over the River Conwey of Boats, or, as the Historian says,
Ships, Snowdon, and gave many Shares of those Lands to his Barons, and others
that had faithfully assisted him. Over this Bridge many of the Nobles of the
King's Army passed out of Anglesey, to view and observe the Country, who
affrighted with the Multitude and Clamor of the Welsh coming upon them,
hasting to return from whence they came, were drowned in their Passage. The
Welsh encouraged by this Accident, which they would have a Miracle, ( non
infortunio sed miraculo ascribentes) pressed their Prince to Act like a Man of
Courage, and it would not be long, e're, according to Merlin's Prophecy, he
should wear the Crown of Brute. Whereupon, with a great Army, he descended into
the Plains, and left his Brother David to defend the Mountains. Where Edmund,
the Son of the Famous Roger Mortimer, then dead, with some other Marchers, set
upon them, and without considerable damage to themselves, The Welsh routed,
Lewlin's Head struck off.
slew a great number of the Welsh, in which Conflict Lewelin's Head was struck
off, presented to the King, and sent to London, and set upon the Tower.

Walsingham F. 50. n. 10, 20. A. D. 1283.
Relates this Story in the year 1283, the 11th of Edward I. and that this
Battle was six days before the Feast of St. Lucy that year; and says, that the
Welsh besieged Rothelan Castle (now Radland) in Flintshire, and that upon King
Edward's coming toward them, they quitted the Siege, and retired. Tho. Wikes
Reports it in the year 1281, and varies also from the others in the Story it
self, and whether any of them be true in that, or not, certain it is, they are
all false in the time, as is evident from the Records hereafter cited.

The King, Append. n. 7.
to the Sheriff of Norf. and Suff. Greeting; Whereas Lewelin the Son of
Griffin, and other Welshmen, his Accomplices, and our Enemies and Rebels, have
so often in the times of us and our Progenitors disturbed the Peace of England,
and do still continue in the same Course; And, for that by the Advice of our
Great Men, and the whole Community of the Land, we propound finally to repress
their Rebellion and Instability, so as it shall not be in their power to
disturb the Peace of the Nation when they please, although it seems to be a very
great Charge and Difficult Undertaking. We Command you, that you cause to come
before us on the Octaves of St. Hillary, (i. e. Jan. 20.) at Northampton, or
before our Commissioners, all those of your Bayliwick that have 20 l. a year
and upwards, who are able and fit to bear Arms, who are not at present with us
in our Expedition against the Welsh. And Four Knights of each County for the
Four Knights summoned to meet for every County. For every City, Burgh, and
Market Town two Men.
Community of the same Counties, having full power from them, and also of every
City, Burgh, and Mercate Town, Two Men, ( Duos homines) for the Communities of
the same, to hear and do those things, which on our behalf we shall cause to be
shown unto them, etc. Witness the King at Rothelan the 24th day of November, in
the 11th year of his Reign. The like Precept was to the Sheriffs of all
Counties in England, to cause to meet, etc. at Northampton, except, to the
Sheriffs of Yorkshire, Cumberland, Westmerland, Northumberland, and
Lancashire, who etc. to meet at York. The like Precept was to the Rot. Wall. 11
Ed. I. M. 4.
Archbishop of Canterbury, to cause all his Suffragans, Abbats, Priors, and
other Prefects of Religious Houses, Procurators of Deans and Chapters of
Collegiate Churches, to come before the King or his Commissioners at the same
time and place, to hear and do as before, and further to give their Counsel and
Assistance, happily to finish what he had begun, to the Praise and Honor of
God, the Magnificence of his Fame, ( and ad magnificentiam nostrae famae) to
the perpetual Peace and Tranquillity of the whole Kingdom, Witness as before.
The like was to the Archbishop of York, for the Meeting of the Clergy of that
Province at York.

After this the King wrote Rot. Walliae. 11 Ed. I. M. 4. De potestate data
petendi and procurandi subsidium Regis in Expeditione Regis Wall. The King
demands a Subsidy, and injoins the form of it. Pope Nich. died, Aug. 22. 1280,
and Martin IV. succeeded Febr. 22. the same year. Walsingham says it was in the
year 1281, and according to Truth.
to the Venerable Fathers in Christ, the Bishops, Abbats, Priors, Deans,
Chapters of the Cathedral and Collegiate Churches of the Province of York, and
their Knights, Freemen, Communities, and all others of every County beyond
Trent, that were to meet on the Octaves of Hillary or 20th of January then near
at hand, That for the Suppressing of the Welsh, etc. and Establishing a
perpetual Peace in England, which he intended with his whole Heart, he had
given Power to the Archbishop of York, and Anthony Bek, Archdeacon of Duresm,
his Secretary, to ask and procure, in his Name, according to the Form to them,
by him delivered and Trent, (plenam damus potestatem petendi and procurandi
nomine nostro juxta formam per nos eis inde Traditam, and injunctam, subsidium
ad opus nostrum, etc.) Commanding and Requiring them to give Credit to what the
Archbishop, and Anthony, should say about the Premises, and to perform what
they should propound to them on his behalf (Ex part nostra.) Witness the King
at Rothelan the 6th day of January, in the 11th of his Reign.

The Welsh affrighted at the Death of their Prince, Mat. Westminster fol. 411. n. 20.
The Welsh deliver up their Castles in Snowdon.
delivered all their Castles in Snowdon, and the very middle of Wales; and the
Clergy and Laity ( Clerus and Populus) granted first a Fifteenth, and
afterward a Thirtieth part of all their Goods, to the

David, the Brother of Lewelin, Ibm. And Walsingham, f. 51. n. 20, 30. f. 52.
lin 6. A. D. 1284. David, Prince Lewelin's Brother, Judicially Condemned, etc.
Wales wholly subdued.
was taken by the King's Spies, and such as he had appointed for that Business,
who refused to see him when brought to Rothelan Castle, although with great
importunity he desired to be brought before him, was sent to Shrewsbury, and
there Judicially Condemned, Hanged, Drawn, and Quartered. From this time Wales
became Subject to England,

King Edward having undertaken the Croysado for the Holy Land, and by reason of
these Welsh Wars, and other things he was about to settle in his own Kingdom,
not being able in his own Person to perform it, intended his Brother Edmund,
Earl of Cornwall, for that Service; and there being Six years Tenths Six years
Tenths granted for the Aid of the Holy Land.
Collected from the Clergy, according to the Canon and Grant Council of Lions,
laid up and secured in several Monasteries, and other Places, for Aid of the
Holy Land; Pope Martin the Fourth sent Two Preaching Friars into England, for
the Exportation and Return of this Money by his Agents and Foreign Merchants,
issued the following Writ to hinder it.

The King to Edmund Earl of Cornwall, Greeting: Append. n. 8. The King forbids
the Carrying of Money out of the Land to the Pope, who sent for it.
Because for certain Causes we will not, that the Six years Tenths Granted by
the Clergy of Our Kingdom for the Aid of the Holy Land, and now Collected, be
carried out of the Kingdom; We Command, that you cause to come before you all
the Merchants of London, as well those of Companies as others, and Injoin and
Inhibit them on Our behalf, under the Peril of Losing Life, Member, and all
their Goods, that they no manner of ways Carry, Cause, or Permit to be Carried,
the Money arising from the said Tenths out of the Kingdom; and if you find any
Merchants or others doing so, That you cause them and the Money to be Arrested,
and safely kept, until you receive other Commands from Us. Witness the King at
Hertlebury the 24th of May, in the 10th of Our Reign. The like Command was to
the Major and Sheriffs of London, and to Stephen Pencestre Warden of the Five
Ports.

And he did not only Issue this Prohibition, but sent Commissioners to the
Places where it was laid up, to see how much there was, and to order the safe
keeping of it for the right Use. Cl. 11 Ed. I. M. 7. Dors. de Decima.
The Priors of Ely and Norwich refused to let the King's Officers see or secure
the Money in their Monasteries, whereupon he commanded Ibm.
the Sheriffs of Norfolk and Cambridgeshire, to cause them, with 3 or 4 of
their Discreet Monks, to come to him wherever he was, to answer the Contempt.
Witness the King at Aberconwey in Snowdon the 15th day of June.

The Two Friars, (viz. Garnerius, and Ramerius de Florentia, ordinis
Praedicatorum) that brought the Pope's Orders for the Return or Transportation
of these Tenths, brought also his Claus. 10. Ed. I. M. 5. Dors. litera directa
Papae de cruce assumenda. The Pope writes to the King about his Voyage to the
Holy Land.
Letters to the King for the taking upon him the Cross, and assigning the time
of the General Passage of the Christians of all Nations into the Holy Land;
They pressed the King for an Answer, who commended their Prudence very much to
the Pope, and only wrote Holiness should receive Answer by Messengers of his
own from Chester the 10th of June.

By these Messengers, Claus 11. of Ed. I. M. 7. Dors. Bulla directa Regis super
Decima. The King sends Answer by his own Messengers.
who were Robert Dean of York, and John Clazel his Chaplain, (as we are
informed by the Pope's Bull to the King about this Matter) he desired, That the
Tenths that were gathered in his Kingdom, might be assigned to his Brother
Edmund, Earl of Campaign and Britany, (as the Pope there styles ready to
undertake the Cross for the Succor of the Holy Land, at the time of the
General Passage. But the Pope excusing the Delay of his Return to his Petition,
Ibm.
refused to Grant his Request, and giving both him and his Brother great
Encomiums, and many fine Words, earnestly moved him to go in his own Person, as
was expected, for the Glory of GOD, and his Own Honor. This Bull is Dated apud
Vrbem Veterem, (now Orvieto) on the 8th of January, in the Second year of his
Popedom,

After this, according to the Registrum Peccham. f. 66. The King and Pope
disagree about the Tenths and Business of the Holy Land.
Relation in the Pope's Letter, or Bull, directed to John Peccham, Archbishop
of Canterbury, recited in his Answer to it, directed to the Pope; The King is
Charged, with Breaking open the Locks, and Seals of the Places where this Money
was kept, and removing of it whither he pleased, to the great Offense of the
Divine Majesty, and much Contempt of the Apostolic See, whereas he ought not
to have done it without his License, having sent (as it is there said) frivolous
Letters for his Excuse. In which Bull or Letter, he Commands him, by virtue of
his Obedience, to go to the King, and admonish The Pope sends the Arch. Bishop
to Admonish the King.
and induce him on his behalf, ( ex part nostra moneas and inducas) to restore
and send the Money back from whence it was taken, without any defalcation,
within the space of a Month, and to tell him he would not, nor ought to suffer
the Holy Land to sustain complied with the Admonition, he would proceed against
him and the Nation, according to the Quality of the Fact, and as he should
think fit. Enjoining the Archbishop to give him an Account what he did in this
Affair, and what the King's Answer was. Dated at the same Place as before, the
5th of July, in the Third year of his Pontificate.

The Archbishop's Return Ibm. The Archbishop's Account to the Pope concerning
the King and the Tenths granted for the Holy Land.
to the Pope was this. Huic igitur Sanctitatis vestrae Mandato vires and vota
subjiciens reverenter, etc. In Obedience to your Holiness's Commands, I went
immediately to the King in the Marches of Wales, and delivered your Letters
into his own Hands; and having openly and plainly Expounded your Letters and
Command to me, and shown the Authority of it, before him and his Great Men, I
admonished the King to the performance of Three Things.

1. That he should restore, and cause to be carried to the Places from whence
it was taken, the whole Money of the Tenths, with such readiness and alacrity,
as might expiate the Crime of taking it away. 2. That for the future he should
forbear such Actions, adjoining, Apostolic Elementy retained him in the number
of her Dearest Sons, yet if he should be afterward found in such Offenses, she
neither could nor would withold from him the Rod of Correction. (Non posse
eam, nec velle virgam ei Correctionis subtrahere) lest sparing the Man, it
should assent to those Divine Affronts or Injuries it had not Corrected. (Ne
parcendo homini Divinis Injuriis quas non corrigeret, assentiret.) 3. That he
should not trouble or prosecute those that had the Money in keeping.
Quibus silenter and Reverenter auditis, etc. To which, he having patiently,
and reverently heard them, and having deliberated with those about him, he thus
answered.

To the First, That there was no necessity of the Pope's sending

To the Second, That he intended no undue thing ( nihil indebitum intendebat)
against the Church for the future.

To the Third, He said he wondered, why it should be put upon

When he sent this Account of his Proceeding to the Pope, he also advertised
him, That it was affirmed by such Testimony as ought to be believed, that the
King had restored the Money; but (Nisi per illos qui ipsius noverunt Pondus,
Numerum, and Mensuram.) This Answer of the Archbishop to the Pope is dated the
29th of November.

While the King Mat. West. f. 411. n. 50, A. D. 1284. King Ed. II. Born.
remained in Wales, for the Establishing and Settling his own, and the Nation's
Affairs there, his Son Edward Caernarvon on St. Mark's- Day; where he continued
until toward the latter end of April the year following, and then having
finished his Work, Ib. f. 412. n. 30. A. D. 1285.
he came into England, and was received at London in great Triumph the last day
of that Month.

Matthew of Westminster Reports, That the King of Ibm. n. 40, 50.
France, Philip IV. called the Fair, not long after his Father's Death, sent
his Ambassadors to King Edward, to come over into France, and employ his
Mediation for a Peace between himself, and the Kings of Arragon and Spain. He
complied with his desire, and on the 24th of June passed the Sea, and was
attended with many Bishops, A. D. 1286.
Earls, and Barons, and was received Honorably by the France, and Conducted to
St. Germans, where he staid some time, and demanded the Lands which his
Grandfather King John had lost, and obtained Ten thousand Pounds Sterling of
the King of France, to be yearly paid at the Tower of London, together with
some Arrears for Normandy, which was his Inheritance.

Mezeray's Story is otherwise, he F. 322. A. D. 1286.
says ever since the Death Philip III. Edward King of England had omitted no
Endeavor to confirm the Treaties with his Successor. In the year 1286, landing
in France about Pontieu, he was received at Amiens by several Lords sent from
the King to meet him; from thence he came to Paris, where he was Magnificently
Treated, and was present at the Parliament, which was held after Easter, and
went from thence to Bourdeaux. The apparent Cause of his Voyage, was the Desire
he had to compose the Business of the King of Arragon France, because Alphonso,
the Eldest Son and Successor of Peter, had Married or Espoused his Daughter
Elianor; He forgot not likewise then to press earnestly he might have some
Consideration for Normandy, and those other Countries, which both his Father
and himself had Renounced, but could obtain nothing in either of these Points.
Being at Bordeaux, he solemnly Received the Ambassadors of the Kings of Aragon,
Castile, and Sicily, all Enemies to France, which gave no Philip; Thus the
French Historian. And there is nothing to be found of his Mediation, or what
Effect it had.

He staid in France above Three years, without doubt to Transact his own
Affairs; And at his Mat West. f. 414. n. 10. A. D. 1289. King Edward punished
his Justices for Bribery.
Return, Aug. the 4th, he made a Progress through England, and punished his
Justices that had taken Bribes in his absence, perverted Judgment, and

Alexander III. King of Scotland, died Buchan. rer. Scot. lib. 7. f. 85. a. n.
10. Printed at Edinburgh, A. D. 1582. Alexander K. of Scots dies.
by a fall off his Horse on the 19th of March 1285; and before himself all his
Children died: his Daughter Margaret was Married to Eric King of Norwey, who by
him left one only Daughter named Margaret, called the Maid of Norwey, Heiress
to the Crown of Scotland. Alexander thus dead without Issue, except this
Grandchild, Norwey with her Father, there was a Convention of the States of the
Kingdom at Scone, in which they Treated of creating a new King, and settling
the State of the Kingdom, Ib. lib. 8. in mitio, f. 86. a. n. 10.
in quo conventu de novo Rege creando, and Statu Regni componendo ageretur,
which King's creation (as the Author expresses it) was only providing a
Husband for the Maid of Norwey, as appears by the following Story, where were
chosen Six Guardians Six Guardians or Governors of the Kingdom chosen. Margaret
the Maid of Norwey his Grandchild and Heir.
or Governors of the Kingdom, to Rule it in the Name of Margaret the Maid of
Norwey, as will presently appear: To whom King Edward, knowing the Grandchild
of his Sister, (King Alexander's Queen) the only Child of the King of Norwey,
and sole Survivor of Alexander's Posterity, to be the Lawful Heir of the
Kingdom of Scotland, sent Messengers thither to require her for a Wife for his
Son. Ibm. n. 20. A Match propounded between her, and Edw. II.
Edwardus Anglorum Rex gnarus suae sororis neptem Regis Norwegiae filiam unam
ex Alexandri posteris esse superstitent, eandemque Regni Scotorum legitimam
haeredem, legatos ad eam deposcendam filio suo uxorem in Scotiam Misit.

To proceed in this Match the Popes Pat. 17. Ed. I. M. 3. Cedula intus de facto
Norwegiae.
Dispensation was procured, they being Cousin Germans, to legitimate the
Marriage. This obtained, King Edward writes to Eric King of Norwey Ib. M. 4.
Cedula.
about this Affair, assuring him, That the Guardians, the Great Men, Prelates,
and the whole Community of the Kingdom of Scotland, had unanimously consented
to it. And the King of Norwey Ib. M. 3. 4. A Treaty about that Match.
wrote to King Edward, and sent Commissioners there named, to Transact with
him, That by his Advice and Assistance his Niece might be obeyed as Queen and
Heir of Scotland, and that she might Govern as Kings do in other Kingdoms, Vt
ipse apponeret auxilium and consilium, qualiter praedictae Reginae nepti suae
obediretur, ut Domina, Regina, and haeres, Regni Scotiae, and quod ipsa inde
Ordinare possit pariter and Gaudere prout aliis faciunt Reges Regnis. Ibm.
King Edward wrote also to the Guardians of Scotland, to send Commissioners to
Treat with those of Norwey about the Emendation, Peace and Quiet of that
Kingdom, and ordering the State of the Queen, (and reformatione Status Reginae)
who sent them accordingly, with whom he joined Commissioners of his own. All
these Commissioners named in this Instrument, met at Salisbury on the 26th of
October, where and when

First, That the Queen and Heir Ibm. The Articles of that Treaty.
(Regina and Haeres) should come into England or Scotland before the Feast of
All Saints next coming, if she had no reasonable Excuse, free from any Contract
of Marriage or Espousals, for which the Commissioners of Norwey did undertake.
Secondly, That if she came so into England, King Edward promised, Scotland was
so secured in Peace and Quiet, as she might safely go thither, and stay there,
if the Scots required, he would send her thither free from all Contracts of
Marriage and Espousals, so as the Scots before they should receive her, gave
good Security to him, and the King of Norwey, they would not Marry her without
their Consents. Thirdly, The Scots Commissioners likewise promised, for
themselves Ibm.
Quod inibi ut in suum Regnum venire poterit, and pro suae voluntatis libito
Commorari, prout ipsius Terrae vera Domina, Regina and Hears; Quodque de
premissis omnes securitates praestabunt, quae rationabiles fuerint, and quas
dicti Duntii Norwegiae ipsos facere posse dicunt. That she might come and
remain there at her pleasure, as true Lady, Queen, and Heir, and that
concerning the Premises, they would give all Rational Security, that the
Commissioners of Norwey should say they might give. Fourthly, If any of the
Guardians or Officers of Scotland were suspected, they should be Removed, Ibm.
and new ones put in their Places by the Commissioners of Norwey, and Scotland,
and such as the King of England should appoint for that purpose, and if the
Scots and Norwegians could not agree in this Matter, then the English
Commissioners were to determine what was to be done, and not only in this, but
in all Matters whatsoever, that should happen in settling the State and
Reformation of Scotland.
For the performance of all this it was Ibm.
agreed there should be a great Meeting of the English and Scots at and near
Rokesburgh, Midlent next following, where the Scots were to give Security for
the Performance of these things, and for the Emendation of Scotland before such
as the King of England sent thither. Ibm.
To this Agreement in Three Parts, Two in French for the English and Scots, and
a Third in Latin for the Commissioners of Norwey. The Respective Commissioners
set to their Seals, and it was Dated at Salisbury on Sunday the Feast of St.
Leonard, (i. e. November 6.) 1289.

By his Letters Append. n. 9. King Edward writes to the Nobility of Scotland to
assist the Guardians.
dated the same day at Clarendon, directed to the Prelates, Great Men, and the
whole Community of Scotland, King Edward Requires them to obey and be assisting
to the Guardians, who were appointed in the Name of his Kinswoman Queen
Margaret, to Govern that Kingdom.

This securing Scotland to the Right Heir, and making it in so The meaning of
Buchanan's King-Creation.
Kingdom, and King-Creation, as Buchanan artificially insinuates in his
Republican Expressions.

For further facilitating of this intended Marriage, and that it might proceed,
with the Assent and Approbation of the Guardians, Bishops, Abbats, Earls,
Barons, and whole Community of Scotland, King Edward Pat. 18 Ed. I. M. 8, 9. A.
D. 1290.
confirmed to them certain Articles agreed on, by special Commissioners on both
Parts. The English Commissioners on behalf of the King and his Heirs Granted:

First, That they should Have, Use, and Enjoy, their Laws, Liberties,
Concessions of King Edward for promoting the Match between his Son and the
Heiress of Scotland.
and Customs, they had before Enjoyed. Secondly, That if Edward and Margaret
should die without Thirdly, That the Kingdom of Scotland might remain
separated, divided, and free in it self, from the Kingdom of England, without
subjection, by its true Bounds and Limits, as it had been before time. This was
Granted with a saving of the King's Right before this Treaty. Fourthly, That
the Chapters of Cathedral, Collegiate, or Conventual Churches, might not be
compelled to go out of the Kingdom to ask Leave to Elect or Present their
Elects, or to do Fealty to the King of Scotland, nor any Tenants in Capite, or
other Persons forced out of the Kingdom, to do their Homage, Fealty, and
Services, or prosecute any Suits, or other things which were used to be done
there, but that they might be done in their usual Places, before the Chancellor
of Scotland Fifthly, That the Parlements for what concerned Scotland, might be
holden within that Kingdom.
The King was to Ibm.
Swear to the Observation of these Things; And the Commmissioners promised
further, That he should oblige himself and Heirs to make Restitution of the
Kingdom in the Case aforesaid in to be paid to the Church of Rome in Aid of the
Holy Land; and, That he should Consent, the Pope might constrain him and his
Heirs, by Excommunicating them, and interdicting the Kingdom, as well to the
Restitution, as Payment of the Money, if he did not.

It was lastly Ibm.
Agreed and Promised by the English Commissioners, That King Edward at his own
Charges should procure Edward and Margaret, and that within the same time, and
infra idem Tempus Communitati Regni Scotiae liberari, to be delivered to the
Community of the Kingdom of Scotland, who could be no other then the Nobility
and Military Tenants.

These Articles and Concessions were Sealed by the Commissioners on Tuesday
before the Feast of July 10.
St. Margaret, on the 15th August, (that is July 18.) A. D. 1290; and the
Letters Patents of Confirmation of this Agreement were Sealed with the King's
Seal at Northampton, August 28.

On the same day the King appointed Append. n. 10. King Edward appointed a
Lieutenant in Scotland, to Queen Margaret and his Son.
the Bishop of Durham to be Lieutenant to Queen Margaret, and his Son Prince
Edward, in Scotland, for Preserving the Peace and Government thereof, with the
Advice of the Guardians, Prelates, and Great Men, according to the Laws and
Customs of the Kingdom. And the Guardians and Noblemen of Scotland, with the
Governors and Captains of the Castles and Forts, engaged themselves Pat. 18 Ed.
I M. 8.
to deliver them up, when their Queen and her Husband should come into that
Kingdom. This whole Transaction at large is to be found in the Patent Rolls of
the 17th, M. 3, 4. and of the 18th Queen Margaret dies.
of Ed. I. M. 8, 9. in the Tower of London, in the Record Office there.

But before this intended Marriage could be consummated, in her Voyage toward
England or Scotland, the Queen died, Rot. de superioriate Regis Angliae in
Regno Scotia, etc. Annis 19, 20, 21, 22, 23, Ed. I. in (...) Land. Several
Competitors for the Crown.
after whose Death there arose a Contention between several Pretenders to the
Right of the Crown and Kingdom of Scotland, which put that Nation into
Confusion; King Ibm.
Edward, as Superior and direct Lord thereof, called his Parliament at Norham in
the Confines of Scotland, Ibm.
( Indicto apud Norham in confiniis Regni Scotia suo Parliamento) and went
thither to determine the Controversy about the Right of Succession between the
Competitors.

On the 10th of Imb. A. D. 1291. King Edward claims the Superiority and Direct
Dominion over Scotland.
May, A. D. 1291, and Nineteenth of Ed. I. by the King's Command, the Nobility,
Prelates, Knights, Congregatis apud Norham ad Regis Mandatum utriusque Regni
Nobilibus, and Praelatis, Militibus, and perpluribus aliis in Multitudine
Copiosa) where Roger Brabancon, the King's Justiciary, in the presence of a
Public Notary, and Witnesses purposely called thither, in praesentia mei
Notarii publici and Testium vocatorum ad hoc specialiter and rogatorum) in the
King's Name told them the Reason of his coming, and of their being there called
together, which was, That he taking notice in what Confusion the Nation had
been since the Death of Alexander their last King, and his Children, for the
Affection he had for them, and all the Inhabitants thereof, whose Protection
and Safeguard was well known to belong to him, for the doing right to all that
claimed the Kingdom, and Preservation of the Peace: To show them his
Superiority, and Direct Dominion, out of diverse Chronicles and Monuments
preserved in several Monasteries, to use his Right; to do Justice to all,
without Usurpation or Diminution of their Liberties, and to demand their Assent
to, and Recognition of his Superiority and Direct Dominion.

The Justiciary having thus spoken in the King's Name, and the Bishops, and
other Ecclesiastic Prelates, Earls, Barons, Great Men, and other Nobles of the
Communalty of the Kingdom of Scotland, there present, having understood his
Meaning, ( Quibus Ibm. The Nobility of Scotland require time to Consider of his
Claim.
per praefatum Dominum Rogerum, nomine Regis Angliae, peroratis, and a
praefatis Episcopis, and aliis Praelatis Ecclesiasticis, Comitibus, Baronibus,
aliisque Nobilibus, de Communitate dicti Regni Scotiae ibidem praesentibus
before intellectis) they required time to Consult with such of their Orders as
were absent, which the King granted until the next day only.

When, Ibm.
it being the 11th of May, they met again in the Church of Norham, and then
they earnestly press the King to give Recognition of his Superiority and Direct
He gives them time, and directs them to produce Evidence against his Claim.
Dominion over the Kingdom of Scotland, which he said was his Right, ( Quod
dicebat esse suum jus.) Upon Deliberation he gave them time until the Second of
June next coming; and on that day precisely they were to Answer his Demand, and
if they had any Evidence, Writings, or Antiquities, which might exclude him
from the Right, and Exercise of his Superiority

And that they might the better understand his Title, and make His Title.
their Objections against it, the Ibm.
Bishop of Durham was appointed to Declare it to the Nobility, and Prelates
there present: The Declaration he made, and Arguments he used were Historical,
and taken from the Ibm.
Manuscripts of Marianus Scotus, William of Malmsbury, Roger de Hoveden, Henry
de Huntingdon, Ralph de Diceto, and the Chronicle of St. Albans. That is, Math.
Paris; That the Scots had been Conquered by several of our Saxon Kings; That
several of their Kings had submitted to them, sworn Fealty, done Homage, and
received the Crown and Kingdom from them; and that the Scots had also submitted
and been Governed by such Kings, as the English Saxon Kings had given that
Kingdom to, and placed over them; That after the Conquest the very same things
had been done, submitted to, and complied with, in the Reigns of William the
First, Second; Henry the First, Stephen, Henry the Second, Richard the First,
King John, and Henry the Third.

Most of which Authorities Cited as Matter of Fact in this long Deduction, are
to be found in the Historians abovementioned now in Print, according to their
several Years and Dates. Except that in the Year 1189. in the Month of
December, it is only said in Hoveden, That William King of Scots came to
Canterbury, and did Homage to Richard the First, for what he held of him in
England; and it is omitted in the same Deduction, Hoveden, f. 377. a. b.
That he Henry the Second, by Bargains, Agreements, New Charters, and
Imprisonment had Extorted from him, Reserving only the Homage due to him for
the Lands he held in England: So as he was to be in the State and Condition
with King Richard, as his Brother Malcolm King of Scotland had in been the time
of his Progenitors. And also, That Alexander his Son, upon the Marriage of
Henry the Third's Daughter, did his Homage to him England; but being demanded
to do the like for the Kingdom of Scotland, and acknowledge his Superiority
according to the Practice of his Predecessors, Modestly Mat. Paris f. 829. N.
50.
refused it, and was not earnestly urged to do it, lest it might disturb the
Jollity of the Marriage Entertainment.

After the King's Title to the Dominion of Scotland had been ^ot. de
Superioritate Regis Angliae, etc.
Second of June, the Bishops, and other Ecclesiastic Prelates, together with
the Earls, Barons, and other Nobles of the Community of the said Kingdom of
Scotland, met right against Norham Castle, (where King Edward then was) in a
Green Plain on the other side of the River Tweed, as also the Noble Men that
claimed the Kingdom. The Scots Nobility meet about King Edward's Title.
Congregatis Ex opposito castri de Norham, ex alia part fluminis de Tweda in
quadam area viridi, Episcopis Prelatisque aliis Ecclesiasticis Regni Scotiae,
una cum Comitibus, Baronibus, aliisque Nobilibus de Communicate dicti Regni.
Necnon and Nobilibus Uiris Jus ad dictum Regnum vendicantibus, etc. The Bishop
of Bath and Wells was sent to Demand in the King's Name, What they had done
since the last Meeting, Ibm.
and whether they would Say, Exhibit, Propound, or show any thing that could or
ought to exclude the King of England from the Right and Exercise of the
Superiority and direct Dominion of the Kingdom of Scotland; and They do not say
or produce any thing against it.
that they would Produce and Exhibit it, if they believed it Expedient for
them, si sibi crederent Expedire, protesting in the Name of the King of
England, he would favorably hear them, and allow what was Just, or Report what
they said to him, and his Council. That upon Deliberation they might do what
Justice required. They though often required, answered Nothing, propounded He
resolves to proceed in Hearing and Deciding the Titles of the Competitors to
the Crown.
nothing against it, declared to them, the King would make use of his Right of
Superiority and direct Dominion in Scotland, in Deciding the Controversy
between the several Competitors for that Kingdom, which according to the
Notary's Form and Method is thus tediously Expressed; Ibm.
Idcirco vobis omnibus and singulis tam Episcopis, Prelatisque aliis
Ecclesiasticis, quam Comitibus, Baronibus, Nobilibus, and Magnatibus aliis de
Communitate dicti Regni Scotiae hic Congregatis, Idem Dominus noster Rex
Angliae, per nos Robertum Bathoniensem and Wellensem Episcopum insinuat and
Denuntiat, Quod cum ex part vestra per vos and vestrum aliquem, nihil sit
propositum, exhibitum, vel oftensum, quod jus, Executionem, seu Exercitium
juris sui, hujusmodi Superioritatis and Directi sui Dominii praedicti debeat
aliqualiter impedire; Intentionis suae est Jure suo praedicto uti, and in ipso
negotio inter contendentes de Jure Successionis Regni Scotiae procedere.

Then beginning with Robert de Brus Lord of Anandale, and one All the
Competitors acknowledge Edward I. to have the Superiority and direct Dominion
over the Kingdom of Scotland, and that they would receive Justice from him.
of those that Claimed the Right of Succession to the Kingdom of Scotland, he
asked him in the Presence of all the Bishops, Prelates, Earls, Barons, etc.
Whether in Demanding the said Right, he would Demand, Answer, and Receive
Justice, before the King England, as Superior and Direct Lord of the Kingdom of
Scotland, who presently, publicly, openly, and expressly, in the Presence of
all and every one of them, and the Public Notary, no body Contradicting or
Gainsaying, answered, That he did acknowledge the King of England, Superior and
Direct Lord of the Kingdom of Scotland, and that he would from and before him,
as his Superior and Direct Lord of the Kingdom of Scotland, Demand, Answer, and
receive Justice. Ibm.
Idcirco ex part dicti Domini Regis Angliae and de ipsius mandato speciali,
incipiendo a vobis Domino Roberto de Brus, Domino Vallis Anandiae, etc.
interrogando quaerimus, hic in praesentia istorum Praelatorum, Comitum,
Baronum, and aliorum Nobilium utriusque Regni hic Existentium, an super
Petitione Juris vobis Competentis ad dictum Regnum velitis coram ipso Rege
Angliae utpote Superiori Domino vestro Regni Scotiae, stare juri, and ab eo
petere, Respondere, and Recipere Justiciae Complementum. Qui statim, public,
palam, and Express, in praesentia omnium and singulorum ibidem praesentium,
and mei Notarii infra scripti, respondens dixit, Quod Dominum Regem Angliae
recognovit Superiorem and Directum Dominum dicti Regni Scotiae, and concessit
se velle etc. ab ipso, and coram ipso, utpote Superiori and Directo Domino suo
Regni Scotiae, Petere, Respondere, and Recipere Justiciae Complementum.

All the other Competitors there present, viz. Ibm. The Competitors who they
were.
Florence Earl of Holland, Lord John Hastings, Patrick of Dunbar Earl of March,
William Vescy, William de Ros, Robert de Pinkney, and Nicolas de Souls, had
the same Question put to them, and made the same Answer.

John Baliol was absent, and upon his Ibm. John Baliol submitted as the other
Competitors.
Procter's Request, the Meeting was continued until the next Day, the Third of
June, to be in the Parish Church of Norham; When he gave the same Answer to the
same Questions.

And they did not only make this Recognition publicly in this great Assembly;
but they made the following Letters Patent thereof to the King. Append. N. 11.
The Instrument by which the Competitors made their Submission.
To all those that shall see or hear this Letter. Florence Earl of Holland,
Robert de Brus Lord of Anandale, John Baliol Lord of Galloway, John Hastings
Lord of Abergavenny, John Common Lord of Badenaugh, Patrick de Dunbar Earl of
March, for his Father, Nicholas de Souls, and William de Ros, Greeting in the
Lord: Whereas we intend to pursue our Right to the Kingdom of Scotland, and to
Declare, Challenge, and Averr the same, before him that has most Power,
Jurisdiction, and Reason to Try it; and the Noble Prince Edward, by the Grace
of God King of England, having informed us by Good and sufficient Reasons, That
to him belongs the Sovereign Seigneurie of the Kingdom of Scotland, and the
Cognizance of Hearing, Trying, and Determining our Right. We of our own Good
Will, without all manner of Force, do Grant to Receive right from him as
Sovereign Lord of the Land; and we Will also and Promise, That we will have and
hold firm and stable his Act, and he shall Enjoy the Realm, to whom it shall be
adjudged before him: In Witness whereof we have set our Seals to this Writing,
Made and Granted at Norham the Tuesday after the Ascension, in the Year of
Grace, 1291.

This done Rot. de Superioritate Regis Angliae in Regno Scotiae ut Supra. The
Rights of the Pretenders to the Crown of Scotland how to be tried.
The King and his Council treated with the Prelates, Noblemen, and Competitors
for the Crown of Scotland, how this Business might be best proceeded in; and
also the Reformation of the State of the Nation. It was agreed by the Unanimous
Consent of the Noblemen and Prelates of both Nations, ( Nemine Contradicente)
That John Baliol and John Common should choose Forty Persons, and Robert de Brus
should choose other Forty fit Persons, whose Names should be delivered to the
King three Days after, viz. June, to whom he was to add Twenty Four, or more or
less, who should Hear and Discuss the Rights of all the Pretenders, to make a
Faithful Report thereof to him, That he might give the Definitive Sentence.

All this was done on the Second and Third of June; but because by the
Letters Patent of Recognition, or Instrument above, he had not sufficient
Power to put in Execution his Sentence to Ibm.
The Competitors came before him on the 4th of June, and very many of the
Bishops, Earls, Barons, Knights, and Noblemen of both the Kingdoms, when he had
Possession given him of the Kingdom and Castles of Scotland, by the
Competitors, with the Consent of the Community of the same Kingdom, Nemine
Contradicente, according to the following Instrument or Writing:

To all those who shall see or hear this present Letter, Ibm. The King had the
Possession of Scotland given him, in order to the Declaring who had most Right,
and putting him in Possession.
We Florence Earl of Holland, etc. as before, Greeting in GOD, Whereas we have
Given and Granted with one assent of our own Good Will, without Force, to the
Noble Lord Edward King of England, That he as Sovereign Lord of the Land of
Scotland, should Judge, Try, and Determine the Claims and Demands, we intend to
propound, and aver for our Right in the Kingdom of Scotland, and to Receive
Right before him as Sovereign Lord of the Land, promising to have and hold his
Act firm and stable; and that he should Enjoy the Kingdom, to whom he should
give it; But for that the said King of England cannot make any manner of
Cognizance or accomplish his Judgment, nor put his Judgment in Execution, nor
the Execution take Effect without the Possesssion or Seisin of the same Land,
or the Castles thereof, we Will, Grant, and Assent, That he as Sovereign Lord,
to perform the Things aforesaid, shall have Seisin of all the Land and Castles
in Scotland, until Right be done to the Demandants, upon Condition, That before
he be put in Possession he shall give sufficient Security to the Demandants, to
the Guardians and Community of the Kingdom of Scotland, to Restore it, and the
Castles, with all the Royalty, Dignity, Seignories, Franchises, Customs,
Rights, Laws, Vsages, and Possessions, and all manner of Appurtenances in the
same State and Condition they were when he received them, saving to the King of
England the Homage of Him that shall be King: So as they may be Restored within
two Months, after the Day the Right shall be Determined and Affirmed; and that
the Profits of the Nation which shall be Received in the mean time, may be kept
in the Hands of the Chamberlain of Scotland that now is, and one to be joined
with him by the King of England, so as the Charge of the Government, Castles,
and Officers of the Realm might be deducted. In Witness whereof, we have set
our Seals to this Writing, Made and Granted at Norham, on Wednesday after
Ascension, in the Year of Grace, 1291.

On the Fifth of June, Ibm. The Names of the Examiners of the Titles of the
Competitors delivered to the King.
the Names of the Eighty elected to Examine, Hear, and Report the Rights of the
Competitors, were delivered to the King, on the Sixth they were ordered to
appoint the Place and Day for their Examination, and Hearing the Petitions of
the Demandants, ( Petitiones Petentium) and Ibm. Berwick the Place of Meeting
for that Purpose.
Berwick upon Tweed was appointed for the Place, which the King accepted; but
not agreeing on the Time the King as Superior and Direct Lord of the Kingdom by
the Unanimous Consent of the Prelates and Noblemen of both Kingdoms there
present, appointed the Second of August a Peremptory Day for the Competitors to
propound their Titles.

On the 11th of June Ibm. The Guardians of Scotland deliver their Guardianships
to the King, etc.
the Bishops of St. Andrews and Glasco, John Common Lord of Badenaugh, and James
Seneschal or Stewart of Scotland, the then Guardians of the Kingdom, and all
the Castellans, or Constables of Castles, delivered up their Guardianships and
Bayliwicks to the King as Superior Lord, Suas Custodias, and B^llivas Domino
Regi, etc. reddiderunt; and when he had received them, he committed the
Guardianship of the Kingdom to the He makes the same Persons Guardians.
same Persons, to Govern it under him, and in his Name; Ibm.
and presently the Bishops and Noblemen of Scotland, by the King's Command,
chose Alan Bishop of Cathnes their Chancellor, and presented him to the King,
who allowed him, and adjoined Walter of Agmundesham, his Clerk, to him, as an
Associate; and on the next day they were both Sworn.

These things done, Ibm. Fealty Sworn by the Guardians, and Pretenders to the
Crown.
the Guardians, and Pretenders to the Crown, and all and singular the Bishops,
and other Ecclesiastic Prelates, Earls, Barons, Great* Men, and the
Communities of Cities and Burghs there present, that were bound to do and Swear
Fealty to the King, had notice to do it on the Morrow to the King of England,
as Superior and Direct Lord of Scotland, in the same place where they were then
assembled, in the Green Plain beyond the River Twede, in the Bounds of
Scotland, Ibm.
which June to the 3d or 4th of August, all the Bishops, Earls, Barons,
Noblemen, And whole Kingdom of Scotland.
Free-Tenents, or Tenants in Military Service, Communities, and all others that
were bound to do and Swear Fealty to the King of Scotland, (Qui fidelitatem
Domino Regi Scotiae facere tenebantur) were (to save Expenses and Labor) Sworn
by Commissioners in all parts of the Kingdom, and a very great number of their
Bishops, Earls, Barons, and other Noblemen of Scotland there present.

While the King was thus employed in Deciding this Controversy, his Mother
Queen Walsingh. f. 57 n. 40. Queen Elianor, Queen Edward's Mother, dies.
Elienor died about Midsummer, and England to see her Interred, and the Funeral
solemnized with all due Honor; When that was over, he returned toward Scotland.

And was at Berwick Rot. superitatis Regis Angliae, etc. ut supra. The
Competitors appear before the King.
on the 3d of August, which day being continued with the day preceding,
according to his Assignation, the Competitors appeared before him and his
Council, in the Assembly of the Prelates and Noblemen of both Nations, and with
Twenty four English Auditors and Examiners of their Titles chosen by the King,
and the Fourscore chosen by Robert de Brus, and John Baliol, and such others as
would Consent to the Election made by them, to Discuss their particular Rights,
and make Report thereof to the King.

There appeared no less then Twelve Demandants that put in their Pleas for the
Crown of Scotland, all entered in this Roll, and Petitioned to have the Kingdom
delivered to them; besides, the King of Norwey, who by his Proctors and
Messengers, demanded it, as Heir to his Daughter Margaret: Ibm. The Twelve
Competitors Names.
The others were Florence Earl of Holland, Patrick de Dunbar Earl of March,
William de Vescy, William de Ros, Robert de Pinkny, Nicholas de Souls, Patrick
Galightly, Roger de Mundevill, John Common, John de Hastings, John de Balioli,
and Robert de Brus.

The Petitions, Ibm. The Competitors Petitions, with their Reasons, Reported to
the King.
with the Reasons of their Claims having been propounded and shown to the
Auditors, they Reported them to the King, before the Prelates and Noblemen of
both Kingdoms, in the presence of all and every of the Demandants, and of the
Public Notary; The King assigned them by their own Consent, Monday next after
the Feast of the Holy Trinity, which would be on the Second day of June, in the
year 1292, for the further

The King Ibm.
being that day at Berwick upon Twede, and the Prelates and Noblemen of both
Kingdoms there assembled, with the Auditors that had been Elected, and those
appointed by the King to discuss and hear the Rights of the Parties claiming,
after an Attentive Hearing came to the King and related what had been done; who
with the Prelates and Noblemen of both Kingdoms great delay, and much time
spent, to the peril and danger of the Kingdom, it was ordered by the Express
Consent of all Pretenders, and by the Assent of Prelates and Noblemen
aforesaid, That the Rights and Titles of Robert de Brue, and John Baliol,
should Robert de Brus, and John Baliol's Titles to be first Discussed.
be first Examined and Discussed, and that afterward all others might
prosecute their Claims, if they thought fit.

The King, Ibm. The Eighty Auditors Sworn to Advise the King how to proceed in
this Judgment.
tho he might have Judged the Case without Superior Lord of Scotland, yet that
he might do it with more Security and Prudence, he caused the Eighty Auditors
to take an Oath, that they would advise him how, and by what Laws and Customs
he was to proceed to Judgment in this Case. These Eighty pretended great
Difficulties, and desired the Twenty four English the King had appointed, might
be added to them. These Twenty four pretended as great, or greater
Difficulties; and therefore without the Advice of the Prelates, Noble, Great,
They desire the Advice of the Prelates and Noblemen of England.
and Wisemen of England, that were absent; wherefore by the unanimous Assent
of all present, the King assigned the Morrow of the Feast of the Translation of
St. Edward the Confessor, (that is the 14th of October) for the further
Proceeding in this Business, in his Parliament in the same place, in Parliamento
suo loco eodem.

At Ibm. The Prelates and Noblemen of both Kingdoms meet at Berwick. The King
asked their further Advice. How the Right of Succession was to be determined in
Scotland.
that day the Prelates and Noblemen of both Kingdoms appeared at Berwick, as
also the Auditors; the King asked them as he had done before, by what Laws and
Customs, Judgment was to be given in the present Case; and if there were found
no Laws or Customs to proceed by, how it was to be given; and whether otherwise
concerning the Kingdom of Scotland, than concerning Earldoms, Baronies, and
other Tenures. They all Answered with one Voice, ( Nemine Contradicente) That
Judgment Laws of the Kingdom, if any; If not, the King might and ought by
Advice of his Prelates, Noble, and other Great Men of his Kingdom, make a new
one. And that as to the Right of Succession in the Kingdom of Scotland,
Judgment was to be given as concerning Earldoms, Baronies, and other
individible or impartible Tenures.

The King having Received these Answers, Ibm. The Titles of Robert Brus and
John Baliol Examined.
he ordered the Auditors to Repair to the Church of the Friars Preachers in
Berwick, and favorably to hear John de Baliol, and Robert de Brus, from day to
day what they had to say or propound; Robert de Brus began first, showing the
Reasons and Arguments for his Claim, and then John Baliol set forth his, in a
long Plea, and answered all what Robert de Brus had said. The Auditors Related
King openly and publicly before the Prelates, and Noblemen of both Kingdom,
his whole Council, and the Auditors, asked what Advice they would give him;
which of the two, according to what they had shown, and set forth, had Right of
Succession in the Kingdom of Scotland; and the force of all their Arguments on
both

An Ibm. The main Question between them.
remotior in uno Gradu in successione, exiens de primogenita, debeat secundum
leges, and consuetudines, utriusque Regni, excludere proximiorem in Gradu
exeuntem de secundogenita? Vel proximior in Gradu exiens de secundogenita,
debeat secundum leges and consuetudines ipsorum Regnorum excludere remotiorem
in uno gradu exeuntem de primogenita? Ad quae unanimiter Responderunt, nidlo
Reclamante vel contradicente, Quod Remotior uno Gradu linealiter descendens de
primogenita, secundum leges and consuetudines utriusque regni praeferendus est
proximiori in Gradu exeunti de secundogenita, in qualibet haereditaria
successione. That is, Whether the more remote by one Degree in Succession,
coming from the Eldest Sister, ought, according to the Laws and Customs of both
Kingdoms, to Exclude the nearer by a Degree coming from the Second Sister? Or,
Whether the nearer by a Degree coming from the Second Sister, ought

That the Reader may more clearly understand this Question and Record a while,
and set forth the Pedigree of both these Noble Persons. Henry Prince The
Pedigrees of Robert Brus and John Baliol.
of Scotland, Son to David I. who died before his Father, left Three Sons;
William called the Lion, Malcolm called the Maiden, (because never Married)
and David Earl of Huntington.

William the Lion had Alexander the Second, his only Son and Child; and he had
Alexander the Third, his only Son and Child, who Married Margaret* Daughter to
Henry the Third, King of England, and Sister to Edward the First; by her he had
Two Sons, Alexander and David, who died without Issue, and one Daughter named
Margaret, Married to Eric King of Norwey, by whom she had one only Daughter
named also Margaret, and called the Maid of Norwey, and was Queen of Scotland;
who dying without Issue, (as was said before) the whole Line of William the
Lion failed, and the Crown reverted to David Earl of Huntington, Heir to
Margaret.

David Earl of Huntington had Three Sons, Henry and Robert, who both died
young, and John, Surnamed Scot, Earl of Chester, died without Issue; and three
Daughters, Margaret the Eldest Married to Alan Lord of Galloway, by him she had
one only Daughter; Dergovilla, Married to John Baliol, by whom she had John
Baliol, one of the Competitors for the Crown, in this Record so often mentioned.

His Second Daughter was Isabel, Married to Robert Bruce, by whom she had
Robert her Son, the other of the Two Competitors

And Adama, a Third Daughter, Married to Henry Hastings, from whence the Earls
of Huntington.

By this Pedigree it appears, That Robert Bruce, Son to Isabel the Second
Sister, was a Degree nearer to his Mother, and so in a Collateral Line to the
Crown, than John Baliol, who was Grandchild Margaret the first begotten or
Eldest Daughter, in a Direct or Right Line to the Crown; Which gives the
meaning of the Question and Answer; The Ground of which was a Controverted The
meaning of the foregoing main Question.
Point amongst the Feudists, Whether the next in Blood, tho of a Collateral
Line (especially if a Male) should not succeed, before one more remote in the
Right Line, some holding one way, some the other.

Upon the Answer abovementioned, Rot. de superioritate Regis Angliae, etc. ut
supra. The Titles of John de Baliol and Robert de Brus Re-examined.
as it is in the Record, Prelates and Noblemen of both Kingdoms, and Assigned to
Robert de Brus and John de Baliol the 6th day of November, to hear their
Sentence; Which was pronounced by the King Judicially, by the Advice of the
Noblemen and Prelates of both Kingdoms, the Auditors aforesaid, and others of
the Council. That Robert by his Petition should receive nothing concerning the
Kingdom of Scotland; Quod praedictus Robertus per Petitionem praedictam nihil
capiat de Regno Scotiae. And as to John Baliol, there could nothing Robert de
Brus Excluded.
be done upon his Petition until the other Competitors were heard. When the
King commanded John Baliol, the other Demandants and the Auditors, to go to the
same place for the dispatch of their Petitions. Amongst whom Robert de Brus
personally appeared, and protested he would prosecute his Claim John Baliol's
Sentence deferred.
to the Kingdom of Scotland, or a Third Part of it, after another

Then also came Ibm. John Hastings pretended the Kingdom of Scotland to be
Partible, and claimed a Third Part.
John Hastings, Son to Henry Hastings, and claimed his Third part of the
Kingdom of Scotland as of a Partible Inheritance; because, as he said, the
Right of the Inheritance descended to Margaret, Isabel, and Adama, Daughters of
David Earl of Hurtington, as to one Heir, and from them it ought to descend to
John Baliol, Robert de Brus, and John Hastings, as Heirs, to the said Margaret,
Isabel, and Adam; and gave this Reason, because all the Lands, Tenements, Fees,
Liberties, Demeasns, His Reasons why it was a Partible Inheritance.
and Honors that were holden of the Crown of England in Capite, were Partible.
Then that the Homage and Service due from the King of Scotland to the King and
Crown of England, show it to be under the Common Law, and so Partible.

Robert Brus Ibm. Robert Bruce made the same Claim, and used the same Reasons.
his Arguments and Reasons were the same; And he said further, he claimed to
hold his Third Part in Capite, of his Lord the King of England, Superior Lord
of Scotland, by Homage; and Requests of his said Lord, he may receive Justice
according to the Common Law of England.

And although their Ibm. The King's great Care before he gave Sentence.
Arguments and Reasons had been sufficiently answered in the Defense of John
Baliol before the Auditors, and related to the King, yet willing to deliberate
with his Council, and the Auditors, upon these things, he Inquired of them,
Whether the Kingdom of Scotland was Partible, who all answered it was not; Upon
which Answer, the King appointed Monday next after the Feast of St. Martin as a
peremptory day, for all the Competitors to hear their Judgments, in his
Parliament at Berwick, intending in the mean time to Deliberate and Examine
Auditors, and others of his Council, that he might be fully informed what with
Justice ought to be done.

On the 7th Ibm. A. D. 1292. 20th of Edw. the First.
of November 1292, which was the Monday after the Feast aforesaid, the Nobles
and Prelates of both Kingdoms, the Auditors, other great Men, and a great
Multitude of the Populacy, in the Hall of the Castle of Berwick, the Public
Notary, who signed these Acts of Court, with other Witnesses, Congregatis coram
Edwardo Rege Angliae, superiori and Domino Regni Scotiae, in Aula Castri de
Berewico super Twedam, utriusque Regni Nobilibus and Praelatis, ac Auditoribus
memoratis, aliis Magnatibus, and Popularibus in Multitudine copiosa, praesente
ibidem me Notario infrascripto, cum Testibus subscriptis, etc. The Competitors
claiming the Kingdom, having had notice and summons to be there, viz. Judgment
given against Eight of the Competitors.
Eric King of Norwey, Florence Earl of Holland, William de Vescy, Patric Earl
of March, William de Ros, Robert de Pinkny, Nicholas de Souls, and Patrick
Galightly, not having appeared, but withdrawing themselves, as not having
prosecuted their Petitions, it was adjudged, and Iudicially pronounced by the
King, with the Consent of the Noblemen and Prelates of Both Kingdoms, That they
should obtain nothing by their Petitions; Consideratum est per idem Dominum
Regem, and judicialiter pronunciatum, de consensu utriusque Regni Nobilium and
Praelatorum quod per Petitiones suas nihil consequantur.

And because Ibm. And against Two others.
John Common, and Roger de Mundevile, did not prosecute their Petitions, they
had the same Judgment.

But as to the last Ibm.
Petition of Robert de Brus, whereby he claimed the Third part of the Kingdom
for his Share, as of a Partible Inheritance, because it appeared by his first
Petition before the King, That he demanded the whole Kingdom of Scotland, he
thereby acknowledged and granted, That the Kingdom was Impartible, and one
entire Inheritance. Which Recognition and Concession he could not then deny;
and for that it had been agreed adjudged by the Prelates, Earls, Barons, Noble
and Great Men, and the whole Council of both Kingdoms, That the Kingdom ought
to be possessed by one Heir only, because of its own Nature it was impartible,
as other Kingdoms, therefore it was Adjudged and Iudicially Declared by the
King, That he should gain nothing by what was said in his Petition. Et quia per
Praelatos, Comites, Barons, Proceres, and Magnates, totumque Consilium
utriusque Robert de Brus his Second Petition cast out.
Regni concordatum est and consideratum, quod praedictum Regnum uni haeredi
debeat remanere, pro eo quod de sui natura est impartibile, sicut and alia
Regna. Idciro per eundum Dominum Regem consideratum est and judicialiter
pronunciatum, quod dictus Robertus ex his quae in dicta sua Petitione
continentur, nihil consequatur omnino.

The same Ibm. John Hastings his Petition not allowed.
Judgment had John Hastings, and for the same Reasons, That he should get
nothing by his Petition, Quod nihil capiat per Petitionem suam.

As to the Petition of Ibm. The Reasons why the Kingdom of Scotland was
adjudged to John Baliol.
John Baliol, who demanded the whole Kingdom as his Right, the King caused it
again to be Examined many days by the Council of both Kingdoms, and after a
full Discussion, it was found, adjudged, and agreed, by all the Noblemen,
Prelates, Auditors, and Wisemen, of both Nations, (Compertum fuit manifest,
and per omnes utriusque Regni Nobiles, Prelatos, Auditores, and Sapientes
Consideratum and Concordatum est, etc.) That the Kingdom of Scotland was
impartible, and ought to remain to one Heir, and because the King was Judge of
the Right of his Subjects, by the Laws and Customs of the Kingdoms, which was
approved, agreed, and affirmed by all the Noblemen and Prelates of both
Kingdoms, ( Quod ab omnibus Regni utriusque Nobilibus and Prelatis est
approbatum, concordatum and dictum,) And by the same Laws and Customs, in the
Case before them, it was Agreed and Iudicially Declared, That the more remote
by Descent in the first Line, was to be preferred to a nearer in the second
Line, in the succession of an impartible Inheritance. And also, That none of
the Competitors denied him to be Heir of the first Line, and therefore was to
be preferred before all others as next Heir to the Kingdom of Scotland by
Hereditary Succession. And therefore the King of England, as Superior and
Direct Lord of Scotland, Adjudged, ( consideravit) That the said John Baliol,
should Recover and have Seisin of that Kingdom, with all its Appurtenances
according Form of his Petition, upon Condition, That he should rightly and
justly Govern the People subject to him, that none might have occasion to
Complain for want of Justice, nor the King as Superior Lord of that Kingdom,
upon the Suit of the Parties, to interpose his Authority and Direction. The
Right of the King of England and his Heirs always Reserved in such Cases, when
he would make use of it.

And accordingly Ibm. and Append. n. 13. King Edw. directs his Writ to the
Guardians of Scotland, to give John Baliol possession of the Kingdom.
King Edward gave him his Writ of Seisin for the Kingdom of Scotland, directed
to William and Robert Bishops of St. Andrews and Glasco, John Common, James
Seneschal or Stewart of Scotland, and Brian Fitz Alan his Guardians of the
Kingdom of Scotland, to deliver him seisin thereof, with its Pertinencies,
saving the Right of him, and his Heirs, dated at Berwick the 19th of November,
in the 20th year of his Reign, Anno Regni nostri vicesimo; Which was a mistake
of the Clerk, it should have been the 21st, he beginning his Reign November the
16th.

With this Rot. Scotiae, 20 and 21 Ed. I. M. 7. This is the same Roll De
superioritat. etc.
there were also Writs of the same Date directed to the several Castellans, and
Governors of Castles in Scotland, to give him possession of them.

The next Ibm. Rot. superioritat. etc., He Swears Fealty to K. Edward.
day, being the 20th of November, A. D. 1292, and in the year of the Reign of
King Edward, ending the 20th, and beginning the 21st, (Et Anno Regni Regis
Angliae Edwardi vicesimo siniente, and vicesimo primo incipiente) at Norham, he
swear fealty to him, as his Liege and Superior Lord of the Kingdom of Scotland.
In Testimony whereof he made to King Edward his Letters Patents of the same
Date. His Oath of Fealty, and these Letters Patents are to be found both in
Latin and French in this Record.

Afterward he was put into [2] Corporal possession of the Kingdom And was
placed in his Throne at the Monastery of Scone.
at the Monastery of Scone near St. Johnstown or Perth, and placed in his Royal
Seat according to the Custom of Scotland. Duncan Earl of Fife ought to have
placed him in his Throne, but John St. John was deputed by King Edward, Rot.
Scot. ut supra, M. 33. The same Roll.
in Nova Creatione Regis, to do it for him.

On St. Stephens-Day, A. D. 1293, and the 21st of King Edward's Reign, Rot.
superioritat. etc. ut supra. The same Roll. A. D. 1293. 21 Ed. I.
Anno a Nativitate Domini 1293, incipiente, Die Festi Stephani protomartyris,
Anno Regni Regis Angliae vicesimo primo, ipso apud Novum Castrum super Tinam
Existente, etc. He did Homage to him at Newcastle in this Form in French; Ibm.
The Form of John Baliol's Homage.
My Lord King of England, Superior Lord of the Kingdom of Scotland, I, John
King of Scotland, become your Liege-man (or Vassal) for the whole Kingdom of
Scotland, with its Pertinencies, and all what belongs to it; which Kingdom, I
claim and hold, and ought of right to hold for me and my Heirs Kings of
Scotland, Hereditarily of you and your Heirs Kings of England, and shall bear
Faith to you and your Heirs Kings of England, of Life and Limb, and Tenent
Honor, against all Men that may live and die; And of this Homage he made his
Letters Patents of the same Date, Witnessed by Sixteen Bishops, Judges, and the
greatest Men of England, and Twenty of the same Quality of Scotland, who at his
Request put to their Seals.

Within four Ibm.
days after Homage done in this manner to King Edward, on the last of December,
upon a Complaint made to him by Roger Bartholomew, Burgess of Berwick, against
some of his Auditors, or Judges, by him deputed in Scotland. He presently
appointed his Justices there present Auditors of the Complaint. Justiciarios
ibidem praesentes hujusmodi Querelae constituit Auditores, (whereof Roger
Brabazon, Chief Justice of the King's Bench, strictly commanding them they
should do quick Justice according to the Laws and Customs of his Kingdom;
before whom, and others of the King's Council, there was a Petition Exhibited A
Petition exhibited, that King Edw. would observe his Promises.
on behalf of the King of Scotland, and by his Advice and Direction, by William
Bishop of St. Andrews, John Earl of Boghan, Patrick de Graham, Thomas Randolph,
and other Great Men of Scotland. That whereas the King of England, and Superior
Lord of Scotland, had lately In the 18th of his Reign, in the Treaty of
Marriage between his Son Edward, and the Maid of Norwey Queen of Scotland.
promised to the Noblemen and Prelates of observe the Laws and Customs thereof,
and that Pleas of things done there might not be drawn out of it. They
beseeched the King of England, and his Council there present, in the Name of
the King of Scotland, That he would please to observe his Promise, and Command
his Officers firmly to do the same.

Roger Brabazon Ibm. The Petition answered.
answered this Petition, Quod dicta petitio videbatur frustratoria, etc. That
it seemed idle and not to the purpose, for that it was manifest, and ought to
be so to all the Noblemen and Prelates of the Kingdom, That the King had
performed all his Promises, and not acted contrary to any of them; and as to
the Complaints concerning his Judges and Officers, lately deputed by him as
Superior and Direct Lord of that Kingdom, who then did Represent his Person,
the Cognizance of Complaints concerning them belonged only to him, and no
other, and he had especially reserved it to himself; and also, that because in
Judgments of the very Superior Lord, or of those that Represented his Person,
no Subjects could pretend to it; and further said, That if the King of England
had made any Temporary Promises when there was no King in Scotland, he had
performed them, and that by such Promises he would not now be restrained or
bound.

And the King of England made Protestation Ibm. The King's Protestation
concerning the Petition and his Promises.
before all the and Prelates of both Kingdoms, then present, That
notwithstanding his Temporary Promises and Concessions, he did not take himself
to be bound, his Protestations otherwise publicly made, remaining in force,
and that he intended, and would admit, and hear all Complainants whatsoever,
and all other Business touching the Kingdom of Scotland, and its Inhabitants,
by reason of his Superiority and Direct Dominion which he had, and of right
ought to have, in that Kingdom, as his Progenitors in their times had, if they
Lawfully, and for Just Causes came before him; and upon those Complaints every
where, and at all times, if he pleased, to do them Justice; and to Use and
Exercise his Superiority, and Direct Dominion, and to call the King of Scotland
himself, if it were necessary, and the Quality of the Cause required it, to
appear before him in his Kingdom of England.

Upon this Ibm. John King of Scotland, etc. acquaints K. Edward of all his
Promises, etc.
Resolution of King Edward, and the Answer of the Justices to the Petition,
John King of Scotland acquitted him of all Promises, Bargains, Agreements, and
Obligations he had made to the Guardians and others of the Kingdom, Custodibus
and Probis hominibus Regni, while by reason of the Superiority of his Dominion,
he held the Kingdom of Scotland in his hands, until he had done Justice to such
as Demanded the Kingdom, and especially the Grant and Instrument made at
Northampton, the 28th Day of August And Confesses they had been performed.
in the 18th Year of his Reign, in which the Promises and Grants set forth in
the Petition were contained. With Confession that they had been all performed,
when he had adjudged and fully Delivered the Kingdom to him, Ibm.
which Release or Acquittance was Scaled with his own Seal, and confirmed with
the Seals of the Bishops, Earls, Barons, and other Noblemen of his Kingdom; and
Dated the Second of January 1293. in the Twenty First year of King Edward's
Reign, and the First of King John of Scotland.

Within a short time after this Protestation, and Release, there happened a
great Case in Scotland, which was brought by way of Appeal unto King Edward, by
Ibm. The E. of Fife Appeals the K. of Scotland, before the K. of England.
Magdulph Earl of Fife, against John King of Scotland. To whom he Directed his
Writ to appear Ryley Placita Parl. f. 154. 155. He appears not, and a Second
Writ is directed to him.
before him on the Morrow of Holy Trinity, wherever he should be in England,
to answer what Magdulph had to say against him: But then not appearing, the
King directed another Writ to Michaelmas, to answer as before. Ibm. f. 157. The
E. of Fife's Complaint.
The Earl of Fife's Complaint was, That when King Edward was last at Berwick,
he commanded William Bishop of St. Andrews, and his Fellow Guardians of the
Kingdom of Scotland, That they should do Right to Magdulph concerning his Lands
and Tenements of Rerys and Crey, of which he had been Disseised by the said
Bishop as Guardian of Fife, Tunc Custodem Comitatus de Fife. Of which according
to the Precept he had recovered Seisin by the Jugment of the Guardians: When
John King of Scotland disseised him again of the same Lands and Tenements; and
that he might not further prosecute his Right, imprisoned him, and caused an
unjust Judgment to be given against him, in Contempt of the King of England and
Superior Lord of Scotland, and to his own great Damage.

The King of Scots Ibm. f. 158. The King of Scots appears.
appeared before the King and his Council Michaelmas, and denied all Contempt
of the Lord his King, and said he had not Day to Answer the said Magdulph; who
Replied, He had that very Day appointed him to Answer, by the King's Ibm. fol.
154, 155. the Writ it self. The Particulars of the Pleadings on both sides.
Writ delivered to him by the Sheriff of Northumberland at Strivelin, on the
morrow after St. Peter, in Bonds (that is the 2d of August) which sufficiently
appeared by the Return of the Sheriff; and the King of Scots being asked,
whether he had the Writ delivered to him by the Sheriff, confessed urged to
answer Ibm. f 158.
when, He said he was King of Scotland, and that he dare not Answer to
Magdulph' s Complaint, or any thing that concerned his Kingdom, without the
Advice of his Subjects, sine Consilio These Probi homines could not be the
Common or Ordinary People.
proborum hominum Regni sui; and Magdulph demanded Judgment against him as
saying nothing. Ibm. f. 159.
Then he was told by the King he was his Liege-Man, and did unto him Homage and
Fealty for the Kingdom of Scotland, and was ordered to come thither to answer,
or say why he would not or ought not to answer before him; and he said as
before, The K. of Scots dare not Answer without advice of his People.
That he Could not, nor Dare answer to any thing that concerned his Kingdom,
without consulting his People, inconsultis probis hominibus Regni sui. Upon
this he was told he might require another Day, he answered, He would require
none. It was then agreed, That the Principal Plea belonged to the King, and
that he made no Defense against Magdulph; Ibm.
and because he would not require Day, or show Cause why he ought not to
Answer, in Elusion of the King's Jurisdiction and Superiority, it was Judged a
Contempt and Disobedience to him; and that Three of his Principal Castles of
Scotland should be Seized into his Hands, and so remain till he had given
Satisfaction for his Contempt and Disobedience. But before the Pronounciation
of the Sentence, he came before the King and his Council, and made Supplication
to the King ore suo proprio, and Delivered it unto him with his own hand in
Writing, in Ibm. f. 159, 160. He Petitions K. Edward for leave to advise with
them, and for longer time.
French, to this purpose. Sire jeo suy vostre home du Royalme de Escoce, etc.
Sir, I am your Man of the Realm of Scotland, and pray you for what I am come
hither, for which concerns the People of my Kingdom, as well as my self, That
you would forbear me while I speak with them, that I may not be surprised for
want of Advice, for that those that are with me, will not, nor ought to advise
me without others of the Realm; and when I have advice from them, I will answer
at your first Parliament after Easter, and will behave my self toward you as I
ought to do. The King advising hereupon at the Instance of the Great Men of his
Council, and with the Consent of Magdulph granted his Prayer, and gave King
Edward grants his Request.
him Day until his Parliament after Easter, on the Morrow of the Holy Trinity.
This is what is to be found in Ryley's Parliament Pleas, about this Case; and
now we return to the Record again.

Which Rot. de Superioritate Regis Angliae, etc. ut supra. The K. at War with
France and Wales. Parliament at St. Edmunds-Bury. A. D. 1295. 23 Ed. 1.
tells us, That on that Day the Parliament ceased, or was not holden, (
Parliamentum cessavit, sive non tenebatur) for that the King was Engaged in War
lately raised against him in diverse Countries, as with the King of France in
Gascony, and with the Welsh in Wales. Yet the suit between the King of Scots
and Magdulph, which had begun before the Justices of the King's Bench in
Parliament, was Continued and Prorogued, ( Loquela, etc. Continuata fuit and
Prorogata.) To the Parliament next to be holden, which Summoned to be at St.
Edmunds-Bury, on the Feast of St. Martin in Winter, (that is November 11.)
which was in the 23d Year of King Edward, and in the Year from the The Public
Notary that Drew up this Record, always begins the Year at Christmas.
Nativity of the Lord, 1295.

The King of England Ibm. Magdulph prosecutes his Plea in that Parliament. The
King of Scots appears not, but sends his Excuse.
was at St. Edmunds-Bury that day, and there held his Parliament, where Magdulph
strenuously prosecuted his Plea. But the King of Scots instead of appearing in
Person, Abbot of Abirbrothok with other Noblemen of that Kingdom, to King
Edward, with Letters, to Excuse him that neither then or before he appeared in
his Court in the Parliaments by passed, at the Day given, or appointed him.
Quod nec tunc, nec prius juxta quod Diem habuerat, ad Curiam suam, in
praeteritis Parliamentis, accesserat Excusavit, pretending certain Causes of
Excuse that he could not come in his own Person.

This Abbot Ibm. The Abbot and others that came to Excuse the K of Scots,
Demand Satisfaction for Injuries done them. The Answer to their Demands.
and those that came with him, brought not only an Excuse, but a Quarrel, and
Demanded of King Edward Satisfaction for many and great Injuries, Oppressions,
and Grievances, sustained by the Scots from his Subjects. To whom after
deliberation, this Answer was given, That the King of England for certain
Causes was coming toward the North parts, and that the King of Scots should
then have sufficient Recompense to his own Content, Injuries could be proved
done to the Scots, by his Subjects of England; and then appointed him a Day in
the same Parliament, by the Continuation and Prorogation of the Justices
representing his Person, against Magdulph, the First Day of March next
following The King of Scots summoned to appear at a Parliament at Newcastle.
at Newcastle upon Tyne. Then expecting his being there, enjoin the Abbot, and
those with him, to give Notice to their King he should then Personally appear,
to Treat with the King of England about the Premises, and other Things
touching the State and Tranquillity of both Kingdoms, and their Inhabitants.

While the King was intent upon this Business, Ibm. The King of Scots
Confederates with the K. of France.
he had certain Information, That the King of Scots, with his Prelates, Earls,
Barons, and other Noblemen, Communities of Cities, and Towns, and others of the
Chief Inhabitants of the Kingdom, had made a Confederacy and League with the
King of France against him, Sealed with both their Seals, and Counter-changed.
Ibm.
For Dispatch King of Scots at the Instance of his Bishops, Earls, etc. sent
four Procurators or Commissioners, William, Bishop of St. Andrews; Matthew,
Bishop of Dunkeld, John de Souls, and Ingram de Vmfreville, the Sum of the
League was,

First, That, Edward King John's Son, should Marry the Daughter The Articles of
the Confederacy.
of Charles of Valois, Earl of Anjou, the King of France his Brother. Secondly,
That the King of Scotland in the present War, should assist the King of France,
against the King of England, and all Confederates as well by Sea as Land,
against the Emperor of Germany, and others. Thirdly, That he should at his own
Charges make War against the King of England, when he was Employed in, or
Diverted by War in other Places. Fourthly, That as well the Earls, Ibm.
Barons, Prelates, and other Noblemen, as far as of right they might, and also
the Communities of ths Kingdom of Scotland, should as soon as they could, send
him their Letters Patent, under their Seals, of their Consent to these Things.
Fifthly, That if the King of England Invaded Scotland, the King of France was
to make War upon him in other Parts, to divert him, Scotland at his own Charges
until they came there. Sixthly, That if the King of England went out of his
Kingdom, or sent many Forces abroad, the Commissioners promised, that
especially in this Case, the King of Scotland should enter England with his
whole Power, as far as he could, making War in the Field, besieging Towns,
wasting the Countries, and by all possible ways Destroying England. Sevently,
That they should not make Peace on either side, without the Consent of the
other.
The League it self, and the Procuratory-Letters are to be found Hen. de
Knighton Col. 2473.

Toward the Ibm. King Edward goes to Newcastle.
time appointed, the King of England prepared for his Journey to Newcastle, and
sent before him the Abbots of Newminster and Wellebeck to the King of Scots, to
give him notice of the Adjornment, and time of his coming, by whom he also
Demanded certain Castles in the Marches to be Delivered to him, for his own and
Subjects security, from the present Dangers, which when past, sent by the
Abbots his Obligatory-Letters for the Performance of his Promise.

On the First of Ibm. The King of Scots came not.
March 1296, and the 24th of his Reign, the King was at Newcastle and staid
there many Days, Expecting the King of Scots, he came not; the King of England
moved nearer Scotland, to Banburgh and War, where he also Summoned and Expected
came, nor sent to Excuse himself; but Returned the Homage and Fealty for
himself, and all others of the Kingdom, to King Edward, and Defied him, by the
After a second Summons he Defies him.
Following Instrument or Writing.

TO the Ibm. Hen. de Knighton Col. 2477. The Instrument by which he returned
King Edward his Homage, and Defied him
Magnificent Prince Edward by the Grace of GOD, King of England, John by the
same Grace, King of Scotland; Whereas you and others of your Kingdom, you not
being Ignorant, or having cause of Ignorance, by your violent Power, have
Notoriously and Frequently done grievous and intolerable Injuries, Contempts,
Grievances, and strange Damages against us, the Liberties of our Kingdom, and
against God and Justice, Citing us at your pleasure upon every slight
Suggestion out of our Kingdom, unduly Vexing us, seizing our Castles, Lands,
and Possessions in your Kingdom unjustly, and for no fault of ours, taking the
Goods of our Subjects as well by Sea as Land, and carrying them into your
Kingdom; Killing our Merchants, and others of our Kingdom, carrying away our
Subjects and Imprisoning them: For the Reformation of which things we sent our
Messengers to you, which remain not only unredressed, but there is every Day an
addition of worse things to them; For now you are come with a great Army upon
the Borders, for the Disinheriting us, and the Inhabitants of our Kingdom, and
proceeding have inhumanely committed Slaughter, Burnings, and violent Invasions
as well by Sea as Land. We not being able to sustain the said Injuries,
Grievances, and Damages any longer, nor to remain in your Fealty or Homage,
extorted by your violent Oppression, we Restore them to you for our Self, and
all the Inhabitants of our Kingdom as well for the Lands we hold of you in your
Kingdom, as for your pretended Government over us.


Ibm.
Knighton says this Letter was without Date; [2] Walsingham [1] Ib. 2. f. 66*
n. 20.
says it was sent about the beginning of April, when the Guardian, and Lector
of the Frior Minors of Roxburgh, brought it to the King. Before this
Restitution of Homage and Fealty, the Scots sent Knighton, ut supra, col. 2477.
n. 20.
to Rome, to have Absolution from their Oaths and Homage; and upon false
Suggestions made to Pope Celestin, they were absolved by his Bull. Deinde Scoti
miserunt ad Curiam Romanam, pro absolutione habenda de Juramento suo praestito
Regi Angliae, and de Homagio suo illi facto, and per falsam suggestionem factam
Celestino Papae, sunt absoluti per Bullam Papalem.

This is a true Abstract of the In fine Rotuli. Vide Rot. Scotiae 19 Ed 1.
usaque 24. and with Chamberlains of the Exchequer in the 3d Treasury at
Westminster, in a long Painted Box, in a great Wooden Chest the Original.
Roll or Record of the Superiority of the Kings of England over the Kingdom of
Scotland, and of the Homages, and Fealties of the King and Kingdom of Scotland
in the 19th, 20th, 21st, 22d, 23d, of Edward the First, A. D. 1291, 1292, 1293,
1294, 1295, containing 34 Membranes or Skins of Parchment drawn up by Andrew,
sometimes Clerk to William de Tang, and Public Notary by the Popes Authority,
who was present with the Witnesses to every Act, (who were the best Men of both
Kingdoms) heard, and saw the things done, and signed every Membrane, with his
usual Mark or Sign; now remaining in the Tower of London, and Printed at large
from the Roll, in Mr. Pryn's Second Volume of the History of John, Henry III.
and Edward I. Not known to any of our Historians, and therefore the Truth of
these Transactions not understood, which makes a considerable part of the
History of his Reign. And this Record does convince Buchanan of Partiality and
Falsehood, of what he has written in the latter end of his Seventh, and
beginning or most part of his Eighth Book of the History of Scotland, and
likewise Archbishop Spotswood, and Sir Richard Baker, of great Errors and
Mistakes in following

The Scots pursue their Designs of Knighton, col. 2478. n. 10, 20. The English
commanded to quit Scotland.
freeing themselves from subjection to the English, and Command, That all the
English that had Lands and Possessions in Scotland, should without delay quit
the Nation, or come forth with all the Strength they had to Defend it against
the English.

The King again Ib. col. 2478. n. 20. The King again summons the King of Scots.
He and they deny Subjection, pretending the Pope's Absolution.
summoned the King of Scots to come to him, and with Force to assist him
according to his Oath: The Scots answered unanimously, That neither they nor
their King was any ways bound to him, or to obey his Commands, because they
were absolved by Pope Celestin from their Oath, and from all Subjection he had
extorted from them.

From Restitution of Homage and Fealty, and Defiance, they proceed Arms,
Walsingh. f. 66. n. 50. Mat Westminster. f. 427. n. 40. The Scots Arm, etc.
enter England, Plunder, Burn, Wast, Kill, and Destroy wherever they come.

To obviate these Insolences, and Chastise them according to their Deserts,
King Edward entered Knighton, col. 4280, 4281. A. D. 1296. King Edward enters
Scotland.
Scotland on Wednesday in Easter-week, besieged and took Berwick Castle with a
great Slaughter of the Scots; From thence he sent part of his Army to Reduce
the Castle of Dunbar lately Revolted, which was done, by the Death and
Destruction of a great many Scots; Ten thousand, says my Author, Seven Barons,
an Hundred Knights, and Thirty one Esquires, were taken in the Castle; The
Scots Army coming to Relieve it, Twenty two thousand of them were slain. From
Beats the Scots.
thence King Edward marched to Edinburgh, which Castle he took in Eight days;
From thence he marched to Sterlin, where the Earl Vlster came to him out of
Ireland with a great Body of Men; and hither the King of Scots, and many of his
great Men, sent to beg his Mercy; Ibm. They Beg, and submit to Mercy.
King Edward appointed them to meet him at Brechin some few days after, where
they submitted to his Mercy and Favor, without making any Terms, or Conditions
whatever.

The King's Hist. Angl. f. 67. n. 40, 50.
Submission runs thus, as it is Translated from Walsingham's Latin Version of
the French Original.
John, by the Grace of God, King of Scotland, to all that shall The Tenor and
Form of the King of Scots Submission.
hear or see these present Letters, Greeting: Whereas we by Evil and False
Counsel, and our Simplicity, have greatly offended and provoked our Lord
Edward, by the Grace of God, King of England, etc. To wit, for that being in
his Faith, and Homage, we have Allied our self to the King of France, who then
was and is now his Enemy, propounding Marriage between our Son and the Daughter
of his Brother Charles, and assisting him by War and otherways with all our
Power. Furthermore by our Perverse Counsel aforesaid, we Defied our Lord the
King of England, and put our self out of his Faith and Homage, and sent our
People into England, to Burn, Spoil, Plunder, Murder, and commit other
Mischiefs, fortifying the Kingdom of Scotland, that was his Fee, against him,
putting Garrisons into Towns, Castles, and other Places. For which
Transgressions our Lord the King of England, entered Scotland by force,
Conquered and took it notwithstanding all we could do against him, as of right
he might do, as Lord of the Fee, seeing after we had done Homage to him, we
Rebelled against him. We therefore being yet free, and in our own Power, do
render unto him the Land of Scotland, and the whole Nation with its Homages: In
Witness whereof, we have caused to be made these our Letters Patent, Dated at
Brechin the 10th Day of July, in the Fourth A. D. 1296.
Year of our Reign.


This Acknowledgment is also Recorded in the Roll of the Oaths of Homage and
Fealty of the Scots a second time, made on several days, and in several places,
Rot. Scot. 24, etc. Ed. 1. Peceia 8. He renounceth all Confederacies against
King Edward, and rendered to him his Kingdom, and all Homages and other Rights
of that and his People, etc.
where he Renounceth all Confederacies, and unlawful Contracts, made in the
Name of himself, his Son, and the Inhabitants of Scotland, against his due
Homage and Fealty, he had done to the King of England for his own Kingdom. And
further rendered to him his Kingdom, and all Homages, and all other his Rights,
with their Pertinencies, suamque Regiam Dignitatem, necnon omnes Terras and
Possessiones, etc. and his Royal Dignity, and also his Lands and Possessions,
with all his Goods moveable and immovable, gratanti animo and spontanea
voluntate, pure and absolute, with a Grateful Mind, and free Will, purely and
absolutely, into the Hands of Antony Bishop of Duresm, receiving them in the
place, and Name of the King, Vice and nomine Regis Angliae Recipientis. These
things were done at Brechin the same day, before a Public Notary, whom he
commanded to publish, and make an Instrument of them, in perpetuam rei
memoriam. The Bishop of Duresm, John Common of Badenaugh the Elder, Bryan
Fitz-Alan, Knights, and Alexander Kenedy, Clerk, Chancellor to the King of
Scotland, being specially called as Witnesses.

The Submission of James Stewart of Scotland is first Recorded in this Rot.
Scot. 24, 25, 26 Ed. 1. Peceia prima. Append. n* 14. The Submission and
Renunciation of James Stewart of Scotland.
Roll, which was, That neither by force or fear, but on his own free Will, as
he said, he came to the Faith and Will of the King of England, and renounced
for him and his Heirs, all Confederacies, Contracts, and Agreements whatsoever
made in his Name with the King of France, or his Adherents, against his Lord
the King of England, if any such were freely, purely, and sponte, pure, and
absolute; and then took his Oath of Fealty in the Form following, and made
thereof, and sealed his Letters Patents.

To all those that shall see or hear these Letters, Ibm. The Form of it*
James Seneschal or Steward of Scotland, Greeting: For that we are come to the
Faith and Will of the most Noble Prince, our Dear Lord Edward, and Duke of
Aquitain: We promise for us and our Heirs upon the pain of Body and Estate, and
whatsoever we can incur, That we will Assist and Serve him well and Loyally
against all Persons that may live and dye, at all times when Required or
Summoned by our Lord the King of England, or his Heirs; and we shall not know
of any Damage done to them, but we will hinder it, to the utmost of our Power,
and shall Discover it to them: And for the performance of this, we bind us and
our Heirs and all our Goods, and further have Sworn it upon the Holy Gospels.
In Witness whereof we have caused these Letters Patents to be made, and sealed
with our Seal. Given at Roxburgh the 13th day of May, in the 24th year of the
Reign of our Lord the King of England.


All the Bishops, and other Ecclesiastic Prelates, Abbats, and The same
Submission and Renunciation of the whole Kingdom of Scotland.
Convents, Priors, Friars, Parsons, Vicars, Abbesses, Nuns, Earls, Barons,
Knights, Citizens, Burgesses, Aldermen, Communalties of Cities, and Burghs, and
other Commoners, or Inhabitants in Scotland, Recorded and Named in four Rot.
Scot. 24. Ed. 1. A. D. 1294. 24. Ed. 1.
large Rolls in the Tower of London with this Title, De Juramentis homagii and
fidelitatis Edwardo Regi Angliae nominatim praestitis, per unamquamque
individuam personam Regni Scotiae; Of the Oaths of Homage and Fealty made to
Edward King of England, by every individual Person of the Kingdom of Scotland
by Name) made the same Submission* Renuntiation, and Oath, at several Places,
and several Times, and made their Letters Patents of it, especially in the
Parliament holden Ib. Pecia, 20, 21, etc. Append. n. 15.
at Berwick on the Octaves of the Assumption of the Virgin Mary, or 22d of
August, in the year from the Nativity of our Lord 1296, by the Consent of the
Noblemen and Prelates of both Kingdoms. These Rolls were not delivered unto the
Kings Keeper of his Rolls, Claus. 34. Ed. 1. Dors. 91
until the 34th of his Reign; and they were drawn up by the same Notary, Andrew
beforementioned, who was present, heard, and saw what was done, as it is
Recorded at the end of the Roll, Pecia 35; And the same Instrument of Homage
and Fealty with the Chamberlains of the Exchequer in the 3d Treasury at
Westminster, with other Things and Instruments in small Boxes in great Wooden
Chests.

This done, Walsingh. f. 68. n. 10. and n. 30, 40. King Edward appoints a
Governor of Scotland, and other Officers there. He sends John Baliol to the
Tower, etc.
King Edward caused the Stone used by the Scotland as a Throne, to be brought
to Westminster, appointed John Warren Earl of Surrey and Sussex, Governor of
Scotland, Hugh de Cressingham Treasurer, and William Ormesby Justitiary, sent
King John Baliol to the Tower of London, where he was decently attended; and
the Noblemen of Scotland, which he brought into England, were forbidden to pass
the River Trent under forfeiture of their Heads.

From Scotland we are to return to England and France, where we find the Peace
between them, which had continued for some time, broken: The Quarrel at first
began between the Mat. West. f. 419, 420, 421, etc. Walsingham, f. 57. n. 50.
etc. A. D. 1291, 1292, 1293, 1294, etc. Peace broken between France and England.
English and French Seamen, who plundered one another Ships, and seized them
wherever they met at Sea, or in Harbor; from single Ships, they brought
Fleet against Fleet, each side complained to their Kings, and Satisfaction was
demanded on both sides; Several Endeavors were used to Compose these
Differences, the Two Queens of France, Consort and Dowager, mediated a Peace,
and were forward in it.

The Pope sent Two Cardinals to the Two Kings to the same purpose, diverse Means
were contrived for Satisfaction on both parts, but none took effect; The King
of England offered an Interview, or a Reference to Commissioners to end all
Controversies, and adjust the Losses and Damages of the Subjects of both
Nations, France charged him, That The Charge against King Edward.
his Subjects and Merchants were Robbed, spoiled of their Goods, and imprisoned
by his Consent, and also with Contempt and Rebellion, in denying his
Superiority and Dominion in Aquitain; For which he peremptorily Mat. West. f.
419. n. 40. the Writ or Citation it self, which is very long. He is Cited to
appear at Paris. And upon nonappearance adjudged to have forfeited his Lands
in France.
cited him to appear at Paris Twenty days after Christmas Day, to answer what
should be objected against him, to stand to the Law, and hear Judgment: King
Edward neglected the Citation or Summons, and was by the Universal Sentence of
the Peers adjudged to have forfeited all his Lands in France, and the Constable
was sent with an Army to take possession of that Dukedom.

Upon this seizing of Gascony, King Edward Ib. f. 421. n. 20. A. D. 1294. 22
Ed. I.
called a Parliament after Whitsunday next following, in which it was Resolved
to Recover Aquitain or Gascony by Force and Arms; whereupon Ib. n. 50.
he sent the Archbishop of Dublin, and the Bishop of Durham, with other Great
Men, to the Emperor of Germany, (called then Almain) to make an Alliance with
him against France, and for 100000 l. Sterling paid unto him, (a good Sum in
those days) the King and Emperor became acquainted, who were scarce known to
one another before; all Difficulties between them were overcome, and great
Things were expected from this Alliance. The King intending to pass into France
with an Army, was detained at Portsmouth by Ibm. f. 422. n. 10.
contrary Winds from Midsummer-day, to the Exaltation of Holy Cross ( i. e. the
14th of September.) On the Vigil of St. Matthew the Apostle, he called another
Ib. f. 422. n. 30.
Parliament, (or happily this might be the same) wherein to support the War the
Clergy granted a Moiety of their Benefices and Goods, at three Payments,
whereof the first to be at the Feast of All Saints next coming, the second
Fifteen days after Easter, and the third Fifteen days after Midsummer, the Writ
appointing the Collectors Diocese of Canterbury bears Date September. 30, and is
to be found amongst the Records of Trinity-Term, 22 Ed. I. Rot. 68, with the
King's Remembrancer in the Exchequer.

On the Claus. 22. Ed. I. M. 6. Do s. A Tenth granted by the Laity the first
day of the Parliament.
Morrow after St. Martin, or the 12th of November next following, the Earls,
Barons, Knights, etc. gave a Tenth part of their Goods on this very first day
of the Parliament, and the Commissions to the Pat. 22. Ed. I. M. 2. in cedula
The Citizens, etc. pay a Sixth part.
Taxors and Collectors of it, are Dated same day.

The Citizens, Burgesses, and Tenants of the King's Demeasns paid a sixth part
of their Goods, but not granted in Parliament, there were Commissioners sent
unto every City, Burgh, and Town of his Demeasns, Inter Recorda 23 Ed. I. n.
vel. Rot. 73 penes Remem. Regis in scacar.
to Require and Induce them, to pay a certain Sum charged upon, or demanded of
them toward the War, which at this time was a sixth part of their Goods, which
was required first, and granted in London, as an Example to other Places; The
Commissions for all Counties in England bear Date the 21st of November. 23d of
Ed. I.

The King wanting more Money to carry on the War against France, in his Claus.
23. Ed. 1. M. 3. Dors. Dated, Sept. 30. Summons to Parliament.
Writ of Summons, directed to Robert Winchelsey Archbishop of Canterbury, to a
Parliament to be holden on the Sunday next after St. Martin, or the 10th of
November, told France had fraudulently surprised Gascony, and not content
therewith had provided a Navy and Army to invade England, and destroy the The
King of France provides a Fleet and Army to Invade England.
Nation and Language, if his Power were answerable to his Detestable Purpose;
To prevent these Dangers and Designed Mischiefs this Parliament was called, but
it sat not on that day, the King being busied at Winchelsea in Equipping his
Fleet for the Defense Ib. M. 2. Dors. de parliamente prorogando.
Writ it self, it was Prorogued before meeting, unto the Sunday next before St.
Andrew, which was in the 24th of his Reign, the 23d ending November 16th. In a
short time the Clergy gave the King a Tenth of all their Moveable Goods, toward
Maintaining the War; The Earls, Barons, and Knights, and others of the Kingdom,
Comites, Barons, Milites, and omnes alii de Regno in subsidium Guerrae
nostrae, gave an Eleventh Nobis Pat. 24 Ed. I. M. 22. De undecima and septima
levand. and Colligend.
undecimam fecerunt, etc. And the Citizens, Burgesses, and good Men of his
Demeasn Cities and Burghs, granted him a Seventh part, etc. Et Cives and
Burgenses, and alii probi homines de Dominicis nostris Civitatibus and Burgis,
septimam nobis concesserint, etc. The Writ for Levying and Collecting this
Seventh and Eleventh is dated December. 4. very few days after their meeting, in
the 24th of his Reign.

The King of Scots by the Instigation of his People, taking advantage The Scots
take advantage by this War with France.
of this Rupture between England and France, obstructed the Vigorous
Prosecution of the War against the French, and thinking to Disingage himself
and them from the Power of King Edward, behaved himself, and suffered as has
been related before in its due place.

The Walsingh. f. 62, 63, etc. And also the Welsh.
Welsh these two or three last Years, having, as they Edward's being Diverted
by his Wars with France and Scotland, attempted several times under diverse
Leaders, to Free themselves from Subjection to the English, were at length
reduced to perfect Obedience. Fol. 325. A. D. 1295.
Mezery the French Historian says, both these Nations put themselves in Arms
against King Edward, by the Instigation and Procurement of the King of France.

Immediately Walsingh. f. 68. N. 30, 40.
after the King and whole Kingdom of Scotland upon their Defections, were
reduced to obedience, and had the second Time done Homage, and sworn Fealty to
King Edward (as we have heard before) he issued his Writs for a Parliament to be
holden at St. Edmunds-Bury on the Morrow of All Souls, or Parliament at St.
Edmonds-Bury. A. D. 1296.
Third of November, Dated the 26th of August, in the 24th of his Reign, at
Berwick upon Tweed. Append. N. 16.
In that directed to the Archbishop, Westminster, when they Granted the Tenth
of their Rents and Benefices, for the Defense of the Kingdom, until the Feast
of St. Michael then next coming; which Grant was accepted by him, in hopes of a
more plentiful Aid for the future, from him, and others, which they promised
should be sufficient for the same Cause, unless in the mean time there was a
Peace or Truce made between him and the King of France: Therefore he Bury at
the time appointed, to order the Quantity and Manner of the Subsidy. The Writs
to the other Bishops, the Abbots, etc. were like to this. Those to the Noblemen
and Sheriffs, were only to Treat about the Dangers impending upon the whole
Kingdom, and Remedies to prevent them.

In this Parliament the Citizens and Burgesses gave an Eighth Part Laity granted
a Twelfth Part, the Clergy Nothing, by reason of a Constitution made that Year
and Published by Pope Boniface. Walsingh. Ut supra. N. 40, 50. The Clergy deny
the King a Subsidy. He Summons another Parliament.
A quo Parliamento a Civitatibus and Burgis concessa est Regi octava, a populo
vero reliquo (i. e. a Comitibus, Baronibus, and Militibus) Duodecima pars
bonorum, Clerus ob constitutionem Bonifacii Papae hoc Anno editam, etc. Regi
pro Guerra sua subsidium petenti Denegavit. The King in hopes of a better
Answer, deferred this Business, to be treated on in another Parliament London
on the morrow of St. Hilary, January the 14th.

In the mean time, Mat. West. fol. 428. N. 30. The K. shutup the Barns and
Granaries of the Clergy.
the King caused to be shut up and secured all the Barns, Granaries, and
Storehouses of the Clergy, and the Archbishop sent the Pope's Bull to be
published in all Cathedrals, forbidding, under the Pain of Excommunication, any
thing to be paid to Secular Princes, out of Ecclesiastic Revenues. The Bull or
Constitution runs thus: Boniface, etc. For the Perpetual [5] Append. N. 17.
Pope Boniface his Bull. Prohibiting the Clergy to pay Taxes to Secular Princes.
Memory of the Matter, etc. it is often delivered from Antiquity, that Laymen
are spiteful to Clergymen, and the Experience of the present Times manifestly
declares it, while not content with their own Bounds, they strive after what is
forbidden, and let themselves loose to do Evil, not wisely attending, that for
them to have any power over Clercs, or Ecclesiastic Persons, and their Goods
is prohibited, yet they impose grievous Burdens upon Prelates, and
Ecclesiastics, Regular, and Secular, they Tax them, and Exact and Extort from
them a half Part, a Tenth, a Twentieth, or some other part of their Revenues
and Goods, endeavoring many ways to bring them into Servitude and under their
Power. And with Grief we relate, some Prelates and Ecclesiastics fearing where
no fear is, seeking transitory Peace, fearing more to offend Temporal, than
Eternal Majesty, they acquiesce in such Abuses, without Authority from the
Apostolic See. We therefore desiring to obviate such Acts, with Advice of our
Brethren, by Apostolic Authority do Ordain, That those Prelates, Ecclesiastics,
Religious or Secular, of what State, Order, or Condition soever they be, who
shall Pay, or grant to Pay, any Taxes, or Impositions, an Half, a Tenth,
Twentieth, an Hundredth, or any other Part or Portion whatever, of the Revenues
of their Churches or Goods, to Laymen, under the Name of an Aid, Assistance,
Lending, or Gift, or under any other Pretense or Color whatsoever, without the
Authority of the same See. Also those Emperors, Kings, Princes, Dukes, Earls,
Barons, Great Men, Captains, Officers, and Governors, by what Names soever they
are known, or any other of what State or Condition soever, that shall Impose,
Exact, or Receive such things, or shall Arrest, Seize, or presume to take the
Goods of Ecclesiastics, deposited and secured in Churches, or that shall
Command them to be Arrested, Seized, or Taken; likewise all who Knowingly shall
give any Advice, Assistance, or Favor in these Matters, for that very Thing,
and in that Moment, shall incur the Sentence of Excommunication. The
Communities or Universities, or Bodies-Politick, that shall be Guilty of these
things, we put under Ecclesiastic Interdict, strictly commanding the Prelates,
and Churchmen, by Virtue of their Obedience, and under pain of being Deposed,
that they acquiesce not in these things, without Express License of the said
See. And that under Pretense of any manner of Obligation, Promise, or
Concession now made, before this Constitution, Prohibition, or Precept shall
come to their Knowledge, or afterward they shall not Pay, or the foresaid
Seculars Receive any thing any manner of way. And if they do Pay, or the others
Receive, that very Moment in doing it they shall fall under the Sentence of
Excommunication, nor shall they be absolved from Excommunication or Interdict,
without special License, and Authority from the Apostolic See, unless at point
of Death: For we intend not by Dissimulation to pass by such an horrid Abuse of
the Secular Powers; Notwithstanding any Privileges under any Tenor, Form, or
Conception of Words whatever, Granted to Emperors, Kings, and others abovesaid,
which we will not shall any way help, him or them against the Premises:
Therefore no Man may lawfully Dare to do any thing contrary to this
Constitution, Prohibition, or Precept. Dated at St. Peter's in Rome the 6th of
the Kalends of March, in the Second Year of our Pontificate; That is, February
24th 1296, in the 24th of Ed. 1.

Notwithstanding the Clergy denied the King an Aid according to this Papal
Prohibition; yet he proceeded in his War, and made Confederatio inter Regem and
Comitem Flandriae. pat. 25 Ed 1. Part. 1 M. 18. The Confederacy between K. Ed.
and the E. of Flanders.
a Confederacy with the Earl of Flanders against the King of France;
Complaining, That he being a Peer of France, and in Homage to the High and
Puissant King Philip, he oppressed and used him according to his own Will,
contrary to Reason, Justice, and his own Desert; and therefore, because he was
so Strong by Advice of his Prelates, Earls, and Barons, he made Alliances and
Covenants, with his Friends, to endure from that time forward for Ever, ( a
touz jours perpetuelement) and particularly with the Earl of Flanders.

First, That if the King of France, or his Heirs, should make War The Articles.
upon him or his Heirs, then the King of England should Aid and Assist him
against the King of France, and all his Assistants, by his Allies Secondly,
That the Earl of Flanders, and his Heirs, Earls of Flanders, and their Allies,
should Aid the King of England, his Heirs, and Allies, in the same manner, and
that within two Months after notice from the King of England, in this present
War, he was to make upon the King of France. Thirdly, That neither the King of
England, nor his Heirs, nor the Earl of Flanders and his Heirs, should make
Peace, Truce, or Sufferance, (i. e. Cessation of Arms) with the King of France
and his Heirs, without the Assent, Grant, and Consent of each other. Fourthly,
That the Earl of Flanders might better and more surely sustain and undergo so
great an Affair, and so great a War, as he had France, his Allies, and
Assistants. Et pur ceo que cuens de Flandres, peust mieuz and plus surement,
sustenir and endurer si grant bensoign, and si grant fais de Guerre come il
convendra contre le Roy de France e ses Alliez, e ses Aidantz. King Edward
granted for him and his Heirs, to the Earl of Flanders, and his Heirs, every
Year during the War, Sixty Thousand Four of these Livres made a Pound Sterling;
so that this was the value of 15000 l. Sterling.
Livres of Black Turnois, or other Current Money at Two Payments, within the
Earldom of Flanders, (Chescun an Durant le at every Payment Thirty thousand
Livres; the First to begin at Christmas, 1297. (an Noel qui serra l'an de
Nostre Seigneur Mil deux centz quatre vintz e Diseseptz) and the Second at the
Nativity of St. John Baptist following. These Payments were to endure so long
as the War should endure. Fifthly, That these Alliances made between them might
no ways be Ne par Commandment, ne par purchaz D'Apostoille, ne d'autri, ne pur
choice qui sait impetree, ne ottrogee, etc.) and if any thing was obtained it
was agreed on both Parts to Reject, and not use it.
For the Faithful Performance of this Agreement, King Edward solemnly Swear to
the Earl of Flanders by his Proxies Monsieur Hugh le Despenser, and Monsieur
Walter Beauchamp, Steward of his Household. And by that Oath he further Agreed
and Covenanted with the Earl of Flanders, That his Son Edward when he was of
Age should Grant, Agree to, and Confirm this Form of Alliance and Confederacy:
Which was Dated at Ipswich, and Sealed with Epiphany, or the 7th of January,
1296. in the 25th of his Reign. Et pur ce totes ces chooses soinet plus seurez
tenuz, and Gardez mieux, and plus fermement, nous en noun de sovenance, and de
Tesmoignage avous cestes presents Letters fait seale^ de nostre Seal; Les
queles jurent faites and Donees a Gippewiz lendemain de la Epephany l'an de
Grace, Mil deux centz quatre vintz and sesse; and de nostre Regne vintisme
quint. The Record is long and Tautological, but this is the very Substance of
it.

Besides Ibm.
the Annual Sum here granted, for the further Support of Guy Earl of Flanders,
and Marquis of Namur in this great Undertaking against the King of France, in
another Instrument in the same Roll and Membrane, and in Respect of the
Alliance he had made with him, and the Covenants and Alliances mentioned in his
Letters aforesaid, King Edward gave him Three hundred thousand Livres Turnois
Noirs, (That is Seventy five thousand Pound Sterling) Livres upon his Assent to
the Covenants; 6000 Livres at Christmas following; 24000 at Candlemas
following; and 70000 Livres at Easter, or Fifteen days after, or at the
farthest at Whitsunday: This Sum is obscurely hinted in the preceding
Confederacy, and this Grant is Dated at Ipswich the same Day and Year.

Yet farther, as Part of this Alliance in another Record in the same Roll and
Membrane, it is agreed, That Edward the King's Eldest Son, so soon as he was of
Age should Marry Philippe Daughter of the Earl of Flanders, if the Match was
not Guy Earl of Flanders, with his Wife and Daughter Philippe, had been allured
to Paris above a Year before, by seemingly very kind Letters from the King of
France, where they were all made Prisoners; the Father and Mother were Released
about Twelve Months after, but the Daughter was kept with Design to prevent
this Match, which would have been very Disadvantageous to France; Mezeray Hist.
Fol. 325. A. D. 1294.
hindered by the King of France, her Death, or any other occasion that might
happen, si le dit Marriage naloit este accomplir par lempeechement du Roy de
France, ou par la mort de la dite Phelippe, ou par autre occasion, quele que
Ele avenist; but if so, then he was to Marry his Isabel. And this was to be
performed without any hindrance of King Edward, or any other; to which, he was
not to consent, nor to any Absolution of the Pope or others, against these
things, Nene consentiones a la absolucion Encontee ces chose, ne autre
Empeechment d'Apostoille, ne d'autrui. Dated at Ipswich the same Day and Year.

The Clergy Walsingham, F. 69. N. 30. The Clergy meet at London, and deny the
King Aid a Second time.
met the Second time at London, according to the King's Appointment, on the
morrow of St. Hilary, that is, the 14th of January, when they continued their
Resolution, and Denied to give him an Aid or Subsidy for the Carrying on his
War against France, according to the Pope's Inhibition Ibm. F. 69. N. 30.
procured by the Archbishop, with the Consent of the Clergy.

All our Historians report the Refusal of the Clergy, but none The Reasons of
this Denial.
of them is so Express in giving the Reasons for it as Knighton, Col. 2491. N.
10. 20. where he tells us, That after the Clergy had refused to give the King
an Aid, Robert Winchelsey Archbishop of Canterbury spoke thus to the Bishops,
Satis vobis constat Domini mei, nec latere potest, quod sub Omnipotenti Deo
duos etiam Dominos habemus, Spiritualem and Temporalem; Spiritualem vero
Dominum Papam, and Temporalem Dominum nostrum Regem, and quamvis utrique
obedientiam debeamus, Majorem tamen Spirituali, quam Temporali, etc. My Lords,
You know well, that under Almighty GOD we have two Lords, a Spiritual and
Temporal Lord; the Spiritual the Pope, and Temporal our King; and although we owe
Obedience to both, yet greater to the Spiritual than Temporal; but that we may
please both, we will send special Messengers at our own Charge to our Spiritual
Father the Pope, to have leave to Grant something, or at least Direction what
we ought to do Vt Licentiam aliquid concedendi habere possumus, vel saltem
Responsum habeamus ab ipso, quid facere Debeamus. Credimus, etc. for we believe
the King, as well as our Selves, does Fear, and would avoid the Sentence of
Excommunication.

After this Denial* he went on Progress or Pilgrimage, to visit his Tutelar
Ibm. f. 44. lin. 8. The King goes on Pilgrimage.
Saint, or Protectress in Dangers or Adversity, the Lady of Walsingham in
Norfolk, where his Procurators, See a particular Instrument about this Matter
in the Record above.
Hugh le Dispenser, and Walter de Beauchamp Steward of his Household, at his
Command and in his Presence, (it not being the Usage for him any ways to Swear
in his own Person) did Swear ( en la Chapelle de nostre Dame a Walsingham) in
the Chapel of the Lady of Walsingham, for him and his Heirs, Kings of England,
and in his Name, according to the Power given them, (which he acknowledged)
That they should Perform and Fulfill all Matters and Things contained in the
Instrument of Alliance between him and Flanders, Nous qui de usage avoms, que
nous en propre Procurators to swear to the Articles of Confederacy, on behalf
of the King.
Person ne jurromy, reconissoms que le dit Monsieur Hue and Monsieur Wautier
fesoms nous* Procureurs, and lour donans poer e mandement, etc. par le
testmoign de cestes presents* Lettres, etc. by Witness of these present
Letters, Dated at Walsingham, (le jour de la Chandeleur) on the Candlemas-Day,
in the Year of Grace, 1296, and of our Reign the 25th.

Anthony Ibm. in another Instrument.
Bishop of Duresm, Walter Bishop of Chester, and Hugh le Dispenser (pur ceo que
en sa propre Person le Roy and mie use a jurer) for that the King uses not to
Swear in his proper Person, did in like manner, by the Power and Authority
given them The King's Proctors sworn to the Covenants of Marriage, etc.
by the King, Swear, That he should Fulfill and Keep all the Articles of the
Covenants of Marriage between his Son and the Earl of Flanders Daughters; This
Instrument is also dated at the same place, on Tuesday after Candlemass, Le
Mardy apres le Chandeleur.

A few days after the Confirmation of this Confederacy, the King The King moved
at the unkindness of the Clergy.
being much moved at the Backwardness, Unkindness, and Stiffness, of the Clergy
to assist him in this War against France, gave Command, Append. n 18. Ordered
the Lay-fees, etc. of the Clergy to be seized.
That all the Lay Fees of the whole Clergy, Archbishops, Bishops, and*
Religious, as of other Clercs whatever, and of whatever State or Condition they
were, together with their Goods and Chattels found upon the same, should be
seized into his hands, until the Sheriffs should receive other Commands from
him; Which Writs or Warrants to all the Sheriffs of England were dated at Ely
in his return from Walsingham, February the 12th.

This Writ was rigidly Executed, as appears by the Protections hereafter
mentioned, and the Report of all Historians; and as the Monk of Fol. 429. n.
30. The Clergy put out of Protection.
Westminster says, the Clergy were also put out of the King's Protection, and
so as the Lawyers were prohibited to plead for them before the Barons of the
Exchequer, or any Temporal Judge; and that all in Orders were commanded freely
to pay to the King the Fifth part of their Revenue, or quit their Estates;
Sponte offerre sibi suorum proventuum quintam partem, aut invite cedere omnibus
Bonis suis. The first that complied and obeyed this Command, were some
Shaveling Prelates in Court, but in the Cure of Souls manifest Pirates, that
they might bring in others to the like Compliance. The Monk thinks he Latins
this very sharply and wittily, Ibm.
Huic mandato primitus obtemperaverunt quidam Tonsorati in Curia Regali
Praelati, in Cura vero animarum Pilati manifesti, ut inducerent pari modo
animos caeterorum.

However it was, before this Writ issued, the Clergy especially The Clergy of
the Province of York comply with the King, and receive his Protection.
of the Province of York, and more particularly of the Dioceses of York and
Carlisle, having great Apprehensions of the King's Anger, and their own
Condition, by early application, and granting the Fifth of their Benefices and
Goods, for the Defense of themselves and their Churches, against the Invasion
and Attempts of the Enemies of the Kingdom, obtained his Protection Append. n.
19.
for themselves, Tenants, Lands, Rents, Goods, and all their Possessions
whatever, which were to be protected, maintained, and defended, from all
Injury, Trouble, and Damage, until the Feast of All Saints next. This Writ of
Protection bears Date at Walsingham, Febr. 6. in the 25th of his Reign, and
only by Privy Seal, but on the 18th of the same Ibm.
month passed the Great Seal, by Warrant from the King.

The same Append. n. 20.
Protection was given to the King's beloved Clerk Iterius de Ingolisine,
Archdeacon of Bath, his Tenants, Many others submit, and receive the King's
Protection.
Lands, Rents, and Possessions, and for the same time, that is, unto the Feast
of All Saints. Dated at Kings-Langley in Hertfordshire the 18th of February;
and the same was granted Ibm.
to John de Melingham, Lambert de Trikingham, John de Lacy, Radulph de
Staunford, John de Drokensford, and an Hundred and twenty others, dated at the
same time and place; and to as many as would submit, and seek for them.

Besides these Writs of Security and Protection, to such whose Writs of
Restitution granted to the Clergy.
Lands were not seized, nor Goods taken, he also granted Writs of Restitution
to those whose Lands and Possessions had been seized, and their Goods taken. As
for Example, take one Append. n. 21.
for Prior and Brethren of the Hospital of St. John's of Jerusalem in England.
Dated at Ambresbury in Wiltshire the 25th of February, in the 25th of his
Reign. Great Numbers of other Writs of Protection and Restitution, granted to
Bishops, Parsons, Vicars, Abbats, Abesses, Priors, Friars, and other
Ecclesiastic or Religious Persons, may be seen and perused in the Close Roll
25 Ed. I. M. 22. to M. 26.

Many there were that through Negligence, or want of Satisfaction They enter
into Recognisances to save their Estates.
concerning the King's Proceedings, or to avoid Trouble, or some other Cause,
had not complied, and taken out their Protections, these the King by his
especial Favor (as he says in the Writ) admitted to enter into Recognisance,
to pay the Fines or Composition set upon them, by one Knight, and the Sheriff
of the County, his Commissioners, and so their Estates and Goods were free from
seizure.

Others there were that invented and spread News amongst the People, by which
Discord might happen between the King and his Prelates, Earls, Barons, and
other Great Men, to the Disturbance of the Peace, and Subversion of the
Kingdom, who also publish Admonitions, and Excommunications against the King's
Officers for seizing and taking the Lands and Goods of those as refused to pay
Taxes, and such as had Complied and Received the French Append. n. 22.
Record, with the Proceedings thereupon, do here follow.

Edward by the Grace of God, etc. To Monsieur Adam de Wells, and the Sheriff of
Lincoln, Greeting: Whereas of late we have conceived The Writs or Commissions
for taking Recognisances of the Clergy.
Displeasure and Indignation against some Clerks of holy Church, not without
their desert, who being within our Realm, and under our Protection, wholly
refused to give an Aid for the Defense of the whole Realm, and the English
Church; We knowing they are not sufficiently mindful, or knowing of the Perils
which may happen to the whole Realm and Church of England through their
default, willing to do them special favor at this time, tho they deserve it
not, have assigned you both, or one of you, (if both cannot meet together) to
receive in our Name Recognisances of Prelates and others of holy Church,
whatever they be, in the County aforesaid, according to their Estates, who will
have our Protection, in the Form that is sent, and enjoined you by us; and to
certify our Chancellor of the Names of those that have made such
Recognisances, and to certify also the Treasurer and Barons of the Exchequer
of such Recognisances having been received; so as nevertheless the
Recognisances be made between this and Easter next, and not after. And hereby
we Command you to do the things aforesaid, according to the Form here-under
directed. In Witness whereof we have caused to be made these our Letters
Patents to be in force for the time abovesaid. Given at Clarendon the first day
of March, in the 25th of our Reign.


The Second Writ or Commission.
Edward, etc. To Monsieur Adam de Wells, and the Sheriff of The second Writ or
Warrant for the apprehension of Inventors, or Dispersers of News.
Lincoln, Greeting; We perceiving that Inventers of News, by which Discord may
arise between us and our Prelates, our Earls, or Barons, and our other Great
Men, tending to the Disturbance of our Peace and Subversion of the Kingdom,
making themselves ready with mortal Enmity, and force of Arms to assault the
Realm, not willing to let such Malice pass without Restraint, We assign you to
enquire and search by all ways you can, for Malefactors, and Disturbers of our
Peace, and Dispersers of News, or such as do or would hinder the execution of
our Commands, or give or publish Sentence of Excommunication, And Publishers of
Excommunication against the King's Ministers and Subjects.
privately or openly against our Ministers, and Subjects, or Adherents, for
Executing our Commands for the Profit of our Realm, or against Persons of holy
Church, that have put themselves under our Protection for to save themselves,
and their Churches; and we hereby Command you, That you take and imprison such,
of what Estate or Condition soever they be, that you find guilty of any of
these things, until you receive other Commands from us: And We Will, That if
both cannot intend this Business, then one of you that shall be nearest the
places, where any of these things may happen, may Execute the Matters aforesaid.

And it is to be remembered, that the Knights and Sheriffs under Commissioners
assigned for the Execution of the Writs or Warrants in all Counties.
written, are assigned in the same Form above written, in the Counties
underwritten; That is to say,

Aleyn Plokenet, and the Sheriff of Somerset, and Dorset, in those

Bueges de Knovill, and the Sheriff of Stafford, and Shropshire, in those
Counties.

John Tregoz, and the Sheriff of Hereford, in that County.

Thomas de Berkelee, and the Sheriff of Gloucester, and Worcestershire, in those
Counties.

John de Segrave, and the Sheriff of Warwick, and Leicestershires,

Robert Fitz-Payn, and the Sheriff of Wiltshire, in that County.

Ralph Pipard, and the Sheriff of Bedford and Bucks, in those Counties.

John Lovel, and the Sheriff of Oxford and Berks, in those Counties.

Thomas de Furnival, and the Sheriff of Derbyshire, in that County.

John le Bretun, and the Sheriff of Middlesex, in that County.

Robert de Tateshale, and the Sheriff of Norfolk, and Suffolk, in those
Counties.

John Engayn, and the Sheriff of Northampton, and Rutland, in those Counties.

Henry Tregoz, and the Sheriff of Surrey, and Sussex, in those Counties.

Robert Fitz Roger, and the Sheriff of Essex, and Hertford, in those Counties.

Reynald de Argentem, and the Sheriff of Cambridge, and Huntington, in those
Counties.

William de Leyburne, and the Sheriff of Kent, in that County.

Henry Teys, and the Sheriff of Southampton, in that County.

Gefrey de Camvill, and the Sheriffs of Cornwall, and Devonshire, in those
Counties.

John de Lancaster, and the Sheriff of Lancaster, for that County.

Reynold de Gray, in the County of Chester, with the Four Cantreds.

John de Havering, in North Wales.

William de Brehuse, and Walter de Pederton, in West-Wales.

Instructions, and Proceedings upon the first Writ or Commission.

It is to be Remembered, That the Knights and Sheriffs shall do Instructions for
these Commissioners, and Sheriffs.
the things above-written, according to the Articles following.

It is ordained, That the Banerets and Sheriffs, shall take Pledges of the Lay
People, such as shall be sufficient to answer the Sums Clergy that cannot find
Lay Sureties, shall bring to the Sheriff Goods to the value of what they are to
pay, to remain with him until they have paid it.

And the Thing demanded or taken in this Form shall be for themselves and their
Churches, for the common Profit of the Realm, and for to have their
Protections; That is to say, of every Prelate, or Parson of a Church, or Clerk
Beneficed, the

And the Banerets and Sheriffs shall cause to be Enrolled the Sums Recognized,
and every Man's Name, with the Names of the Pledges or Sureties, and send the
Roll to the Exchequer that the Money may be Levied.

And the Banerets and Sheriffs shall give to every Clerk that Certificate under
A Commission to the Coroners in every County to Swear them.
their Seals to the Chancellor, to obtain the King's Protection; Then follows a
Commission to the Coroners in every County to Swear the Commissioners.

The King to his Coroners in the County of Surrey, Greeting; We send you Two
pair of our Letters Patents, with the Form enclosed in these Presents, to be
delivered to Henry Tregoz, and our Sheriff of Surrey and Sussex, commanding
you, That you deliver to them the said Letters with the Form, and that you
receive an Oath of them, That they shall faithfully do and perform those things
for which they were by those Letters assigned by us according to the said Form.
The like Letters were directed to the Coroners of the Counties underwritten,
etc.

These Commissioners and Sheriffs acted according to their Commissions They
acted according to their Instructions.
and Instructions, as appears by many of the Original Recognisances, and
Certificates, with the Seals annexed to them, yet remaining amongst the Records
in the Tower, upon which the Ecclesiastics and Clerks had Protections granted
them, and Writs for the Restitution of their Temporalities, Goods, and
Chattels. The Certificates were in diverse Forms: For Example,

To the Noble Peer, and our King's Discreet Append. n. 22. The Forms of the
Certificates of such as Fine to the King to have his Protection.
Chancellor, or his Deputy Gilbert de Knovil, Sheriff of Devon, if it pleased
him, Health or Greeting, and as much of Reverence and Honor as he could: Know,
Sir, That the Abbat of St. Dogmael by his Proctors or Substitutes, Robert de la
Pit, and William de Culecumbe, came to me the first day of April, and granted
to the King double the Aid he last paid, for the Defense of himself, his
Churches, and the Common Profit of the Realm, and to have his Protection, and
for this he found a Surety. In Witness whereof, I have sent my Letter Patent
and Close.

To Sir John de Langeton, the King's Chancellor, John de Segrave, and the
Sheriff of Warwick, and Leicester, Greeting; Know we have Received Master
Robert de Craft Parson of Bedeworth, and Eylmerthorp, into the King's
Protection. In Witness whereof we have sent this Bill sealed with our Seals.

William de Plympton Parson of West Bedeford, before Sir Aleyn Plokenet, and
the Sheriff of Somerset, made a Fine of Eight Shillings, which is the Double of
his Tenth according to his Recognisance, for to have the King's Protection, and
for the Defense of himself and Churches, and the Common Profit of the Realm.
Pleges for the Fine Thomas de Kynhammer, and Adam Vincen, Laymen. In Witness
whereof the said Sir Aleyn has set his Seal to this Bill.

To the Venerable and Discreet John de Langeton, the King's Chancellor, Adam de
Well, and R. le Vener, Sheriff of Lincoln, deputed to take the Recognisances
of the Clergy of that County, Greeting; Know that William de Brumton made Fine
with the King to have his Protection and his Lay-fee restored, and this we to
you.

To Sir John de Langeton, the King's Chancellor, Henry de Thistelden, Sheriff
of Oxford, Greeting; Whereas William, Vicar of the Church of Wyteny, came
before me at Oxford, and made Fine xvii s. iiii d. which is the Double of the
Tenth of his Vicarage, as he says. I have given him this Bill or Certificate,
sealed with my Seal, to obtain the King's Protection. Given at Oxford the 12th
day of March, in the 25th year of the Reign of King Edward.


Where the Fines and Sums are not mentioned in the Certificates, they are noted
in an Account of them, at the end of the Bundles of Certificates, in this
manner.

Henry de Gudeford gives the King to have his Protection x 1.

Philip de Willugby entered into Recognisance to satisfy the King for his Lands
and Tenements, and Chattels found upon them, and has Protection for himself
and Tenants.

Hugh Parson of Kingston, before Sir Aleyn Plokenet, and the of Somerset, made
Fine of viii s. which is the Double, etc. And so the Certificates of very great
numbers of others are contained, and to be seen in the Bundles in the Tower.

What was done upon the second Commission appears by the Writs directed to the
Sheriffs for Discharging and setting at Liberty such Rectors, Vicars, Priests
and Clerks, as had been imprisoned for publishing of the Popes Bull and
Sentence of Excommunication, Misdemeanors against the King and his Crown.

While the Execution of this first Commission was in Agitation, there was an
Assembly of the Clergy to be in Mid-Lent at London, to which Assembly the King
directs this Writ.

EDward, Append. n. 23. The Clergy forbidden to ordain any thing in prejudice
to the King or his Affairs, in their Synod.
by the Grace of God, King of England, etc. To the Honorable Fathers in God
the Archbishops, Bishops, and other Prelates, and to all those of the Clergy
who at Mid-Lent next coming are to meet at London, Greeting; We forbid you all,
and every one of you, upon as much as you can forfeit to us, That you, or none
of you, do ordain, or cause to be ordained, or assent to any Ordinance in that
Assembly, that may turn to the prejudice or grievance of us, or any of our
Ministers, or those that are in our Peace or Allegiance, and in our Protection,
or Adherents, or any of them. Given at Sturmister the 21st day of March, in the
25th of our Reign.


And Hugh le Despenser had a Commission of the same Date, to go in his own
Person, and take such with him of the Council as he thought fit, to publish
this Prohibition at the day of their meeting, Pat. 25. Ed. I. p. 1. M. 9.

The Result of this Synod we have in Fol. 430. lin. 4 A. D. 1297. The Result of
that Synod.
Matthew of Westminster, Archbishop, and certain other Bishops, his Suffragans,
meeting at St. Paul's, London, on the 26th of March, to consult of the State of
the Church; Two Lawyers, and Two Friar Preachers stood up, and in hopes of
gaining Royal, and Temporal Favor, argued and endeavored to prove, that the
Clergy in time of War, notwithstanding the Pope's Prohibition, might Lawfully
give and pay Taxes to the King. And furthermore, it being forbidden any one,
under Pain of Imprisonment, publish the Sentence of Excommunication against the
King himself, or those which lately sought his Protection, they all departed;
The Archbishop having first charged their Consciences with this saying, Salvet
suam animam unusquisque. Let every Man save his Soul.

What was done upon the second Commission appears by the What was done upon
this second Commission.
Writs directed to the Sheriffs for Discharging and setting at Liberty, upon
Security given, such Rectors, Vicars, Priests, and Clerks, as had been
imprisoned for publishing of the Pope's Bull, and Sentence of Excommunication,
and for other Misdemeanors against the King and his Crown.

The King to the Sheriff Append. n. 24.
of Devon, Greeting; We Command thee, That thou set at Liberty, first
taking Security, that they give us Satisfaction when we demand it, those
Chapellanes which thou did lately take and imprison, for publishing a certain
Sentence, and other Transgressions against us and our Crown, according to what
we more fully enjoined thee by Word of Mouth. Witness the King at Plimpton the
11th day of April, in the 25th of his Reign.

This Writ was followed by another, directed to the Sheriff of Cornwall, to the
same purpose, but more particularly for the delivery of such as were named in
the Writ.

The King to the Sheriff of Cornwall, Greeting; Append. n. 25.
We Command thee, That if our beloved in Christ William Bodrugan, Archdeacon of
Cornwall, will undertake to have before thee Master Clement de Rupe, Master
Ralph de Treredenek, William Vicar of the Church of St. Sevara, ( and Thirty
three others) which were taken and detained in Prison at Launceston for
publishing of a certain Papal Letter, (i. e. the Bull) as 'twas said, so as
they may appear before us at our Pleasure to make Satisfaction for their
Faults, if they have committed any of this Kind; Then that you cause without
delay to be delivered from the Prison aforesaid those Rectors, Vicars, Priests,
and Clerks, which upon that occasion, and no other, were detained in the same;
Witness the King at Plympton the 17th of April, in the 25th of his Reign.

King Edward's Engagements to the Earl of Flanders, and his other Confederates,
required his going over Sea, and about Ten days after, at this place, he
directs his Warrants Append. n. 26. The King gives Command to his Fleet to be
ready to pass beyond Sea.
to the Barons and Goodmen of his Ports of Hastings, Favesham, Sandwich, Hethe,
Winchelse, Romenhale, Dover, and Rye, commanding them to have the whole Service
of their several Ports that was due to him, ready Armed and Equipped at
Winchelse, on the Morrow of John the Baptist next coming, to go whither he
should command them. And he Required them further, That besides their Service,
they should fit out and arm all other Ships of Forty All Ships of Forty Tuns
Burden commanded to be ready.
Tuns Burden or above, to be ready at the same day and place, to go with their
other Ships into his Service; but that he would not this should be made an
Example for the future. Witness the King at Plympton the 27th of April, in the
25th of his Reign.

On the same day, and at the same place, he directs his Warrants Claus. 25. Ed.
I. M. 19. Dors.
to the Bailiffs and Good-men of Yarmouth, and to the Mayors and Bailiffs of
all Ports in England, the Occasion being Extraordinary, to arm and set out all
the Ships of 40 Tuns, and above, of their several Ports, so as they might be at
Winchelsey on the Morrow of St. John Baptist, as before.

He sent also his Warrants and Orders of the same Date Ibm. M. 19, 20.
to the Warden of the Cinque Ports, and the Sheriffs of all Counties in which
there were Seaports, to repair to them, and take care the Ships should be
Armed and Equipped, and ready at Winchelsey at the time he had Commanded.

Soon after Claus. 25. Ed. I. M. 17. Cedul. Summons to all that had 20 l. per
Annum to go with the King.
the King wrote to all the Sheriffs of England, Reginald de Gray, Justiciary of
Chester, to give notice to all those in their several Bailiwicks or Counties,
that had 20 l. per Annum or above, as well within Liberties, as without,
whether they held of him in Capite, or not, to provide themselves with Horse
and Arms, and to be ready to go with his own Person, for the Defense of
themselves, and whole Kingdom, whenever he should send for them. Witness the
King at Plympton the 5th day of May, in the 25th of his Reign.

On the 15th of May for the Dangers and Perils that might happen to him, and
his Kingdom, by the Treachery of his Enemies, reciting the former Warrant, and
having appointed the time of his passage beyond Sea, he Append. n. 27. Of
whomsoever they hold to pass with his Body beyond Sea.
commanded all the Sheriffs of England, and Reginald de Gray, to summon all
that had 20 l. per Annum, of whomsoever they should hold the same, to be with
him at London, provided with Horse and Arms as they ought Sunday next after the
Octaves, or Eight days after St. John Baptist, to pass with his Body beyond
Sea, to the Honor of God, of himself, and their selves, for the safety and
common Profit of the Kingdom. Witness the King at Loders (in Dorsetshire) the
15th of May, in the 25th of his Reign.

At the same time he sent his Ibm. He summons his whole Military Service to go
with him.
Warrants to the same Persons, to summon the Archbishops, Bishops, Abbats,
Priors, and other Ecclesiastic Persons, and also Widows, and other Women,
within their Counties, that held of him in Capite by Military Service, or
Serjanty, or of Wards in his Hand, or Tuition, to be at the same time and place
with their whole Service of Horse and Arms, to pass with his Body, etc. Witness
as above.

Then also he wrote Ibm. And writes to all the Earls, Barons, and Bishops,
particularly to be ready.
to Edmund Earl of Cornwall, reciting his first Writ, etc. to be ready with
Horse and Arms, at the same etc. Witness as above. In like manner he wrote to
Roger le Bygod Earl of Norff and Marshall of England; To Humfry Bohun Earl of
Hereford and Essex, Constable of England; To William Beauchamp Earl of Warwick,
Richard Fitz-Alan Earl of Arundel, Robert de Ver Earl of Oxford, John de Warena
Earl of Surry, Gilbert de Hunfranvil Earl of Anegos, and 122 Barons, and great
Men there named; And after the same manner he wrote to all the Bishops
particularly.

On the 24th of this month the King wrote Ibm. n. 28.
again to all the Sheriffs of England, and Reginald de Gray, Justiciary of
Chester, to The Sheriffs to certify all that had 20 l. per Annum in their
Counties.
Execute his former Writ of Summons, and to certify under their Seals the
Names of all such as had 20 l. per Annum or above, of whomsoever they held it,
in their Bailiwicks or Counties. Witness the King at Portsmouth the 24th of
May, in the 25th of his Reign.

While the King was thus preparing for his Voyage, Walsingh. f. 70. N. 10, 20,
30, 40. The Scots arm under William Waleys their Leader. Kill the English.
the Scots by the Instigation of William Waleys whom they chose their Leader,
in this Month of May, (upon the King's Justitiary William de Ormesby's
Banishing many of them that refused to do Homage, and Fealty to King Edward)
armed themselves, and Killed all the English they met with, practicing strange
Cruelties upon them; which he having notice of, laying to Heart the Affliction
of his Friends in Flanders for want of his Assistance, directed The Earl of
Surry sent to Suppressthem He sent Henry de Percy.
William Waren Earl of Surrey with the Militia beyond Trent, to march into
Scotland, to suppress this Insurrection. The Earl raising an Army in the North
Parts, sent his Nephew Henry de Percy with it into Scotland, who marching
toward the Scots found the Heads of them, the Bishop of Glascow, the Steward of
Scotland, Andrew de Mornia, and William Walleys, inclineable to Peace, upon
Condition of the Safety of their Lives and Limbs, Lands and Goods, so as all
things might be Pardoned to that time. Henry Who accepts from them Terms of
Peace.
de Percy admitted the Peace, upon promise of Hostages, and Articles in
Writing, if it should please the King, who, made acquainted with the Terms,
Consented to it, that his Voyage might not be hindered. When the Earl of Surrey
went into Scotland to see the Performance of these things, the Scots shifted
from delaying to deliver Hostages; whereupon the Bishop of Glascow, and William
Douglas, lest they might be thought Traitors, yielded themselves, the Bishop
was secured in Roxburgh Castle, and Douglas in Berwick.

In order to the King's Voyage into Flanders, as has been noted before, the
Militia was Summoned to meet at London on the Sunday after the Octaves of St.
John Baptist, which are July the First. Mat. Westminster Fol. 430. N. 20, 30,
40. A. D. 1297. The Earls of Norfolk and Hereford, Constable and Marshal,
refuse to do their Duty and Service.
says, They were summoned to meet on the Morrow of the Translation of Thomas
the Martyr, (i. e. Becket) which is July the 8th, and may agree with the
Record, (if the First of July that year fell on a Sunday) when the Earls of
Norfolk and Hereford, the Marshal and Constable, being Required by the King,
Refused to do their Duty, and Request him to appoint some other of his Household
to that Service, and retired; and on the 25th of July [8] he wrote again to all
his Ports, to send [8] Claus. 25. E. 1. M. 9. Dors
their Ships to Winchelsey, with what speed they could.

The King, no doubt, in hopes of a perfect Reconciliation before he went over
Sea, Append. N. 16. The King restores to the Archbishop of Canterbury all his
Lands and Goods.
wrote to the Sheriffs of Kent, Surrey, Middlesex, Sussex, and Essex, upon the
earnest Request and Mediation of the Prelates of that Province, and out of
Special favor, to Restore to the Archbishop of Canterbury all his Lay-Fees,
together with his Oxen, Carts, or Wagons, and all other his Goods and Chattels
being upon the same, in the state they were then in: Witness the King at
Westminster, July the 11th, in the 25th of his Reign.

And that he might extend his further favor to all the Clergy that had
submitted, and were reconciled, he gave a general Protection to them, that had
not received it before, and Ibm. N. 30. He grants a General Protection to all
the Clergy.
wrote to the Sheriffs of London and others, at the Request and Prayer of the
Archbishop of Canterbury, and other Bishops and Prelates of his Kingdom,
Supplicating him in behalf of the Clergy, That they should Maintain, Protect,
and Defend all the Clergy in their Bayliwics, their Tenements, Lands, Goods,
Rents, and all their Possessions; not permitting them to receive any Injury or
Molestation in their Persons or otherwise, though they had not his Protection.
Witness St. Paul's, London, 31st of July, in the 25th of his Reign.

It ought not to be omitted here, That notwithstanding the Mortal Enmity and
War between the two Kings of England and The King of France Remonstrates
against the Pope's Bull prohibiting Taxes.
France, yet King Philip the 4th Published a sharp Remonstrance against the
Pope's Bull, which caused this Trouble and Contention between the King and
Clergy in this Nation, in which he strenuously asserted the Rights of his
Crown, and the Liberties of the Gallican Church, which were the very same with
those of England. The Archbishop of Rhemes with the Suffragans and Abbots of
his The Clergy of France join with him.
Province, seconded their King's Remonstrance with a Supplication to the Pope,
to recall his Bull, lest it might break the Peace and Unity of the Gallican
Church and Kingdom, as being very Injurious and Grievous to the King, and
Temporal Nobility, and as bringing Scandals, nay perhaps Ruin and Destruction
to the Nation; Boniface the 8th, sent an Explanatory Bull to The Pope explains
his Bull for the ease of the King, Nobility, etc.
King Philip, by which he Declared, That his former Bull extended not to
voluntary Grants and Aids made by the Clergy, nor to Cases of Necessity, when
Taxes and Contributions were necessary for the Defense of the Kingdom, then
they might be Raised without consulting the Pope. That the King and his
Successors (provided they were Twenty years of Age) might be Judges of the
Necessity, if not of that Age, then their Council; and Lastly, He Declared,
that Bull, or Constitution, it was not intended to take away or diminish any
Rights, Liberties, Franchises, or Customs of the King, Kingdom, Dukes, Earls,
Barons, or Temporal Nobility, whereof they were in Possession before he Emitted
that Bull. The Remonstrance, Supplication, and last Bull, Dated at Orvieto or
the Old City July 22. in the Third year of his Pontificate, A. D. 1297. are to
be found in Peter Pithous Proofs of the Liberties of the Gallican Church.
Printed 1639. Chap. Sect. or Numb. 8, 9, 10. Fol.

By reason of the Clergies Denial to Grant the King a Seasonable and Timely Aid
to carry on his Wars, he was forced upon Unwarrantable Courses against the Laws
of the Realm, Knighton, Col..249:. N* 60. The K. forced upon Unwarrantable
courses to raise Money.
by Raising the Custom upon Wool from a Noble, to Forty Shillings the Sack, and
ordering the Owners should sell their Wool within a Month, at certain Places
assigned, or they should be forfeited. For the Victualling his Army and Ships,
he took Wheat, Oats, Malt, Salt-Fish, and Flesh, as Pork, Beef, Mutton,
without paying for them, as well from Laymen, as the Clergy; by which
Oppressions the People were very much Grieved and Disturbed, being hereby
prepared to follow the Dictates of any Projectors against the King.

It cannot be thought, but by this time the Archbishop and his Friends, the
Constable and Marshal and their Friends understood one another, and carried on
a joint Design. The Causes of the Controversy (but just now only mentioned)
between the King, Constable, and Marshal, and the Reasons of their Refusing to
do their Duty, their withdrawing from his Presence, and from Court, with their
Denial to return when sent to, will best appear King's Declaration upon Record,
sent to all the Sheriffs in England.

WHereas the King Append* N. 31. The King's Declaration of the Causes of the
Constable and Marshal's refusing to do their Duty, and retiring from Court.
always desiring the Peace, Quiet, and good Estate of his People and Kingdom,
after his Voyage which he is now making, etc. All occasions by which the said
Peace and Quiet may be Disturbed shall be wholly taken away. But because at
this time there may be such Reports raised amongst the People, that may cause
them to behave themselves otherwise toward their Sovereign Lord, then they
ought especially since the Earl of Hereford, and Earl Marshal have lately
withdrawn themselves from him, or for other Matters; hereupon, for that he
would have the Affairs of his Realm Uniform and Quiet, he makes known, and
would that all should know the Truth of what follows. Lately, when a great Part
of the Men of Arms of England, some upon Request, others by Summons of the King
came to London, the King willing to provide for their Discharge, the settling
of their Expenses, and that they might know what they were to do, sent to the
said Earls as Constable and Marshal of England, to come to him for that
purpose. The Earl of Hereford came, and Monfieur John Segrave to Excuse the
Earl Marshal, that by reason of Sickness he could not come, and therefore had
sent him in his stead. Presently by their assent they were ordered to make
Proclamation in the City of London, That all those that were come thither,
either by Summons or Request, should on the Morrow appear before the Constable
and Marshal, to know and be This was the proper Business of these two great
Officers, and without this Ordering and Enrolment, the Men at Arms were not
assigned the Quantity of their Service.
Enrolled, in what manner, and how many of them would serve the King in that
Voyage beyond Sea. They told the King they would perform the Order as they had
received it in Writing. But the same day toward Night the Earls sent the King a
Message in Writing by Sir John Esturnis Knight, in this Form. For that, Dear
Sir, You commanded the Marshal by the Constable, and by order in Writing, that
he should cause it to be published in the City, That all such as were come by
your Summons or Request, should be on the Morrow by One of the Clock before the
Constable and Marshal at St. Paul's, and that they should Enroll so many Horse
of one, and the other, and then to inform you of it. Your Constable and Marshal
do pray you to Command some other of your Household to do it. And for that Sir,
you know well, that though some are come upon Request, and not Summons, yet if
they do this, they should enter upon their Office, and do Service: Wherefore
they pray you to Command others. Upon receipt of this Message, and Counsel
taken thereupon, the King thinking they might have done it unadvisedly, sent
Monfieur Geofrey de Genevill, Monsieur Thomas de Berkeley, Monfieur John Treg^z
Constable of the Tower, and Guardian of London, Roger Brabazon, and Monsieur
William de Bereford, to advise them Better, and that they might so order
things, as they might not turn to the Prejudice of the King, nor their own
Estate; and if they would not be otherwise advised, then they should ask them
if they would avow the Letter sent, and the Words contained in it, which they
did; and the King being acquainted with it, advising with his Council, put in
the Place of the Earl of Hereford, Constable, Monsieur Thomas de Berkeley, and
in the Place of the Earl-Marshal, Monsieur Geofrey de Geneville, as they
desired; whereupon they withdrew themselves from the King and Court; and soon
after the Archbishop of Canterbury, and many other Bishops, came to the King,
beseeching him they might speak with the which the King Granted; they sent to
them to know where they might come to speak with them, they let them know by
Letters they should be at Waltham the Friday on the Morrow of St. James. They
went thither, the Earls came not, but sent Monsieur Robert Fitz-Roger, and
Monsieur John de Segrave, Knights, who said the Earls could not then come for
some Reasons. On Sunday following the Bishops and two Knights came to the King
at St. Albans, and at their Requests, the Knights had Letters of safe Conduct
given them for the Earls to come to, stay with, and return from the King, yet
they never came; and now it is given out the Earls offered to the King certain
Articles for the common Profit of the People, and that he utterly refused them,
of which the King knows nothing, for they never propounded, or caused to be
propounded any thing to him, nor does he know, why they are retired; amongst
which Articles it is reported, there were certain Grievances, which the King
understands well, as the Aids which he often demanded of the People, by reason
of his Wars in Gascony, Wales, and other where, which could not be Maintained,
or his Kingdom Defended, without the Assistance of his People, of which he
thinks often, that he should so much grieve, and burden them, and prays they
would have him Excused; and if it please GOD he returns from this Voyage, he
would have all Men know, That according to his great Desire, according to the
Will of GOD, and to the Satisfaction of his People, he will amend all things
whatever, where he ought: And if he does not return, he will order his Heir to
do it as well as if he had Returned; for he knows well, that no Man is so much
bound to the Kingdom, or to love the People, as he himself. On the other side,
there is great necessity of his going to assist his Ally the Earl of Flanders,
and his Passage is so hasty for the Peril his Friends beyond Sea are in, which
if he should lose, the Kingdom might be in great Danger; And therefore they
should have the Confirmation of the great Charter of the Liberties of England,
and of the Charter of the Forest, if they would Grant him an Aid or Gift, such
as was Necessary for him at this time; and the rather for that upon his going
over, a lasting Peace might ensue; and if he had Refused Articles, or any thing
else in Hatred, and Destruction of his People, contrary to the Common Profit of
the Realm, or that he has done otherwise against the Earls then is here said,
he desires no Man to believe him; for these are the true Proceedings, and the
very Truth of things to this time. Afterward he put them in mind what Dangers
and Wars may arise from Rumors, Stories, and Reports, raised between the King
and his People, etc. concluding his Declaration, That all his good People would
pray, That his Voyage might have a good End, to the Honor of GOD, of himself,
of them, and his Kingdom, and that a Durable Peace might follow. Given at
Odymere (near Winchelsey) the 12th day of August, in the 25th of his Reign.


The King being informed there were Excommunications ready to be Pronounced and
Published against his Officers, etc. sent a Prohibition Append. N. 32.
to the Archbishop and all other Bishops to forbear it. The King to the
Venerable Father in Christ, Robert, etc. The K. forbids the Bishops to publish
Sentence of Excommunication against his Officers, etc.
Whereas we have been forced by inevitable Necessity for the Defense of our
Kingdom and Hereditary Right invaded by the King of France, and other Enemies,
and for the Preservation and Safety of the English and of the Persons of
Ecclesiastics, and others, we have taken from them Grain, and other Goods, and
the same necessity yet compels us to do the like, for which Corn and Goods we
are resolved to make full Satisfaction; and now we understand that you intend
to promulge, and cause to be published, Sentence of Excommunication against our
Officers that took them by our Command, which if you should do, it would
manifestly redound to the great and immeasurable Michief of our Crown and
Dignity, the Scandal of the People, and as it may happen, the Consequence of it
may prove the Destruction of the Church, and Subversion of the whole Kingdom.
We forbid you, upon Observation of the Oath of Fidelity by which you are bound
to us, and upon forfeiture of all you hold of us, to publish any such Sentence
against our Officers, Clercs, or Laics, or to do any Injury to them, especially
when we are ready to make Satisfaction. Witness the King at Winchelsey the 19th
Day of August, in the 25th of his Reign.

King Edward being so far engaged to assist the Earl of Flanders Earl now much
pressed by the King of France, having lost some Towns, and being in fear of the
Revolt of his People; Walsingh. Hist. Angl f* 71. N. 30, 40, 50. f 72. N 10, 20.
while he was thus at Winchelsey, or Odymer, with all possible Expedition
providing for his Passage, the Earls sent him the following Petitions of his
Kingdom in Writing, and with this Title.

These are the Injuries and Grievances, which the Archbishops, Bishops, The
Grievances of the whole Kingdom presented to the King.
Abbots, Priors, Earls, and Barons, and the whole Community of the Land, do
show unto our Lord the King, Humbly beseeching him, That for his own Honor,
and the Safety of his People he would correct and amend them.

First, It seems to the Community of the Land, That the Summons Secondly,
Whether they ought to perform Service or not, because it is said in general
words, the King would pass over into Flanders: It seems to the Community, that
there they ought to do no Service, because neither they, nor their
Predecessors, or Progenitors, ever performed oppressed with Tallages, Aids, and
Takings, or Prizes, as of Wheat, Oats, Malt, Wool, Leather, Oxen, Cowes,
Powdered Meat, without paying for them, by which they were supported. Thirdly,
They say they cannot pay Taxes, by reason of their Poverty proceeding from the
Tallages and Takings aforesaid, because they had scarce wherewithal to support
themselves, and many were in such Condidition, as they had not wherewith to
Till their Lands. Fourthly, The whole Community of the Land thinks it self very
much grieved, That they are not used according to the Laws and Customs Fifthly,
They were Grieved and Oppressed, that Magna Charta, or the Great Charter was
not observed, and that the Charter and Assize of Forests was not observed
according to Custom. Sixthly, The whole Community thought it self grieved, by
the Imposition upon Wool, which was too Burdensome at 40s. per Sack, and Ibm.
f. 72. lin. 5.
for that the Wool of England, amounted to almost half the value of the whole
Land, and this Imposition amounted to the Fifth part of the value of it. Then
they conclude, That because the Community wished the King Honor and Safety, as
they were bound to do, it seemed to them it was not good for him to pass into
Flanders, unless he were assured That People were true to him and his People;
and also in regard of Scotland, which now began to Rebel, and would do so much
more when
When the King received these Petitions he Ibm. N. 10, 20.
told the Messengers, he could not Answer them without his Council, some part
whereof was gone into Flanders, and some part left at London; The K. could not
answer the Petitions of the Community without Advice of his Council.
and sent to entreat the Earls by the Messengers, That if they would not go
over Sea with him, They would at least do no Mischief to the Kingdom in his
absence, for that he thought by the

It is Recorded in the Close Roll of this Year, that the King passed into
Flanders on the 22d of August, Claus. 25 Ed. 1. M. 7. Dors.
Memorandum quod Die Jovis vicesimo secundo Die Augusti Transfretavit Rex in
Flandriam. Mat. Westminster Fol. 430. N. 50.
says it was the Day following, on the Vigil or Eve of St. Bartholomew, and
that the same Day the Earls and Barons came to the Exchequer, and forbad the
Barons The Earls and Barons prohibit the Levying of Taxes granted to the King.
Sheriffs to Levy the Eighth Penny of the Laity, telling them, They knew nothing
of it, and that Taxes could neither be Imposed or Exacted without their Assent.
Walsingham Ut Supra. F. 72. N. 40.
says, That the Earl of Hereford, and Earl-Marshal, with their Confederates or
Accomplices, prohibited the Treasurer and Barons of the Exchequer to cause to be
Levied the Eighth Penny of the Laity, that was granted to the King at
Bury-St.-Edmunds, and that they prevailed with the Citizens of London to stand
with them for the They prevail with the Citizens of London to stand with them
for their Liberties.
Recovery of their Liberties.

The Scots taking the Opportunity of these Commotions in England, still delayed
to give Hostages and Pledges for the Peace made with Henry de Percy, though
demanded by Earl Warren; and toward the End of Ibm. F. 72. N. 10.
August took Arms again under the Leading of Waleys, and in a short time drove
almost all the English out of The Scots again take Arms, and drive the English
out of Scotland.
Scotland: William de Warren aforesaid, the Guardian of Scotland, fled from
Berwick into England, and the English that were there after him, and quitted
the Town, yet the Castle was kept, and well Defended by those that were in it.

Upon this News from Scotland, the Ibm. N. 30. The Prince, Guardian of England.
Council that the King left with the Prince whom he had constituted Guardian of
England assist and advise him, persuaded him to send for the two Great Earls,
and if by any ways he could reconcile them to his Father. On the 9th of
September Append. N. 33. He Writes to the Constable and Marshal to meet him at
London.
he wrote to the Archbishop of Canterbury, Six other Bishops, Twenty three
Abbots and Priors, these Two, and Eight others, to meet on the morrow after St.
Michael at London, to confer with him, and those of his Council there present,
about urgent and difficult Affairs. When they came together, Walsing. Ut Supra.
f. 73. N. 40, 50.
they would not consent Form of Peace than that which is now called the Statute
de Tallagio non Concedendo, or of not Granting Tallage; which is the same in
Ibm.
Walsingham, with that of Sir Ed. Coke's Second Institutes, Fol. 532. taken out
of the Old Statutes, Printed by Rich. Totel, 1556. Part 2. p. 73. a.

Henry de Knighton Col. 2523. N. 10, 20, etc. They come Armed and take
Possession of the City Gates.
tells us, They came guarded with 500 Horse, a great Number of choice Foot, and
that they would not Mediation of the Venerable Father Robert Archbishop of
Canterbury, (Cujus memoria in Benedictione sit) whose Name be blessed, as the
Historian, there was no Agreement to be made, unless the King would confirm the
Charter of the Forest, and the Great Charter with some Articles added to it,
which were the Statute beforementioned, then put in Writing by them, and were
the Grieuances sent to Winchelsey, drawn into the Form of a Charter or Statute.
This was done by the King, as F. 74. N. 10.
Walsingham says, (Tanquam ab eo, qui in arcto positus erat, cedendum Malitiae
temporis censuit,) as by one in straight, thinking it best to give way to the
Iniquity of the time: And Ibm.
for this the Laity gave an Eight Part of their Goods; the Clergy of the
Province of Canterbury a Tenth, and the Clergy of the Province of York a Fifth
Part.

On the 15th of September before this Meeting or Great Council, to Claus. 25
Ed. 1. M. 6 Dors. A Parliament called.
the Prince had Issued Writs for a Parliament to be holden on the Octaves of St.
Michael, or 7th of October, for the Confirmation of the Charters, as his Father
had before propounded in his Declaration; and for that Confirmation Ibm.
the Laity regranted the Eight Part of their Goods they had given before at
Bury, and the Clergy gave a Tenth; and the whole Business was dispatched in
three Days; for this Statute or Charter, which in Coke's Second The Chartres
confirmed.
Confirmatione Chartarum, was Sealed and Dated the 10th of October; and is to
be found upon the Statute Roll 25 Ed. 1. M. 38. with this Memorandum at the End
of it, that this very Charter or Confirmation, The Confirmation of them Sealed
in Flanders.
word for word, was Sealed in Flanders with the King's Great Seal at Gaunt, the
5th Day of November in the 25th year of his Reign, and sent into England; a
sure Sign Sir Edward Coke never saw the Original of this, nor of the Statute de
Tallagio non Concedendo, who places them in the 34th of this King.

On the Append. N. 34. The Earl-Marshal, the Constable, and Lord Ferrers
Pardoned, and by what Mediation.
Statute-Roll there is a Destinal Pardon for the two Earls, the Lord Ferrers,
etc. somewhat differing from that in the Printed Statutes. Dated at Gaunt on
the same Day, procured at the special Prayer and Request of his Son Prince
Edward his Lieutenant in England, William Bishop of Ely, William Bishop of Bath
and Wells, Richard Bishop of London, Walter Bishop of Litchfield and Coventry,
Henry Elect of York, Edmund Earl of Cornwall, John Warren Earl of Surrey and
Sussex, William Beauchamp Earl of Warwick, and the others of his Council, with
his Son in England. Registrum Winchelsey in Doctors-Commons, fol. 227. a. b.
and 228. a. b.
This Pardon had been doubly granted before by the Prince, and by his Council,
in two Instruments, or as they are called, Letters-Pattents, one of the Prince,
the other of his Council, Dated October 10. and Sealed own Seals, because the
Great Seal of England was with the King: At the same time also they Undertook
and Bound themselves, to secure them from any Damage which might happen to
them, from the King, and procure them this very Pardon.

Things thus composed in England, there was a Truce, or as it is A Truce between
the two Kings and their Allies for a short time.
called in the Instrument it self, A See Bundle of Writs of Privy Seal in the
Tower. And Pryns Hist. Ed. 1. f. 757.
Sufferance or Forbearing all Acts of Hostility by Sea and Land, between the
King of England, and his Allies, on the one Part, and the King of France and
his Allies on the other, until the Feast of Epiphany, for the Duchy of
Aquitain, and for the Earldom of Flanders, and all other Parts, until the
Octaves of St. Andrew (or the 7th of December.) Dated on the Feast of St.
Denis, (that is October 9th.) in the Year of Grace, 1297. in which there are
the Names of the English Confederates; That is to say, the King of Almayn or
Emperor; the Earl of Flanders, the Earl of Savoy, the Earl of Bar, the Duke The
King of England's Allies or Confederates.
of Brabant, the Earl of Holland, the Earl of Montbeliard, John de Cholon,
Seigneur Darly, John de Burgonig, John Lord of Moamtfancon, Walter his Brother,
the Lord of Newcastle, the Lord Dosselier, the Lord of Fanconby, the Lord of
Jour, the Lord of Conkendary, Simon de Montbeliard, Lord of Montron, Stephen
Doissler Lord of New-Town, (de Ville Neove) and many others, of Burgoinge,
Almaigne, Brabant, Holland, Gascoinge, and Arragon, and others, of which the
Names were not known: And by this Sufferance all Trade or Commerce was to be
Exercised as at other times.

This was enclosed in Letters Ibm. and Pryns Hist. f. 758. The Truce sent into
England.
under Privy Seal, dated at Gaunt the 15th of October, in the 25th of his
Reign, and sent to his Son, enjoining him to see it kept in all points, through
the Realm; and Claus. 25 Ed. 1. M. 26. Dors. in cedula.
to that purpose, on the 20th of October he sent it to all Ports in England, to
be Proclaimed, and strictly Observed Articles.

On the next Day, setting forth that the Scots despising their The Scots
despise their Oaths of Homage and Fealty.
Oatbs of Homage and Fealty, and not content to have Broken the Peace before,
to have Killed his Subjects, and done many other great Mischiefs, Ibm. They
enter England, burn, and waste all before them. The King summons the Service of
Earls, Barons, etc. to suppress them.
had then Entered England, Burning and Wasting the Country, slaying his People,
and destroying all before them, sent his Summons to 200 Earls, Barons, Knights,
Abbats, and others, to be ready at Newcastle upon Tine, on St. Nicholas-Day, or
6th of December, with their Service of Horse and Arms, to go with his Son
against the Scots, to suppress their Rebellion, and defend his own Kingdom.

By Commissioners on both sides the Sufferance or forberance of Hostility was
prolonged and continued until Lent then next coming, the Bundle of Writs, and
Pryn ut supra, f. 756, 757. The Truce between the Two Kings prolonged.
Instrument whereof was sealed with their Seals, and dated at Grolingues Abbey
near Courtray in Flanders, Nov. 23. 1297. In this Instrument also are contained
the Names of King Edward's Confederates, as before.

In the 24th of this Walsingh. Hist. f. 64. 1. 5, etc. n. 10.
King, in the year 1296, the Cardinals Albanum and Praeneste, had been sent by
the Pope, first into France, then into England, (whether they came about
Whitsuntide) to make Peace between the Two Kings, and expected the Two
Cardinals sent to persuade Peace, or make a Truce for two years.
King's coming out of Wales until the first of August, when they delivered
their Message, and persuaded to Peace, or a Truce for Two years; The King
answered he could agree to neither, without the Consent of the King of the
Romans, by reason of the League between them confirmed by Oath; They Request
the King obtain his Consent, which in Reverence to the Court of Rome he
granted, and they returned into France.

The King, as they desired, Bundle of Letters and Writs in Jurie London, 24 and
25 Ed. I. and Pryn Hist. Ed. I. from fol. 748, ^0 fol. 764.
wrote to the King of Almaign or Romans, to send his Commissioners to Cambray
to the Cardinals, with Power before them to Treat of and Conclude a Truce
Honorable and Beneficial for them both. Many Commissions were granted, and
Commissioners Ibm. A^ ways propounded for a Peace or Truce prove ineffectual.
appointed on both sides at several References made to the Pope. But when all
these Ways proved ineffectual, the Pope by his own Authority took upon him to
denounce and declare a Truce for Two years under pain of Excommunication, to
such as should not submit to it; Walsingh. ut supra, f. 69. n. 50. The Pope by
his own Authority declares a Truce for two years.
This the Cardinals published without success; as appears by their Letter or
Manifesto published for the knowledge of all People, in which are contained the
Minutes or Heads of this Truce, and the King of France his Protestation against
it, and the Pope's pretended Power

Vniversiis Proves des libertez de l'Eglis^ Gallicane, Printed 1651, chap. 7.
n. 12. L 96.
praesentes literas inspecturis miseratione divina, B. Albanensis, and S.
Penestrimensis Episcopi salutem in Domino, Notum facimus, etc. To all that
shall see these present Letters, B. by Divine Mercy Bishop of Albano, and S.
Bishop of do make it known, etc. Then giving a short Account of the Truce, and
that it was to have continued for Two years from the Feast John Baptist last
past. They say, That when they presented to the King of France the Popes
Letters Patents, containing the Truce, to be read, cumque dictas literas
praesentaremus dicto Regi The King of F^ance protests against the Pope's Power
to make a Truce.
Franciae legendas, etc. He forthwith before they were read, caused in his own
and their presence these Protestations to be made, That the Temporal Government
of his Realm belonged to himself alone, and no other; That he would acknowledge
no Superior in it, nor subject himself any way, to any Person living, in things
of his Temporal Government, but would maintain his Fees, (Sed se intendere And
denies his superiority in Temporals.
feoda sua Justiciare) and Defend his Kingdom, and the Rights of it in all
things, as God should enable him, by the help of his Subjects, Friends, and
Assistants; Nor, that he took himself or Kingdom to be affected by the Popes
Declaration of the Truce in his Letters Patents directed to him, nor the
Sentence of Excommunication therein contained; And further added, That he would
not recede in Word or Deed from these Protestations; yet as to what concerned
his Soul, and Spiritual Government, as his Predecessors had done before, he was
ready to obey the Precepts of the Holy See, as much as he was bound and ought
to do, as a Devout Son of Holy Mother Church. These things premised, the
Cardinals proceeded to the publication of the Truce and Sentence, and caused
the Pope's Letters to be read before the King. Done at Creil in Beauvaisis on
the 19th of April, 25th of Ed. I.
1297. Datum Credulii Bellovacensis Diaecesis, etc.

After this, Walsingh. Hist. Angl. f. 74. n. 30.
on Innocent's- Day, or 28th of December, and 26th of Edward I. there came to
him then at Gaunt the Master of the Order of Preachers, and the General of
Friars Minors, who had been with the King of France about the same Business,
and beseeched The Pope as a Mediator, not as a Judge offers to make Peace.
on behalf of the Pope, That they would send their Commissioners to Rome with
full Power to Treat of Peace, the Pope Judge, but Kind Mediator, and in
prejudice to neither, to endeavor to settle Peace and Tranquillity in both
Nations, And published to that purpose a Two years Truce.
and restore the former Friendship between the Two Kings. And because that
could not be accomplished without a Truce, therefore the Pope by these
Messengers, published again a Two years Truce, as he had desired before by the
Cardinals, under pain of Excommunication, and Interdict of both the Nations.

The King of England Ib. n. 40. Both Kings submit all Differences to the Pope
as a Private Person only.
considering it was dangerous staying in Flanders, and that he had been
imprudently brought thither by the Contrivance of the Earl, that his own
Kingdom was unsettled by Intestin Sedition, and that he could have no
Confidence in the King of the Romans, the Pope not being his Friend, consented
to the Truce. And both Kings sent their Commissioners to Rome, and Compromitted
and Referred all Differences whatever between them to Boniface VIII. as Bene^
Gaitan, or a Private Person, but not Pope, as will appear by his own Instrument
of the Terms of Peace hereafter mentioned.

Mat. Fol. 431. n. 10, 20. Both Kings accept and agree to a Truce for two years.
Westminster says, both Kings accepted and agreed to a Truce for Two years, to
begin at the Feast of Epiphany or beginning of Lent, when the abovementioned
short Truce ended, for themselves, and Confederates, and when King Edward came
for England, and landed at Sandwich on the 21st of March.

And within few days after, to make good the Promise he had made not long
before his going into Flanders, Instructions and Commissions were sent forth to
Append. n. 35. The King to make good his Promise, sends out Commissions of
Inquiry, what Goods had been taken from his Subjects.
Two Knights, one sent by the King, and the other taken out of the Country, one
Clerk, and one Religious Person to be assigned by the Bishop of the Diocese, to
inquire by the Oaths of Lawful Men of every County, in what manner and how much
Wool, Woollfells, Leather, Grain, Beasts, Flesh, Fish, or other Goods, had
been wrongfully and illegally taken from the Clergy and Laity, for Victualling
and setting forth his Fleet, or for other Matters, since the War between
himself, and the King of France. Witness the King at Westminster the 4th of
April, in the A. D. 1298.
26th of his Reign.

After the Notable Protestation of the King of France against the Pope, says
Peter Proves des Libertees, ut supra, f. 97. The Compromise made to Bennet
Cajetan, not Pope Boniface, etc.
Pithou, desiring to make Peace with the Emperor Elect, and the King of
England, compromitted that whole Affair in the Person of Pope Boniface as a
Private Person, and Benedict Cajetan by his Family Name, and not as Pope, on
purpose, that he might not usurp upon the Authority of the Kings.

In this year, and about this time, Adolph the Emperor (or as the King of
Almain, or of the Romans) was deposed by the Electors and German Princes, and
as Hist. of France, f. 327. A. D. 1297. Adolph the Emperor deposed. The King of
France his Money prevails with the German Princes.
Mezeray Stories, was first detained in Germany by private Dissentions raised
by the French, or the Sums of Money King Philip gave him underhand, so as he
did not afford the Earl of Flanders that Relief he expected; and at the same
time debauched Albert Duke of Austria, by the all powerful Influence of Money
from the Party, who brought over with him the Duke of Brabant, the Earls of
Luxemburgh, Guelders, and Beaumont.

The same Historian also gives this Account of his Deposition, Ibm. A. D. 1298.
Adolph the Emperor deposed. And how.
the Money that Adolph had received on both hands was the cause of his Ruin,
and on the contrary what Albertus had received for the same end served to raise
his Fortune; for this last having made use of some of it to corrupt the Princes
of Germany, who were displeased for that Adolphus had given him no share of
Assembly they had at Prague for the Coronation of King Wincheslaus, they easily
suffered themselves to be persuaded, the Pope was consenting to the Deposition
of Adolphus, as being useless to the Empire; and in effect, the Cabal was so
strong, that they Deposed him, and Elected Albert Duke of Austria. The Two
Competitors came to Blows about it near Spire the 2d of July, Adolph fighting
valiantly, but betrayed, or at least forsaken by his Men, there lost his Life.

The Abbat of Vrsperg, an old German Writer of this time, says thus, Paralip.
fol. 341. Printed at Basil, 1559. The occasion of his being Deposed.
Whereas there was great confusion in the Empire, and there was necessity to
have a more powerful Emperor, the Electors met at Ments, and Deposed him, for
when Adolph had received 75000 Marks to assist the King of England against the
King of France, he kept it all to himself, and divided none amongst the German
Princes, he could neither raise Soldiers, nor help the English. This Charge in
the Empire, and the Embroilment of his Affairs at home, caused King Edward to
accept the Popes Mediation, as above.

The King before this time had summoned the Cl. 26 Ed. I. M. 5. Do^s.
Militia of the Nation to meet him at Carlisle on Whitsun-Eve, with their Horse
and Arms, to go against the Scots, whose Power was now The King summons the
Militia of the Nation against the Scots.
formidable, and their Forces numerous; yet on the 10th of April Ibm. M. 12.
Cedula. Dors. A Parliament or great Council summoned.
he summoned the Earls and Barons, Two Knights of every Shire, Two Citizens of
every City, and Two Burgesses of every Burgh, to meet and Treat with him, about
certain Matters that concerned him, and the whole Kingdom; Walsingh. f. 75 n*
20. The Charters Reconfirmed.
Here the Constable and Marshall demanded, that because the Charters had been
confirmed beyond Sea, for the greater security they might be confirmed Bishop
of Durham, the Earls of Surrey, Warwick, and Gloucester, promised the King
should do it, upon his Return with Victory. The King then commanded his Army to
be ready at Roxburg upon Tweed on the Feast of St. John Baptist. The King going
aside to Visit St. John of Beverly, found his Army at the time and place
appointed; Ib. n. 30, 40, 50. and f. 76. n. 10. The Scots beaten at Falkirk.
He marched on into Scotland; The Scots meet him with a mighty Army under the
Conduct of Waleys; On St. Mary Magdalen's- Day, or 22d of July, both Armies
drew up Falkirk; upon the Signal given by the King, the English boldly attacked
the Scots, their Horse soon gave ground, the English pursuing and killing great
numbers, my Author says Sixty thousand. Waleys and the Great Men of Scotland
fled into the Woods. After some stay in Scotland, where he used some severity,
The King returns into England.
in his Return at Carlisle, he gave the Constable and Marshall Leave to go
home, and stayed himself in the North Parts until after Christmas; when he
returned into the South, and in Cl. 27. Ed. I. M. 18. Dors. Summons a Parliament.
February summoned a Parliament to meet on the first Sunday in Lent, Walsingh.
f. 76. n. 20. The Pope's Award read in it.
where was Read the Pope's Instrument of Award between the Two Kings, which is
long, but the Effect thereof was, This Instrument is Entitled, Pronuntiatio
Bonifacii, in Jurie London, 25 Ed. I and Pryns, Ed. I. f. 758. The Articles of
his Award, as Benedict Caietan, not as Pope.
That whereas they by their special Messengers and Proctors, had compromitted
into him as a Private Person and Benedict Caietan, and as an Amicable Composer
and Arbiter of all Wars, Controversies, Differences, and Causes whatever moved
between them; He did Award and Pronounce;

1. That there should be a firm and stable Peace between the Two Kings. 2. That
the voluntary forbearing of Hostility, and the Truce lately made and confirmed
between the Two Kings, etc. should be inviolably observed. 3. That the King of
England should Marry Margaret the King of i. e. 3750 l. Sterling) per Annum. 4.
That Isabel, the Daughter of the King of France, not then 7 years old, should
at convenient time, be Married to Edward the King of England's Son, then 13
years of Age, with the Dower of 18000 l. Turnois per Annum. 5. That all Goods
on either side, Ships especially, taken before the War, and then not imbeziled
or destroyed, should be restored; and if destroyed and not to be found, then
either King to make Satisfaction at the Request of each other. 6. That all the
Lands, Vassels, and Goods, which the King of England had in France before the
War, which he may have restored to him by virtue of this Compromise, he should
have and enjoy under such Conditions and Security as shall be awarded. 7. That
all the Lands, Vassals, and Goods, which the King of France was then possessed
of, that were the King of England's before England was then possessed of,
should be put into the Hands and Possession of the Pope, and so to remain until
the Kings themselves agreed about them, or he should order what was therein to
be done, without prejudice to the Lands, Vassals, and Goods, or the King's, as
to the Possession, Detention or Propriety of them. This Pronunciation or Award
was Dated at the Pope's Palace in Rome on the 20th of June, 1298. 26th of Edw.
I. A. D. 1298.

To which Award when it was read in Parliament, all the Clergy and Laity gave
their Consent, Mat. West. f. 431. n. 50. The whole Parliament confirm the Pope's
Award.
Cui assensum praebuit Plebs omnis, and Clerus.

This done the Ibm. The Charters confirmed. The King refused to confirm the
Disforesting.
Earls, Barons, and Prelates, demanded the Confirmation of the Charter of
Liberties, and of the Forest, with the Deforestation then made; He confirmed
the Charters, but refused to confirm the Deforestation, or parting with so much
Land Forests as they demanded.

Walsingham Fol. 76. n. 40.
Reports, That in this Parliament, the King being desired to confirm the
Charters as he had promised in Scotland, after some delay, consented, with a
Salvo jure Coronae, saving the Rights of his Crown, which the Earls hearing
returned home; but calling another Claus. 27 Ed. I. M. 18. Dors. Writ dated
Apr. 10.
Parliament to meet 15 days after Easter, he granted what they desired.

The Execution of the Pope's Award was delayed, neither of the Kings being
forward to deliver their Possessions, etc. in Gascoign into his Hands; but
being resolved to make Peace if he could, Rot. A^^m. 27 Ed. I. M. 11. intus.
he sent the Bishop of Vicenza to the King of France, before whom, and with the
Consent of the King of England's Commissioners, it was Agreed, That both the
Kings should perform that Article; and King Edward Authorized several
Commissioners, The King of England performs the 7th Article of the Pope's Award.
to deliver the Possession of his Lands, Vassals, and Goods, into the hands of
the Bishop, who was to receive them in the Name of the Pope as a Private
Person, and Benedict Gaitan. This Instrument bears Date at Westminster, April
22. 1299, the 27th of Ed. I. In May following Prince Edward Ibm. Prince Edward
Contracted to Isabel, the King of France his Daughter.
made the Earl of Lincoln his Proxy to Contract the Espousals with Isabel, the
King of France his Daughter.

While the Bishop of Vicenza was in France, he solicited the Release of John
Baliol King of Scots, by the King of France his Mediation to the Pope, to give
it in Charge to the Bishop his Legate, who obtained it, Append. n. 36 and
Pryn's, Ed. I. f. 797. A. D. 1299. 27. Ed* ^.
and he was delivered to him at Whitsand in France, by Robert de Bourghersh,
Knight. Constable of Dover Castle, the King's Proxy, upon Saturday before St. Mary
Magdalen's Day, or 22d of July, upon Condition, That the Pope might Direct and
King John Baliol delivered to the Pope's Proxy.
Order what he pleased, only as to his Person, and the Estate he had in
England, as King Edward might have done, if he had been personally with him in
England, saving to him and his Heirs, Kings of England, the Kingdom of
Scotland, the Men, and Inhabitants, and all the Appurtenances to that Kingdom;
It being there Read and Rehearsed before his Delivery, and in his own presence,
and the presence of the Bishop of Vicenza, That he had committed Inhuman
Trespasses and Treasons against his Sovereign Prince King Edward, contrary to
his Homage and Fealty, etc. And that the Pope should not Qrdain or Direct any
thing in the Kingdom of Scotland concerning the Men or Inhabitants, or
Appurtenances of the same Kingdom, for John Baliol, or his Heirs which are, or
may be, or any other Cause whatsoever. And upon these Terms, the Bishop in Name
and Stead of the Pope, received him from the King's Proxy, on the said Saturday
before the Feast of St. Margaret, A. D. 1299. and 27th of Ed. I. Certainly at
this time the Pope understood not that Scotland was his Fee, as he claimed it
two years after.

It may be supposed, that King John Baliol was willing to go any His Character
of the Scots.
whither rather than into his own Country, he having voluntarily, and of his
own accord, without the privity of King Edward, by an Append. n. 37. and Pryns,
Ed. I. f. 665.
Instrument drawn by a Public Notary the year before, Renounced Scotland, and
Resolved never to come there more, or have to do with it, because he had found
such Malice, Fraud, Treason, and Deceit in the Scots, that they had designed to
poison him.

This year Mat. West. f. 431. n. 50.
died Two very great Men, Humfry de Bohun, Earl of Essex and Hertfordshire, and
Constable of England, and William Beauchamp Earl of Warwick.

The Scots were this year Troublesome, and the King had summoned the Militia of
the Kingdom Brevia Regis in Jurie Land. 27 Ed. I. and Pryns, Ed. I. f. 809. The
King summons the Militia to go with him into Scotland. The Pope sends a Nuncio
to complete his Award.
to meet him at Carlisle on the Vigil of Pentecost, to go with him into
Scotland upon his own Wages, against his Enemies, and to settle such English as
he had there given Lands unto, in them; in the mean time, he received a Message
from the Pope, that he was sending his Nuncio to Mounstreuit in Picardy, where
should be a Treaty, to end all Differences in pursuance of his former Award;
This Message was communicated to the Archbishop of Canterbury, other Bishops,
Earls, and Barons, who advised him to remain in the South while this Treaty was
over, by reason of Debates that might happen in it, which might require speedy
Advice, and Resolution, and therefore wrote to all the Sheriffs of England to
make Proclamation the Militia should not meet at Carlisle until the first of
August. Given at Stabenheth the 7th of May, 27th of Ed. I. A. D. 1299. 27 Ed. I.


Many of the Nobility and People not being satisfied, or seemed not to be so,
that the Perambulations, and setting out the Bounds of the Forests, were not
done so speedily as they desired, the King sent Brevia ib. and Pryn, f. 810.
The People dissatisfied at the delay of the Perambulations of the Forests.
Writs to the Sheriffs of all Counties to proclaim and give notice, That the
Commissioners for these Perambulations should meet at Northampton at
Michaelmass next, with full power to proceed Special Commissioners appointed to
dispatch that Business.
in that Business without delay. Dated at Lewis the 25th of June, in the 27th
of his Reign.

But this was not thought sufficient, for it was reported and The People yet
not satisfied.
noised abroad, that the King intended not to observe Magna Charta, or the
Charter of the Forest, nor would ever suffer the Perambulations to be made, and
the Bounds of the Forests to be set out, and Ibm. and f. 811. The King issues a
Second Proclamation to quiet them.
further Proclamation to give the Causes and Reasons why the Perambulations,
etc. could not be made sooner, and to let the World know he was pressed too
hard, and not in due manner to do these things, and that those who raised these
Reports were malicious People, and desired to cause Differences between him and
his Subjects, and to disturb the Peace of the Nation. Dated on the same day,
and at the same place.

In the beginning of September Walsingh. f. 77. n. 10. Mat. Westminster. f. 432. n.
10, 20. A. D 1299. 27th of Ed. I. King Edward Married to Margaret, the King of
France his. Sister.
Margaret, Sister to the King of France, was Conducted into England by the Duke
of Burgundy, and Earl of Britan, to whom King Edward was Married on the 12th of
this month, in the Cathedral of Canterbury, by the Archbishop. The Wedding was
very splendid, and much Foreign Nobility attended the Solemnity. The King's
Expectations were every way great from this Match, but it answered them not.

On the Feast of St. Martin, or 11th of November, says Fol. 77. n. 30.
Walsingham, the King held a Parliament at York, and from thence went to
Berwick, intending to proceed further into Scotland, to Relieve Sterling
Castle, then besieged by the Scots; but the Noblemen Sterling Castle delivered
to the Scots.
then with the King, informing and pressing him, the boggy and low Grounds were
impassable in the Winter Season, diverted his Intention, and so as he sent to
the Besieged, wanting Victuals, yield the Castle, saving their Lives and Limbs.

At Berwick the King remained until after Christmas, and the Queen at Windsor,
but what he did there I find not, other than that he issued his [2] Writs dated
at this place December 29th, A Parliament to begin the Second Sunday in Lent.
for the calling of a Parliament at London, to meet on the Second Sunday in
Lent.

In which the Charter of the Forest, and Magna Charta, with A. D. 1300. 28 Ed.
I. Artic. supra Chartas in the Preamble. In which the Charters, etc. were
confirmed, and a new Statute made.
the Statute of Winchester, were Renewed and Confirmed, and a new Statute made
called Articles upon the Charters, Printed in the Statutes at Large, Coke's
Second Institutes, and Totel's Magna Charta, and then it was ordered they
should be published by the Sheriffs four times in the year; For the observation
whereof, where there was no Remedy at Common Law, there were Three Knights
chosen in every County, summarily to hear and determine from day to day, all
Plaints concerning such as had offended against them (the King's Ministers not
excepted) without allowing any delays, allowable by the Common Law, who had
power to punish Offenders, by Imprisonment, Ransom, or Amerciament, according
as the Fault required.

To this purpose the King Claus. 28 Ed. I. M. 11. Dors. Three Knights chosen in
every County to see the new Statute observed. [3] Ibm. M. 8. Dors. Which was to
be read and published four times in the year.
issued his Writs to all the Sheriffs, Coroners, and Communities of Counties in
England, to choose Three Knights, to be at York on the Morrow of Ascension, to
receive Instructions accordingly; Witness the King at Westminster, March 27th,
in the 28th of his Reign. And likewise sent out other [3] Writs to all the
Sheriffs in England, by which he Commanded them to Read the Charters, and
publish them four County days after Easter, St. John Baptist, Michaelmass, and
Christmas, and as much as in them was to see them firmly holden and kept in
all their Articles. Witness the King at Westminster, March 28. in the 28th of
his Reign.

Within less then three weeks after, he also directed Ib. M. 7. Dors. The
Reason why the King granted the Statute called Articles upon the Charters.
Writs to all the Sheriffs in England, to let them know, That the People upon
special Grace and Favor Granted the Articles upon the Charters, so much to
their advantage; and Commanded them to proclaim them in the County Court, and
all Burghs, and Mercate Towns, within their Counties or Bayliwicks, and to
cause them to be firmly observed and performed. Witness the King at St. Albans,
the 15th of April, in the 28th of his Reign.

And a fortnight before, he had directed his Ib. M. 8. Dors. He appoints
Commissioners to make Perambulations of the Forests.
Writs to several Commissioners in all Counties, where there were Forests, to
make Perambulations, and to receive Instructions about them on the Morrow of
the Feast of Ascension, with a Charge, that through their neglect, they might not
remain undone. Witness the King at Westminster, April 1. in the 28th of his
Reign.

Yet all these Writs and Commissions satisfied not the Earls, The Earls and
Barons not satisfied with these things.
Barons, and others, they still murmured, and pretended, that the
Perambulations would not be really made, or speedily performed; Whereupon, as
Walsingham says Fol. 80. n. 10, 20. He calls a Parliament at Stanford. The
Earls and Barons came with Horse and Arms. The King grants their Demands.
, the King held a Parliament at Stanford, to which the Earls and Barons came
with Force, with intention, as 'twas said, to extort the full Execution of the
Charter of the Forest then delayed; Ad quod Parliamentum convenerunt Comites
and Barons eum equis and armis, eo prout dicebatur proposito, ut executionem
Chartae de Foresta hactenus dilatam, extorquerent ad plenum. To whose Will the
King condescended, ( eorum voluntati in omnibus Rex condescendit) and granted
what they demanded.

At this time he sent the Statute of Claus. 28 Ed. I. M. 7. Dors. The Statute
of Winchester to be proclaimed, etc.
Winchester enclosed to all the Sheriffs in England, as it had been Confirmed
and Renewed, (See Articles upon the Charters, Cap. 17th) to be Proclaimed, and
Articles. Witness the King at Stanford, May the Second, in the 28th of his
Reign.

Then Eight Days after, Pat. 28 Ed. I. M. 14. The Commission to three Knights,
etc. renewed at the Request of the Prelates Earls, and Barons.
the King being at St. Edmunds-Bury, at the Request of the Prelates, Earls,
Barons, and others, to Quiet (though perhaps not Please or Satisfy) them, he
renewed his Commission to three Knights and others Elected in each County, to
see the Articles of the Great Charter, the Charter of the Forest, and Statute
of Winchester observed; and to punish all Offenses against them, not punishable
by the Common Law of the Realm. And this speedy Justice and quick Proceedings,
upon Complaints from Day to Day, without allowance of such Delays as the Common
Law admitted: Yet with a Saving to the Common Law, that it might not hereby
receive Prejudice, or any Plea to be holden by these Commissions that might be
Determined by it. Witness the King at St. Edmunds-Bury, May 10. in the 28th of
his Reign.

There are two Writs upon the same Roll and Membrane, dated The Sheriffs to
assist these Commissioners. And to Swear them faithfully to Execute their
Office.
on the same Day, and at the same Place, to the Sheriffs of every County, to be
Assistant to these Commissioners, so often as they should give them Notice, and
to empower them to Swear the Commissioners in full County, well and faithfully
to Execute their Office.

For the Receiving of the Returns of the Perambulations of the A Parliament
called for the receiving the Returns of the Perambulations of the Forest.
Forests, and Hearing and Determining all just Exceptions against Lincoln,
eight Days after St. Hilary, or 20th of January. Claus. 25. E. I. M. 9. Dors.
To meet at Lincoln Eight days after St. Hilary.
The Writ to the Sheriff of Cumberland, containing, That whereas of late for
the comcommon Profit of the People of the Kingdom, he had granted that the
Charter of the Forest should be observed in all its Articles, and had assigned
Commissioners in every County of England where there were Forests, to make
Perambulations, and to make Report to him, before any Execution was done
thereon. And for that his Oath, the Right of the Crown of England, his Reasons
and Claims, as also the Right, Reasons, and Claims of all others might be safe.
He, though the Commissioners had brought to him what they had done, yet because
the Prelates, Earls, Barons, and all other Great Men of the Kingdom, in whose
presence he would have his own, and the Reasons of others propounded and heard,
according to whose Advice he intended to proceed, especially for that they were
bound with him by Oath to Observe and Maintain the Laws or Rights of the
Kingdom and his Crown, (Jura Regni and were not then present with him. And for
that likewise, those who were to propound their Reasons concerning this Matter,
had no notice of it, without whom a good End could not be put to it; and
because this Business might be Dispatched without further Delay, willing to
have Conference and Treaty with the Prelates, Earls, Barons and Gentlemen
aforesaid, and with others of the Community of the Kingdom upon this Affair,
and other arduous Matters touching himself, and the state of the Kingdom, he
Commanded firmly, The Sheriffs commanded to send to this Parliament the same
Knights, Citizens, and Burgesses that were in the last.
enjoining him to cause to come before him at his Parliament at Lincoln, in the
Octaves of St. Hilary next coming, two Knights of his Country or Baylywick;
That is to say, those which came for the Community of the County by his Precept
to the last Parliament, and also the same Citizens, and the same Burgesses, for
all the Cities and Burghs within his Bayliwic; and if any of them were Dead, or
Infirm, then to cause others to be chosen, and come in their stead, so as that
they might be present at the Day and Place aforesaid, with full Power to hear
and do, what should be then ordained for the common Profit of the Kingdom: And
to cause to be allowed to the same Knights, Citizens, and Burgesses, their
reasonable Expenses, in coming to, staying at, and going from the Parliament;
and further, he commanded the Sheriff publicly to make Proclamation in the
County, That all those who would put in any Exceptions against the
Perambulations, should appear before him in Parliament, to show them. Witness
the King at the Rose, September 26. in the 28th Year of his Reign.

This is the Full of the Writ of Summons in English, wherein the Reasons are
given why the Perambulations, could not be Received and Considered sooner. The
Writs to the Bishops, Earls, and Barons, were in the same Form and Words as to
the Reasons, etc.

In like manner he Ibm.
wrote to the Sheriffs of all Counties there particularly named, as well those
that had Forests in them, as others, except Cheshire, which then sent no
Members to Parliament.

He Ibm. M. 2.
wrote also to the Commissioners that made the Perambulations, to be at this
Parliament, and bring with them those Perambulations,

Amidst these importune Pressures of the Nobility, Walsingh. f. 78. N. 20. The
K. marches into Scotland with an Army. The Scots demand their K. John Baliol,
and to Redeem their Lands. Both their Requests denied. They appear in a mighty
Body, yet fly before the King.
the King marched with an Army into Scotland, and coming into Gallowey, the
Great Men of the Scots desired him to permit John Baliol peaceably to Reign
over them, and that he would suffer them to Redeem their Estates of such
English as he had given them to, declaring, if he would not, they would
themselves as well as they Scots with their Leaders appeared in a mighty Body,
thinking to Surprise the King, and his Army; but he, and his Son marching
toward them, they fled to the Hills and Woods.

About this Time, the Scots knowing all things Saleable at Rome, richly
Present, or Bribe the Pope, moving him for his Advice and Assistance against
their Lord the King of England. Scoti cognoscentes, Ibm. N. 30, 40. The Scots
apply themselves to the Pope for Advice and Assistance against K. Ed.
Romae omnia venalia, Donis Dominum Papam uberrimis ditaverunt, petentes ab eo
Consilium, pariter ac auxilium, contra Dominum suum Regem Angliae. The Pope
complies, makes the Archbishop of Canterbury his Legate, sends him Letters to
deliver to the King, with order to show him his Commands. In Ibm. and Mat.
West. f. 435, 346, 437. He makes the A. B. of Canterbury his Legate to the
King, and by his Letter claims Scotland as the Right of the Church of Rome.
which he Claims the Kingdom of Scotland as belonging to the Church of Rome by
full Right, ( pleno jure;) Requires and Exhorts him in the Name of God, to
Discharge out of Prison, and Restore to their Liberty, all Bishops, Clercs, and
Ecclesiastic Persons, and to remove all his Officers, whom by Force and Fear,
he had appointed to Govern that Nation under him, and Willed him, if he
pretended any Right to the Kingdom of Scotland, or any Part of it, not to omit
to send Commissioners fully instructed, within six Months after the receipt of
his Letters, to his presence, he being ready to do him Justice as his beloved
Son, and inviolably to observe his Right, if he had any: Bringing back and
reserving by the Tenor of these Letters, all Questions, Strifes, Controversies
whatsoever, between him, the Kingdom of Scotland, the Prelates, Clercs, and
Secular Persons, which then had been, were, or might be for the future, to the
Cognizance, and Determination of the Roman See; Decreeing it void, if any thing
should be attempted to the contrary. Dated at Anagni the 5th of the Calends of
July, or June, A. D. 1300. in the 28th of Ed. 1.

The Archbishop was full of Obedience, and very quick in repairing He readily
obeys the Pope's Commands.
to the King, who was then in Scotland; Ibm Fol. 438. l. 2. in the A. Bishop's
Letter to the Pope, or Certificate, what he had done in this Affair. And
persuades the King to comply with the Pope's Letter.
preparing for his Journey immediately upon the Receipt of the Pope's Commands,
and came to him August 25th, being then at Dinner in the midst of his Army, who
appointed him the next Day for the Delivery of the Message, which was done, and
the Pope's presented to the King, before Edward his Son, the Earls, Barons, and
Knights of his Army in great Multitude; who causing them to be Read publicly,
were patiently heard of all; when the Archbishop (a sure Friend to the Scots)
Encouraged the King, and Persuaded him ( Ibm. N. 50. in the same Letter.
as he says himself) by all Ways and Means he could, or knew, to Obey and
Comply with all things in those Letters. Then Ibm.
withdrawing by the King's Command, while he Deliberated with his Noblemen, he
was called again, and Answer, Fol. 439. N. 10. The King's Answer to the Pope's
Letter.
That having received the Pope's Admonition, concerning the State of the
Kingdom of Scotland, it was the Custom of England, That in such Affairs, all
whom these concerned ought to be advised with: And the present Business of
Scotland, having Relation to the State and Right of the Kingdom of England,
there were many Prelates, Earls, Barons, and Great Men not then with him in the
Army, concerned in it, without whose Advice, he could not Answer fully: Yet
that he intended as soon as could, to Consult and Deliberate with the Absent as
well as Present, and by their common and joint Determination send the Pope an
Answer.

And for this Reason, at the same Time and Place, when he issued his Writs for
the Calling of a Parliament to meet on the Octaves of St. Hilary, for Receiving
of the Perambulations of the Forests, the King wrote also, Claus. 28 Ed. 1. M.
3. Dors. H^ Sumons many Clergymen Lawyers to the Parliament at Lincoln.
to some of his own Clercs, several Deans of Cathedral Churches, several
Archdeacons, Officials, and others, that had the Best Reputation for Lawyers in
those times, to come to this Parliament, for that he would then have special
Conference and Treaty with Lawyers, and others of his Council, about the Right
and Dominion he and his Ancestors had in the Kingdom of Scotland; and to the
same Purpose he Ibm. And sends to the Universities for their best Lawyers.
wrote to the Chancellors, and both Universities, to send to this Parliament the
most Expert and Knowing Men in the Written Law, which were sent accordingly.
And further he sent his Writs Ibm. and M. 3. Dors.
to several Deans and Chapters, to several Abbots, Priors, and their Convents,
(the Chiefest of the Nation) to search their Archieves, and send to this
Parliament To advise about his Title to Scotland.
all their Chronicles, in which was to be found any thing concerning the
Kingdom of Scotland to make good his Title to it.

Upon Reading the Pope's Bull by the King's Order, and truly Interpreting of it
to the Barons in Parliament, there was much The Resolution of the Barons, with
their Letter to the Pope, concerning his Pretenses to the Kingdom of Scotland.
Debate amongst the Lawyers, whether, how, or after what manner this Bull or
Letter should be answered, as appears by an old Parliament Roll in the Tower, in
the 29th of this King, and truly Printed in Mr. Pryn's Ed. 1. what of it
remains, Fol. 885. whereupon it was Resolved by the Barons See this Letter in
M. West. F. 443. N. 30, 40, etc. Walsi. f. 85. N. 10, 20, 30, etc. Dugdales
Summons to Parlements. f. 31, 32, 33, 34. from the Record in the Exchequer;
with all the Barons Names, Printed at Oxford in Latin and English 1678. with
the Names of the Earls and Barons, the Cuts of their Seals of Arms.
to write to the Pope, and let him know, That in Temporals the Kingdom of
Scotland by no manner of Right whatever belonged to the Church of Rome at any
time; That it was an ancient Fee, or Feudal Right of the Crown and Kings of
England, and that the Kingdom and Kings of Scotland, have been Subject only to
the Kings of England, and no other; and further, That the Kings of England
concerning their Rights in that Kingdom, or other Temporalities have never
answered, or ought to answer, before any Ecclesiastic or Secular Judge, by
reason of his Royal Dignity, and Custom to the contrary in all Ages. And to
signify to him, That having diligently considered his Letters, it was, and for
the future should be, the common, unanimous, and unshaken Resolution of all and
every one of them, That their Lord the King, concerning his Rights in Scotland,
or other his Temporal Rights, should in nowise answer judicially before him, or
send Proxys or Commissioners to him, especially when it would manifestly tend
to the Disinheritance of the Crown of England, and Dignity Royal, and the
Notorious Subversion of the State of the Kingdom; to the Prejudice of their
Liberties, Customs, and Paternal Laws, which by their Oaths they were bound to
Observe and Defend, and by the help of God, would maintain them with their
whole Force or Power; nor would they permit the King to do such strange and
unheard of things, if he should attempt it: Wherefore they Reverently, and
Humbly beseech his Holiness, favorably to permit the King peaceably to possess
his Rights, Liberties, Customs, and Laws aforesaid, without Diminution or
Disturbance. In Testimony whereof they put to their Seals (104) for themselves
and the whole Community of the Kingdom. Dated at Lincoln the 12th of February,
A. D. 1301. in the 29th of Ed. 1. A. D. 1301. 29 Ed. 1.


This Business was first Dispatched, That as soon as might be, when the six
Months after the King had received the Pope's Bull should be Elapsed, in which
he had appointed the King to send Commissioners to him, the Pope might receive
Satisfaction why they did not come.

At the same time the Perambulations of the Forests, the main Business for
which this Parliament was called, according to the purport of the preceding
Writ, were Exhited therein; and as it is contained in the Rot. Perambulationum
Forestar. 29 Ed. 1. in Turr^. A. D. 1301. 29 Ed. 1. The Perambulations of the
Forests Settled and Confirmed. See the Ordinance of the Forest made the 33d
year of this King, in the Statutes at Large.
Record, the Community of the Kingdom Granted the King a Fifteenth Part of
their Movables, they should have at Michaelmas next coming; and he Confirmed
them with this Clause, Quod quicquid per istas Perambulationes ponitur extra
Forestam, Remaneat extra Forestam; and Residuum remaneat Foresta, secundam
metas and bundas in perpetuum; That is, whatever by these Perambulations was
Deforested, should remain so, and what was then allowed to be Forest, according
to the Metes and Bounds then set out, should be so for ever. These Letters
Patents, or Confirmations of all the Perambulations, bear date at Lincoln, Feb.
14. in the 29th of his Reign. Thus were the two Charters, and the Great
Business of the Perambulations of the Forest fully Settled and Confirmed.

When the Laity gave this Fifteenth, Robert Archbishop of Canterbury The Laity
gave a xvth for this Confirmation. The Arch-Bp. for the Clergy would not do any
thing without the Pope's License.
would grant Nothing for the Clergy, not of the Temporalities annexed to the
Church, without the Pope's special License. Pro hoc confirmationis effectu,
concesserunt Comites and Barons Regi quintam decimam partem bonorum suorum
mobilium, in Festo Sancti Michaelis proximo tunc futuro; sed Robertus
Archiepiscopus Cantuariensis pro Clero nihil voluit concedere, neque de
Temporolitate annexa Ecclesiae, sine Licentia Summi Pontificis speciali, as the
Record has it.

After the Transaction and Settling of these Two great Affairs, those whom the
King employed had time from the Chronicles sent to Parliament from the
Monasteries, to make a See Mat. Westminster. f. 439. n. 20, 30, etc. Walls. f. 81,
etc. Rot. Claus. 29. Ed. I. M. 10. Dors. Printed in Ryley's Placita
Parliamentaria, Append. f. 596. The King's Title to Scotland sent to the Pope,
with a Narrative of the Perfidiousness of the Scots.
Deduction of his Right and Title to Scotland, which was Historical, and almost
the same, but more full and particular than that which was delivered to the
Scots when he claimed the Superiority, and direct Dominion over Scotland, in
the 19th of his Reign. This was sent in a Letter from the King to the Pope,
with a Narrative of the whole Nation of Scotland, having done Homage and sworn
Fealty to him, and owned and acknowledged him to be their King Supreme Lord
several times; and what they had done against their Oaths, invading, burning,
spoiling, and wasting England when they thought fit; and also cautioning the
Pope against the false Insinuations and Suggestions of the Scots; concluding
with a Petetion, That he would have a Paternal Care and Affection to his Royal
Rights. Dated at Kemsey, or Kynardesey, the 7th of May, A. D. 1301. if the Year
began at Christmas; if on Lady Day, or 25th of March, then 1302. in the 29th of
his Reign.

The King at the Request of the King of France, had granted the Scots a Truce,
which was to end at Whitsunday next coming, as says the Claus. 29. Ed. I. Dors.
M. -- Dugd. Summons to Parl. f. 35.
Writ, by which he Summoned the Earls, Barons, and Knights, (such as he
pleased) to meet him at Berwic, in the Feast of St. John Baptist, with their
Horse and Arms, and to go with him against the Scots, His Rebels, and notorious
Traitors, to Repress their Rebellion and Pride; so the Record, Contra Scotos,
Rebels nostros, and notorie proditores, ad ipsorum Rebellionem, and
Proterviam reprimendam. This Summons was dated at Lincoln, Feb. 14. in the 29th
of Ed. 1. on the same Day he confirmed the Perambulations.

This Year, the King made his Eldest Son Edward, Walls. f. 79. n. 10. Matthew.
West. f. 433. n. 50. Prince of Wales and Earl of Chester.
Prince of Wales, and Earl of Chester; with which the Welshmen were well
pleased, as being born at Caernarvon in their own Country.

In Scotland he makes his Pat. 29. Edw. I. M. 2. intus and Claus. 29. Ed. I. M.
3. Dors.
Procurators or Proxies to the Pope, Walter Bishop of Litchfield and Coventry,
Amadeus Earl of Savoy, Otto de Grandison Knight. and Gerrard Archdeacon of
Lichfield, to desire him speedily to put an end to all Differences between him
and the French King, and to complete the long-deferred Treaty of K. Edw. sends
Procurators to the Pope to complete the Treaty of Peace between him and the K.
of From.
Peace, according to the Form of his Pronunciation, or Decree, made by virtue
of the Compromise unto him; but the Pope was not at leisure. The Commissions,
or Procuratory Letters, are dated at Glasco, Aug. 24. in the 29th of his Reign.

The King staid all Winter in Scotland, Walls. L85. n. 50. A. D. ^301. 30. Ed. I.
where many of his Military Men lost their Horses for want of Forage. After
Christmas Instance of the King of France, Ib. ^. 86. ^in. 3. He grants the
Scots a Truce.
Granted the Scots a Truce until the Feast of All Saints next coming; and
toward the Spring having settled things in Scotland, returned into England.

All the Arguments the King used by Letters and Messages to the Earl of Savoy
and Otto de Grandison Claus. 30. Ed. I. M. 15. Dors. Two of the King's
Procurators to the Pope refuse the Employment.
, who were best acquainted with the State of his Affairs, and Differences
between him and the France, could not persuade them to undertake this Embassy,
or Procuration to the Pope; and therefore he Ibm. The other two proceed.
committed the whole Affair to the Bishop and Archdeacon, to hear for him and
in his Name the Pope's Pronunciation, Will, and Pleasure, in those things that
then were not declared and determined between them, by virtue of the Compromise
made by both into his Person. Ibm.
Ad audiendum pro nobis and nostro nomine, Pronunciationem vestram, Voluntatem,
and Beneplacitum super his quae inter Regem Franciae, and nos per vos (i. e.
the Pope) virtute Compromissi, etc. restant pronunciandae and facienda. This
Letter and new Commission was directed to the Pope, to give him notice of the
Refusal of the First two, the Earl 30. Ed. I.
and Knight, and dated at Darlington in the Bishopric of Duresm, March 5. in
the 30th of Edw. I.

In April following Roger le Bigod, Earl of Norfolk and Marshal of England,
granted and quiet claimed for his Heirs, Rot. Claus. 30. Ed. I. M. 14. Dors.
The Earl-Marshal grants his Lands, etc. to the King and his Heirs.
to the England and Wales, except the Manors of Sterington, Wylton, Thornton,
and Leversham; with the Advousons of the Churches, and all other their
Appurtenances in the County of York; and the Manors of Acle and Castre, with
their Appurtenances; and the Advouson of the Church of Geldeston in the County
of Norfolk, with the Knights Fees, Advousons of Religious Houses and Churches,
Hundreds, Honors, Liberties, St. John's in Colchester the 12th of April, in
the 30th of Ed. I.

He also made a Grant Ibm. Also his Goods.
to the King, of all his Goods and Chattels, upon and in those Castles,
Manors, Towns, etc. except Ibm.
County where he had Lands, to give Livery and Seisin accordingly.

Further, at the same Place, and on the same Day, he restored, remitted, and
quiet claimed for him and his Heirs, to the King and his Heirs for ever, all
the Ibm. He Releases and gives up his Earldom and Marshalship.
Right, Honor, and Dominion he had by the Name of Earl in the County of
Norfolk and the Marshalcie of England, with every thing thereunto belonging.

Lastly, he restored, remitted and quiet claimed the Ibm.
Castles of Bristol and Nottingham, which he was to have held for Life by the
Grant of the King, so as he, nor any one in his Name, should claim any Right
therein. Dated at Fulham, May 15. in the 30th Year of Ed. I.

The Reasons of these Grants and Restorings might be what The Reasons why the
Earl-Marshal gave the King his Lands, and parted with his Office and Honor.
Mat. Westminster reports, (though he mistakes the Year) in the 33d of warily
convented the Earl-Marshal, upon a Conspiracy, which the Archbishop of
Canterbury, and many Earls and Barons had contrived against him while he was in
Flanders; who not being able to contradict what the King said, begged his
Pardon. For obtaining of which, he made the King Heir of all Things he had: By
which means he saved his Life; and the King, as a Reward, added to his Life a
Thousand Pounds Land by the Year. Which might be Manors and Lands he had
liberty to except. Mat. West. f. 452. lin. 2. He with the A. Bp. and others had
conspired against the King.
Et aderat tempus loquendi, Rex convenit caute Comitem Mareschallium super
quodam Dedecore, and Conspiratione quam Archiepiscopus Cantuariensis, and
plures Comites and Barons contra eum Machinaverant, ipso tunc agente in
Flandria, qui nequaquam valens ista contradicere, Gratiam Regis petiit. Pro qua
obtinenda, constituit Regem haeredem suum universorum quae habuit, and sic
mortem perdidit, and vitam invenit, and Rex Remunerans eum, vitae Comitis mill
libratas Terrae adaugendo concessit. In King convented all the others, one by
one, that were in this Conspiracy, and fined or punished them in Sums of Money.
Ibm. lin. 8.
Similiter Rex singulatim singulos conveniens, qui huic facto consenserant,
pecuniaria poena mulctavit.

Yet within this very Year of his Reign, the King Rot. Cart. 30 Ed. I. n. 24.
28, 29. Dugd. Baron. vol. 1. f. 136. col. 1. The King regrants his Lands, Honor
and Office to the Marshal.
regranted the Earldom and Marescalcie of England, with all his Castles,
Manors, and Lands in England and Wales, to him and Alice; and for want of such
Issue, to return to the King and his Heirs Dugd. Bar. ib.
He died without Issue in the 35th of this King, and the Honor and Estate came
into his hands.

Some great Business the King had at this time, that he had fixed in his Mind,
and laid much to Heart, for which he sent Peter de Dene Canon of London, and
Roger le Sanvage Knight, Pope. Pat. 30. Ed. I M. 12. intus. Pryn's Ed. I. f. 93
The King sen^^ Messenge^s to Rome upon secret Service.
Dilectos and Fideles nostros Petrum de Dene Canonicum Londinensem, and Rogerum
le Sauvage Militem, pro quibusdam negotiis nostris quae multum insident Cordi
nostro and Domini summi Pontificis praesentiam destinantes, etc. Joining with
them I^m.
William de Geynsburgh his Lieger at the Court of Rome, and Ibm.
writing to M. Cardinal Deacon of New St. Mary in the Porch or Gallery Ibm.
(Sanctae Mariae novae in Porticu Diacono Cardinali) to assist them, and
effectually promote his Business with the Pope, and for so doing he should
always find him ready Pat. 30. Ed. I. M. 12. intus.
to do those things which were grateful to him. The same Letters were wrote and
directed to Six Cardinals more, Four Deacon and Two Priest Cardinals. This
Letter is Dated June 13. at Chartham. The Four Deacon Cardinals were his
Pensioners Luke de Flisco, Deacon Cardinal of St. Mary in the Broad way,
Sanctae Mariae in via lata Cardinalis Diaconus. Peter Piperne, Deacon Cardinal
of New St. Mary, Sanctae Mariae novae (not in Porticu) Diaconus Cardinalis.
William Cardinals the King's Pensioners.
of Pergamus, Deacon Cardinal of St. Nicholas in the Tullian Prison (a Parish
in Rome, as they all were) Sancti Nicholai in Carcere Tulliano Diaconus
Cardinalis. Francis Deacon Cardinal of St. Mary in Cosmedyn, Sanctae Mariae in
Cosmedyn Diaconus Cardinalis Ibm.
. Who had every one 50 Marks Sterling yearly paid out of the Exchequer by equal
Portions at Easter and Michaelmas, for Diligence and Sincerity in Transacting
his Business.

The King's former Proctors having not done any thing concerning the Peace
between the Two Kingdoms, he sends others to the Pope, viz. Claus. 30. Ed. I.
M. 6. Dors. New Procurators sent to the Pope for a final Conclusion of the
Peace between the two Kingdoms.
William de Gainsburgh and H. de Hertpole, Two Friars Minors, and Two of his
own Clerks. John de St. Clare, Cannon of London, and Philip Martell, Professor
of the Civil Laws, with William de Dene Knight, or any Four or Three of final
Dispatch to this Business, according to the Form of his former Pronunciation or
Decree Pat. 30. Ed. I. M. 9. intus. Without effect.
. Giving them also in their Commission, or Letters Procuratory, full and free
Power, to Demand, Hear, and Receive a total Consummation of his Decree, and the
Peace to ensue thereupon. Both these Records are Dated at Arundel, September. 9.
A. D. 1302. in the 33th of this King. Their Negotiation proved also
ineffectual.

As the Earl Marshal, so Humphry de Bohun, Son and Heir to that Humphry who
opposed King Edward in the 25th of his Reign, and doing Homage, had Dugd. Bar.
f. 183. col. 1. and Rot. fin. 27. Ed. I. M. 23. The Constable grants all his
Lands, Honors, and Office to the King.
Livery of his Father's Lands, in the 27th: This Year also granted all his
Castles, Towns, Manors, Lands and Tenements, Knights Fees, Advousons of
Religious Houses and Churches, Hundreds, Honors, Liberties, and all their
Appurtenances in England and Wales, to the Ro^. Claus. 30 Ed. I. M. 5. Dors.
King and his Ibm. The King regrants them upon Marriage with his Daughter.
And all his Right, Honor, and Dominion he had as Earl in the Counties of
Hereford and Essex, and the Constableship of England. The Grant is dated at
London, the 8th of October, in the 30th of Edw. I. Which upon the Marriage of
Elizabeth 7th Daughter of Edward I. Widow of John Earl of Holland, Zeland, and
Lord of Friseland, were Dugd. ut sup^a. Claus. 32 Ed. I. M. 16. Cart. 32 Ed. I.
n. 48. John de Seagrave made Guardian of Scotland.
Regranted to him about two years after.

After the Feast of All Saints, when the Truce with the Scots was expired, the
King sent Walls. f. 86. n. 30.
John de Seagrave with an Army into Scotland, Pat. 30. Ed. I. M. 15.
making him Governor of Berwick and Guardian of the Kingdom; who marching
Walls. f. 87. lin. 3.
with a small Party toward Edinburgh, the Scots, who lay in Ambuscado, wounded
and took him with several others; but a fresh Party coming up, rescued Taken
Prisoner, and rescued.
and took him from those that had him Prisoner.

Next Year, on the 10th of January, A. D. 1303. beginning A. D. 1303. Pryn's
Ed. I. 1020
the Year at Christmas (as Walsingham always does) [3] the King of France,
willing to leave the Scots out of the Treaty, and conclude a Peace with
England, King Edward gave his Letters Patents, or Commissions, to Amadeus Earl
of Savoy, Henry de Lacy Earl of Lincoln, and Otto de Grandison, or any Two of
them, dated at Odyham, January 10. Pryn's Ed. I* f 1020 The Truce with the King
of France prolonged. 31 Ed. I. A Peace between the two Kings.
to Prorogue the Truce between him and the King of France, their Kingdoms and
Subjects, and to settle a firm and perpetual Peace between them, their Heirs
and Successors, against all Persons but the Pope and Church of Rome; and also
to the same Persons and Bishop of Worcester gave Commission on the 2d of March
in the same Year to the same purpose, who Treating with the Dukes of Burgoine
and Britan, and other Commissioners King of France, concluded a firm Peace
between the Two Kings and their Realms, Ibm. The Scots left out of it.
leaving the Scots out of the Treaty. For the Confirmation whereof, the King
made his Letters Patents, and Sealed them at the Town of St. John's or Perth in
Scotland, June 10. A. D. 1303. in the 31st of his Reign. All the Procurations,
Patents, and other things concerning this Peace, and the Articles themselves,
are in a special Roll in the Tower, which at the writing hereof I could have no
opportunity to peruse.

Upon this Treaty and Peace, Mat. West. f. 446. n. 20. Gascoigny restored to
King Edward. The Revolt of Flanders the cause of this P^ace.
Gascoigne was restored to King Edward, with all its Rights and Liberties, as
he possessed it before the beginning of the War. The Revolt of Flanders from
the Subjection of France (which had been subdued when King Edward, by reason of
the Domestic Troubles, and Confusion of his own Affairs at home, was not able
to assist the Flemmings) Ibm n. 30. and Mezeray's Hist. Fr. f. 330.
contributed much to the advancement of this Peace; for the French Flanders,
were every where beaten, and their Armies routed, and in all their Attempts had
ill Success.

This Year the Scots armed again, under the Walls. f. 86. n. 40. f. 87. n. 10.
20. 31 Ed. I. The Scots arm again under W. Waleys. They crave Peace; and have
their Terms granted. Sterling-Castle besieged.
Conduct of William Waleys, and the King summoned his Militia to be at Roxburgh
in Scotland on Whitsunday, from whence by small Marches he went through the
whole Kingdom to Cathness, no Force opposing Scots finding they were not able
to resist, sent Mediators, and humbly craved his Peace, and that they might be
permitted to compound for their Estates with them to whom they had been given;
both which the King granted. In his Return from the North, passing it by as he
went, he besieged Sterling-Castle, which was defended against him, and staid
all Winter at Dumfermling not far from thence. Mat. Westminster says, the Great
Men of Scotland, as well Earls as Barons f. 446. n. 40. 50.
Magnates Regni Scotiae, tam Comites, quam Barons, being wholly reduced and
overcome, submitted themselves to the Will of the King of England, who admitted
them to his Grace and Mercy, imposing upon them a pecuniary Mulct, appointing
them Days and Years, and certain Times for the payment of it.

This Year on the Ibm. f. 447. N. 30. Pope Boniface the 8th dies.
12th of October. died with Grief and Anguish of Mind, Pope Boniface VIII. after
he had been Walsing. F. 87. N. 20. f. 89. n. 10. Benedict the 11th Chosen.
accused by the King of France of Heresy, Simony, and Murder, imprisoned, and
plundered of all his Goods; and the Bishop of Ostia was chosen Pope, by the
Name of Benedict XI.

After Winter the Ibm. f. 89. N. 40.
King went in Person to the Siege of Sterling Castle, when it was briskly plied
with Engines, yet they within made a good Defense; but being very hard pressed
by the Besiegers, the King being there all the time, the Castle was Sterling
Castle yielded upon Discretion. A. D. 1304. 32 Ed. 1.
yielded upon Discretion on St. Magaret's Day, or 20th of July, the Governor
whereof William Olifard who had surprised it, was sent to the Tower of London,
and others to diverse Castles.

The King Ibm. N. 50. John Segrave appointed Guardian of Scotland.
having thus subdued Scotland, according to his England, appointing John de
Segrave Guardian of it, and when he came to York Ibm. The King's Bench and
Exchequer removed to London.
removed the Courts of King's Bench and Exchequer, which had been there seven
Years, to their old Place at London.

On the Seventh of July this Year died Mat. West. f. 448. lin. 7. A. D. 1304.
32 Edw. 1. The Cardinals Nine Months in choosing a Pope.
Pope Benedict, and in nine Months the Cardinals could not agree about the
Choice of another; at length, they unanimously chose the Ibm. f. 451. N. 10.
Archbishop of Bordeaux, Bertram de Angeous, upon Whitsunday the Year
following, by the Name of Clement the Fifth.

Toward the latter End of the Year of the Lord 1304. and within three Months
after the Beginning of the 33d year of the Reign of the King, we find it
Recorded upon what Terms the Scots made their Submission after their last
Insurrection, the Title of the Record is, The Terms given to, and accepted by
John Common, Aydants and Assistants, were these following in this Form.

These are the Things agreed on *with Monsieur Richard de Ryleys Placita
Parliamentar f. 369. from the French Record there.
Burgh Earl of Vlster, Monsieur Aymer de Valence, Seigneur de Montignak,
Monsieur Henry de Percy, Knights, and John Benstede, Clerk, on the Part of King
Edward, and John Common of Badenagh, for Himself and his Aydants of Scotland, as
well those that were out of it, as within it. For the Faithful Keeping and
Observing Earl, Aymer, Henry, and John de Benstede, in The Terms of Peace given
to, and accepted by the Scots.
the Name of the King, and the said John Common, Monsieur Edmund Common de
Kilbride, Monsieur John de Graham, Monsieur John de Vaux, Monsieur Godfry de
Roos, Monsieur John de Maxwell the Elder, Monsieur Peter de Prendregyst,
Monsieur Walter de Berkeley de Kerdaau, Monsieur Hugh de Earth, Monsieur William
de Earth, Monsieur James de Roos, and Monsieur Walter de Rothevan, Knights, for
themselves, and all their Scots assistants, who would be in the Peace and Faith
of the King, were Sworn.

First, It was agreed, That all Manner of People of Scotland, who came to the
Peace of the King with the said John Common, except the Persons after named,
should be received to the Conditions following, to wit, Their Lives and Limbs
or Members were saved, They were to be Free from Imprisonment, and not to be
Disherited, except for their Ransom or Fine, and the Amends for their Faults
only committed against the King. Secondly, Those under Age ought to have the
same Conditions, as to their Lives, Limbs, Imprisonment, and Disheritance.
Thirdly, For their Ransom, and all other Things, it should be as Sunday after
the Feast of St. Matthew next ensuing, and the Establishment of Scotland was to
be as it should be then ordained. Fourthly, All the strong Holds now in the
King's or his Friends Hands, should Remain so, and the Charge of keeping them,
should be Defrayed out of what belonged to them, or in other Convenient manner,
by those who had the Custody of them, or to whom they were Delivered. Fifthly,
The Prisoners on both sides were to be set Free, except Monsieur Peter de
Morham, and his Father. Sixthly, That the Hostages for the Payment of the
Ransoms of Prisoners on both sides, should be Released.
The Persons Excepted, were Robert Bishop of Glascow, Monsieur James the
Steward of Scotland, John Souls, Monsieur David de Graham, Monsieur Alexander
de Lindesey, Monsieur Simon Fraser, Thomas Du Boys, and Monsieur William de
Waleys, concerning whom it was agreed, That the Bishop as to his Body and
Temporality, the Seneschal or Steward, and John Souls, should have the same
Conditions with the Commons (That is, have their Lives and Limbs safe, be free
from Imprisonment, and not Disinherited) but with two Years Banishment out of
Scotland beyond the River Trent; Steward's Castle should be in the King's
Possession during his Exile, and he to be at the Charge of keeping them.

Concerning Monsieur David de Graham, and Monsieur Alexander de Lindesey, it
was agreed, They should have the same Conditions, and be Banished Scotland for
half a Year, David beyond the River Tweed, and Alexander beyond Trent. As to
Monsieur Simon Fraser, and Thomas Du Boys, it was agreed also, That they should
three Years, and also out of the Dominions of the King of France, unless in the
mean time they could find Favor; and as to William Waleys he was to submit
himself wholly to the Mercy of the King.

Further it was agreed, That the Bishops of St. Andrews and Dunkeldin, the Earl
of Boughan, (i. e. John Common,) the Seneschal, or Steward of Scotland, Monsieur
John de Souls, Monsieur Ingelram de Humfranvill, and the other Persons of
Scotland, which were abroad, and the Confederates of John Common, should come to
the King's Peace within Fifteen Days after Easter next, every one according to
his Quality, at Dumfermling, to do Homage, and swear Fealty.

And be it known, That the foresaid Earl of Vlster, Aymer, Henry and John
Benstede, promised in Good Faith, to use their best Endeavor with the King, to
Ratify in all points this Accord by his Letters Patents, so soon as John Common
and others, that should come with him, had done their Homage, and sworn Fealty
in due manner. In Witness whereof, one Part of the Indenture which was to
remain with the King was Sealed by John Common, Edmund Common, John de Graham,
John Vaux, and others, and the other Part was Sealed by the Earl of Vlster,
Aymer, Henry and John Benstede. Dated at Strathord the 9th day of February, in
the 33d year of the King; the Title of the Record is, Forma Pacis Scotiae in
Adventu Johannis le Common, and aliorum: The Form of Peace of Scotland upon the
Submission of John Common, and others.

In the Ryley's Placit. Parliamen. f. 240. A. D. 1304. Ed. 1. 33 d.
Parliament at Westminster, on the Sunday after St. Matthew the Apostle, the King
enjoined the Bishop of Glascow, (how it came to be so at this time I find not)
the Earl of Carrick (i. e. Robert Brus) and John de Moubray, Ibm. f. 243 Three
Scots, a Bishop, Earl, and another, to agree upon the Number and Quantity of
the Scots to come to an English Parliament.
That they would treat amongst themselves, and agree upon a Day and Place for a
Parliament to be called concerning the State of the Kingdom, and People of
Scotland, the Number and Quality of the Scots who should come to it, and others
who should stay in the Kingdom, and have the Care of it.

Their Advice and Agreement Ibm. They agree upon the Number and Quality of
those Persons.
was, That the Parliament could not be well assembled before Midsummer, and the
Place to be Two Bishops, Two Abbots, Two Earls, Two Barons, and Two for the
Commons, (and Dieux pur la Commune) were a sufficient Number, if the King
thought so. And concerning the Persons that were to take care of the Kingdom,
they thought, the present Guardians, and King's Ministers with the Community
were sufficient for that; Ibm. A. D. 1305. 33 Ed. 1. The King appoints the Time
of the Parliament, and consents to the Number of Commissioners to be chosen by
the Scots.
which things being Read before the King and Council, on the 26th of March, the
King Answered, Willed, and Granted, (Vult and Concedit) the Day of the
Parliament should be three Weeks after Midsummer; and that it should be at
London. That Ten who should be chosen by the whole Community, might come to the
Parliament for the whole Community of Scotland, and that the Keeping of the
Nation should be as they had said.

They three Petitioned the King, That those which were Elected to come to this
Parliament for the Community, might have their Charges and Expenses born by
them. His Answer was, Ibm. f. 244.
Rex vult, etc. The King Wills, That those Ten who shall be chosen to come
Those Commissioners to have their Expenses born.
to the Parliament for the whole Community of Scotland, shall have their
Expenses of that Community, etc.

This Parliament was Ibm. f. 503 and Claus. 33 Ed. 1. M. 13. Dors. in cedula.
Prorogued from three Weeks after the Feast of St. John Baptist, to the Feast
of the Assumption of the Virgin Mary, or 15th of August, and from thence to the
Octaves of the Nativity of the same Virgin, or 15th of September, Ibm. Ibm. f.
279.
at which time came the Scots Commissioners chosen by the Commonalty Scotland,
*who met for that Purpose at Perth, on the Morrow of Ascension; the Bishops of
St. Andrews and Dunkeldin; the Abbots The Names of those Scots Commissioners.
of Cowper and Menros; the Earl of Bohghan; Monsieur John de Moubray; Mons.
Robert de Keth; Mons. Adam de Gurdan; Mons. John de Inchemartin; Earl Patrick,
who was chosen by the Commonalty to be the Tenth, came not, and therefore by
Command of the King Monsieur John de Monteith was assigned in his stead; Ibm.
The Settlement of Scotland by those Commissioners, and 20 English.
These with Twenty English there named, Treated about the Establishment of
Scotland, and settled the King's Lieutenant, or Guardian, the Chancellor,
Chamberlain, Judges and Sheriffs, all by Name, as well of those that were born
in Scotland, as English; They likewise settled the Coroners, the Castles, and
Constables of Castles; They also ordered all things concerning the Laws and
Vsages of Scotland, concerning the Peace, and Disturbers of the Peace, and
concerning whole Government. And the Title to this Record is, Ordinatio facta
per Dominum Regem, super stabilitate Terrae Scotiae; The Ordinance made by the
King for the Establishment o^ Scotland.

King Edward thinking himself safe by this Establishment, The King accuses the
Archbishop, etc. of Treason.
thought he had now a time to speak with the Archbishop of Canterbury, Chron.
Will. Thorn. c. 2004. n. 50, 60, etc. and Antiq^. Eccles. Britan. from the
Annals of St. Augustins in Canterbury, f. 207. n. 10, 20.
whom he accused of a Confederacy with certain Earls, Noblemen, to Dethrone
him, and keep him in Prison and Crown his Son Edward, which when he could not
deny, being severely rebuked by the King, he fell down at his Feet with great
howling, and much weeping, beseeching Pardon, calling the King his Lord, which
he never did before ^n Speech or Writing; Ibm in both.
So this Proud Man, hated of God and Men, who with his Pride had Blackened the
Priesthood, and Clergy of all England, (Sacerdotium and Clerum per totam
Angliam sua superbia deturpavit) and Exercised an unheard of Tyranny over the
People, now taken by the King in his own Wickedness, conscious of it, and
affrighted with the fear of Punishment, as he lay prostrate on the Ground
before the King, committed himself and his Goods to his Mercy.

The King Rot. Romans 34 Ed. I. M. 10. Walsingh. f. 91. n. 50. Mat. W^stm. f.
454. n. 10. A. D. 1306. The King prosecutes him before the Pope, who suspends
him, etc.
Complains of him to the Pope, and prosecutes him before him, for disturbing
the Peace of the Kingdom, and causing often Commotions in it, defending and
encouraging Rebels, and Disinherit him; for which Crimes, at the Instance of
the King, he was cited by the Pope to his Court, and was there suspended from
the Execution of his Office, (ab executione, officii sui and temporalium atque
spiritualium administratione suspensus est) whilst he should purge himself of
what was objected to him by the King.

Upon this Suspension the Rot. Romans 34 Ed. I. M. 5. n. 9.
Pope deputed certain Persons to administer the Spiritualities and
Temporalities of the Archbishopric, and receive the Profits to his Use. As to
the last the King Ibm. The same Letter dated at Brudele in Marchi^ Scotiae,
Sept. 7. The King would not permit the Pope to reappoint Receivers of his
Temporalities, during the Suspension of the Archbishop.
wrote to him, it was to the manifest prejudice of his Crown and Dignity, and
therefore he had caused them to be seized, as he might lawfully, and was bound
to do, by his Royal Right, and according to the Custom of the Kingdom. Yet though
the Profits of the Temporalities belonged to the Crown during the Suspension,
for the particular Affection he had to his Person, he was willing, and granted,
that the Guardian thereof, should pay them to such as he should assign to
receive them.

Not long after the last Parliament, and the Establishment of Scotland made
therein, and agreed unto by the Scots Commissioners, the King made these his
Letters Patents, according to the former Covenants and Agreements made between
Richard Earl of Vlster, Aymer de Valence, Henry de Percy, John Benstede, and
John Common, etc. in February preceding.

EDward by the Grace of God, King of England, Lord of Ireland, R^yley's Placita
Parliam. f. 366. Letters Patents for the Establishment of Scotland.
and Duke of Aquitain, to all those that shall see or hear these Letters,
Greeting; For the perpetual Memory of things underwritten we let you
understand, That the People of Scotland, after they were in our Homage and
Ligeance, and bound to us by Oath of Fealty, and by their Charts, or Writings,
as strongly as we or our Council knew how ^^ order and direct, by evil Counsel
rose, and made War against us, committing Robberies, Burnings, Murders,
Felonies, and many other Evils and Mischiefs according to their Power in
Scotland, and in England, contrary to their Homages, Fealties, and Ligeances
aforesaid. And afterward many of them returned to our Faith and Obedience, and
were received to our Peace and Will; and at last John Lord of Badenagh, and the
others of his Party, came also, and were received (a nostre pees a nostre foi)
to our Peace and Faith, so as for their Ransoms, and Amends, for their
Trespasses, and Outrages, only against us, and for the Establishment of
Scotland, (esteuessent a nostre ordinance and a nostre volunte) they should be
at our Ordinance and Pleasure; We notwithstanding these Contempts, Trespasses,
Outrages, and Disobediences of the People of Scotland toward us, have been so
great and heavy, as there cannot sufficient Amends or due Satisfaction be made
for them at any time, as they themselves acknowledge, tho we cannot suffer such
Crimes to pass without some Punishment, yet seeing those People have behaved
themselves well and loyally since our last being in those Parts, and for the
Hopes we have of their good Behavior and Service for the future, willing to do
them special Grace, Have granted, and do grant their Lives and Limbs shall be
safe, and that they shall be free from Imprisonment, and not Disinherited;
saving to us always the Lands, Tenements, and Lordships, the Demeasns and
Appartenances of the Royalty of Scotland, which John Baliol, late King thereof,
gave away, and alienated, to do our Pleasure with them; And we Pardon and
Release to the People aforesaid, that have submitted and received our Peace and
our Faith, the Crimes committed against us, the Anger, Rancour, and all manner
of ill Will we any ways had against them, so as they shall be bound to pay what
is ordered by us, and our Council (solonc nostre dit (dictum) and nostre
pronunciacion que sensuent en cest form) according to our Decree and
Determination, which follow in this Form.

First, We Order and Decree, that John Common, and the others The Articles of
that Establishment.
with him which shall come to our Peace and Faith, upon the Covenants granted
them, (Qui ove lui vindrent a nostre pees and a nostre foi, par mi les
covenances qui leur feurent grantez) shall pay for their Ransom, (paent pur
Ranzon and amends des trespass par eux faitz, and Amends of the Crimes by them
committed, Three years value of their Lands and Rents, toward the building of
new Castles in Scotland, for security of the Nation, and preserving the Peace,
or to other Uses as we shall think fit. And we Pardon the said John Common and
David Graham their Exiles, and remaining out of Scotland according to the The
Covenants made with John Common.
Covenants aforesaid.

Further it is Ordained by us and our Council, That the People of Scotland which
submitted to us before John de Baliol, shall pay only the Rents of Two years of
their Lands, except those that can show themselves acquitted by our special
Grant or Deed.

The same Order and Decree was made concerning Adam de Gourdon, and Simon de
Fraser Knight.

Further we Decree and Determine, That the Bishops, Abbats, Priors, and the
Clergy of the Kingdom of Scotland, except the Bishop of Glasco, shall pay for
their Ransom, and their Crimes, the value of their Rents and Lands for one
year, except those that can show by special Deed* or other manner, they ought
to be discharged.

The Bishop of Glasco was to be upon the same Terms with John Common in all
respects, and also as to his Banishment, which was remitted.

Further, That Ingelram de Umfrevil, because he made his Submission but a
little while before these Letters were granted, should pay Five years value,
etc. And that William de Baliol, and John Wychard, should pay for the same
Reason Four years Rent.

Further, That Hugh de Adrossan, John de Gourley, John de Naper, and John de
Makilgoigny, who were of the Retinue of the said William Ingelram, and John,
should pay Three years value.

Further, For the time and manner of payment of these Compositions or Fines,
the King's Lieutenant and Chamberlain of Scotland should make a reasonable and
just Extent of the Lands of the Offenders, according to the present value of
the Lands, and according to that Extent the Composition or Fine was to be
levied and paid every year, at the usual time of Payment, half the value; and
so from year to year till the whole was paid, and the other half of their Lands
and Rents should remain to them for their support and maintenance.

And it is to be known, That our Will is not, that this Determination should
extend to, and be understood of such Persons of the Scots as were Prisoners
upon this Occasion, nor of such as have not submitted to our Peace or Faith. In
Witness whereof we have caused these our Letters Patents to be sealed at
Westminster the 15th of October, in the 33d of our Reign. The Title of this
Patent is, Forma pacis Scotiae; The Form of Peace of Scotland.


William Waleys could not be mentioned in this Record, having William Walers
taken, Hanged, Drawn, and Quartered.
been taken about the Feast of the Assumption of the Virgin Mary, or 15th of
August, two months before the Date of it, and London, where on the Eve of St.
Bartholomew, he was Condemned to be Hanged, Drawn, and Quartered, his Head to
be fixed upon a Pole on London Bridge, and his four Quarters to be sent into
Scotland, and set up in four parts of the Kingdom.

Notwithstanding this Establishment, the Agreement and Forms A. D. 1306. 34 Ed.
I. [5] Mat. West. f. 453. n. 10, 20, 30. The Scots, Bishops, Noblemen, and
others Perjured twice or thrice. They Conspire against against King Edward, and
set up Robert Brus. John Common Murdered, because he would not be Perjured. A.
D. 1306. 34 Ed. I.
of Peace by Consent of the Scots, and their Commissioners, when the King
expected nothing but Peace, and fair Compliance, [5] in January following the
same Scots that had twice or thrice done Homage, and sworn Fealty to King
Edward, and the Bishops themselves that had Sworn Faith and Truth to him as
heartily as other Men, joined with Robert Brus Earl of Carrick, in setting up
Andrews, and Glasco, and Abbat of Schone, who were the great Contrivers of his
Design, and Assistants in it, and begun a War more troublesome and lasting then
any before; and because John Common was very resolute in keeping his Oath, and
would not join with them, being a Man of great Power and Interest in Scotland,
and much pressed to do it by Robert Brus, he with his Followers killed him in
the Church of the Friars Minors of Dunfres, on January, and upon the
Annunciation of the Blessed Virgin next following, he was Crowned at Scone in
the presence of the Two Bishops, the Abbat, and many other Earls, Barons, and
Knights.

In Easter Ib. f. 454. n. 10. The Pope Absolves the King from his Oath
concerning the Perambulations of the Forests.
Week ensuing, the Pope's Bull was published, absolving the King from the Oath
of Deforesting, or laying out of his Forests, such Lands as were, or ought not
truly to be contained Ill Practices, and Vsages, Tricks and Deceits of his
Officers, within and belonging to them, Excommunicating such as observed it,
and absolving such as broke it.

In the Historians it appears not what use he made of this Absolution, but in a
Writ or Letters upon the 34 Ed. I. M. 13 and 14. The King troubled at the
Actions of his Officers.
Statute Roll, with the Ordinance he then made, Dated May 28. he Expressed
troubled in Mind for the Clamours of the People, who, as he there says, were
much oppressed, impoverished, and injured by the Officers of his Forests, and
therefore desiring to obviate these Oppressions, and Grievances, which he could
not pass by without great Scandal or Offense, (Quae absque gravi scandalo
diutius sub dissimulatione praeteririe non possumus) and to provide for the
Peace and Tranquillity of the Kingdom, he Emitted the foresaid Ordinance of the
Forest, Dated May 28. in the 34th Totel's Magna Charta, 1556. Part. 2. p. 67.
a. but with this Writ, or these Letters, which were Ib. Rot. Stat. 34 Ed. I. M.
13 and 14.
sent into every County in England, with Command to the Sheriffs to cause them
to be read, and the Ordinance contained in them, to be proclaimed in full
County.

The King being fully informed of the Insurrection and Proceedings of Robert
Brus, and his Confederates, Mat. West. f. 454. n. 30, 40, 50. and f. 455. The
King sends an Army into Scotland.
sent Aymer de Valentia Earl of Pembroke, Robert Clifford, and Henry Percy,
into Scotland, with a good Force against the new Crowned King; and the King
intending to follow them, summoned his Army to Rendezvous at Carlisle 15 days
after Midsummer, and to make the Expedition more great and glorious, he
Knighted, Ibm. And Knighted 300 Sons of Noblemen, etc.
with his Son, on Whitsunday at Westminster, Three hundred young Gentlemen, the
Sons of Earls, Barons, and Knights, that had wherewithal to maintain their
Honor, and gave them their Military Garments out of his own Wardrobe; Ibm. The
Scots Routed and put to Flight. Many of the Scots Tried for Perjury and
Rebellion, and Hanged.
These, with the Prince, were to march with him into Scotland against his
Enemies; They set forward on the morrow of Holy Trinity, but before they came
there, the Earl of Pembroke had fought with, and routed the Scots, and put
their King to flight at Metfen near St. John's Town, or Perth, 2 or 3 days
after Midsummer. In this Battle many were Ib. f. 455. n. 40, 50. and f. 456. n.
10, 20, 30. The two Bishops, and Abbat, the Contrivers of the Rebellion taken.
most of which were Tried and Hanged for Perjury and Rebellion. Afterward, the
King, Prince, and many Great Men, went into Scotland, when some received them
Honorably, others left their Habitations and fled. The Army roving up and down
after the Fight pursued the Fugitives, some they killed, others they took
alive, amongst whom were the Two Ib. f. 455. n. 30. The Bishop of St. Andrews
sent Prisoner to Winchester Castle.
Bishops, and the Abbat, armed under their Surcoates; These were sent into
England, and imprisoned. The Bishop Andrews was sent to the Sheriff of
Hampshire, to be kept in Winchester Castle, as the King's Enemy, Rebel and
Traitor, and by the Append. n. 38. The Sheriff of Hampshire charged with him.
Mittimus or Warrant he was to be kept in the strongest Tower of the Castle,
and safely, and securely put in Iron Fetters, under Penalty of the Sheriffs
forfeiting all his Goods, Lands, and Tenements, if he made his Escape; By the
Warrant no Man was to see, or speak with him, but such as the Sheriff should
appoint to attend him; And for further Security, the Sheriff was Custos or
Warden of the Castle, as his Guard, under the same Penalty with the Sheriff, if
he Escaped.

The Bishop of Glasco was sent to the Castle of Porcester in the same County,
by a Mittimus or Claus. 34 Ed. I. M. 6 intus. The Bishop of Glasco sent to
Parchester Castle.
Warrant in the same Form, and Words; as also was the Abbat of Schone sent to
the Ibm.
Castle of Mere in Wiltshire, by the like Mittimus directed to the Sheriff

The Pope being informed of the Murder of John Common, by his In Turri Lord. 34
Ed. I. and Pryns, Ed. I. f. 1122. The Pope Excommunicates the Murderers of John
Common.
Bull directed to the Archbishop of York, and Bishop of Carlisle, ordered them
to Excommunicate Robert Brus, and all his Accomplices, until they made
Satisfaction, and deserved Absolution. And the King made Inquisition Mat. West.
^. 456. n. 10.
in Scotland by Men of Credit, (per fide dignos homines) who, and what Persons
committed the Murder, and were present at the Coronation of Robert Brus, and
took them almost all, and put them to death.

And for the greater Claus. 34 Ed. I. M. 3. Dors. in French, and Ril^y's Appen.
f. 510. Ordinances made by King and Council, for the security of the Peace of
Scotland.
Security of the Peace of Scotland, it was agreed by the King and his Council,
That the Guardian of Scotland should cause to be proclaimed in all Cities,
Burghs, and Mercate Towns, and in other Places where he thought fit; That all
such who were against the King in the last War, and were not come to his and
others who committed Felonies, and other. Crimes, for which they ought to lose
Life or Member, and were not taken, should be apprehended by any Persons where
ever they came, and to that purpose to Levy Hue and Cry, with Horn and Mouth,
and pursue them with force, from Town to Town, Country to Country, County to
County, until they rendered themselves, or were taken dead or alive, and that
those who neglected to do this, should lose all their Goods, and be imprisoned
during the King's Pleasure. The Guardian was likewise to inquire after the
Receivers of such Persons, that they might have such Justice as they deserved.

It was then also Accorded, That all those who were Guilty, and Abettors of the
Death of John Common, should be Drawn and Hanged, and those that advised, and
assented to it, and those who after the Fact knowingly and willingly, or freely
received them, should have the same Judgment.

And those that were guilty of his Death, that were, or should be taken by
force in this War against the King, should be Hanged, or have their Heads cut
off, and their Receivers to have the same Judgment.

And all that were against the King in the War at any time, as well before, as
in, and after the Battle of Metfen, those who were the most notorious and
dangerous of them, should be put in Prison where the King should appoint, and
not to be released but by his Order.

And those who willingly were of the Party of Robert Brus, or were aiding,
advising, procuring or persuading the People to Rise contrary to Law, and were
thereof Convicted, whether Clerks or others, were to be imprisoned during the
King's Pleasure.

And it was Agreed, That the People of Scotland who were forced to rise against
the King in this War, should be Fined as the Guardian should see cause, and
according to their Offense; and for the greater Authority, and Execution of
this Agreement, the King caused it to pass under his Seal of Scotland.

In the same Roll and Membrane, there is the Acknowledgment The Senesch. or
Steward of Scotland his acknowledgment of his Crimes against King Edward.
made by himself of the Heinous Crimes and Offenses of James the Steward of
Scotland against his Liege Lord King Edward, against the Homage and Fealty he
did, and swear to him, and against his Ligeance, whereupon he rendered and
submitted high and low and in all things, his Body, Lands, and Tenements, and
all he had or might have, to his Will, who of his special Grace Restored to him
all he held in Scotland, for which being free, delivered out of Prison, and in
his own full Power, he again did Homage, and Oath of Fealty, as he had done in
the 24th of his He renews his Homage and Fealty.
Reign; and for the sure keeping and performing his Homage and Oath in all
Points, he bound his Body, his Heirs, Lands, Tenements, all he had or could
have high and low, and in all things, to the Will of the King and his Heirs;
And Willed and Granted for him and his Heirs, That if he or they, should ever
be in War against him or How, and in what manner he bound himself to be true
and faithful to him, and his Heirs.
them, or Ayding or Advising any of their Enemies secretly or openly, that then
their Bodies, Lands, Tenements, and all they had or could have, should from
that time be forfeited to the King and his Heirs, in such manner as neither he,
nor his Heirs, might claim them at any time. And further he Granted for him and
Heirs, That if at any time it should happen they should be against the King or
his Heirs, as aforesaid, That the Archbishops, Bishops, or any other Prelates
of England, or Scotland, as many, and such as the King or Heirs would, without
Cognizance of the Cause, or any manner of Admonition, Warning, or Contradiction
of any one, might give the Sentence of Excommunication against him and his
Heirs, and put all his Lands under Interdict. In Witness whereof he Sealed
these Letters Patents, A. A. 1306. 34 Ed. I.
in the Priory of Canons at Lanercost, 23d of October, A. D. 1306. and of the
King's Reign the 34th. Done in the presence of five Barons, two Knights, and
four Clerks, with Two Public Notaries allowed by the Pope, to attest it.

On the 3d of Claus 34 Ed. I. M. 2. Dors. A Parliament for the settling of
Scotland, and Business concerning the State of the Kingdom.
November, being then at the Priory of Lanercost in the County of Cumberland,
near Carlisle, the King issued his Writs of Summons for a Parliament to meet at
that City on the Octaves of St. Hillary, or 20th of January. This Parliament was
called for the Settling, and Establishment of Scotland, and for other Business
concerning the King, and the State of the Kingdom, as appears by the Writ; What
was done concerning Scotland I Business of the Kingdom was (besides the hearing
many Petitions and dispatch of much private Business) the great Oppression of
Churches and Monasteries. Stat. of Carl. Riley's Placita Parl. f. 312. Cok. 2.
Institut. f. 580. The chief Business of the Kingdom was to prevent the Tallage
and Tribute imposed upon English Monasteries by Foreign Abbats.
The Oppression of Monasteries, as was showed by the grievous Complaints of the
Great and Noblemen, arose from the imposition of Tribute, by their Superiors,
(as then called) from beyond the Seas, as especially by the Abbats of the
Orders of Cisteaux, Cl^ny, Praemonstratum, of St. Augustine, and Benedict, who
under pretense of visiting them England, as being the Heads of their Orders,
imposed upon them diverse grievous and importable Tallages, Rents, and Tributes,
contrary to the Laws and Customs of the Kingdom; by which means, what had been
Charitably given to Pious Uses, and for the increase of Divine Worship, was
turned into a Wicked Tribute, not pleasing to God, (in cens^m Reprobum est
conversum) wherefore by the Advice of the Earls, Barons, Great Men, Chief Men,
and other Noblemen, and the Communities of his Kingdom, Westminster, in the 33d
year of his Reign, Ordained in that Parliament, That no English Abbats, etc.
should pay Taxes or Tallages to Foreign Houses or Abbats.
he Ordained and Determined, That no Abbat, Prior, Master or Guardian, or any
other Religious Person of what State, Condition, or Order soever he was, under
his Power and Dominion, should pay any Rent, Tallage, Tribute, or Impositions,
charged upon them by their Superiors the Abbats, Priors, Masters, Wardens, of
Religious Houses or Places, or agreed between themselves; Nor that they should
go beyond Sea to visit such Monasteries,

Further the King inhibited all and singular Foreign Abbats, Priors, The King's
Inhibition to Foreign Abbats, etc. to Exact such Contributions.
Masters, and Wardens of Religious Houses, under whose Subjection impose any
Payments, or Burdens upon them, under forfeiture of all they had in his
Dominions, or could forfeit for the future.

Yet by these Statutes and Ordinances it was not the King's Riley ^t supra, f.
314. The King intended not by that Institution to extinguish the Visitation of
those Monasteries, etc.
intention, to exclude the Abbats, Priors, and other Foreign Religiose, from
the Office of Visiting only in those things which belonged to Regular
Observance, and the Discipline of their Order, provided that such Visitors took
nothing from the Monasteries, Priories, or Houses they Visited, or carried any
thing out of the Kingdom, but their moderate, and reasonable Expenses.

These Ordinances and Statutes, Ibm.
tho they were made in the 33d of Edw. I. as abovesaid, yet the Publication of
them was suspended until this Parliament at Carlisle, that they might proceed
with more Mature Deliberation, after which, and a full Debate with the Earls,
Barons, (and aliis Nobilibus, and Communitatibus The King Ordains and
Determines in making a Law.
Regni sui) and other Nobles, and the Communities of his Kingdom by their
Unanimous Consent ( Ordinavit and Statuit) May next coming; And sent it to all
the Sheriffs in England, to be published Ibm.
as a Law made for the common Benefit of the People, and Melioration of the
State of the whole Kingdom, Ad Communem populi utilitatem, and totius Dominii
nostri meliorationem. Witness the King at Carlisle the 20th of March, in the
35th of his Reign. 35 Ed. I.


The other great Business was the Consideration of the Append. n. 39. Petitions
of the Nobility against the Exactions of the Pope*
Petitions exhibited by the Earls, Barons, Great Men, and Community of the
whole Kingdom of England, for the State of the Crown, of the Lands of Scotland,
Wales, and Ireland, and the whole Community aforesaid, concerning diverse new
intolerable Grievances, Oppressions, Injuries, and Extortions, done to, and
brought upon the Earls, Barons, Great Men, and Community, by the Authority, and
Command of the Pope, and by Mr. William Testa, his Clerk or And his Clerk
William de Testa.
Nuncio, or by his Commissaries, Ministers, or Vicegerents in his Name.

The Articles or Heads [7] of the Petitions were; First, The The Articles of
the Petitions.
Extravagant Number of Provisions of the best Spiritual Preferments given to
Italians, other Foreigners, and Non-Residents, to the great prejudice and
disinheritance of the Founders, Benefactors, and their Successors, and to such
as had the Right of

Secondly, The Rents and Revenues of Religious Houses, which the Pope intended
to apply to the use of diverse Cardinals.

Thirdly, Concerning First Fruits of vacant Benefices reserved to the Pope, a
thing never heard of before, concerning the Collection whereof, he had lately
put forth hard Interpretations, English Church.

Fourthly, About the Peter Pence, that they were not taken according to the
first Grant, but exacted to Treble the value.

Fifthly, Concerning Legacies given to Pious Uses, they were wickedly demanded
and exacted by Authority of the Apostolic See, and converted to other Uses
than the Testator or Donor intended.

Sixthly, Concerning Debts the Creditors went to the Pope's Clerk, and offered
them half the Debt, more or less, to get the

Seventhly, Concerning indistinct Legacies, (such as were given in general, and
not in particular Words) approved by the Canon and Civil Law, the Pope's Clerks
impiously appropriated to themselves, ( Clerici Domini Papae impie sibi
appropriare nituntur, etc.) and to convert them to Uses contrary to the Design
of the Dead.

There are Two Copies of these Petitions, one in Riley's Placita Parl. f. 376.
French, the most full and large; The other in Ib. f. 379. The Mischiefs of
Money sent out of the Kingdom.
Latin, which concludes thus, That all these things tended to draw the Money
out of the Kingdom, the manifest Stripping of the Church, the Enriching of
Strangers, and Impoverishing the Natives, unless Append. n. 40.
God would arise and dissipate his Enemies, so as by the Secular Prince, and
his Council, with the Consent of the Noble, and Great Men, so great Wickedness
might be repressed.

Upon which Articles of Oppressions, Grievances, Extortions, and William Testa,
the Pope's Agent.
Injuries, William Testa was [1] called into full Parliament, and Convicted, nor
could he any ways Excuse himself, but by saying he did these things by
Authority of the Pope. And because these [9] Ibm.
Practices, if suffered, manifestly tended to the diminution of Divine
Convicted in Parliament of great Crimes against the Crown and Church.
Worship, the Robbing of the English Church, the prejudice, hurt, and
Disheriton of the Crown, Power, Jurisdiction, and Dignity Royal of England, the
destruction of the whole Community, and perpetual Subversion of the State of
the Kingdom, the Laws and Customs of the same; from whence greater Dangers in
process of time might ensue.

At length having considered these Mischiefs, by Assent of the King and whole
Council of Parliament, Ibm. Oppressions, Grievances, and Extortion from and by
the Pope prohibited. And William Testa ordered to revoke what he had done.
it was Provided, Agreed, Ordained, and Judged, That the Premised Grievances,
Oppressions, Injuries, and Extortions, ought not to be permitted in the Kingdom
and Lands aforesaid. And Master William was in the same Parliament forbidden to
do any thing contrary to this Provision, Agreement, and Judgment, by himself or
any other whatsoever. And he was injoined to revoke and make void whatever
Commissaries, Ministers, Vicegerents, Adherents, and Assistants, and safely to
keep within the Kingdom the Money Levied upon this Account, until the King by
Advice of the Council aforesaid, should otherwise direct.

And for the greater Ibm. The Clergy and Laity write to the Pope, complaining
of his Oppressions and Extortions.
Evidence of the Matter, it was ordained and agreed by the King and Council
aforesaid, That Experienced Messengers should be sent to the Pope from the
King, and whole Community, to Notify and Expound to him these Grievances,
Oppressions, Extortions, and Injuries: And a Letter was drawn up accordingly on
the Name and Behalf of the Clergy and Laity, full of Sharpeness and Reflection
upon the Pope, his Ministers, and Nuncio's; Riley ut supra. f. 355. l. 3. of
the Letter.
Nos Clerus and Populus dicti Regni, etc. with this Ibm.
Title in the Margin, Litera a Regno Angliae ad Papam, the Letter from the
Kingdom of England to the Pope.

At the same time Writs were ordered to be directed Ibm. f. 382. 383.
to all the Sheriffs of England, to Enquire by the Oaths of Lawful Men of the
County, after the Names of the Ministers and Commissaries of William Testa, who
had committed these Grievances, Extortions, etc. William Testa's Officers
Questioned.
And the Names of such as had caused any one to be cited before himself, or
Commissaries, etc. And to attack them by their Bodies, so as they might appear
before the King, eight Days after Holy Trinity where ever he was in England, to
answer to him or any others that would complain, and to do and receive what the
King's Court, (the Court of King's Bench now, which then was always 35 Ed. 1.
with the King) should adjudge and ordain. Witness the King at Carlisle, March
22d. in the 35th of his Reign.

The Prince of Ibm. f 382. The Prince of Wales ordered to do Justice.
Wales, Guardian of Scotland, and Justice of Ireland, had also command to see
this Provision, Agreement, Ordinance, and Judgment, inviolably observed in
those Lands or Countries.

But after the After the Recess of the Parliament, the King gives William Testa,
etc. Protection to go through the
Recess of the Parliament, the King at the Request of the Bishop of Sabin and
Cardinal, (who came from the Pope into England, for the Consummation of the
Peace with France, and the Marriage of the Prince of Wales, with that King's
Daughter) and was then at Carlisle, commanded the Chancellor not to Seal their
Writs to the Sheriffs, etc. Ibm. f. 383. and Pat. 35 Ed. 1. M. 10. intus.
Kingdom, to Dispatch the Pope's Business.
And for the Reverence he had to the Apostolic See, and Affection he bore to
Pope Clement, gave William Testa and Peter Amalmeni, the Pope's Clercs and
Nuncio's, their Commissaries and Ministers, a Protection to go through the
whole Kingdom for the Dispatch of the Business of the Church of Rome. Witness
the King at Carlisle, April the 4th, in the 35th of his Reign.

He also Append. N. 41.
granted to them in as much as he might or could, (Quantum in nobis est) to
Collect or Keep to the Use of the Pope, the Fruits of the first Year, of all
Vacant Ecclesiastic Benefices with And gave him Liberty to take the first
Fruits of Vacant Benefices to the use of the Pope.
Cure and without Cure, in the Kingdom for three years, reserved by the Pope to
himself, (Non obstantibus quibuscunque prohibitionibus in Parliamento nostro
inde factis) Notwithstanding the Prohibitions made in Parliament, so as they
meddle not with the Revenues of Abbeys, or Priories, nor carried the Money out
of the Kingdom, but by way of Exchange. Dated the same Day at Carlisle.

And further he gave them a Pat. 35 E. 1. M. 19. intus and Riley ut supra. f.
384. With a Dispensation to use their Offices, etc.
Dispensation to use their Offices, as Pope's Clercs and Nuncios, as the Clercs
and Nuncios of former Popes had done in former times, notwithstanding any
former Prohibition by him made; Provided they did nothing against his Crown or
Dignity, or any of his Subjects, any manner of way. Dated the same Day and at
the same Place.

Lastly, He gave Ibm. in Utr^que loco. And Transport their Money by way of
Exchange.
them leave by way of Exchange, and by assistance of Merchants, to send all the
Money Collected, which reasonably belonged to the Church of Rome, or to the
Pope, so as they Transported not any Coined Money, or Silver in the Mass, by
themselves, or others. Dated at the same Place and Time.

Under pretense Append. N. 42.
of these Letters, Grants, and Dispensations, the Pope's Clercs aforesaid,
(pretextu quarum literarum, prefati Clerici, Domini Papae, etc.) not having
respect to the Prohibitions in Parliament, By reason of these Indulgences, the
Pope's Clerks return to their former Practices*
returned to their former Practices; and being opposed in their Proceedings, by
many of the Kingdom, by reason of those Prohibitions, they Petitioned the
King's Council holden at Westminster, in the Feast of Holy Trinity next
following, and Exhibited their Letters, etc. And because it was found, That by
them the King had revoked nothing of the Ordinance made in Parliament (Et They
Petition the King and Council for allowance of them.
quia compertum fuit per easdem quod Dominus Rex nihil Revocavit de praedicta
Ordinatione in Parliamento facta,) nor Granted any thing to the same Clercs, by
the said Letters, but that they might have and receive the first Fruits of
vacant Benefices, as far as he could Grant them, (Quantum in Rege fuit) and
hereupon forbad them Their Petition was rejected, and they commanded to desist
from any such Practices.
to do or attempt any thing that might turn to the prejudice of his Crown and
Royal Dignity, or any other of his Subjects: And it being found also, That
every of the Grievances aforesaid were in prejudice of the King, and his
Subjects. By Command of the King being then at Carlisle, it was agreed in the
same Council, That the Clercs should not do them, nor have the first Fruits of
Benefices of the Patronage of the King, because it would turn to the prejudice
of him, his Crown, and others. The Clercs understanding this Agreement, would
not any further prosecute their Petitions, or appear to receive their Answer:
And therefore there was a further Prohibition made, That whereas there had not
been a full Deliberation And for doing any thing against the K. his Crown, and
Dignity, etc.
had upon their Petitions, they should not attempt any thing prejudicial to
Him, his Crown, and Dignity, the Noblemen, and People of his Realm. Witness the
King at Carlisle, the 27th day of June, in his 35th year.

This Prohibition was served Ryley ut supra. f. 385.
upon them by the Mayor, Aldermen, and Sheriffs of London; and afterward, if
the said Clercs had presumed to have been Relieved against this Prohibition,
before they could attempt it, the King died, so as nothing further

In the time of this Append. N. 43.
Parliament at Carlisle, either the King himself, or the Lords took notice of
the great Familiarity there was between the Prince, and Piers de Gaveston, and
what Influence he had upon, and Power over the Prince; but whether upon the
King's own Observation, or their pressing him to it, (I find not) nor for what
particular Reasons, on the 26th of February at Lowercost by the King's Order
and Command (not on his Deathbed as Piers de Gaveston Banished England.
commonly storied) he was Banished England, and to be ready to quit it at
Dover, three Weeks after the Turnament or Justs, which should be Fifteen days
after Easter Day was this Year 1307. on the 26 of March, so that the day of his
Departure was the First of May.
Easter next coming, and not to return without the King's Leave, and Calling
him back; and for the Performance of this Order, Monsieur Piers at the Day and
Oath upon the Body of God, (i. e. The Consecrated Host) the Old Cross, and the
King's other Relics, and the Prince of Wales made Oath in like manner, That
he would not Receive, Retain, or Permit the said Piers to be with him contrary
to this Order, unless he was Recalled by, and had leave from his Father to
return; and for his Subsistence beyond Sea, so long as he staid there, Monsieur
Piers had allowed him an hundred Marks Sterling by the Year.

After Easter this Year, in the Heat of the Controversy and Quarrel between
the King, Nobility, and Pope's Nuncios, as before related, M^t. W^st. f. 458.
Robert Brus put to flight the E^of Pembroke and Gloucester.
Robert Brus having increased his Army, engaged Aymer de V^lence Earl of
Pembroke, and put him to flight, killing few of his Men; Three Days after he
also put to flight the Earl of Gloucester, with the Slaughter of many on both
fides, and afterward besieged him in the Castle of Air, until by the King's
Army Siege was Raised, when with his Men he fled into the Woods and Mountains;
Ibm. Robert Brus flies into the Woods and Mountains.
yet King Edward sent into England, and under great Penalty Commanded all that
ought him Service to be ready at Carlisle, three Weeks after the Feast of St.
John Baptist, and there sent his Son into England also, to prosecute his Match
with the King of France his Daughter, by the assistance of the The Prince sent
into England.
Spanish Cardinal, Bishop of Sabin. Ibm.
After the Departure of his Son, the King fell ill of a Dysenterie or
Bloody Flux, yet by small Scotland from Carlisle, and at Burgh upon Sands his
Disease increasing, he Died the 7th of July, A. D. The King Dies.
1307.

Church Affairs.
NOT long before the Death of Henry III. the Monks of Canterbury by his License
Antiquit. Brit. f. 189. n. 10, 20. God. de presul. Angl. p. 137. A. D. 1272.
had chosen William de Chillenden Sub-Prior, for their Archbishop; the Pope
persuaded him, as a Person not ^it for that Place, to wave the Election, and
make way for Robert Kilwar^eby a Friar-Minor, (who for Eleven years had been
the Collector of the Pope's Moneys, or Revenues in England) to be Archbishop by
his Provision, without the King's License, the Monks Election, and his
Approbation afterward, contrary to the King's Prerogative, the ancient Rights
of his Crown, the Laws of the Realm, and Liberties Church.

But to provent, if it might be, for the Future the like Practices of the Pope,
within less than a Month after the Death of Henry the Third, King Edward being
in the Holy Land, the Guardians of the Kingdom, and Council in his Name, by
their Proctors made public Append. N. 44.
Protestation for the Vindication of the Prerogative and Rights of his Crown
against these Provisions, before they Granted Temporalities; Ibm.
showing, That Cathedral Churches when void, ought of Right and Custom, and
were wont to be filled, by the Canonical Election of the Chapter, the King's
Leave having been first asked and obtained. And that after the Election, the
Elect ought to be presented to the King. That he might object against him if he
had any thing reasonable to propound against him; and that it seemed to the
King and his Council, a great Prejudice to him, and the Church of Canterbury,
whose Patron and Defender he was, Vsages, where there could not be found any
Fault either in the Matter or Form of the Election, nor so expressed in his
Letters of Provision, yet should assume a Power of Supplying Vacancies with
Bishops: Whence lest for the future the Roman Church should proceed to do the
like, or if it should do it, That the King might not receive Prejudice, or be
bound to restore the Temporalities of the Churches, the King of Procurator and
Clerc made Protestation in his Name and stead, That this Grant of the
Temporalities, should not be drawn into Example for the future. This
Protestation was made, and Read at Westminster in St. Stephen's Chapel, on the
Vigil of St. Lucy the Virgin, ( i. e. December 12th,) in the presence of Friar
Robert ^e ^dwarde by the Elect, (by the Monks afterward in compliance with the
Pope, or under a Pretense to Preserve their own Bishop of E^^^ster, Walter de
Merton Chancellor of England, John de Chist^^ Dean of St. Paul's, R. Burnel Arch
Deacon of York, and many others. A. D. 1272.

And on the same Day the Pat. 1. Ed. 1. M. 20. intu^.
Temporalties, having had sufficient Testimony of his affection to the King,
and taken the Oath of Fealty to him, for that Time out of his especial Grace
were Granted by his Lieutenant, or Guardians of the Kingdom.

After six years, Antiqu. Brit. f. 192. n. 20, 30. A. D. 1279.
this Archbishop was made Bishop of Porto in Italy, and Cardinal, and then
Abdicated his Archbishopric, upon whose Cession pretending it was his Right so
to do, notwithstanding the Monks had Elected the Bishop of Bath and Wells, then
Chancellor of England, and the former Protestation; The Pope made John Peckham
another Preaching Friar-Minor Archbishop, and Consecrated him at Rome; He was
born in Sussex of Obscure Parents, and had his first Institution in the
Monastery of Lewis.

The Archbishops, Bishops, and Clergy, endeavoring to put in practice the
Canons of Boniface made at Complete Hist. of Engl. f* 668.
Merron 42 Hen. 3. A. D. 1258. and the Provincial Constitutions of the same
Boniface at Spelm. Council. Vol. 2. f. 305.
Lambeth 45 of Hen. 3. A. D. 1261. This Archbishop, in the August, or 30th of
July, A. D. 1279. Ibm. f. 320. and 323.
called a Council of his Suffragans at Reading, in which several Sentences of
Excommunication were enjoined to be Published, Append. N. 45.
which so Troubled the King, that he convened the Archbishop in his Parliament
at St. Michael next following, wherein he made an open Revocation of such as
pleased him not, and were against the Rights of his Crown.

In the 8th of King Edward, this Archbishop and his Suffragans intending to
hold a Spelm. Vol. 2. f. 327.
Council at London, the King fearing by their late Canons and Proceedings at
Reding, they might presume to Constitute something therein against his Crown
and Dignity, Append. N. 46.
appointed Roger le Estrange, and Hugh Fitz-Otto Steward of his Household, his
Commissioners, to go to them, and appeal against such Proceedings.

Next Year he called a Spelm. Ut supra. f. 328
Council at Lambeth, but the King suspecting the Loyalty of the Archbishop and
Bishops, directed his Apprend. N. 47.
Writ to them, Commanding them upon their Oaths of Fealty they had all taken to
be Faithful to him, and Defend his Rights, and the Rights of his Kingdom, as
much as they could, and enjoined them by Virtue of their Oath, and under pain
of losing the Temporals they held of him, that they should in that Council do
nothing against him, his Kingdom, and the Rights or Laws, which his
Predecessors and he had used by ancient and approved Custom, nor to do, assent
to, or attempt any thing against them.

Notwithstanding this Inhibition, the Review the Council of See Church Affairs
in time of Hen. 3. and Spelm. Conc. Tom. 2. f. 329.
Lambeth, holden under Boniface the then Archbishop, to see how far it was
suspended by the King's Appeal to the Pope about it; and notwithstanding his
Revocation (of some of the Canons and Sentences of Excommunication made at
Lambeth, and renewed Reding) about two years before in open Parliament, he
renewed them again in this Council, as Ibm. f. 334. and Linwood Constitutiones
Provinciales in fine, f. 30.
That, against such as procured or obtained Prohibitions, against Proceedings
in Spiritual Courts; That, against the Infringers and Opposers of Ecclesiastic
Liberty; That, against such as took any thing out of or from the Houses,
Manors, or Lands of Ecclesiastic Persons against their Wills; That, against
such as took or removed any Persons, or Goods out of Sanctuary, and hindered
any Victuals to be brought to such Persons; and Lastly, against such as Denied
to execute the King's Writs for taking the Excommunicates, or hindered the
taking of them, or unjustly procured their Liberty.

This Council ended Spelm. Council. Tom. 2. f. 341.
on the Sixth of the Ides, or 10th of October, and he wrote the King a Letter
about Ibm.
Church-Liberty Dissension between the King and Great Men of England, and the
Archbishops, Bishops, and Clergy of the same, concerning the Oppression of the
Church against the Decrees of Popes, the Constitutions of Councils, and
Sanctions of Orthodox Fathers, in which the Bighest Authority, the greatest
Truths, and Sanctity did consist; and therefore beseeched the King there might
be an End put to those Dissentions, which could not otherwise be, then by his
being inclined to close with those three things, from which the Canons were
Collected, and to submit his Crown to the Crown of Christ, for that the
Ecclesiastic or Church-Liberties were the Jewels of his Spouse; He tells him
further, That by the Express Precept of the Law, he was bound to obey the Pope.
That the Determination of every Controversy that could not be Determined by
inferior Judges belonged to him; That Catholic Emperors submitted all their
Laws to the Holy Canons, and therefore he ought to submit his Laws, and abolish
all such as were contrary to to them. Lastly he told him, no Oath could bind to
the Keeping or Performance of such things as were Repugnant to Ecclesiastic
Liberty; and if he had taken any that might any way excite his Conscience
against the Church, he would absolve him from it; and concludes, That he firmly
believed he could not provide for the safety of his Soul, or the stability of
his Kingdom, unless he closed with what he Propounded. The Epistle is Dated at
Lambeth, the 4th of Nones, or Second of November, 1281. in the 9th of Edw. 1.

But this Epistle prevailed not upon the King, nor ended the Controversies
about the Regalia, or Royal Rights of the Crown, and Liberties of the People,
between the Secular and Ecclesiastic Powers, whatever the Pretenses of the
Archbishops, Bishops, and Clergy, were for the Advancement of Holiness, and
Religion; the Design was Dominion, whether the King or They should have
Temporal Jurisdiction, notwithstanding all Prohibitions, Attachments,
Informations, and Suits against them, the Records of which would swell into a
Volume, if they were all Collected from those in the Tower only of this King's
Reign; and always when the King's Necessities urged him, or that he was
Fatigued with, or Disappointed in his Wars, they took the Advantage of
promoting Ecclesiastic Liberty, (which was any thing they called so) against
the Rights, Royalties, and Prerogative of the Crown, (and never wanted
Ambitious, Designing, Discontented, and Poor Noble, and other Military Men, or
Gentlemen, who had made themselves so, by their own Luxury and Debauchery, and
pretended to what was then called Sanctity, and seemed to be more Holy and
Religious than others) to join with, and assist them, in hopes to make
themselves Great, and repair their Broken Fortunes, or succeed in the Places of
others, and become Governors and Regulators of the Nation, and Ministers of
State under the Church Power.

Taxes in this KING's Reign.
IN the 4th of his Reign the King in Parliament had a Fifteenth Pat. 4. Ed. I.
M. 6. A. D. 1276.
Granted him by the Earls, Barons, Great Men, and Community of the Kingdom, and
by the Archbishop of Canterbury and his Suffragan, a Subsidy of their Goods
(not said how much)

In the 5th of his Reign the Laity Gave him the 12th Part of Walls. Hist. Angl
f. 48. n. 20.
their Goods toward the War in Wales.

In the 11th of his Reign again, toward the War against the Ib. f. 51. n. 40.
Communia de Term. Trin. 12 E. I. Rot. 6. Dors. penes Remem^rator Thesourii.
Inter Comunia de Termino S. Mich. Rot. or. n. 5.
Welsh, the Laity Gave him a 30th Part, and the Clergy a 20th Conceditur a
Populo in Subsidium Werrae suoe Tricesima, and a Clero Vicesima pars Bonorum
suorum.

In the 18th of his Reign, he had a 15th of all their moveable Goods Granted by
the Archbishops, Bishops, Abbats, Priors, Earls, Barons, and all others of the
Kingdom, or Government, as appears by the Chequer-Roll in the 19th of Edward-I.
with the King's Remembrancer.

In the 22d of his Reign, the Prelates and Clergy Granted the Inter Recorda de
Trin. Term. 22 Ed. 1. Rot. v. l. n. 68. with the King's Remembrancer.
Mediety or half of their Benefices and Goods, to be taken a 3d Part at the
Fast of All Saints next coming, a second 3d Part 15 Days after Easter, and the
third 3d Part 15 Days after St. John Baptist then nextcoming.

In the same Year, at a Parliament or Council holden on the Claus. 22 Ed. I. M.
6. Dors. de militibus Eligendis, and Mittendis ad Concilium.
November, or ( Crastino S. Martini) at Westminster, when Four Knights were
summoned from every County, to consult and consent to such things as the Earls,
Barons, and Great Men should Ordain, for themselves and whole Communities of
the Counties. Upon the same day they met, viz. November. 12. they gave the King a
10th Part of all their moveable Goods, etc. as Hat. 22 Ed. I. M. 2. in Cedula.
appears by the Writ or Commission for Appointing Assessors, Taxors, and
Collectors for the same Tenth; Test Rege apud Westmonast. die November. Anno
Regni sui 22.

And in the same Month, after the 16th Day thereof, the Guardian, Inter Record.
de An. 23 Ed. I. n. vel Rot. 73. de sexta part Regi Concessa in Land. with the
King's Remembrancet.
Sheriffs, Aldermen, and whole Community of the City of London, Granted a 6th
Part of their moveable Goods, as a Subsidy toward his War. The Writ or
Commission by which the Taxors and Collectors were appointed, bears Date
November. 26. 23 Ed. I.

In the same Month, and about the same time of it, there were Ib. in the same
Year and Roll.
Commissioners appointed to ask, require, and effectually induce in Person the
Men of all his Demesne Cities and Towns in all the Counties of England, by all
ways they should see expedient, to grant a 6th Part, as London had done, that
it might show Example

A Parliament summoned to meet the Sunday after St. Martin, Claus. 23 Ed. I. M.
4. Dors. de Parliamento tenendo. Ib. M. 2. Dors. de Parliamento prorogando.
Pat. 24. Ed. I. p. 1. M. 22 de undecima and septima Regi Conces. Levand. and
Colligend.
or 11th of November; the Writ bears Date Tertio die Octobris. It met not then,
but was Prorogued before meeting to the Sunday before St. Andrew, or 30th of
November, by Writ dated November. 2. at Odmer. The Clergy in this Parliament Gave
the King a Tenth; and alii de Regno nostro, others of Our Kingdom, or
Government, Gave an Eleventh and the Citizens and Burgesses, and other Good Men
of his Demeasns, Gave him a Seventh of their moveable Goods: And the Warrant
for the appointment of the Taxors and Collectors, bears date December. 4.

In the 24th, the Earls, Barons, Knights, et alii de Regno, Inter Comunia de
term. S. Mic. An. 25 Ed. I. Rot. vel. n. 5. penes Remem. Regis in Scaccario.
Mat. West. f. 428. n. 20. 30. This Parliament was held at Cro. animarum 24 Ed.
I. St. Edmunds-Bury. Claus. 25 Ed. I. M. 6. Dors. f. 74. n. 10.


The Clergy gave nothing, by reason of an Inhibition the Archbishop had
obtained from Pope Boniface, which Inhibition, or Bull, he caused to be
published at this time in all the Cathedrals See more of this matter in the
History.

In his 25th Year, he had an Eighth of all the Laity, and a Walsingham in his
History says, the Laity gave a Ninth, (which agrees not with the Close Roll,
which says an Eighth) the Clergy of the Province of Canterbury gave a Tenth,
and the Clergy of the Province of York a Fifth.

In the 29th of his Reign, upon his Confirmation of the Perambulations Rot.
Peramb. Forest. 29 Ed. I. in Turre.
Lincoln, which they should have at Michaelmas next coming. Robert Archbishop
of Canterbury would grant nothing for the Clergy, without the special License
of the Pope.

In the 32d of his Reign, being then in Scotland, as appears Pat. 32 Ed. I. in
Xedula.
by the Dates of the Commissions at Dunfermlyn and Strivelin, to Ryley's
Placita Parliament. f. 246. 264, 265.
Capitation by Poll, or in Common, according to their Faculties and Wealth, as
it might turn most to his Advantage. And in the 33d Year, the Archbishops,
Bishops, Prelates, Earls, Barons, and other Tenants of his Demeasns, petitioned
in the Parliament holden on Sunday next after the Feast of St. Matthew the
Apostle, at Westminster, that they might have leave to Talliate their Tenants
of the same Demeasns, as he Talliated them, and it was granted.

About this time he had a Fifteenth granted to him. Ibm. f. 260.


In the 34th Year, the King intending to Knight his Son, summoned Inter Comunia
Brevia de Term. S. Trin. Anno R. R. Ed. I. 34. Rot. vel n. 40. penes Remem.
Regis in Scaccar.
the Archbishops, Bishops, Abbats, Priors, Earls, Barons, and other Great Men
to be before him and his Council on the morrow of Holy Trinity, to Treat of,
and Grant an Aid upon that Occasion. He also sent to all the Sheriffs of
England, to cause to come before him and his Council Two Knights of every
County, and of every City Two Citizens, and of every Burgh One or Two
Burgesses, as the Burgh was greater or lesser, etc. These same Prelates, Earls,
Barons, and other Great Men, and Ibm.
also the Knights of Shires, Treating deliberately upon this Matter, and
considering there was an Aid due as aforesaid, and that many Burdens were
incumbent upon the King, by reason of his War in Scotland, unanimously Granted
to the King for themselves and whole Community of the Kingdom, a 30th Part of
all their Temporal moveable Goods, etc. for a competent Aid toward the
Knighthood of his Son, and also for an Aid toward his Expenses which he was to
be at in the War.

Also the Citizens and Burgesses of Cities and Burghs, and others Ibm.
of the King's Demeasens assembling together, and treating about the Premises,
considering the Burdens incumbent upon the King, etc. unanimously Granted unto
him, for the Causes abovesaid, a 20th Part of their moveable Goods, etc.

The Issue of Edward I.
BY his First Wife Sandford's Geneal. Hist. f. 130. and 138.
Elianor, Sister to Alphonso King of Castile, and Daughter of Ferdinand III.
and only Child by Joan his Second Wife, Daughter Walls. f. 48. n. 40. Mezeray,
f. 319. A. D. 1279.
and Heir of John Earl of Pontive, or Ponthien, he had John his Eldest Son, who
died

By her also he had Walls. Hypodigma Nustriae. f. 499 n. 20. Sandf. ut supra, f
138.
Henry and Alphonso, who both died young, and before their Father.

His Fourth Son by her was Edward born at Caernarvon in Wales (called therefore
Edward of Caernarvon) on St. Mark's Day, April 25. [4] Walls. Hist. 52. n. 10.
in the 12th Year of his Reign, A. D. 1284 who succeeded him Edward II.

By this Queen Sandf ut supra, f. 139, 140, 141, etc. Wais. Hypod. Neustr. 499.
he had Nine Daughters; Elianor married to the Earl of Bar in France; Johan of
Acres, or Acon, in the Holy Land, so called because there born; first married
to Gilbert of Clare Earl of Gloucester, and afterward to Ralph Monthermer,
without her Father's Consent: The Third Margaret, married to John Duke of
Brabant; Berenger and Alice, the Fourth and Fifth, died in their Childhoods;
the Sixth, Mary a Nun at Amesbury; the Seventh, Elizabeth, married to John Earl
of Holland, Zealand, and Lord of Friesland, who died without Issue, and she was
afterward married to Humphry de Bohun Earl of Hereford: Beatrix and Blanch
Sandf. ut supra, f. 144.
, the Eighth and Ninth, died in their Childhoods.

Issue by his Second Wife Margaret, Sister to the King of France, Daughter to
Philip III. Surnamed the Hardy.

Thomas de Brotherton Sandf. ut supra, f. 205.
born at a small Village of that Name in Yorkshire (from whence he was so
called) on the 1st of June, A. D. 1300. he was created Dugd. Bar. Part 2. f.
63. from Chart. 6. Ed. 21. n. 30, 31, 32.
Earl of Norfolk by his Half-Brother Edward II. December. 16. in the 6th Year of
his Reign, and had then Granted unto him all the Castles, Manors, and Lands in
England, Wales, and Ireland, which Roger Bigod lately possessessed, except
those his Widow had in Dower; and in the 9th of the same King was Ibm. from
Cart. 9. Ed. II. n. 32.
made Earl-Marshal of England.

Edmond Ibm. f. 92.
of Woodstock, born there on the 25th of August, A. D. 1301. and was created
Earl of Kent in the 15th of Edw. II.

Elianor his Sandf. ut supra.
Tenth, and only Daughter by this Queen, died in her Childhood.

A CONTINUATION Of the Complete etc.
King EDWARD the Second.
AFter the Death of Edward the First on the 7th of July, 1307, his Son Edward
the Second succeeded him, being about the Age of Twenty three years; and Seven
Weeks after his accession to the Crown, he summoned a Parliament by his Cl. 1
Ed. II. M. 19. D^rf. A. D. 1307.
Writs dated August 26th, to meet at Northampton on the Quinden of St. Michael,
or 13th of October, Ibm. A Parliament summoned.
concerning the Burial of his Father, his own Marriage and Fol. 96. n. 10. Not
well known what it did.
Walsingham tells us, That the Money which would scarcely pass amongst the
People in his Father's Lifetime, was made current after his decease, under the
Pain of Losing Life and Member; and that the Cl. 1 Ed. II. M. 12. intus.
Clergy, Citizens, and Burgesses gave their new King a Fifteenth part of their
Goods; and the other Laics a Twentieth. I find not what was further done here
in England his great Favorite Peirs de Gaveston returned into England, his
App. n. 43. Peirs de Gavesion returned into England.
Exile and the Obligation of his Oath not to come over, unless recalled by, or
had Leave to come from King Edward the First, having been both determined by
his Death. And also the Oath which King Edward made when Prince of Wales, at
the same Ibm.
time, That he would not Receive or Retain him without the Leave of his Father.

How long he had been in England, and how long Earl of He is made Earl of
Cornwall and Guardian, and Lieutenant of the Kingdom.
Cornwall, before the 26th of December, in the first year of King Edward's
Reign, I have not seen. On that day being at Westminster, he made him by the
Name and Title of Peter de Gaveston Earl of Cornwall, his Append. n. 48.
Guardian and Lieutenant of the Kingdom, for the better Conservation of the
Peace and Quiet thereof, while he should be beyond the Seas, or during his
Pleasure. And on the 18th of January following, being then at Dover, Ib. n. 49.
The great Power given to him.
he gave him Power to grant Licenses of choosing Pastors of Cathedral and
Conventual Churches, to take their Fealties when Elected and Confirmed, and
restore the Temporalities, to give Prebends and vacant Benefices, which were of
his Collation or Presentation, and dispose of Wardships and Marriages which
might happen in his absence. On the 19th of January he Cl. 1 Ed. II. M. 11.
Dors.
summoned a Parliament to meet at Westminster on the first Sunday in Lent, being
then at Dover, but of it there are no Memoires in the Tower, or other-where,
that I have seen. Then the King passing over Sea on the 28th of the same month,
was The. de la Moor, f. 593. n. 10.
Married to Isabel, Daughter of Philip the Fair King of France, at Bologne,
with wonderful Pomp and Celebrity, there being at the Solemnity Four Kings and
Three Queens, besides the Bride; and returning into England, they were both Cl.
1 Ed. II. M. 10. Dors.
Crowned at Westminster on the 24th of February, where the Earl of Cornwall
excelled all the Company in rich Clothes and Ornaments, and carried the Royal
Crown Ib. and de la Moor, ut supra, n. 20.
before the King, which much increased the Envy of the Nobility against him.

He was the [4] Son of a Gasconian Knight, who had done Who Peirs Gaveston was.
[4] Friar John Trokelow's Annals of Ed. II. f. 192. col. 2. ^. in Biblioth
Cotton. Claudius, D. 6.
Edward the First great Service in the Wars of that Country, and in respect
thereof he ordered him to be Educated with his Son the Prince; which made the
great familiarity between them. Tho. de la Moor, Servant to Edward the Second,
gives him this Character; [5] That he had a fine Body, was of a quick and sharp
Wit, curious in his Behavior, and sufficiently Skilful [5] Ut supra:
in Military Affairs, which appeared (as he says) by his Management of, and
keeping in due Subjection the Scots, when he commanded the English Forces in
that Kingdom, for which he was envied by those who saw his happy Success.

By reason of the King's extravagant Favors toward, and in The Nobility much
moved by the King's favor to him.
conferring Honors and Lands upon him, especially after he had Married his
Niece Margaret, Sister to the Earl of Gloucester, with his receiving him into so
great Intimacy, and making him Chief Minister, (as may be supposed according to
the Report of all our Historians) the Nobility were much moved, who pressed and
advised the King he might avoid the Realm, which not being done so soon as was
expected, the King declared Pat. 1 Ed. II. M. 10.
to all such England, longer than the Morrow of St. John Baptist, according as
it had been advised by the Prelates, Earls, and Barons, and agreed to by
himself. Given at Westminster the 18th day of May.

Accordingly he was sent into Ireland, and made the King's He is made the
King's Lieutenant in Ireland.
Pat. 1 Ed. II. M. 3. in Cedula. An. D. 1308.
Lieutenant there, to Direct and Act in all things in his Reding, 16 die Junii.

But long he stayed not there, for in the Second year of the King he procured a
Tournement to be proclaimed at Walsingh. f 96. n. 50. A. D. 1309. The Nobility
contrive how to destroy him.
Waling ford, and called thither so many Military Men out of Foreign Parts,
that he insulted over the English Nobility, who came to meet them, amongst whom
the chief were Thomas Earl of Lancaster, Humphry de Bohun Earl of Hereford,
Aymer de Valence Earl of Pembroke, and John Earl of Warren and Surry, who being
much displeased, and hardly bearing the Pride of Gavestan, and the Reproach
they received, every day considered and contrived how they might destroy him,
De die in diem quomodo Petrum perderent cogitabant.

The Prelates, Earls, and Barons, taking advantage of the King's continued
Exorbitant Kindness to him, and heaping upon him so great Riches and Estates,
to the disadvantage of the Crown, and lessening the Revenues thereof, and the
great Power he had with him, and being thereby (as may probably be concluded)
the great Obstacle to the Execution of their Designs formed against They press
the King to give them a Commission to choose Ordainers to make Ordinances for
the Government of his Household and Kingdom.
the King's Father, and himself, were impatient till they

THE Append. n. 50. A. D. 1309. 3 Ed. II. The Commission for that purpose.
King to all those who shall see or hear these Letters, Greeting; Whereas to
the Honor of God, and for the good of us and our Realm, we have of our free
Will granted to the Prelates, Earls, and Barons of our Realm, that they may
choose certain Persons of the Prelates, Earls, and Barons, and others whom they
think fit to call to them, during the time of their Power, that is, to the
Feast of St. Michael next coming, and from that Feast for a year next
following, to Ordain and Establish the Estate of our Household, and of our
Kingdom, according to Right and Reason. We Grant by these our Letters, to such
as may be chosen by the Prelates, Earls, and Barons, whoever they shall be,
full Power to Ordain the State of our Household, and of our Kingdom abovesaid,
in such manner as their Ordinances be made to the Honor of God, to the Honor
and Profit of Holy Church, and to the Honor of us, and our Profit, and to the
Profit of our People, according to Right and Reason, and the Oath which we made
at our Coronation. And we Will, that those which are chosen, and all under our
Dominion, and of our Ligeance, shall observe and keep the Ordinances to be
made, in all Points, and that they may secure the Observation of them, they may
Bind themselves, and Swear to one another, without being questioned by us or
our Friends; and if peradventure it shall happen, that part of those which
shall be chosen to make the said Ordinances, shall be hindered by Death,
Sickness, or other reasonable Cause, which (God forbid) so as they cannot
perfect the said Ordinances, then it shall be lawful for such as are present to
Proceed by themselves, or call such other to their Assistance, as shall be most
for the Honor of us, the Profit of us and our People. In Witness of these
things, we have caused to be made these our Letters Patents. Given at
Westminster the 16th day of March.


The very day following the Prelates, Earls, and Barons, or at least as many of
them as might then be in London, Append. n. 51. An Instrument made by the
Nobility to the King concerning the Commission above.
made an Instrument to the King, wherein after they had repeated this Grant and
Commission, they grant and promise for them, their prejudice of the King or his
Heirs, or of them, their Successors or Heirs, nor to the damage of any one
against Right and Reason; nor, That the Grant aforesaid may in other manner be
intended or claimed, properly from his Courtesy and Free Will or Pleasure, and
that the Power of the said Ordainers, as to making the Ordinances, should not
endure longer than the Time limited. In Witness whereof, they put their Seals
to these their Letters Patents. Given at London the 17th Day of March, in the
Year of Grace 1309. and the Reign of their Lord the King the Third.

They lost no time after they had their Commission; for within Claud. D* 2. f.
295. a. in Biblioth. Cotton.
underwritten:

The Archbishop of Canterbury.

Bishops of Earls of Barons. London, Gloucester, Hugh de Ver. Salisbury,
Lancaster, William le Marshall. Chichester, Lincoln, Robert Fitz-Roger.
Norwich, Hereford, Hugh Courtenay. St. David's, Pembroke, William Martin.
Landaffe, Richmond, John de Gray. Warwick, Arondell.

The Oath was this, Ibm.
as it is translated from the Old French:

I will make such Ordinance as shall be to the Honor of God, the The Ordainers
Oath*
Honor and Profit of Holy Church, and to the Honor of our Lord the King, and
to the Profit of him and of his People, according to Right and Reason, and
according to the Oath which our Lord the King swear at his Coronation; And that
I will not forbear for any Man Rich or Poor, nor for Love or Hatred, nor any
other thing: But will make such Ordinance in Form abovesaid. Ibm.
And then after the Form of taking of it, it is noted in Latin, That,

Factum fuit, and Receptum praedictum Juramentum, etc. The said [5] N. 52.
Oath was made and taken in the Form aforesaid, according to the King's Will
and special Command, on Friday the 20th of March, in the Year of our Lord 1309.
in the Third Year of the Reign of King Edward, the Son of King Edward, at
Westminster, in the Great Painted Chamber of the said King.

The Ordinances themselves are transcribed from the Parlement-Roll, and Printed
in the Appendix, and were to this Effect, and according to this Sense and
Tenor:

For that the King was Deceived by Evil Counsel, and the Nations of Gascoigne,
Ireland, and Scotland in danger to be lost, and the Realm of England to be
ruined, by Oppressions, Prizes, Takings, and Destructions; therefore Robert
Archbishop of Canterbury, the Bishops, Earls, and Barons, Chosen according to
the King's Commission, did Ordain, to the Honor of God and Holy Church, and
the Honor of the King and his Realm, in manner following:

1. That Holy Church have all its Franchises, as it had before, The Ordinances.
and ought to have.

2. That the King's Peace be kept throughout the Realm, so as any Man may
safely go, come, and stay any where, according to the Law and Usage of the
Realm.

3. It is Ordained for the Payment of the King's Debts, the

4. That the Customs be Received by Persons of the Realm, and not by Strangers,
that the Issues and Profits of them, and all other things, do come entirely
into the Exchequer, and be delivered thence by the Treasurer and Chamberlains
for to maintain his House or Court, and otherwise to his Profit, that the King
may live of his own, without taking any other things

5. That the Merchants, Aliens, and their Goods, be Arrested, while they have
given Account of the Customs, and other Profits and Issues of the Realm, they
received since the Death of King Edward, the Father of this present King,
before the Treasurer and Barons of the Exchequer, and others to be joined with
them by the Ordainers.

6. That the Great Charter be kept in all its Points; and that the Ordainers,
and such as they shall call to their Assistance during their Power, shall
declare all obscure and doubtful Points in it.

7. For that the Crown was so abased and dismembered by diverse Gifts, it was
Ordained, That all the Gifts Granted to Gascoigne, Ireland, Wales, and
Scotland, as in England, should be Repealed, and were declared Repealed,
without any Regranting to those that had them, unless by common Consent in
Parliament; or if any such Gifts or Releases were afterward made, without
Assent of his Baronage the Baronage.

8. For that it had been at other times Ordained, That the Customs, Issues, and
Profits of the Crown, should be received, by the People of the Realm, and not
by Strangers, and paid into the Exchequer, for the Maintenance of the King's
Household, etc. and it had not been done as Ordained; therefore it was Ordained
again it should be so.

9. And for that the King ought not to undertake to make War against any one,
or go out of the Realm without the common Assent of his Baronage, for many
Dangers that might Baronage; and if he should do otherwise, and cause his
Service to be summoned, the Summons should be null and void: And if it should
happen the King should make War against any, or go out of the Kingdom by Assent
of his said Baronage, and that it should be necessary to appoint a Guardian of
the Realm, he by common Assent of his Baronage in Parliament.

10. That there be no Prises or Takings for the King, but such as are due of
ancient Right, that none under color of Purveyance take to the use of the
King, or other, any Corn, Goods, or Merchandise of any one, against his Will,
or with his Will, according to Cap. 19.
Magna Charta, without paying the Hue-and-cry; and if taken, committed to the
next Gaol, and undergoing the Common Law as a Thief and Robber.

11. That no new Customs or Maletolts levied sinee the Coronation of Edward I.
or Inhancement of the old, be taken of Merchants, notwithstanding the Charter
made by him to the Merchant Strangers against the Great Charter, the Franchises
of London, and without the Assent of the Baronage, etc.

12. To the Honor of God and of Holy Church, it was Ordained against such as
should maliciously procure Prohibitions and A^eachments against the Ordinaries
of Holy Church, in case of Correction of Sin, and other things purely
Spiritual, which belonged not to the Lay Court, That the Justices should

13. That because the King had been Guided and Counseled by Evil Counselors,
therefore it was Ordained all Evil Counselors should be removed from the King,
that neither

14. For that many Evils happened by such Cousellors and Ministers, it was
Ordained, That the King should make the Chancellor, Chief Justice of one Bench,
and the other Treasurer, Chancellor, and Chief Baron of the Exchequer, Steward
of his Household, Guardian of the Wardrobe, Comptroler, and a sit Clerk to keep
the Privy Seal, the Justices of the Forest on this side and beyond Trent, the
Escheators on this side Trent, and the Chief Clerk of the Common Bench,
^y(...)be Advice of us Baronage in Parliament; and if it should happen and be
necessary to choose any such Officers when there was no Parliament, then the
King should do it by the Advice he had about him, until there should be a
Parliament: And so it should be for the future, concerning such Ministers when
need required.

15. That all Governors of Ports and Castles upon the

16. And for that the Nations of Gascoigne, Ireland, and Scotland, were in
danger to be lost for want of Good Ministers, it was ordained, That Good and
Sufficient Officers should be placed there according to the Form of the 2d
Article next

17. That Sheriffs be from thenceforth made, by the Chancellor and Treasurer,
and such of the Council as shall be present; and if the Chancellor be not
present, then by the Treasurer, Barons of the Exchequer, and Justices of the
King's Bench, that such should be chosen only as had Lands to answer the King
and People for their Doings, and no others to

18. That the Guardians and Officers of Forests receive just Trials for their
Grieving the People, Oppressions and Misdemeanors, and be removed from their
Offices, notwithstanding they have Grants for their Lives.

19. Directs the manner of Trial of Trespasses of Vert and etc. in the Forests,
according to the Charter of the Forest, and Declaration of King Edward I. which
is there recited.

20. For that by the Examination of Prelates, Earls, Barons, Knights, and other
Good People of the Realm, it was found that Peirs de Gaveston had evilly
Counseled the King, and had enticed him to do ill in diverse manners; That he
cheated his Liege People, so as he despised their Counsels; That he caused the
King to grant Lands, Tenements, and Offices to himself and his Heirs, and
diverse other People, to the great Damage and Injury of the King and his Crown;
That he caused Blank Charters to be sealed with the Great Seal, in deceit and
disinheritance of the King and Crown; That he maintained Robbers and Murderers,
causing the King to pardon them; That King Edward, the Father of the present
King, ordered him to England, and directed that his Son the present King should
for ever forswear his Company; and for several other Reasons, as the Nourishing
of Concord between the King and his People, and the Eschewing of many Perils
and Discords, it was Ordained the said Peirs should for ever be exiled out of
England, Scotland, Wales, and Ireland, and all the King's Dominions either on
this side or beyond the Sea, between that time and the Feast of All Saints next
following Dover assigned him for his Port to pass from, and no other) and if he
should be found in England, or any other part of the King's Dominions beyond
that Day, then he should be treated as an Enemy to the King, Kingdom, and
People.

21. That This Emeric, and those of his Company, were a Society of Merchants by
the name of the Society of Merchants of Friscobald's of Florence, who Rented
the King's Customs of Wool, Woollfells, and Le^ther, and had done so in the
Ed. I. Pa^. 35. Ed ^. M. 17. Dors.
Emery, and those of his Company of Friscomband, should render an Account of
the Treasure he had received, as Quinden or 15 days after St. Michael, or the
Bodies and Goods of that Company which were found in the Power of the King,
should be arrested, and Emery declared and holden the King's Enemy, and used as
such, if he was found in the King's Power on this side or beyond the Sea.

22. For that Monsieur Henry de Beaumont, to the Damage and Man, after it had
been Ordained otherwise by the Ordainers, and other Rents, Lands, Franchises,
and Offices, and procured for others Lands, Rents, Tenements, Franchises, and
Offices against such Ordinance; And for that he gave evil Counsel, contrary to
his Oath, it was Ordained he should be outed the King's Council for ever, and
not to come near the King, unless he were summoned to Parliament, or in War, if
the King would

23. That it was found by the Examination of Prelates, Earls, and Barons, That
the Dame de Verscy had procured the King to give to Sir Henry Beaumont her
Brother, and others, Lands, Franchises, and Offices, to the Damage and
Dishonor of the King, and open Disherision of the Crown; Et ausint procure
Demander horse Lettres Desus la Targe contre ley, and lentention du Roy; It was
Ordained she should go to her House within 15 days after St. Michael next
coming, without ever returning to Court to stay there, and for all these things
aforesaid, and for that the Castle of Bamburgh was Parcel of the Crown, it was
Ordained it should be re-taken into the King's Hands, and should not be given
to her or any other without the Pleasure and good Will of the King.

24. That Acquittances should be allowed for Debts paid, and

25. For that common Merchants and many other People are received to Plead in
the Exchequer Pleas of Debt and Trespass,

26. Also, For that the People are much grieved, that the Marshal and Steward
hold many Pleas which belong not to their Office, it was Ordained, they should
not hold Plea of Frank Tenement or Debt, or Covenant or Contract, nor the
Common Pleas of the People, but only Debts and Trespasses of the Court or
King's House within the Verge, and Contracts

27. For that before that time many Felonies had been committed etc.

28. For that the People were much grieved, that some Persons

29. For that many People are delayed of their Demands in the King's Court ( i.
e. Bench) because the Parties allege they ought not to Answer the Demandants
without the King, and also many of the People grieved by the King's Officers
against Right, of which Grievances Men can have no Remedy but by frequent
Parlements, it was Ordained, That the King hold a Parliament once every year, or
twice if there be need, and in i. e. Petitions) should be delivered and ended
in Parliament according to Law and Reason.

30. That Money shall not be altered without great occasion, and then by common
Advice of the Baronage in Parliament.

31. All Statutes made in Amendment of the Law, and for the Profit of the
People by the King's Ancestors, shall be kept and maintained as before, and
ought to be according to Law and Reason, if they were not contrary to the great
Charter, the Charter of the Forest, or these Ordinances, and if so then to be
null and void.

32. That the Law or Common Right be not delayed by Letters

33. Contains an Interpretation of the Statute of Acton Burnel.

34. Concerns the Case of Appellants or Appealors, and the Sheriffs and Gaolers
Practices thereupon, now almost antiquated.

35. That no Man be appealed of Felonies maliciously, or Outlawed in the
Country where he has no Land or Tenements, nor put to Death or Disherited by
such Suit, or Outlawry, he rendering himself to the King's Prison, etc.

36. For the abatement of Appeals in Suits and Slight Cases,

37. Against Protections for the Delay of Suits, as well in Pleas of Land, as
of Debts and Trespasses, by such as feigned themselves in the King's Service;
That the Plaintiff or Demandant discovering the Deceit, to have Damages awarded
him at

38. Also it was Ordained the great Charter of Franchises, and the Charter of
the Forest of King Henry, the Son of King John, should be holden in all Points,
and if there were any Points doubtful in them, they were to be declared next
Parliament after this by the Baronage, Justices, and other Sages of the Law; and
this was to be done after this manner, because it was not in their power for
want of time.

39. That the Chancellor, Treasurer, Chief Justices, of one

40. Also it was Ordained, That in every Parliament there should be assigned One
Bishop, Two Earls, and Two Barons, to hear and determine all the Complaints of
those that would impeach the King's Ministers whosoever they were, for doing
any thing contrary to these Ordinances, and if all the Parties

41. Also they Ordained, That the Ordinances abovesaid should be maintained and
kept in all their Points, and that the King should cause them to be put under
his great Seal, and sent England, to be published, and firmly observed as well
within Franchises as without, and in like manner the Warden of the Cinque Ports
should be sent to, that he should publish them to be kept through his whole
Jurisdiction.

Then follows the King's Confirmation.
WE these same Ordinances showed to us, and published on Monday The Ordinances
confirmed by the King.
next before the Feast of St. Michael last past, do Agree unto, Accept,
Confirm, Will and Grant for us and our Heirs, That all the said Ordinances, and
every one of them made according to the Form of our Letters Patents, shall be
published, and hereafter firmly observed and kept. In Witness whereof we have
caused to be made these our Letters Patents. Given at London the 5th day of
October, in the 5th year of our Reign.


In the Parliament Roll it is not entered, or any mention made of the
Protestation the King made when he confirmed these Ordinances; Pat. 6 Ed. II.
part. a. M. 20. intus. Ril. Plac. Parl. f. 541.
That is to say, That if they contained any thing to his Damage or Prejudice,
or contrary to the Commission granted to the Ordainers, Eapro non concessis and
non confirmatis haberentur, those things were not granted or confirmed,
reserving The King's Protestation, that if the Ordinances contained any thing
to his damage it should be void.
to himself in that Protestation Power, by good Advice of the Ordainers, and
others, to correct and amend the same, as was more fully contained in a Public
Instrument made of this Protestation.

The Summons to this Parliament, wherein these Ordinances were confirmed, were
Dated at Cl. 4 Ed II. M. 1. Dors. A Parliament summoned to confirm these
Ordinances.
Berwick upon Twede, the 16th June, in the 4th of Ed. II. for it to meet the
Sunday before St. Laurence, or the 10th of August, which was in the 5th year of
his Reign, at London.

In the mean time there Cl. 5 Ed. II. M. 31. Dors. A Quarrel between two Barons.
happened diverse Debates, and a Quarrel between Two Barons, Nich. de Segrave,
and William Marshall, who took Arms on both sides, and engaged their Friends
and Confederates so to do, intending to come to this Parliament Ibm. They
intend to come to the Parliament with a number of Armed Men on either side. The
King forbids them.
The King taking notice it would be in Contempt of him, the Hindering of the
Dispatch of Business, to the Terror of the People, and Disturbance of the
Peace, sent his Prohibition to them, Commanding them upon their Faith and
Homage, and forfeiture of their Lands and Tenements, and all they could
forfeit, they should not come to the Parliament so Armed, or in any other manner
than they and others use to come in the time of his Father. Witness the King
Berwick upon Twede, July 20th.

After the Articles had been confirmed, several of the Prelates, Earls, and
Barons, thought it had been a long Session, and made it their Cl. 5 Ed II. M.
25. Dors. The Continuation or Prorogation of this Parliament.
Request to the King, they might retire into their own Countries, by whose
Advice or Assent he continued the Parliament unto the Friday next after the
Feast of All Saints at Westminster, (Parliamentum illud usque in diem Veneris
proximum post festum omnium sanctorum celebrandum, duximus continuandum) and
gave Leave to some of the Prelates, Earls, and Barons, in the mean time, to go
home, (Et quibusdam de Praelatis, Comitibus and Baronibus, licentiam
concessimus, se interim ad propria divertendi) commanding Ibm.
them to be at the time and place aforesaid; and further commanding the
Archbishop of Canterbury, That he should give notice to the Deans and Priors
of Ibm.
Cathedral Churches, also the Abbots, and Archdeacons, in their own Martin.
Witness the King at London the 8th day of October.

But this short time (as he thought) for the Summons of his Clergy Ibm.
pleased not the Archbishop, and therefore the King, if there might be any
Words in that Writ Ibm.
prejudicial to him and his Church, promised they should be amended in
Parliament, Martin, according to his Discretion. Witness the King at Eltham the
24th day of October.

The Archbishop without doubt took the longest time, and accordingly others of
the Prelates, Earls, and Barons, delayed their coming until the Clergy should
meet, unless there were a further continuance of the Parliament, which I find
not; for on the 28th of November the King issued his Cl. 5 Ed. II. M. 22. Dors.
The great Earls intended to come to Parliament with Horse and Arms. The King
Commands them not to come in such manner.
Writs to Gilbert of Clare Earl of Gloucester and Hertford, Thomas Earl of
Lancaster, Humfrid de Bohun Earl of Hereford and Essex, Adomar de Valencia
Pembroke, Guy Beauchamp Earl of Warwick, and Edmund Earl of Arundel, [7] to
signify to them, he was informed they were coming to his present Parliament,
which was continued at Westminster, with Horse and Arms, after an undue manner,
which would hinder the Dispatch of Business in Parliament, which concerned him
and the State of the Kingdom, affright the People, and disturb his Peace,
wherefore he Commanded them upon their Faith and Homage, not to come in such
manner, but

By reason of the Solemnity of Christmas this Parliament was The Parliament
Dissolved. Another Parliament summoned.
Dissolved, and much Business was left undispatched, and therefore there was
another Parliament summoned to meet concerning that Business at Ib. M. 17. Dors.
Which never met.
Westminster, on the first Sunday in Lent; Westminster the 19th of December.
This Parliament never met, the Sheriffs in all Counties had Ibm. M. 15. Dors.
Command to make Proclamation, That the Knights, Citizens, and Burgesses, or
others, should not come at the time, and to the place appointed, because the
King could not be there, without any continuation of their meeting at other
time and place; Witness the King at York the 20th day of January.

Piers Gaveston quitted the Nation according to the 20th Article Piers Gaveston
quitted the Nation according to the Ordinances.
of the Ordinances, but long he stayed not beyond the Seas, for on the 18th of
January we find him in England with the King at York, and recalled by him,
Append. n. 53. Was recalled by the King.
as having been Banished contrary to the Laws and Vsages of the Kingdom, which
he was bound to maintain by the Oath he made at his Coronation; and he farther
wrote to the Sheriff of Yorkshire, and all Sheriffs in England, That seeing he
had in the Instrument of Exile no other Appellations but of good and Loyal, he
returned at his Commandment, and was ready to stand to Right before him, and
answer to all such as would accuse him, every thing that should be objected
against him, according to the Laws and Vsages aforesaid; Wherefore he should
always esteem him good and Loyal, and commanded them to repute him so, and
publish this Matter through their whole Counties; Given at York the 18th day of
January; And Cl. 5 Ed. II. M. 15. Dors.
two days after, writes to the Sheriffs of those Counties where he had Lands,
to restore

The Lords neglected not this opportunity offered them by this The Lords make
advantage of the recalling Piers Gaveston.
Indulgence of the King, Declaring the Laws and Customs of the Kingdom were
not observed, nor the late made Ordinances regarded. The King to obviate the
Effects of such Reports, issued a Declaration, The K. issues a Proclamation and
Declaration to sati^fi^ them and others.
which he commanded and firmly injoined the Sheriffs of all Counties to
proclaim in full County, in all Cities, Burghs, and Mercate Towns, and other
Places they should think expedient, That it [2] was his great Care, and chief
Desire, his Peace should every where be observed, and that all the Laws and
Customs of the Kingdom used and approved in the time of his Progenitors, and
also all the Ordinances lately made to the Honor of God, and Holy Church, and
his own, to the profit of him and the People, which were not to the Damage or
Prejudice of him, or his Crown, or contrary to the Laws and Customs abovesaid,
should be maintained and kept. Witness the King at York, the 26th of January.

And not long after, fearing Disturbance from the Lords, he wrote Pat. 5 Ed. 2.
Part 2. M. 22. The K. writes to the Mayor of London, etc. to secute the City,
etc.
to the Mayor, Aldermen, and Common Council of London, to secure the City, so
as by the Meetings of the Prelates, Earls, Barons, or any others, there might
happen no Hurt or Danger to him, or the City. Witness the King at York, the 8th
of February.

This Declaration and Order, availed not, and therefore the The Declaration
avails not
King (as he said) resolved to Preserve the Rights of his Crown and Dignity
Royal, the Peace and Tranquillity of Holy Church, and the whole People
committed to his Charge in all things. And to this Purpose Claus. 5 Ed. 2. M.
13. Dors.
wrote to all Sheriffs (the nearest to the Place King at York, the 24th Day of
February.

This way also proving ineffectual, he intended to proceed amicably with the
dissatisfied Bishops and Barons, and according to the Power reserved in the
Protestation he made, when he confirmed the Ordinances, he appointed Append. N.
55. A. D. 1311. 5 Ed. 2. The King appoints Commissioners to Treat with the
Ordainers about correcting the Ordinances, according to his Protestation.
Commissioners, the Bishop of Norwich, Guy Terre, John de Crumbewell, Hugh de
Audeley, William Deyncourt, Henry Spigurnell, Henry le Scroop, Knights, (the
two last Justices) and Thomas de Cobham, Robert de Pikering, Walter de Thorp,
Gilbert de Middleton, John Fraunceys, and Andrew Briggs, Clercs, or as many of
them as could be present, to Treat with the Prelates, Earls, and Barons, who
made the Ordinances, (upon which were grounded all the Pretenses of Discontent
and Quarrelling with the King) to Correct and Reform by their good Advice, all
such York, the 8th Day of March.

Those Prelates, Earls, and Barons, were then at Pat. 6 Ed. 2. Part 1. M. 20.
intus. Ry-Plac. Parl. f. 541.
London, and excusing themselves for Treating concerning the Ordinances, in the
absence of the King, sent him this Answer, Ibm. The Ordainers at present
decline a Treaty with the King's Commissioners in his absence.
That in his presence, whenever he pleased to call them together, they would
Treat upon the Ordinances. and should be ready to do all things according to
the Protestation he made, and also according to the Protestation they made, at
the time of publishing those Ordinances.

In the mean time, these Ordainers pursued their Designs, both open and secret,
which were much promoted by a Trokelow, f. 194. b. Col. 2. and f. 195. a. Col.
1. Walls. f. 100. n. 20. 30 The Speech of Henry E. of Lincoln before his Death.
Speech our Historians report to be made by Henry Earl of Lincoln on his
Deathbed, to Thomas Earl of Lancaster, who had married Alice his Daughter and
Heir, That God had blessed him with greater Riches then any Nobleman in
England, and that therefore he was He saw the Church of England that was wont
to be free, now brought into Servitude by the Oppressions of the Romans, and
unjust Exactions so often How Holy Church was oppressed, etc.
Extorted by Kings; (Cernis jam occulata fide, Quod Ecclesia Anglicana quae
solebat esse libera, per oppressiones Romanorum, and injustas Exactiones a
Regibus toties Extortas nunc facta est ancilla) and the People also which were
wont to enjoy many Liberties, were brought into the same Condition, by diverse
Tallages and Vexations Adjuring him by the Blessing of God and his own, That
when he had an Opportunity, he should Free and Defend the Church and People
from such Oppressions, for the Honor of God, That he should pay all due Honor
and Reverence to the King that was his Lord, yet cause him to remove from his
Court Evil Counselors and Strangers, (and ut malos Consiliarios and
Alienigenas a Curia sua amoveat) and effectually to observe the Tenor of Magna
Charta, and other Articles, ( i. e. the Ordinances) Demanded by, Guy Earl of
Warwick, who better understood them then any other. Having ended his Speech,
says Ut supra. N. 50. 50. Thomas Earl of Lancaster and his Adherents resolve to
Relieve Holy-Church, etc.
Walsingham, he took his Leave of the World, and after his Funeral, Thomas Earl
of Lancaster with his Adherents, Humfrid de Bohun Earl of Hereford, Aymer or
Adomar de Valentia Earl of Pembroke, Guy Beauchamp Earl of Warwick, and the
Earl of Arundel, and other Barons which the Warren and Surry, who enclining
toward the King, was brought off to the Party by the Archbishop of Canterbury,
undertook to Relieve Holy Mother Church from Oppression, and recover the due
Liberty of the Kingdom.

Thomas Earl of Lancaster Ibm. The Earl of Lancaster chosen General of the
Party.
was chosen their Captain or General, who by common Agreement sent to the King
then at York, Beseeching him either to Deliver Piers Gaveston to them, or as it
Ibm. f. 101. ^. 1. a. Who demand of the King to deliver Gaveston to them, etc.
He took little notice of their Request.
The King took small notice of their Supplications, left York, and went to
Newcastle upon Tine, where he continued until the Feast of the Ascension, the
Queen being at Tinmouth. The Lords Ibm. n. 10. The Lords Arm. The K goes to
Newcastle with Gaveston.
Arm, raise an Army, and with all speed march toward Newcastle, not that they
would offer Injury, or create Trouble to their Lord the King, but only take
Piers Gaveston, and judge him according to the Laws made by common Agreement,
(ut ipsum petrum captum, secundum leges communiter editas (i. e. the
Ordinances) judicarent. When the King heard the Barons Ibm. The Barons march
thither with an Army. The K. goes to Tinmouth. From thence to Scardeburgh by
Ship.
were coming with an Army, he with Peter fled swiftly to Tinmouth; and when
they had possessed themselves of Newcastle, forthwith he again with Gaveston
went into a Ship; and though the Queen then great with Child, beseeched him
with Tears to stay, he took no Scardeburgh, commanding the Soldiers in the
Castle to Victual it forthwith, and protect him, while he went toward
Warwickshire. Fol. 195. b. Col. 2.
Trokelow writes, That the Earl of Lancaster, before he left Newcastle to
pursue the King and Piers de Gaveston, sent to the Queen then at
Tinemouth-Castle, (and in The Earl of Lancaster sends to Comfort the Queen,
whom the K. had left at Tinmouth.
great Passion that the King would not stay with her) by Trusty Messengers to
comfort her, Faithfully promising, That he would not give over his pursuit
until he had removed Peter from the King, and Ne forte indignationem Regis
causa ipsius incurreret.

The Lords Walsingh. f. 101. n. 10. The Lords besiege Scardeburgh Castle.
having notice of his being Shipped off, seized upon his Horses, and other
Goods he had left at Newcastle, causing them to be valued, and kept secure, and
then marched with what speed they could to Scardehurgh, and besieged it; Ibm.
N. 20.
but the Earl Lancaster finding no Opposition from the Country, retired with
his Forces, that he might not be burthensom to the adjacent Parts, and left the
Earls of Pembroke and Warren to take in the Castle, who in a short time so
wearied the Guards within by Assaults, that they were not able to Defend it.
Ibm. Piers Gaveston renders himself. Upon condition to stand to the Judgment of
the Barons.
Then Piers seeing no remedy rendered himself upon condition to stand to the
Judgment of the Barons, and that he might once more speak with the King. Ibm.
The K. desired Piers his Life might be saved.
The King hearing Peter was taken, desired he might speak Great Men in all
things. Ibm. N. 30.
The Earl of Pembroke laying hold of this Promise, persuaded the Barons to
grant the King's Request, promising under pain of losing all his Lands to keep
him safe, while he had spoken with the King, and then to restore him to the
Barons at a Day and Place prefixed, Ibm.
intending to have carried him to Wallingford; in his way thither at Dadington,
(now Deddington Oxfordshire, four or five Miles from Banbury) the Earl left him
to the Care of his Servants, while he went to lodge with his Lady at a
Neighboring Place, Ibm. N. 40.
which the Earl of Warwick having notice of, came with a great Multitude, and
noise of Armed Men that Night, and took him from the Servants, and carried him
to his Castle. It being then doubtful what to do with him, whether they should
carry him to the King, or put him to Death, a certain Ibm.
Cunning Man, and of great Advice, answered, (Quidem vir astutus and profundi
Consilii respondit) That it was to no purpose, having been at such Charge and
Trouble to take him, to hazard the losing of him, or to seek him again, Ibm. N.
50.
adding, That it were much better that he should suffer Death, then a War
should be raised in the Kingdom; when all assenting to this Advice, they took
him out of Prison, and carried him to an Ascent or Hill about a Mile North-East
of Warwick, called The Lords put Piers Gaveston to Death without Judgment.
Black-Low, and there cut off his Head, on the Knighton, Col. 2533. lin. 5.
day of Gervaise and Protasius, the Martyrs, or 19th of June. Sir William
Dugdale Baronage, Tom. 2. f. 44 Col. 1.
from the MSS. K. 84. 96. b. in the Bodleian Library, reports the Earls of
Lancaster, Hereford, and Arundel being at this Consultation. Thus Walsingham;
But Part of this Story is otherwise upon Record.

The King Append. N. 56. A. D. 1312.
wrote to John de Moubray, Guardian of the County City of York, That Henry de
Percy late by his Writing or Instrument, before him in his Presence, upon
Forfeiture of Life and Limb, Lands and Tenements, and all he could forfeit,
undertook to preserve and keep safe from Damage Peter de Gaveston Piers
Gaveston not truly dealt with upon his Surrender.
then Earl of Cornwall, for a certain time, according to certain Terms and
Conditions, upon which he rendered himself to the said Henry, and others
without the Castle of Scardeburgh, and that Henry after the said Peter had been
Killed before the Time, and contrary to the Terms and Conditions aforesaid,
came not to him, but withdrew himself, by which he made himself suspected, and
therefore commanded him to take him without Delay, and bring him to him
wherever he was. Witness the King at London, the 31st Day of July, in the 6th
of his Reign.

The Walsing. F. 101. N. 50. and f. 102. l. 1. etc. The Lords demanded the
Confirmation and Execution of the Ordinances.
Great Men having obtained their Purpose, against Gaveston, sent to the King,
proudly Demanding ( Proterve Postulantes) their Ordinances to be Confirmed, and
put in Execution, Threatening, That if it was not done speedily, they would come
and force him to do it; Ibm.
and forthwith they united their Forces, and Quartered themselves in the
Country about Dunstable, he being then Ibm.
at London.

Upon this Occasion undoubtedly it was, as also upon occasion of an Answer to
the like Message about Five Months before, as Append. N. 57. The K. sent to the
Chief Ordainers to come to his Presence, and treat about reforming the
Ordinances.
John de Benstede, one of his Justices, to the Earls of Lancaster, Hereford,
and Warwick, who were at the making of those Ordinances, to be with him at
London or Westminster, on the Sunday next after St. Bartholomew, to Treat in
his Presence about Correcting and Reforming the Ordinances, if any thing should
be found in them Injurious or Prejudicial to him; and that he should enjoin
them by their Faith and Homage, that they should not come with Horse and
August, at Canterbury.

Notwithstanding this Notice and Inhibition, they came not, but marched about
the Country with Horse and Arms, Encouraging They came not, but marched about
the Country.
the People to join with them, and therefore the King enjoined Append. N. 58.
Encouraging the People to join with them.
certain Commissioners, (reciting the most Material Part of his Precept, as
above, to John de Benstede.) And seeing they had not come to him as then
Ordered and Enjoined, or sent any one to answer for them; and understanding the
said Earls, assigned the same Comissioners, to forbid the Earls, and every one
The K. forbids the Earls to come near him with Horse and Arms.
of them, by the Faith and Homage they ought him, That they should not with
Horse and Arms come nearer to him, and if the Earls would not obey the
Prohibition, then to forbid all and every one coming with them, to proceed
further, under the same Forfeiture. Witness the King at Westminster, the Third
Day of September.

The Bishops with the Earl of Gloucester, perceiving this Walsingh. F. 102. N.
10.
Dissension would be dangerous to the Church and Kingdom, used all their
Endeavors for a Peace: Ibm.
They met at St. Albans with the Pope's Nuncios, sent by him as Mediators
between the King and Lords. These Nuncios, Ibm. Walsingham's false Report of
the Treaty between the K and Barons.
says Walsingham, sent certain St. Albans to Whethemsted three or four Miles
distant, where the Barons then lay with their Army, with the Pope's Letters,
persuading them to Peace; and that they would not receive them, saying, They
were not Learned, but bred up to Arms, and therefore cared not to see them:
Then the Messengers desired to know if they would speak with the Nuncios, who
would willingly come to them to Propound and Discourse with them about a
Project of Peace; This says the Historian, they utterly refused, sending Ibm.
n. 20.
The Nuncios affrighted at this Return, Early in the Morning made haste to
London, after they had been at St. Albans above a Month, and that then the
Bishops and Earl of Gloucester, by great Industry made the Peace. But this
cannot be true; for the Record of the Articles of Peace is in this Form.

Ceo est le Claus. 6. E. 2. M. 8. Dors. Riley's Placit. Parl. f. 538. A. D.
1312. The Treaty of Peace between the K. and Barons.
Tretiz de la Pees, etc. This is the Treaty of Peace upon certain Displeasures
the King has conceived against the Earls of Lancaster, Hereford, and Warwick,
and other Barons and Great Men of his Realm, made and accorded, before the
Honorable Father, Monsieur Ernald by the Grace of GOD, by the Title of St.
Prisca Priest-Cardinal, Monsieur Arnold Bishop of Poicters, sent into England
by our Holy Father the Pope, Monsieur King Philips Son, and Brother to Queen
Isabel.
Lewis France Earl of Eureux, the Earls of Gloucester and Richmond; By the Earl
of Hereford, Monsieur Robert de Clifford, and Monsieur John Botetorte, sent to
London, with sufficient power to Do, Treat and Agree on the Part of the Earls,
etc, and by the Earl of Pembroke, Monsieur Hugh le Dispencer, and Monsieur
Nicholas de Segrave, Deputed by the King, to hear the said Treaty, and Report
it to him in the manner following.

1. First, That the Earls and Barons shall come before the King The Articles of
Peace between the K. and Barons.
in Westminster Hall, and with great Humility on their Knees make their
Submission, and Swear if he will have them, That what they did, for which he
thought ill of, and intended to punish them, was not done in Despite of him,
and they shall humbly pray his Forgiveness, and receive it with a good Will,
and shall restore all that was taken at Newcastle upon Tine, or other where,
from Pier de Gaveston whatever it was, viz. all his Jewels, Horses, and other
things whatever etc. 2. The Second Article contains the Statute for the
Security of the Earls and Barons, their Adherents and Allies, which was to have
been passed in the next Parliament to be holden on the Third Sunday in Lent,
with this Title, Old Statutes printed. A. D. 1540.
Ne quis occasionetur pro Morte Petri de Gaveston: That no Man be prosecuted
for the Death of Peter Gaveston; and further, That the King should Release and
Quit the Earls, Barons, their Adherents, Friends and Allies, all Rancor,
Displeasure, Actions, Obligations, Complaints, and Accusations, which arose by
the Occasion of Peter Gaveston, since he married his Dear Companion Isabel
Queen of England, whether it were for the Taking, Detaining, or Death of him,
or the Seizing any Town or Castle, or Besieging of them, or for bearing Arms,
or imprisoning any Persons. 3. Also it was agreed, That if this Security
pleased the Earls and Barons, and that they would not come to Parliament in
their proper Persons, they should send their Proxeys, with sufficient Power to
receive and consent to that Security, and also with sufficient Power to consent
to a Security to be made in that Parliament, for the Adherents to, and Receivers
of Peter Gaveston, which security was treated of and agreed, and there recited,
being the same with the Ibm.
Statute having Ne quis occasionetur pro Reditu Petri de Gaveston: That no Man
be prosecuted for the Return of Peter de Gaveston. 4. Also the Treaters agree,
That in the next Parliament there should be Provision made by the common Assent
of the Prelates, Earls, and Barons, that in all Parlements, Treaties, and other
Assemblies in England, from that time forward for ever, Men should come without
Force, and without Arms, peaceably to the Honor of the and the three Treaters
promised to use their utmost Endeavor with the Earls of Lancaster and Warwick,
by themselves or Poxey's, to consent to this Provision: And further it was
ordered, That no Business should be propounded in this Parliament, but the
Security's, and this Provision, nor any come with Arms, before the Submission
was made, ( which was certainly Done, or the Acts of Security had never passed)
and then they might Treat of other Parliament Matters, as there might be
occasion. 5. Also the Treaters promised, That after this Reconciliation was
made, they would do what in them lay, with their whole Endeavor with their
Peers, That the King should have an agreeable Aid of the whole Realm, for his
War with Scotland. 6. Also the three Treaters complained, That the King since
the Conduct given for this Treaty to the Lords and their Adherents, had caused
Griffin de la Pole, to be seized, and also of Monsieur. Fouk Lestrange; There
were to be two Justices not suspected of Partiality, appointed by the King, to
Examine the Matter, and do them right. 7. Also that the Goods of Monsieur Henry
de Percy, which were seized by the King, be restored by Pledges or Sureties
until the next Parliament. 8. Also it was agreed on behalf of the King, That all
Men might safely Pass and Repass through the Kingdom of England, or elsewhere,
for the Dispatch of their Business under his Protection, they doing or
receiving no Wrong: This Conduct and Security to continue until Pentecost next
coming, and of this, the King to grant Letters under the Great Seal, To the
Earls, Barons, and their Adherents.
The Collation of this Indenture was Made and Read in the Year of Grace 1312.
on the Wednesday next before Christmas, in the Cardinal's Chamber at London, in
the Presence of the Cardinal, the Bishop of Poicters, the Bishop of Worcester,
the Earl of Pembroke, and many others: In Witness whereof one Part of John
Waleweyn, and Michael de Meldon, to be carried to the Earls and Barons.

The two Securities mentioned in this Treaty, were not passed into Statutes, as
was agreed in the Second Article in the Parliament summoned on the 20th of
January, in the Sixth of this King, to meet on the Third Sunday in Lent, nor in
the next, May next following, to meet Fifteen days after the Nativity of St.
John Baptist, but in that which was A. D. 1313.
summoned on the 26th of July, in the Seventh of his Reign, to meet on Sunday
next after the Feast of St. Matthew the Apostle, as may be seen in the Old
Statutes Printed 1540.

Robert Winchelsey, Archbishop of Canterbury, lived to see the Articles Robert
Winchelsey A Bishop of Canterbury dies
of this Treaty finished, but Dying on the Histor. Sacra. f. 17. By whose
Persuasion the E. of Lancaster opposed the King.
11th of May Persuasion and Encouragement the Earl of Lancaster and Adherents
opposed the King in his Folly. Ran. Higden. Lib. 7. Cap. 41.
Thomas Lancastriae ipsius Roberti (speaking of this Archbishop) animatus
hortatu, cum sibi adherentibus per plures annos conatus est Regiis obsistere
ineptiis.

The great Opinion the Earl had of this Archbishop, or thinking it a great
Advantage for a Miracle-worker and Saint, to have been Append. N. 59. The Earl
of Lancaster wrote to the Prior and Convent of Canterbury for a Particular of
the Miracles wrought by Winchelsey.
Prior and Convent of Canterbury, praying them as he had done before, to give
Testimony some notorious Way, and by their Letters Patents, what Miracles God
had wrought by Robert Archbishop of Canterbury that last was; and what he had
wrought as well in his Lifetime, as after his Death, and to inform him of the
Miracles, which were hanged up in writing before his Tomb.

Taking advantage of these Dissentions and Controversies in England, Robert
Brus Buchan. Hist. f. 80. b. A. D. 1313. Robert Bruce taking advantage of the
Dissentions in England, reduces a great Part of Scotland to his Obedience.
reduced the most Part of Scotland to his Obedience, and took in most of the
English Garrisons, some by Force, others upon Terms, some one Year, some
another. Having taken Edinburgh, he sent his Brother Edward to besiege Sterling
Castle, in which was Philip Mowbray a Stout and Provident Governor, who taking
notice of the Success of the Scots, had exceedingly Fortified and Victualed it.
Edward Brus after some Ibm. n 80.
That if the English did not Relieve the Castle within a Year from the Day of
the Treaty, it should be Delivered to the Scots; and that the Garrison should
have safe Conduct, to go whither they would, with all their Goods.

The next Spring, the Scots came into the Marches or Borders, A. D. 1314. 7.
Ed. II.
and made great Ravages and Slaughters there; and to suppress their
Insolences, secure the Borders from their Cruelties, and drive them back, the
King summoned the Militia to Claus. 7 Ed. II. M. 8. Dors. The Earls of
Lancaster,
meet him at Newcastle upon Tine 3 Weeks after Easter, and march from thence
against his Enemies; and all that ought him Service came: But the Trokelow, f.
198. a. col. 2. and Walls. f. 104. n. 50. Warwick and Arondel, refuse
Earls of Lancaster, Warwick, Warren, and Arondel, refused their Service,
because the King had not effectually observed, or put the Ordinances in due
execution without them. The King Ib. f. 105. lin. 1. etc. to serve the King
against the Scots. The Battle of Bannocks-bourn.
marched with a numerous and glorious Army to the Relief of Sterlin-Castle,
where he received a mighty Overthrow on the Eve and Day of St. John Baptist, or
24th of June. In this Battle (which is called the Battle of Strivelin, or
Bannocks-Bourn, because Fought near Sterlin, and by the Brook or River Bannock)
was slain Gilbert Earl of Clare, and several other Noblemen, Knights and
Banerets, and a great number of ordinary Men, and many of all sorts taken
Prisoners, the King hardly escaping. The Particulars of this Fatal Fight may be
seen in most of our Historians. Froys. vol. 1. c. 6. f. 2. a. col. 2.
There was great murmuring after this Defeat, the Barons, whereof the Earl of
Lancaster was Chief, put it upon Hugh Spenser the Younger, that by his Advice
the Field was lost, and that he was favorable to the King of Scots.

In the Parliament holden at Westminster, eight days after St. Hilary, January,
in the 8th of his Reign ( per Petitionem [2] Rot. Parl, n. 35, 36. A. D. 1314.
Archiepiscoporum, Episcoporum, Comitum, Baronum, and aliorum de Communitate
Regni coram nobis and consilio nostro exhibitam, etc.) by a Petition of the
Archbishops, Bishops, Earls, Barons, and others of the Community of the
Kingdom, exhibited to the King and his Council, That Oxen, Cows, Muttons, Hogs,
Geese, Hens, Capons, Chickens, Pigeons, and Eggs, were intolerably dear; it was
enacted That the best Ox not fed with Grain, should be sold for 16 s. and no
more; and if he were fed with Corn, then for 24 s. at most. The best live fat
Cow for 12 s. a fat Hog of two Years old for 3 s. 4 d. a fat Wether or Mutton
unshorn for 20 d. and shorn for 14 d. a fat Goose for 2 d. ob. a good and fat
Capon for 2 d. a fat Hen for 1 d. two Chickens for 1 d. four Pigeons for 1 d.
and twenty four Eggs for 1 d. And those that would not sell these Things at
these Rates, should forfeit them to the King.

This Parliament Append. n. 60. The People in Stafford and Shropshire refuse to
pay a 20th part Granted by Parliament.
gave the King a 20th Part of their Goods, or Movables, which in Stafford and
Shropshire some dissatisfied People refused to pay, and hindered the Collectors
appointed by the King from gathering of it, Ibm. The Pretenses of their Denial.
pretending it was granted upon certain Conditions, to wit, That he should
cause the Great Charter of the Liberties of England, the Charter of the Forest,
the Ordinances made by the Prelates, Earls, and Barons, and the Ibm.
Therefore that he might be thoroughly satisfied about the Nature of the Action,
and have the Names of the Actors, he appointed one of his Clerks, with the
Collectors, Commissioners appointed to enquire about their Pretenses.
to make enquiry by themselves, and if it were needful by the Oaths of lawful
Men of those Parts, of all Particulars concerning the same, and certify him
distinctly of them.

In the 9th of his Reign, in the Parliament at Lincoln Rot. Parl. n. 1. A. D.
1315. The cause of Summons to Parliament deferred to be declared, because the
Earl of Lancaster and other Great Men not come.
, holden 15 Days after St. Hilary, the King deferred the declaring the Business
of the Parliament, because Thomas Earl of Lancaster and Great Men were not then
come; according to whose Advice he intended to proceed; yet on Ibm. The
Chancellor and Justices of both Benches enjoined ^ob^ing in their Briefs of
such Causes ^s could not be determined ou^ of Parliament. The Scots disobedient*
to K. Ed. II.
Wednesday next after the Quinden of Hilary, the Chancellor, Treasurer, and
Justices of both Benches, were enjoined to bring in Briefs of such Matters
depending before them in their several Places, which out of Parliament could not
be determined, that here in this Session they might do in such Cases what ought
to be done.

On the 12th of February, being Thursday, the Earl of Lancaster and other Great
Men being present, the cause of Calling the Parliament was declared, being for
their Advice and Assistance against the King's Enemies the Scots, who had
possessed themselves of the greatest part of that Nation, and disowned their
Obedience, Ibm.
beseeching and enjoining the Prelates, Noblemen, and other his Liege Subjects
being there, to advise and assist him: Supplicans and injungens Prelatis,
Proceribus, and caeteris Fidelibus, and Subditis suis ibidem existentibus, ut
sibi in praemissis consulerent, and facerent sibi auxilium oportunum.

After this it was agreed Ibm.
, That the Prelates and Noblemen ( Prelati and Proceres) should meet on the
morrow being Friday, to treat of Parliament Business, they met that Day, and
discoursed of many things; and it was agreed and commanded by the King (
Concordatum fuit and per Regem preceptum) they should meet the Ibm. The Prices
of Victuals revoked.
when they agreed the Proclamation about the Prices of Oxen, Cows, Sheep,
Geese, Hens, and other Victuals set the last Parliament, should be revoked, and
that they should be sold as formerly at reasonable Rates. The reason of this,
says Walsingham, was Hist. f. 107. n. 20.
because after the Price set in Parliament, they were much dearer.

On Tuesday following the King, by the Bishop of Norwich, promised Rot. Par.
ib. n. 1. The King promises to observe the Ordinances.
observe all the Ordinances formerly made by the Prelates and Great Men ( per
Prelatos and Proceres) and also the Perambulations of the Forest made in his
Father's time, saving to the King his Reasons against them ( salvis Regi
Rationibus suis contra Perambulationes) and thereof Writs were made accordingly.

On the Friday next coming Ibm. Soldiers how raised and paid against the Sc^^s.
the Great Men and Community of the Kingdom ( Magnates and Communitas Regni)
Granted to Scotland, of every Town in the Kingdom one Stout Footman, except in
Cities and Burghs, and the King's Demeasns; and these Footmen were to be armed,
and furnished with Swords, Bows, Arrows, Slings, Lances, and other Armor fit
for Footmen, at the Charge of the Towns, and their Expenses to be paid until
they came at the Place of Rendezvous, and their Wages for 60 Days after and no
longer, if the King's Service required it, at 4 d. the day; and Market Towns
that were further able to be charged with Men, were so to be charged, the King
promising to give his Letters to the Great Men and Community of the Kingdom
(Magnatibus and Communitati Regni) and to their Heirs, That this Grant should
be no Precedent, nor drawn into Example for the future.

The same Day the King, by Advice of the Prelates and (Consilio Praelatorum and
Procerum) ordered the Ibm.
whole Service due to him, i. e. all the Horse of England, to be Summoned for
this cause, to be at Newcastle upon Tine 15 Days after Midsummer.

The Citizens, Burgesses, and Knights Ibm. n. 2.
(Cives, Burgenses, and Milites de Comitatibus qui venerunt ad Parliamentum)
then Granted Ibm.
Civium, Burgensium, and Hominum de Civitatibus, Burgis, and de Dominicis
Regis) of Citizens, Burgesses, and Men of Cities, Burghs, and the King's
Demeasns, which they had at Michaelmas then last past.

On Shrove-Tuesday in the Parliament, Ibm. n 3. The King had a sincere good will
toward the Earl of Lancaster and other Great Men.
the Bishop of Norwich on behalf of the King, moved the Earl of Lancaster to
put away all (erga ipsum and alios Proceres Regni sui) and held them to be his
Faithful Liege-men, and told him the King desired to have him the Chief of his
Council, requesting him Ibm.
(ex part Domini Regis and Praelatorum ac Procerum Regni ibidem existentium)
on behalf of the King, Prelates, and Great Men there present, to take upon him
to assist and advise in the Affairs of King and Kingdom. The Earl thanked the
King, and (humiliter supplicavit quod ipse possit deliberare) and then answer.
Which he did in a very short time, and was Sworn of the King's Council in the
Form following:

Whereas our Lord Ibm. n. 4.
King Edward, by the Grace of God King of England, has, with the Prelates,
Earls, and Barons of the Land, Ibm. this number only in French upon the Roll.
avesques Prelates, Countes, e Barons de son Terre) in full Parliament requested
his dear Cousin, Monsieur Thomas Earl of Lancaster, that he would be Chief of
his Council, in all Great and Weighty He requested the Earl to be Chief of his
Council.
Affairs touching himself and his Realm, with other Prelates, Earls, and
Barons, which may between the King and himself take care, that he may be for
the Profit of him and the Realm; The said Earl, for the great Love he had for
his Lord the King, and for the Common Profit of the Kingdom, and the Ordinances
Ibm. The Earl complies upon such Terms as he might Govern the Kingdom.
(qil ad sur merci enterement Grante a teniz) which he had upon favor entirely
granted to observe, and the right Laws to maintain in all Points, and in hope
to make Amendments in such things as had been ill done in his Court and the
Estate of his Realm, did grant to be of the King's Council, with the Prelates,
Earls, Barons; so as at the Hour the King shall not do according to his
Directions, and others of his Council concerning the Matters of his Court and
Kingdom; after such things have been shown him, and he will not be Governed by
the Council of him and others, the Earl, without Evil Will, Challenge, or
Discontent, may be discharged from the Council; and that the Business of the
Realm concerning him, shall not be done or performed, without the Assent of him
and the other Prelates, Earls, and Barons, which shall be ordained, or
appointed to advise him, Ibm.
(saunz Assent de luy and des autres Prelatz, Countes, and Barous qi de luy
Conseiller serront ordenetz) And if any of the Prelates, Earls, and Barons,
shall advise the King or do other thing which shall not be for the Profit of
him and his Realm, then at the next Parliament, by the Advisement of the King
and his Friends, Ibm.
(solone lavisement nostres Seigneur le Roy and le seon) they shall be removed;
and so it shall be from Parliament to Parliament, as to them and every of them,
according to the Faults found in them. In Witness whereof, this Bill was to be
entered on the Parlement-Roll; ceste Bille enter en Rouelle de Parliament. And
then it follows,

Billae Ibm. The Instrument by which he was made Chief of the Council, entered
upon the Parliament-Roll
predicta formam continens supra scriptam, liberata fuit Willielmo de Ayremin
Clerico, etc. The foresaid Bill containing the Form above written, was
delivered to William Ayremin Clerc, by the hands of the Lords Walter of
Norwich, and Bartholomew de Badlesmer, commanding the said William, by Order of
the King, to inroll it Word for Word.

Over the Army abovementioned, raised by the Parliament Scots, the Earl of
Lancaster was made Rot. Scot. Ed. 2. M. 6. The Earl of Lancaster made General
of the Army against the Scots, and Lieutenant of Scotland.
General, and the King's Lieutenant in Scotland; but what great things he did
with this Army, or by his Lieutenancy, it appears not in any History I have met
with.

Next Year the Pope sent two Rot. Claus. 10 Edw. II. M. 2. A. D. 1317. Two
Cardinals sent to make Peace between Engl. and Scotland,
Cardinals into England, Ganselin by the Title of the Saints Marcellin, and
Peter Priest Cardinal, and Lucas by the Title of St. Mary in the Broad-way,
Deacon Cardinal to make Peace between the Two Kingdoms of England and Scotland,
and reconcile the Earl of Lancaster to the King. c. 59 4. D. 50 and the King
and E. or Lanc.
Sir Tho. de la Moor says, they were made Friends in a Plain near Leicester,
and that they embraced and kissed each other. f. 110. n. 20.
Walsingham says, Peace was made between them upon certain Conditions; and that
not long after the King unjustly brake them. They Walls. f. 109. n. 50. and f.
111. n. 40. d la Moor, ut supra. They Excommunicate Rob. Brus, and put Scotland
under Interdict.
both say, these Cardinals brought with them the Pope's Bulls, by which they
Excommunicated Robert Brus, and put the Kingdom Scotland under Interdict, for
their Defection from, and Disobedience to the King of England, unless he and
they submited to him.

This Year Ibm.
de la Moor says Robert Brus manfully and by force took Berwick, killing none
that would yield. f. 111. n 50. A. D. 1318.
Walsingham reports it was betrayed by the Governor Peter Spalding, and sold
to the Scots, to the great Disturbance of the King.

Neither King nor Kingdom of Scotland valued much this Excommunication Neither
Rob. Brus nor the Kingdom of Scotland valued the Excommunication or Interdict.
and Interdict, or at least Robert Brus's Friends, or those of his Party, never
considered or regarded it; for in the 11th of this King, the Year following, he
summoned a Parliament to meet on the morrow of Holy Trinity at Lincoln, Rot.
Claus. 11 Ed. II. M. 3. Dors. The Scots invade England.
which he revoked for this reason, That his Enemies and Rebels the Scots had
invaded England, and come into Yorkshire, commiting many Murders, Plundering,
Wasting, and Burning the Country, so as he resolved suddenly to march against
them with an Army to restrain their Incursions, and bring them to a Submission;
and therefore the Parliament not to meet.

According to this Resolution, in Autumn this year De la Moor, f. 595. l. 1,
etc. The King besieged Berwick.
the King Berwick, the Scots on the other side of the Country invaded England,
spoiling, wasting, and burning, as far as York, Ibm. and Walsingh. Hist. f.
112. n. 20, 30. A Truce with the Scots for Two years.
which caused the King to raise the Siege of Berwick, and consented to a Truce
for Two years.

In the Twelfth of this King, the Earl of Lancaster Governed and Directed all
things; Append. n. 61.
To him certain Prelates, Earls, and Barons, by the Will of the King, and
Assent of many Great Northampton, went to Discourse, and Treat about the Honor
and Profit of the King, and Realm; and it was agreed between them, That
Bishops, Earls, and Barons should remain with him, to Advise him in such
Matters as concerned him until his next Parliament; and concerning this and
other Matters an Indenture was made in the Form following.

This Ibm. The Indenture of Agreement between the King, the Earl of Lancaster,
and other Great Men.
Indenture Witnesses, That the Honorable Fathers, the Archbishop of Dublin,
the Bishops of Ely, Norwich, and Chichester, the Earls of Pembroke, and
Arundel, Monsieur Roger de Mortimer, Monsieur John Somery, Sir Bartholomew de
Badlesmere, Monsieur Ralph Basset, and Monsieur John Botetourt, by the Will and
Assent of the King, have Discoursed with the Earl of Lancaster concerning the
things touching the Profit of himself and the Realm in the Form following; To
wit, That the Bishops of Norwich, and Worcester, the Earls of Pembroke,
Richmond, Hereford, and Arundel, Sir Hugh de Courteny, Sir Roger de Mortimer,
Sir John de Segrave, Sir John de Gray, and one of the Banerets of the Earl of
Lancaster, which he shall Name, should remain with the King for one quarter of
a year until the next Parliament, and that Two Bishops, One Earl, One Baron, and
One Baneret of the Earl of Lancaster's, at least, should always be with him,
and that all considerable Matters that might or ought to be done out of
Parliament, should be done by their Assent, otherwise to be void, and amended in
Parliament by the Award of the Peers; and such as should remain with the King
Quarterly, shall be chosen and assigned out of them, and others in Parliament,
to Act, and Advise the King as aforesaid. And the abovesaid Prelates, Earls,
and Barons, by the Will and Assent of the King, undertook, That he should
Release and Acquit the Earl of Lancaster, (ses gentz, and ses meignees) his
People, Followers, or Retinue, or as now those of his Party, of all manner of
Felonies and Trespasses against the Peace, until the day of St. James this
year; and that the Charters of Release and Acquittance should be plain and
absolute without Condition, and if better Security for them might be found at
the next Parliament, they should have it, and there Confirmed by the King and
his Baronage. And the Earl of Lancaster granted, That he would make Releases
and Acquittances to all those that on behalf of the King should demand them, of
Trespasses done to his Person, as soon as the things aforesaid should be
Confirmed; nor that he would bring Suit of Felony against any one, from the
time they had his Letters, saving to him all Plaints, Actions, and Suits, which
he had against the Earl of Warren, and all those that were assenting and aiding
to the Felonies and Trespasses which the Earl had committed against him,
against the King's Peace. And that the Ordinances be kept and observed, as they
are under the King's Great Seal. And that these things abovesaid should be
performed, and kept in all Points. The Honorable Fathers in God the
Archbishops of Canterbury and Dublin, the Bishops of Norwich, Ely, Chichester,
Salisbury, Chester or Litchfield, Hereford, and Worcester, the Earls Marshal,
Edmond his Brother, the Earls of Richmond, Hereford, Ulster, Arondel and
Anegos, Sir Roger de Mortimer, Sir John de Somery, Sir John de Hastings, Sir
John de Segrave, Sir Henry de Beaumont, Sir Hugh le Dispenser le fuiz, Sir John
de Gray, Sir Richard de Gray, Sir Bartholomew de Badlesmere, Sir Robert de
Mohant, Sir Ralph Bassel, Sir Walter de Norwich, have undertaken by the Will
and Assent of the King. In Witness whereof the Prelates, Earls, and Barons
aforesaid, have put their Seals to one part of this Indenture, and the Earl of
Lancaster has put his Seal to the other; Written at Leek (whether in
Staffordshire, Warwickshire, or Yorkshire, it appears not) the 9th day of
August, in the A. D. 1319.
12th of King Edward. After this Indenture, in the same Record, we have an
Account what was done in the succeeding Parliament concerning the Contents of it.

And now at the Ibm.
beginning of this Parliament Rot. Claus. 12 Edw. II. M. 28. in scedula. The
Request of the Prelates, Earls, and Barons, made to the King in Parliament.
summoned on the 25th of August to meet at York three weeks after Michaelmas,
this Indenture was read, in the presence of all assembled in the Parliament, and
all things in it diligently considered, Prelates, Earls, and Barons agreed to
Pray and Request the King for the Honor of himself, and the Profit of him and
the Realm, That for the great Business that concern him, and do happen from day
to day, he would please to assent, That Two Bishops, One Earl, One Baron, and
One Baron or Baneret, of the Family of the Earl of Lancaster, in his Name, and
for him, should be present and remain with him by Quarters of the year, to
Deliberate The Parliament is for Proceeding according to the Indenture.
with, and Advise him in due manner, and that they

The King understanding this Request, and desiring to be Advised, The King
allows it.
and Profit of him and his Realm, and considering that when he received the
Government, he found Scotland in War against him, and since that there has
been War in Ireland, and many other Disturbances have happened in his
Dominions, for which he thought it necessary to have with him the greatest and
most sufficient Advice, he did agree, and willed to have Prelates, Earls, and
Barons, to advise him in the Form aforesaid; and so as his Ministers should
always perform their Offices, according to the Law and Usage of the Kingdom.

And whereas it was contained in the Indenture, That the Prelates, Earls, and
Barons there named, had undertaken, by the Lancaster, his People or Party and
Followers, Releases and Acquittances of all manner of Felonies, and Trespasses
against his Peace, until the day of St. James this year, and that the Charters
of Release and Acquittances should be absolute, without Condition, and if
better Security could be found for them in the next Parliament, they should have
it, and also confirmed by the King and his Baronage.

The King by Assent of the Prelates, Earls, Barons, and Comonalty He Pardons
the Earl of Lancaster, etc.
of his Realm in his said Parliament, granted Pardon to the Earl of Lancaster,
and his Followers, of the Suit of his Peace, and whatever belonged to him by
reason thereof, of all manner of Felonies, and Trespasses committed against the
Peace unto the 7th day of August last past, and Pardon of Outlawry to those
that should demand it, if any had been pronounced against them, Ely, then his
Chancellor, That he should make Charters under his great Seal absolute, and
without Condition, for for the Earl of Lancaster, and such as he should by his
Letters Name to the Chancellor.

Also, whereas in the same Indenture it was contained, That the And granted the
Ordinances should be kept.
Ordinances should be Holden and Kept as they had passed the written upon the
Parliament Roll, and sent to the Chancery to be enrolled there, and from thence
to both Benches to be enrolled there.

By the Claus. 15 Edw. II. M. 14. Dors. in cedula. Hugh Despenser the Son, the
King's Chamberlain.
Award against the Despensers it appears, that Hugh the Son, was named and
agreed to be the King's Chamberlain in this Parliament; De la Moor says, in the
same year, ( i. e. 12th of Edw. II.) he was made Chamberlain by the Consent of
the Prelates, and others, because they knew the King hated him, yet he by
Prudence and Obsequiousness, soon changed his mind, and obtained his Affection,
when they prosecuted him with the greatest Hatred. F. 594. lin. 5.
Anno igitur sequenti, Praelatorum consensu and aliorum quorundam Hugo
Despenser filius constitutus est Regis Camerarius, quem eo libentius in hunc
locum promoverunt, quia eum Regi Exosum The Character of the Spenser's, Father
and Son.
Cognoverunt. At vero is prudentia and obsequio, haud multo post dirempto Regis
animo, eum in sui amorem facile Commutavit, unde and illi odio eum vel maximo
prosecuti sunt. Then Ibm. and n. 10.
speaking of his Father, he Reports him to be a Person of great Integrity, Wise
in Counsel, Stout in Arms, whose Confusion and Ignominious End was caused by
his Inordinate Love toward his Son, a Person of a Brave Presence, Proud
Spirit, and Wicked Life, causing by his Ambition and Covetousness, Widows and
Orphans to be Disinherited, and Noblemen to be put to Death, by which he
hastened his own, and his Father's Destruction. These are the short Characters
given of both the Dispensers, by this Historian, and a brief Account how the
Son came to be Chamberlain. In the year following, I have not read or seen any
thing worth noting.

In the 14th of this King, William de Braiosa, a Baron in the Walsingh. Hist.
f. 113. n. 20. The reason of the Discontent of some Barons.
Marches of Wales, and a Spend-thrift, who propounded to sell part of his
Estate called Gowerland, that descended to him by Inheritance, to several
Lords; The Earl of Ibm.
Hereford, because it was nigh his Lands, agreed with him for it; The Two Roger
Ib. n. 30.
Mortimers, because it lay near their Lands, thought it convenient for them,
and knowing nothing of his former Bargain, agreed with him also for the Land;
The Lord John Ibm.
Mowbray, Ib. n. 40.
This Land held of the King in Capite, and could not be sold without the King's
License, and lying on every side next the Lands of Hugh Despenser the Son, then
his Chamberlain, he obtained Leave of the King to Purchase it; and then bought
it of the Owner. Ib. n. 40, 50. A Confederacy between the Earl of Lancaster,
and a great number of Barons against the Despensers. See the Revocation and
Adnullation of the Process and Award against the Two Spencers, here following.
The Barons Kill and Imprison the Tenants and Servants of the Spensers.
This so provoked these Barons, and especially the Earl of Hereford, that he
Complained of the Injury done him to Thomas Earl of Lancaster; number of the
Barons to them, made a Confederacy to live and dye for Justice, and destroy
Traitors, and especially both the Hugh Despensers, Father and Son.

In pursuance of this Confederacy, the Earl of Hereford, the Barons there
named, Monsieur Roger de Mortimer, the Nephew and the Uncle, Monsieur Roger
Damory, Monsieur John de Mowbray, Monsieur Hugh de Audeley, the Father and the
Son, Monsieur Roger de Clifford, Monsieur John Giffard de Brimmesfield,
Monsieur Morice de Berkeley, Monsieur Hen. de Ties, Monsieur John Maltravers,
and many others of that Alliance, on the Feast of the Invention of Holy Cross,
or 3d of May, entered into the Lands of Hugh the Younger in Wales (while he was
with the King doing his Office as Chamberlain) by Force and Arms, and killed
Ibm. They burn, pulldown, and destroy their Houses and Castles.
some of his Servants and Tenants, others they kept in Prison, and some they
suffered to be Ransomed; burnt, pulled Ibm. They carry away their Goods of all
sorts.
From hence they rambled up and down the Country, and went into Glocestershire,
Wiltshire, Hampshire, and all Counties, where Hugh the Father had Lands, and
begun their Work on Barnaby-day, or 11th of June, at his Manor of Fastern in
Wiltshire, and in all his Lands, Houses, and Castles, and

When they had done these Mischiefs, they marched to Sherborn And enter into a
Confederacy.
in Dorsetshire, where was at that time Thomas Earl of Lancaster, whose the
Castle was, and others, and on Sunday after Midsummer-day they entered into a
new, or confirmed the old Confederacy.

The Confederacy of the Earls and Barons against Hugh and A. D. 1320.
Hugh le Despenser.

This Indenture Witnesses, That on the Sunday next after the Feast From the
French Copy in the Register of Christ-Church, Canterbury, f. 242.
of St. John Baptist, in the 14th Year of the King at Sherborn in in the
presence of the Arch-Biship of York, the Bishops of Durham and Carlisle, the
Earls of Lancaster and Aenegos, it was considered, That Hugh le Despenser, the
Father and the Son, had ill counseled and moved the King, to the Dishonor and
Damage of him and of his Kingdom; and having heard and understood the Reasons
of the Earl of Hereford, Roger de Mortimer the Nephew and Uncle, Note, That the
Addition of Monfieur is put before every of these Names.
Hugh de Audely the Father and Son, Roger Dammory, John de Mowbray, Maurice de
Berkeley, Roger de Clifford, Henry de and other Great Men, and others of the
Marches (i. e. of Wales) And notice of Information having been given to the
Earls of Lancaster and Aenegos, Monsieur Robert de Holland, Fonk de Estrange,
Stephen de Here also the same Addition is put before every of their Names in
the French Copy.
Segrave, William le Latimer, John Devery, John de Harrington, Adam de
Swimnington, William de Kyme, Marmaduke de Tweng, Richard Walleys, Robert
Pierpount, Ranulph Dacre, Edmund Deyncourt, Thomas Willeby, William de
Penington, That the Earl of Hereford, Monsieur Roger de Mortimer, and other
Great Men of the Marches, and others abovenamed, have begun Quarrels and
Complaints against Monsieur Hugh the Father and Son; and that it is done to the
Honor of God, the Honor and Profit of the King and of his Kingdom. And it
seemed to them all, that the Oppressions could not be taken off from the
People, until they had Hugh the Father and Son in their possession, or they
were banished: And it was with one Assent of them all there, whoever they were,
That the Quarrels or Complaints before named, should be maintained to the
Honor of God and of Holy Church, to the Profit of the King, the Queen, and
their Children, and the Safety of the Crown and People. And so as the Earl of
Lancaster and other Great Men which began this Quarrel will maintain it, so the
Earl of Aenegos, and all named after him, with them will maintain it with all
their Power. And whenever the Earl of Lancaster and other Great Men shall leave
the Quarrel, the Earl of Aenegos, and all those named after him, may leave it,
without being accused or questioned for it. And to maintain these things, the
Earls of Aenegos and all others after him, put to their Seals. This was the
part of the Indenture Aenegos.

From whence they march to St. Albans, plundering Victuals [8] Walls. Hist. f.
114. n. 10, 20, 30, 40.
every where in their March, and oppressing the Poor. [5] Per viam diripientes
ubique Victualia and Pauperes Terrae Gravantes; from whence they sent the
Bishops of London, Salisbury, Ely, Hereford, and Chichester (then at St. Albans
to make Peace) to the King at The Barons come to St. Albans, and send 5 Bishops
to the King to Banish the a Spensers. The King's Answer to the Bishops.
London; not only to send Hugh and Hugh the Two Traitors from his Court, but
also out of the Kingdom. The King's Answer was, That Hugh the Father was beyond
Sea in his Service, and Hugh the Son was at Sea for the Guarding of the
Cinque Ports according to his Duty; and that according to Right and Custom,
they ought not to be Banished without answering for themselves.

The King had Rot. Claus. M. 5. Dors. 14. Ed. II. He summons a Parliament. The
Barons came to London with Horse and Arms; And keep a Council by themselves,
and come not to the Parliament at Westminster. And then made the Award against
the Despensers, as appears by the Revocation, as above. The Award made by the
Barons against the Spensers.
fummoned a Parliament on the 15th of May, Midsummer, or the 15th of July, at
Westminster. The Barons, upon the receipt of the King's Answer, go to London
with Horse and Arms, notwithstanding the King had commanded them to come to the
Parliament in due manner; there they held a Council by themselves, and came not
to Westminster as they were summoned, but remained in London with Horse and
Arms 15 days after the King had begun and holden Spencers, and concealed it
from the King, who knew nothing of it, until the Hour they came with it to
Westminster with Force and Arms, so as the King could not hinder the passing of
it, which was to this effect: To the Honor of God and Holy Church, and of our
Lord the King, for the Profit of him and his Realm, and to maintain Hugh le
Despenser, Father and Son, That whereas Sir Hugh the Son at the Parliament at
York 3 Weeks after Michaelmas. Claus. 12 Ed. II. M. 28. in cedula.
was Named, and it was there Agreed he should be Chamberlain to the King; in
which Parliament it was Agreed, That certain Prelates and other Great Men should
be with the King by turns, at several Seasons of the Year, the better to advise
Hugh the Son, drawing to him his Father, who was not by Order of Parliament to
be near the King, or to be one of those Counselors, between them both have
usurped Royal Power over the King and his Ministers, and the Government of the
Kingdom, to the Dishonor of the King, the Injury of the Crown, and Destruction
of the Kingdom, Great Men, and People; and have done the Wickednesses
underwritten, in

1. That Sir Hugh the Son made a Bill or Writing, whereby he would have had Sir
John Gifford of Brimmesfield, Sir Richard de Greye, and others, entered into a
Confederacy to have forced the King to do what he would have him; and had
almost done

2. Homage and the Oath of Allegiance is more by reason of the Crown than of
the Person of the King, and bound him more to the Crown than the Person; and
this appeared, for that before the Crown descends, there is is no Allegiance
due to the Person Expectant. Wherefore in case the King carries not himself by
Reason, in Right of the Crown, his Lieges are bound by Oath made to the Crown
to remove the King and the State of the Crown by Reason; and otherwise the Oath
ought not to be kept. Then it was demanded, whether the King was to be dealt
with by Suit of Law, or by Rigor ( par Suit de Loy ou par Aspertee;) By Suit
of Law it could not be, for he had no Judge. In which case, if the King's will
be not according to

3. Also upon the Application of the Great Men and People

4. Also by their evil Contrivance, they will not suffer the Great Men of the
Realm nor Good Counselors to speak with, or come near the King to advise him,
nor the King to speak

5. Also to attain to their Wickedness, Covetousness, and Disinheriting the
Great Men, and Destruction of the People, they put out Good and Agreeable
Ministers placed by Assent, Hugh the Father, Sir Ralph Basset, Sir Ralph
Camois, and Sir John Inge, and others their Friends; who caused to be indicted,
by false Jurors of their Alliance, the Peers of the Land, as the Earl of
Hereford, Monsieur Giffard of Brimmesfield, and Monsieur Robert de Monshall,
and other good People, to get their

6. Also they falsely and maliciously advised the King to raise Arms against his
People in Glocestershire, contrary to the Great Charter, and the Award of the
Peers of the Land, and by their false and evil Counsel, would have made War in
the Land for their own proper Quarrel, to the Destruction of Holy Church and
the People.

7. Also whereas the Earl of Hereford, and the Lord of Wigmore (i. e. Mortimer)
by the King's Command were assigned to make War upon Lheuelin Bren, who had
levied War against him in Glamorganshire, when the Earl of Glocester's Lands,
by reason of his Death, were in the King's hand; and Lhewelin had rendered
himself into the Lords hands to the King's Grace and Pleasure, and upon that
Condition delivered him to the King, who received him accordingly; but when
these Lords were out of the Country, these Two, the Father and Son, usurping
Royal Power, took Lhewelin, and carried him to Cardiff, after that Sir Hugh the
Younger was seized thereof (as of his Share of the Earl of Glocester's Estate,
one of whose Daughters and Heirs he had married) pretending to a Jurisdiction,
where none was Henry: And also took upon them Royal Power and Jurisdiction,
which was appendant to the Crown, in Disheritance of the Crown, and Dishonor
of the King, the said Lords of Hereford and Mortimer, and in ill Example and
great Peril in the like case in time to come.

8. Also they ill advised the King to take into his hands the Hugh Audely the
Son, who was forejudged without due Process, contrary to the Law of the Land,
by the Covetousness of the said Hugh to get some of those Lands; and by other
false Compassments contrived to have the Lands of Sir Roger Dammory, and for
having him attainted for entering into Glocestershire, in Disheritance of the
Peers of the Land.

9. Also that whereas the King had granted by his Letters Patents to the Earl
of Warwick in full Parliament at Westminster, That after his Death his Executors
should have his Lands until his Heir was of Age; which Grant, after the Earl's
Death, was confirmed by the King at Lincoln, at the Request and Assent of the
Peers of the Land in Parliament, the said Sir Hugh the Father procured his Son
to cause the King to repeal this Grant without cause, Hugh the Father, for his
own Profit, the Guard of those Lands; and also had defeated by evil Counsel
what the King had granted in his Parlements by good Advice, and by Assent of
the Peers of the Land, to the Dishonor of the King, and against Right and
Reason.

10. Also, that they would not suffer the King to take reasonable Fines of the
Peers of the Land and others, when they entered John de Mowbray for the Lands of
Gower, and of others, to the Damage and Dishonor of the King, and contrary to
the Law of the Land, in Disheritance of the Great Men and others. Also making
the King do against his Oath in Parliament.

11. Also by wicked Covetousness and Power Royal they will not suffer the King
to hear or do Right to the Great Men, upon what they presented to him, for
himself and themselves touching the Disheriting the Crown and them touching the
Lands which were the Templers. Also by Usurped Power Royal they (...)



(...)self and Family; He is denied Entrance, with a Ibm. f. 115. lin. 2. etc.
The Queen denied Entrance into Le^ds Castle in Kent. The Garrison deny to
render it to the K.
Sawey Return from the Guard within, That they would not suffer the Queen, or
any other, to enter there, without Command or Letters from the Lord of it. She
came her self, and demanded Entrance into the Castle, and was denied, and
forced to seek Lodgings other where. When she returned to the King, and
complained to him of the Affront offered to her, he was very Angry, and having
drawn together many Thousands of Armed Men, with many Londoners, [6] [6] Ibm.
n. 10.
came Personally to the Castle, commanding the Garrison to render it to him;
They Refuse to obey the King's Command, he straightly Besieges them; They hold
out so long as they had Victuals, He besieges and takes it, puts the Governor
to Death, and many of the Warders.
and when they could not longer hold out they deliver the Castle. Thomas
Colepepper the Governor of it, was Drawn and Hanged for his Rebellion against
the King, (Thomas Colepeper custos castri, qui tenuerat Castrum contra Regem,
tractus and suspensus est.) The Women found there were sent to the Tower of
London, and

Sir Thomas de la Moor tells us, it was about F. 595. n. 30, 40. A. D. 1321. 15
Ed. II. The Barons came to Relieve the Castle. And sent to the King to raise
the Siege, who would not. They march into other Parts of the Kingdom with their
Army.
Michaelmas, that the Queen demanded Entrance into the Castle, that she might
Lodge there, and after a Months Siege, the Barons with their Forces came to
Kingston upon Thames, on the Vigil of the Apostles Simon and Jude, or 27th of
October, in hopes to Relieve it, from whence they sent the Archbishop of
Canterbury, the Bishop of London, and Earl of Pembroke, to the King to raise
the Siege; promising him after the next Parliament, to deliver the Castle into
his Hands, He not granting their Desires, they marched into other Parts of the
Kingdom, and the Castle in a very short time was Surrendered.

In December following, Hugh Dispenser the Younger, Revocation, ut supra. Sir
Thomas de la Moor, ut supra n. 50. The Banishment of the Spensers revoked.
applied himself to the King for the Repeal of his Exile, who committed
Petition to the Archbishop of Canterbury, the other Bishops and Clergy, being
then in a Provincial Synod at London, to advise about, and give him their Sense
upon it, who Judged the Award, as to the Exile and Disinheritance, Erroneous,
against Right, and obtained by Force, without their Consent, as Peers of the
Land, and therefore advised, and prayed the King to Repeal, and make it null
for Ever; which was done, and the King granted him his Protection and safe
Conduct, for Westminster, the 8th of December in the 15th of his Reign.

The King kept his Christmas Walsingh. Hyp^dig. Neust. f. 504. n. 40. De la
Moor, ut supra. A. D. 1322. 15 Ed. II. The King increased his Army, and marched
against the Barons.
at Cirencester in Glocestershire, where Hugh Despenser, and others persuaded
him to increase his Army, and march against the Barons; He did so, and went
into the Marches of Wales, and left Gloucester, which was possessed by the
Barons, and passing by Worcester, went to Bridgnorth, and took Castle; while he
was in Shropshire both the Mortimers submitted themselves, and were sent to the
Tower of London. Maurice de Berkeley, and Hugh Audeley, Senior, fell into the
King's Hands, and were sent to Wallingford-Castle* Ibm. The Earls of Hereford
and Lancaster join their Forces.
The Earl of Hereford and his Adherents marched toward the North, to join the
Earl of Lancaster who expected them. The King marched after them, and comes to
Burton upon Trent, where the Earl of Lancaster had joined them; They hinder the
King's Passage over the Trent by the Bridge there three Days, and Killed some
of the King's Men and Servants, so as the King was forced to find another way
over the Trent, and marched toward them in the Town, which when they saw, they
Fired the Town, and marched into the Field, to give the King Battle; but
perceiving the King coming toward them, with a great Force, superior to them in
Earl of Lancaster with his Confederates fled Northward with their Army, and
made Great Depraedations and Robberies in their way; the King pursues them to
Burgh-Bridge, The Scots Friends and Allies to the Earls. The Earl of Hereford
killed at Borough-Bridge. The Earl of Lancaster taken there.
then marching toward their Friends and Allies the Scots; where they were
stopped, by Forces brought from Carlisle by Sir Andrew Harclay, and others from
York by Sir Simon Ward; in forcing his Way over the Bridge, the Earl of
Hereford was Killed, the Earl of Lancaster not being able to bear the shock of
the Battle, taken by Sir Andrew Harclay, and many other Barons, Banerets, and
Knights, to the Number of [2] Ninety Five. [2] De la Moor, f. 596. n. 10.


The Earl of Lancaster was sent to Pontfract, where on Monday Our Lady Day this
Year 1322. was on Thursday. The Earl of Lancaster impeached of Treason, etc.
before the Annunciation of the Blessed Virgin, or 22d of March, he was
impeached before the King for diverse Treasons, Murders, Burnings,
Depraedations, and other Felonies, in the Presence of Edmond Earl of Kent, John
Earl of Richmond, Adomar de Valentia Earl of Pembroke, John de Warenna Earl of
Surrey, Edmund Earl of Arundel, David Earl of Athol, Robert Earl of Anegos, and
other great Men of the Kingdom, by whom he was adjudged to be Drawn, Adjudged
to be Drawn, Hanged, and Beheaded.
Hanged, and Beheaded, which then were accounted three distinct Punishments.
Two whereof for the Greatness of his Blood and Family the King pardoned, so as
he was only Beheaded. This Impeachment and Judgment was Recorded in Chancery,
in the 15th Title of Pleas of the Crown, and was brought into the first
Parliament of Edward III. at Westminster, by Henry Earl of Lancaster his
Brother, for the Revocation thereof, in which Revocation that whole Record is
recited, and many of The Confederacy of the E. of Lancaster, etc. with Robers
Brus King of Scots, etc.
the Practices, of Earl Thomas, the Confederacy between him, the Earl of
Hereford, and their Adherents, with Robert Brus, Thomas Randolph Earl of
Murray, and James Douglas, Two of the greatest Managers of the Scots Affairs at
that time, and others, concerning mutual Assistance and Defense, and the
Ingratitude of this great Earl toward the King, are declared* for which
Revocation see the Appendix, N. 62. N. 62.


By the same Judgment, and for the same Crimes suffered these Barons, Walsing.
History, f. 116 n. 30, 40, 50. The Barons that suffered for the same Crimes
with the Earl of Lancaster.
Warin Lisle, William Toket, Thomas Manduit, Henry de Bradborn, William
Fitz-William, William Cheyny, Roger Clifford, John de Mowbray, Gocelin
D'enynvill, Henry Teyes, and Bartholomew de Badlesemer who was beheaded at
Canterbury, only Roger de Damory, died of his Natural Death.

The Prior and Monks of Pontfract obtained the Body of Thomas Earl of
Lancaster, and Buried it in their Church, on the Right Hand of the High Altar,
whither came a great number of People, Pilgrims, and Others, to Offer and Pray
at his Tomb, really believing the Miracles, and great Cures of Diseases that
were reported to be done by him, a Specimen whereof I shall give the Reader
from an English Chronicle in Corpus Christi College Library in Cambridge,
Litera F. Vol. 63. Book 7. Capitulo 201.
in the Sense and Language of those Times, it was wrote in.

Of the Miracles that GOD worughte (wrought) The Miracles said to be done by
the Earl of Lancaster.
for Seint Thomas of Lancaster, wherefore the King let close (caused them to
be shut) the Church Doors of Pountfret of the Prioree, for (that) no Man shall
come therein to the Body for to Offren. And soon after that the Good Erl Thomas
of Lancaster was Martered, a Priest that had long time ben blyende Dremed in
his Hull (Hill) there that the Good Erl Thomas of Lancaster was done unto Death,
and he should have his sight again, and so he Dremed iij Nightis seuying, (three
Nights following) and the Priest, tho (then) let lose him to the same Hulle,
and when he come to that Place, that (where) he was Martered on, devoutly he
made there his Prayers, and prayed God and Sent Thomas he most (might) have
his sight again, and as he was at Prayers he laid his right Hond oppon the same
A Blind Priest restored to his Sight.
Place that the good Man was Martered, and a Drop of dry Blood and small Sonde
cleved on his Hand, and therewith he Strekede his Even, (Eyes) and non thorug
might of God and of Sent Thomas of Lancaster, he had his Sight again, and
thanked the Almigte God and Sent Thomas, and whenne this Meracle was Cud
(known) among Men, the People come there in every side and knelede and made
hire (their) Prayers at his Tomb, that is in the Priorye of Pountfret; and
prayed that Holy Marter of Socor and of Help,

Also there was a young Child Drenchede (Drowned) in a A Dead Child restored to
Life.
Well in the Town of Pountfret, and was ded iij Days and iij Nigtis, and comen
and laid the ded Child upon Sent Thomas Tomb the Holy Marter, and the Child
aros there from Death to Live, as menye a Man hit saw.

And also much People were out of hire Mind, (out of their Men out of their
Wits restored to them.
Wits) and God has sent ham (them) hire Mind again, thorug Virtu of that Holy
Marter.

And also God has given thereto Criples hire goyinge (Going) Cripples,
Crooked, Blind, and Sick Cured and Healed.
and to Crooked hire Honds, and hire Feet, and to Blyende also hire Sight, and
to menye Sike (Sick) Folk hire hele (health) that had diverse Maladies, for the
love of his good Marter.

Also there was a Rich Man in Coundom in Gascoigne, and such A Man whose Flesh
rot^ed from his Side and stank, c^^ed, and his Flesh restored.
a Malady he had that as his right side rotede, and fell away fram him, and
Men migt se his Livere, and also his Heart, and so he stank that onney (no) Men
migt come neyre him, wherefore his Friends were for him Wonder sorye; but at
last as God would, they prayed to Sent Thomas of Lancaster, that he would pray
to almigte God for that Person, and behighte (thought) to gone to Pountfret
for to done hire Pilgrimage, and the Good Man soon after slepte full soft, and
Dremed that the Marter Sent Thomas come unto him, and anoyntede over all his
seek Body, and therewith the Good Man awoke and was all hole, and his Flesh
was Restored again, that before was Rotede and fall away, for which Miracle
the Good Man, and all his Friends lovede God and Sent Thomas ever more after.

And also two Men have been helede there of the Morivaile Two Men cured of the
Plague.
( Murrain or Plague) thorug help of that Holy Marter, thoug that Evele be hold
incurable.

Whenne the Spensers herd that God deed such Miraclis for his Holy The
Spensers affirmed it Heresy to believe these Miracles.
Marter, and they would beleve hit in no manner wise, but seyde Eresie, such
Virtue of him to beleve.

And whenne Sir Hugh the Spenser the Son saw all this Doying, Spenser the
Son's Messenger to the K. shed his Bowels at his Fundament.
(Doing) anon he send his Messanger fram Pountfret, That (where) he Dwelled, to
the King Edward, that tho was at Graven at Skiptone, (at Skipton upon Craven)
for cause that the King should undone the Pilgrimage. And as the Reband
(Ribald) that was York, and shed all his Bowels at his Fundament: So in the
Author.

And when Sire Hugh the Spenser herd this Tyding some Del he Slander thorugout
all Christendom for the Death of Thomas of Lancaster, if that he suffered the
People done hire Pilgrimage at Pountfret, and so he The Church Doors shut where
the E of Lancaster was buried, to hinder Pilgrims to honor his Body.
Counceiled the King that he commanded to close the Church Doors of Pountfret,
in the which Church the Holy Marter Sent Thomas was Entered, (Interred) And thus
they deden al Froncheyse Pilgrimage come unto that Holy Body. And for Encheson
(because) that the Monks suffered Men and Women to honor that holy Body of Sent
Thomas the Marter thorug counceile of Sir Hugh the Spenser the Sone, and thorug
counceile also of Master Roberd Baldok the false pelede (pilled) Clerk, that
was the Kings Chancelere the King concende (consented) that they should be That
is to live upon their own Stipend^, Salaries and Income, and not to receive any
Offerings or Ci^s, etc.
set to here Wages, and let make Wardeyns over her own good long time, (and
Hughe the Spenser* fourteen Gascoignes well armed kept the Hulle When the
People were shut out of the Friars Church, and a Guard set upon the Tomb, they
went to the Hill where he was put to Death, and offered there.
there that the Good Man Sent Thomas was done to Death, and biheveded,
(beheaded) so that no Pilgrim migte come by that way; fulwel wend he (thought
he) to haf by nome (taken away) Christis migte and his power, and the great
loose (many) Meraclis that he showed for his Marter Thomas thorug all
Cristendome.

And it was not at Pontfract only, that the People were affected and possessed
with the Saintship and Miracles of this Earl, Paul's also in London they did
the same things, which caused the King to write Append. n. 63. The Earl of
Lancaster worshipped in St. Paul's, London.
to the Bishop and the Dean and Chapter, That he took it ill, that many of the
People of God committed to their Charge, deceived by a Diabolical Cheat,
foolishly coming to a Table in their Church, in which the Images of diverse, and
amongst the rest the Effigies of Thomas late Earl of Lancaster his Enemy and
Rebel, was Painted and Worshipped, and Adored as a Holy Thing, affirming
Miracles The King writes to the Bishop of London, the Dean and Chapter, to
hinder it.
to be done there, to the Discredit of the whole Church, to the Disgrace of him
and them, the manifest Danger of the People aforesaid, and pernicious Example
of others; And that they knowing these Abuses, by connivance had permitted them
to be done, yea, rather for Gain, and filthy Lucre sake, they had Dissembled in
this Matter, therefore he Commanded, and firmly Injoined them, considering the
Premises, and that taking notice the Church was of his Patronage, and that the
Bishop was by to make Prayers and Oblations, or other things tending to Divine
Worship, without the Authority of the Roman Church, as they ought by the Duty
of their Offices, and knew belonged to them by Canonical Sanction. Witness the
King at York the 28th of June, in the 16th of his Reign.

But within a month after the King was Dethroned, and his Pious Lady, his
Queen, in her Son's Name, (for what Reasons may easily be guessed) Append. n.
64. The Queen extolling the Earl of Lancaster's stout Behavior for Holy
Church, and his Miracles, writes to the Pope to Saint him.
wrote to the Pope, extolling his glorious Virtues, and declaring what a Stout
Champion he had been for the Liberty of Holy Church, and the Laws of the Land,
and also how many Miracles had been wrought, and People healed, by Pious
invocation upon him, and infinite Remedies granted to the great number of those
that resorted to his Tomb, desiring Process might be made for Sainting of him;
Dated at London the last day of February, in the First year of the Reign of
Edward III. Her Messengers for Transacting this Affair, who went with this
Letter, were Walter Burle Professor of Divinity, William Trussell Knight. and Mr.
John Thoresby Clerk.

And she thought it not enough to have the Pupil Sainted, but He was made
Archbishop 23d of Ed. I. A. D. 1294. and died the 12th of May, 6 Ed. II. 1313.
She also writes to the Pope to Saint Robert Winchelsey, Arch Bishop of
Canterbury, and the Instructor of Lancaster.
Robert Winchelsey, Archbishop of Canterbury, inserted into the same Catalogue
of Saints, and to that purpose wrote again to the Pope, in her Son's Name,
about Eight days after, That he shined in Miracles, and had restored Health to
innumerable Sick People, humbly and devoutly beseeching his Holiness, [6] that
he would vouchsafe to insert into the [6] Append. n. 65.
venerable Catalogue of Saints so Precious a Stone, rejected of Men, but Chosen
of God; Dated at Westminster the 8th day of March, in the First of Edward III.

Toward the end of that month Walter Reynold, then Archbishop of Canterbury,
and the Bishops of his Province, Hist. sacra. Vol. 1. f. 173. The Archbishop
of Canterbury, Walter Raynold, and the Bishops of his Province, write to the
Pope to the same purpose.
wrote to the Pope, moved by the Example of Thomas Earl of Lancaster of famous
Memory, who had wrote to him before upon the same suffered and done for the
Rights and Liberties of the Church, and sending him a few Miracles amongst
innumerable others, that God had wrought for him, and upon Bended Knees humbly
Supplicated his Holiness, that upon their Information he would Estimate,
Diffine, Order, and Command what was further to be done in that Case, for the
Honor and Glory of the Divine Name, and the wished for Exaltation of Catholic
Faith. I find not that

Nor was it the Sense of all Men in those times, that the Earl of Lancaster
deserved it, as it is Reported by Lib. 7. Cap. 42. Ranulph Higden's Report of
the Earl of Lancaster.
Ranulph Higden, the Monk of Chester, who lived at the time. De cujus iri
meritis (says the Monk) an inter sanctos sit annumerandus, crebra in vulgo
Disceptatio est, etc. of which Man's Merits, (speaking of of this Earl) there
was much Dispute amongst the Vulgar, whether he was to be numbered among the
Saints, some asserting he His seeming Virtues.
ought, for that he gave much in Alms, honored the Religious, and contended to
Death, as it seemed, (ut videbatur) in a just Quarrel. Others thought the
contrary, That a Man who neglected his generous His Crimes, and Character.
Wife, and defiled innumerable Women, (innumeras mulierculas polluit;) That put
to Death such as did but lightly offend him, That cherished Renegado's from
their Orders or Profession, and Transgressors of the Law, lest they might be
punished by the Law; That committed all things to the Direction of his
Secretary; That at the time of Contending to Death for the Maintaining of
Justice, basely fled, ought not to be thought a Saint, especially when he was
unwillingly taken, and suffered unwillingly. But what Money might do, or the
Shadow of, or counterfeit Miracles then celebrated Sed profecto oblationum
dona, and miraculorum simulacra quae in loco suae decapitationis in
praesentiarum celebrantur, qualem in posterum habebunt exitum, secula videbunt
post futura.

However it was, the Queen was not only pleased to have him a Saint, but there
must be a Chapel built upon Append. n. 66. The Queen, etc. contrives a Chapel
to be built on the Hill and Place of Lancaster's Execution.
the Hill Pontfract, and the Burgesses of the same Town, before the King,
Queen, and Henry Earl of Lancaster, Brother to Thomas, That John de Ypre, an
Hermit, abiding upon the Hill where the Noble Earl of Lancaster was put to
Death, should procure and increase Alms and good Deeds, to make a Chapel
there; That there should be a Clerk assigned by the Queen and Earl of
Lancaster, and a Monk whom the Prior should appoint, to remain there to receive
and lay out what should be received at the Hill, for the Building of the
Chapel; and it was also agreed there should be a Trunk provided with Three
Locks and Keys, whereof the Clerk was to keep one, the Monk another, and a
Burgess of the Town the third; Which Trunk for the security Priory, and carried
back to the Hill every day; To be opened once or twice a week in the presence
of the Three Key Keepers, and the Money to be delivered to the Clerk to pay the
Workmen, etc. The King's Confirmation of this Accord is Dated at York on the
5th of June, in the First year of his Reign.

This was a fruitful Age of Miracles, for within less then Two Lancaster,
Append. n. 67.
the King sent a Commission to Enquire after certain Persons, that reported
Miracles reported to be done by Two ordinary Men. These Two Persons were taken
at Borough-Bridge.
Miracles to have been done at the place where Henry Montfort, and Henry
Wylington hung at Bristol, who were Condemned to be Drawn and Hanged by the
King's Court for Rebellion, and afterward their Bodies to remain upon Gibbets;
This Report brought much People thither, to the Disturbance of the Peace, and
Alienation of their Affections from the King, insomuch as by Force

On the 14th of March, in the Fifteenth of his Reign, just before A. D. 1320.
the Barons Army was defeated, and this Saint taken at Borough-Bridge in
Yorkshire, the King at Derby issued his Summons for a Parliament to be holden
at York three weeks after Easter next Easter Day was April 11. this year, 1322.
The Process and Award against the Spencers brought into Parliament.
coming, into which Parliament upon the Petitions of Hugh Despencer, the Father
and Son, (notwithstanding the Son's had been Reversed before, as above) was
brought before the King, the Process and Award for their Disheritance and
Exile, and upon showing the Errors in them, they were both Revoked and made
Null; Which Revocations, because they contain something of the History, and
much of the Practice of, and Way of the Great Men's Living in those times, I
have, with as much brevity as I Old French, not being any where Printed or
Published that I know of.

Whereas lately at our Parliament summoned at Claus. 15 Ed. II. M. 14. Dors. in
cedula. This Writ dated at Westminster, May 15. and 14th of Ed. II. A. D. 1320.
The Petition of Hugh Spencer the Son, to the King.
Westminster to meet Three weeks after the Nativity of St. John Baptist last
past, an Award was made against Sir Hugh le Despenser the Son, and Sir Hugh le
Despenser the Father, by certain Great Men of the Realm, and then after the
Feast of St. Andrew next following, Hugh the Son Petitioned Us, showing, That
while he was in our Service in the Office of Chamberlain, and so appointed in
full Parliament, the Earl of Hereford, Monsieur Roger de Mortimer the Nephew,
Monsieur Roger de Mortimer the Uncle, Monsieur Roger Damory, Monsieur John de
Mowbray, Monsieur Hugh d'Audele the Father, Monsieur Hugh d'Audele the Son,
Monsieur Roger de Clifford, Monsieur John Giffard de Brimmesfield, Monsieur
Maurice de Berkeley, A Confederacy against the Spencers.
Monsieur Henry de Ties, Monsieur John Maltravers, and many others, made a
Confederacy by Oaths and Writing to pursue and destroy him, and upon this
Agreement all the abovenamed, with their May the ^d.
Retinues, came the Wednesday after the Feast of the * Invention of Holy Cross,
in the 14th year of the King, to Newport in Wales, with Force and Arms, that
is, to wit, with 800 Men at Arms, with the Banner of the King's Arms Displayed,
and with 500 Hobelors, and 10000 Foot, to enter upon all his Lands to destroy
them, and The Outrageous Practices against them.
with the same Power and Force to besiege his Towns and Castles, and took them
by force, and killed part of his People, Sir John Iwayn, Matthew de Gorges, and
about 15 other Welshmen; and part they maimed, as Sir Philip Joce; and part
they took and imprisoned, as Sir Ralph de Gorges, who was then in Prison,
Monsieur Philip Joce, Sir John de Fresingfield, Sir John de Dunstable, William
de Dunstable, and many others, which they freed upon Ransom; and they took,
carried, and drove away his Goods and Chattels found in his Towns and Castles;
That is to say, 40 War Horses, and Armor for 200 Men completely Armed, and
other Warlike Engines and Implements, and Victuals, Wheat, Wine, Honey, Salt,
Flesh, Fish, and other Victuals, to the value of 2000 l. and burnt all his
Charters, Remembrances, and Monuments they could find, to his loss 2000 l. They
also burnt part of the Gates of his Castles, and Houses, and took the Irons out
of the Windows, and Leads off the Houses, etc. and carried them away, to the
damage of 2000 l. and then names Ten Castles in Wales, and the Marches, which
they took and destroyed; and with the same Force and Power, they stayed in his
Lands totally to destroy them about 15 days, in which time they forced the
greatest part of all the Country to Swear to be of their Party, and those that
would not, they imprisoned, put to ransom, and burnt their Houses and Goods;
and in the same time they robbed and plundered him of all the Movables in and
upon his Manors, 60 large Working Mares with Colts and Foals of two years, 160
Heifers, 400 Oxen, 500 Cowes with their Breed for two years, 10000 Sheep, 400
Hogs, and all other necessary things found upon them, as Carts, Ploughs,
Vessels, all these they took, drove, and carried away (without leaving any
thing) from his Manors, Lands, and Towns in Wales, which were 24 in number, to
his damage of 2000 l. They burnt his Granges, and destroyed his Crop upon the
Ground, to his damage of 2000 l. and the Debts which were owing him there, by
force and cruelty they made his Debtors pay unto them, to the value of near
3000 l. with Fee-Farm Rents, and other Customs, which amounted to near 1000 l.
And from Wales with the same Power and Force they came into England, upon his
Castles, Towns and Manors there, and cut up his Woods, Vnchaced his Chaces,
Disparked his Parks, pulled down his Houses, robbed and rifled as much as they
could any where find, to his damage of 10000 l. and then seized upon his
Friends, and his People, whereof some they put to ransom, some they rifled, and
some they imprisoned, to the great grievance of them, and then by the same
Cruelties and Hardships, they made the greatest part of the People against
their wills, to be of their Party, and Sworn to them. And also with their Force
and Power they came to the Parliament at Westminster, and there upon false
Accusations, without calling the said Hugh to Answer, against all manner of
Right and Reason, and against the Law of the Land, Erroneously Awarded him to
be Disherited and Exiled England, wherefore he prays the King, as he is bound
by Right of his Crown, and by the Oath he made at his Coronation, to maintain
all People in their Rights, That he would please to cause to be brought before
him the Process of the Award made against him, that it may be Examined, and
that the said Hugh may be received to show the Errors in it, and if there shall
be any found, he would please to Repeal and Redress them, and to do further
according to Right and Reason; and the said Hugh afterward shall be ready to
stand to Right, and to answer every Complaint and Accusation according to
Reason. And he shows the Errors of the said Process, For that the The Errors
of the Award.
Great Men who pursued and destroyed him, prayed Pardon of the King for all
those things, which might be Judged Felonies or Trespasses in that Pursuit,
which they made by their own Authority, by which wrongfully they made
themselves Judges of him, where they could not, or ought not to be Judges; also
Error, in that the said Hugh was not called into Court, or to answer where the
Award was made; also Error, in that the Award was made without the Assent of
the Prelates who were Peers in Parliament; Item, Error, in that there was no
Record of their Pursuit, or the Causes contained in the Award; also Error, in
that the Award was made against the Form of the Great Charter, wherein is
contained, That no Man shall be forejudged, nor in other manner destroyed,
unless by Judgment of his Peers, or by the Law of the Land; with Request to the
King to take notice, that the Great Men were summoned to come duly to the
Parliament, but did not, when they came with Horse and Arms, and all their
Force; Whereupon the said Hugh came and rendered himself Prisoner to the King,
praying he would receive him into his Protection to prosecute his Complaint,
and that Right might be done him in these Matters; and the King received him,
as he ought to do, (sicome fair devioms) and caused his Petition to be carried
to the Archbishop of Canterbury, the Bishops, and other Prelates, and the
Clergy of the Province of Canterbury, then being in a Provincial Council at
London, charging them by the Faith they ought him, to advise about the
Petition, and let him know their thoughts concerning it; and when they had well
Advised concerning it, they answered, That it seemed to them, that the Process
and Award of the Exile, and Disinheritance of Hugh the Son, and Father, were
Erroneous and Wrongfully made, wherefore they agreed and unanimously assented,
as Peers of the Land, and prayed as Peers Spiritual, That the Award which was
made wickedly and wrongfully against God, and all manner of Right, (contre Dieu
and tote manner de droit) might be by the King repealed and annulled for ever;
and said further, That they nor none of them ever assented to the Award; but
that every one of them at the time when the Award was made, in Writing made
Protestation, That they could not, or would assent to it for many Causes; and
the Earl of Kent the King's Brother, the Earls of Richmond, Pembroke, and
Arondel, before the King and Prelates, said the Award was wrongful, and against
Law and Right, and prayed him, with the Prelates, and as they had done before,
to null and make void the Award; and the Earls affirmed, That for fear of the
Force, which the Great Men suddenly brought to the Parliament to make the Award,
which was to them unknown and unexpected, they gave their Assent to it, and
also advised the King to suffer it to pass, for which Offense and Mistake they
prayed his Pardon.

And then afterward another Petition was delivered to the King, on behalf of
Ibm. Claus. 15 Ed. II. ut supra. Hugh Spens^r the Father's Petition to the King.
Hugh the Father, setting forth, That the same Great Men before named, and
their Adherents and Confederates with Force and Arms on the Day of St. Barnaby,
in the 14th Year of the King, came to his Manor of Fastern in Wiltshire, and
Twelve others in that Shire, Six in the County of Gloucester, Four in
Dorsetshire, Five in Hampshire, Two in Berkshire, Six in Oxfordshire, Three in
Buckinghamshire, Four in Surrey, One Cambridgeshire, Two in Huntingtonshire,
Five in Leicestershire, One in Yorkshire, One in Lincolnshire, Five in
Cheshire, and Five in Warwickshire; in all 63 Manors there named, where they
made the same Havoc, committed the same Spoils, Devastations, and Destructions
upon his Houses and Lands they had done upon his Sons, and used his Debtors,
Tenants, Friends, and People as those of his Son; except that the loss of his
Goods, moveable and immovable, in and upon his Manors and Lands, l. And at
the same time they entered the Abbey of Langley in Wiltshire, broke up his
Coffers, and carried away 1000 l. in Silver; also his Charters, Evidence, and
Bonds, Cups of Gold and Silver, and other Silver Vessels and Jewels, to his
Damage of 10000 l. And at the same time with Force and Arms entered the King's
Castle of Marlborough (where he was the Constable) and took his Goods there
found, 36 Sacks of Wool, 6 Pair of rich Vestments, a Library, a Golden Chalice
for the Sacrament, l. Excepting these Differences of Losses, the Petition is
the same with his Sons verbatim, and The Petition of the Spensers brought into
Parliament.
the Errors assigned in the Process and Award, are the very same; his rendering
himself Prisoner to the King, and his Reception into the King's Protection the
same, and expressed in the Et nous apres, a nostre Parliament summons a Everwyk
as treis semeins de Pasch en an nostre Regne Quinzisme feisems devant nous le
Process del dit Aegard a la suite les ditz Hugh le Fitz, and Hugh le Pere, en
cestes Paroles, A 15 Edw. II. The Writ of Summons to this Parliament bears Date
March 14, 1321. Easter Day was April 11. 1^22.
l Honeur de Dieu and Seinte Eglise, etc. And we afterward, at our Parliament
at York, three Weeks after Easter, in the 15th Year of our Reign, caused to
come before us the Process of the Award, at the Petition of the said Hugh the
Son and Hugh the To the Honor of God and Holy Church, etc. the whole Award
being cited in this Record. After which Recital it follows, ( a quen Parliament,
etc.) At which Parliament at York, the said Hugh the Son and Hugh the Father
being brought before us in Court, prosecuting their Complaints, and praying us
to do them Right; and the said Hugh the Son for himself showed and alleged the
Errors in the Process as abovesaid; and also Hugh the Father alleged the same
Errors, and prayed severally and jointly, That as the Award was made
erroneously and wrongfully, against the Laws and Usages of the Realm, and
against common Right and Reason, that we would annull and defeat the said
Award, and that they might be remitted and reconciled to our Faith, and to such
Estate as they had and were in before the Award: And hereupon hearing the The
Process against them examined in Parliament.
Reasons of the said Hugh and Hugh, we caused the Process to be examined in
full Parliament, in the presence of the Prelates; Earls, Barons, Knights of
Counties, and the People that were come, by reason of the Parliament (en
presence des Prelates, Countes, Barons, Chivalers des Countes, and le People
and estoit venutz pur Encheson du dit Parliament) And we found the said Award
was made Reasons why the Award ought to be made void.
without calling them to Answer, and without the Assent of the Prelates, which
are Peers of the Realm in Parliament, and England, which says no Freeman shall
be Banished, or other way Destroyed, but by lawful Judgment of his Peers, or
the Law of the Land, and for that they were not called in Court to make Answer,
and for these Errors, and for that the Causes in the said Award were not duly
proved (and pur ceo que les Causes contenues en la dit Agard ne furent pas
duement approvets;) And further having regard to that, that we caused the
Parliament at Westminster London in that manner, they held their Councils and
Assemblies at London, without coming to us at Westminster according to Summons;
and then we sent to them to come to the Parliament at Westminster (and avioms
fait venir, devant nous Prelates, and aucunes Countes and Barons, Chivalers
des Countes, and autres que vindrent pur la Commune du Royalm) and caused it to
be published, That Hugh and Hugh, until they came as aforesaid: And the
Contrivance of the said Award they wholly concealed and kept from us, unto the
very Hour they came to Westminster with Force and Arms, and made their Award
against Reason, as a thing treated and agreed on amongst themselves, on their
own Authority, in our absence, and encroached Hugh and Hugh, as it belonged to
us. And further taking notice that those Great Men, after the Award made,
prayed our Pardon and Release for Confederating themselves by Oath, Writing, or
in other manner, without our Leave, in pursuing them, and Trouping with Banners
of ours and their own Arms displayed, and taking and possessing Castles, Towns,
Manors, Lands, Tenements, Goods, and Chattels, and also taking and imprisoning
People of our Allegiance and others, and some they wounded, and some they
killed; and many other things they did, in order to destroy the said Hugh and
Hugh, in England, Wales, and (ne Record aver) upon the Causes of the said
Award. And we are bound by the Oath we made at our Coronation, and obliged to
do Right to all our Subjects, and to redress and cause to be amended all Wrongs
Hugh and Hugh, and for other reasonable Causes, of our Royal Power, in a full
Parliament at York, by the Advice and The Award made void by Assent of the whole
Parliament.
Assent of the Prelates, Earls, Barons, Knights of Counties, the Commons of the
Realm, and others being at our Parliament at York (pur le Conseil and lassent
des Prelatz, Countes, Barons, Chevalers des Countez le Commun du Royalme, and
altres a nostre dit Parliament a Everwyk Estauntz) do wholly null and defeat (de
tut Anentissoms and Defesoms) the said Award of the Exile and Disheritance of
the said Hugh and Hugh, and all things in the Award (and quant que cel Agard
touch) and do fully remit and reconcile the said Hugh the Son, and Hugh the
Father, to our Faith and Peace, and to the Estate they had and were in before
the making of the Award in all Points. And we Award, That they have again
(reeient) Seisin of their Lands and Tenements, Goods and Chattels, etc. And we
Will and Command, That where this Award is enrolled in any Places of our Court,
it be cancelled and annulled for ever. And so the Roll was cancelled and
crossed, and remains so at this day, with this Memorandum written under the
Award.

Les chooses susescrites sont anenties e chaunceles per force dun Agard que se
sit au Parliament le Roy a Everwyck a treis semains de Pasch lan du Regne nostre
Seign. Quinsime, sicome est contenue en un Roll que est consu pendant a ceo
Roll en le Mois de May prochien, These things above written are nulled and
cancelled by force of an Award made in the Parliament at York held three Weeks
after Easter, in the 15th Year of the Reign of our Lord, as it is contained in a
Roll sowed to, and hanging at this Roll in the Month of May.

In Great Stat. Roll. from Hen. III. to 21 Ed. III. M. 31. Biblioth Cotton.
Claud. D. 2. f. 232. a. The Ordinances examined and annulled in Parliament, A.
D. 1322. 15 Ed. II.
this Parliament at York the Prelates, Earls, Barons, and the Commons of the
Realm (amongst which were the Ordainers then alive) there assembled by the
King's Command, caused to be rehearsed and examined the Ordinances dated the
5th of October, the 5th of Edward II. And for that by Examination thereof it
was found in the said Parliament, That by the things which were Ordained, the
King's Power was restrained in many things, contrary to what was due to his
Seignory Royal, and

This Year the King raised an Army, and about the Feast of St. James marched
into Scotland; the Scots fearing his Power, Scots Sea Tho. de la Moor, f. 596.
n. 20. 30. The King raises an Army against the Scots, and goesin Person. The
Army b^ffled. The Scots invade England, plunder and burnt almost as far as York.
(ultra Mare Scoticum se conferunt, that is, Edinburgh Frith) carrying with
them and destroying all the Victuals on this side; and in a short time the King
returns into England, his Army not having wherewithal to subsist. The Scots
come over the Frith and follow him by Night-marches, and almost surprised him
in his Camp in Blackmore-Forest; but he escaping with a few, they took the Earl
of Richmond, and the King of France his Envoy, with many others, and waste the
York; they burnt Ripon, and compounded with Beverly for 400 l. Sterling, and
returned home laden with Spoils. [3] Walls. Hypo^. N^ustr. f. 503. n. 40. and
Hist. f. 17. n. 50 f. 18. lin. 1, etc. The King and Kingdom of Scotland send to
Rome to take off the Excommunication and Interdict, but prevail not.


The Two Cardinals [6] sent from the Pope in the 10th of the King (as there
noted) to make Peace between the Two Nations of England and Scotland, and
Reconcile the King and Earl of Lancaster; but their Negotiation being without
Effect in Scotland, Excommunicated Robert Brus King thereof, and put the whole
Kingdom under Interdict, for their Perfidiousness to the King of England. To
take off both, the Ibm. f. 505. n. 30, 40. and Hist. u^ supr^.
Bishop of Glasco, and the Earl of Murray, were sent to Rome by King and
Kingdom, but prevailed not, Satisfaction not having been given to the Pope, nor
King and Kingdom of England. Whereupon Robert Brus desired of the King of
England a Truce, De la Moor, ut supra. A Truce for 53 years between England and
Scotland.
which was granted to him for Thirteen Years.

Philip the Mexer. Hist. f. 345.
Fair of France left Three Sons, who all Reigned after him. Lewis the Eldest
Reigned but Nineteen Months; to him succeeded Philip called the Long, he
Reigned Five Years and Six Weeks, Ibm. f 349.
dying on the 3d of January at Bois de Vincennes, A. D. 1322. The Youngest
Brother Charles, called the Fair Ib. f. 350. Charles the Fair King of France.
Reims on the 11th of February following, A. D. 1322. all the Peers of France
assisting at that Solemnity, but the King of England, and Earl of Flanders.

This King not long after sent his Envoys Walls. Hist. f. 119. n. 20. f. 20. n.
10.
to cite King Edward to come and do his Homage for the Dukedom of Aquitan and
Earldom of Panthieu. The King sent wholly to excuse himself, or for but a time
to delay it, by Advice of his Council, De la Moor, f. 596, n. 20, 30, etc. He
summons K. Edward to do him Homage, who made his Excuse.
the Kent and Archbishop of Dublin; they were honorably received by the King
of France, but returned without obtaining what they were sent for.

The King of France took these Excuses for a Denial, and sent his Uncle Ibm. De
la Moor. n. 40, 50. which the K. of France took for a Denial, and sends to
seize the Duchy of Aquitan and Earldom of Ponthieu. A Truce between the two
Kings while a Peace made.
Charles of Valois, an Enemy to the English, for the Disobedience of King
Edward, in not doing his Homage, to seize the Duchy of Aquitan and Earldom of
Ponthieu: He took Possession Again, and some other Parts of that Dukedom, and
went to the Town of Regle, or Reole, which was Fortified, and the Earl of Kent,
the King's Brother, in it, which was yielded; and upon a Treaty between them
Two, a Truce was made, while the Two King's might agree upon a Peace.

In the mean time, the King accused Adam Walls. Hist f. 119. n. 30, 40, 50. The
King accused Adam Bishop of Hereford. His Excuse for not answering.
Bishop of Hereford in Parliament for Treason, for assisting his Enemies and
Canterbury (who was his Judge next to the Pope) and the other Bishops his
Peers. The Archbishop and Bishops hearing what he said, implored the King's
Favor for him, who not granting their Request, they challenged him as a Member
of the Church. A few days after, the King renewed his Accusation, when the
Archbishops of Canterbury, York, and Dublin, with Ten other Bishops, came to
the Place of Judgment, and took away their Brother without making Answer,
enjoining all Men, in the Name of God, not to lay violent hands upon him,
Anathematizing all that should do it. After this the King being much moved,
caused him to be Tried by a Jury of his Country, who found him Guilty;
whereupon all his Lands and Temporalities were seized.

The Claus. 1. Ed. 3. Part 1. M. 13. int^^^. His Crimes.
Record by which he was Restored to his Temporalities in the First of Edward
III. reciting the Record of his Trial in the Country, gives a more particular
Account of his Crimes, which informs us, That by Inquisition taken at Hereford
before the Justices of the King's Bench, it was presented, That Adam Bishop of
Hereford was of the Confederacy of Roger de Mortimer of Wigmore, who was then
reputed an Enemy and Rebel to the King his Father, and that he sent certain Men
at Arms to his Assistance; and then being accused for these things before the
Justices, and his Father, He pleads he cannot answer without offending God and
Holy Church, nor without leave of the Pope. He is found Guilty by Inquisition.
he alleged, that without offending God, and Holy Church, and without leave of
the Pope, he could not, or ought to answer, nor ought the Justices to proceed
to take the Inquisition; and though the Bishop submitted not to the
Inquisition, yet the Justices went on, and for that it was found by that
Inquisition that Roger, and sent to his assistance Men at Arms: It was adjudged
by the Justices, he should as convict remain in the Custody of the Archbishop
of Canterbury, and that his Lands and Tenements, Goods, and Chattels, should
His Lands, Tenements, etc. Adjudged to be Seized.
be seized into the King's Hands, and remained so seized, until the Date of
this Record, by which they were restored. Witness the King at Westminster, the
16th of February* in the First of his Reign.

After this Judgment given by the King's Justices, this De la Moor f. 597.
through out. He upon that Judgment endeavors to revive the Hatred of the
Nobility against the Spensers. And incense the Queen against them, and the King
her Husband.
Bishop used all means to revive the Hatred of the Nobility against the
Spensers, now laid asleep, and incensed the Queen against them, upon pretense
they advised the King to reduce her Family to a less Number, and Retrench her
Expenses, which (being a Lady affecting Prodigality) caused her Hatred not only
toward the Spensers, but also toward her Husband. He made use of the Bishop of
Lincoln, and both Bishops advised her, to take an Opportunity of making a Visit
to her Brother the King of France, and her Uncle Charles de Valois, and beg
their advice and help against the Spensers, which if she obtained, all things
would succeed according to her Desire.

At this time Ibm. The King intended to pass into France about a Treaty of
Peace.
according to the Truce made between Charles Valois, and the Earl of Kent when
he delivered up Reole, (as was noted before) a Peace was to be treated of
between the two Kings, for which purpose the King intended to pass the Sea
himself; but the Earls of Winchester and Gloucester, (for such were now the two
Spencers) dissuaded him, lest being left at home without Is dissuaded.
him, or if they should accompany him into France, they might fall into the
Hands of their Enemies. Ibm. The Queen makes means to go into France upon the
same Affair.
In the mean Lincoln and Hereford, and others of the Noblemen, the King was
prevailed with to send her into France; where she was kindly received by And
obtains her Desire.
her Brother, and Uncle, ( Dum causam mariti agit) while she Transacted her
Husband's Business, who staid upon the Goast all the time of Lent, and Summer,
for more easy receiving Letters Ea interim Ibm. and Walsingh. F. 121. N. 40,
50.
suas res agit.) In the mean time she did her own Business; and notwithstanding
the King's Commissioners, the Bishops of Winchester, and Norwich, and the Earl
of Richmond, by her Mediation the Bargain was made, or they received a Form of
Peace from the King of France, That if King Edward would give his Right in the
Dukedom of Aquitain, and Earldom of Pouthieu to his Son Edward, upon his doing
She bargains with her Brother, that if King Edward would give Aquitan and
Ponthieu to the Prince, upon doing his Homage he should have Seisin of them.
Upon that Agreement the Prince goes into France and does Homage.
Homage he would give him seisin of both; These Things agreed on both sides,
the King of France sent his Letters of Safe Conduct for the Prince, and the
King sent him with a Grant of those Lands to have and to hold them to himself
and Heirs, Kings of England; adding, That if the Son should die, living the
Father, they should return to him; and also other Conditions, by which it
should not be Lawful for the King of France to Marry De la Moor, Ut supra. and
Walsing. Ut supra. A. D. 1324. 18 Ed. II.
This Agreement was Confirmed by the Advice of the Prelates, and other Noblemen
at Dover, the Day after the Nativity of the Virgin Mary, in the Eighteenth of
the King; and on the Thursday following, Edward the Son, accompanied with the
Bishop of Excester and other Noblemen, went on Shipboard, and afterward about
the Feast of St. Matthew, did Homage to his Uncle of France, under Protestations
made on both sides; the whole Affair being France.

Soon after Michaelmas the King De la Moor, ut supra, and f. 589. lin. 1. etc.
The K. wrote to the Queen to return with his Son into England. She makes her
Excuse, having no Mind to return. The Bishop of Excester removed from her
secret Council.
wrote to her, That she would speedily bring her Son into England. She wrote
back, That the King of France her Brother, out of great Affection would have
them stay with him; and sending back the greatest Part of their Families, she
employed the residue of the Year, in prosecuting her own Designs. The Bishop of
Excester was sent over with the Prince, but was now removed from the Queen's
Secret Council, and Roger Mortimer and other Fugi^ib^s the King's Enemies, were
received into it. (...) ^6 Ed. 2. Part 1. M 34. Do^s. And Roger Mortimer taken
into it.
This Roger Mortimer the Younger, upon Trial for Treason had received Sentence
to be Drawn and Hanged, the King out of his special Grace, pardoned the
Execution of that Sentence, and willed that instead thereof he should be a
perpetual Prisoner, and assigned certain Justices to declare his Favor, and
adjudge him to Perpetual Prison; and not long after the De la Moor, F. 596. N.
50.
Escape out of the Tower of London, and got into France.

The King much moved at the Queen's stay, and Detaining his Son out of the
Kingdom, some Ibm. ^. 598. ^. 10. Reasons why the Queen (...) France.
to salve the Matter, said they were unwillingly Detained; others guessing that
she was so bound by the Unlawful Embraces of Mortimer, that without him, and
the other Eugitives, she would not return.

However it was, The King Claus. 19 E. 2. M. 2. Dors. The King sent and wrote
often to the Queen to return out of France. The fear of Hugh Spenser the
Younger was her Chief Excuse. The King answers all her Excuses.
sent and wrote to her often times to return home, Expressing great Kindness to
her, and grief of Mind for her absence; many feigned Excuses she had for her
not coming, but the Chief was the Danger and Fear she was in of Hugh le
Dispencer the Younger, which she sent to him by the Bishop of Winchester, with
her Letters of Credence; in answer to which the King wrote, That he as much
wondered as he could, seeing King attesting the same; and therefore the Homage
being done to his Brother of France, and that they were in so fair a way of
Affection one to another, he Commanded and Charged her as much as he could,
That all And charge and commands her to come to him in all haste.
feigned Matters and Excuses laid aside she should come to him with all haste,
( Par qui uous vous mandoms and chargeoms en quanque nous pooms, que totes
tieles Enchesons feints, and autres chooses lessees and excusations cessantes,
reigns a nous od tote have) for that the Bishop had told him, That his Brother
the King of France in his Presence told her, That according to the Tenor of her
Safe Conduct she should not be disturbed nor stayed from coming to him Edward
He also Willed and Commanded her to send his Son to him.
to come to him, as he had commanded him. And whereas at the time Walter Bishop
of Excester was lately with her, he had been certainly informed, That some of
his Enemies, and his Banished People, waited to Destroy him, if they had
opportunity; to aavoid Westminster the First of December.

At the same time, Ibm.
the King of France by the Bishop of Winchester, wrote to him, and sent a
Message by word of Mouth, That The King of France wrote the Queen dare not come
to K. Edward for fear of her Life and Hugh Spenser.
he had been informed by Persons of Credit, that the Queen dare not come to him
for fear of her Life and Hugh le Despenser; to which excuse he made the same
answer he had done to his Queen, and averred by Oath, That if the said Hugh, or
any other Living in his Kingdom, or in his power, should offer any Ill to her,
and he could know it, he would make them severe Examples to all others, and
beseeched him not to believe those that told him other King Edward's Answer to
that, and other things.
things, for that he had and ought to have greater Reason to know He prays him
to send his Wife to him.
for the Honor of themselves and of her, being much disturbed for want of her
Company.

He also earnestly prayed him to dispatch his Son Edward, and And to dispatch
his Son's Business, and suffer him to come to him.
deliver and surrender to him the Duchy and Lands, which he preserved out of
affection to him, that he might not be Disherited; Excester's sudden leaving
France, returning into England, as he had done in the Letter to his Queen,
Dated as above, at the same Place.

The Ibm.
like Letters were sent to

His Friends and Peers of France.
The Archbishop of Rhems, The Bishop of Laon, The Bishop of Beavois, The Duke
of Burgundy, The Duke of Britan, The Earl of Flanders, The Earl of Valois, The
Abbot of St. Denis.
Peers of France.
The Archbishop of Roan, The Bishop of Langres,
Gaucher Chastillon, Constable of France.

His Relations, but not Peers.
The Lord of Cossi, Jews Earl of Clermont, Robert de Artois E. of Beaumont.
The next day the King Ibm. The K* wrote to his Son to return without his
Mother if she could not.
wrote to his Son, that though he was young, and of tender Age, yet he might
remember what he Commanded him, and charged him with at his departure from
Dover; and also what Answer he made him then. That when the King of France had
received his Homage, he should take his leave of his Uncle, and return to him
with his most Dear Companion, the Queen his Mother if she could come so soon,
if not, he should come without her, and should not omit it any manner, neither
for his Mother, or any other, upon his Blessing. Dated at Westminster, the
Second Day of December.

His Son wrote an Answer to this Letter, as appears by Ibm. The Prince answered
his Father's Letter, and he wrote a Second Letter to him.
another of his Father's to him in March following, wherein he acknowledges he
did remember what he was charged with at Dover, and especially not to marry
without his Consent, and what he said there to his Father at his Departure, and
promised in this Answer to do always his Commands and Pleasure to his power.
Whereupon the King in this second Letter, strictly charge The Contents of the
King's second Letter.
him again, well to remember those things, and in no case to Marry, or suffer
himself to be Married without his assent, nor before he should come to him, nor
do any thing that might turn to his Damage or Trouble of Mind; and as to what
his Son said in his answer, That he could not come over so soon as he commanded
him, by reason of his Mother, nor leave her, being bound by Nature to perform
his Duty to her; to which he rejoined in these Words, ( Beaufitz vous saves
coment nous lavoms amee, and cherie and verroiement, si ele se eust portee verse
nous come fair denst, and come bone feme verse son Seigneur, etc.) Good Son,
you know how much I should have Loved and Cherished her, and truly if she had
carried her self toward us, as she ought to have done, and as a good Woman or
Wife toward her Lord. But whereas she feigned an Occasion to withdraw from us,
(ele se feign encheson de se retrere de nous) by reason of our Dear Nephew,
and faithful Hugh le Despenser, who has always loyally The Queen's Kindness to
Mortimer.
served me: You see, and all the World may see, that she openly, notoriously,
and designedly, against her Duty, and against the Estate of our Crown, which
she is bound to favor and maintain, has drawn to her, and retains in her
Company and Council (attree a soi and in sa compaignie reteint de son conseil
le Mortimer, etc.) Mortimer our Traitor and Mortal Enemy, proved Attaint, and
in full Parliament so judged, and keeps him Company every where in House and
abroad, in despite of us and our Crown, and the Laws of the Realm; Whom at
another time your Uncle Banished his Kingdom at our Request, as our Enemy; and
yet she does worse, if worse can be, in bringing you into his Company, and
making him your Counselor, and She makes him her Son's Companion and
Counselor.
making you adhere and stick to him openly and notoriously in the face of the
World, to the greatest Dishonor of us and you, and in prejudice of our Crown,
and the Laws, and the Vsages of the Laws of England, the which above all things
you are bound to Preserve and Maintain, (as queux vous estes sovereinment
tenuz, saves, and maintenir) and therefore he Commands and Charge him upon
his The King commands him to return notwithstanding any feigned Excuses.
Faith, Amity, and Legeance, and his own Blessing, that he come to him with
what speed he can, notwithstanding the foresaid Excuses, or any other; his
Mother having wrote, that if he would return, she would not hinder him, (car
vostre Mere nous ad Escrit, que si vous voillez returner ele ne vous
disturbereit pas) and he could not understand his Uncle should hinder him
against the Tenor of his Safe Conduct. Given at Lichfield the 18th of March.

At the same time King Edward Ibm. King Edward Answers the King of France his
Letter concerning his Queen.
wrote to his Dear Brother the King of France, That he had considered his
Letters, wherein he signified to him, he had seriously Discoursed his Sister,
about the Reason and Things to which he had Answered, and that she had told
him, she desired only to be with him, and in his Company, as a good Wife ought
to be with her Lord, ( and que ele vous ad dit, qele desire tant etc.) and that
the seeming Amity between her and his Nephew Hugh le Despenser was only
feigned, yet it was convenient to keep it up to gain time, and avoid worse
things. To disprove what she said to her Brother the King of France, he
reminded him of what great Amity and Kindness she often pretended to Hugh
Despenser since her being there; and repeats the Intimacy between Mortimer and
his Wife, and how she was wholly advised and directed by him, and did whatever
he advised in the same Words and Manner as in the last Letter to his Son, and
then desires him to restore the Duchy of Aquitain, etc. to him, without having
regard to the wilful humor of a Woman, and send him his Pleasure by the
Bearer. Given at Lichfield, March 18. on the same day as before.

On the 15th of April next following, the King Rot. Romans 19 Ed. II. M. 3. He
writes to the Pope about the Affair of his Queen.
wrote to the Pope, and sent him a Transcript of what had passed between
himself, the King of France, his Sister the Queen, and his Son, France,
heartily beseeching him to read and consider them, and apply such Remedy for
the removing the Matter of Scandal and Dissension, and the Dangers that might
proceed from thence, as he should think fit, promising wholly to be directed by
his Advice. Given at Knelworth the 15th day of April.

All these Letters, all these Mediators, could not bring her into Neither
Letters nor Mediators could bring the Queen into England, until her Design was
ripe.
England, until her Design was Ripe, and that she could come with Force; yet in
all probability, they caused her either to quit, or be thrust out of France;
Tho some of our Historians, and the French Historian Fol. 3^^, 352. The
Historians Account of the Transactions between the King and Queen at this time.
Mezeray, (who understood nothing of this Story, as appears by his Writing) and
all from Froysard, Report, That by the Arts of the Spencers, and the Money
given Charles the Fourth of France, and scattered in his Court, and to the Pope
himself, and distributed in his Court, that made them their Friends, so that
her Brother forbad all Persons to assist her, and commanded her to go out of
his Dominions.

Take the Original from F. 1. a. col. 1. in the Prologue to the First Volume,
Printed at London, 1520. Especially at Froysard.
Froysart, who says he wrote his Chronicle from the Chronicles of Sir John la
Bele, Canon of Lambert's of Liege, an Intimate, and of the Secret Council of
John of Haynault.

The Barons [9] could not bear or suffer Hugh Spenser's favor with the King
any longer, but sought each other amongst themselves, [9] Ib. f. 3. a. col. 1.
c. 8.
to be of a Peaceable Accord, and sent secretly to the Queen, who had been at
Paris three years, (which was false by two parts of the time) signifying to
her, if she could come into England with One thousand Men at Arms, and bring
her Son and Heir with her, they would all come to her, and her Son Edward; She
showed these Letters to the King of France, who promised such Assistance, and
to furnish her with Money; She was providing for her Voyage, of which Hugh
Spencer had notice, The King of France corrupted with Money.
who contrived with Gifts to Buy off the King of France, and sent secret
Messengers, with plenty of Gold, Silver, and Jewels into France, and especially
to the King, and his Privy Council, King forbad under pain of Banishment, That
none of his Subjects should assist the Queen to go into England by force; and
further, Hugh Ib. col. 2.
Spencer, out of his Malice to the Queen, to get her under the King's Power,
and his, caused the King to write to the Pope, That he would write to the King
of France, to send his Wife again into England, for he would acquit himself to
God and the World, that it was not his fault, that she departed from him, for
he would nothing to her, but

Also he sent Ibm. The Pope and Cardinals corrupted with Gold and Silver.
Gold and Silver great plenty, to diverse Cardinals and Prelates who had most
power with the Pope, (who lead the Pope by such-wise, with their Gifts and
subtle ways) that he wrote to the King of France, That on pain of Cursing, he
should send his Sister Isabel into England, to the King her Husband: These
Letters were brought to the King of France by the Bishop of Xaints, when he had
read them, they were showed to the Queen his Sister, and then commanded her
speedily to avoid his Kingdom, or he would make her to avoid it with shame.

By this means Ib. cap. 9. Robert of Artois his Advice to the Queen.
all the Barons of France were withdrawn from the Queen, except Robert of
Artois her Dear Cousin, who privately advised and encouraged her; and gave her
secret notice, That her Ib. f. 3. b. col. 1.
Brother would deliver her, her Son, and the Earl of Kent, King Edward's
Brother, and Sir Roger Mortimer, She goes out of France to William Earl of
Haynault.
to the King and Hugh Spencer, and advised her to go into the Empire to William
Earl of Haynault, and Sir John of Haynault

The Earl received her with Joy at Valenciennes, and Ib. fol. 4. col. 1. He
received her kindly, and brings forth his four Daughters. The Prince likes
Philip best
brought forth his four Daughters, Margaret, Philip, Jane, and Isabell, the
Prince liked Philip best, and she kept him Company during his stay there.

Walsingham Fol. 123. lin. 1, etc.
tells us, that the King, as 'twas reported, ( prout dicitur) had procured the
Death of his Wife, and Son Edward, and that John of Britania, Earl of Richmond,
her Familiar, was to have been the Executioner, but that perceiving the
Noblemen of France to have been corrupted by large Gifts, and that there was no
safety to be expected there, she fled privately with her Son and Family (or
Followers) to the Earl of Haynault, of whom they were Honorably and
Magnificently received.

Whether she was commanded by her Brother, or fled privately France, certain it
is she Ib. n. 20. And was contracted to her.
went to the Earl of Hanault, and having Contracted her Son to his Daughter
Philip, ( Fol. 598. n. 10.
Sir Thomas de la Moor says, Married him to her, without the Advice of the
Nobility;) by his Assistance, who provided Men and Ships, Walsingh. at supra.
The Earl of Haynault furnishes the Queen with Ships and Forces to come for
England
she came for England, with her Son, (then not Fourteen years of Age) Edmond
Earl of Kent the King's Brother, Roger Mortimer, and many others, who were
forced, or England, and with 2757 Men at Arms, commanded by John of Hanault,
the Earl's Brother, and landed at Ibm. and Anglia sacra, part prima, f. 366.
She lands at Harwich.
Harwich on Wednesday before Michaelmas-day, where she was joined by the Earl
Walsing. Ib. n. 30. Several Bishops, Earls, and Barons, join with her.
Marshal, the Earl of Leicester, and other Barons, and Knights, ( cum Praelatis
fere omnibus) with almost all the Prelates, but chiefly with the Bishops of
Lincoln, Hereford, Dublin, and Ely, who together made her up a great Army, Ibm.
which being refreshed at St. Edmunds-Bury, she went forward to seek out her
[2] Ut supra, n. 20.


On the 28th of September, the King issued his Proclamation against Append. n.
68. A. D. 1329. 20 Ed. II. The King proclaims Mortimer Traitor, etc.
Roger Mortimer, giving notice, That he and the other Traitors had entered his
Kingdom by force, and had brought with them Aliens and Strangers, and taken
upon them Royal Power over him, and that therefore he was resolved to oppose
them in Person, to Arrest and destroy them and all their Company and Queen, his
Son, and Earl of Kent, who he would by all possible means to be as safe as
before their landing; and summoned all Persons that by their Ligeance were
obliged, to come with all their Force and Power, in Defense of him, themselves,
and the Kingdom, and for the Ease of the People he promised to pay the Soldiers
Wages; and also promised to all Great Men his Charters of Pardon for Felony or
Adherance to his Enemies, as well in times past, as at present; and for
Outlawry for what Cause soever, except the Traitor Roger Mortimer, and the
great Managers of the People which came from beyond Sea with him, and those
that killed Sir Roger Boler; and then promised 1000 l. Sterling and Pardon to
any one should bring him the Body or Head of Roger Mortimer. Given under his
Great Seal at the Tower of London, the 28th of September.

This Proclamation has not its desired Effect, the People having The
Proclamation without effect.
been so prepossessed with strange Notions, and Jealousies concerning the King,
and both the Spencers, and the strange things the Queen and Mortimer would do
for Holy Church, themselves, and the Kingdom, that in her March, her Army daily
increased, and the King's decreased; She did no injury Ibm.
to the Bodies Goods of any but her Enemies, which she sought out, and [7] Ib.
n. 40.
every where applied their Goods to her own use, and destroyed their Farms.

The Queen's Army was much De la Moor, f. 598 n. 30, 40. The Queen's Army much
increased.
increased by some Bishops Letters wrote to their Fellow Bishops, and other
Friends, that there were so many Dukes, Earls, and Barons, with their Troops,
sent by the King of France, to defend the Right of his Sister, as England could
scarce feed them.

And also by another Lie spread all over the Kingdom, That Her Cause carried on
by Lies.
the Pope had absolved all Englishmen from their Oath of Fealty sworn to the
King, and that he had thundered out the Sentence of Excommunication against all
those that bare Arms against the Queen, Praeterea profiluit Ibm.
Mendacium, ab exercitu in omnes Regni parts divulgatum, quod summus pontifex
Romanus omnes Anglos absolvit a fidelitate jurata suo Regi, etc. For the
Confirmation of which Lie, it was pretended there were Two Cardinals with the
Queen in the Army, sent to her with these Favors from the Pope. Ad hujus
Mendacii confirmationem, etc.

The Queen upon her Landing emitted a Proclamation, Walsingh. f. 124. lin. 1,
etc.
That all should enjoy Peace and Quiet, except the Public Enemies of the
Kingdom, the Two Despensers Father and Son, and Robert The Queen's Proclamation.
Baldock the King's Chancellor, and their Favorers, who were the Cause of the
present Disturbance of the Nation; That no Goods should be taken from any
without the Consent of the Punishments for Plunderers.
Owners, if above the value of 3 d. (then a days Wages for a Common Soldier)
his Finger was to be cut off; nor 6 d. (the Wages of an Hobelor) under Pain of
his Hand being cut off, ( nec valorem Duodeci(...) Sterlingorum) which I
Translate 12 d. the daily Wages of a Man at Arms) upon Pain of Death.

The King then at London requested Assistance of the Ib. f. 123. n 40. The
Londoners refuse to give the King Assistance.
Londoners, who refused to aid him, whereupon he [3] left the City, and went
Westward; In the mean time the Londoners, who were always in a fury, when they
had a liberty of being Insolent, pretending Friendship to the Queen, ( dum Ib.
f. 124. n. 10, 20
haec aguntur Londinenses, nenses, quibus nunquam deest furia, cum adest
insolendi licentia) gathering together the Rabble of all Artificers, (
Congregatis de cunctis artificiis, infirmis personis, etc.) taking Arms, and
seize The Rabble seize their Major.
their Major, threatening to kill him if he would not swear to Consent to their
Orders, which he did, to save his Life, Fecerunt Ibm. They Consederate to kill
the Queen's Enemies, etc.
igitur Conjurationem, etc. And they made a Confederacy, That the Queen's
Enemies wherever to be found, of what State or Condition soever they were, or
such as should procure any Damage Liberties of the City, should be put to Death.

Under pretense of this Oath, Ibm. They cut off John Marchal's Head, Hugh
Spenser's Servant.
they presently took John Marchal, Servant to Hugh Spenser the Younger, ( and
ejus caput immisericorditer amputarunt) and unmercifully cut off his Head, and
plundered all his Goods; and on the same day continuing their Madness, ( Ib. n.
30. They plunder the Bishop of Execser's House, and cut off his Head.
eodem die continuantes suam Rabiem) they ran to the Bishop of Excester's
House, setting fire to the Gates, entering, plundered his Jewels, Plate, and
Household Stuff; and coming out of the Fields on Horseback to the North Door of
[6] St. Paul's, the mad People took, beat, wounded, and threw him off his Horse,
and dragged him into Cheapside, where they proclaimed him a Public Traitor,
and cut off his Head. The Reason of their Fury against this Bishop Ibm. n. 40,
50. The Reason of their fury against this Bishop.
was, That being Treasurer of the Kingdom, he had persuaded the King's Council,
that the Itinerant Justices might sit in London, Ibm.
who found Citizens had offended in many things, for which they lost their
Liberties, some were Fined, and others had Corporal Punishment.

Next day they seized the Ibm. They seize the Constable of the Tower. Prisoners
set free all England over. Fugitives and Banished Persons return into England.
Constable of the Tower, and took the Keys from him, and set free all the
Prisoners, and so it was all over England, and at the same time all Fugitives
and Banished Persons returned.

We have a further Account of the Death of the Bishop of Excester, and some of
these things, from Hist. sacra. f. 366. Another Account of the Murder of the
Bishop of Excester.
William de Dene, a Public Notary of the Church of Rochester, living at the
time. The Archbishop, 15 days after Michaelmas, intended to have held a Treaty
with the Bishops at St. Paul's, about sending some of their own Order to the
King and Queen as Mediators of Peace between them; The Bishop of Rochester
dissuaded his going into the City, or beyond the Thames, to Treat, being then
at Lambeth, telling him the Hearts of the People were against the Bishops, and
that they hated them, imputing all the Evil that had happened in the Nation to
their Sloathfulness, Foolishness, and Ignorance; Next day they met at Lambeth,
and Resolved to send Two; The Bishop of Winchester was willing to go for one,
but could not get a Companion. Ibm. All sorts of Citizens meet at Guildhall,
and contrive how to put to Death the Bishops of London and Excester, and the
King's other Justices.
Die Mercurii proximo ante Festum St. Lucae convenerunt apud la Gyld-Hall, etc.
On Wednesday before St. Luke the Citizens, great majores and minores) met at
the Guildhall, where they contrived how they might take, and put to Death, the
Bishops of London, and Excester, and the King's other Justices, and how they
might Plunder the Merchants, and Mercatores in Civitate depraedarent, taking
the occasion of the Queen's coming, Ibm. The Queen comes to London. All her
Enemies that adhered not to her.
accepta occasion de adventu Reginae, quod Reginae adhaerere no^entes
proditores Regni public censerentur, because those that would not adhere to
the Queen were publicly Reputed Traitors to the Kingdom. The Justices were
then met at the Friars Preachers, and the Bishop of Excester was flying to St.
Paul's Church, they caught him at the Door, beat and grievously wounded him,
and drew him through the Streets and Lanes to the Great Cross in Cheapside,
where the Sons of the Devil, ( Filii Diaboli Virum fidelem, providum, and
discretum, ac Regno valde necessarium truculenter decapitarunt) Beheaded Tunc
conturbata est tota Ibm. Those who were called the Queen's Enemies were
plundered all the Nation over.
Terra, and in circuitu impii ambulantes, animalia and alia bona pacificorum,
quos hosts Reginae dixerant, sub tali color ubique depraedantes abduxerunt:
Then the whole Nation was in confusion; and the Wicked calling peaceable Men
the Queen's Enemies, and under that color took away and plundered their Goods.

The King not thinking himself safe there, had left London before De la Moor, f
598 n. 50. The King goes into Wales.
by such as he had sent to make a Discovery, that almost all the Nobility,
afrighted with false Reports ( tota fere Regni Communitas falsis territa
rumoribus) had come in to the Queen, went in Ibm. Sets H. Spenser the Father to
defend the Town and Castle of Bristol.
Wales; and having appointed Hugh Despenser the Father, then Earl of
Winchester, to defend the Town and Castle of Bristol, went with Hugh the Son,
then Earl of Gloucester, Robert Baldock, and few others to Ibm. and Walls. f.
125. n. 10. The King lay close in the Abbey of Neath in Glamorganshire.
Chepstow, and there took Ship, intending for the Island of Lundy, or Ireland;
but the Wind being cross, he could make neither, and having undergone much
Hardship at Sea, he landed, and got to the Abbey of Nethe in Glamorganshire,
where he lay close,

In the mean time, the Queen followed him with her Army, and sent these Letters
abroad, to command and draw in the Ibm. Append n. 69. The Queen's Letter, by
which she commanded and drew in the People to her Assistance.
Isabel by the Grace of God Queen of England, Dame of Ireland, Countess of
Pontif, or Ponthieu; and we Edward, Eldest Son to the Noble King of England,
Duke of Guyen, Earl of Chester, Pontif, and Monstroil, or Monstrevil; and we
Edmond, Son to the Noble King of England, Earl of Kent, To all those to whom
these Letters shall come, Greeting: Whereas it is notoriously known, That the
State of Holy Church and the Realm of England, are many ways blemished and
abased, by the Evil Counsel and Abett of Hugh le Despenser, who by Pride and a
Desire to Lord it, and set himself over all others, has taken upon him Royal
Power against Right, Reason, and his Allegiance; and in like manner made use of
all the Evil Counsel of Robert Baldock and others his Adherents, so as Holy
Church is reviled, and shamefully put under great Subjection, Her care of Holy
Church, and the Prelates of Holy Church.
and the Prelates of Holy Church spoiled of their Goods against God and Right;
Holy Church defamed and dishonored many ways, and the Crown of England
destroyed in diverse manners, in Disheritance of our Lord the King, and his
Heirs, the Great Men of the Realm, by the Envy and wicked Cruelty of the said
Hugh; many of them, without Fault and without Cause, put to shameful Death;
some Disherited, others Imprisoned, Banished, and Exiled; Widows and Orphans
wrongfully forejudged of their Right, and the People of the Land, by diverse
Tallages and undue Exactions very often burdened, and by diverse Oppressions
grieved without Mercy. By which Offenses the said Hugh has shown himself an
open Tyrant and Enemy to God and Holy Church, to our most dear Lord the King,
and to the whole Realm. And we, and many others with us, and in our Company,
who have long been estranged from the good Pleasure of our Lord the King, by
the false Suggestions and Evil Procurement of the aforesaid Hugh and Robert,
and their Adherents, are come into the Land to raise the State of Holy Church
and the Realm, and to defend the People from these Mischiefs and grievous
Oppressions, and to maintain to our Power the Honor and Profit of Holy Church,
and our Lord the King and the whole Realm, as abovesaid. Wherefore we command
and pray you for the Common Profit of you and every one of you, to be Aidant to
us at all times and in all places, and by all the ways you know or can, that
the things abovesaid may be speedily brought to a good Effect and End. For know
certainly, That all we, and all those with us, will not undertake any thing
that shall not be for the Honor and Profit of Holy Church, and of the whole
Kingdom, as in time you will see and find, if God please. Given at Wallingford
the 15th Day of October, in the Twentieth Year of the Reign of our most dear
Lord the King.

From Wallingford she marched to Oxford, and so in a short Bristol taken.
time to Bristol, which she besieged, and soon took; and the next day after she
came thither, De la Moor, f. 599. n. 50. H. Despenser the Father drawn and
hanged.
Hugh Despenser the Father, Earl of Winchester, was Drawn and Hanged upon the
Common Gallows, Hearing or Trial, on the Aist. Sacr. vol. 1. f. 18. The Queen
at Hereford a Month.
Vigil of Simon and Jude, or the 27th of October.

Then the Queen went into the Marches of Wales, and staid at Ib. and f. 600.
The Queen goes with her Army into the Marches of Wales to find out the King,
and takes him with H. Despenser the Younger and others.
Hereford a Month, from whence she sent Henry Earl of Lancaster, and Rhese ap
Howel a Clerc and Welsh-man, who knew those Parts well, with part of her Army
to find out the King, and by Money corrupted the Welsh-men, so as they
discovered him to be in the Abbey aforesaid, where he was taken, with Hugh
Despenser the Younger, Robert Baldock, and Simon de Reding, Ibm.
who were committed to the Custody of the Earl, by the Advice of the Bishop of
Hereford.

Before it was known where the King was, it was supposed he had left Append. n.
70. It was supposed the King was out of England.
England, and 4 quitted the Government; whereupon on the 26th Day of October,
at Bristol, the Archbishop of Dublin, Winchester, Ely, Lincoln, Hereford,
Norwich, and other Prelates, and Thomas Earl of Norfolk, Edmund Earl of Kent,
the King's Brothers, Henry Earl of Lancaster and Leicester, Thomas Wake, Henry
de Bello Monte, or Beaumont, William la Zouche de Ashby, Robert de Monte alto,
or Montalt, Robert de Morle, Robert de Wattevile, and other Barons and Knights
in the Presence of the Queen and the Duke of Aquitan her Son, by the Consent of
the whole Community of England, being then present, unanimously The Prince or
Duke of ^ Aquitan made Guardian of the Kingdom.
said Duke and Guardian should Govern the Kingdom in the Name and Right of the
King his Father in his absence: And he took the Government of the Kingdom upon
him accordingly, and passed all Matters under his Privy Seal, not having any
other. Afterward, on the 20th of November, when the Queen's and Duke's Enemies
were taken, and the King was returned into his Kingdom, the Queen, Duke,
Prelates, and Noblemen aforesaid, with the Assent of the Community aforesaid,
then being at Hereford, by reason that the Power of the Guardian ceased by the
King's coming into his Kingdom, sent the Bishop of Hereford to The Great Seal
sent to the Queen and her Son.
the King, then at Monmouth, to beseech him to Command, That all things that
might tend to the Peace of the Kingdom, might be Sealed with the Great Seal
then with him. This was done in the Lancaster, etc. and the King was prevailed
on to send the Seal to his Wife and Son to Ibm. [6] Walls. f. 125. n 30, 40. The
King carried to Kenelworth-Castle. The Earl of Arundel and 2. others Heads
struck off at Hereford.
Seal what they would with it.

Whilst the Earl of Lancaster was carrying the King through Wales, [6] by
Monmouth, Lidbury, and other Places, to his Castle of Kenelworth in
Warwickshire, they sent Hugh Spenser the Son, Robert Baldock, and Simon Reding,
to the Queen at Hereford. Before Arundel, John Daniel, and Thomas Micheldene,
had their Heads struck off by the Procurement and Hatred of Roger Mortimer, who
Ibm. n 40, 50. Mortimer the Queen's most familiar Counselor.
was at this time the Queen's most familiar Counselor ( Consiliarius Reginae
familiarissimus) without whom the Queen did nothing. Ibm. n. 40, 50.
Those that brought Hugh Spenser, for their Reward had Two thousand Pounds, as
she had promised. And Ibm. H. Despenser the Son drawn, hanged, and quartered.
soon after he was adjudged to Death, without being put to answer, ( sine
Responsione) and was Drawn Hanged upon a Gallows 50 Foot high, and then
Quartered, and his Head fixed upon London Bridge. Ib f. 126. lin. 3. Simon
Reding drawn and hanged.
On the same Day Simon Reding was Drawn and Hanged for speaking hard things of
the Queen.

Yet Knighton Col. 2547. n. 10, 20, etc. Knighton's Relation of the Judgment of
H. Despenser the Son.
reports Hugh Spenser the Younger was Arraigned before Sir William Trussel, a
Justiciary, in the Form there mentioned, which was by way of a Speech made
against him, as

Hugh le Despenser Ibm. Sir W. Trussell's Speech against H. Despenser the Son.
in the Parliament at Westminster, in the 15th of the King, your Father and you
Hugh were awarded Traitors and Enemies of the Realm, and Banished as such,
never to return without the Assent of the King in full Parliament duly
summoned. Contrary to which Award, your Father and you Hugh were found in the
Court without Warrant: And you Hugh, as you returned into the Kingdom,
feloniously spoiled and robbed Two Domands (Merchant-Ships so called) of Goods
to the Value of Forty thousand Pounds. Hugh, after this Felony, you came to the
King, and caused him to go with Force against the Peers of the Realm, and other
his Liege People, to destroy and disherit them, contrary to the Great Charter:
And also taking upon you Royal Power, you Hugh and your Assistants, with Force
and Arms, robbed feloniously the good People of the Realm; and by Andrew
Harleye, and other Traitors your Adherents, Murdered the good Earl of Hereford,
Monsieur William Sullee, and Monsieur Roger de Berfelde ( at Borough-Bridge)
and caused to be taken my most Honorable Lord Thomas the Good Earl of
Lancaster, and caused him to be Judged by a false Record, against Law, Reason,
and the Great Charter, and also to be Murdered, Martyred, and put to a cruel
Death. Also in the same March (in the French Journey) to Borough-Bridge, you
caused many of my Lords (the Earl of Lancaster) Barons and Knights to be Drawn
and Hanged, by false Record against Law and Reason, Col. 2548. n. 10, 20, 30.
and caused other Great Men to be put in Prison and Murdered to get their
Estates, as Roger Mortimer the Nephew and Uncle, Hugh Audeley Father and Son,
and the Earl of Hereford. Hugh, after this Destruction of the Nobility, you
Hugh, your Father, and Robert Baldock, usurping Royal Power over the King, led
him and his People into Scotland against his Enemies, where you Hugh by your
Traitorous Conduct caused him to lose 20000 of his People, to his great
Dishonor, and Damage of the Realm, and to return without doing any thing.

Hugh, Ibm. n. 40, 50, 60.
this Treason nor this Tyranny would satisfy you, until by Royal Power gained
over the King, you destroyed the Franchises of Holy Church and the Prelates, as
the Bishops of Hereford, Lincoln, and Norwich, taking their Goods out of their
Churches: And whereas you knew God had done great Things by my Lord (the Earl
of Lancaster) you caused to be murdered, you placed armed Guards, and shut the
Church-Doors, that none should enter to Honor God and his Saints. Hugh, after
these Mischiefs, you advised the King to give unto the false Traitor the Earl
of Winchester, Andrew Harkley, and self, Lands properly belonging to the Crown,
in Disherision thereof. Ibm. Col. 2549. n. 10, 20.
Hugh, whereas the Queen and her Son passed beyond Sea by the King's Command to
save the Country of Guyen, in point to be lost by your Traitorous Counsel, you
sent over a great Sum of Money to some of your wicked Adherents, to destroy the
Queen and her Son, (qest Droit heir del Realm) who is Right Heir of the
Kingdom, and to hinder their coming over. Ibm.
Hugh, your Father, Robert Baldock, and self, and other false Traitors your
Adherents, taking upon you Royal Power, made great and small by force to swear
to, and assure you, to maintain you in your false Quarrels or Pretenses (en
vouz faux Quereles) not having regard that such Confederacies were False and
Traitorous, against Legience and the State of the King and his Crown. Ibm. n.
30, 40.
And forasmuch as you Hugh, and other Traitors, knew that the Queen and her Son
were arrived in the Nation, by your Evil Counsel you caused the King to
withdraw himself, and go from them, and carried him out of the Kingdom, to the
Danger of his Body, and Dishonor to him and his People, feloniously taking
with you the Treasure of the Realm, contrary to the Great Charter.

Hugh Ibm. The Judgment upon H. le Despenser the Son.
you are found Traitor, wherefore all the good People of That you are found as
a Thief, and therefore shall be Hanged; and are found as a Traitor, and
therefore shall be Drawn and Quartered; and for that you have been Outlawed by
the King, and by Common Assent, and returned to the Court without Warrant, you
shall be Beheaded (vous serrez decollez) and for that you abetted and procured
Discord between the King and Queen, and others of the Realm, you shall be
Embowelled, and your Bowels burnt. Ibm. n. 50.
Withdraw, Traitor, Tyrant, and so go take your Judgment, attainted wicked
Traitor.

He was at this time Earl of Gloucester; and I see no Trial by Common Jury, or
his Peers; and the Attaint was only this Speech made against, and most what was
objected to him, had been Pardoned by Act of Parliament. ( Et sic Ibm. His
Executioc.
statim morte plexus est Octavo Kalendarum Decembris) And so he was presently
put to Death, on the 8th of the Kalends of December, or 24th of November.

The Earl of Lancaster made no great haste with his Prisoner the King to
Kenelworth, for in 13 Days time he was got no further Monmouth than Lidbury in
Herefordshire, at which Place the Append. n. 71.
Writ for Proroguing a Parliament that was pretended to have been Summoned by
the King to meet 15 Days after St. Andrew, was Dated the 3d of December ( Test
Rege apud Lidbury, tertio die Decembris, 20 Ed. II.) Witness the King at
Lidbury the A Parliament to be holden by the Queen and her Son, if the King not
in England. Prorogued to the morrow of Twelfthday. The King* knew nothing of
the Writ of Prorogation dated December. 3.
3d of December. The Writ for this Parliament, which was to meet 15 Days after
St. Andrew, I believe can no where be found, which was to be holden by Isabel
Queen-Consort of England, and Edward his Eldest Son Guardian of England, he
then being out of the Kingdom, as it is said in the Writ, Dated the 3d of
December, etc. for Proroguing that Parliament to the morrow of Epiphany, or
Twelfth-Day; To be holden by him if Personally present, or in his absence by
his said Consort and Son. But the miserable King knew nothing of this Summons
Dated at Lidbury on the 3d of December, with his Test; for the Great Seal was
that Day in the keeping of the Bishop of Norwich at Wodstock, and the next Day
delivered to Roger Mortimer and the Duke of Aquitan ( i. e. Edward the King's
Son) at the same Place, as it most certainly appears by the Record in the
Appendix, The Parliament met according to the Prorogation. [4] Hist. Sacr. vol.
1. f. 367. The first thing moved in it, was, Whether the Father or Son should
be King.
n. 70.

The Parliament (as it is called) met crastino Epiphaniae, or 7th of January: The
first thing moved by the Bishop of [4] Hereford, and many other Bishops joining
with him, was, Whether King Edward the Father, or his Son Edward, should Reign
over them? They were Agreed the Son should have the Government of the Kingdom,
and be Crowned King Append. n. 72. It was carried for the Son. The Reasons why
he was deposed.
for the Causes following:

1. First, For that the Person of the King was not sufficient to Govern; for in
all his time he was Led and Governed by others, who gave him Evil Counsel, to
the Dishonor of himself, and Destruction of Holy Church and all his People,
not 2. Also, In all his time he would not give himself to Good Counsel, nor
take it, nor to the Good Government of his Kingdom; but always gave himself to
Works and Employments 3. Also, For want of Good Government he lost the Kingdom
of Scotland, and other Lands and Dominions in Gascoigne and Ireland, which his
Father left him in Peace and Amity with the King of France, and many other
Great Persons. 4. Also, By his Pride and Cruelty he destroyed Holy Church, and
the Persons of Holy Church, putting some in Prison, and others in Distress; and
also put to shameful Death, and Imprisoned, Banished, and Disherited many Great
and Noble Men of the Land. 5. Also, Whereas he was bound by his Oath to do
Right to all, he would not do it for his own Profit, and the Covetousness of
him and his Evil Counselors which were with him; neither regarded the other
Points of the Oath which he made at his Coronation, as he was obliged. 6. Also,
He abandoned his Realm, and did as much as he
These Articles were Conceived and Dictated by John Stratford Author. December.
col. 2765. n. 40. Commissioners sent to the King at Kenelworth-Castle
Bishop of Winchester and Treasurer of England, and written by William Mees
Clerc, his Secretary and a Public Notary. Having Approved the Articles, they
were by Comune Agreement Knighton, col. 2549. n. 50, 60.
sent to the King, then Prisoner in Kenelworth-Castle, Three Bishop's, Two
Earls, Two Barons, Two Abbots, and Two Justices, amongst whom was Sir William
Trussell before noted, Proxy to the whole Parliament, to Resign their Homage and
Fealty to the King, which he did in this manner: Append. n. 73. Homage and
Fealty resigned to K. Edw.
I William Trussel, Procurator of the Prelates, Earls, and Barons, and other
People in my Procuracy named, having for this full and sufficient Power, do
Resign and Deliver up to you Edward King of England, as to the King before this
Hour, the Homage and Fealty of the Persons in my Procuracy named, and do Return
them upon you Edward, and make Quit or Free the Persons aforesaid, in the best
manner that Law and Custom may do it; And do make Protestation in the Name of
those that will not for the future be in your Fealty, or Allegiance, nor claim
to hold any thing of you as King, but shall hold you as a Private Person,
without any manner of Royal Dignity.

Sir Thomas de la Moor f. 600. n. 40, 50.
tells us who the Three Bishops were; John Straifort Bishop of Winchester, Adam
de Torleton Bishop of Hereford, and Henry Burwash Bishop of Lincoln: Three
Principal Companions The Bishops of Lincoln and Winchester circumvent the King,
by Promises and Threats.
in transacting this Affair. The Bishops of Winchester and Lincoln came before
the rest to the King, who with his Keeper the Earl of Lancaster, persuaded him
to resign his Crown to his Son, and circumvented the King, promising him as
much Honor after his Resignation threatened him if he would not, the People
should yield up their Homage and Fealty, and repudiate his Sons, and Choose one
not of Royal Blood. With these and other importune Promises and Threats, they
obtained their Desires. And then the Bishop of Hereford Ib. f. 601. lin 4. etc.
brought in all the other Commissioners, sent by the Parliament, into the King's
Chamber, where the whole Matter they came for was dispatched, not without great
Grief and Reluctance from the King.

Walsingham f. 126. n. 20, 30.
reports, all the Nobility met at London, on the morrow of, or day after
Twelfth-day, in Parliament, and Judged the King Unfit to Rule, and for several
Reasons to be Deposed, and his Son Prince Edward to be chosen King. Of which
when Queen had notice, Ibm. The Queen outwardly sorrowful.
she was full of Grief outwardly ( ut foris apparuit.) But the Prince affected
with this outward Passion of his Mother, would not accept the Title against his
Father's Will and Consent ( Et Ibm. n. 40, 50. The Prince unwilling to receive
the Crown.
juravit quod invito Patre, nunquam susciperet Coronam Regni.) The King when he
received this News by the Commissioners, was much disturbed, and said since it
could be no otherwise, he thanked them for choosing his First Born Son, making
his Resignation, and delivering up the Royal Ensigns and Tokens Commissioners
returning to the Parliament at K. Ed. resigns.
London, with the King's Answer and the Royal Ensigns, made the Rabble Ibm. His
Son made King.
rejoice; and presently the whole Community of the Kingdom admitted Edward, a
Youth of Fourteen Years of Age to be their King, on the 20th Day of January,
which they would have to be the First Day of his Reign. And from that time he
acted as King before his Coronation, as may appear by the Claus. 1 Ed. III.
Part. 1. M. 28. Append. n. 74.
Writ to all the Sheriffs of England to proclaim his Peace.

The King to the Sheriff of Yorkshire, Greeting: Because Edward, Note this Writ.
late King of England, our Father, by Common Council and Assent of the
Prelates, Earls, Barons, and other Great Men, and also of the Communities of
the said Kingdom, of his own Free Will removed himself from the Government of
the said Kingdom, Willing and Granting, That we as his Firstborn and Heir of
the Kingdom, should take upon us the Rule and Government: And we yielding to
the Good Pleasure of our Father, by the Counsel and Advisement of the Prelates,
Earls, Barons, Great Men, and Communities aforesaid, have taken upon us the
Government of the said Kingdom and received the Homages and Fealties of the
said Prelates and Great Men according to Custom. Therefore desiring our Peace
for the Quiet and Tranquillity of our People to be inviolably observed, we
Command, That presently after sight of these Presents, you cause our Peace
publicly to be proclaimed through your whole Bailiwic, forbidding all and
singular, under the pain of Disinheriting, and losing Life and Member, That
they presume not to infringe or violate our Peace, but that all Men do
prosecute their Suits and Actions without violence, according to the Laws and
Customs of the Land, etc. Witness the King at Westminster the 29th of January.
On the First of February, being Sunday, he was Crowned.

In the time between his being declared King and his Coronation, the Londoners
fearing themselves for their Cruelty against Bishop of Excester, to palliate
their Wickedness, Hist. Sacr. f. 367. vol. 1. The Londoners sorce the Bishops
to swear to maintain and desend all the Rights and Li^e ries of the City.
interim Londinenses sibi metuentes de crudelitate Patrata in Episcopum
Exoniensem, ad palliandum iniquitatem eorum, etc. forced the Archbishops of
Canterbury, York, and Dublin, and the other Bishops which came to the
Parliament, to come to their Guild Hall, where all the Bishops, except the
Archbishop of York, the Bishops of London and Carlisle, Swear to maintain and
defend the Rights and Liberties of the City, in the presence of the Earl of
Kent and an immense Multitude, who came to see the Silliness of the Bishops,
how they Sacrificed to Mahomet: Ibm.
In presentia Comitis Cantiae, and multitudinis immensae, qui ad videndum
fatuitatem Episcoporum, quo modo Mahumeto Sacrificabant confluxerunt. The
Bishop of Rochester protested The Bishop of Rochester's Protestation.
before a Public Notary, and Witnesses especially called, That it was not his
Intention to Swear, but saving his Order, and saving all Things contained in
Magna Charta.

The King was all this time De la Moor, f. 601, 602, 603. The Nation begins to
be sensible of the King's Condition.
Prisoner in Kenelworth-Castle, not knowing what further they were doing. The
Nation observing what had been done, seeing the Queen engaged, and the Prince
carried along with them, (not then perhaps suspecting or in the least
understanding the Designs of the Heads and Privado's of the Faction) began to
be sensible of the King's Condition, consider the Pretenses of his Enemies, and
to think how they might be kind to him, and prevent further Mischief. His
Keeper the Earl of Lancaster pities his deplorable case. Many Lords and others
begin to think how they might deliver him; the suspicion whereof, caused him to
be removed from Kenelworth-Castle, and to have new Keepers.
His Keeper also, the Earl of Lancaster, began to be every way obliging to him,
much pitying and commiserating his deplorable Case. Many Lords and others began
to think how they might deliver him out of Captivity; the notice or rather
suspicion thereof, much startled Mortimer, the Bishop of Hereford, the Queen,
and Chief Actors in this Tragedy, reflecting upon what they had Kenelworth, and
appointing him new Keepers, who were Thomas Gournay and John Maltrovers
Knights, receiving him at Kenelworth-Castle by Principal Authority, (
Authoritate Principali, as Sir Thomas de la Moor phraseth it) and hurried him
up and down the Nation, that it might not be known where he was; and at last
brought him to He is inhumanly treated
Berkley-Castle in Glocestershire, where he was inhumanly treated by his
Keepers, attempting to destroy him by all ways of horrid Indignities, brutish
Usages, and before uncontrived and unthought of Affronts: But having been
frustrated in their Intentions, by his natural Strength of Body and Fortitude
of Mind, on the 10th of the Ibm. f* 603. n. 20. And barbarously murdered.
Calends of October, or 22d of September, at night in his Bed they stifled and
smothered him, with large and heavy Bolsters and Pillows, and put up a red-hot
Iron, through

Church Affairs.
IN these we may give a short Account and History of the Templars, being an
Ecclesiastic Order, and in these times the Pope Jurisdiction over, Judgment
and Censure of them, as not being subject to Temporal Power. This Order began
in the Mat. Paris, f. 67. n. 10* 20, 30, 40. A. D. 1118. A short History and
Suppression of the Templars.
year 1118, only Nine Knights at first entering into a Combination by voluntary
Agreement, were the first Founders of it, whereof the Two Principal were Hugo
de Paganis, and Godfrey of St. Omar, to whom, because they had no certain
Habitation, Baldwin King of Jerusalem assigned them part of his own Palace,
near the South-Gate adjoining to the Temple of the Lord, from whence they were
called Templars: Their first Profession was for the Remission of their Sins, to
guard the Highways for the safety of Pilgrims, and such as came to visit the
Sepulcher, and to defend them from Thieves and Robbers. The King, Nobility, and
Patriarch, with other Prelates, giving Lands to support and maintain them. Nine
years after, Ibm.
in the Council of Troyes, they had a Rule and Habit assigned them by Pope
Honorius, when their Numbers and Possessions began to increase; in a short time
numerous, that there was in the Convent 300 Knights, besides of Brethren almost
an infinite number; and they were said to have such vast Possessions, as there
was no Christian Country, wherein they had them not, and so as to exceed
Princes in their Revenues, and are reported by the same Ib. f. 615. n. 50. A.
D. 1244.
Historian, to have obtained, and been possessed of in the space of 126 years
9000 Manors in Christendom: Their increase in Revenues and Riches begat the
Envy, and their neglect and non observation of first Institution of their
Order, their Luxury, Pride, and most horrid and detestable Crimes which were
reported of, and objected against them, begat the hatred of all Christendom, so
that within Sixty three years after, when they were [4] possessed of 16000
Lordships, besides other Lands, viz. Heylin's Cosmogr. lib. 3. fol. 98. a.
in the year of our Lord 1307, on Friday after St. Denis, or 12th of October,
by Command of the Mezeray's Hist. f. 333.
King of France, Philip the Fair, with Consent of Pope Clement the Fifth, all
the Templars in France were secured, Houses, Lands, Possessions, Goods,
Treasure, Church Ornaments, and Writings seized on, and delivered to Guardians,
under whose Custody and Administration they remained.

In like manner it was R^t. Claus. 1 Ed. II. M. 12. Dors. De captione
Templariorum, etc. A. D. 1307.
ordained by the King and his Council, that all the Templars in every County in
England, Scotland, Ireland, West-Wales, North Wales, and Earldom of Chester,
but more particularly those in England, should be attached by their Bodies
Wednesday next, after the Feast of Epiphany, or 6th of January, and that all
their Lands, Tenements, Goods, and Chattels, as well Ecclesiastic as Temporal,
with their Charters, Writings, and all Muniments, should be seized into the
King's Hands; That the Goods and Chattels should be inventoried and prised, and
Indentures made of them in the presence of the Guardian, or Preceptor of every
place, and in the presence of Two Lawful Men, whereof one to remain with the
Guardian, and the other with the Sheriff, the Live Stock to be kept upon the
Premises, and the Lands to be Plowed and Sown to the best Profit and Advantage;
That the Bodies of the Templers should be kept safe in convenient Places, other
then their own, but not to be put in vile and base Prisons, while the King
should order otherwise, and that every one according to his Condition, should
receive a Competent Maintenance Record the manner how this Ordinance was put in
Execution: The Writ wherein the Instructions for the Execution of it were
included, was Dated December the 20th, in the First of Edward II. A. D. 1307.


The King of Puteanus de la condemnation des Templars, p. 8, 9.
France, after he had secured the Templars, desirous to proceed in the
Prosecution of them, consulted the Faculty of Divinity in Paris, who answered
him by Decree; Authority of a Secular Judge could not extend it self to proceed
against any one for Heresy, unless he was required by the Church, or unless in
case of necessity, where there was danger, he might secure Heretics with
intention to deliver them to the Church; Those that were in the Exercise of War
for the Defense of the Faith, having made a Vow of Religion approved by the
Church, were holden for Religious, and exempt from the Lay-Judge; and as to
their Goods, they ought to be preserved Templars.

The Pope finding Ib. p. 9.
the most wicked Procedure of the King, pretending they were Ecclesiastics,
Remonstrated to him by his Bull the great Obedience of his Predecessors to the
Holy See, who never attempted to Judge Ecclesiastics; That the Templars were
immediate Subjects of the Church; That to the prejudice of his Bulls, he caused
Execution to be done as well upon their Persons, as Goods, for which he
demanded Reason, sending to him Two Cardinals, to cause him to put things in
such a State, that might satisfy him; Requesting him to Command, That the
Accused, and their Goods, might be put under the Power of them Two.

In pursuance of his Ib. and p. 10, 11.
Bull, full of Discontent, the Pope Power of the Archbishops, Bishops,
Prelates, and Inquisitors in France, and removed the whole Affair before his
own Person, which made the Pursuit of the King void, and of none effect; Which
the King resented by a Remonstrance which he made on his part; A Courageous
Remonstrance, (^aith the Author) and full of Resolution, ( Remonstrance
couragense and pl^in de Resolution) for he complained first, The Pope was cold
to second this just Pursuit, it being without difficulty; That God hated
nothing more then those that were Lukewarm, this was to give Consent to the
Crimes of the Accused, and give them Assurance they need not confess their
Faults; That the Pope was subject to the Laws of his Predecessors, and as some
have said, that he might be Censured in a Case of Faith; That the suspension of
the Power of the Inquisitors made by the Pope, was much prejudicial to this
Affair, giving hope to the Templars they might find favor before him, or that
the Business would never be ended; That what he did was as a Catholic King,
not as an Accuser, not as a Threatner, or Partial Promoter, but as the Minister
of God, a Champion of the Catholic Faith, a Zelot for the Divine Law, and for
the Defense of the Church, according to the Traditions of the Holy Fathers, of
which he was bound to give an Account to God.

The King by all ways showing to the whole World, that he [1] Ib. p. 11.
went freely on in this Affair, and by justifying himself, he had done nothing
without just Occasion, satisfied the Cardinals, and caused to be conducted to
Poicters, where the Pope then was, some of the principal Templars, that he
might know from their own Mouths the Justice of his Procedure.

The Pope Ibm.
interrogated these Templars, and 72 of them confessed, that at their Reception
into the Order, they denied Jesus Christ, and many other Crimes, which were so
horrible that he would not insert them in his Bull; Ibm.
yet their Depositions were taken in Writing before the Bishop of Preneste, the
Two Legates sent into France, and Three other Cardinals.

These Confessions Ibm. and p. 12.
without constraint, and of other most strange things, and the freedom the King
of France used, changed the Resolution of the Pope, and he saw well he had
failed in the suspension of the Power of the Archbishops, Bishops, and
Inquisitors of France, (and il vid bien quil avoit failli en suspendant le
pouvoir, etc.) for by his Bull he took off the Suspension, and permitted the
Bishops with all diligence to proceed within their Dioceses against the
Templars.

In the mean time the Ibm.
Legates advised the Pope, the King had put the Templars under their Power, and
judging they could not safely be sent out of the Kingdom without a great Guard,
he ordered they should be kept within the Realm by his own People, always under
the Name of the Pope and himself.

The King was very jealous of his Rights and Authority, yet [4] Ibm. p. 13, 14.
showed no Discontent; however wrote to the Pope, That as he had frankness he
had used in delivering what he did to the Cardinals, to do Violence to his own
Rights; and for the Templars Goods, those he had deputed to keep them were his
faithful Subjects, and such as had the Charge of his Demain.

This Letter Ib. p. 14.
drew from the Pope a Bull, by which he declared, That what he had done, and
should do in this Affair by Persons of the Templars, as their Goods, should be
made no advantage to him, nor prejudice to the King, or Prelates, Dukes, Earls,
Barons, or others of the French Nation, as to their Homages, Fees, and other
Rights, they could pretend to, upon the Goods of the Templars, both Moveable
and Immovable, since their being secured.

While these things were in agitation, fearing lest there might be alteration
in his Proofs, there being as yet no Process made Ibm. and p. 15.
the King by Deliberation of his Council, with the Advice of the Prelates,
Princes, and Barons, of his Realm, issued a Commission as well to Friar William
of Paris of the Order of Preachers, and the Pope's Inquisitor in France, as to
some Gentlemen upon the place where the Accused were Prisoners, to assist on
his part in Templars, in which Commission were inserted their chief Names; That
when they first entered into the Order, they denied Jesus Christ three times,
and spit upon the face of the Crucifix so often, that those that were received
kissed those which received them on the Breech, the Navel, and Mouth, and then
obliged themselves, and made a Vow to expose themselves one to another for the
Exercise of the Execrable Sin of Sodomy.

The Ibm. p. 15, 16.
Inquisitor and Gentlemen lost no time in the Execution Commissions, but
labored without intermission to perform what the King had injoined them, so as
the Inquisitor on several days Heard and Examined 140 Templars, of the Temple
at Paris, who all agreed, That at their Reception into the Order, they were
made to deny Jesus Christ, and spit three times upon a Crucifix that was
presented to them; Secondly, They all deposed, That he who was received, kissed
the Receiver in the Mouth, Navel, and Breech; Thirdly, That they had straight
Prohibitions aginst the Carnal Knowledge of Women, but if pushed with Carnal
Appetite, the Brethren without Fear or Conscience might use one another;
Fourthly, Some of them Ib. p. 16.
confessed they had Adored a Wooden Head gilt, with a great Beard, which was
only brought forth at general Chapters.

The Grand Master, Ibm.
James de Molay or Mauleu, and Hugh de Peraldo, being Examined amongst the
rest, confessed the same things, and there was but Ib. p. 17.
Three of the whole number, which affirmed they had never seen any ill in the
Order.

The Ib. 27, 28.
Pope not having any great Confidence in the French Inquisitors, deputed Three
Cardinals, to Examine the Prisoners themselves at Crinon in Tourain, that he
might know whether their Informations were true; From whose Report, the Pope
perceiving Order to be more and more corrupt, thought it necessary his
Inquisition should be general, and therefore dispatched his Bulls or
Commissions to all the Archbishops, Bishops, and Officers, in France, England,
Wales, Scotland, Ireland, Almain, Bohemia, Poland, the Kingdoms of Arragon,
Majorca, Navarre, and the Lands adjoining, the Provinces of Arles, Aix, Ambrun,
Vienne, Bezanson and Tarentais, Cyprus, and all Italy, Sicily, Hungary, Achaia,
Sardinia, and Corsica.

To these Bulls or Commissions the Articles of Ib. p. 29, 30, 31. Append. n 75.
Inquiry, directed and prescribed by the Pope, were annexed, which were these:

1. Whether, when first they were admitted into the Order, they abjured Christ,
the Virgin Mary, or the Saints, or were admonished to do it, or they themselves
had incited others to abjure? 2. Whether they had denied Christ, or Crucified
Jesus, to be true God, or that he suffered for the Redemption of Mankind? 3.
Whether they affirmed him a false Prophet, and that he suffered own Crimes? 4.
Whether they believed the Master of the Order, not being in* Holy Orders, could
by the Sacrament of Penance forgive Sins, and whether he had done it? 5.
Whether they thought they had any thing in their Statutes, to the Orthodox
Roman Church, or that favored Crimes and Errors? 6. Whether, when they entered
into the Order, they were taught, that they might luxuriously use one another,
and commit no Wickedness, and whether they taught the Novices this? 7. Whether
they swear to advance their Order against Right, and 8. Whether he that
admitted them into the Order, told them they could have no Salvation in Jesus
Christ? 9. Whether they spit upon the Cross, and the Image of Christ, or
stamp't upon it, or on the Holy day of Friday, or any other, pissed upon it?
10. Whether they worshipped a Cat, or Skull, or any fictitious and false Image
or Idol, with Divine Worship, in their great Meetings, or other Place of the
Brethren; and whether they hoped for Riches, and plentiful Fruits of the Earth,
and Trees from them? 11. Whether they touched the Idol with the Girdle they
girt about their Shirts and Flesh? 12. Whether they libidinously and
intemperately kissed the young Novices in any indecent part? 13. Whether, when
they said Mass, they omitted the Holy Mysteries, and Words of Consecration? 14.
Whether they esteemed it Wicked and Nefarious, to do these
The King having been at Poicters, Puteanus, ut supra, p. 33.
conferred with the Pope, and they had agreed upon these Heads; That the
Templars should be kept by the King, at the Request of the Pope and Bishops,
and in their Name; That the Bishops might Judge the Templars within their
Diocese, except those who were reserved to the Pope; That in case of Abolition
of the Order, the Goods should be employed for the Service of the Holy Land;
That they should give to one another Covenants, that the Money arising from
those Goods of the Templars, should not be diverted to any other use.

The Bishops and other Prelates Ibm. p. 34. 35.
in pursuance of the Bulls, Templars within their Dioceses, and did what they
could to find out the Truth of the Accusations; but for that in France the
Examination had been made before by Inquisitors with the King's Authority,
assisted by Gentlemen named by himself, with which the Pope was not satisfied,
and further, because the Order was not only settled in France, but spread all
over the Earth, he thought it most necessary to name Commissioners himself to
proceed anew in his Name and by his Order against Templars, who were the
Archbishop of Narbon, the Bishop of Bayeux, Mande, and Limoges, Matthew of
Naples Archdeacon of Rouen, John de Mantua the Pope's Notary, Archdeacon of
Trente, John de Montlaur Archdeacon of the Church of Maguelon, and William
Agarris Provost of the Church of Aix, as appears by the Commission it self
Dated at Poicters the second of the Ides, or [6] Ibm. p. 113. to p. 123. in the
Extracts, etc A. D. 1309.
Twelfth of August, in the third Year of his Pontificate, A. E. 1309.

The same Ibm. 36.
Month the Commissioners began to act, and sent out their Citations for the
whole Order to appear before them at Paris in the Bishops Hall.

On the 22d of November, they caused the Grand Master James de Molay, and Hugh
de Peraldo, to come before them; but I find nothing worth noting that passed
between them. One of the Superiors of the Order, Ibm. p. 38, 39.
Ponzard de Gyziac, told the Commissioners, That the Templars in many Places
had been grievously Racked; That all which they had confessed was for fear of
Death, and that some of them died in their Torments; yet nevertheless he was
resolved to defend his Order; and desired Renaud of Orleans, and Peter of
Boulogne, Friars of the Order, might be joined with him for Advice.

These Commissioners Ibm. p. 46, 47.
remained at Paris, from the Month August, 1309. to the Month of May in the
Year 1311. in which time they examined 231 Witnesses, as well Templars as
others; and they almost all confessed the Crimes contained in the Articles sent
by the Pope.

During Ib p. 47.
this time, there was a Council of the Province of Sens, held at Paris against
the Templars, where the Archbishop of Sens presided. Those that undertook the
Defense of the Templars, told the Pope's Commissioners, they had appealed to
the Pope from the Council of Sens, and other Councils, which were holden for
Matters concerning them, and requested them to take notice of it; who refused
to do it, because both the Commissioners and Councils had the Pope's Power.

This Ibm. p. 48.
Provincial Council, by a long Process, Sentenced many Templars, some whereof
were only Absolved; others did Penance, and were delivered; others were
Condemned to end their Lives between Four Walls, and 59, as such as had
relapsed, were Degraded by the Bishop of Paris, and delivered over to the
Secular Power, and by that condemned to be Burnt, which Judgment was executed
accordingly; who declared themselves Innocent at their Death, and that what had
been imposed upon them was false, to the Astonishment of the People.

There were Ibm. p. 152, etc.
74 Templars named in the Instrument, who offered to defend the Order: They and
their Procurators in the Ibm. and p. 157, etc.
Instrumente and Articles of Defense, do say, That the Articles sent by the
Pope were detestable, horrid, and wicked Lies, unreasonable and impossible;
That the Religion of the Temple was pure free from such Sins and Vices; That
the Articles were made and forged by false Brethren, and Enemies to the Order;
and that the King of France first, and then the Pope, had been deluded and
imposed upon by these Men: That the Brethren of the Temple, that had confessed
and told so many Lies, did it for fear of Death and Torments, or were suborned
or taught what they should say, so as they might agree, though brought from
several Parts: That the Apostates and Fugitives from the Order, and such as had
been Witnesses and Informers: They also protest and declare it to be notorious,
That what the Brethren of the Temple had said, or should say while in Prison,
ought not to prejudice the Order; and that they were corrupted and compelled by
Promises, Money, or fear of Torments and Contumelies they had seen others
suffer; whereas the false Brethren had great Promises made them, and lived
splendidly. To prove these things, they desire they might be in their former
General Council; and that those that could not come, might appoint their
Proctors. These and many things more are contained in their Reasons, Arguments,
and Articles of Defense, which were delivered in Writing and due Form of Law,
to the Pope's Commissioners, as may be seen in the Instruments themselves
before cited in the Margin.

The Pope by his ^pelm. Council. vol. 2. f. 458. Labbei Council. Tom. 11. Part.
2. col. 1539. A. D. 1308.
Bull dated at Poicters on the 2d of the Ides August, in the 3d of his
Pontificate, A. D. 1308. had Summoned a General Council to meet at Vienne in
Dauphin, on the Calends or first of October, two Years after the same Calends
then next coming; and from that time by a second Bull, Labbei, ib. col. 1554.
Dated at Avenion on the 12th of the Calends of December, or 22d of November,
in the 6th of his Pontificate, A. D. 1310. he Prorogued the Meeting of the same
Council to the Calends of October then next coming, A. D. 1311. A. D. 1311. ^


On the 11th of the Calends of April, or the 22d of March next Ibm. Labbe. col.
1569.
following, on Thursday in the Week before Easter, the Pope called a private
Consistory of Cardinals and Prelates, wherein he made void and utterly annulled
the Order of Templars, and on the 3d of April next coming, A. D. 1312. the
second Session of this Council began, in which by Approbation of the Council,
the Pope published the Cassation as above, Philip King of France being present,
with his Brother Charles of Valois, and his three Sons. The Bull by which this
whole Order was dissolved, has this Title, Ibm. col. 1557.
Sententia de extinctione Templariorum a Clemente Papa V. lata in Concilio
Viennensi: The Sentence of Extinction of the Templars, made by Pope Clement V.
in the Council of Vienne, Dated there on the 6th of the Nones, or 2d of May,
1312. an Exemplification whereof ^ot. Claus. 7 Ed. II. M. 11. Dors.
Tower of London, in which it is said the Pope dissolved the Order (non sine
Cordis amaritudine and dolor) not without Grief and Bitterness of Heart; for
their unheardof Wickedness and Obscenity, which, for the Filthiness of it,
could not be inserted in the Bull. Yet it was not done by definitive Sentence,
which could not of right be given upon the Inquisition and Process had against
them, but by way of Provision, or Apostolic Ordinance: Labbe, ib. D. E.
(Non per modum definitivae Sententiae, cum eam super hoc secundum
Inquisitiones, and Processus super his habitos, non possemus far de jure, sed
per viam Provisionis seu Ordinationis Apostolicae) by irrefragable Sanction to
endure for ever; by Apostolic Authority reserving all the Goods (which in the
Civilians and Canonists Sense, are both Moveable and Immovable) to the
Ordering and Disposal of the Apostolical See; and then annexed them for ever to
the Order of the Hospital of St. John of Jerusalem. That the Templars were
taken and imprisoned in England, and their France, has been shown before: That
also they were here Examined as there, appears by the Instrument, or
Commission, and Records here cited. The Pope, by his Bull, or Commission, Dated
at Poicters the 12th of August, 1309. appoints the Patriarch of Jerusalem, the
Archbishop of York, the Bishops of Lincoln, Chichester, and Orleans, the
Abbats of Lotyngiac in the Diocese of Paris, and St. Germans in the Meadows
near Paris, Richard de Vaux, Cannon of Narbon, his Chaplain and Hearer of
Causes in his Palace, and Guido de Vich, Rector of Hoshe in the Diocese of
London, to be Inquisitors into, and Examiners of the Crimes of the Templars,
Claus. 3* Ed* II. M. 21. Dors.
in the 3d of Edw. II. it was agreed (A^cordez est que tous les Templars
Dengleterre) that all the Templars of England should be brought to three
Places, London and Lincoln in the Province of Canterbury; and those in the
Province of York to that City, to be examined by the Inquisitors and Examiners
assigned Pope, and by the Ordinaries or Bishops of the Diocese where they were;
and that the Inquisitors and Ordinaries should repair thither; and the King
commanded such as had the keeping of the Templars to carry them before them, as
often as they should be required; and in the 4th of his Reign granted safe [2]
Rot. Pat. 4 Ed. II. Part 1. M. 10.
Conduct to the Pope's Inquisitors or Nuncio's, the Abbat of Lotyngiac and
Richard (or, as in the Record, Sicard de Vaux) with others, to go to Places
aforesaid, and enquire upon the Articles Pope against the Order of the
Templars, and all and singular Persons of it.

What was proved against the English Templars before these Inquisitors, [3]
Col. 1^30. n. 10, 20, 30.
I have not seen Recorded. [5] Thomas Stubbs, in the Acts of William Greenfield
then Archbishop of York, gives this very short Account of it; That at London
and York, before the Archbishop and Bishop of those Cities, the Templars were
solemnly examined, by the Pope's appointment, upon the Articles framed against
them, to which they gave competent and agreeable Answers; and though they were
accused in many things, yet nothing was found for which the Order might seem
justly to be disannulled. This Archbishop was in the Council, and much
Honored by the Pope; and when the Order was dissolved (Pietate motus) Templars
in his Diocese, distributed them into Monasteries, and commanded they should be
provided for during Life.

Walsingham in his History likewise Fol. 99. n. 10, 20, 30* 40.
makes a short Report of the whole Story, and tells us, That Philip King of
France thought to make one of his Sons King of Jerusalem, and to obtain for him
all the Rents and Revenues of the Templars; and upon this Great Master of the
Order, to be burnt in his Kingdom, and procured the whole Order to be made null
in the Council of Vienne: But he missed of his Purpose, and the Pope, not
without a great Sum of Money (non sine magnae pecuniae interventu) gave them to
the Hospitalers. About this time there had been many heinous Crimes sworn
against the Templars, in the Provincial Council of London, called at the
Command of the Pope, the same that were sworn against France. They confessed
the Report, but not the Fact, unless one or two Ribalds (that is, most wicked
and profligate Men) in every State (to wit, of Priest-Templars,
Knight-Templars, Common Brethren, and Servant-Templars;) Nisi unus vel duo
Ribaldi in omni statu. Yet at last they all confessed they could not purge
themselves from the things charged on them; so that every one of them were
thrust into Monasteries, there to do perpetual Penance, where they in all
things behaved themselves well. This Walsingham is taken out of Adam Murymonth
In 1310. and 1311.
who then lived, and his very Words transcribed by him.

In the Sentence of Extinction of the Templars, and Donation of their Lands and
Goods to the Hospitalers, all Possessors and unlawful Detainers of them, of
what State, Condition, Excellency and Dignity soever they were, whether
Bishops, Emperors, or Kings, were Excommunicated, unless within one Month after
Master and Brethren of the Hospital of St. John's of Jerusalem, or their
Procurators, they parted with, and fully and freely restored them to that
Order; and also all that were Aiding, Advising and Assisting in the Detaining
of them; and likewise all Chapters, Collegiate and Conventual Churches, Cities,
Castles, Towns, and other Places that detained them, and delivered them not
when required, as aforesaid, were put under Interdict; from which
Excommunication and Interdict, absolved, until they had made full and due
Satisfaction. And besides these Punishments, all Persons and Places that
detained the Goods and Estates aforesaid, and delivered them not, that held
Fees of the Roman, or any other Churches, were decreed (ipso facto) in very
Deed to be deprived of them.

In the end of this Council, says the last cited Ibm. A*D.
Historian, the Pope sent two Cardinals into England, to receive the Lands,
Goods, and Possessions of the Templars, for the Use of the Hospitalers. The
Earls and Noblemen, whose Progenitors had given them to the Templars (the Order
being dissolved) possessed themselves of, and refused to restore them, so as
the Nuncio's returned without doing the Business they came for. The Pope's
Append. n. 76.
Letter, or Bull, to the King, That he should give his best Assistance in
promoting of the Delivery of the Templars Goods to the Master and Brethren of
the Hospital, or their Procurators; and further, That he should expressly
Command all his Earls, Barons, Great Men, Corporations, and Bodies Politic,
Seneschals, Bailiffs, and other Officers, which were by him deputed to keep
those Goods, to deliver them when required, was Dated the 26th of the same
Month of of May, in which he passed the Sentence of Extinction. This in Bull,
or Letter, by which the two Cardinals, as Procurators, or Attorneys, came to
demand the delivery of the Lands of the Templars for the Hospitalers.

On the 25th of November, 1313* by virtue of a long tedious Rot. Claus. 7 Ed.
II. M. 12. Dors.
Instrument for the restitution of the Possessions, Goods, and Chattels to the
Hospitalers, which had belonged to the Templars in England, in which the Pope's
Proceedings against them were recited, Albert of Black-Castle (de Castro nigro)
Great Commander of the Hospital of St. John's of Jerusalem, and Deputy of the
Great Master, and Leonard de Tibertis, Prior of the Hospital of St. John's of
Venice, and Procurator General of the Order: Their Procurators petitioned and
required, That whereas the Pope had given, by Consent of the General Council,
all the Houses, Churches, Chapels, Oratories, Cities, Castles, Towns, Lands,
Granges, Places, Possessions, Jurisdictions, Rents, and Rights, and all Goods,
Moveable and Papal Power (de plenitudine Apostolicae potestatis) to the said
Hospital, etc. The King hearing this Supplication, made Protestation for the
Preservation of his Right, and Rights of his Subjects, notwithstanding such
Restitution and Rendering; and that if he made such Restitution, it was for fear
of the Danger which he foresaw might come upon him and his protested, That at a
^it time he and his Subjects would demand the Goods, as if they never had been
restored.

Three Days after, on the 28th of November, the King caused to be delivered all
the Things above mentioned to the two Procurators, Albert and Leonard,
according to the Pope's Bull directed Dangers and Damages that might otherwise
happen to him, his Dominions, and Subjects, saving the Right of him and his
Subjects, according to the Effect of his Protestation. The King's Letter to
this purpose was directed to the Guardians Ibm.
of the Lands and Tenements of the Templars in London, and Suburbs; and the
like Letters were sent Ibm.
to Fifty six other Guardians of their Lands and Possessions in all Counties,
and several particular Places in England, and to Audomar Earl of Pembroke, to
deliver and surrender the new Temple, with all its Lands, Tenements, and
Appurtenances in London, the Suburbs, and Middlesex. In like Ibm.
manner he wrote to the Bishop of Lincoln, several Noblemen, and all the
Sheriffs of England.

And then after these Letters and Instrument, there is entered impertinent Ibm.
Acquittance reciting the Proceedings, as before, in their Request against the
Templars, from these Procurators, by which they acknowledge themselves to be
well contented and paid (been contenti and pacati) by the King, and all others
in the Restitution, etc. Dated in London on the Nones or 5th of December, A. D.
1313.

The Pope by a long Bull dated on the 5th of the Kalends of November, October,
in the 4th of his Pontificate, commanded Robert Winchelsey, Archbishop of
Canterbury, A. D. 1309, to deliver an Abstract of it to the King, and to
Expound it to him, which was thus Directed; R^g* st^^m W^nchels^y, f. 6. ^. in
Doctors-Commons.
Excellentissimo Principi and Domino suo, vobis Domino Edwardo Dei gratia Regi
Angliae illustri Domino Hiberniae, and Duci Aquitaniae, insinuamus, and
Exponimus nos Robertus permissione Divina Cantuarensis Archiepiscopus totius
Angliae primas, ex injuncto nobis mandato Apostolico quae inferius
discribuntur. To Edward, by the Grace of God, illustrious King of England, Lord
of Ireland, and Duke of Aquitan, we Robert by Divine permission Archbishop of
Canterbury, and Primate of all England, by the Pope's Command, do insinuate,
and declare to you, the things underwritten; Which were these Grievances.

1. That his Officers, although they were bound fervently to assist Cardinals of
the Roman Church, whom the Wisdom of God had taken into part of the Apostolic
Care thereof, and to whom the fullness of Reverence was due from all Sons of the
Church, (a cunctis Ecclesiae filiis debetur Reverentiae plenitudo) yet they
presumed to give them great trouble, and to do unto them and their Agents,
grievous Injuries, especially unto Neapoleon of St. Adrian, and Francis of St.
Mary in Cosmedin, Deacon Cardinals, notwithstanding they had done such things
as promoted King's Honor, and hindered the contrary from being done.

2. There was another Cause of profound Trouble arose in the Judgment of the
Pope himself, (praeterea sensibus ipsius Pontificis alia profundae Turbationis
causa consurgit, etc.) That whereas sometimes imitating the Steps of his
Predecessors, he had provided the Ecclesiastic Dignities, and Benefices of his
Kingdom, and King's Officers glorying in Licentious Wickedness, although they had
no just Power or Jurisdiction given them in such Matters, either from God or
Man, yet they rashly presumed to inhibit their Agents to act for them, or form
any Processes, or cause them to be published, whereby the Hinderers of such
Proceedings damnably incurred the Sentence of Excommunication.

3. Also adding worse things to the former, not fearing any Citations
concerning Matters that belonged to Ecclesiastic Jurisdiction, granted by the
Apostolic See, tho against Ecclesiastic Persons, they prohibit all such
Citations to be executed, and also that no Man go to the Apostolic See by
virtue of such ipso facto, damnably incur Excommunication.

4. Also, for that the Pope cannot sufficiently admire, and feels the cruel
Prickings in his Mind, (Item ex eo summus Pontifex non sufficit admirari, diras
sentit in animo Punctiones, etc.) Nuncio's of the Holy See, when sent into your
Kingdom about Business, they dare not publish them, before they are shown to
your self, and if they do, they are chased out of the Kingdom by Terrors and
Frights, and sometimes seized by your Officers as Vile and Reprobate Persons,
not attending what great Detraction of Honor and Reverence from the Holy See
is made thereby, in Contempt and Disgrace of the same, as by the detestable
boldness of the said Officers concerning Mr. William Piat, reserved in your
Kingdom by the Pope himself, according to the prohibition of your Officers in
Reproach of the Holy See, and the Pope, was by your Sheriff of Yorkshire, not
attending that the Supereminent Authority of the Holy See, is Honored, or
Despised in its Ministers, committed to Prison, and there detained until he
redeemed himself by l. Sterling.

5. Also your Officers refuse to cause to be taken such as are Excommunicated
by Authority of the said See, at the Request of the said Nuncio's, or Judges
sent from the Apostolic See.

6. Also your Officers and Ministers do hinder the Delegates of the Apostolic
See, us, and other Ordinaries, (nos and alii ordinarii) and all Ecclesiastic
Persons, whatever, to judge of Causes merely belonging to Ecclesiastic
Jurisdiction, and strictly forbid us and them, tho unjustly, That we nor they
do any ways meddle with the Judgment of them, (and minus just nobis and eis,
ne de cognitione hujusmodi intromittamus vel intromittant aliqualiter) and if
we or they do contrary to this Prohibition, which ought not to be obeyed, the
same Ministers and Officers take unduely our, and their Goods, manifestly
thereby hindering Quam debent pro reverentia Divina, and eorum salutis argumento
intentis studiis defensare.

7. Also we and the Ordinaries aforesaid dare not take, or keep in Custody any
Ecclesiastic Person, nor do Justice upon him, what great Fault soever he has
committed, being affrighted by the Threats of your Ministers.

8. Also your Officers and Ministers not taking notice that Laics have no Power
given unto them over Clercs, Religious, (amerciant in paena pecuniaria) and
otherwise unjustly condemn them at their pleasure, and force them to answer
before themselves, seizing their Persons and Goods against their Wills, in
Criminal, Personal, and other Actions, although they allege the Privilege of
Clerks, to avoid their Jurisdiction, (ipsosque per captionem personalem, and
bonorum suorum and aliis tam super criminalibus quam personalibus, and aliis
actionibus quibuscunque renitentes and invites, and etiam eorum forum
declinantes, and Clericale privilegium allegantes, coram se respondere
compellunt.

9. Also your Officers and Ministers do condemn Clercs in Priests Orders, as
Thieves and Murderers, and cause them to be put to Death, offending thereby the
Supreme King, who has (in supremi Regis offensam, qui Christos suos per
quamcunque secularem potestatem tangi prohibuit) and in these Cases Twelve
Laymen are admitted as Witnesses, ( i. e. Jurymen) against the Clerk, who if
they say they believe they committed the Fault, for which they are accused,
upon this saying of the Witnesses they are condemned to Death, for which things
they undoubtedly incur the Sentence of Excommunication, ipso facto.

10. Also your Officers and Ministers take the Goods, Rents, and Profits of
Prelates and Clerks, at their pleasure, not offering or giving them
satisfaction.

11. Also as well your Officers and Ministers, as the Noblemen, pretending that
Churches and all Monasteries were founded by them, do go and come into
Religious Houses, and the Houses

12. Also when the Guard of Bishoprics, Monasteries, Priories, and other
Benefices of holy Church belonging to them by and other grievous Pains; from
the Commission of which Wickedness the King ought to restrain his Officers.

After these Grievances Ib. f. 7. a.
the Pope complains, he had often sent and wrote to the King for Redress, but
could never receive any Answer from him; therefore lest the Glory of
Ecclesiastic Liberty, which was the Gift of Heaven, should be sullied, (ne
Ecclesiasticae Libertatis gloria, coelestis muneris dono concessa, in vestris,
regno and terris, in vestrae salutis and honoris dispendium maculetur, etc.)
the Pope renewed the same Exhortations with Paternal Affection, entreating,
admonishing, and persuading, in him that gives Health to Kings, (in eo qui
Regibus dat salutem) that he would not suffer these Grievances, Injuries, and
Troubles to be done, but that he by his Royal Protection would defend and
cherish the Churches, and Persons themselves, for the Divine Reverence of the
said See and of the Pope (pro divina dictae sedis, and Domini nostri summi
Pontificis reverentia.

And then he demands the Annual Sum of Rent of 1000 Marks per Annum, which he
was bound to pay to the Roman Church, and the Arrears of it for about 15 years
in his Father's time and his.

The Ib. a. and b.
Pope concluding and closing with Devout Prayers England, that duly Honored
God, and his Spouse the Church, enlarged their Government, (qualiter
progenitores vestri, Reges Angliae, qui Deum and Ecclesiam sponsam suam debite
honorabant, principatuum suorum culmina latius diffundebant, etc.) and how
Peace and Quiet prevailed in their times, and how the Kingdom then abounded in
Wealth. How also in the times of those Kings, elated, or proud Obstinacy,
despising her Advice, and not regarding her Exhortations, brought upon
themselves and Kingdoms great Troubles and Dangers. And therefore to avoid
them, presses him effectually to compel his Officers and Ministers to abstain
from acting such Grievances, and to protect and defend the Churches, and
Ecclesiastic Persons, and to pay the whole Pension or Rent, as he was obliged.

After the delivery of these (Gravamina) Grievances, by the Pope's Command, he
sent Append. n. 77.
to him a very formal Account of it, and the King's Answer; That he had
frequently Treated about the Execution of his Command, with some of his
Suffragan Brethren that had received the like, and that afterward on the 3d of
the Kalends of March, or 27th of February, in the presence of the Patriarch of
Jerusalem, his Brother Suffragans, the Bishops of London, Winton, Sarum,
Lincoln, Norwich, Chichester, Worcester, Excester, Bath and Wells, and St.
David's, and of some Earls and Barons of the Kingdom, he declared the Contents
of his Mandate to the King, and delivered them to him written in Latin and
French, with Exhortations and Admonitions; And that because the King said he
would deliberate upon them, he came to him again, with some of his Brethren, on
the Ides or 15th of March, to receive his Answer, who not appearing after long
waiting, he sent the Bishop of Worcester, then Lord Treasurer, to him, and
desired he would give an agreeable and convenient Return to the Roman Church,
and to him, concerning the things declared and delivered to him; That at length
he let him know by the Lord Treasurer, and John de Longham, a Friar Preacher
and his Confessor, That he could not make Answer then, Contents of the Mandate
not only touched him, but all the Earls, Barons, and Great Men of the Kingdom,
with whom he could not then Treat, as was necessary to be done; but hoped he
might in a short time: That at last the King, with his Council, on the 2d of
the Kalends of April, or 31st of March, answered in this Form; That saving the
Right of his Crown in as much as he could, he would in all things, as a Devout
Son of the Church, obey him, and the Holy Apostolic See; Adding, Council of
his Kingdom, and send such Answers by his own Messengers, before the time
prefix't for a General Council, as might be pleasing to God, acceptable to

In the Twelfth of his Reign he prohibited Append. n. 78.
the Archbishop of Canterbury, the Prelates and Clergy, That in their
principal Synod to be held at London, they should not attempt to do, or ordain
any thing against his Crown and Dignity, or against the State of the Kingdom;
but if they had any thing to Prosecute Transacted in the next Parliament he had
then summoned to meet at Lincoln.

In the Ib. n. 79.
Fifteenth year likewise, he commanded the Archbishop of Canturbury, and the
other Prelates, that were to meet in the Provincial Council to be held at
London, That they should not determine, do, or any ways ordain any thing
prejudicial to himself, State of his Crown, or his Kingdom.

There having been frequent Prohibitions directed to the Ecclesiastic Courts,
and many Doubts raised, about what Pleas might be holden in them, the King Ib.
n. 80.
wrote to his Justices, That Pleas merely Spiritual, as punishment for Mortal
Sin, such as Fornication, Adultery, and the like, of which the punishment was
sometimes Corporal, sometimes Pecuniary, especially if the Convict was

Also the punishment for the Churchyard not being well fenced, or the Church
not being in good Repair, or Decently Beautified, in which Cases Pecuniary
Punishments could only be inflicted.

Also if the Rector demanded of his Parishioners Oblations, due and accustomed
Tithes, or if one Rector sued another for great Tithes.

Also if a Rector demanded a Mortuarie, where it was due.

Also if a Prelate, or Patron of a Church, demanded a Pension Rector.

Also for laying violent hands on a Clerk, or defaming him, were within the
Cognizance of an Ecclesiastic Judge, notwithstanding his Prohibition; and
these were the Heads of such things, and Pleas, as were then controverted
btween, and claimed by, both Ecclesiastic and Secular Judges.

Taxes in this KING's Time.
IN the Parliament at Northampton, in the First of his Reign, the In Rot. Caput.
in Custod. Cler. pipae Temp. Edw. II. Claus 1. Ed. II. M. 12. intus.
Earls, Barons, Knights, and all others of the Kingdom, ( and omnes alii de
Regno) or Government, granted to the King a Twentieth part of their Movables,
except their Armor, War Horses, Jewels, Robes, and Vessels of Gold and Silver,
of Knights ( Militum and aliorum liberorum hominum) and other Freemen, and of
their Wives. The Citizens, Burgesses, and Tenants of the ancient Demeasns of
the Crown granted a Fifteenth part of their Movables, as also did the Clergy.

In his Second year, at a Parliament holden at Westminster a Claus 3 Ed. II. M.
23. in Ced.
Month after Easter, the Laity granted a Twenty fifth of their Movables.

In the Seventh year, in his Parliament at Westminster, the Earls In Rot. Comp.
ut supra.
Barons, Knights, Freemen, and the Communities of Counties, gave a Twentieth
part of their Goods; and the Citizens, and Burgesses, and Communities of
Cities, and Burghs, gave a Fifteenth.

In his Eighth year he had a Twentieth part of the Movables of Rot. Pat. 8 Ed.
II. M. 12. Dors. Part 2.
the Laity, granted by the Communities of Counties of the Kingdom ( per
Communitates Comitatuum Regni) in Parliament.

In his Ninth year he had granted a Fifteenth of Citizens, Burgesses, Rot.
Parlem. 9 Ed. II. n. 2.
and Tenants in ancient Demeasns, for his War with the Scots, in the Parliament
held at Lincoln, the Community of the Kingdom, Military Men, being summoned to
do their Service then.

In the Fifteenth year of his Reign the King Rot. Claus. 15 Ed. II. M. 16. Dors.
summoned a Parliament to meet at York three weeks after Easter; and after the
end of this Parliament, and after the 7th of July next following, he directed
his Writs to the Prelates and Clergy to meet at a Provincial Council at
Lincoln, which the Archbishop of Canterbury was immediately to summon to Treat
of a Competent Aid to be granted to him, toward his Expedition against the
Scots, who had invaded England; in which Writs, as it were for a Direction, he
Rot. Claus. 16 Ed. II. M. 20. Dors.
recites what the Earls, Barons, Noblemen, and the Communities of the Kingdom
had done in the Parliament at York, viz. That they had granted him a Tenth of
the Goods of the Community of the Kingdom, and a Sixth part of the Goods of
Citizens, Burgesses, Tenants of ancient Demeasns, Ibm.
Praelati, Comites, Barons, and proceres, necnon Communitates Dicti Regni apud
Eborum, ad tractandum super dictis negotiis and aliis nos and statum dicti
Regni tangentibus, nuper Convocati decimam de Bonis de Communitate ejusdem
regni, and sextam de Civitatibus, Burgis, and Antiquis Dominicis nostris nobis
liberaliter concesserunt and gratanter.

The Issue of Edward II. by Isabell, Daughter of Philip the Fair King of France.
ON the Day of St. Brice, or 13th of November, his Eldest A. D. 1312. Ed. II.
12. Walsingh. Hist. f. 102. n. 30.
Son Eoward, who succeeded him by the Name of Edward the Third, was born at
Windsor.

In the year 1315, his Second Son John was born at Eltham Ibm. Hypodig. Neutr.
f. 502. n. 30, 40.
(from whence his Title) on the Assumption of the Virgin Mary, in the Eighth of
his Father's Reign, he was Created Earl of Cornwall, and after several Matches
propounded for him, died unmarried, about the 20th year of his Age.

Joan his Eldest Daughter, Married to David King of Scots, Sandford, Genealog.
Hist. etc. f. 155.


Eleanor Duchess of Gueldres his Second Daughter, she Married Ibm.
Reynald Second Earl of Gueldres, who was Created Duke of Gueldres, by the
Emperor Lewis of Bavaria; by her he had Two Sons, Reynald and Edward, who were
both Dukes successively after him,

A CONTINUATION Of the Complete etc.
King EDWARD the Third.
THis Young Man at the Age of Fourteen Years being placed in the Throne of his
Father, then living and in Prison, as has been related in the latter end of
the The young King managed by the Queen, Mortimer, etc. The Adherents to Tho.
Earl of Lancaster petition
former Reign, was, with all the Affairs of the Nation, managed by the Queen,
with the Advice of Roger Mortimer chiefly, and other Privado's in their
Designs, who had been all Favorers and Abettors of the Cause and Quarrel of
Thomas Earl of Lancaster; Adherents being all Friends to, and Assistants in
this Revolution, on the 3d of Append. n. 82. to be restored to their Lands,
etc. They were all Friends to, and Assistants in this Revolution.
February, two Days after the Coronation, Petitioned the King and his Council
in that Parliament, which had Deposed his Father, then Sitting at Westminster,
That being of the Quarrel of the Noble Earl of Lancaster ( estetent de la
Querele le Noble Count de Lancastre) and therefore wrongfully Imprisoned,
Banished, Disherited, might be Restored to their Estates, with the Issues of
them, from the time they had been wrongfully diseised. And it was granted by
the Assent of the whole Parliament, That all the Lands and Tenements, which had
been seized by reason of that Quarrel or Contention, which was affirmed to be
good by the whole Parliament ( ia quele Querele par tot le Parsement est afferme
bone) as well in Ireland and Wales, as in England, should be Restored, with
their Issues and Arrears of Rent, except those that had been Received to the
King's Use.

On the same Day Stat. at Large, 1 Ed. III. The first thing printed, f. 77. All
that came over with the Queen and her Son pardoned, and those that joined them
after their arrival.
all those that came over with the Queen and her Son, and those that joined
with them after their arrival, were also pardoned, etc. The long Preamble to
that Pardon, Statute, or Grant, is worth notice, as containing the Cover,
Pretenses, and Suggestions of all the Contrinances and Designs against Edward
the Second; in these Words:

Whereas Hugh Spenser the Father, and Hugh Spenser the Son, late at the Suit of
Thomas Thun Earl of Lancaster and Leicester, and Steward of England, by the
Common Assent and Award of the Peers and Commons of the Realm, and by the
Assent of King Edward, Father to our Sovereign Lord the King that now is, as
Traitors and Enemies of the King and his Realm, were Exiled, Disherited, and
Banished out of the Relams for ever; and afterward the same Hugh and Hugh by
Evil Counsel which the King had taken of them, without the Assent of the Peers
and Commons of the Realm, came again into the Realm; and they with others
procured the said King to pursue the said Earl of Lancaster, and other Great
Men and People of this Realm; in which Pursuit the said Earl of Lancaster, and
other Great Men and People of this Realm, were willingly Dead and Disherited,
and some Outlawed, Banished, and Disherited, and some Disherited and
Imprisoned, and some Ransomed and Disherited; and after such Mischief, the said
and Hugh, Master Robert Baldock, and Edmond late Earl of Arundel, usurped to
them the Royal Power, so that the King nothing did or would do, but as the said
Hugh and Hugh, Robert, and Edmond Earl of Arundel, did counsel him, were it
never so great Wrong: During which Usurpation, by Duresse and Force against the
Will of the Commons, they purchased Lands, as well by Fines levied in the Court
of the said King Edward as otherwise. And whereas after the death of the said
Earl of Lancaster, and of other Great Men, our Sovereign Lord the King that now
is, and Dame Isabel Queen of England his Mother, by the King's Will and Common
Counsel of the Realm, went over into France, to Treat a Peace between the Two
Realms of England and France, upon certain Debates then moved; the said Hugh
and Hugh, Robert, and Edmond Earl of Arundel, continuing their Mischief,
encouraged the said King Edward against our Sovereign Lord the King that now is
his Son, and the said Queen his Wife; and by the Royal Power which they had to
them encroached, as before is said, procured so much Grievance, by the Assent of
the said King Edward, to our Sovereign Lord the King that now is, and the Queen
his Mother, then being beyond Sea, that they remained as forsaken of the said
King Edward, and as exiled from this Realm of England. Wherefore it was
necessary for our Sovereign Lord the King that now is, and the Queen his
Mother, being in so great Jeopardy of themselves, in a strange Country, and
seeing the Destruction, Damage, Oppressions, and Disherisons, which were
notoriously done in the Realm of England, upon Holy Church, Prelates, Earls,
Barons, and other Great Men, and the Communalty, by the said Hugh and Hugh, and
Robert Earl of Arundel, by the encroaching of such Royal Power to them, to take
as good Counsel therein as they might: And seeing they might not remedy the
same unless they came into England with an Army of Men of War, and by the Grace
of God with such Puissance, and with the help of Great Men and the Commons of
the Realm, they have vanquished and destroyed the said Hugh and Hugh, Robert
and Edmond. Wherefore our Sovereign Lord King Edward that now is, at his
Parliament holden at Westminster at the time of his Coronation, on the morrow
after Candlemas, in the First Year of his Reign, upon certain Petitions and
Requests made to him in the said Parliament, upon such Articles above rehearsed,
by the Common Counsel of the Prelates, Earls, Barons, and other Great Men, and
by the Communalty of the Realm, there being by his Commandment, has Provided,
Ordained, and Established, in Form following:

First, That no Great Man nor other, of what Estate, Dignity, or Condition he
be, that came with the said King that now is, and with the Queen his Mother,
into the Realm of England, nor none other then dwelling in England, that came
with the said King that now is, and the Queen, in Aid of them to pursue their
said Enemies, in which Pursuit the King his Father was taken, and put in Ward,
and yet remains in Ward, shall not be Impeached, Molested, nor Grieved in
Person, nor in Goods, in the King's Court, nor other Court, for the Pursuit of
the said King, taking and withholding of his Body, nor Pursuit of any other,
nor taking of their Persons, Goods, nor Death of any Man, or any other things
perpetrate or committed in the said Pursuit, from the Day that the said King
and Queen did arrive, till the Day of the Coronation of the same King.

What follows in this Statute, is not much to our purpose: Those concerned in
the Conspiracy against, and Design upon the King, thought them well covered by
this Preamble, and themselves well secured by this First Chapter.

After the end of this Parliament, there were Rot. Claus. 1 Ed. III. M. 16.
Dors. The Scots refuse to treat of a Peace. They break the Truce with England.
Commissioners sent to the Borders of Scotland to Treat of Peace; but the Scots
brake the Truce which had been made with King Edward II. raised an Army, and
invaded England. Walls. f. 127. n. 40. They make their escape from Stanhop-Park.
The Young King and his Mother raised an Army, and with the Stipendiary
Strangers marched against them, and had almost enclosed them in Stanhop-Park,
in the Bishopric of Durham; yet in the Night they escaped, and got into their
own Country, but threatened to return again: Wherefore, for the Defense of the
Kingdom and other Matters, there was a Parliament Holy Cross, or 15th of
September, at Lincoln. The Rot. Claus. ut supra.
Writ in which most of this Relation is contained, bears Date at Stanhop, Aug.
7. The English and Haynalters quarrel.


In their March toward the Scots, the Haynalters Domineering over the English,
they Quarrelled at York, where many were killed, and the most English; whether
for fear of the English, or [6] Knighton, col. 2551. n. 50. Walls. ut supra. The
Haynalters etc leave England.
for what other Reason, the Haynalters and other Foreigners Ibm. c. 2552. n. 40.
England not long after, well Rewarded with Gold and Silver by the Queen and
Mortimer, and others of their Faction.

What was done in this Parliament, I find not. This Year there was another Rot.
Claus. 1 Ed. III. M. 3. Dors.
Summoned to meet at York, on the next Sunday after the Purification of the
Virgin Mary, to Treat of certain Articles propounded and declared between the
Two Nations at Newcastle; but nothing was done at this Parliament, the Bishops
Rot. Claus. 2 Ed. III. M. 31. Dors. A Parliament at Northampton,
Dated March 5. next following, he called another Parliament to meet three Weeks
after Easter at Northampton. In this Parliament In A. D. 1327. A shameful Peace
made with the Scots.
says Murymuth, and Walsingham from him ( facta fuit turpis Pax inter Anglos
and Scotos) there was made a shameful Peace between the English and Scots, by
the Direction and Contrivance of the Queen and Roger Mortimer, by which David,
Son and Heir to Robert Brus King of Scotland, was to Marry Joan King Edward' s
Sister, both Children: And he was also to release all his Right and Claim of
Superiority, that he and his Progenitors had in the Kingdom of Scotland, and to
deliver up all Charters and Instruments concerning the same. Some great Matters
having happened after this Parliament that required great Advice, there was a Rot.
Claus. Ed. III. M. 15. Dors. A Parliament at Salisbury.
Writ issued, Aug. 28. for another to meet at Salisbury, on the Sunday next
after the Quinden of St. Michael. In this Parliament Walls. f. 129. n. 10. Three
new Earls made in this Parliament.
there were made Walls. f. 129. n. 10. Three new Earls made in this Parliament.
three Earls, John of Eitham, the King's Brother, Earl of Cornwall, Roger
Mortimer Earl of the Marches of Wales, and the Butler of Ireland Earl of
Ormond. Ibm.
To this Parliament the Earl of Lancaster, the Lord Wake, and other Noblemen,
came not, though they came armed near to the Place. Knighton, col. 2554 n. 10,
20, etc. They raise an Army for the Queen against the Earl of Lancaster.
These new Earls and their Adherents raised a great Army for Queen Isabel
against Henry Earl of Lancaster, and other consented to their wicked Deeds, and
with a great Force of English and Welsh marched to Leicester, and there
plundered and spoiled the whole Country. The Earl of Lancaster was then in the
South parts of the Nation with great Force, and marching toward Roger Mortimer
and his Army, encamped near Bedford, intending to give him Battle, where the
King's two Unkles Ibm. ^^. 40, 50. The King's two Unkles leave the Earl of
Lancaster. Thus deserted, he makes his Submission.
Thomas of Brotherton and Edmund Earl of Kent, left him, and submitted
themselves to the Queen Mother Mortimer. Seeing himself thus deserted, he made
his Submission to the King before the whole Army, and was by the Mediation of
Simon Archbishop of Canterbury, and other Bishops, reconciled to him, Claus. 3
Ed. III. M. 31. Dors.
making Oath with others in his Company, and giving Security by Recognisances,
That he nor they should attempt any thing upon the Bodies of the King, the two
Queens, nor of any others great or small of their Council, or that were about
them; nor should do, or procure to be done, any Evil, Injury,

On the 25th of Claus. 4. Ed. III. M. 41. Dors. A. D. 1329. A Parliament at
Winchester.
January, the First Day of the Fourth Year of his Reign, the King Summoned a
Parliament to meet at Winchester, on the Sunday before St. Gregory, or 13th of
March, where on Walls. f. 129. n. 20, 30. The Earl of Kent adjudged to death in
that Parliament, For intending to deliver his Brother K Ed. out of Prison.
the morrow of that Feast, or 12th of that Month, the Earl of Kent was seized,
and adjudged to Death. It Is not agreed Edward II. at Liberty, being then, as
was reported, and by him supposed, to be living, and Prisoner in Corf-Castle.
In the Articles against Mortimer (presently to be mentioned) it is urged upon
him, That he was the Author of the Report to the Earl of his Brother's not
being dead; and that he invented it to trick him out of his Life.

Edmund, Son and Heir to Edmund Earl of Kent, and his Mother Margaret Countess
of Kent, Rot. Parl. 4 Ed. III. n. n. 11, 12. His Son restored to the Blood and
Lands of his Father.
requiring the Record made against the said Earl, might, for the Errors
therein, be revoked, set forth in their several Petitions, That his Father and
her Husband was informed by Roger Mortimer, Sir John Maltravers, and other his
Accomplices, That King Edward was alive, after he was Murdered, with design to
deceive him into a pretended Contrivance Parliament at Winchester, as Mortimer
confessed to the People at his Death, and that he died wrongfully. Whereupon
Edmund was Restored to the Blood and Lands of his Father, and the Countess to
her Dower.

(...) might have happened, out of regard to the King, departed and went toward
their own Countries, grieving that they might not speak with, or advise their
Liege Lord as they ought.

4. Also, The said Roger by the said usurped Power, caused the King to march
forcibly against the Earl, and other Peers of the Land, which were appointed to
be with the King to Advise him; and so prosecuted them with Force, that the
said

5. Also, Whereas the said Roger knew well the King's Father was Dead, and
Buried, he by others of his Party in deceivable manner, informed the Earl of
Kent that he was alive; wherefore the Earl being desirous to know whether it
was so or not, used all the good ways he could to discover the Truth; and so
long as the said Roger, by his usurped Royal Power, caused him to be
apprehended in the Parliament holden at Winchester;

Also, The said Roger, by his usurped Royal Power, caused the King to give to
him and his Children, and Confederates, Castles, Towns, Manors, and
Franchises, in England, Ireland, and Wales, in Decrease of the Revenues of the
Crown.

7. Also, The said Roger in deceivable manner caused the Knights of Shires, at
the Parliament at Winchester, to grant to the King one Man at Arms of every Town
of England, that answered in Air by Four and the Provost, at their cost, for a
Year in his War in Gascoign; which Charge he contrived for the Advantage of
himself and Party, in Destruction of the People.

8. Also, The said Roger by his Power, caused Summons to be sent to many great
Knights, and others, That they should come to the King wherever he was; and
when they came, he caused them to be charged to prepare themselves to go into
Gascoign, or Fine at his Pleasure; which Fines were for the Benefit of him and
his Party.

9. Also, The said Roger falsely and maliciously made Discord between the King's
Father and his Queen; and possessed her, That if she went to him, she should be
killed with a Dagger, or otherwise Murdered: And by this way, and his other
Subtilties, he so ordered it that she would not come at her Lord; to the great
Dishonor of her Son and self, and great Damage to the whole Realm, perchance
in time to come, which God forbid.

10. Also the said Roger by his Usurped Royal Power, had caused to be taken for
him and his Party, the King's Treasure, as much as he pleased, without Tale, in
Money and Jewels, in destruction of the King, so as he had not wherewithal to
pay for his Victuals.

11. Also the said Roger by the said Power, caused to be shared by him and his
Confederates the 20000 Marks which came out of Scotland for the Articles of
Peace, without any thing received by the King.

12. Also the said Roger by his Royal Power, received the King's Duties, and
Purveyance through the Kingdom, as if he had

13. Also the said Roger by his Royal Power caused the King to grant to the
Mounting of 200 Irish, of those that killed the Great Men and others, which
were in the King's Faith, whereas

14. Also the said Roger contrived to have destroyed the King's Secret Friends,
in whom he had most Confidence; and he surmised to the King in the presence of
the Queen his Mother, the Bishops of Lincoln and Salisbury, and others of his
Roger, and this he affirmed so impudently upon the King, as he could not be
believed, against what he had said; And for these things he had been
apprehended, and for many others not as yet fit to be declared; Wherefore the
King charged the Earls, and Barons, the Peers of the Land, as these things
concerned himself, themselves,



The Earls, Barons, and Peers, having Examined the Articles, The Peers Opinion
concerning the Articles against Mortimer.
came into Parliament before the King, and they all delivered their Opinion by
one of their Peers, That all things contained in the Articles were notorious
and known ^^ themselves and the People, wherefore they as Judges in Parliament
by assent of the King, did Award and Judge the said Roger as Traitor and Enemy
to the King The Judgment against Mortimer.
and Kingdom, to be Drawn and Hanged, and commanded the Earl Marshall to
Execute the Judgment, and to the Major, Aldermen, and Sheriffs of London, the
Constable of the Tower, and those who had the Guard of him, to be aiding to the
Earl Marshall at the Execution, which was done on Thursday next after the
Monday the 26th of November was the first day of this Parliament, St. Katherin,
being the 25th. See the Summons in Append. n. 82.
first day of the Parliament, being the 29th day of November. He was not brought
to Answer, but Condemned without hearing, and for that reason this Judgment was
Reversed as Erroneous, and made void by Act of Parliament, and his Grandchild
Roger Restored to his Title and Estate, Rot. Parl. 28 Ed. III. n. 8, 9, 10, 11,
12.

In the Rot. Parl. 4 Edw. III. n. 2. Simon Bereford charged as a Confederate
with Mortmer.
same Parliament, the King charged the Earls, Barons, Peers, to give right and
true Judgment against Simon de Bereford Knight, who had been aiding and
advising to Roger Mortimer, in all the Treasons, Felonies, and Wickednesses,
for which he was adjudged to Death, as it was notorious and known to the said
Peers, who came before the King in Parliament, and said all with one Voice, (and
disirent touz come d'une voice) that the said Simon was not their Peer,
wherefore they were not bound to Judge him Peer of the Land, but for that it
was a thing notorious and known to all, that he was aiding and advising to the
said Roger in all the Felonies, Treasons, and Villainies abovesaid, which were
in Usurpation of Royal Power, Murder of the Liege Lord, (Murdre de Seigneur
Lige) and destruction of Royal Blood, and that he was guilty of diverse other
Felonies, and Robberies, and principal Maintainer of Robbers and Felons, they
as Peers and Judges of Parliament, by Assent of the King, do Award and Adjudge
him, as Traitor King and Realm, to be Drawn and Hanged; Adjudged to be Drawn
and Hanged.
and the Earl Marshall had Command to do Execution, which was done on the
Monday next after the Feast of St. Thomas the Apostle.

All the Peers, Earls, and Barons in this Ib. n. 3. John Maltravers Practice
and Contrivance against the Earl of Kent.
Parliament agreed, That John Mautravers was guilty of the Death of Edmond Earl
of Kent, the King's Uncle, as he that chiefly, traitorously, and King Edward
was dead, he cunningly, and by his false and wicked Subtleties, made the Earl
think and believe King Edward was alive, the which false Contrivance was the
cause of all the ensuing Evils, wherefore as Peers and Judges of Parliament they
award the said John to be Drawn, Hanged, and Beheaded as a Traitor, when he
should be found; Judged to be Drawn, Hanged, and Beheaded. A Thousand Marks to
him that should take him alive. Five hundred Pounds for his Head.
and prayed the King to issue his Proclamation, That any one who could take him
alive, and bring him to the King, should have bring his Head should have 500 l.
of the King's Gift.

Further, Ib. n. 4. The same Judgment against Bogo de Bayons, and John Deveroil.
the same Judgment was given against Bogo de Bayons, and This John Deveroil or
Daverel, was a Creature of Mortimer's, and Governor of Corf Castle, where 'twas
reported King Edward was, who being sent to by the Earl of Kent, told the
Messenger he was there, alive and well, but that no body might see or speak
with him, but such as were sent by the Queen, or Mortimer.
John Deveroil, for the same Cause, and he that could take Bogo alive, and
bring him to the King, should have 100 l. or bring his Head should have 100
Marks, and he that could take John alive, and bring him to the King, should
have 100 Head, should have 40 l.

The same Judgment Ib. n. 5. The same Judgment against Thomas de Gurney, and
William de Ocle, for the same cause.
was given against Thomas de Gurney, and William de Ocle, for the Death of King
Edward, Father of the King that then was, (pur la mort le Roi Edward, piere
nostre Seigneur, etc.) That they falsely and traitorously Murdered him; and he
that could take Thomas alive was to have 100 l. or bring his Head 100 Marks; he
that could bring William Ocle alive was to have 100 Marks, or his Head 40 l.

Amongst the Pleas of the Crown in this Append. n. 84. Thomas de Berkele
Arraigned, found not guilty.
Parliament is contained the Arraignment of Thomas de Berkele Knight, for the
Death of King Edward the Second; for that the said King was committed to the
keeping of the said Thomas and John Mautravers in the Castle of the said Thomas
at Berkele, when he was Murdered. The said Thomas says, That at the time of
the Murder of the Murder of the said Note, That so often as Ed. the II. is any
way mentioned in this Record, he is acknowledged to have been King at the time
of his Murder.
King, he was sick at Bradelye, without the said Castle, and Trial by Twelve
Knights named in the Record, who found him Not Guilty, nor that he fled, or
withdrew himself upon it, but that he placed under him Thomas de Gurney and
William de Ocle, to keep the King, by whom he was Murdered; he had Day given
him to hear his Judgment in next Parliament, and the mean time, was committed to
Ralph Nevill, Steward of the King's Household.

In this Rot. Parl. 4 Ed. III n. 13. Richard Son to the Earl of Arundel,
restored to Blood, Lands, and Goods.
Parliament Richard Eldest Son to the late Earl of Arundel, prays to be
restored to Blood, Lands, and Goods, seeing his Father was put to Death, not
being tried by his Peers according to the great Charter and the Law of the
Land: But because the Attainder was confirmed by Parliament at Northampton, he
mended his Petition, and prayed to be restored of the King's mere Grace, and he
was accordingly restored.

Also in the Ib n. 14. A Thousand Pounds per Annum given to William Montacute,
for taking Mortimer without Bloodshed.
same Parliament, the Prelates, Earls, and Barons, pray and advise the King to
give and grant 1000 l. per Annum to William Montacute and his Heirs for his
Service, in quietly taking Roger Mortimer Earl of March, and his Confederates,
without Bloodshed, a 1000 Marks whereof was to be out of the Lands of Mortimer.

Upon the same Prayer and Advice his Assistants Ib. n. 15. His Assistants were
likewise Rewarded.
Edward Bohun had 400 Marks per Annum to him and his Heirs, Robert de Vfford
300, and John Nevill 200.

In the 5th year of his Reign the King called a Parliament at A. D. 1331.
Westminster, to Cl 5 Ed. III. M. 7. Dors. Part. 1.
meet on the morrow after Michaelmas. The Bishop of Winchester being
Chancellor, Rot. Parl. 5 Ed. III. n. 2. A Parliament called about the Business
of France and Ireland. And to ordain how the Peace might be kept.
declared the cause of Summons to be concerning the Duchy of Aquitan, and the
King's Peace should be made, or other Issue put to the Dissentions between the
King's of England and France, by reason of the said Lands; and also about the
Business of Ireland, concerning the King's going thither, to be advised by his
Lieges in that Nation; and likewise to ordain how the Peace might best be kept:
When also it was agreed, That the King's Business ought to be dispatched before
any other, and auxint, illoeques The King's Business in Parliament to be
dispatched before any other.
feust Accord que les Busoignes le Roi deusseient primerement estre exploitez,
einz ce que Rien feust fait de nully autre Busoign.

The Chancellor further Ib. n. 3. The Lords Advise the King to an Amicable
Treaty with the King of France about the Duchy of Aquitan, etc.
applied himself to the Archbishop of Canterbury, and all the other Prelates,
Earls, Barons, (and autres Grantz) and other Great Men, for their Advice,
whether they thought it best, for the King to proceed with the King of France
Process, or War, or Amicable Treaty; They all agree in the 3d way, by amicable
Treaty with the King of France for the Restitution of Aquitan, seeing the two
former might prove dangerous; and to that purpose the Bishops of Winchester,
Worcester, and Norwich, two or one of them, as the King pleased, with the Lords
Beaumont, Percy, and Montague, Monsieur Geofry Lescrop, and Maistre John de
Shordich, were to be sent to the King of France.

As to the Business Ib. n. 4. The Lords Advise the King to go in Person to
Ireland.
of Ireland, it was agreed by the King, Prelates, Earls, Barons, and other
Great Men in the same Parliament, (si est accord par nostre Seigneur le Roi,
Praelates, Countes, Barons, and autres Grantz en Mesme le Parliament, etc.) That
the King should provide himself to go thither, as soon as he could, and that in
the mean time he should send over some Great Men, with Men at Arms, to aid the
Justices, and other Liege People, opposed the Government.

In this Parliament Ib. n. 9. The Queen Mother to have Lands and Rents of the
value of 3000 l. a year assigned her.
the King by assent of the Prelates, Earls, Barons, and other Great Men, and at
their Request, granted, That the Queen his Mother, not being well paid
according to her mind Three thousand Pounds (trois mill livres) yearly, which
she was to receive out of the Exchequer for her support, should have Lands and
Rents of the value assigned to her.

Then for keeping of the Peace it was Ib. n. 10. An Agreement how the Peace was
to be kept.
agreed in full Parliament, by the King, Prelates, Earls, Barons, and other
Great Men of the Kingdom, (par nostre Seigneur le Roi, Praelat, Countes, Barons
and autres Grantz du Royalme en pleyn Parliament chescun des ditz Grantz eut
especialment examine and assentat, etc.) every one of the said Great Men having
been especially Examined and Assenting, That no Great Man of the Land for the
future, shall retain, maintain, or avow, openly, or privately, by himself or
others, any Robber, Evil-Doer, endicted of Felony, or Fugitive for the same,
nor any sued to Exigend, Common Transgression, or of Evil fame; and the said
Great Men promised with all their Power to assist the Justices, Sheriffs, and
other the King's Officers, in the Execution of Judgments, and other things that
belonged to their Offices, as well against Great Men, as others of what
Condition soevery they were.

On the 27th of January, in the 6th of his Reign, the King issued his Rot.
Claus. 6 Ed. III. M. 36. Dors. A. D. 1331. A Parliament called.
Writs for a Parliament to meet on the Monday after St. Gregory, or 12th of
March, reciting in the Summons the Cause of calling it, which the Chancellor
more fully declared; Rot. Parl. 6 Ed. 3 n. 5. To advise the King whether he
should go to the Holy Land with the King of France.
To wit, That the King of France, and many other Kings and Princes, (quamplures
alii Reges and Principes, so in the Writ) had ordered his going toward the Holy
Land, in that present Month of March, and that it much pleased him to have the
Company of the King of England, for the greater performance against the Enemies
of God, and for this purpose sent Letters and Messengers to the King, for whom
he demanded the Advice of the Prelates, Earls, Barons, and other Great Men, in
full Parliament, King of France or not.

After this Declaration Ibm.
Monsieur Geoffry Lescrop, by Command of the King, and in his presence, before
all the Prelates, Earls, Barons, and other Great Men, Reported, That the King
was Notorious Riots in the Nation.
informed, and it was a notorious thing to them all, That diverse People defying
the Law, were gathered together in great Companies in destruction of the King's
Lieges, the People of Holy Church, and the King's Justices, taking and
detaining some of them in Prison, until to save their Lives, they had received
great Fines and Ransomes, at the pleasure of the Evildoers, some they put to
Death, and Robbed others of their Goods and Chattels, doing other Mischiefs,
and Felonies; and thereupon the said Geffry, on behalf of the King, charged The
King demands Advice about his going to the Holy Land.
the Prelates, Earls, Barons, and other Great Men, That by the Faith and
Allegiance they ought him, they would Counsel him Voyage to the Holy Land,
which he very much desired to undertake, with their Advice; and also how the
Peace And how to chastise and restrain the Rioters.
might be kept, and how those Rioters might be chastised and restrained from
their Wickedness.

The first care by the Advice of the Ibm. The Lords advise to prosecute them by
Law and Force.
Prelates, Earls, Barons, and Great Men, was against these Wicked People; That
the King should prosecute them by Law, Force, and all other good ways,
Commissions were issued, to the best Men in the Counties, and Sheriffs, to
apprehend and imprison, and raise the Posse Comitatus against them, and cause
them to be Endicted and punished according to their Deserts.

And it was further Ibm. They were likewise to be Excommunicated.
Agreed by the King, Prelates, Earls, Barons, other Great Men, the Knights of
Shires, and Communes, (par nostre Seigneur le Roy, Prelates, Countes, Barons,
and autres Grantz, Chivalers de Countees, Gentz du Comune, etc.) That a
Sentence of Excommunication ordered by the Prelates, and Clergy, should be
pronounced against them in the Church of St. Paul in London, and sent to all
the Bishops in England, to be also pronounced against them in their Dioceses.

First, Ib. n 6. The Reason and Terms of the Excommunication, and who to be
Excommunicated.
That all those who disturbed the Peace and Quiet of Holy Church, and the
Realm, especially such as made Alliances, Covenants, Obligations,
Confederacies, or in any other manner, were Excommunicated, and so to remain.

Also Ib. n. 7.
the Receivers, Favorers, and Defenders of them.

Also, Ib. n. ^.
That all such Covenants, Obligations, Confederations, and Alliances, were made
void, and annulled by the said Prelates, and that if any Oath was taken to
confirm them, that was also declared void.

As to his Ib. n. 9. The Lords Answer about the King's going to the Holy Land.
going to the Holy Land, they all concluded the time assigned by the King of
France, to be too short.

It was Ib. n. 10.
further declared in this Parliament, on behalf of the King, by Monsieur Geffry
Lescrop, That in the last Parliament, in the 5th of the King, at Westminster, it
had been agreed, That the Debates moved between the Kings of England and France
concerning the Lands beyond Sea, should be reconciled by Treaty, by way of
Marriage, or any amicable manner; and that thereupon the King sent his
Commissioners to the King of France, who Treated with him, and made Report to
King Edward, That the King of France said to them, that if it pleased him to
come to The King asked Advice of the Lords, whether he should go into France to
Treat Personally with that King.
him Personally, he would do more favor to him than to any other, wherefore
'twas necessary to send speedily to the King of France; and for this purpose,
he demanded the Advice of the Prelates, Earls, Barons, and other Great Men, in
full Parliament, whether in case the Messengers with the King of France at their
return, should inform the King his Affairs would be in Prelates, Earls, Barons,
and other The Lords consent to his going.
Great Men, consented to his going, in hopes all Obstacles of a Composure
between them might be thereby removed, and much advantage accrue to him; They
also assented, his Voyage into Ireland might be deferred until Michaelmas next
coming, so as in the mean time some Men at Arms, and others, might be sent in
Aid of his good People there.

The Saturday next after the meeting of this Parliament it was Dissolved. Upon
the Peace made at Northampton, by the Contrivance of Mortimer and Queen Isabell
to secure themselves, King Edward lost his Superiority over Scotland, and the
English Noblemen and others the Lands and Estates they had there, some of whom,
by France to Edward Baliol, Son of Edward Baliol, Son of John, came out of
France into England.
John Baliol late King of Scotland, and brought him into England, at what time
he claimed the Crown of that Kingdom as Heir to his Father, against David Son
to Robert Brus, Walsingh. f. 131. n. 20, 30 Buchan. f. 87. b. f. 88. a. b. f.
89. a. n. 30, etc. Claims the Crown of Scotland, and recovers it by King
Edwards Assistance. And was Crowned at Scone.
in which Claim, by the Mediation of his Friends, he was assisted by Edward
King of England, who furnished him with a small Army of English, by which his
Friends were encouraged to come to him, and after several of the Regents of
Scotland, and Guardians of David and Kingdom, as Thomas Randolf, James Douglas,
Andrew Murray, and other Great Men of his Party, either dying, or having been
killed or taken Prisoners, in the Engagements, Skirmishes, and Battles, between
both Parties for the space of Two years, the Brusians having always been
worsted, tho most in number, and the greatest People, by the constant
Assistance of the English, Edward Baliol was Crowned King on the 8th of the
Kalends of September, or 25th of August 1332, at Scone, in the 6th of Edward A.
D. 1332.
the Third.

In the Second year of his Reign he made REcognition, and an He does Homage,
and Swear Fealty to King Edward, etc. in the presence, and by consent of the
Parliament of Scotland. See the Original here under noted where to be found. The
Form of his doing Homage.
Acknowledgment, That the Kingdom of Scotland was holden of the Kings, and
Crown of England, by Homage Liege, and Fealty, as of their Sovereign Lord, by
ancient Right, and also presence and by assent of the Prelates, Earls, Barons,
Knights, and others of his Kingdom in Parliament assembled at Edinburgh, holding
his Hands between the King of England's, in these Words:

Jeo Edward par la Grace de Dieu Roi Descoce and des Isles apertenences,
Devenke vostre home liege pur les dits Roialm, and Isles contre touts Gents que
purront vivre and morir, and le dit Roi Dengleterre come Sovereign Seigneur des
dits Roialm Descoce and Isles, receut nostre Homage en la form susdit. Et puis
Apres entrasems en la foi de dit Roi Dengleterre Sovereign Seigneur de dits
Roialm Descoce and Isles touchees les Saints Evangeles par les paroles que
sensuit; Nous seroms And Swearing Fealty.
foial and loial, and foi and loialte porteroms a vos nostre treschier Seigneur
Roi de Angleterre, and a vos heirs come as Sovereignes Seigneurs de dits
Roialm Descoce and Isles contre touts Gents que purront Vivre and Morir. Et
voloms, grantoms, and obligeroms, nos and nos heirs affair a nostre dit
Seigneur le Roi Dangleterre and a ces heirs Homage liege and Fealty en le
forms susescrits, au chescun changement de Seigneur ou inneument dune part ou
d'autre.

That is: I Edward by the Grace of God King of Scotland and the Isles thereto
belonging, become your Liege Man for the Realm and Isles, against all People
that can live and dye, and King of England received our Homage in the form
abovesaid as Sovereign Lord of the Realm of Scotland and the Isles, and then
afterward we entered into the faith of the said King of England, Sovereign Lord
of the said Realm of Scotland and the Isles, touching the Holy Gospels by the
Words that follow: We shall be true and faithful, and faith and truth bear, to
our most Dear Lord the King of England, and to your Heirs, as Sovereign Lords
of the said Realm of Scotland and Isles, against all People Will, Grant, and
Oblige us, and our Heirs, to do to our said Lord the King of England, and to
his Heirs, Homage, Liege, and Fealty, in the Forms above-written, upon every
Change of a Lord, or Renewal of one part or the other. In the same Instrument
he granted to King Edward Berwick, etc. In Witness whereof he made his Letters
Patents, dated at Edinburgh, Febr. 12. A. D. 1333, in the Second of his Reign.
The Original under the Great Seal of Scotland, is in a Scotia Tempore Regis
Edwardi Tertii, in a great Chest with that Title, in the old Chapter House in
the Cloister at Westminster.

In the same Year of his Reign reciting that Edward III. by great Edw. King of
Scotland grants to Edw. King of England 2000 l. per An. to him and his Heirs,
for his Assistance, etc. with the Town of Berwick. By Assent of Parliament.
Expense and Labor of him and his People, had given him great Assistance in
the Recovery of his Inheritance, he granted for him and his Heirs, to give,
assign, and deliver unto him 2000 l. yearly, Land and Rents, in the Borders
where it should best please him. And in part of those 2000 l. yearly Rent, he
gave, granted, and assigned the Castle, Town, and County of Berwic upon Twede,
with their Appurtenances, separate from the Crown of Scotland, and annexed
Crown of England for ever. By Assent of the Prelates, Earls, Barons, Knights,
and others of the Kingdom (and aliorum de Regno nostro) in Parliament assembled.
And in further full Other Towns, Castles, and Counties in Scotland given to K.
Edward of England.
Satisfaction of the said 2000 l. per An. by the same Assent in Parliament,
gave, granted, rendered, and assigned the Town, Castle, and County of
Rokesburgh, the Town, Castle, and Forest of Jedworth; the Town and Castle of
Selkirk, the Forests of Selkirk and Etrick; the Town, Castle, and County of
Edinburgh, with the Constablaries Haddington and Linliscon; the Town and County
of Pebles, and Town, County, and Castle of Dunfres, with their Appurtenances,
Knights, Fees, Services, with the Advousons of Churches, Chapels, Religious
Houses, Custody of the Temporalities in the time of the Vacation of
Bishoprics, and all things whatsoever belonging to them, with the Subjection
and Government of the People in those Places; To hold them to him and his
Heirs, separate from the Crown of Scotland, and annexed to, and incorporated
with the Crown of England for ever. Dated at Newcastle upon Tine, June 12. in
the Second Year of his Reign. The Original under the Great Seal of Scotland is
in the same Box above noted, and is confirmed by several Instruments in that
Box under the Great Seal.

King Edward of England two Years before had Froysard. K. Edw. demands Berwick,
and was denied. Du Chesne, f. 641. C. D. D. Bruce denied Homage to K. Edward*
sent to David the young King of Scots, to deliver up to him Berwic as his
Heritage and proper Right, and enjoyed by his Ancestors; and to come and do
Homage for the Kingdom of Scotland, holden of his Crown. He consults his Barons
and Great Men, according to whose Advice he gave the Ambassadors this Answer:
That he greatly marvelled at what King Edward required, seeing there could no
ancient Titles or Papers be found, by which it might appear that the Realm of
Scotland held of the Realm of England by Homage, or As R. Bruce his Father had
done to his Antecessors.
any other way; That his Father King Robert had conquered Berwic War against
Edward II. and he would keep it; and that his Father never would do Homage to
the Ancestors of Edward King of England: And desired the Ambassadors to pray
their Master, That since he had Married his Sister, he would permit him the
same Liberty the Kings of Scotland had at all times enjoyed.

In the mean time, King David's Friends held Berwic, so as King K. Edw.
besieges Berwick.
Edward could not obtain it without Force, notwithstanding the Grant of Edward
Baliol, or his Demand by Right; and therefore sent an Army under Command of the
R. de Avesbury, p. 82. a. c. 21. A. D. 1334. 8 Ed. III.
Lord William Montacute, to besiege it, and within a Month followed with
another Army to assist in the Siege. On Monday, on the Eve of St. Margaret, or
19th of July, the Scots came with a vast Army to relieve the Town. King Edward
marched to meet them, and led up his Beats the Scots Army, and takes it.
Army himself, and in Huntene-More near Berwic, fought with, and routed them,
killing, says the Historian, Forty thousand. The rest fled, when the Besieged
yielded the Town and Castle.

The next Year Ib p 826* b. c. 22. He wastes and burns Scotland. The Scots make
a Peace with him.
King Edward marched through Scotland with a great Army, ravaging, burning, and
spoiling the Country, all flying before him, and none daring to oppose him. At
length returning St. Johnston, many Earl, Barons, Knights, and other Nobles of
Scotland, having his safe Conduct, came to him there, and concluded a Peace
with him, as follows:

These Ibm. c. 23. The Articles of the Peace.
are the Points and Things accorded between the Council of the Kings of England
and Scotland of one Part, and Monsieur Alexander de Moubray, Monsieur Geffry de
Moubray, Monsieur Godfry de Ros, Sir William Bulloke, and Eustace de having
Full Power from Monsieur David de Strabolgi Earl Duscelle, and Robert Steward
of Scotland, to Treat, Accord, and Agree all Points between the foresaid Kings,
and the said Earl and Steward on the other Part. 1. First, It Is Accorded and
Agreed, That the Earl of Ascelle, and the Great Men, and all others of the
Community of Scotland, which came into the Conditions, shall have Life and
Scotland which they ought to have of Heritage, or other Right, except those
that shall be excepted by comune Assent. 2. Also, It Is Agreed they shall have
Pardon of Imprisonment, and for all Trespasses by them done in the Realms of
England and Scotland, from the Beginning of the World, to the Day of the Date
thereof. 3. Also, That the Earl of Ascelles and Monsieur Alexander de Moubray,
shall have the Lands, Tenements, Possessions, Offices, and Fees they had in
England, at their Departure after the Homage at Newcastle upon Tine. 4. Also,
It Is Agreed, that the Franchises of Holy Church in Scotland, shall be
maintained according to the ancient Usages Scotland. 5. Also, That the Laws of
Scotland in Burghs, Towns, Sheriffdoms, within the Lands of the King of
Scotland, shall be used according to the ancient Usages and Customs of
Scotland, as they were used in the time of King Alexander. 6. Also, That the
Offices in Scotland may be always administered Scotland of his Royalty may make
such Officers as he please, and of what Nation soever. 7. Also, It Is Agreed,
That all those that shall be in these Conditions, or this Agreement of the Earl
Dascelles, that have Lands within the Lands of the King of England, in
Scotland, may have again their Lands, Tenements, Possessions, Offices, and
Fees, as they had at their Departure, after the said Homage made at Newcastle
upon Tine, except those that shall be excepted by common Assent. 8. Also, If
they should be empleaded concerning their Lands and Tenements aforesaid, they
shall have their Defenses
The rest are of things that concerned particular Persons, and not much
material to be known now. This Accord or Articles of Peace were writ in the
Town of St. John in Scotland, the 18th Day of August, in the Year of Grace
1335. and 9th of Edward A. D. 1335. 9 Edw. III.
III.

On the first of November next following, King David, in consideration D. Bruce
did Homage and swear Fealty to K. Edw.
that his Predecessors and Progenitors, Kings of Scotland, in ancient times
held, and of Right ought to hold the Kingdom of Scotland of the Kings of
England by Liege Homage and Fealty, and that very many of them had made
Personal Homage, and done Fealty to them, as appeared by ancient Records and
Pleas of the Crown, as well in Parlements, as in the Iters or Circuits of the
Chamberlains and Justices of his Predecessors and Progenitors, Append. n. 85.
And by Advice and Consent of the 3 Estates in Parliament, acknowledge him to be
Superior Lord of Scotland.
by his Letters Patents made with the Advice and Consent of the Three Estates
of the Kingdom in Parliament at Edinburgh, did acknowledge to hold the Kingdom
of Scotland of Edward III. King of England, by Liege Homage and Fealty, as of
the Superior Lord of the Kingdom of Scotland, notwithstanding all and all
manner of Releases, Remissions, Quiet Claims, and other Letters whatsoever made
by any King or Kings of England to the contrary. This Instrument was Dated in
full Parliament, on the first of November aforesaid, in the 5th Year of his
Reign, and yet remains entire under the Great Seal of Scotland.

After this Treaty concluded with the Scots, King Edward was at leisure to look
after his Affairs in France; and a mere Accident contributed much to his Claim
of that Crown: Mezeray, f. 377.
Robert de Artois Earl of Beaumont, who had been the greatest Friend to Philip
of Valois in setting the Crown upon his Head, Ibm. f. 36. R. de Artois came
into England, and advised K. Ed. to make his Claim to France.
made Pretensions to the Earldom of Artois, after the Death of Mahaut, and
brought several Grants under the Great Seal of France to confirm them; which
being strictly examined, were found Counterfeit, and Judgment given against him
by the King. Much moved at the Loss of his Pretensions and Honor, reproached
the King, and provoked him to the utmost Extremity; so that though he had
Married the King's Sister, he was Banished, and his Estate confiscated, Froys.
vol. 1. c. 28.
comes into England, and advised King Edward to make his Claim to the Crown of
France. This being communicated to his Council, they Ibm. He consults his
Friends.
advise him to consult his Father-in-Law William Earl of Haynault, and his
Brother John of Haynault, who had done him great Service in Conducting his
Mother and self into England, before he attempted any thing in this Affair. Ibm.
Accordingly he sent Henry Burghersh Bishop of Lincoln, with two Bannerets and
two Doctors, to acquaint them with his Intentions; Ibm. They approve the
Design, and advise him to make Alliances.
who not only approved the Design, but advised the King to make further
Alliances with some of the Neighboring Princes.

In pursuance of this Advice Pat. 10. Ed III. Part 2 M. 6. He Commissions Will.
Earl of Haynault to treat about Alliances and Retainers.
by special Commission, Dated the 16th of December, he empowered William Earl
of Haynault, Gulielmus Comes Hanoniae, Hollandiae, and Zelandia, ac Dominus
Frisiae) to Treat and Agree with such Noblemen, Persons of Note, and others, as
he should think fit, about Alliances and Retainers.

The like Commissions, and with the like Power of the same Date, were sent to
Ibm. The like Commissions he gave to others.
William Earl of Juliers, the King's Brother-in-Law (being Husband to Joan,
Sister to Queen Philippa) to Sir John de Montgomery Knight, and to Mr. John
Waweyn, Canon of Darlington.

On the 19th of 11 Ed. III. p. 1. M. 11. They contract with several Noblemen
and others in Haynault, Guelderland, and Juliers.
April following, a like Commission was issued to Henry Bishop of Lincoln,
William Earl of Salisbury, and William Earl of Huntington, who were sent into
Flanders; and before the Month of May was ended, Rot. Aleman. 11 Ed. III. M 9,
10, 11. A. D. 1537. What Men they were to find, and what their Wages and
Stipends.
they contracted with several Noblemen and others in Haynault, Guelderland and
Juliers, to King against France, together with what Number of Men every of them
were to find to serve the King, and the Wages and Stipends (or as now called
Pay) they were to receive for so doing.

In a very short time after Ibm. 4 German Princes enter into Alliance with K.
Edw.
Reginald the Second Earl of Gueldres and Zutphen (who Married Eleonora the
King's Sister) and William Marquess of Gulick came into the Alliance; as also
Ibm.
Rupert Count Palatine of the Rhine, Duke of Bavaria.

Lewis the Emperor Ibm.
entered into a Confederacy with King Edward, by which they obliged themselves
and Heirs, to Assist each other with all their Power to recover their
Inheritances and Possessions, Lewis the Emperor joins with him. John Duke of
Lorrain, etc.
withheld from them by Philip of Valois.

About the same time Ibm. M 8. And many petty Earls and Lords retained to serve
him.
John Duke of Lorrain, Brabant, and Lemburgh, was retained for King Edward, and
many petty Earls and Lords.

In the same Year, the 11th of Edward III. several of the same Confederacies
are entered upon the M. 1. and 6. and 11. The Wages of Retainers better than 18
d. a day. A Man at Arms better than 18 d. a day.
Scots Roll, where in some of them the Wages was expressed, which was allowed
by the King to his Retainers, for every Man at Arms they brought into his
Service by the Month, viz. 15 Florens of Florence, which was 45 s. Sterlin,
Eighteen pence a Day, great Wages at that time.

The Allies and Confederacies on the French side were the Du Chesue, f. 646. C.
The King of France his Confederates.
Bishop of Liege, John King of Bohemia and Earl of Luxemburgh, Henry Count
Palatine of the Rhine, Aubert Bishop of Metz, Otho Duke of Austria, Theodore
Marquess of Montferrat, Ame Earl of Geneva, Gefrey Earl of Linanges, Waleran
Earl of Deux-Ponts, Henry Earl of Vandemont, John Earl of Sarbruck, Imbert
Bastard of Savoy; and many other Lords and Captains of Almain, Spain,
Franch-County, Dauphine, Savoy, and other Countries, the Scots, and Duke of
Lorrain.

Having made these Alliances against France, King Edward, before Acts of
Hostility, Rot. Alman. 11 Ed. III. n. 13. A. D. 133^ Commissioners sent by K.
Edw. to K. Ph. to treat about the Right of the Crown of France, and to which of
them it belonged.
constituted the Bishop of Lincoln, the Earls of Salisbury and Suffolk and John
Darcy, his Agents, by Commission Dated October 7. to Treat (cum Magnifico
Domine Principe Domino Philippo Rege Franciae Illustri) with the Magnificent
Prince Philip the Illustrious King of France, or his Commissioners, concerning
the Right of that Crown, and to which of them it belonged. And by another Ibm.
They were also by another Commission empowered to treat about Aquitan, etc. and
also a happy Peace.
Commission, the same Persons were Treat upon all Controversies and Demands
whatsoever relating to the Dukedom of Aquitan, or other Parts beyond Sea, and
also of a happy and perpetual Peace.

Yet the same Day considering the famous Kingdom of France was lawfully
devolved to him by Right of Succession, and that he had claimed that Kingdom as
his Inheritance, he Appen. n. 85 B. A Commission to the Duke of Lorrain and
Brabant to be Viceroy of France.
made John Duke of Brabant and Lorrain his Lieutenant, Captain, and
Vicar General there; granting and committing to him mere Empire, the Power of
the Sword, and all Jurisdiction high and low, the Conusance and Decision of all
Questions or Cases, as well Criminal as Civil, with Power to appoint Judges and
Ministers as he pleased, for the good Government of the Kingdom, according to
the Laws thereof.

The same Commissions were Ibm. The same Commission to others.
granted and made to William Marquess of Juliers, William Earl of Henault, and
William Earl Northampton; to each of them severally, the Words King of England
and France, and King of France and England, being transpised; that is,
sometimes England was put before France in these Commissions, and sometimes
France before England.

These Commissions so made, he directed his Ibm. He sent his Writ to all the
great Persons of France and others to obey his Viceroys.
Writs of the same Date, to the Archbishops, Bishops, Dukes, Marquisses,
Earls, Barons, and all other Persons in the Kingdom of France whatsoever,
commanding them willingly and freely to receive the said Duke, and obey him in
all things as if he were present himself, letting them know, That to the
Obedient he would be very kind, and to the Stubborn very severe.

The same Commands were directed to them in the Names of The same Commands were
to obey others.
Marquess of Juliers, the Earls of Hanault and Northampton, particularly and
severally, with the same transposition of Words, King of England and France.
What were the Effects of these Commissions of Treaty and Lieutenancy, I find
not.

The Pope taking notice of these things, to prevent the War between The Pope
mediates a Peace between the two Kings.
the Two Nations, sent to both Kings Peter Priest-Cardinal of St. Praxed, and
Bertrand Deacon-Cardinal of St. Mary in Aquizo, if it might be, to take up, and
end all Controversies between them. Rot. Fran. 11 Ed. III. M. 2. Dors.
Upon their Application to King Edward, a Truce, in hopes of a Peace to follow,
was obtained, until the morrow after Candlemas, in the 12th of his Reign: It
was thence continued Rot. Alman. 12 Ed. III. M. 36.
to the first of March, and from that time to Rot. Alman. 12 Ed. III. M. 36.
Midsummer following, if the King of France would agree to it. But he not
complying with the Terms of the last Continuation of the Truce, King Edward was
advised to declare it null; which was done on the Ibm. M. 16
6th of May; and further, to pass beyond Sea to confer with his Allies, in
prosecution of his Design against France. He took the Advice, and went to
Antwerp: But before he went, the Cardinals prevailed with him to direct a Rot.
Alman. 12 Ed. III. Part 1. M. 5. A. D. 1338.
Commission, Dated June 21. to John Archbishop of Canterbury, the Bishop of
Durham, Robert de Vfford Earl of Suffolk, Sir Geofry le Scrop Knight. and Mr. John
Vfford Archdeacon of Ely. with full Power to treat and conclude all things in
variance between them, in order to a full and final Peace. another Ibm.
Commission of the same Date, John Duke of Brabant, the Earl of Hanaw and
Gueldres, the Marquess of Juliers, and Sir William Dunork Lord of Onstrehout,
were added to them. The Styles of the Commissions were different; in one it is,
Philippus de Valoys Consanguineus noster Franciae (Philip of Valoys our Kinsman
of France) without other addition. In the other it is, Excellentissimus
Princeps, Dominus Philippus Rex Franciae, Illustris Consanguineus noster
Charissimus; Most Excellent Prince, the Lord Philip France, our Illustrious
most dear Cousin.

At Antwerp there was a Congress of the Confederates with King At a Congress of
the Confederates.
Edward, where on the 22d of July, he revoked Pat. apud. Antwerp. 12 Ed. III.
M. 3. 7. The Commissions to treat were revoked.
the Power he had given the Commissioners abovesaid, to Treat with Philip de
Valois as King of France. From thence the Froys. lib. 1. c. 32. K. Edw. made
Vicar General of the Empire.
Marquess of Juliers was sent to the Emperor, who obtained a Promise from him,
To make King Edward Vicar General of the Empire, Ibm. c. 34.
which was Emperor commanded all People and Subjects of the Empire to obey the
King of England his Vicar, as himself, and do him Homage.

In the 13th of his Reign, at the Request of the Cardinals, Pat. Concess.
homin. Angl. and Vascon. 13 Ed. III. M. 17. Another Treaty appointed, without
effect.
John Archbishop of Canterbury, Richard Bishop of Durham, Henry Bishop of
Lincoln, the Earls of Derby, Salisbury, and Suffolk, with others, had, on the
1st of July, Authority to Treat with Philip de Valois, or his Deputies, upon
the Dignities, Honors, Rights, and Lands, belonging to King Edward, and all
other Differences whatever. The French Commissioners were the Archbishop of
Rouen, the Bishops of Langres and Beavais; the Place at Arras; but without
effect.

Having made this Progress toward a War with France for the obtaining that
Kingdom, Walls. f. 136. n. 50. See there the whole Letter, and in Rob. Avesbury,
p. 83. b. K Edw. writes to the Pope, and sets forth his Title to the Crown of
France by Right of Succession.
he wrote to the Pope, setting forth his Title to it, That the Crown belonged
to him by lawful Right Succession, as being Grandchild to Philip the Fair by
his Mother Queen Isabel; and though, as he grants, she could not Inherit by the
Constitution of France, yet when all the Sons of Philip were dead without Issue
Male, (Charles the Fair being the last) he claimed it as the nearest Male to
his Grandfather, and having the Right of Succession before Philip of Valois,
being Son to Charles Earl of Valois his Grandfather's Brother; and affirmed,
That his Mother's Disability to take the Crown, could not, nor ought not to
bar him of his Right. This Letter bears Date at Antwerp, July 16. 1339. in A.
D. 1339.
13th Year of his Reign.

The Pope in Walls. f. 140. n. 20. The Pope's Answer to K. Edward s Letter.
answer to this Letter, reprehends him for joining with Lewis of Bavaria the
Emperor, and receiving from him the Office of Vicar General of the Empire,
seeing by his Predecessor Pope John XXII. he had been Excommunicated, and
deprived of all Dignity and Honor; who also had exercised the Power of the
Apostolic Sword against all his Adherents who showed him any Favor, and gave
him any Help or Advice, or called or acknowledged him Roman King or Emperor,
declaring them Favorers of Heretics. Then persuading him to Peace, and
pretending great Affection to him, advised him to hearken to the Cardinals,
that loved him sincerely, and wished him Prosperity; and in making Peace, would
pleasing to God, and acceptable to the People.

This notwithstanding, King Edward, after he had been at Antwerp He entered
France with an Army.
above a Year, on the 19th of September, 1339. says Avesbury (in October, says
Walsingham) [8] entered France with a great [1] Ibm. f. 143. n. 30, 40, 50.
Aves. p. 86. b. Burns, wastes, and destroys the Country.
Army, and burnt, wasted, and destroyed Cambresis, or the Territory of Cambray,
and the Country of Vermundois; and such as resisted him were put to the Sword.
Ibm. Puts all that resisted him to the Sword.
The King of France marched toward him with a vast Army; but when he came to
Fighting, he retreated for Fear.

The Pope hearing of this, Walls. 144. n. 10, 20. The Pope offers his Mediation
for a Peace.
attributes the cause of not Fighting to Providence, and an Act of Divine
Clemency for the sparing of Christian Blood; and after many Remarks upon it and
the War, beseeched the King, for the Lord's sake, and by the Mercy of God, to
think of Peace, and in the mean time to consent to a Truce in order to a Peace;
and if the Cardinals, by what they should propound, could not effect it, he
offered his own amicable Mediation for a happy End and Composure of all
Differences.

The King's Answers to the Ibm. f. 145. 10, 20, etc. K. Edward's Answer to the
Pope's offer of a Mediation.
Pope, were his most humble Thanks for offering his Mediation, and the Care and
Affection he had for his Sons, and that he should pursue his wholesome Advice;
Philip unjustly usurped the Crown of France, lawfully devolved upon him after
the Death of his Uncle Charles the last King thereof; That he had seized on
Aquitan, and excited the Scots to Rebel against him; and therefore he intended
not to neglect his Hereditary Rights, but should endeavor to recover them by
the Help of God; and although that Kingdom had been demanded for him before the
Cardinals, who had earnestly and laudably labored in the Business of Peace,
yet he could not obtain a reasonable

On the Claus. 13 Ed. III. Part. 2. M. 28. Dors. A Parliament summoned.
25th of August, not long before King Edward's Inroad into France, the Duke of
Cornwall, Guardian of England, in his Name issued Writs for a Parliament to meet
15 Days after Michaelmass; Rot. Parl. 13 Ed. III. Part. 1. n. 4. The King sent
to them an Account of his Affairs in France.
To which Parliament came the Archbishop of Canterbury, the Bishop of Durham,
and Monsieur William de la Pole, from the King then in France, to show the
Lords and Commons what he had done beyond Sea, and his Condition there, and the
Mischief that had befaln him, and those with him, by reason he was not supplied
from England. At the same time came Letters to the Earl of Huntington, and to
the Prussia Merchants, That the King was in France, near St. Quintins, with an
Army of 15000 Men, honored through the whole World, and his Liege People safe in
all Points, and preserved for ever; Then also he showed to the Great Men and
Commons, how that he and others that were with the King, for the Charge they
had been at, to have his Allies and others to march with him into France, were
obliged with him for 300000 l. Sterling or more, and how that the King and his
Friends could not honorably depart from thence, without giving his Creditors
And requires a very great Sum of Money.
Satisfaction, and likewise, that for this Cause, and for the Maintenance of
him and his Quarrel, which was undertaken by the common assent of them all, and
for his Business on this side the Water, he ought to be supplied with a very
great Sum.

Whereupon in this great Necessity Ib. n. 5. The Great Men give him every Tenth
Sheaf, Fleece, and Lamb, etc.
it was thought convenient to Aid him with a very great Sum, or he would be
dishonored, and he and his People destroyed for ever; and it was (les Grantz
ont Grante) to give him every Tenth Sheaf, Fleece, and Lamb, of their
Demeasnes, except of their Bond Tenants.

The Commons Ib. n 8. The Commons desire another Parliament, Give their Reason
for it. And pray the Two best valued Knights may be chosen in every County.
declare themselves very forward and willing to assist the King, but they pray
the Duke of Cornwall, Guardian of England, and the Lords, That he would summon
a Parliament to meet in convenient time; That the mean while they might go
Country, to endeavor to have an Aid granted answerable to the King's
Necessity; and they further pray, That Two of the best valued Knights might be
chosen in every County for that Parliament.

Accordingly the Guardian issued G^ 13 E. III. Part. 2. M. 1. Dors. The Commons
give 30000 Sacks of Wool.
Writs on the 16th of November for another Parliament to meet Eight days after
St. Hillary, January, in which the Commons gave the King 30000 Sacks of Rot.
Parl. 13 Ed. III. Part. 2. n. 5, 6. 7. The Clergy give nothing because, etc.
Wool upon certain Conditions comprised in Indentures made hereupon; The
Clergy gave nothing, because in the Eleventh year of his Reign they gave a
Adam. Marymouth, A D. 1337.
Triennial Tenth toward the War coming then on with the King of France, and to
pay Germans, Brabanters, and others Confederated with him against that King,
Walsingh. f. 147. n. 20.
the three years being not then expired.

The King and Queen Ib. n. 10. King Edward writes to the Peers and Great M^n of
France of all sorts, and Plebeians. Setting forth his Title to that Kingdom.
kept their Christmas at Antwerp, and Gant in Flanders, from whence he wrote
to all the Prelates, and Persons Ecclesiastic, to the Peers, Dukes, Earls*
Barons, Nobles, and Plebeians of the Kingdom of France, setting forth his Title
as aforesaid, and telling them, That Philip of Valois intruded himself into the
Kingdom by force in his Minority, and possessed it against God and Justice;
Therefore lest he should seem to neglect his own Right, and the Gift of
Heavenly Grace, or submit to the Divine Pleasure, he claimed the Kingdom and
Government, in hope of Celestial help, (Ne videamur jus nostrum and Donum
Declaring what he would do if possessed of it.
Celestis Gratiae negligere, etc.) declaring he would be very Gracious to the
Good and Obedient, and do Justice to every one according to the La^dible Rites
and Custumes of the Kingdom; To Reform all things were amiss, and add according
to the Condition of the Times what was best and most expedient for them, by
assent of Peers, Prelates, and Great Men, and his faithful Subjects. The Letter
as written in Latin begins thus; Rob. Avers. p. 83. a. cap. 28.
Edwardus Dei Gratia Rex Franciae and Angliae ac Dominus Hiberniae Vniversis
Ecclesiarum Praelatis, and Personis aliis Ecclesiasticis, Paribus, Ducibus,
Comitibus, Baronibus, and Nobilibus, ac Plebeis in Regno Franciae constitutis,
veram noticiam, subscriptorum universorum, etc. Edward by the Grace of God King
of France and England, Lord of Ireland, to all Prelates of Churches, etc. as
above, Dat. apud Gandavum die Februarii Anno Regni nostri Franciae primo,
Angliae vero Decimo quarto, Dated at Gant the 8th of February, in the First
year of our Reign of France, and of England the Fourteenth.

Some short time after he came for England, and at Harwich on the 21st day of
February he issued Claus. 13 Ed. III. pars. 1. M. 33. Dors. Summons for a
Parliament.
his Summons for a Parliament, to meet on Wednesday next after Midlent Sunday.
The cause of Summons was declared to be, for granting the King a great Aid, or
Rot. Parl. 14 E. III. pars. 1. n. 5, 6, 7. A great Aid desired. The King in
Debt, and was to remain as a Prisoner at Brussels until it was paid. The Lords,
and Knights of Shires give the 9th Sheaf, Fleece, and Lamb. The Citizens and
Burgesses a 9th of all their Goods according to the true value.
he would be for ever dishonored, and his Lands as well on this side, as
beyond the Sea, in great danger, if he should loose his Allies. And further, he
was in his own proper Person to return to Brussels, and stay there as a
Prisoner, until the Sum he was engaged for there was all paid; and in case he
had a sufficient Aid, all these Mischiefs would cease, and his Design (with the
help of God) have a good issue, etc. Wherefore upon his Request, the Prelates,
Earls, Barons, and Knights of Shires, having regard to the Mischiefs, etc.
granted him the Ninth Sheaf, Fleece, and Lamb; and the Citizens and Burgesses
the very Ninth of all their Goods, according to the true value, for two years
next coming, upon condition he would grant their Petitions presented to him and
his Council.

In this Parliament Ib. n. 9, 10. The Commons make it their Request not to be
subject to the King as King of France.
the Great Men and Commons made it their Request, that seeing the King had
taken upon him the Title King of France, and changed his Arms, they might not
be bound to obey him as King of France, nor the Kingdom of England put in
subjection to him as King of France, or to the Kingdom of France, (le fist
fair lettres patentes de Indempnite) he thereupon caused to be made Letters
Patents of Indemnity Append. n. 86.
.

On the 30th of May next following, declaring in the Writ Claus. 14 Ed. III.
pars. 1. M. 23. Dors. A Parliament called.
his intentions of going beyond Sea for the Defense and England, and the
Recovery of his own, and the Rights of his Crown, he summoned a Parliament to
meet at Westminster on the Wednesday after the Feast of the Translation of St.
Thomas the Martyr, (that is, Thomas Becket) which Feast was July the 7th, to be
holden before his Son Edward Duke of Cornwall and Earl of Chester, whom he had
made Guardian of England.

And he not only publicly declared his intention in the Writs of Summons, but
Rob. Aves. p. 89. a. c. 29. A. D. 1340. The Archbishop of Canterbury,
appointed the precise day to be on the 13th of June, to pass from Orwell in
Suffolk into Flanders, with about 40 Ships that lay ready there, to Treat with
his Confederates about the War; Upon this Resolution the Archbishop of
Canterbury, then his Chancellor, informed Ibm. Then Chancellor, acquaints the
King with the Danger in his Passage to France. He would not believe him. He
Quits his Council, and sends him the Seal.
him, That Philip of Valois, his Adversary of France, foreseeing his Passage,
had privately sent a great Fleet of Men of War to encounter him in the Haven of
Sluice; and advised him to provide more Ships, and reinforce his Fleet,
otherwise he and his Affairs might be lost in the Passage. The King, not
believing him, said he would go whatever came of it. The Archbishop quitted
his Council, and taking Leave departed, and sent the Seal of his Office to him;
yet the King thinking better on the Matter, called to him Robert de Morle his
Admiral, and one Crabbe, a famous Mariner, who upon his enquiry Information and
Advice the Archbishop had given, whereupon he presently sent for him, and
delivered to him Ib. p. 89. b.
the Seal; and also having sent to the Northern and Southern Parts, and to
London, within ten days he had a sufficient Fleet, and more Armed Men and
Archers then he could expect, or had use for. With this Fleet he sailed toward
Flanders, and on Midsummer Ibm.
Day the English and French Fleets engaged, when the English obtained a mighty
Victory, killing French, and taking and destroying Two hundred Ships.

The Parliament met at the time appointed, and the cause of Summons was
declared to be, Rot. Parl. 14 E. III. pars. 2. n. 2, 3. The cause of calling
the Parliament.
to Treat and Ordain concerning the things might happen to the King; for
keeping the Peace in England, upon the Marches of Scotland, and upon the Sea;
and to Advise and Determine how, and in what manner, he might Ib. n. 4, 5.
On the next day, being Thursday, it was shown to the Great Men and Commons,
(as Grantz and Comunes) That since the Summons to this Parliament, God by his
Grace (Dieu par sa grace) had given the King Victory over his Enemies, to the
great Assurance, Repose, and Quiet of all his Liege Subjects; and how, that to
perform his Design upon his Enemies, he was forced to loose his Allies, (il lui
covendroit a force estre eidez ou perdre son alliez) and the Knights, Citizens,
and Burgesses, were charged by the Duke and the Council, to advise how and in
what manner the King might best, and to the most Profit of him, and the least
grievance of his People, be served by the Aid which had been granted him, and
to give their Answer on Saturday next following, (and donez lour respons samedy
prochein suant.) on which day (a queu samedy) after great Treaty and Debate had
(enter les Grantz and les ditz Chivalers and autres des Comunes) it was agreed
by all the Great Men and Commons, That there should be Men assigned to sell the
Ninths granted to the King last Parliament, and directed the quickest and best
way of selling them.

To this Parliament Ib. n. 6, 7. The King wrote to that Parliament. That the Aid
given last Parliament was great.
were sent by the King the Earls of Arundell and Gloucester, and Sir William
Trussell, with Letters of Credence, dated at Bruges, July the 9th, in the 14th
year of his Reign in England, and first of France, directed to the Dukes,
Archbishops, Bishops, Earls, Barons, and others assembled in Parliament,
signifying to them, That tho the Subsidy granted in the last Parliament was
great, yet because it could not in due time Zwynes on Midsummer-day: Ib. n. 8.
Yet because it could not be collected in due time, it answered not his purpose.
And farther acquaints them, That with the Assent of his Allies, the Great Men
of England who were with him, and the Country of Flanders, he had divided his
Army, and intended to go and lie down before Tournay with one part of it, being
an Hundred thousand Flemings Armed, besides (as must be supposed) his English
Forces, Robert Earl of Artois with Fifty thousand, besides all his Allies, and
their Power, were marching toward St. Omers, that for the governing and
marching of this Army he had need of a very great Sum of Money, over and above
what was sufficient to discharge his Debts, which were necessarily to be paid
before his march, requesting them and every one of them dearly ( vous prions
cheremont, and a chescun de vous) to consider the great Danger might happen, if
he was not supplied with Money and Allies should go over to the Enemy, and join
him if not paid. At the Close of his Letter he tells them, Ib. n. 9.
That the Persons abovenamed came over to declare his Condition and Business,
willing them to give full Faith and Credit to what they should say.

This Letter having been read, and the Messengers Ib. 9, 10. Upon the King's
Letter.
heard; necessity could not be aided so speedily as he ought by the Ninth,
wherefore the Great Men sought all the ways they could, ( par quoi les Grantz
sercherent totes les voies quils poaint) that the King might be speedily aided,
and thought it the best, that he should have at present a certain number of
Sacks of Wool; which was propounded to the Knights of Shires for their
assents, how they might be hastily provided, and Merchants spoken to, to take
them at an indifferent and equal Rate, ( and sur 20000 Sacks of Wool granted
for a present Supply.
ce parlez as Chevaliers des Counties d'avoir louz assent coment, etc.) The
number of Sacks agreed upon was 20000, for which the Merchants were to pay the
King 40 s. per Sack Custom, besides the Price of the Wool beyond Sea, Ibm.
( pur equitter ert ses dettes, and pur les ploit de ses grosses busoignes) to
discharge his Debts, and for the Exploit of his great Affairs: And it was left
to the King's Flemings Ib. n. 11.
or Almans should be paid with the Money was to be received of the Merchants.

Soon after King Edward, Rob. Aves. p. 90. b. c. 30, 31.
with the assistance of the Duke of Brabant, the Earl of Haynault, (whose
Forces then passed under the name of Flemings, as in the Parliament Roll) and
the Communities or Governments of Bruges, Gaunt, and Ipres, besieged Tournay;
from which Siege he wrote Append. n. 87. a. He besieged Tournay, and wrote to
the King of France.
to Philip of Valois, without any Title or addition, That he had besought him
by Messages, and all other ways he knew reasonable, to restore his Rightful
Heritage of France, and for that he saw he would not do him Reason, he had
entered into the Country of Flanders, as Sovereign Lord thereof, signifying to
him, That by the aid of Jesus Christ, and power of the Country, his own People
and his Allies, he would put a short end to his Claim, if he would approach him
and advance toward him. But for that Two so great Armies, as there was on both
sides, could not long continue together without great damage to the People and
Country, which thing every Christian And sent a Challenge to him, to determine
the Quarrel and their Claims, by Duel between their Two Bodies, etc.
ought to avoid, especially Princes and Governors of the People; he desired a
brief period might be put to the Matter, and to avoid the Deaths of Christians,
the Quarrel being between themselves, that the discussion of their Claims might
be determined by and between their two Bodies. And if he would not consent to
this way, then that it might be ended by Battle between them and an hundred of
their best Men on either side. And if he would not take one of these, then that
he would assign a certain day, within ten days after the date of this Letter,
to fight Army with Army before the Town of Tournay. This was his desire, not
out of Pride or Disdain, but that the will of Jesus Christ might be shown
between them, for the greater repose amongst Christians. Given under his Great
Seal at Clyn, in the Field, the 27th day of July, in the 14th year of his Reign
of England, and first of France.

To this Letter he had the following Answer returned; Ib. 87. b. The King of
France his Answer to King Edward's Letter and Challenge.
Philip King of France, to Edward King of England: We having seen your Letters
brought to our Court, from you to Philip of Valois, in which were contained
certain Requests made to Philip of Valois; and for that your Letters were not
directed, or the Requests made to us, as clearly appears by the Tenor of them,
we ought not to have given you any Answer, nevertheless, because we understand
by the said Letters, and otherwise, that you are entered into our Kingdom of
France, great damage to us, our Realm and our People, without Reason, not
regarding what a Liegeman ought to observe toward his Lord; for you have entered
into our Homage Liege, and recognized us King of France according to Reason,
and promised such Obedience as Men ought to promise to their Liege Lord, as
appears more clearly by your Letters Patents sealed with your Great Seal, which
we have by us. Our intention therefore is, when it shall seem good unto us, to
drive you out of our Realm; and we have firm hope in Jesus Christ, from whom
all our Puissance, etc. Given in the Fields near the Priory of St. Andrew,
under our Privy Seal, in the absence of our Great Seal, the 30th of July, in
the year of Grace 1340.

Hereupon Philip of Valois Ib. Avesh* ut supra. p. 91. c. 33. Philip of Valois
brought a great Army into the Field, but dare not fight. The English burn and
destroy 300 Cities, Towns, and Villages. And kill a vast number of French of
all sorts. Both Armies in great want of Forage and Victuals.
brought a very great Army into the Field, as was thought to raise the Siege,
but he kept at such a distance off the English Army, being afraid (as says the
Historian) to engage them, that he could not be provoked to fight; tho the Earl
of Haynault, the Lord Walter Manny, and Reginald de Cobham, the King's Marshal,
and other Officers of the Army, were sent with Parties from the Siege, who
wasted the Country, destroyed and burnt three hundred Cities, Towns, and
Villages, within six Leagues round Tournay, and killed of the French Fourteen
Barons, Sixscore Knights, and more then Three hundred Men at Arms.

At last both Armies being very numerous, and in great distress for want of
Forage and Victuals, and the King of England especially in very great want of
Money, the Two Kings consented Treaty of Truce until Midsummer next following.
Ib. p. 91. b. c. 34. The King of England in great want of Money. Commissioners
on both sides to Treat of a Truce.
The Commissioners for the King of England were, the Duke of Brabant, the Duke
of Guelderland, the Marquess of Juliers, and Monsieur John de Haynault Lord of
Beaumont. Those for the King of France were, John King of Bohemia and Earl of
Luxenburgh, Adulph Bishop of Liege, Raoul Duke of Lorrain, Ame Earl of Savoye,
and John Earl of Arminiac, who concluded a Truce between the Two Kings, their
Aidants and Allies, Ibm.
upon the ensuing Articles.

1. That no prejudice, or injury, be done by either Party to the The Articles
of the Truce.
other, during the Truce and Respite. 2. It was agreed, That the Two Kings,
their Aidants and Allies, whosever they were, should remain in the same
possession and seizin, they were in at that time, of all their Goods, Lands,
and 3. It was agreed, That during the Truce, the Kings, their Assistants and
Allies, whoever they were, might safely go out of one Country into another, and
the Merchants with all manner of Merchandise, and all other People with their
Goods might go, and come as well by Land as Sea and Water, as freely as they
used to paying their Passage Money, Tolls and Customs as anciently due. The
Barons and others of Gascoigny, in the Duchy of Guien, to be comprised in this
Article. 4. It was agreed, That neither of the Kings should procure, or cause
to be procured by themselves or others, any grief or prejudice to be done to
the other, his Friends, or Allies by the Church of Rome, or others of Holy
Church whatever they were; nor to Lands, or Subjects, by reason of the War or
any other cause, nor for the service the Allies, and Assistants of both Kings
had done, or should do for either of them. And if their most Holy Father, the
Pope, or others, would do so, both Kings might oppose them to their Powers,
without doing ill, during the Truce.
All Prisoners of War on both sides to be released during the Truce, upon their
Paroles to return again to Prison when it was ended.

6. That there should be a Truce between the English and Scots for the same
time, and certain Persons appointed upon the Borders of each Kingdom to see it
observed, upon such Conditions as Scots refused, the King of France was not to
assist them with Force, or any other ways to relieve and encourage them. And it
was agreed, That this Truce should be notified, or proclaimed in England and
Scotland, 26 Days after the Date thereof; Ibm. p. 93. a.
which was confirmed and sealed with the Seals of the Commissioners on both
sides, in the Church of Espetelyn, on Monday the 25th of September, in the Year
of Grace 1340.

In the time of this Truce, several Commissions were issued for Several
Commissions during this Truce, to make a firm Peace, without effect.
the ending all Controversies between the Two Kings, by a full Peace, or long
Truce, as they are to be found in the Alman or Close Roll in the Tower, in the
15th of Edward III. But they had no other effect than to continue the Truce
unto the Decollation of St. John Baptist, or 29th of August; from thence to the
Exaltation of the Holy Cross, or 14th of September; and from that time
Midsummer the next Year.

While the King lay before Tournay, the Scots Knighton, col. 1580. The Scots
plundered and wasted the Borders.
that had not submitted to King Edward Baliol, came into England, and plundered
and ravaged the Country as far as Durham; but being included in the Truce, as
above, all Hostility ceased during that Truce.

After the Siege of Tournay, the King went to Gant, and staid returning into
England, on the Feast Claus. 14 Ed III. Part 2. M. 12. Dors.
of St. Andrew, about midnight he arrived at the Tower, and next morning he
sent for the Archbishop of Canterbury to Lambeth, but found him Hist. Sacr.
vol. 1. f. 20. The A. Bp. of Canterbury and others of the King's Council
imprisoned
not there. He also sent for the Bishop of Chichester his Chancellor, the
Bishop of Lichfield and Coventry Lord Treasurer, and several others his Great
Officers, Clerks of Chancery, and Justices, and imprisoned them in the Tower,
except the Bishops, p. 93. a. c. 35.
Robert of Avesbury, for fear of the Clementine Constitution, That Bishops
ought not to be imprisoned, he permitted to have their Liberty. On the 3d of
December, the Archbishop went to Canterbury, and secured himself in his
Church, to escape future Dangers. Most of the Persons Rot. Parl. 14 Ed III Part
1. n. 13, 14, 15.
sent for, or imprisoned by the King, were of the King's Council in England;
and those who were appointed and directed in Parliament, to take care of the
Payment of the King's Debts to the Town of Brussels, and other Towns in Brabant
and Flanders, and treat with the Merchants, both Foreign and English, about
paying the Money, amongst whom was the Archbishop.

The Sheriffs Ib. Part 2. ^. 17 and 25^
were commanded to send from all Cities and Burghs, in their several Counties,
Merchants to be before the King's Council at London, or Westminster, on Monday
next after the Assumption of the Virgin Mary, or 15th of August, to treat with
About selling the Wool, granted.
them about buying the Ninth of Wool in all Counties; where the Archbishop of
Canterbury, some other Bishops, Earls, and Barons of the King's Council there
named, as being nearest at hand, Treated with them, and contracted n. 20, etc.
ad 28.
for great numbers of Sacks of Wool; the Money to be paid at Bruges within
three Weeks after, or upon the Feast of the Nativity of the Virgin Mary, or
September; or upon the Feast of St. Michael. The Merchants of Bard and Prussia
bought much of this Wool, and engaged to pay the Money to the People of
Louvain and Malins, and several particular Persons there named, Almans and
others, that had been retained by King Edward; and also sent for diverse Persons
to account before them, and ordered them to return the Money to the King beyond
Sea.

On the 30th of July n. 29.
the Archbishop of Canterbury, the Lords Chancellor and Treasurer, the Earl of
Arundel, Thomas Wake of Lydell, and others of his Council in England, wrote to
the King to give him an account of his Subsidy; and to let him know, That the
Grant of 20000 Sacks of Wool to raise Money speedily, was not made (in the
Parliament he Summoned, before he went beyond Sea, to meet on Wednesday next
after the Feast of St. Thomas, or 7th of July) until the Vigil or Eve of St.
James, or 24th he could not wonder, nor his Allies, or good People of Flanders,
That neither Wool nor Money was then come to him; for certainly as much as
could be levied of his Subsidy should come to him daily, as soon as the Pains
or Knowledge of Man could cause it to be sent or paid.

The Archbishop having secured himself at Canterbury, Hist. Sacr vol. 1. f.
21. 25. The A. Bp of Canterbury's Advice and Reproof to the King.
the King sent Nicholas de Cantelpue with Letters of Credence, That he London,
where he might personally speak with him; but he came not, pretending some
about the King had threatened to kill him. Yet though he came not, he wrote to
the King, and admonished him to take good Advice, and make [9] Walls. f. 150. ^.
10, 20, etc.
use of good and wise Counselors, and to remember that by evil Counsel his
Father had, contrary to the Laws of the Land and Magna Charta, imprisoned some
great Men and others, adjudged them to death, seized their Goods, or put them
to grievous Ransom: And what happened mind, That by the Circumspection and
Discretion of the Prelates, the Great and Wise Men of the Nation, his own
Affairs had prospered, so as he possessed the Hearts of the People; and had met
more Assistance from the Clergy and Laity than any of his Progenitors. But at
present, by the evil Counsel of some English and others, who loved their own
Profit more than his Honor, or the Safety of the People, he had imprisoned
Clercs and others, against the Laws of the Land, Coronation Oath, and against
the Great Charter; the Infringers whereof were, by the Prelates of England and
the Pope's Bull, which he had by him, excommunicated. Which things he had done
to the great Danger of his Soul, and Detriment of his State and Honor. He
tells him, he had pronounced Excommunicate all such about him that were
Favorers of Treason, Flatterers of, and imposed upon him; and as his spiritual
Father beseeches him to hold them as such, some of which by their Sloth, and
Wicked Service and Advice, lost Tournay. And requested him to call together the
Prelates, Great Men, and Peers of the Land, to see and enquire in whose hands
the Wool, Moneys, and other things then remained, which since the beginning of
the War had been granted to him for maintaining thereof; and by what means, and
whose default he lost Tournay; and punish the Offenders in all things according
to Law. And as to what concerned him, saving always the Estate of Holy Church,
and his own Order, he was ready in all Points to submit to the Judgment of his
Peers. This Letter was Dated at Canterbury the First of January.

In the same Month Ib. f. 151. n. 30, 40, etc He wrote also to the Chancellor
of England to preserve the Liberties of the Church.
he wrote to Robert Bouser (a Layman) late made Chancellor of England, in the
place of the Bishop of Chichester, to preserve the Liberties of Holy Church,
and the Laws of destreined for it, upon Prelates and others of the Clergy, who
were not bound to pay it, as those that Rot. Parl. 14 Ed. III. Part 2 n. 14.
and 17.
paid the Tenth granted to the Clergy, and held nothing of the King by Barony,
or were obliged to come to Parliament; and also exacted the Tenth of such as
were bound to pay the Ninth, oppressing the Clergy, contra Deum and Justitiam,
against God and Justice: Exhorting and requiring him in the Lord (hortamur in
Domino and requirimus) not to permit the Religious and Clergy to pay otherwise
than according to the Form of the Grant of the Taxes, nor give his Advice or
Assent to any thing in prejudice of the Great Charter, or that might tend to
the Subversion of Church-Liberties, declaring if he should make out any Writ,
Commission, or Precept to that purpose, he should not omit to exercise such
Power as Holy Church had permitted him.

He Walls. f. 152 n. 10, 20, etc. The A. Bp. declaimed in a Letter to the King
all those Excommunicate,
wrote also to the King and his Council after this manner: (Domino nostro Regi
Consilioque suo, ac omnibus and singulis dicti Consilii sui Personis monstramus
nos, Johannes permissiones divina Cantuariensis Archiepiscopus, totius Angliae
Primas, sedis Apostolicae Legatus, etc.) To our Lord the King and his Council,
to all and every one of them; We John by Divine Permission Archbishop of
Canterbury, and the Pope's Legate, do declare all those that do Arrest Who
imprisoned Clercs,
Clercs, put them in Prison, and detain them against their Wills, are
Excommunicated by Canon. Which Sentence he published in the or oppressed the
Church.
Church of Canterbury, and caused it to be published by all his Brother
Suffragans, or Bishops of that Province. After the Denunciation of which
Sentence, several Clercs (there named) were taken and imprisoned ( in
prejudicium Dei Ecclesiae Sanctae) in prejudice of God and Holy Church, against
the Laws and Privileges of all Clercs, and to the danger of their Souls, who
did such things, or gave Advice or Assent to the doing of them. Wherefore he
beseeched the King to preserve untouched the Rights and Privileges of Holy
Church, and forthwith release the Clercs, and others, that had been imprisoned
against the Great Charter, the Laws of the Land, and Privileges of such as were
detained. And further beseeched all of the King's Council, who had presumed to
advise the King to commit such things (qui talia committendi consilium Regi
dare presumserunt) not to hinder the Release of those that were kept in Prison.
He also declared, That the King's Ministers or Officers, of what Condition
soever, who entered the Granges, Houses, and other Places of Archbishops,
Bishops, Ecclesiastics, or other Religious, without the Consent of their
Bailiffs, and took and carried away their Goods; and all those that commanded
these things to be done, were involved in the same Sentence of Excommunication.
He wished the King would vouchsafe to apply a fit Remedy, for he could not
dissemble; but that against such, as his Pastoral Office Bishops of the
Province, he should execute what was his and their bounden Duty. Yet it was not
his Intention, that the King, Queen, or their Children, should be comprehended
in this Judgment, or Sentence of Excommunication, as far as by Law or Right
they might be excused Ibm. n. 50.
(nostrae tamen Intentionis non existit Dominum nostrum Regem, Dominam Reginam,
aut Liberos eorundem, dictis Sententiis involvi seu comprehendi, quatenus de
jure poterunt excusari.

As he had resolved Ib. f. 153. n. 20, 30, 40, etc.
he wrote to all the Bishops of his Province Ibm. f. 154. n. 30.
and commanded them to declare Excommunicate all such as deprived Churches of
their Rights, or by Malice infringed or disturbed their Liberties or free
Customs; and those especially that violated the ancient Liberties and free
Customs of his Church of Canterbury, or in any manner diminished them, or did
any thing contrary to its Privileges. Also those that disturbed the Peace and
(quacunque art vel ingenio) should violate, break, diminish, or change any of
the Liberties and free Customs contained in the Great Charter, or Charter of
the Forest, privately or openly, by Word, Deed, or Advice, or the ancient
Liberties and free Customs granted by them to the City of London, should be
declared Excommunicate. And then he directs them to proceed in the same manner
against imprisoned Clercs, or entered into the Houses, Granges, Ba* etc. of
Archbishops, Bishops, etc. as above.

The King, moved with this Behavior of the Archbishop Ibm. f. 154. n. 30, 40.
and^. The King's Letter concerning the A. Bp. of Canterbury and his Crimes.
wrote to the Bishop of London, and the Prior and Chapter of Canterbury, in
harsh and severe Language, how he had been used by the Archbishop, and charged
him with many great Crimes; as, that being exalted to the Throne in his Nonage,
desiring to be directed Kingdom of France devolved to him by Right of
Succession, and was usurped by Philip of Valois, he with great Importunity
persuaded him to make a Confederacy against Philip with the German Princes
(idem Archiepiscopus nobis importuna instantia persuasit cum Princibus
Alemanniae contra dictum Philippum foedus inire) exposing us and our Affairs to
the Charge and Hazard of War; promising and affirming, That he would cause
abundantly to be supplied the necessary Expenses from the Revenue of our Lands,
and Subsidies; adding further, That we need only take care to have ready expert
and stout Soldiers. Then he tells how he went beyond Sea, and entered into a War
at a vast Expense, obliging himself to his Confederates in great Sums of Money
upon the promised Aid; but trusting to a broken Reed, and his Assistance in
Money not coming to him, he was forced to contract improfitable Debts under the
greatest Usury; and so as he could not prosecute his Expedition, but must of
necessity return into England: Where declaring to the Archbishop his Streights
and Misfortunes, he called a Parliament, which gave him the Ninths as above, and
the Clergy a Tenth; Archbishop promised again to assist him effectually toward
Collecting the Subsidy, and administering other Necessaries: Whence trustingto
his promised Assistance, he again passed over Sea, and obtained his
Sea-Victory, as before related; and afterward besieged Tournay, as aforesaid;
when every day expecting (tandem convenerunt ad nos amici Fideles,
Peregrinationis nostrae Comites, and Tribulationis nostrae participes) with
whom he discoursed how he might most aptly be delivered from his present
Misfortunes, all agreed the Fault was the Archbishop's, either by Sloth or
Negligence, if not Malice; murmuring against him, that he had not corrected the
Insolence of the Archbishop and Officers (Archiepiscopi and Officialium
Insolentiam, etc.) Discipline and Correction of his Officers (unde nos ad
disciplinam and correctionem nostrorum officialium mentis aciem dirigens) he
removed some from their Offices for Maladministration, by subversion of
Justice oppressing the People, and taking Bribes: Others of less Note he
committed to Prison; and believing he might have a more full account of the
Actions of his Archbishop, to whom he had committed for a long time all the
Administration of all his Affairs, he sent Nicholas Cantilupe to command him to
come speedily to London, that he might have Personal Discourse with him; but
being always Proud, and fearful in Adversity, he pretended Danger from some
about him, if he should stir out of the Church of Canterbury. The second time
he sent to him Ralph Stafford, Steward of his Household, with Letters of safe
Conduct, to come to, and inform contemning his Requests and Messages, with an
haughty Look he answered, That he would not meet, come to, or confer with him,
but in full Parliament, which at that time it was not rationally expedient to
convene (quod in his diebus ex causis rationalibus non expedit convocari.) Then
recounting his great Bounty and Beneficence toward him, his extraordinary
Respect and Assection to him, and the mighty Trust and Confidence he had in
him, declares how ungrateful he was, and how he had deceived him, wounding his
Innocence, by railing at, and reproaching the Justice, Fidelity, and Diligence
of his Officers, by Preaching publicly, and sending Letters into diverse Parts,
That by Royal Power and against Justice, the People had lately been oppressed,
the Clergy confounded, the Kingdom over-burdened with Exactions, Taxes, and
Tallages. And because he falsely endeavored to obtain Name of a Good Pastor,
which he always wanted, yet truly he was a notorious Mercenary by common
Opinion, and his own public Confession; (and quia nomen boni Pastoris, quo
hactenus semper caruit, etc.) he applied himself to assert the Liberty of the
Church; which if it had been injured or grieved, either in Persons or Things
(in rebus vel Personis) it was only and truly to be ascribed to the Remisness,
crafty Intentions, and reprobate Counsels of the Archbishop (Archiepiscopi
duntaxat remissioni, and callidis adinventionibus, ac reprobis consiliis sunt
veraciter ascribendae) wickedly pretending he had certain Sentences and
Articles of Excommunication, made in general against the Violators of
Church-Liberty and the Great Charter, to blacken the Good Opinion the People
then had of the King, to defame his Ministers, traitorously to raise Sedition
amongst the People, and to withdraw the Affections of the Earls, Barons, and
Great Men from him. Wherefore being willing, as he was bound, to secure the
Integrity of his Fame, to obviate the Malice of the Archbishop, and to avoid
the Snares laid for him and his, he desired to publish some other of his
Actions, besides those above repeated; to wit, That by his improvident Advice
in his Nonage, he had made so many prodigal prohibited Gifts and Alienations,
and done so many excessive Favors, that his Treasury was exhausted, and his
Crown-Rents beyond measure diminished; and that corrupted by Bribes, he had
without reasonable cause remitted great Sums of Money due to him, and had given
much of his Rents and Revenue, to Persons not deserving, or converted it to his
own Use; and presumed to attempt other things to the Detriment of his Estate,
Damage of his Royal Dignity, and Grievance of his Subjects, abusing the Power
committed to him. Commanding those to whom this Letter was directed, to publish
it, and cause others to publish it, in such Places as they should think
convenient. Witness his Self at Westminster, the 12th of February, in the 15th
of his Reign.

On Ash Wednesday, being the 21st of February, the Archbishop Preached in the
Cathedral of Canterbury, and Hist. Sacr. vol. 1. f. 23. The A. Bp. published
the K. 's Letters,
at the end of his Sermon he told the People, there were Letters directed by
the King to the Prior and Convent against him, which he desired might be read:
Which was done by order of the Prior, and the Contents of them published in the
English Tongue. Against and makes his Defense.
which the Archbishop in every Point defended his Innocence; admonished the
People to pray for the King, Queen, and their Children; and to those that
should do so devoutly, and also pray for the State of Holy Church, being
penitent, and sorry for their Sins, he granted Forty Days Indulgence from
Purgatory. And the next Day, being the Chair of St. Peter at Antioch, or the
22d of that Month, Ibm.
the Abbot of St. Augustines in Canterbury, to whom and his Convent the like
Letters had been sent, published The Abbot of S. Augustines published them to
the Disadvantage of the A. Bp.
them to the People, expounding them in Hatred to the Archbishop (in odium
Archiepiscopi) that so the People might have an ill Opinion of him.

The very same Complaints against this Archbishop the King Rot. Romans 14 Ed.
III. M. 4. The King sent to the Pope to remove him out of the Kingdom.
sent to the Pope, though in somewhat smoother Language in some parts of the
Epistle; and requests he might be by him removed Kingdom, for preserving the
Peace of it, and preventing other Dangers that might be feared to ensue, if he
staid there, Dat. apud Langele 14 die Martii.

The Archbishop wrote an Answer to the King's Letter, which bears this Title,
Hist. Sacr. vol. ^. f. 27. The A. Bp.'s Answer to the King's Letter, which he
cal's a famous Libel.
(Excusatio Archiepiscopi ad famosum Libellum) The Excuse or Answer of the
Archbishop to the slanderous Libel; addressing himself by way of Preface to
the King, telling him the Holy Pontifical Authority, and the Royal Ordained
Power; of which the Charge of the Priests was the greatest and highest,
inasmuch as they were in the last Judgment to give an account of Kings:
Wherefore he ought to know, that they depend upon the Judgment of Priests, who
might not be directed by their Wills; for who could doubt but Christ's Priests
were to be thought the Fathers and Masters of Kings, Princes, and all faithful
People. Ibm.
(Reverendo Domino suo Edwardo Dei gratia, etc. Duo sunt quibus principaliter
regitur iste Mundus, Sacra Pontificalis Autoritas, and Regalis Ordinata
Potestas; in quibus est pondus tanto gravius and sublimus Sacerdotum, quanto
and de Regibus illi in divino reddituri sunt examine rationem. Et ideo scire
debet Regia celsitudo ex illorum vos dependere judicio, non illos ad vestram
posse dirigi voluntatem. Quis enim dubitat Sacerdotes Christi Regum, and
Principum, omniumque fidelium Patres and Magistros censeri?) And he proceeds to
inform him, that many Bishops Ibm. f. 28.
Excommunicated Kings and Emperors; and also to inform him what Good Kings were
to do, and how to behave themselves toward Bishops, and what Reverence, Honor,
and Respect was due to them. And he complains, that the Honor due to him, in
regard of his Dignity, and as he was his Father, was turned into Disgrace,
Devotion into Reviling, and Reverence into Contempt; (sed proh dolor, etc.
Honor nobis exhibendus conversus est in Opprobium, Devotio in Blasphemiam,
Reverentia in Contemptum) whilst his Ibm.
(dum Epistolas vestras Regio sigillo Signatas, quin verius Libellos famosos)
dictated and written by his Enemies* containing many Crimes falsely imputed to
him, were sent to the Bishops of his Province, Deans, Abbots, Priors, their
Convents and Chapters, to be published to his, and would to God not to the
injury of him too; (in nostram, utinam non in divinam injuriam.) By which
unthought of, that he might not say detestable Fact, Royal Power presumed to
Judge the Lord God in his Servants and Priests; and he seemed to condemn him
his Spiritual Father, and greatest Peer of the Land, against the Order of God,
Human Law, and natural Reason, not called, not convicted by Record, and
unheard, to the Danger of his Soul, and as an ill Example to the manifest
Prejudice of all the Peers of England. At last, making great Profession of his
Affection to him, and the great Services he had done him, he comes to his
Answer, here following: That Ibm. f. 29.
whereas he accused him, That when the Kingdom of France was devolved to him by
Right of Succession, he importuned him to make a League with the Almain to
recover his Rights and was only to find expert Soldiers, and he would find
Money; which failing, you were, you say, forced to contract great Debts upon
Usury. Ibm.
To this he said, That in the beginning of his Government, when he Bishop of
Winchester, it was known by whose Counsel he was Governed. That when the
Kingdom had devolved to him by Hereditary Right, and so judged in the Parliament
at Northampton, the two Bishops of Adam Orl^ton.
Worcester, Coventry and Litchfield, were sent into France to Claim that
Kingdom in your Name, and to hinder the Coronation of Philip de Valois; which
Embassy was the greatest occasion of the War. We at that time were not
employed in any of your Affairs, but were hated at Court, for what Danger of
Men's Souls, Bodies, and Goods, by a devouring War, endeavored with all our
Power to make Peace between the Two Kingdoms; but Ibm. f. 30.
after all Endeavors for Peace proved insuccessful, and Philip had made War
upon you, then in a Parliament at Westminster, called for that Purpose, seeing
the Obstinacy of Philip, it was agreed you should League with the Germans or
Almains, and others. As for the Payment of the Expenses of this War, there were
Agreements made with certain Merchants in a Council at Stamford, which are to
be found in Chancery; which if observed, together with other Subsidies granted
both by Clergy and Laity, and the great Customs of Wool, not only in our own,
but in the Opinion of all the Council, had been sufficient for the whole War,
if well managed. Ibm.
And your Majesty knows well, that these Agreements were not broken or changed
by us, nor did the Subsidies come to our hands; because after your first
Passage we staid not in this Kingdom, but with the Reverend Fathers the
Cardinals and Bishop of Durham, went into France to treat of Peace, often going
backward and forward from and to your self, then in Brabant; and afterward,
when there was no hopes of Peace, staid some time with you there, and were made
Partakers of your Necessities, and with other Prelates and Great Men of
England, became bound with you for great Sums upon Usury.

The Ibm. f. 31.
second thing charged upon him in the King's Letters, he says, was yet more
wonderful (That when the Ninth was granted, he promised effectually to assist
in the levying of it; but that by reason of the nonperformance of that Promise,
when before Tournay, he was forced to consent to a Truce, contrary to his
Mind;) To this he said, the whole Subsidy for the Ninth for the first Year, was
assigned to his Creditors before his second Passage, appear by the Assignations
themselves; and therefore it was manifest, that he neither promised to send,
nor could send any thing to the Siege of Tournay, especially not knowing when
it began.

To the Ibm.
third thing, (That the Necessities and great Streights he was in were brought
upon him by his Fault, Negligence, and Malice, as also of his other Officers,
some of whom he was forced to remove, and imprison others, lest his Friends
that were with him, and Allies beyond Sea, should leave him: And when desiring
to have a better Information of his Affairs, he sent for him, etc.) The
Archbishop affirms, he made no Promise Ibm.
to send Money to him; and therefore such as Warred in his Service, Ibm. f. ^2.
as concerning his Faithful Friends, and those that accompanied him in his
Enterprises beyond Sea, who desired a fit Remedy to be applied to those ill
Services, that brought him into those Inconveniences and Misfortunes; it was to
be believed, according to their Words, that as culpable or guilty of any Fault,
they were to be punished just, not arbitrary Process. Then as to his Two
Messengers, first Nicholas Cantilupe, bringing the King's Letters of Credence,
he only cited and enjoined him to go into Brabant to pay the King's Debts, and
stay there while they were paid; so that if he had been summoned to have been
at London with the King, as his Letters intimated, he must have been here and
beyond Sea at the same time. As to Ralph de Stafford, he came without Letters,
and by bare Word cited him to come to the King, affirming he ought Ibm.
and says (this notwithstanding) that though the King's Letters of Conduct at
first view seemed sufficient for his coming to, staying at, and returning from
his Councils, if he had been summoned, as he was not; yet the same day he
received these Letters of Conduct, the Sheriff of Canterbury brought him the
King's Writ to appear at London before the King and Council upon a Contempt: So
as though the King's Letter gave him free liberty of returning, yet by the King's
Writ he was of necessity to fall into his Enemies hands; Ibm.
(quod non decuit, nec decuisset Regiam Majestatem) which became not, nor could
become Royal Majesty: Nevertheless, he was, and should always be ready to
answer what should be objected against him, before the Prelates and Peers,
saving his State and Order; Statu nostro and Ordine semper salvis.

As to what was Ibm. 34.
charged upon him (for publishing Sentence of Excommunication, and commanding
it to be published, against the Violators of Ecclesiastic Liberty and the Great
Charter, to blacken the King's Reputation, defame his Ministers, and
traitorously move Sedition amongst the People, and to withdraw the Affections
of the Earls, Barons, Nobles, and Great Men, from the King) because it seemed
to affix the Crime of Treason upon him, in which case no King or Temporal Lord
could be his competent Judge, he protested openly and publicly, by these
Presents, That what he said, or should say, he intended not to prejudice his
State in any thing, but wholly to decline Trial by any Secular Judge whatever:
Ibm.
Quia praemissa proditionis crimen in Caput nostrum retorquere videntur, quo
casu Rex nullus, vel Dominus Temporalis, judex noster competens esse potest,
sicut satis Superius est ostensum; protestamur palam, and public per
Presents, Quod dicta vel dicenda, in nullo, Statui nostro prejudicare
intendimus in hac part, sed judicis cujuscumque Secularis examen totaliter
declinari. At last, as to Ibm. f. 35.
his Prodigality in giving away the Revenues of the Crown to undeserving
Persons, and wasting the Product of them, and converting the King's Treasure to
his own use, he utterly denies it, asserting again his Innocence, and the great
Service he had done, the Labor and Expenses he had been at for the Crown. And
near his Conclusion he says, Haec Ibm. 36.
ad Libellum famosum responsa sufficiant in praesenti; This may suffice for
Answer to the scandalous Libel at present, Honor it had neither been wrote or
published.

The King Ibm. f. 36, 37, 38* The King's Reply to the A. Bp.'s Answer.
replied very briefly to this Answer, reproves him for his insolent and
undutiful Language; tells him how much he Honored and Revered his Spiritual
Fathers, and that he ought not to overlook their Offenses, when he saw them
tending to the Danger of him and his Government: And shows him his other
Bishops to publish any Sentences of Excommunication, or other things, against
the Rights of his Crown, or derogatory to his Royal Dignity and Prerogative, as
they had been always used by his Progenitors.

During this Controversy between the King and Archbishop, A Parliament called.
there was a Parliament called to meet at Westminster, on Monday next after the
Quinden of Easter, the Writ of Summons in ordinary bearing Date March 3. at
Wedestoke. Claus. 15 Ed III. Part 1 M. 37. Dors. A. D. 1341.
In this Parliament the Archbishop appeared, and humbled himself to the King;
Rot. Parl. l. 3. p. 8. The A. Bp. humbles himself to the King, and begs pardon.
( le dit Ercevesque se humilia a nostre Seignieur le Roy) requesting his
Favor and Good Will, to which the King received him, and for which the
Prelates and Great Men gave him all possible Thanks qil puisse estre aresnez en
pleyn Parliament devant les Piers) which the King granted; ( quen chose le Roy
ottroia) but said, he would that the Business touching the State of the Kingdom
and Common Benefit, should be first dispatched.

Afterward Ibm. n. 43. A Committee appointed to examine the A. Bp.'s Answer to
the King.
in the same Parliament, the Bishops of Durham Salisbury, the Earls of
Northampton, Warwick, Arundel, and Salisbury, were appointed to hear the Answer
of the Archbishop, to the things charged upon him by the King ( de chooses que
lui sont surmys par le Roi) so as if his Answer was allowed; then the King of
his good Grace should hold him excused ( adonques le Roi de la bon grace lui
tenera pur excusez.) And in case his Answer seemed not sufficient to the King
and his Council, then it was to be debated in the next Parliament, and there
Judgment given concerning Ibm. n. 49.
touching the Arraignment of him ( totes les chooses touchants la reinement
Lercevesque de Cantirbery) remained with Sir William Kildesby, Keeper of the
Privy Seal.

The next Parliament was in the 17th of Edw. III. when the King Rot. Parl. 17
E. III. n. 22. The things against the Archbishop to be vacated in Parliament,
as neither reasonable or true. Note what year this was.
commanded, that the things touching the Arraignment ( les chooses touchants
larraynement Lersevesque de Cantirbirs) of the Archbishop, which remained in
the hands of Sir William de Kildesby, to be advised upon this Parliament, ( pur
aver ent avisement de ce Parliament, soient adnulles, and ouster de tut) should
be annulled and totally outed or laid aside, as such as were neither reasonable
or true: ( come celles que ne sont pas raisonables ne veritables) John de
Vrford was commanded to bring them into Parliament, to be vacated there.

The Parliament in the 15th of Edward the Third, which began on Monday next
after the Quinden of Easter, being that year April 23. because the Prelates,
Earls, Barons, and other Great Men were not fully come ( pur ce que les
Prelates, Countes, Barons, and antres Grantz, ne sont pas pleinement venus) was
continued Rot. Parl. 15 E. III. n. 4.
from day to day until Thursday; when the cause of Summons Ib. n. 5. The cause
of Summons to Parliament declared.
declared with the common Preface, That Philip de Valois, who called himself
King of France, had wrongfully seized his Lands, Seigniouries, and other
Possessions in the Duchy of Guien, and other-where; and also, as much as he
could, supported his Enemies the Scots against him; That it had been agreed by
the Prelates, Earls, Barons, and the Commonalty of the Land in full Parliament,
that he should pass beyond Sea to purchase Friends, Allies, and Retainers, to
help him to conquer his Rights, ( que nostre Seignieur le Roi se purchaseroit
amys, alliez, and retenantz qui lui purroient aider a conquer ces droictures,
etc.) to which purpose there had been granted many Aids that had been diverted,
and spent by some of his Officers and others, to his great damage, and
hindrance of all his Business; That he intended not to ask any new Subsidy, but
charged and requested very earnestly the Great Men, and others of the Commons,
that they would Treat together, and advise among themselves, that is to say,
the Great Men by si ad il chargez and priez en chargeance manner les ditz
Grantz, and autres de la Comune, qils se treisent ensemble and savisent enter
eux, cest assavoir les Grantz de par eux, and les Chivalers des Countees,
Citeyns and Burgeys de pas eux) how he might best be served, and receive the
Arrear of the Ninth for the first year; and how he might most speedily receive
them for the second year, before the Feast of St. John Baptist next coming, for
the Achievement Saturday next following.

But the Consideration of this Matter was put off, until the King's Answers Ib.
n. 42.
to the Petitions of the Great Men, the Commons, and Clergy, were made into
Statutes, which were shown to the King, with certain Conditions demanded by the
Great Men, and Commons, upon the grant of 30000 Sacks of Wool made to him, in
compensation of the Ninth of the second year; ( od ascuns conditions que les
Grantz and la Comune demanderent du Roi sur le grant, quil ferroient a lui de
30000 Then with the Custom about the value of 180000 l. Statutes made with
Conditions.
sakes de leyn in recompensacion de la neofisme garb, aignel, and toison del an
second;) The Statutes and Conditions were read before the King, and the great
Officers and Justices required to Swear to the Observation of them, as it might
in their places belong to them. The Chancellor, Treasurer, and some of the
Justices made Protestation, they neither The Chancellor, Treasurer, and some
Justices, would not consent to them.
consented to the making, or form of them, nor that they could observe them, in
case they were contrary to the Laws and Usages of the Kingdom, which by Oath
they were bound to keep; yet these Statutes and Conditions were sealed with the
Great Seal, and delivered to the Great Men and Knights of Counties, ( as
Grantz, and as Chivalers du Countees.)

Some of the King's Answers to the Articles, or Petitions of the Ib* n* 20. The
King's* Answer to some of the Conditions.
Church, and all Liberties granted to any other Estate, or Persons, may be
observed; and that the Great Charter may be proclaimed again, and confirmed by
Oath: The King's Answer was, He would the Observation of the Great Charter, and
other Liberties; which being exemplified Ib. n. 28.
under the Great Seal, he thought was sufficient, and that there was no need of
Swearing par trop y ad parjurs en son roialme.)

To the fifth, That Ib. n. 23.
several of the King's Officers, and others, have entered into Religiouses
Houses and Parsonages, and by force taken away their Goods, and further by
Oaths forced upon Religious Persons and Parsons, have enquired of things within
their Houses, and them so found have carried away, his Answer was; Ib. n. 30,
31.
That he would not that any Man should enter Churches fee against their
Liberties, nor would that any of his Officers should enter into the Churches,
Lands, or Houses, to take their Goods; but if Laymen to defraud him brought
their Goods thither, he thought himself wronged.

To the seventh, Ib. n. 25.
That the Kings Officers levied of Parsons, Rectors of Churches, the Ninth
Sheaf, the Ninth Lamb, and the Ninth Fleece, when they ought only to have paid
their Tenths, the Answer was, Ib. n. 32.
He would not the Ninths or Tenths to be Ninths by such as held a Barony, or
used to be summoned to Parliament. And then the King Ib. n. 35.
granted for him and his Heirs, That if any Person do any act against the form
of the Great Charter, or any other good Law, that he should answer in
Parliament, or other place where he ought by Law to answer.

The Statutes, and the Conditions abovementioned, are entered Where the
Statutes and Conditions are.
into the back of the Roll, and Printed in the Statutes at Large French. In the
Third Chapter of the Statutes it was agreed, That the Chancellor, Treasurer,
Barons, and Chancellor of the Exchequer, the Great Officers to be sworn in
Parliament.
Justices of both Benches, Justices assigned in the Country, Steward, and
Chamberlain of the King's House, Keeper of the Privy Seal, Treasurer of the
Wardrobe, Controllers, and those that were appointed to remain and be about the
Duke of Cornwall, should then be sworn in Parliament; and so from thenceforth
at all times, to keep and maintain the Privileges and Franchises of Holy
Church, the Points of the Great Charter, the Charter of the Forest, and all
other Statutes, without breaking any Point.

In the 4th Chapter of the same Statutes it is said it was agreed, Orders about
the Justices and great Officers.
That if any of the Officers aforesaid, or Controullers, or Chief Clerk in
either Bench, by Death or by other Cause, be put out of his Office, that the
King by assent of the Great Men, which should be nearest him in the Country,
and by the good Counsel he should have about him, should put another convenient
into his Office, who was to be Sworn according to the Form aforesaid: And that
in every Parliament the King should take into his Hands, at the third day
thereof, the Offices of all the Ministers aforesaid, and so to remain four or
five days, except the attainted in Parliament, and punished by Judgment of the
Peers, and outed of his or their Office, and another convenient put in his
place: And the King was to cause Execution to be done without delay, according
to the Judgment of the Peers in Parliament. Contrived by the Clergy.


It is very probable, that these Agreements concerning the Officers were the
Contrivances of the Archbishop, Bishops, and Clergy; for it was a great
trouble to them, that the Chancellor, Treasurer, and many other Officers who
were Clerks, had been put out of their Offices (as has been related before) at
the King's arrival in England; and others, that were Lay or Secular Persons,
placed therein. Walsingh. f. 150. l. 13.
Rex Edwardus Angliam intravit, ministros suos videlicet Cancellarium,
Thesaurarium, and alios amovit; non Clericos, imo Seculares ad placitum suum
substituit.

The Statutes abovementioned were some months after the The Statutes and
Conditions abovementioned revoked.
making of them (that is, on the first of October next following) revoked by
the King, as contrary to the Laws and Customs of the Land, his Prerogatives and
Royal Rights, by the Advice and Consent of the Earls, Barons, and other
Wisemen; as appears by the Revocation it self of the same Date, directed to the
Sheriff of Lincoln, Printed in this year in the Statutes at Large, and in
Pulton; Writ directed to the Archbishop of Canterbury. The King Append. n. 88.
The King's Writ to the Archbishop that in a Provincial to be holden at London,
to the Venerable Father in Christ, John Archbishop of Canterbury, Primate of
all England, Greeting: Whereas some time since in our Parliament at
Westminster, assembled in the Quinden of Easter last past, there were certain
Petitions made, expressly contrary to the Laws and Customs of England, and not
only very prejudicial, but reproachful also to our Royal Dignity; which if we
had not permitted to have been drawn into a Statute, the said Parliament had
been without success, and dissolved in Discord, and so our Wars with France and
Scotland, which we principally undertook by your Advice, had very likely been
(which God forbid) in ruin; And we, to avoid such dangers, permitting
Protestations of revoking those things, when we could conveniently, that had so
been extorted Nothing be done prejudicial to him or his Crown.
from us against our will, yet permitted them to be sealed with our Seal at
that time: And afterward by the advice and assent Earls, Barons, and other
Wisemen, for Lawful Causes, because our consent was wanting (or as it is in the
Revocation, directed to the Sheriff of Lincoln, because we never consented to
the making of the Statute; but as then it behoved us, we dissimuled in the
Premises, etc.) we have declared it null, and that it ought not to have the
name and force of a Statute. And we understand, you have commanded a Provincial
Council to meet at London, on the morrow of St. Luke next coming; in which you
intend to excite the Bishops of your Province against us, and to Nor to confirm
the Statute and Conditions.
ordain and declare some things prejudicial to us, about confirming the said
pretended Statute, and for the enervation,* depression, and diminution of our
Royal Jurisdiction, Rights and Prerogatives; for the preservation whereof we
are bound by Oath; also concerning the Process depending between us and you for
certain Matters charged upon you by us; and that you intend to promulge
grievous Censures concerning these things: We willing to prevent so great
mischief, do strictly forbid, that in that Council you do not propound, or any
ways attempt, or cause to be attempted any thing in derogation, or diminution
of our Royal Dignity, Power, or Rights of the Crown, or of the Laws and Customs
of our Kingdom, or in prejudice of the Process aforesaid, or in confirmation of
the pretended Statute, or otherwise in contumely of our Name Honor, or to the
grievance or disadvantage of our Counselors or Servants. Know ye, that if you
do these things, we will prosecute you, as our Enemy and Violatour of our
Rights, with as much severity as lawfully we may. Witness the King at
Westminster the first day of October.

The Revocation was confirmed, or rather the Statute vacated in Parliament the
17th of Edward the Third, in the very next Title or Number to the Acquittal of
the Archbishop, as follows; Append. n. 89. The Revocation confirmed in
Parliament.
Also it is accorded and assented unto, That the Statute made at Westminster in
the Quinden of, or fifteen days after Easter, shall be wholly repealed and
annulled, and loose the name of a Statute, as being prejudicial, and contrary
to the Laws and Vsages of the Kingdom, and the Rights and Prerogatives of the
King. But for that there are some Articles in the same Statute which are
reasonable and agreeable to Law, (as in the Revocation in print) it is agreed by
the King and his Council, that those Articles, and others, accorded in this
present Parliament, shall be made into a new Statute, by the advice of Justices
and other Sages, which shall be perpetual.

The Necessitous Condition of the King's Affairs requiring 20000 20000 Sacks of
Wool to be Transported.
Sacks of Wool to be Rot. Parl. 15 E. III. n. 45.
transported before Michaelmas next coming, it was provided, That no Man before
that time should send over Sea any Wool, on pain of thrice the value, and loss
of Life and Member.

How this Archbishop was prohibited, and kept from entering in at the Door of
the Painted Chamber, where the Parliament sat, by Two Sergeants at Arms placed
there by the King; we have it in Birchington, the Monk of Canterbury, Hist.
Sacr. vol. 1. f. 39, 40. The Archbishop not permitted to enter the Painted
Chamber where the Lords sat in Parliament.
in his Life. On Saturday, the Feast of St. Vital, or 28th of April, being the
sixth day of the Parliament, he came to Westminster, and to the Door of the
Painted Chamber; The Sergeants told him, they could not permit him to go in; To
whom he said, the King called him to Parliament by his Writ, That he was after
the King the greatest, and ought to have the first Voice, (ego sum major post
Regem, primam vocem habere debens) That he challenged the Rights of his Church
of Canterbury, and demanded entrance into the Chamber; but the Sergeants
expressly denied it to him, and to the Bishops of London and Chichester, who
were with him. Then advancing his Cross, he told them, That he would not depart
from that place until the King should command him; at length, staying there,
the Ea(...) of Northampton and Salisbury coming out, he desired them to
acquaint the King with what had been done; and that they would request him in
his Name, to preserve the Right of the Church of Canterbury. At last, with his
Fellow Bishops, and the Bishop of At last he was permitted to enter.
Ely, he was admitted into the Chamber, where Treating with the Prelates and
Peers of the Land, the King withdrew. On Thursday following, being the 3d of
May, in full Parliament, he with Ten Bishops, Eight Earls, Four Abbots, Eight
Barons; (all And admitted to favor by the supplication of Great Men.
there named) the King's Chamberlain, John Darcy, Bartholomew Burghersh, the
Mayor of London, the Barons of the Cinque Ports, and Knights of the Community
of England, (ac militibus communitatis Angliae) appeared before the King, and
supplicated him for the Archbishop, who admitted him into favor; but did not
then (as Birchinton affirms) excuse him wholly from his Crimes, Parliament
Records above cited.

Not long after the Dissolution of this Parliament, Lewis the Emperor Append.
n. 90.
wrote to King Edward, That Philip King of France had given him Authority by
his Letters, to Mediate a Peace between The Emperor by Letter offers his
Mediation of a Peace with France.
them; which, tho encumbered with many and weighty Affairs, he was willing to
undertake, it being very expedient for, and advantageous to himself, Kingdom,
and Allies; if he would give him like Power by his Letters to Treat of, and
make a Philip King of France, move King Edward; for since he had made Truce and
Agreement (meaning the Truce at Tournay) with Philip without his knowledge,
will, or assent; by advice of his Princes, who knew his Leagues, Agreements and
Unions, to whom it seemed he might with Honor make Agreement and Friendship
with the King of France, he had contracted and entered Causes before noted he
revoked his Commission, by which he had made him Vicar of the Empire; yet
certainly letting him know, that in his Mediation and Treaties he would provide
for him like a Brother; and if he would acquiesce in his Advice, his Cause
should be brought to a good end by his assistance. And for his further
intimation he sent to him one of his Chaplains, who he desired might speedily
be sent back. These Letters were dated at Francfort, June the 24th.

To which Letter King Edward sent his Answer, Append. n. 91.
That he had received it with Respect; and then reciting the chief Contents
King Edward by his Letter refuses to accept it.
of it, commends his Zeal for making an Agreement between him and Philip of
Valois, giving him notice, That he always wished for a reasonable Peace with
him, which he had prosecuted as much as he could with Justice; and that he then
desired such a Peace, as he wished for, might be procured at the instance of so
great a Mediator. But because he knew his Right Kingdom of France to be
sufficiently clear, he would not by his Letters commit it to a doubtful
Arbitration or Judgment; much wondering he should join with Philip, that had
done him such notorious injury, when seeing the evident Justice he had for his
Demands, and Philip's obstinacy in not complying with them, he had for that
reason entered into a League with him. And as to what was said, That he without
his knowledge or assent had made ^ Truce, and entered into a Treaty of Peace
with Philip, considering the Circumstances of the Fact it ought not rationally
to have moved him; because at that time he besieged Tournay, and ought to
follow the advice of those that were with him, and gave him their assistance;
Considering also that Winter was coming on, and the distance between them, he
could not be permitted to consult him. And further he put him in mind, That he
had granted, opportunity he might Treat without his knowledge; but so as not to
make a final Peace with Philip without his consent, which he never intended to
do. It seemed also to some, that the Revocation of the Vicarship was too
suddenly done, when as according to the Agreement by the height of Imperial
Power made with him, it ought not to have been done, until he had obtained the
Kingdom of France, or the greatest part of it. Dated at London the 18th day of
July, in the second year of his Reign France, and over England the Fifteenth.

After the Truce at the Siege of Tournay, Fr^issard, ^. 1. c. 64. The Duke of
Bretagne dies.
John Duke of Bretagne, who had served the King of France in his Army, in the
way toward his own Country fell sick, and died without Issue: After his death
there arose a controversy between Charles Earl of Blois, and John Earl of
Montfort, about Succession to, and Enjoyment of that Dukedom. Their Titles were
thus; Arthur the second had Ib. and Robert of Aversbury, p. 98. b. c. 40.
Competitors for the Dukedom.
Two Sons by his first Wife, this Duke John, and another who Married, and had a
Daughter only, and died before the Duke his Brother. This Daughter was Married
to Charles Earl of Blois, Nephew to Philip the French King by his Sister. The
same Arthur by a second Wife had a Third Son, who did bear the Title of Earl of
Montfort. The Question was, Whether the Wife of the Earl of Bloys, or the Earl
of Montfort, was nearest in Blood to the late Duke.

Upon the Dukes Death Montfort went to Nantes, the chief City Bretagne,
Fro^ssard, Ibidem. The Citizens of Nantes and some others own Montfort.
where he was received by the Citizens and People of the Country thereabout, as
their Lord, and as nearest of Blood to his Brother, who did homage and swear
fealty to him. To this place he summoned in the Ib. 65, 66, 67. The Nobility
and best fort of People appear not upon his Summons.
Nobility, and the best sort of People of the Country, and good Towns of
Bretagne, who appeared not; whereupon he raised an Army, and took the Town and
Castle of Breast, the City of Rennes, the Town and strong Castle of Hannybout,
the Town and Castle of Caraches.

Yet after all this the Earl Ib. c. 68. He offers to hold the Dukedom of the
King of England by Homage and Fealty. King Edward accepts his offer, and
promises to defend him.
of Montfort, fearing the Earl of Bloys by the power of France might drive him
out of the Dukedom, came into England, and offered to King Edward to hold it of
him by Homage and Fealty, if he would defend him against the French King, and
all others who should give him Trouble in this Matter. The King accepted his
offer, and thought he should have great advantage by it, as not having a more
commodious way of entering France than by Bretagne; calling to mind, that the
Alemans or Germans, and Brabanters, had done little or nothing for him; and
only made their own advantage by spending him much Money. After Homage done,
King Edward in the presence of the Lords of Bretagne, and England, that were
present, promised he would aid and defend him, as his Liege-man, against the
French King and all others. The Homage and Promises were written, sealed, and
delivered interchangeably.

The French King observing what the Earl of Montfort had The French King
summons him to Paris.
done in Bretagne, and hearing he had done Homage to the King of England for
that Duchy; at the Request of the Earl of Bloys he was summoned to appear at
Paris before the King, Twelve Peers, and other great Lords of France. He
appeared according to Summons, Ib. c. 69, 70. He denies he did Homage to the
King of England.
and when the French King charged him with having done Homage to his Adversary,
the King of England, he denied it: He then commanded him by all he held of him,
that depart from Paris in Fifteen days, in which time the Twelve Peers, and
other Lords, should judge of his Right. But he suddenly and privately withdrew
from Paris, and returned into Bretagne.

Nevertheless the Peers and Lords on the 15th day gave their The Peers of
France give the Title of the Duchy of Bretagne to Mary the Wife of the Earl of
Bloys.
Opinions concerning the Title and Inheritance of the Duchy, That it belonged
to Mary the Wife of the Earl of Bloys; and further their Opinions were, That if
ever the Earl of Montfort had any Right, he had forfeited it two ways, by doing
Homage, and receiving it from any other Lord than the King of France, of whom
he ought to have held it; and by disobeying the King's The Earl of Bloys enters
Bretagne.
Commands, in going from Paris without his Leave.

No sooner was this Judgment passed for him, Ib. c. 71, 72. Surprised and took
Earl Montfort.
but the Earl of Bloys, with great assistance from the King of France, entered
Bretagne, and surprised and took the Earl of Montfort in the Town of Nantes, by
the Treachery of the Townsmen; from whence he was Prisoner to Paris, and there
died. This was done (says Foissard Ib. c. 72. A. D. 1341. Who died at Paris,
being there Prisoner.
in the year 1341, about the Feast of All Saints, which was in the Fifteenth
year of Edward the Third; after whose Death his Widow, Sister to the Earl of
Flanders, a Princess of great Prudence and Courage, Ib. c. 79. and Du Chesne,
f. 656. B. His Widow maintains War against the Earl of Bloys.
maintained the War against the Earl of Bloys, and kept possession of those
Parts and Places of Bretagne, as had not been brought under his power. This was
in the beginning of Winter, when the French Nobility, that Earl of Bloys by the
King of France his Command, retired, the fury of the War then ceasing; but
failed not to return in the Spring, to attempt to take from the Countess of
Montfort what remained in her possession. So soon as she was informed of their
return, she sent Ib. in both. She sends to the King of England for assistance.
Emery de Clisson, a Lord of Bretagne, into England, to Request Assistance of
the King, propounding her Son John, Heir to the Earl of Montfort, as a Husband
to one of his Daughters, (who was afterward S^^df. Genealog. Hist. f. 179.
Which she received.
Married to Mary his fourth Title of Duchess of Bretagne.) The Proposition was
readily agreed to by the King, and he sent Sir Walter Manny into Bretagne, with
as many Men Fr^iss. and Du Ch^sne, ^t supra. A. D. 1342. Upon the Marriage of
her Son with the King's 4th Daughter.
at Arms as Sir Emery desired, and also 3000 Archers; but these were not
sufficient to defend the Country against the Force of the Earl of Bloys, who
had taken Rennes, Vannes, and other Places; and would have conquered all
Bretagne, if not speedily opposed. Ib. Fr^iss. c. 86. 90. and Du Che^ne, f.
657. B.
This Account was sent to the King by Messengers from the Countess, and Sir
Walter Manny; whereupon he sent Robert de Artois with more Men, Arms, and
Archers, to reinforce Sir Walter. Du Chesne, I^m C. D. Fr^^ss. c. 92.
This joint Force besieged and retook Vannes; but not long after Vannes was
recovered by assault, made by the Forces and Friends of Charles of Bloys; in
the defense whereof Ib. c. 9^. Du Ch^sne, f. 658. B. C.
Robert de Artois was much, and dangerously wounded; who not long after
returned into England, in hopes of better Surgeons and Medicines, and died
there.

The mean while the Scots entered into England, plundered, The Scots enter
into, burn and waste the Borders.
burnt, and ravaged the Counties of Northumberland, Cumberland, and the
Bishopric of Durham; against whom the King raised an Army in the Northern
Counties.

King Edward very much disturbed Ib. in both. An Army raised, with which
for the Death of his great Friend, and at the Progress of Charles of Bloys,
raised a great Army, and appointed it by Proclamation Clause 16 E. III. M. 20.
Dors. A. D. 1342. the King went in Person into Bretagne. He wrote to the Pope
to Command Prayers, etc. to be made for his Success.
to be ready to pass with him into Bretagne by Midsummer following; and then
wrote to Pope Clement the Sixth to put up Prayers to the Almighty for his happy
Progress, and that he would cause Preachings, Processions, and other Pious
Offices to be exercised in England for a Blessing upon his Armies, which at
that time he intended against France and Scotland. The Letter it self being
written in an extraordinary strain of Piety and Devotion, and to show the
Devotional Latin of those times, is Printed in the Appendix. N.
Notwithwithstanding his Proclamation, he could not get ready Clause 16 E. III.
p. 2. M. 23. Dors.
until the 4th of October, when he took Shipping at Sandwich; and sailing
toward France he met with the French Fleet; from which, after a sharp
Engagement, they were separated by Storm. At length he landed near Vannes in
Bretagne, which he besieged; and Froiss. c. 94, 98. Two Cardinals sent by the
Pope to mediate a Truce, which was obtained for 3 years.
the French Army, under the Conduct of the Duke of Normandy, lay ready to
relieve it. At which time the Pope sent Cardinals of Penestrin and Tusculum,
who mediated a Truce for Three years; for the maintaining whereof the King of
England, and Duke of Normandy (as Froissard says) made Oath, according to the
Articles of the Truce which do here follow, tho not exactly according to the
form in Robert of Aversbury, p. 100. c. 42. or in Tho. Walsingham, f. 159. n.
10, 20, etc. which is tedious and without method, but according to Du Chesne,
F. 659. B.
who has drawn up the whole and entire Sense of them in a short

1. For the Reverence of Holy Church, and the Support of Christianity, The
Articles of the Truce.
and Ease of the Subjects of both Kings, and the Honor of the Cardinals
Treating Peace and Concord between them, they would The first Article is
according to Avesbury.
send some of their Blood, and others to the Court of Rome, to end all
Differences and Debates before the Pope, having Power by Advice of the Pope,
and Consistory of Cardinals, to allege and propound their 2. The Treators, or
Ambassadors, shall appear before the Pope by the Feast of John Baptist, or
Midsummer-day next coming; That before Christmas the Treaty may be ended, if
nothing happens for the prolonging of it; or in case the Pope be not hindered by
other Business, or that he cannot compose in that time the Differences between
the Kings; yet nevertheless the Truce shall continue for Three years after
Michael then next following, between the King of England and France, the King
of Scots, and the Earl of Haynault, and all the Allies of the said Kings, that
is to say, the Dukes of Brabant and Gelderland, the Marquess of Juliers,
Monsieur John de Haynault, and the People of Flanders, in all their Lands and
Seigniories. 3. That the King of Scots, and Earl of Haynault, and other Allies
of the Kings, shall send their Messengers or Ambassadors to Ib. and Wal^ing.
the Court of Rome, by the Feast of St. John, with sufficient Power to consent
to, and confirm the Treaty before the Pope, for what belongs to them; but if
they would not send, the Treaty was to proceed notwithstanding. 4. That the
Truce shall be observed in Bretagne between the Two Kings, and their Allies,
notwithstanding they both pretend Right to 5. The City of Vannes shall remain
in the Hands of the Cardinals, or of one of them, to be holden during the Truce
in the Name of the Pope. And after the end of the Truce, they may dispose of it
as they please. 6. That the Cardinals shall labor diligently, to find some way
how the Flemmings may be absolved from the Popes Censures they had incurred.
Avesbury.
7. That the Earl of Flanders may remain in his Earldom, as Lord without Mean,
but not as Sovereign, provided the People do Consent. 8. Both Kings shall
endeavor without fraud, that their Subjects do not make War upon one another,
in Gascoign, nor in Bretagne, during the Truce, or in any other place; and in
case they should, there should be no Rupture between them. 9. That none, who
were under the Obedience of one King, before 10. That nothing shall be given or
promised, directly or indirectly, to any Party to make War during the Truce.
11. That the Truce be kept, and observed by Land and Sea, and Sworn to by both
Parties, and speedily published in both Armies, and within Fifteen days in
Gascoign, Bretagne, and Flanders; and in England and Scotland within Forty.
The residue of the Articles are the same with those of the Truce, made at the
Siege of Tournay, the 25th of September 1340, in the Fourteenth of Edward the
Third, before noted. This Truce was made in the Priory of St. Mary Magdalen in
the Town of Malatrait, and Signed the 19th of January 1343, according to
Avesbury, and on the same day 1342, according to Walsingham.

About five Weeks after this Truce was Signed, Clause 17 E. III. Part. 1. M.
25. Dors. Writs for a Parliament.
Writs were sent forth for a Parliament to be holden at Westminster, on the
Monday next after the Quinden of, or 15th after Easter; Test Custode, Witness
the Guardian of England, Feb. 24. etc.

The chief cause of Summons of this Parliament (signified also in the Writ it
self) Rot. Parl. 17 E. III. n. 7, 8, 9.
was to treat and advise with the Great Men and Commons ( od les Grantz and
Comunes) what was best King's Affairs, concerning the Truce made The
Declaration of the Cause of Summons.
between him and his Adversary of France; and then touching the Government and
Safety of this Nation and his People. And for that Monsieur Bartholomew de
Burghesh, who was with the King in Bretagne at the making of the Truce, knew
best how things went there, the Chancellor sent to him to come, and declare in
Parliament the manner of making the Truce; who reported, That after the King had
begun the War with France, by Assent of the Prelates, Great Men, and Commons, (
par Assent des Prelatz, Grantz, and Comunes) to conquer his Rights and
Inheritance there, he many times passed the Sea with his Host; and in his last
Passage had harassed the greatest part of the Duchy of Bretagne, and by God's
Assistance had taken Towns, Castles, and Forts: At last he came to the City of
Vannes, which by Advice of the Great Men with him, he besieged, where he was
desired by the Pope, for the Reverence of God and Holy Church, he might send
Two Cardinals with Terms of Peace, or a Truce until a Peace might be treated
of, and concluded. The King perceiving the Truce to be Honorable and
Advantageous for him and his Friends or Allies, assented to it, that during the
continuance thereof, a Treaty of Peace might be had before the Pope, as a
Mediator and Friend, but not as a Judge, or one to whom the matter was
compromitted; come mien, amy, and noun pas come juge, ne recompromissair) which
Peace, if Good and Honorable, the King would accept; if not, he would pursue
his Quarrel. And he said further, That because the War was begun by the Common
Assent of the Prelates, Great Men, and Commons, the King would not treat of, or
make Peace, without their Common Assent. Wherefore the Prelates and Great Men
were charged ( furent chargez) to Assemble on Thursday the First of May (Joedy
le primer jour de May) to treat, advise, and agree among themselves, send
Envoys to the Court of Rome to propound his Rights before the Pope, or not. And
in the same manner the Knights of Counties and Commons were charged ( furent
chargez les Chivalers des Countees and Comunes) to assemble in the Painted
Chamber, to treat, etc. and to report their Answer and Agreement in Parliament
the same Day ( and de reporter lour respons and lour assent en dit Parliament le
dit Joedy.) On which Day the Prelates and Great Men answered, Their Advice was,
That the Truce Honorable and Advantageous to the King and all his Friends; and
that every Christian ought to wish the War, which was so great and hurtful to
all Christians, might end in Peace: Wherefore they agreed to the Truce, and
that the King should send Messengers to Rome, to lay before the Pope, as
Mediator and Friend, but not as Judge, his Rights and Demands, in order to a
Treaty of Peace, according to the Form of the Truce. And then the Knights of
Counties came, and the Commons ( and puis vindrent les Chivalers des Countees
and les Comunes) and answered by Monsieur William Trussel in the White Chamber,
who in the Presence of the King, Prelates, and Great Men ( qi en presence de
nostre Seignieur le Roy, and des Prelatz and Grantz) proposed for the Knights
and Commons ( purposa pur les Chivalers and les Comunes) that they were fully
agreed the Truce should be kept, to the end a good and honorable Peace might
be made. And further, the said Commons ( les ditz Comunes) prayed the King to
send solemn Envoys, or Messengers to treat of Peace, as abovesaid; and in case
he could have an Honorable and advantageous Peace for himself and Friends, he
would accept it; but if not, the said Commons ( les ditz Comunes) granted to
aid and assist him, and to maintain his Quarrel with all their Power; (
granteront de luy aidez, a meyntenir sa querele ove tote lour poair.

Several Commissions Rot. Fran. 17 Ed. III. M. 12. 20 Maii; ib. 19 Aug. n. 6.
ib. 18 Ed. III. M. 3. 4 Aug. ib. M. 2* October. 20.
were made to Commissioners, to treat Commissioners sent to the Pope.
before the Pope as a private Person, and not as a Judge, with the
Commissioners of his Cousin Philip of Valois, upon all Dominions, Dignities,
Honors, Lands, Possessions, Places, and Rights, concerning which there was any
Controversy or Dissension between them; and also concerning the Right he had
or might have to the Crown and Kingdom of France; and generally about all
Dissentions, Wars, Quarrels, Commotions, Questions, Damages, Injuries done,
given, or etc.

In the Cotton Library Cl^opatra* Edw. III. f. 28. in the bottom. The Pope
offers Equivalents to the English Commissioners. They refuse to treat of any
thing but the Crown and Kingdom of France.
there is a Treaty as it was managed at Avignion before the Pope, day by day,
from the 22d of October, to the 29th of November, by William Bateman Bishop of
Norwich, John Offord Dean of Lincoln, the Archdeacon of Norwich, Sir Hugh
Nevill Knight, and Nicholas de Flisco. The Pope offered many Equivalents to the
English for the Dukedom of Guien, etc. to treat about what had been attempted
against the Truce, and by means it had been broken: But they would not enter
upon the Treaty of any other Matter, until they were satisfied in their Demand
of the Kingdom and Crown of France for King Edward. By the last Commission
there Rot. Fran. Ed III. M. 2. 18 October. 20.
were Two other Commissioners added to the former, John de Thoresby and Sir
Ralph Spigurnel Knight, who appeared in the Pope's Court on the Feast of St.
Catherine, or 25th of November, before himself, and delivered the King's
Letters to him, and he appointed the next day at the time of Vespers to hear
John Thoresby acquainted him that Sir Ralph and he had Commissions, and were
sent by the King for two things, for reformation of what had been attempted
against the Truce, and also that they might assist the other Commissioners in
the Treaty. The Pope appointed them to come before him the 28th Day; but not
being then at leisure, he appointed the next Day, when they understanding from
the Commissioners of the King's Adversary, That he should have nothing in the
Kingdom of France but in Hugh Nevill to him with his Letters, and likewise Sir
Simon de Buyssy to the King of France: And so stood the Treaty at that time, on
the 29th of November, 1344. and 18th of Edward III.

During the Treaty, the French King put to death at Paris Oliver de Clisson,
and many other Barons and Lords of Bretagne and Normandy Froissard lib. 1. c. 99
for suspicion of Treason. Du Chesne says ^. 660. A. B.
they held secret Intelligence and private Correspondency, and made a League
with King Edward under their Seals, contrary to the Ninth Article of the Truce,
which was, That none in the Obedience of one King, at the time of Truce, should
put himself under the Obedience of the other, while it continued.

The Treaty hitherto having been without Success, Claus. 18 Ed. III Part 1. M.
14 Dors. A. D. 1334.
the Writs for a Parliament
April issued his Writs for a Parliament to meet on Monday next after the
Octaves of Holy Trinity, or 7th of June that Year. The next Day the Names of
the Lords were read and examined Rot. Parl. 18 Ed. III* ^. 5.
before the King in Parliament, ( item soient les nouns des Seigneurs, etc.) to
see who were come, who not; and the Names of those who were not come, were
given to the King in Writing, that he might order such Punishment as The absent
Lords to be punished at the King's Pleasure. The cause of Summons declared.
he pleased ( pour ordainer lieu punissement come lui plerra.)

On Thursday the Chancellor declared the Causes of Summons to be concerning the
Truce made in Bretagne, and the Breach thereof, in seven Articles; and begins
Ibm. n. 6.
thus: ( Seigneurs en les Trewes prises, accordez and affermez par serement en
Bretaigne enter autres pointz, etc.) Lords, in the Truce made, agreed, and
confirmed by Oath in Bretagne, amongst other Articles it was agreed,

1. That the Truce should be kept in Bretagne between the Kings and their
Adherents ( enter les Rois and lour Adherantz) notwithstanding the Right they
both claimed in the Duchy. 2. Also, That none who were under the Obedience of
one of the Kings ( en obedience dun des Rois) should come under the Obedience
of the other King ( del autre Roi) during the Truce. 3. That there be no
renewing of Injuries against one part or other, in 4. Also, That the said
Lords, their Adjutors, and Coadjutors and Allies, whatever they be, do remain
in such Possession, and such Seisin, as then they had of all their Benefices,
Lands, and Possessions ( des toux lour benefitz, terres, and possessions) which
they held, or had any ways obtained, during the Truce. 5. Also, That what was
promised to the Earl of Montfort, before, and within, the City of Vannes, might
be performed. 6. Also, If any one in Gascoigne, or otherwhere, continuing the
Truce, move War against their Neighbor, or Enemy, who shall be in the Interest
of either Party, then the said Kings ought not to meddle in it by themselves or
others, directly or indirectly ( que le ditz Rois ne se devient mellez par eux
ne par autre, droitement, ne noun droitement.) 7. That to none of either Party
shall any Gift or Promise, be made directly or indirectly, to make War during
the Truce.
And against these Articles several things have been done Ibm. Things done
against the Truce.
as the King's Council have been informed ( par ascunes de Bretaigne) by some
of Bretagne.

First, That some of the Allies of him, that calls himself the King of France,
have taken and imprisoned many Men at Arms of the Allies of our King, and some
they sent into France, to remain in Prison there, during the Pleasure of the
King's Adversary.

Also the said Adversary caused many Knights, Esquires, and other Persons of
Bretagne (Chevaliers, Esquiers, and autres gentz) who were known to be in the
Legiance and Obedience of our King, before the Truce made, and were comprised
in it, and ought to have been protected by it, to be carried to Paris, and
there put to death against the Assent and Decree of the Members, and others of
his Counsel in his Parliament; and some he caused to be murdered falsely and
maliciously, against the said Truce, and against his Oath. And the said
Adversary sent Men at Arms and Foot to a great number, into Gascoigne and
Bretagne, who, after the Truce made, took Castles, Towns, Mannoros, and
Fortlets, and seized Lands and Possessions being in the Possession and
Obedience of our King ( esteantz en la possession and en obedience de nostre
Seigneur le Roi) at the time of the Truce made, in which, amongst other things,
it is contained, That no new thing should be attempted during the Truce ( es
que^oc enter autres chooses est contenuez que rien serroit attemptez de novell
durantes mesmes les Trewes.) And further [5] the said Adversary endeavors, by
all ways he can, or knows, to take and seize all the Lands and Possessions
which our King has beyond Sea, and to procure his Allies in Brabant, Flanders,
and Almain, or Germany, to leave him; and King and Council have certainly been
informed, or have understood, to destroy the English Language, and to possess
England (which God forbid) if a forcible Remedy be not applied to his Malice (
and si est il inferme propos a ce que nostre Seigneur le Roi and son conseil
ont intenduz en certain a destruire la Lange Englois, etc.)

On the other side ( dautre part) the Ibm.
Scots, who are the said Adversaries Allies, have openly declared, That when he
gives observe or regard the Truce, but march into England, and do what Mischief
they can.

Wherefore the King Ibm.
prays and charges ( pur quoi nostre Seigneur le Roi pria and chargea les
Prelates, etc.) the Prelates, Earls, Barons, and Commons, That these things
considered, they would give him such Advice and Assistance, as was necessary
for the saving his and their own Rights and Honor.

Which things being Ibm. n. 7.
recited by the Archbishop ( les Prelates, Counts, Barons, and les autres des
Commons prierent, etc.) the Prelates, Earls, Barons, and others of the Commons,
pray, That they may deliberate till Monday next following.

And from that Monday Ibm. n. 8.
because they had not then fully deliberated, they pray till Wednesday, the
Vigil or Eve of St. John Baptist; upon which day the Archbishop, and Ten other
Bishops, Five Abbots, Two Priors, Eight Earls, Six Barons, all there named, and
the Commons of the Realm assembled in the White and les Commons du Roialme
assemblez en la Chamber blanch, etc.) in the presence of the King, having
regard to the great Mischiefs and Dangers, which may come to the King, and all
his Subjects and Allies, if the Malice of his Adversary was not stopped; and
considering the great Charges, which the Great Men and the Commons of England,
had been at, and suffered by reason of the War continuing so long, by false
Truces, and Sufferances; and seeing openly, that an end of the War, or so good
a Peace The Parliament prays the King to make an end of the War by Battle or
Peace.
as ought to be, cannot be made without great force of Men, and great Power,
they pray the King with one Assent, and every particular Person of the Great
Men for himself ( si prierent touz dun assent, and chescune singulere person
de Grantz a par lui, etc.) that he would make an end of the War, either by
Battle, or by a convenient Peace, if it might be had.

And that when Ibm. n. 9. And not to lay a^^de his Voyage for the Pope's
Letters.
the King should be ready to pass beyond Sea, to take what God should give him
( pur prendre ce que Dieux lui durra) upon the Exploit of this Business, he
would not for the Letters or Command of the Pope, or any other, lay aside his
Voyage, until he had made an end one way or other. The which Prayer the King
fully granted, ( a quele preere le Roi ottroia pleynement) but because it could
not [2] be done without a great and agreeable Aid, the Archbishop, Bishops,
Prelates, and Procurators of the Clergy of the Province of Canterbury, granted
to the King a Triennial Aid for this Voyage granted by the Clergy and Commons.
Tenth; ( and les ditz Commons le samaday apres granterent nostre Seigneur le
Roi pur mesme la cause deux Quinzismes de la Commonalte de la Cerre, and deux
dismes des Citees and Burghs;) And the said Commons granted to the King for the
same cause Two Fifteenths of the Commonalty of the Land, and Two Tenths of the
Cities and Burghs. And Ibm. n. 10.
after that the said Commons granted another Fifteenth; ( and apres le dite
Commune grantent une autre quinzisme.) Ed. III. translated exactly from the
French on this Roll, n. 14. to n. 23. which Statute was made from the Petitions
of the Commons, and the Answers to them; and it is called in the todding on the
Roll, the Charter of the Commons; (la Chartre enseale par la Comune) and also
for the Statute, or Charter for the Clergy, bearing Date July 8. in the 18th of
his Reign, which gave them many Privileges, n. 24. to n. 32. In both these
Statutes, obsolete, it is said, the Great Laymen granted to pass and adventure
themselves with the King, and therefore they are not found upon the Roll to be
Taxed.

The residue of this Year was spent in Wal^. f. 164. n. 30. Froys. l. 1. c.
100. Ashm^le, f. 182.
Tournaments, and other Military Exercises, at Dunstable, Smithfield, and
especially at Windsor, in Feastings, Revellings, Dancing, and all manner of
Jollity.

But it was not long after the beginning of the next Year, that King Edward
Av^^. p. 103. a. c. 48. III news from Bretagne.
received news of what had been done in Bretagne; how the Noblemen, who adhered
to him there, were put to death; and what havoc and depopulation had been made
in those Places under his Subjection. Whereupon William de Bohun Earl of
Northampton, had Rot. Franc. 19 Ed III. Part 1. M. 24. The King sent Defiance
to Philip of Valois.
Commission, Dated April 24. to defy Philip of Valois as a Truce-breaker, his
capital Enemy, Persecutor, and unjust Usurper of his Inheritance the Kingdom of
France. And, done in Normandy and Bretagne against the Truce, had been declared
to be so by the Parliament; so he wrote Rot. Romans 19 Ed. III. M. 2. n 4. He
wrote 'to the Pope complaining of him.
to the Pope on the 26th of May following, almost the same thing; and made
grievous Complaints to him of Philip de Valois having, in the highest manner,
broken and dissolved the Truce. The effect of his Letter the Pope repeats in
his Bull, or Answer to it (the Original being in the Cotton Library Cleop^tra,
E. 2. The Effect and Contents of K. Edward's Letter to the Pope.
) That for avoiding the Dangers and Damages that might arise, by reason of the
Dissentions Wars between Edward III. and the Illustrious King of France, as the
Bull has it, ( inter te, fili carissime, ac carissimum in Christo filium
nostrum Philippum Regem Franciae Illustrem) he had offered many ways of Peace;
that he might apply himself, as he much desired, to the Service of his Redeemer
beyond Sea, but was always delayed with fair Words and Treaties without effect,
to his great Damage. His second Complaint was (after a Narrative of the Truce
made before Vannes) That when he returned England, and had left a few Men only
in Bretagne, and sent his Commissioners to treat before his Holiness about a
Peace (as related before) he received news, which pierced his Soul, That
certain Noblemen of Bretagne were, by Command of Philip, taken, carried to
Paris, and put to death: And also of the great Ravage and Depopulation made in
Bretagne, Gascoigne, and other Places. 3dly, That he endeavored by crafty and
secret Treaties to draw his Allies and Subjects from him, and procured other
things to be attempted, against the Truce by Sea and Land: Therefore he thought
it utterly dissolved by his Adversary. And now since the Time of Treaty was
ended, and no rational way of Peace appearing, nor were the things attempted
against the Truce reformed or amended, but rather multiplied, although by his
Holiness's Letters the said King had been often required to reform Bretagne to
cause the Truce to be observed, yet took the contrary part, and blamed him that
he did not what he ought toward an Accommodation) he thought himself excused by
God, Holy Church, and the People; if seeing he could have no other Remedy in a
just Cause, he declared the Truce dissolved by Philip, and defied him, as
above, and renewed the War again, protesting he would attempt nothing that
might offend his Holiness or the Apostolic offering Peace when he might have a
good one, or by good means ( cum habere poterit bono modo.

The Pope's Answer to this Complaint, begins with a most obliging The Pope's
Answer to K. Edward's Complaints.
Compellation, calling God to Witness ( Fili dilectissime, novit Ibm.
Altissimus, qui scrutator est cordium, and cognitor secretorum, etc.) Most
beloved Son, the Most High knows, who is the Searcher of Hearts, and
understands all Secrets, that he had faithfully endeavored to procure a Peace
between him and the King of France without partiality, and would not yet spare
any Pains for the effecting of it. And he tells him, That those who wrote his
Letters, probably understood not the Truth of the Affair; for that there were
some things put in them, and some things left out, which caused notable He
tells him he had not done according to the Truce.
Errors. It was agreed by the Truce, That there should be some of the Royal
Blood Commissioned to Treat on either side in his Presence; and though the King
of France had sent several of the Royal Blood, and many Prelates of great
Authority (as it had been agreed) with sufficient Power, and were very ready to
Treat; yet he had sent none such; and therefore it ought to be considered,
Whether he, the King of France, or himself, were in fault, that the Peace did
not proceed as it ought to have

As to the taking and punishing of the Ibm.
Noblemen, mentioned in his Letters, and that therefore the Truce was broken,
the Pope says he had wrote to his Magnificence, and told his Commissioners,
That the King of France, in answer to the invective Letters he had wrote to him
upon that Subject, affirmed, That those Noblemen had manifestly violated the
Truce, by committing Murders, by burning and wasting the Countries, and doing
That the Noblemen put to death had broke the Truce, committed Murders, etc.
other horrid Wickednesses in Bretagne, where they were taken and punished
according to Justice; ( quod illi nobiles violando ipsas Treugas manifest in
partibus Britanniae, ac homicidia, depopulationes, incendia, and alia horrenda
maleficia committendo, ibidem flagrantibus hujusmodi and aliis criminibus capti
propter praemissa, and alia sua facinorosa scelera, and deinde puniti exigente
justitia extiterunt.) And that the same Noblemen asserted they were not in
Confederacy with him, but with John of Bretagne Earl of Montfort, who had also
denied when at Paris, that he had any Confederacy with him, that is King Edward.

Further, Ibm.
That his Excellence could not but know, that as he had complained of things
attempted against the Truce in Bretagne, Gascoign, and otherwhere, so the King
of France had likewise complained of things done against the Form and Tenor
Truce in the same places, and also upon the Sea, having exhibited diverse
Articles thereof: That therefore he had directed Letters to them both about
this Matter; To which the King of France answered, he would inviolably observe
the Truce, and cause And that the King of France would inviolably keep the
Peace, if he would do the same.
whatever had been done against it to be revoked, provided he would do the
like. Then having charged him by Letter with giving assistance to Charles of
Bloys, taking upon him the Title of Duke of Bretagne, he wrote back often, That
he never assisted him with Men or Money, or any other way; and the same thing
John Duke of Normandy, his Eldest Son, constantly and frequently affirmed in
his presence.

And whereas Ibm. Charles of Bloys denies himself to be within the Truce.
he had wrote effectually to Charles of Bloys, about the Observation of the
Truce; he came to him, and in his presence, and in presence of the Cardinals
that mediated the Truce, declared and affirmed, he never entered into the
Truce, ( asseruit se nunquam truges aliqualiter inivisse, nec fuerat super hoc
requisitus) He is not named in the Truce, or amongst the Allies; yet it is said
in the Truce, it was to be kept in Bretagne by both Kings and their Adherents.
of the Truce he could no ways be comprehended in it, of which he seriously
gave notice to his Commissioners before their departure from his Court.

At which time Ibm. The King of France complies fully with the Pope's Method
propounded. The King of England did not.
he thought it most expedient to avoid Scandal, and for other causes, to
consider the Complaints made on both sides, which were long, many, and
intricate, according to a Method to be propounded, and consented to by both
Parties, concerning Revocation of what had been done against the Truce, with
which he had acquainted his Commissioners, and to the same purpose wrote to
them both. The King of France returned his Letters of Consent according to his
Proposition, sealed with his Seal, readily and freely, without any limitation
of time; but he prefixed so short a time, as nothing could be undertaken in
that Business.

Then Ibm. The Pope's Excuse for his Legate in Bretagne.
to what he said concerning his Legate sent into Bretagne Truce to be observed,
hearing what had been attempted against it; he, as it had been often related to
him, as much as he could with Justice, and as he found Compliance, was more
favorable to his Cause than the other, as Charles of Bloys by Letters and
Messengers grievously complained to him. But whether his Legate did any thing
unjust or injurious, he knew not; however upon the first Complaint of his
Friends he recalled him, who at his return excused himself; and if he could be
informed Practice, he should correct him for it.

After these Ibm. And says, that against the Tenor of the Truce he seized the
City Vannes.
Answers, he put him in mind, That against the Tenor of the Truce he had seized
upon the City of Vannes, and expelled those, who were to keep it by direction
of the Cardinals, and Mediators, in the Name of him, and the Roman Church,
during the Truce; who were to dispose of it afterward as they pleased; Of
which he said nothing in his Letters.

At last Ibm. The Pope desires him to think seriously, whether he or the King
of France had violated the Truce.
in a long, tedious Discourse, telling him how God had fitted him with many
Endowments to prosecute his Business against the Enemies of the Christian
Faith, ( ad prosequendum Dei negotium adversus hosts fidei Christianae) he
earnestly persuades him to undertake the Holy War; and to think diligently,
Whether to himself, or to the King of France, the Violation of the Truce ought
to be imputed: Withal requesting, and exhorting him in the Lord, ( rogamus
itaque Celsitudinem tuam regiam, and in Domino attentius exhortantes, tibi sub
virtute juramenti praestiti super eisdem treugis injungentes, etc.) enjoining
him by virtue of the Oath he made, to observe the Truce, to restore the City of
Vannes And charge him upon his Oath to restore the City of Vannes.
into the hands of the Cardinals, in the same Condition it was when he expelled
those they appointed to keep it, in the Name of him and the Church, during the
whole time of the Truce, as therein expressed; and to return to the observation
of the Truce, which was until Michaelmas then next coming, and a year
afterward; omit his Warlike Preparations and Insults, promising to prevail
with the King of France to do the like.

And then Ibm He Exhorts him to return to the Treaty of Peace.
he concludes with Prayers and Exhortations by the Mercy of God, to return to
the Treaty of Peace, and to send knowing Commissioners, with Inclination
toward, and full Power to Treat of it; and promises, That having God only
before his Eyes, he will promote it without partiality, to the praise of God,
the honor and profit of both parts, and would induce the King of France to do
the same. The day of the Date and Month of this And promises his utmost
Assistance.
Bull are not legible, but the year is, being the Fourth of his Pontificate,
which was the 19th of Edward III.

Yet this he thought not sufficient to make his Case known to the World; but,
first declaring his Title to the Crown of France, (the same as when he first
claimed it) he drew up, what he had wrote King Edward again declares his Title
to France.
to the Pope, into a Manifesto, and published it with this Title, [9] ( Rex
omnibus ad quod praesentes hae literae pervenerint salutem, etc.) The King, to
all Men to whom these Letters, or this Manifesto, [9] Avesbury, p. 103. a. c.
48. And put forth a Manifesto.
or Declaration shall come, Greeting, etc. Which were dated at Westminster the
14th of June, in the 19th year of his Reign over England, and over France the
Sixth. Datae Ib. p. 104. b.
apud Westmonasterium 14 die Junii Anno Regni nostri Angliae decimo nono, regni
vero Franciae sexto.

About Michaelmas following Ib. and Du Chesne, f. 661, 662. He sends an Army
into Gascony, and takes 47 Towns great and small.
King Edward sent Henry Earl of Derby, Son of Henry Earl of Lancaster, with the
Earl of Pembroke, Walter Manny, into Gascony with a considerable Force, where
he took the strong Town Bruggerac at the first assault, and forty six other
Towns great and small, which Philip de Valois had injuriously taken, and
detained from the King of England; the last of which was the Town and Castle of
Auberoche. After which the Earl of Derby, with the Earl of Pembroke, and Sir
Walter Manny, retired to Bordeaux; upon notice whereof the Earl of Laille, King
Philip's Lieutenant in Gascogne, brought together besieged Auberoche; To the
Relief whereof the Earl of Derby coming, he obtained a great Victory, and took
many Noblemen and great Officers.

After Easter Avesbury, p. 105. a. c. 50. Du Chesne, f. 663. D. A. ^. 1346. 20
E. III.
next year, John Duke of Normandy, Son and Heir to Philip of Valois, besieged
the Town of Ag^illon in Guien, in which was a strong Garrison placed by the
Earl of Derby, and well provided; For the relieving of this place, and to
reinforce King Edward, the Prince of Wales, and many Noblemen.
the Earl of Derby, King Edward raised an Army, and in Person, with the Prince
of Wales, then Seventeen years of Age, and many of the Nobility, intended to
pass into Guien; but the Wind being cross, and the Weather stormy, he was
persuaded Ib. Du Chesne and Aves.
by Geoffrey of Harcourt (an Outlaw and Exile of France, Lord of St. Saviors,
the Viscount in Constantin in Normandy, and one of Land with an Army in
Normandy.
his Marshals) to land in Normandy, and he did so on the 12th July, being
Thursday, land at La Hogue. What he did after his landing, and in his march
toward Caen, and of his taking of that City, and other things, Avesbury Ib. p.
105. a. c. 51.
has delivered in a Transcript of the Journal of Michael de Northburg, an able
Clerk, and one of King Edward's Counselors, who went, and was with him all the
while.

Where he landed, Ibm. What he did there after his Landing.
for the unshipping of his Horse, and refreshing of himself and Army, and
baking of Bread, he stayed Barfleur, and burnt the Ships in that Harbor, Eight
of which had Castles before and behind, ( des queux huit avoient chastiel
devant, and decere.) After the Party left the Town, the Mariners burnt it. The
first of the King's March was to Valoignes, where he stayed only one night, and
found sufficient Refreshment. From thence he marched to Carenten, where were
found plenty of Wine and Victuals: Much of this Town was burnt, notwithstanding
the King did marched to St. Lo, where the People with some Soldiers seemed to
make resistance; in this place he found a thousand Tun of Wine, besides great
store of other Goods. Next night he lodged in an Abbey, and his Army was
quartered about him in Field Villages, ( and son host as villes champestres
entour luy) which in Parties made inroads into the Country, robbing and
destroying five or six miles about every day, and burning Towns in many places,
( and chivacherent les gentz del host robbantz and destruantz cinque od sis
lieus, environ toutz les jours, and arderent en plusors lieus.) Three or four
days after his removal from this Abbey, he came before Caen; in which were the
Constable of France, and the Chamberlain of Tanquerville, with a great Force
for its defense. The King took it by assault with a great slaughter of Knights,
Esquires, and other People; and made Prisoners the Constable and Chamberlain,
with 500 Knights, and Six or sevenscore Squires. In the Town were found Wine,
Victuals, and furent troue en la ville vines, victualles, and autres biens and
chatieux santz nombre.)

When the King removed from Hoges, Ib. in the same Journal. Qu. whether not
Rothness? How he burnt and destroyed the Country.
there were about 200 Ships stayed there, which sailed to Rothmasse, and went
on Shore, and burnt the Country two or three Leagues (lieues) within the Land,
and took much Goods, and brought them to their Ships: From whence they went to
Cherburg, a good Town, where was a strong all which were burnt, as were all
things and Towns upon the Sea Coasts from Rothmasse to Hostrem upon the Haven
of Caen, about Sixscore English miles. There were then also burnt Sixty one
Ships of War, with fore-Castle and hind-Castle, ( ount ars 61 niets de guerre
od chastel devant and derere) with 23 Cayers and other small Vessels of about
30 Tuns.

From Caen he marched to Poissy upon Avesb. p. 100. c. 54.
the River Seyn, where he repaired the Bridge that was broken down, and passed
the River on the morrow of the Assumption of the Virgin Mary, or 16th of
August, after he had defeated several great and strong Parties, who came to
hinder his passage, and killed many of them. The Bridges were every where
broken down, and guarded to hinder his passage, so that he could not march very
fast; and therefore he had time to plunder and ravage the Country, to burn most
of the good Towns and Villages he past through, or came near, as may be seen in
Froissard L. 1. c. 122, 123; 124, 125; 126.
and Du Chesne. F. 664, 665.
At length he came to the River Soam in Ponthieu and Picardy, which he passed
at a Ford called Blanchtaque, between Abbeville and the Sea, Avesb. p. 109. a.
c. 54. The Battle of Cressy.
where was placed an Army to oppose him, which he routed, killed 2000, and took
a great number of Knights and Esquires; the rest fled to Abbeville. From hence
King Edward marched leisurely toward Ibm.
Cressy in Ponthieu, his Army burning harassing the Country, where the King of
France joined Battle with him on Saturday the 26th of August; Walsingh. f. 166.
n. 30.
The Victory was obtained by the English. There were slain on the French side
Avesb. ut supra. What Great Men were slain.
the King of Bohemia, the Duke of Lorrain, the Earls of Alanson, Flanders,
Lewis of Blois, the Earl of Harecourt, Geoffry of Harecourt's Elder Brother,
and his Two Sons; the Earls of Albemarl and Savoy, the Archbishop of Nismes,
and Bishop of Sens, six German Earls, and many other Earls, Barons, and Lords.
Froiss. l. 1. c. 130.
English Army was ranged in Three Battles; the Prince of Wales headed the
first, the Earl of Northampton the second, and the King himself the third. Ibm.
The King of France fled only with five Barons, Sir John of Haynault, who had
left King Edward's Service, Sir Charles of Montmorancy, the Lord of Beaujew,
the Lord Daubery, and the Lord Montfort, to Bray Castle, and so to Amiens. On
Sunday morning came several Ib. c. 31. The number of the slain.
Reinforcements, and great Bodies of Frenchmen to their King's Army, as routed,
many taken, and great numbers stain. That day in the afternoon King Edward sent
to have the dead viewed, and numbered Ib. c. 32. In that Battle.
by Two Barons and Three Heralds; At their return to the King they gave him an
account of Eleven great Princes, Fourscore Banners, ('it is Froissard's Word)
Twelve hundred Knights, and more than Thirty thousand Ordinary Men. From Cressy
the King marched to Avesb. f. 109. b. c. 55. A Parliament called.
Calais, and laid Siege to it on the Third of September.

Upon his last passage into France Rot. Parl. 20 E. III. n. 6.
the King, and Lords that accompanied him, and also the Great Men of his
Counsel that were in England, agreed and ordered there should be a Parliament
summoned to meet at Westminster on the Monday next after the Nativity of the
Virgin Mary. Ibm. The King s^nds to inform the Parliament of his success and
progress in France.
To this Parliament the King sent from the Siege of Calais, Bartholomew
Burghersse, John Darcy his Chamberlain, Mr. John de Thoresby Keeper of his
Privy Seal, John de Carleton, to inform them of the State of his Affairs, and
to propound and declare some things to them in that Parliament, that concerned
the Honor of God and the Church, the Defense and Quiet of the Kingdom of
England, and his War in France, and also other things that were to be done,
These Letters of Credence, or this Commission, [4] was dated before Calais on
the [4] Ibm.
7th of September; and directed to the Archbishops, Bishops, Abbots, Priors,
Earls, Barons, and other his faithful Subjects in Parliament; ( and aliis
fidelibus suis in Parliamento suo, etc.) which when read, Bartholomew Burgersse
for himself and Companions ( pur lui and pur ses compaignons) in presence of
the Guardian of England, ( Leonell the King's Son) the Prelates, and other
Great Men there named, Ib. n. 7.
showed the Graces God had given to the King, to the Great Men, and others with
him, after their landing La Hogue, (monstra les graces que Dieu avoit donez a
nostre Sir le Roi, etc.) by a short Account of his Progress and Success in
Normandy, the Battle of Cressy, and his besieging of Calais, from whence he
resolved not to depart, until he had taken the Town; and that then he would
draw toward his Adversary, pursue his Quarrel, and not return into England,
until he had ended the War beyond Sea, with the help of God. Ibm. And to desire
an Aid.
For the accomplishment of which things, the said Messengers ( a queu chose
pour fair les ditz messages prierent, etc.) prayed the Prelates, Great Men, and
Commons, that they would Treat and Advise about an Aid, and Means to perfect
that which had been so graciously begun; for that by common assent in
Parliament, at the time when the King Ibm.
undertook this War, they all promised that they would assist him with their
Bodies and Goods to their power, (touz lui promistrent, qils lui eideroient de
corpse and d'avoir a lour poair.)

At the same time they produced an Ordinance Ibm. The Ordinance of Normandy
produced in Parliament.
or Agreement King's Adversary, and some Great Men of France and Normandy, to
destroy the whole Nation of England, and the English Language: And to put this
Design in Execution, the Earl of Eu then Constable of France, and the
Chamberlain of Tankerville, were to raise a great Army for that purpose; but,
as it pleased God, they were both taken at Caen, and many of their Men there
killed and taken, so as the intended destruction of the English was defeated.

This Ordinance is Ib. n. 8.
entered upon the Parliament Roll, and there in the Todding called,
(L'Ordinance de Normandy) The Ordinance of Normandy; It Is pretty long, but the
most Material things were, That the King of France his Eldest Son, John Duke
What it was.
of Normandy, as General, with the Nobles, and others of that Dukedom, should
pass into England with Four thousand Men at The design to invade and conquer
England.
Arms, Knights, Esquires, and Men of good Estate, and Forty thousand Foot. And
if this Invasion could not be made that year, then it Country of Normandy was
to serve him with the same number of Men at Arms, and Twenty thousand Foot, in
any other place, where the King, Duke, or either of them should be in Person.

It was Ibm. How England was to be divided in case of Conquest.
also agreed, That if by God's assistance England were Conquered, the Conquest
should be made in the Name and Honor of the Duke; and that all that the King
of England enjoyed King and Lord, with all his Rights and Honors: And what the
Nobles, Barons, and other Seculars possessed, was to be enjoyed by the Church,
Barons, Nobles, and Noble Towns of Normandy, ( que les Nobles and les Barouns
and autres Seculars y ont, serra and demorra as Esglises, as Barouns, Nobles,
and as Noble villes de Normandy;) That the Pope and Church of Rome should
safely enjoy what they had without diminution; and that whatever had been taken
from the Scots by War, or otherwise, should be restored fully and entirely
without delay. Ibm.
This Ordinance was Dated at Boys de Vincens the 23d Day of March, 1338. and,
says Avesbury, p. 107. a. c. 53.
it was found in Caen, when it was taken and delivered to the Archbishop of
Canterbury, that he might excite the Clergy and Laity ( ut per hoc excitaret
clerum and populum) to pray more willingly for Peace and the King.

After these things had been declared and expounded Rot. Parl. ut supra.
in Parliament, they all thanked God for the Success he had given the King
against his Adversary; and said, That whatever had been given him, had been
well employed, and that they would further Aid him according to their Power.
The Knights, Citizens, and Burgesses desired time to consider of the Aid until
Thursday An Aid granted.
next following, when they granted him Two Fifteenths, making grievous
Complaints of Oppressions and Poverty in the Grant; Ibm. n. 11. The Commons
Complaints and Grievances.
praying the King to think how they had been annually charged with Tallages, as
Fifteenths, Wool, Ninths, Men at Arms, Hobelors, Archers, Victuals, Guard of
the Seacoasts, and many other Taxes, by which they were almost ruined. And
also in the last Parliament, when they granted Two Fifteenths for the ending of
the War, it was granted and certainly promised to them ( grantes lour fust, and
certeinment promis en le dit Parliament) they should not be charged or grieved
with Payments or Tallages: Wherefore, Commissions to Array, in all Parts of
England, Men at Arms, Hobelors, and Archers, according to the Value of their
Lands, or to make Composition therefore. They likewise complained of Purveyance
and Free Quarter; and of the Custom and Subsidy of Forty Shillings the Sack
upon Wool. Ibm.
Which Grievances, Hardships, and Oppressions ( les queux Grievances, Duretees,
and Oppressions) were done and suffered every day, without Assent or Grant in
Parliament ( sanz Assent ou Grant en Parliament) expressly against See Rot. Parl.
14 Ed. III. Part 1. n. 8, 9. Pulton's Stat. 14 Ed. III. c. 1.
Record. Yet notwithstanding these Oppressions and Grievances, the Commons, to
the utmost of their Abilities, granted Two Fifteenths for the final
Accomplishment of the War, by Gods Help, and Destruction of his Enemies, to be
levied in two Years, of Cities, Burghs, and ancient Demeasns, as also of the
Commons of the Counties, so as Ibm.
their and sur ce hastive and bon remedy ordeigner) for the Common Profit of
the Land, according as the King's Four Commissioners, or Messengers, had
granted on his behalf to the Commons:

The first Petition of the Commons was, The Commons Petitions, n. 10.
That the Ordinances, Promises, and Grants made in Parliament, for the future

Also, That Commissions might not be issued out of Chancery, to charge the
People with the Array of Men at Arms, Hobelors, Archers, or Victuals, without
Assent or Grant in Parliament; and if any such were, the People should neither
be charged with, nor bound to obey them.

The Answer was, as to the first Point, Ibm. R^. The King's Answer to the
Commons Petitions.
That it should be as they desired. As to the second, it was notorious, that
the Great Men and Commons (les Grantz and Comunes) in many Parlements had
promised the King to assist him to their utmost in Body and Goods (en corpse and
avoir e quant qils poant) in his Quarrel with France, and for the Defense and
Safety of England: Wherefore Great Men ( Ibm*
pur quoi les ditz Grantz veantz la necessite nostre Seigneur le Roi) seeing
his Necessity to be supplied with such Men before his Passage, to recover his
Rights beyond Sea, and for the Defense of England, had ordered, That those who
had an Hundred Shillings a year Rent on this side Trent, should find Men at
Arms, Hobelors, and Archers, according to the quantity of their Estate and
Tenure, to go with the King at his Wages: or if they would not go in Person, to
find others; or if not that, to pay the King what he could procure Men for: And
so things were, and had been done, and no otherwise. And the King would not,
that what was done in this Necessity, should be made an Example for the future,
as appeared by his Letters Patents.

Another Petition of the Commons, Commons Petitions, n. 18.
was, That the Forty Shillings a Sack upon Wool, might not be collected, but
only the old Custom paid.

To this the Answer Ibm. The King's Answer.
was, That the Prelates, and others, seeing Consent of the Merchants, he should
have the Subsidy of Forty Shillings on every Sack of Wool that passed beyond
Sea, for two Years; and that several Merchants had advanced Money upon that
Grant to the King, for the carrying on the War: And therefore it could not be
annulled, without the Assent of the King and his said Great Men (and de ses
ditz Grantz.)

While King Edward was doing these great things in France, and was before
Calais, there came an account from the Earl of Derby in Gascony, That the Duke
Aves. p. 110. c. 56. The Earl of Derby's Success in Gascony.
of Normandy, and the French, had in great haste raised the Siege of Aguillon,
on Sunday before St. Bartholomew; and went off in such haste, as they left
their Tents and most of their Baggage behind them: That he had taken many Towns
and Castles of Force and Value in that Country, and put it into good Order, and
then marched into Poictou, took Poictiers, and settled that Country, and thence
came back to Bordeaux, from whence he came to England, and was at London on the
Feast of St. Hillary, or 13th of January.

The Success against the Scots was likewise considerable this Year. Ib. p. 111.
a c. 57. The Scots invade England with a great Army.
David their King being excited by Philip of Valois, invaded England with a
great Army, and marched as far as Durham, Archbishop of York, Henry Piercy,
Ralph Nevill* and other Great Men of the Northern Parts, with such an Army as
they had then raised, met him, and gave the The Battle of Nevill's Cross.
Scots Battle on St. Luke's Eve, or 17th of October, at Nevill's Cross near
Durham; where they obtained a very memorable Victory, killing the Earls of
Morave and Strathern, and the Flower of the David King of Scots taken Prisoner.
Scots Militia and Men at Arms; taking King David, the Earls of Fife and
Monteth, Malcom Fleming, that called himself Earl of Wigetown, and William
Douglas, Prisoners, and many Men at Arms. By Warrant directed to Thomas Rokeby
Rot. Scot. 20 Ed. III. M. 2. A. D. 1346.
Sheriff of Yorkshire, Dated December. 20. who then had the King of Scots in his
keeping, he was commanded to carry David de Bruys (that had Sent to the Tower
of Land.
with Force of Arms invaded England, plundered and burnt the Country, killed
the King's Subjects, and done other Mischiefs) to the Tower of London, and
deliver him to the Constable thereof, or Lieutenant, there to remain in safe
Custody. Ib. 21 Ed. III. M. 9. Dors. A. D. 1346.
The Earls of Monteth and Fife were condemned for Treason; the first whereof
was executed about the beginning of March, in the 21st of Edward III. and the
second reprieved during the King's Pleasure.

The Pope wrote Aves. p. 111. a. c. 58. The Pope sent to K. Edw. to consent to
a Treaty of Peace.
to King Edward from Avignion, on the 18th of the Calends of February, or 15th
of January, with great Urgency and Vehemence to consent to a Treaty of Peace,
and sent Anibald Bishop of Tusculum, and Stephan by the Title of St. John, and
St. Paul a Priest Cardinal, with his Letter, to be his Nuncio's, to treat of,
and mediate a Peace.

The King's Ib. b. c. 59. To which he would not agree, unless his Heritage was
yielded to him.
Answer to this Letter, or Bull, was to this effect: That he was very willing
to consent to a Treaty of Truce, or Peace, as he always had been, for the
Benefit of Christianity; but his Adversary had always broken the Truces that
had been made, and kept his true Heritage from him; which if he did not yield
up,

While the King lay before Calais, Charles Ib. p. 114. a. b. cap. 64, 65.
Charles of Bloys enters Bretague with the Title of Duke.
of Blois, who had taken upon him the Title of Duke of Bretagne, besieged the
Town and Castle of Rochedirian, a strong Place in this Country; for the Relief
whereof, Sir Thomas Dagworth, King Edward's Governor of that Dukedom, raised
what Force he could there, and in Normandy, and marched toward the Siege: Of
which Charles of Blois had notice, and stood all Night with his Army ready to
June, before A. D. 1347. 21 Ed III. His Army beaten, and himself made Prisoner.
Sunrise both Armies were engaged; and Sir Thomas received the Charge of the
French four times successively, and afterward put them into Confusion, and
obtained the Field, having slain between 6 and 700 Knights, Esquires, and Men
at Arms, besides ordinary Men; and then made Prisoner Charles de Blois, with
several Great Men there named, and a great number of other Knights and
Esquires; ( and aultres Chivalers, and Esquiers a grant nombre.) Ibm.
is from Sir Thomas Dagworth's Letter to the Chancellor of England.

About a Month or five Weeks after, the King of France had a Letter from the
Governor of Calais Ibm. p. 113. b. 114. a. cap. 63. Calais in great distress
for want of Victuals.
of the ill Condition the Town was in for want of Victuals; That the Dogs,
Cats, and Horses were most eaten; That the Garrison had agreed, if they had not
speedy Relief, to issue out of the Town, and go into the Field to fight for
their Lives, or die bravely, as being more Honorable

On the Friday Ibm. b 115. a. b. cap. 66, 67.
or 27th of July, before the Gule or first Day of August, it being that Year on
the Wednesday, the King of France on an Hill on the other side of the Marsh
before Calais, over against King Edward, lodged or posted his Army, which was
very great, as by what follows in his Letter to the Arch-Bp. of Canterbury, to
his Chancellor, and Treasurer. Ibm. The King of France comes with a great Army
to relieve it. Two Cardinals mediate a Treaty*
The Cardinals the same Day came to the end of the Causway leading to Calais (
vindrent mesme le jour les Cardinaux a bout de la choucee, etc.) and send their
Letters to his Cousin of Lancaster, and other Great Men of his Army, requesting
they might speak with them. Whereupon he gave Leave to him, and his Cousin of
Northampton, to go to them; who were with great earnestness requested by them
that there might be a Treaty; telling them they knew well the French King would
make such Offers of Peace, as would according to Reason be acceptable. At their
instance, as one that had always been ready to accept of a reasonable Peace,
and at the moment they made the Offer, he assented: And his Cousin of Lancaster
built two Pavilions, or Tents, between both Armies; and there assembled, or
met, before the Cardinals and Marquess of Juliers, Which held 3 days without
effect.
the Earls of Lancaster and Northampton, Monsieur Bartholomew de Burghersh his
Chamberlain, Monsieur Reignald de Cobham, and Monsieur Walter de Manny, on his
Part; The Dukes of Bourbon and Bathenes, the Chancellor of France, the Lord
Ostmond, and Monsieur * Off^m^nt.
Geofry de Charny, on the Part of his Adversary, who only insisted upon Terms
about the Town of Calais; yet at last offered his Commissioners, That he should
enjoy the Dukedom of Guyen, and County of Ponthieu, as his Grandfather had
done; which was thought a small matter to what Damage he had received. So that
after Three Days Treaty without effect, on Tuesday the last The King of France
challenges the King of England to Battle, and then runs away with his Army.
Day of July, toward Evening his Adversaries gave him notice, by some Great
Men, That if he would come out of his Fastnesses, to a Place convenient to
Fight in, to be set out by Four Knights chosen on either side, he would give
him Battle any time between that and Friday Evening. On the next Day, being
Wednesday, Ibm.
and the first of August, he let him know he accepted his Offer, and gave
Letters of safe Conduct to Four Knights, to come and join with Four of his, to
set out the Ground. Whereupn his Adversary Ibm. Calais yielded*
on Thursday night, with his Army, in great haste marched off, as if they had
been routed, and burnt their Tents, and most part of their Baggage. Ib. p. 116.
a. cap. 68. A* D. 1347. 21 Ed. III.
The next Day, which was the 3d of August, the Besieged wanting Victuals, and
despairing of Relief, yielded up the Town, and themselves and all their Goods,
to his Mercy and Pleasure.

But King Edward being much enraged at the Inhabitants long holding out, and
the great and many Injuries they had done Hard Terms put upon the Calcsians by
K. Edward, according to the French Historians.
him at Sea, did not admit them to these Terms, as the French Historians
Froysard, Du Chesne, de Serres, and Mezeray report, until they sent Six of
their Chief Burgesses, bare-headed and barefooted in their Shirts, with Ropes
about their Necks, to deliver the Keys of the Town and Castle to him, with a
total Submission to his Pleasure. He was greatly resolved to put them to death;
but his Queen then in the Camp, by an importune Intercession, obtained their
Lives. It Is very remarkable, That, as the same Historians say, at a Eustace of
St. Peter, the most Noted of them, to save his Fellow- Burghers, offered
himself to be one; by whose Example there soon followed others to make up the
Number. The same Historians.
The Keys thus delivered, and the King in possession of the Town, all the old
Inhabitants were removed by his Authority, and it was new Peopled with English,
to whom he gave all their Goods. p. 116. a. c. 8. Avesbury reports none of
those Terms; but gives a more fair account of of the Usage them.
Robert of Avesbury has nothing of this Relation of the Six Burghers being
demanded, or thus sent out; he only says, That the Besieged wanting Victuals,
and hopeless of Relief ( ipsam villam, ac se and sua omnia voluntati Domini
Regis Angliae reddiderunt, and idem Dominus Rex semper misericors, and
benignus, captis and retentis paucis de Majoribus, Communitatem dictae villae
cum bonis suis omnibus gratiose permisit abire) rendered the Town, themselves,
and all they had to the King's Will, who, always merciful and kind, retained
only a few of the Chief Persons, and graciously permitted the Community of the
Town to go away with their Goods.

Soon after the taking of Rot. Cales. 22 Ed. III. M. 4.
Calais, by the Mediation of the Cardinals, the Earls of Lancaster and
Huntington, Ralph Lord Stafford, Walter de Manny, and others, had Commission to
Treat of a Truce with the Commissioners of Philip de Valois, which was
concluded, A Truce made at Calais.
affirmed, and sworn to, on the 28th of September, 1347 to continue till 15
Days after Midsummer next following. Aves. p. 116. b. ^17. a. c. 69, 70.
The Chief of the Articles were the same with the Truce made before Tournay. In
a very short time after, having settled the Town, with his Affairs in those
Parts, making Sir Amery de Pavy, an Italian, Governor thereof, Walls. f. 167.
n. 50. K. Edw. returns into England.
he returned into England with great Glory and Renown.

The Number of King Edward's Army at this time in France, Normandy, and before
Calais, besides the Lords Append. n. 92. The number of his Army. What their Pay
for a year and 21 weeks.
was 31294. And the whole Pay and Wages of this Number, from the 4th of June in
the 20th Year of his Reign, to the 12th of October in the 21st of his Reign,
being a Year and 131 Days, amounted to 127201 l. 2. s. 9 d. ob. as appears by
the Particulars.

Within 5 or 6 Weeks after his Return, on the 13th of November, he sent forth
Claus. 21 Ed. III. Part 2. M. 9. Dors. Summons for a Parliament.
Writs of Summons for a Parliament to meet on the morrow of St. Hillary, or 14th
of January.

The cause Rot. Parl. n. 4. The cause of Summons.
of Summons by William de Thorp Lord Chief Justice, was declared to be for two
things: First, concerning the War with France, undertaken by Consent of the
Lords and Commons. The Second, how the Peace of the Nation might be kept: And
that within four Days, they should give their Answer to the King and his
Council, what they thought of these things.

The fourth Day the Commons declare, Ibm. n. 5. The Commons not able to advise
any thing concerning the War.
That they are not able to advise any thing concerning War; and therefore
desired to be excused as to that, and that the King will be advised by his
Nobles and Council; and what shall be by them Determined, they would Consent
unto, Confirm, and Establish.

To the second they answer, Ibm. n. 70. The Commons Advice to the King about
keeping the Peace. Having been long in Parliament, they desire to be dismissed.
Whereas they were charged to advise the King, how the Peace of the Land might
be better kept, That in every County there should be Six Persons, of whom Two
to be the Greatest of the County, Two Knights, and Two Men of the Law, or more
or less, as need should be; and they to have Power Commission out of the
Chancery, to hear and determine Matters concerning the Peace, etc. And then
because they had been so long in Parliament, to their great Costs and Mischief;
they desire the Answer to their Petitions, and a Dismission.

It Is probable the King received not the Satisfctaion he expected Summons to
Parliament.
from this Parliament; for within a Month and 3 Days after the firstday of the
Meeting thereof, he issued Rot. Claus. 22 Ed. III. Part 1. M. 32. Dors.
Writs for Summoning another (that is to say, on the 14th of February) to meet
on Monday next after the Sunday in Midlent: On which Day, because the Great Men
Summoned were not fully come, the Parliament was continued until the next Day,
and for the same reason unto Wednesday: (Pur ceo que les Grantz gestoient
somons ne furent pas pleynement venuz fu continuez tanque le Mardy prochien
suant and pui, pur mesme la cause du dit Mardy tanque a Meskerdy.) When
Monsieur Rot. Parl. 22 Ed. III. n. 2, 3. The cause of Summons declared.
William de Thorp Chief Justice, propounded the Causes of Summons (fully also
contained in the Writ) which were two: The first, That according to the Truce
made at Calais, between the King and his Adversary of France, certain
Messengers were to be sent to the Court of Rome, on both Parts, to treat of a
small Peace between them; That King Edward had sent his competent Messengers to
find the Disposition of the Pope concerning some Preparatories for the Treaty
and other things, about the Feast of St. Andrew last past, in hopes to have
heard from them in his last Parliament; of whom, or of what they had done, he
had then received no certainty; and for that many notable things had been
agreed last Truce in favor of him, his Subjects and Allies, by the Malice of
the adverse Party, were not then accomplished. And also for that his said
Adversary, contrary to his Faith given, (Trop grant multitude des Gentz
d'Armes) of Men at Arms, and others, with Ships and Galleys of greater Force
than at that time had ever been heard of, (que cea en arere ad este oi) to
invade England, destroy the Nation, the King and his Subjects, as it manifestly
appeared by what he had shown and did show every day. The other cause was to
know how and in what manner the Peace of the Land might be best kept; and then
the Commons were commanded to treat together, and take good Advice how the
Malice of the King's Adversary might be resisted; and for the Safety of himself
and Kingdom how he might be Aided, to his greatest Profit, and the least Charge
to his People. The Commons having advised together, gave the Answer following.

To their most Honorable and most redoubted Liege Lord, his poor Commons Ibm.
n. 4.
show, (A lour tres Honurable and tres Redoutez Seigneur That at his last
Parliament he sent the Noble Earls of Lancaster and Northampton (and autres
Grantz) and other Great Men, to tell them, That he intended not to take any
thing of, or charge them, which they had published to the whole Land, for which
they had also thanked him, according to their Knowledge, as much as they could,
and prayed for him Night and Day (and prient pur lui nuyt and jour) and yet at
this present Parliament, upon News now come (pur noveles que sont venuz) he
demanded a The Commons Grievances and Complaints.
very great Charge of his poor Commons (un trop grant Charge da sa poor
Comune.) They desire his Nobleness and most High Lordship, he would please to
understand the Mischiefs and Burdens of the Commons: That is to say, the
reasonable Aid which had been pardoned in his 14th Year; (that is, a Grant was
made it should not be paid all his Reign) to wit, 40 s. upon every Knight's Fee
to make his Eldest Son Knight; whereas by Statute there was but 20 s. due upon
every Fee: Fifteenths of the Commons, Tenths of Cities and Burghs, Men at Arms,
Hobelors, Archers, taking of Victuals without paying for them, Guarding the
Sea, and also the Subsidy of Wool; by reason whereof, every Sack of Wool,
that was the Treasure of the Land, was sold for 40 s. less than its Value. So
as it would be a great Trouble to the Commons to bear any Charge. Yet The
Conditions of the Grant of an Aid.
nevertheless, so as the Aid now to be granted might not be turned into Wool,
neither by way of Loan or Value, or in any other manner; nor levied too
hastily, but in the Form it was to be granted; and that the Eyres of Justices
in the mean time might cease, as well of the Forest as of Common Pleas and
General Enquiry in the whole Land, if this Aid should be levied: That no
Subsidy upon Wool for the future may be granted by the Merchants: That no
Imposition, Loan, or other Tallage, or Charge whatsoever, shall be put upon
them by the Privy Council, without their Grant and Consent in Parliament: That
Two Prelates, Two Lords, and Two Justices, might be assigned to hear and
dispatch their Petitions, which were not answered in the last Parliament; and
that their Petitions in this Parliament might also be answered according to
Reason; and the Answers to remain in force, without being changed or altered:
That the Justices do enquire of False Money, which destroys the People: That
David Bruys, William Douglass, and other Chieftains of Scotland, may in no
manner be released, neither by Ransom, nor upon their Faith: That he would
restore the 20000 Sacks of Wool taken of the Commons by way of Loan: That an
Aid to Marry his Daughter might not be taken the mean time; and, That there
might be no Marshalcy in England, except that of the King, or the Guardian of
England, when he was out of the Kingdom. Upon these Conditions, and otherwise
not; (sur cestes Conditions, and autrement nient;) and also that they may be
entered in the Parlement-Roll, as Matter of Record (come chose de Record) by
which they might have Remedy, if any thing should be done to the contrary in
time to come: The said poor Commonalty, to their very great Mischief, Grant to
the King (si grante la dite poor Communalte a lour trop grante Mischief a
nostre Seigneur le Roy trois Quinzismes, etc.) three Fifteenths to be levied in
three Years, to begin at Michaelmas next coming, so as every Year one Fifteenth
may be levied, and no more, at two Terms in the Year, St. Michael and Easter,
by even Portions; and that this Aid may be assigned and reserved only for the
War, and not to pay Debts. And if the War should cease, or a Truce be made,
then the Fifteenth of the last Year not to be levied. That of these Conditions,
and the manner of this Grant, Letters Patents shall be made, and sent into all
Counties, without paying any thing for them, wherein shall be made mention of
the great Necessity the King was in, after the last Parliament. And in case the
War should break out toward Scotland, the Aid granted beyond Trent, should be
employed for the Defense of those Parts, as it had been formerly.

About this time Lewis of Bavaria being dead, several of the The Electors offer
to choose K. Edward Emperor of Germany.
Electors met at Colen, from whence they sent Ambassadors to King Edward, and
offered to Elect him Emperor of Germany; Claus. 22 Ed. III M. 20 Dors. A. D.
1334. He refuses their Offer.
in Return to which Offer he sent Sir Hugh Nevill, and Ivo de Glinton, Canon of
St. Paul, with his Refusal of that Dignity, and great Thanks for the Honor
they intended him.

The time of the Truce of Calais being near expiring, Rot. Fran. 22 Edw. III.
M. 13. Several Truces continued and made.
the King upon the Pope's sending Commissioners, either to prolong the Truce,
or Treat of a final Peace, the former was agreed for six weeks; Which Term
being ended, the Ambassadors on both sides met between Guines and Calais, and
agreed to another Truce, to begin on the 13th of November, and continue to the
first of September, 1349; Which Truce on the second of May that year, Rot.
Fran. 23 Edw. III. M. 9, 10. Dors.
was prorogued to the Feast of Pentecost, 1350. The Articles Truce before
Tournay, A. D. 1340, and of that before Vannes, A. D. 1343. This year, says
Walsingham, was F. 168. n. 10.
Glorious in England, for Peace, Victories, the Spoils of Caen, Calais, and
other Towns and Cities in France, as also for Garments, Furs, Gold and Silver
Vessels, and other rich Vtensils, which were seen almost in every House, and
that then it was, the English Dames began to pride themselves in the Apparel
The English Women imitate the French in Apparel.
of the French Dames.

In a very short time after the Truce as above was concluded, the Lord Geofrey
Charny, Governor of St. Omers, Froysard, lib. 1. c. 150.
made a Bargain with Sir Amery de Pavy, an Italian or Lumbard, Du Chesne, L
669. C. D. and f. 670. A B. The betraying of Calais.
Governor of Calais, for 20000 Crowns, to betray the Town to him, of which King
Edward having notice, came privately thither, the night or very evening the
delivery was agreed on, with the Prince of Wales, and several Earls and Barons,
and lodged himself in the Castle, to secure it with the Men he brought with
Money was brought and paid, and Twel^e Knights, and an Hundred Men at Arms,
were let into the Castle, who were all Prevented by the King and Prince of
Wales.
made Prisoners by the King's Guards within it, who lay undiscovered. Sir
Geofrey was under the Town with a considerable Force, placed near two Gates,
ready to enter it when they should be opened. But the mean time the Prince of
Wales went forth at one Gate, and the King at the other, concealed under the
Banner of Sir Walter Manny, and fought on Foot among the common Soldiers, Lord
Eustace of Rybemont, a valiant Person, who struck the King twice to his Knees,
yet at last Many Frenchmen of Note made Prisoners.
was overcome by him, and made his Prisoner, with Sir Geofrey de Charny and
many other Frenchmen of Note. The Prince likewise prevailing against the Party
he engaged with, and there were slain and drowned about 600 French, who were
double the number to the English that sallied out of Calais upon them.

The very evening of this day Froysard, c. 152. The King Treats the Prisoners
and his own Nobility with a Supper.
the King ordered a great Supper provided, as well for the Prisoners as his own
Nobility, and coming in amongst them, took a Chaplet of Pearls from his own
Head, and placed it upon the Head of Sir Eustace of Rybemont, as one that had
deserved best of all Men in the Morning Action, and forgave him his Ransom.
Froysard says this Action was done upon the 31st of December, 1348, the 22d of
Edward the Third; and Walsingham places it in the year 1349, which was in the
same year of the King, but the difference is inconsiderable, January; And
Walsingham following Robert de Avesbury, reports it to have been on the 2d of
January, which was indeed according to this Account in the year of our Lord
1349. The King discharged Rot. Fran. 22 Edw. III. M. 1.
Sir Amery de Pavy of the Government of the Town, and put in Sir John Beauchamp.

This year the Plague first began in Dorsetshire about the first A great Plague
in England.
of August, and spread it self all over the Nation, and continued until
Michaelmass twelvemonth after; it was so great in both years as a Rot. Clause
22 Edw. III. Part 2. M. 7. Dors.
Parliament being summoned it was twice prorogued Ib. M. 3. Dors. and Rot.
Clause 23 E. III. Part 1. M. 19. Dors.
for that reason, and at last respited and deferred until new Summons. This was
a general and horrid Plague, it began in the Kingdom of Cathay, A. D. 1346, by
a most horrible stinking Vapor, which broke out of the Earth like a
Subterraneal Fire, Mezeray, f. 369.
From Cathay it passed into Asia, and Greece, from thence into Africa, and
afterward into Europe, and so into France and England. By reason of this
Plague there is scarce any thing remarkable reported to have been done in the
last year thereof, 1349, in either Kingdom, which was the 23d of Edward the
Third. Yet Mr. Ashmole F. 185. c. 5. Sect. 3. The Institution of the Order of
the Garter.
in his Institution, Laws, and Ceremonies of the most Noble Order of the
Garter, would fix the Institution Order this year, and seems to assert, That
the first great Feast of St. George, was this year celebrated, which is scarce
probable; for the Writ by which the Parliament that was to meet fifteen days
after Easter, Rot. Clause 23 Edw. III. Part 1. M. 19. Dors.
was prorogued until new Summons, because of the Raging Pestilence in the
Nation, is dated March the 10th preceding; Easter Day this year falling on the
9th of April, and the Quinden or fifteenth of Easter being the 23d or St.
George's-Day, it cannot be thought that this great Solemnity, to which the King
sent his Heralds into Germany, France, Scotland, Burgundy, Haynault, Flanders,
and Brabant, to invite all Knights and Esquires to come and show their Military
Skill and Valor in all kinds of Feats of Arms, when the Parliament was put off
from meeting on that day, until new Summons, by reason of the Mortal Pestilence
then raging, as it is expressed in Writ. However this famous Order might then be
instituted, the Modal of it contrived, and the Statutes made to adorn Martial
Virtue, and to increase and confirm Faith, Honor, and Courage in the minds of
the Nobility; which were then the true Endowments, Practice, and Badges of
Military Men, by the observation and performance whereof they truly acquired a
great Name and Reputation, as the only Men of Trust and Fidelity, and not to do
Honorably, Justly, Stoutly, and Faithfully, was by them esteemed the greatest
Blemish, Villainy, shame, and Dishonor imaginable. Of this glorious Order I
shall write nothing further, but leave the Reader to the perusal of the
Excellent, Laborious, Ashmole.

The next year Avesbury, p. 120. (...) 74. A. D. 1350. Sir Thomas Dagworth
slain.
Sir Thomas Dagworth, the King's Lieutenant in Bretagne, with a small number,
as he was used to do, in the month of July, going from place to place to visit
the Garrisons, was surpised by an Ambush of French, and after a brave Defense,
killed, as were most with him, or made Prisoners.

In August following, about the Feast of St. Laurence, or 10th of that month,
Ib. c. 75.
as Avesbury, or according to F. 370. Philip King of France di^^; his Son John
Crowned.
Mezeray Philip King of France died, and his Eldest Son John was Crowned at
Rheimes on the 26th of September following. Walsingham, f. 170. n. 50. falsely
(as appears from the Parliament Rolls hereafter cited) places the death of King
Philip in A. D. 1355, and 29th of Edward the Third.

The Spaniards Avesbury, ut supra. c. 76, 77. The Spaniards take many English
Their Fleet beaten by the English.
the year before came toward Bordeaux with a great Fleet of Ships, and took
many English Ships coming from thence laden with Wine, and killed all the Men.
And this year they came upon the English Coast; The King suspecting it was to
waste, burn, and rob the Country near the Shore, fitted out a Fleet, taking
with him many Noblemen, and Manning it well with Men at Arms, Archers, and
Seamen, about the latter end of this month engaged them before Winchelsey, Ib.
p. 121. a. c. 77. They make a Truce.
and took Spaniards made a Truce for Twenty years.

The Truce Rot. Fran. 23 Edw. III. M. 9, 10. The French Truce prorogued.
abovementioned, that had been made between Calais and Guines on the 13th of
October, 1348, to continue unto the first of September, 1349, was the 2d of May
preceding Prorogued (so the Word in the Record) to the Feast of Pentecost in
the year 1356.

In August that year Philip of Valois (as above) died, and his John succeeded
Ib. 24 E. III. M. 2.
on the 25th of November next following, Commissioners were appointed to Treat
with his Commissioners to confirm the last Truce made with his Father to the
first of August then next to come, which was to be in the year 1351, and 25th
of Edward III.

Upon a new Treaty this same Truce Ib. M. 8. Dors. The same Truce continued.
Hostilities committed notwithstanding the Truces.
was proclaimed to continue a whole year longer, until the first of August,
next after that first of August which was to be in the year 1352, and 26th
Edward III.

Notwithstanding these Truces were in being, there was often something
enterprised, by each Party against the other. Avesbury, p. 121. a. c. 78. A. D.
1351. A. D. 1351. 25 Ed. III.
The French besieged the Town of St. John de Angely in Xantogne in the year
1351, and made themselves Masters of it. Ib. b. c. 80.
The English surprised the Castle of Guines, the Governor having been corrupted
with Money, which King Edward pleasantly excused, as F. 372.
Mezeray has it, saying, Truces were Merchandise, and that he did no more than
follow the Example of King Philip, who would have bought Calais.

This year the King issued his Writs Rot. Clause 25 Ed. III. M. 5. Dors.
on the 15th of November, for summoning a Parliament to meet on the Feast of St.
Hillary, or 13th of January, which was on Friday; Rot. Parl. 25 Ed. III. Part
2. n 1. Summons to Parliament.
from that day it was continued to Monday, because many of the Lords were not
come, and then until Tuesday, the Fifth day of the Parliament, when Sir William
de Shareshall, in the presence of the King, Lords and Commons, Ib. n. 7. The
cause of meeting declared.
declared the cause of Summons, setting forth the King's Title to the Crown of
France, telling them, That Philip of Valois had usurped it all his Life, and
not only so, but moved War against him in Gascoign and other Places, seizing
upon his Rights and Possessions, and doing the Mischiefs to him by Sea and
Land, which they well understood, in subversion of him and his Realm of
England, and that in Parlements before that time the Matter had been propounded
in behalf of and fut pry de sibien as Grantz come as Comunes qils ent
vorroient doner lour conseil and advis) what was best to be done; and after
good Deliberation had, they said, They knew no other way to advise him, than to
procure Allies, to go against his Adversary by main Force, and to do this, they
promised to aid him with Body and Goods, (and a ceo fair ils lui promistrent de
lui aider de corpse and de avoir;) Whereupon the King made Alliances beyond Sea,
and with their Assistance, and the help of his good People of England, he made
War upon him, because he could not have a reasonable Peace; That the King and
his Adversary had often assented to Truces, yet his Adversary during those
Truces imagining to subdue and deceive the King, broke them every way,
continuing his Malice John his Son, after his decease, continuing the same
wrongs his Father had maintained, possessed the Kingdom of France, and contrary
to the last Truce confirmed and sworn to by both, which he had broken in
Gascoign and Bretagne, and also upon the Sea, and had sent to Scotland to
continue the ancient Alliance made between them, wholly in Subversion and
Destruction of the King and his People of England: Wherefore the King first of
all much thanks his Commons Aids they have made him, and for the Goodwill he
had always found in them; pur quoi tut ad e primes nostre Seigneur le Roi
mercy molt a ces Comunes des Eydes qils lui ont faitz, and de lour bone
volunte qils ad totes voyes trouve en eux, etc.) and prays them (and les pry)
they would advise upon these things until Wednesday, (tant a cest meskerdy
preschien suant) which was next day) and be at Westminster by Sunrising (taust
apres le solail lever) in the Painted Chamber, to deliberate, and to hear if
the cause of his Parliament, and to show the King their Grievances, if they had
any, that Remedy might be given them this Parliament.

Afterward Ib. n. 8. A Committee of Lords and Commons to meet to confer upon
the Business of this Parliament. The King sent the Lords or Great Men to them.
Sir William charged the Commons on behalf of the King (le dit Sire William
chargea les Comunes de par le Roi) to shorten their stay in Town, and for the
quick dispatch of these Matters, and others that might be shown them from the
King, that before their departure they would go together in Westminster, to
choose 24 or 30 Persons out of their whole number, to be on the morrow in the
Painted-Chamber, that the King might send to them some Great Men (aucunes des
Grantz) to confer with them upon the Business aforesaid.

On Friday Ibm.
all the Commons came before the Prince, and the other Great Men, (and les
autres Grantz) in the White Chamber, The cause of Summons further declared and
enforced.
where Sir Bartholomew Burghersh gave them an Account of the Malice and
falsehood of the King's Adversary of France, (ou fut dit par Monsieur Barthen de
Burghersh la Malice and la Fausine de son adversair de France) how he had broke
the last Truce, and that lately upon the Sea, in Gascoign, Bretagne, and near
Calais, and endeavored by all the Subtilties and Contrivances his Council
knew, to trouble the King and his Subjects every where, and said the Commons
ought diligently to advise what seemed, and what might be best to do for the
King to oppose and check the Malice and falsehood aforesaid, for the safety of
himself, his Kingdom William told the Commons, if they had any Petitions of
Grievances done to the People, or for the amendment of the Law, they should
bring them into Parliament; and told the Prelates and Lords, they were to attend
the Business of all Persons Petitions in the Places where they were assigned.

And then after a long Ib. n. 9.
Treaty and Debate by the Commons (that is, the 24 or 30 Persons chosen to
confer with the Great Men sent to them by the King) with the Commonalty, and
the Advice of the Great Men sent to them, as well about a convenient Aid to the
King to oppose the Malice of his Adversary, as about making the Petitions
concerning the common People of the Land; (and puis apres long Trete and
Deliberation eues pur les Upon Treaty of the Committee, and Advice of the Lords
sent to them.
Comunes ove la Comunalte, and lavis de ascuns des Grantz a eux envoies sibien
sur un eide que convendroit a Roi, etc.) The Commons came before the King, and
all the Great Men in Parliament, (vindrent les ditz Comunes devant nostre
Seigneur le Roi and touz les Grantz en Parliament) and showed how the Common
People of the Land were much impoverished by the late Mortal Pestilence, as by
other Burdens, Taxes, Taillages, and many other Payments laid upon them, but
notwithstanding these Mischiefs, having regard to the necessary Defense to be
made for the safety of the Nation, against so Malice of the Enemies of the
Kingdom, delivered to the King in full Parliament a Roll, (baillerent a le Roi
en Parliament une A Roll of an Aid, and the Petitions of the Commons was
delivered to the King.
Roll, etc.) containing as well the Aid which they had entirely with one accord
granted, as the Petitions, (touchant la comune de la terre) concerning the
Commons of the Land, to which they prayed the King to give a good and quick
Answer, (bon and hastif Respons;) He granted their Prayer, and Thanked them for
the great Ayds given him before, and for that now granted, and for

Then follows the Grant Ib. n. 10. The Aid.
of Three Tenths, and Three Fifteenths granted to the King this Parliament by
the Great Men of the Land, and the whole Commons, ( Grantees a nostre Seigneur
le Roi en cest present Parliament par les Grantz du Roialme and par tote la
Comune, etc.) for the great necessity declared to the said Commons, by the King
and Great Men, ( par le Roi and les Grantz avantditz) etc. upon the Conditions
following:

To wit, Ib. n. 11. The Conditions of the Aid.
That all the Fines, Issues, Amerciaments, Profits and Excesses levied, or to
be levied upon the Laborers, Artificers, Regrators, etc. go to the Commons
toward this Tax, etc. as in the Statutes at Large, now nothing to the purpose;
and so the Answer.

That hereafter Ib. n. 12.
no Tax, Taillage, Ayds or Charges be demanded or levied of the Commons; and
that all the reasonable Petitions prayed by the Commons, may be granted,
confirmed, and sealed, before the departure of this Parliament.

As to Tax and Taillage, Rot. Ib. The King's Answer.
it is not the intention of the King, or the Great Men, ( ne des Grantz) they
should ever be charged.

As to granting their reasonable Petitions, the King is pleased it should be
done.

Also the Commons pray, Ib. n. 16.
the Loans that were granted to the King by many Persons of the Commons, may be
released, and none compelled to make such Loans for the future against his
will, for that 'twas against Reason and the Franchise of the Land; and that
Restitution might be made to those that had made the Loans.

The King Rot. Ib. The King's Answer.
is pleased it should be so.

Also, That whereas the Justices Ib. n. 17.
assigned in diverse Counties, have judged many Men that were Arraigned before
them Traitors, for diverse Causes unknown to the Commons to be Treason, That the
King by his Council, ( and par les Grantz and Sages de la Terre) and by the
Great and Wise Men of the Land, would please to Declare the Points of Treason
in that Parliament.

The Rot. Ib. The Answer.
Answer was, as in the Statute of the 25th of Edward the Third, Cap. 2.

The next year, about the beginning of August, Sir Walter de [6] Avesbury, c.
81, 82. p. 121. b. 122. a. b. A. D. 1352. 26 Ed. III. A great Victory obtained
over the French in Britany.
Bintley, the King's Governor of Britain and Parts adjoining, with a small
number of English, in respect of the great Army a Marshal of France had
encompassed them with, in the Plains near the Town of Mauron, obtained a
considerable Victory, having killed Sevenscore Knights, and as many Escuyers,
and Men at Arms as made the number 500, besides Common Soldiers without number,
and many taken Prisoners, according to his own Relation Ibm.
Letter to the Lord Chancellor, John Thoresby, Bishop of Worcester, and soon
after Archbishop of York, in which he mentions the Names of those of the best
Quality that were slain or taken.

On the 6th of December Mezeray, fol. 372. Pope Clermont the Sixth dies,
Innocent the Sixth succeeds.
Pope Clement the Sixth died, and Cardinal Stephan de Albret, Bishop of
Clermont, succeeded him the 18th of the same month, a Limosin by Birth, and
took upon him the Name of Innocent VI.

In the 27th of his Clause, 27 Ed. III. M. 12. Dors. A great Council summoned.
Reign, he issued his Writs, July 15, by which he summoned a great Council to
meet at Westminster on Monday after St. Matthew the Apostle, Rot. Parl. 27 Ed.
III. n. 31. or 9. The causes of it declared.
on the 7th of October; The King, Prelates, and Great Men ( le Roy, Prelates
and Grants) being in the Rot. Parl. 27 Ed. III. n. 31. or 9. The causes of it
declared.
White Chamber, ( les coes appellez) the Commons were called, and Monsieur
Bartholomew de Burghersh, the King's Chamberlain, told them, That the King
thinking how he might best Ease his People, who had been often charged with
Impositions, and great Ayds, by reason of the War against his Adversary of
France, who detained his Rights and Heritage of the Crown of France, had sent
lately the most Noble and Excellent Persons of his Realm, the Archbishop of
Canterbury, the He was created the the first Duke of Lancaster on the 6th of
March, 25th of Ed. III. See pat. 25 E. III. p. 1. M. 18.
Duke of Lancaster, and other Prelates, and Great Men, to Guynes, to Treat with
the Deputies of his Adversary ( ove les Deputes son dit adversari) in presence
of a Cardinal which the Pope sent thither as a Mediator; and after this Treaty
had sent his Confessor to the Pope, to let spend part of his time in another
War to the greater Pleasure and Honor of God, if his Adversary would make
restitution of the Duchy of Guyen to him as entirely as any of his Ancestors
had enjoyed it, to hold it freely without Homage or Service, he would be
willing after the end of the War, to resign the Crown of France: That the Pope
had been farther K. Edw. upon Terms would have quitted his Title to the Crown
of France.
addressed to, privately to search out his Adversaries Inclinations toward
another Treaty, with Protestation, That if he should not accept it, all his
Rights should be entirely saved to him, as if no Offer had been made; of which
the King not having received any Account from the Pope, he sent his Clerc,
Master William de Witlesey Archdeacon of Huntington, to know what had been
done in this Affair, who brought back nothing to any purpose: Ibm.
Wherefore it seemed convenient to the King, the Great Men, and his Council,
That he should prepare himself for War against his Adversary, as well for the
Defense of England, as to recover his Rights, for which he ought to have a
great Sum of Money. Ibm.
And the said Chamberlain show them further, That the Subsidy of Wool,
Leather, and Woollfels, ended at Michaelmas last past* That it was not the
King's Intention to lay any Tax, or other: Charge upon his People; but he
requested the Prelates, Great Men, and his Commons, to grant him the Subsidy of
Wool, Leather, The Subsidy of Wool, etc. granted for 3 years.
and Woollfels, for some time; ( mes il pry as Prelates, Grauntz, and ses
Comunes, qils lui veullent Granter le Subside des Leines, Quirrs, and peaux
lanus pur un temps.) Upon which Request and Deliberation had between the said
Prelates, Great Men, and Commons, they unanimously agreed and granted the King
the Subsidy of Wool, etc. to receive it as it had been taken formerly, for
three Years from Michaelmas last past, if the War held so long; sur queu priere
ene deliberation enter les ditz Prelatz, Grantz, and Comunes sassenteront
unement and granterent au Roi le Subsidi des leines, quirrs, and peaux lanuz,
etc.) upon Condition that the Money arising from this Subsidy, should be safely
kept for the War, and not to be employed to any other Use.

This Year after Christmas Aves. p. 122. b. c. 84. Charles of Blois set at
liberty for a great Sum of Money.
Charles of Blois, who took upon him the Title of Duke of Britan, and had been
Prisoner in England a long time, by the Mediation of the Great Men of that
Payment whereof, two Sons and a Daughter were sent into England as Hostages.

King Edward continued his Inclinations to Peace, Rot. Parl. 28 Ed. III. n. 58.
K. Edw. continues his Inclinations for Peace. St Mark was on Easter Tuesday,
Easterday this year being Apr. 23.
which were declared by Monsieur Bartholomew de Burghersh, to the Great Men and
Commons ( a les Grantz and Comunes) in the Parliament holden next Year, on
Monday after the Feast of St. Mark, signifying to them, that there was great
hopes of Peace, by Treaty sanz assent des Grantz and de ses Comunes) wherefore
he demanded of them, on behalf of the King, Whether they would Assent and Agree
to Peace, if it might be had by Treaty? To which the Commons answered with one
accord, That what Issue it should please the King and Great Men to take of the
Treaty, should be agreeable to them ( a quoi Ibm.
les Comunes dun assent and dun accord, responderent que quel Issue que pluist
a Seigneur le Roy and les Grantz de prendre du dit Tretee feust agreeable a
eux.) Then the Commons were asked again, If they would Assent to a perpetual
Peace, if it might be had? who all entirely answered ( Oil, Oil) Yes, Yes.
Whereupon Master Michael Northburgh, Keeper of the Privy Seal, Commanded Sir
John de Swyneley the Pope's Notary, That he should make thereof a Public
Instrument.

Not long after this Parliament Aves. p. 123. b. c 89. A Peace concluded. The
Peace to be confirmed by the Pope.
by a Second Treaty a Peace was concluded, upon the Terms King Edward had sent
to the Pope the Year before: And it was agreed, That for the Pope's
Confirmation of this Peace, there were Messengers to be sent by both King's to
the Roman Court, and at the same time a Truce was Ibm.
made, until the Feast of St. John Baptist, which was to

About Christmas Ibm. The King's Envoys to the Pope for that purpose. The
French Envoys before the Pope deny the Articles of the Peace.
, Henry Duke of Lancaster, John Earl of Arundel, William Bishop of Norwich, and
Michael Bishop of London, went to the Roman Court, in behalf of King Edward; by
whom the Articles of Peace were recited before the Pope, in the Presence of the
French Envoys, who denied the Form of the Articles, and said their had been no
such Agreement, and that they would not consent to them: And the English Envoys
returned, not having William Bateman Bishop of Norwich, who died, and was
Honorable interred at Avignion.

After the Expiration of the Time of Truce, King Edward on the 20th of
September Rot. Claus. 29 Ed. III. M. 8. Dors. A Parliament summoned.
issued his Writs for a Parliament to be holden on the morrow after the Feast of
St. Martin, being Thursday the 12th of October, when Rot. Parl: 29 Ed. III. n.
1. The cause of Summons declared.
it was continued, because the Lords were not come, until Wednesday next
following the 18th of October. Wednesday, Sir Walter de Manny declared the
cause of Summons, as knowing the whole matter of it, which was as follows, in
part much according to the Relation of Avesbury: Ibm. n. 4, 5, 6, 7, 8, 9.
That the King had lately sent Commissioners to Calais, to Treat about a Peace
with the Commissioners of his Adversary of France, in the Presence of the
Cardinal of Bologne sent by the Pope: That several Points had been agreed; and
that according to the Agreement, he had sent the Duke of Lancaster, and others,
his Ambassadors Court of Rome, to perfect and finish the Peace before the Pope;
but without effect, for the Faults found with it on the part of his Adversary;
( pour defaute and coupe trove de la part son Adversair:) That while his
Ambassadors remained there, the King of Navarre (who about two Years before had
Married Mezeray, f. 372. The King abused and cheated by the King of Navarre.
Jane the King of France's Daughter) had complained often to the Duke of
Lancaster of the Rot. Parl. ut supra.
Wrongs and Hardships he had suffered from the King of France, affirming upon
his Guernsey and Jersey, to affirm and make good the Alliance ( pur affermer,
and secure lalliance:) That for this cause, upon the Duke's return into
England, the King, informed of this Agreement, Thames toward the Isles; and
the Winds being contrary, with much trouble got to Portsmouth, and there staid
so long, as he received certain Intelligence the King of Navarre would not
proceed in, or had quitted the Alliance ( que le Roy de Navarre enter less la
dite Alliance) against his Promise and Oath, and was become an Allie of his
Adversary. Whereupon the King returned with his Fleet and Forces ( nostre
Seigneur se retourna ove sa Navy and Gentz;) and seeing he could not have
Peace, and the Alliance failed, and also that his Adversary made himself strong
with Men at Arms, and other Forces near Calais, thinking to have a speedy
Battle with him, he resolved, The King passes to Calais with his Fleet and
Army. His Foreign Allies.
with his Fleet and Army, to pass over to Calais: That when he was landed, by
Advice of his Council, he Mustered his those of his Allies which he found
there; as those of Monsieur Henry de Flanders, Monsieur Frank de Vanhale, and
other People of Almain, in great number, and marched out of Calais on the Feast
of All Souls, or 2d of November, toward the He could not provoke the King of
France to Battle.
Places where, by Spies or other means, he could be informed his Adversary was,
that he might bring him to a Battle: But to avoid that, he fled Night and Day,
the King pursuing him, wasting and burning the Country throughout ( degastant,
ardent, and bruillant le pays par tut) until by Assent of his Council, because
his People were much wearied for want of Wine, having drank His Men wearied for
want of Wine.
only Water for near four Days ( per cause que les Gentz fuerent molt lassez
pur defaute de Vin, and ne buerent que de eau bien per quatre jours) he
returned toward Calais, where he designed to have fought his Enemy; but he came
not. Then he paid off his Allies very He pays off his Allies, and returns into
England.
frankly, they having been there a long time, and returned into England to his
Parliament.

After this Relation, the Ib. n. 10.
Commons were told by Sir William Shareshull, Chief Justice of the King's Bench,
They ought to have regard to the great Trouble the King had endured, for the
Defense and Safety of the Kingdom, and of his Readiness to march into Scotland
against his Enemies, who had taken the Speedy Advice desired of the Parliament.
The King desires to finish the War with France.
Town of Berwick by Force: And that to shorten the Time of Parliament, and their
stay in the Town, they were to give speedy Advice what was best for the King to
do, to make an end of the France, which he desired sovereignly, or above all
things, might be done with dispatch ( quel il desire sovereignment que soit
fait en have) and how he might be best aided to do it, to the least Grievance
of his People, and most Profit to himself, he gave them time to answer until
Friday next following ( en sur ceo les dona jour de Respons de Vendredy
preschien suant) and in the mean time to prepare their Bills and Petitions, and
bring them into Parliament: Ibm. n. 11.
( A quen Vendredy vindrent les dites Comunes en la presence nostre dit
Seigneur le Roy, Prelatz, and Grantz, assemblez en la Chamber blanch el eve
illoques une brief parlance ove les dits Grantz, Granterent uniement, etc.) On
which Friday, the Commons came into the presence of the King, Prelates, and
Great Men, assembled in the White Chamber, and having there a short Conference
A Subsidy of 6 years granted to the King.
with the said Great Men, Granted ( uniemen and dune accort) unanimously and of
one accord to the King, the Subsidy of Wool, Leather, and Woolfel's for six
years next coming. So as during Impositions or other Charges upon the Commons;
and then they brought their Petitions before the King, who answered them.

Avesbury in his p. 126. a. b. c. 95. His Expedition into France.
Narrative of the King's Expedition into France, tells us, That after his
return to Calais, on Wednesday the Feast of St. Martin, or 11th of November,
the Constable of France, and others, met the Duke of Lancaster, the Earl of
Northampton, and Sir Walter Manny, at the end of the Causway of Calais; and by
Letters of Credence from their King, offered Battle to the King of England on
Tuesday following. The English Lords answered by the King's Command ( de
Praecepto Regio) That it was his Intention, as much as he could, to avoid the
Effusion of Christian Blood, and therefore desired to fight Body to Body with
his Adversary; so as the whole Right to the Crown of France might be decided by
this France might be finally determined, and that he who was Conquered should
yield it to the Conqueror. Which Offers the French refused, standing to their
Proposition of Fighting on Tuesday. The English offered to Fight Saturday: The
French persisted in their First Offer; which the English accepted, upon
Condition, That if they could not bring their King to Battle on that Day, they
should render themselves Prisoners to the King of England; as in like manner
they would render themselves Prisoners to the King of France, if they brought
not then their King to Battle. The French refused this Offer; and the English
thought they trifled with King Edward, and put Cheats upon him, that by Delay
French on Tuesday, but none came. [8] Froys. lib. 1. c. 155. Du Chesne, f. 674.
D. Mezer. f. 373.
[8] The French Writers make a contrary Story of this: They say, That after
King Edward had ravaged and burn Bolognois and Artois, as far as the Town of
Hisden, which nor the Castle he could not take, he returned to Calais: That the
King of France, having Rendezvoused his Army at Amiens, marched to Hisden, and
pursued him to St. Omers, and from thence sent to him Arnold de Andreghen,
Marshal of France, and other Knights, to let him know he would Fight with him
Body to Body, or Power to Power, when and in what place he pleased; which he
refused, returning into England, and King John to Paris.

Before this Action of his Father's near Calais, on the Nativity of the Virgin
Mary, or 8th of September, Aves. p. 125. b. cap. 93. The Prince goes into
Gascoigne.
the Prince, with the Earls of Warwick, Suffolk, Salisbury, and Oxford, with
300 Ships, and a good Force in them, set Sail from Plymouth into Gascoigne;
Ibm. Marched to Narbon; burns and destroys the Country.
marched from Bordeaux to Narbon, seated, as it was then called, on the Greek
Sea, now the Mediterranean, laid waste, burnt, and destroyed all the Cities,
Walled, Fortified, and other Good Towns, in his March backwards and forwards,
except the City Ib. 129. b.
Tholose, in which were the Constable of France, the Marshal de Clermond, and
Earl of Armanak, with a great Force to defend it. The time of these Burnings,
Plunderings, and Destroyings, was two Months before the Return Bordeaux, a
Journal whereof is to be seen in a Letter from the Prince to the Bishop of
Winchester, then Lord Treasurer, Dated on A. D. 1355. 29 Edw. I^I. ^
Christmas Day, and another more exact from Sir John Wingfield, one of the
Chief Actors in this Cavalcade, Dated on Wednesday before Christmas Day, in
Avesbury, p. 127. a. b. p. 128. a. b. p. 129. a. b. p. 130. a. b. Cap. 98, 99,
100. now not much to the purpose to be either transcribed or translated.

The King having received News, that the Scots had surprised Berwick surprised
by the Scots.
the Town of Berwick, as was noted by Sir William Shareshull in his Discourse
to the Parliament; so soon as it was ended, in the latter end of November,
marched with a great Army toward Scotland, and kept his Christmas at Newcastle
upon Tine. Ibm. p. 131. b. cap. 103.
The English all this while defended Berwick-Castle against the Scots, and on
the January, the King being in it, with Sir Walter Manny, Retaken by the King.
the Town was surrounded with the English Army, and the Port and Castle both
secured by the English Navy, the Scots threw themselves upon the King's Mercy,
and yielded up the Town.

For the very severe Usages and Hardships, drawn up in hard The King of
Scotland ill used by his People.
Words, in the very Grants Edward Baliol King of Scotland received from the
Scots, and not being able to endure them, or contend Honor and Dignity due to
him from his People in his old Age and feeble Condition, on the 20th and 25th
Day of January, at Rokesburgh, Gave, Granted, and Confirmed, for him He grants
the Crown of Scotland, etc. to K. Edw.
and Heirs, to Edward King of England, the Kingdom, Government, Title, and
Crown of Scotland, together with the Isles, and all manner of Royalties,
Dignities, Honors, Prerogatives, Privileges, Rights, Dominions, Homages,
Services, Fees, Advowsons, Cities, Castles, Towns, Lands, Possessions, and all
and singular things Crown of Scotland, or might any way belong to it; and all
his Isles, Castles, Cities, Towns, Demeasns, Lands, Possessions, Dignities, and
Rights, with their Apertinences in England, or Galway, or otherwhere within the
Kingdom of Scotland; to have and to hold to him, his Heirs, and Assigns; And
puts him in possession of the Kingdom.
and put him in possession of all these things, as well by delivery of his
Golden Crown, as delivery of corporal Possession of the Soil of the Kingdom,
etc. In consideration whereof, King Edward l. Sterling by the year for his
Life, to be paid Quarterly. There were several long Rot. Scot. 29 Ed. III. M.
12.
Instruments made about this Grant, as also an Exemplification of the main
Indenture of the Agreement between the Two Kings, Dated at Banburgh the 20th of
February Ibm. 30. Ed. III. M. 6.
the Year following. Also there is King Edward's Release of the Homage done to
him by Edward Baliol, Ibm. 8.
Dated the 12th of March next after at Westminster, and a Proclamation, That
notwithstanding this Grant, the Scotland should enjoy and be Governed by their
Old Laws and Customs as before, without any Change or Alteration, Ibm.
Dated at the same Place, on the 15th of the same Month.

In the next Year, Prince Edward Walls. f. 171. n. 40.
marched out of Bordeaux with his Army toward the River Loire, and designed
such another Ravage and Destruction in the Countries on both sides of it, as he
had made the Year before between Bordeaux and Narbon, Ibm. and Du Ch^sne, f.
675. D. from Froys. f. 78. a. cap. 157.
Upon the News whereof, the King of France went directly from Paris to
Chartres, where he drew Forces from Avergn, Berry, Burgogn, Lorain, Haynault,
Vermandois, Picardy, Normany, and Bretagne, to oppose him; in the mean time
guarding the Passes and breaking down the Bridges upon the Loire, while the
Prince took Remorentin, and several other Places and Castles, and had many
Skirmishes with French Parties, beat them, and took several Prisoners, on the
South Side of the River, before the memorable Battle of Poicters; the best
Description whereof is in Fol. 371. A. D. 1356.
Mezeray's Abridgment of Froisard's tedious Relation of it, as follows:

While the King was at Chartres, where he was drawing all his The Battle of
Poictiers.
Forces together, he was informed that the Prince of Wales with English, had
pillaged Quercy, Avergne, Lemosin, Berry, and was marching to do the same in
Anjou, Tourain, and Poitou; he thought fit to cut off his March upon his
Retreat, and led his Army along the Loire. The Prince being advertised, left
the Road to Tours, and retired by Poitou; but he could not do it so speedily,
but that the King's Army overtook him within two Leagues of Poitiers. The
Prince finding him so near, entrenched himself amongst Maupertuis.

Cardinal de Perigord the Pope's Legate, went often from one The Pope's Legate
endeavors to prevent the Battle.
Army to the other to prevent them from coming to Blows. Froys. 8. b. cap. 161.
The King of France his Confidence destroyed him.
Edward offered to pay for all the Damages he had done in his March from
Bordeaux; to deliver up all his Prisoners, and not to bear Arms himself, nor
any of his Subjects, for seven years time against France. But K. John believing
the Victory secure and A. D. 1356. 30 Ed. III.
19th of September: Nay, by the worst Advice in the World, he caused all his
Horsemen to alight, excepting Three hundred select Men, who were to begin the
Onset, and the German Cavalry, who had Orders to

The thickness of the Hedges hindered these Three hundred Horse from breaking in
upon them; the English-men's bearded Arrows made the Horses mad, and turned
them upon the Germans, who fell into the Avant-Guard, and they were totally
routed by a Gross of the Enemies, who came forth and charged them during their
Disorder.

Of the Four Sons the King had in this Battle, Three of them Philip the
Youngest of the Four, who obstinately resolved to run the Fortune of his
Father, and fought by his side.

The King's single Valor sustained the Enemy's Charge a considerable time; and
if one fourth part of his Men had but Seconded The King of France yields
himself. His Son Philip and several of the French Nobility made Prisoners.
he yielded himself up into the hands of John de Morebeque an Artesian
Gentleman, whom he had banished the Kingdom for some Crime. Philip his Son was
taken Prisoner with him. There were but 6000 French killed in this Fatal Day;
but of that Number were 800 Gentlemen, and amongst those the Duke of Bourbon,
the Duke d' Athenes, Constable, the Marshall de Nesle, and above 50 more of
good Quality.

The Young Prince, as Courteous as he was Valiant, Treated The Prince very kind
and civil to the King of France
the King as his Lord; the same Night he served him at his Table, and
endeavored to allay his Grief and Misfortunes, by the most obliging and
becoming Language he could express. The next day fearing this Noble Prey might
be snatched from him, and withal observing his Soldiers were so laden with
Plunder, He carries him to Bordeaux, with a great number of Prisoners.
that they were incapable of further Service, he took his March toward
Bordeaux, and carried away the King and his Son along with him, together with a
prodigious Number of Prisoners.

According to F. 79. b. cap. 160. The French in this Battle 4 times more than
the English.
Froysard, the Men at Arms only, besides others of the French, were four times
the Number of the whole English Army, they being Forty eight thousand, divided
into three Battles, Sixteen thousand in a Battle; the English Army not being
Eustace of Ribemont, and Two other Lords, gave to the King of France, having
been sent by him to discover their Number.

In this Battle the Earls of Warwick, Suffolk, Salisbury, Stafford, The English
Noblemen thatshew most Courage in this Battle.
Sir James Audeley, Sir John Chandos, Sir Reginald de Cobham, etc. behaved
themselves very bravely; but beyond others, the Earl of Warwick, Sir James
Audeley, and Sir John Chandos. And as it is said by Froysard, F. 83. a. cap. 164.
the Prince of Wales, who was Courageous

On the 5th of May next Year, the Prince of Wales arrived at A. D. 1357. 31 Ed.
III. The King of France brought Prisoner to London.
Plymouth, with his Noble Prisoners the Walls. f. 172. n. 40. Knighton, col.
2615. n. 10, 20, etc.
King of France and his Son, where, and in his Passage from thence to London,
he Palace of the Savoy, the King, Queen, and Great Men often making him Visits.
Holins^ed, f. 390.
Here he staid until toward the next Spring, when he was removed to
Windsor-Castle, where he and his Son passed the Time in Hawking and Hunting,
and toward Winter returned to the Savoy.

Soon after the King of France his Froys. ^. 1. c. 173. f 86. b.
Arrival in England, the Pope sent the two Cardinals of Perigord and St. Tital,
into England, to mediate a Peace between the Two Kingdoms; but without effect:
Yet so far they prevailed, as to procure a Truce until the Feast of St. John
Baptist, which was to be in the Year 1359. or A Truce for two years by the
Pope's Mediation.
33d of Edward III. out of which Philip of Navarre, the Countess of Montfort,
and Duchy of Britan, were excepted.

Before this, by the Mediation of Joan Queen of Scots (or, as Rot. Scot. 27 Ed.
III. M. 2.
it is phrased in the Record, Consort to David Brus his Prisoner) King Edward,
who in the 27th of his Reign had his Leave to come into England to her Husband,
with moderate Attendance ( cum moderata Familia) and upon the Prayer of David
Brus his Prisoner, the Prelates, Great Men, and Commons of Scotland Ibm. 28 Ed.
III. M. 4
( a la Priere David de Bruys nostre Prisoner, and des Prelates, Grantz and
Comunes Descoce) he granted to Treat with them about his Deliverance: And
thereupon sent to Newcastle Commissioners appointed to treat about the
Deliverance of David Bruce.
upon Tine the Bishop of Duresme, William de Bohun Earl of Northampton and
Constable of England, Gilbert d'Vmfreyvill Earl of Anegos, the Lords de Percy
and de Nevill, William Baron of Greystock, and Henry le Scrop, his
Commissioners, with full Power to Treat with the Bishop of St. Andrews and
Brechin, Patrick of Dunbar Earl of the March of Scotland, the Abbot of
Dumfermelin, and Master Walter de Moffet Archdeacon of Leonesse, Commissioners
for Scotland: Where it was Ibm.
Agreed,

1. That David should be Ransomed and fet free for Ninety thousand His Ransom
90000 Mercs, to be paid in 9 years.
Mercs of Sterling Silver, to be paid in Nine Years by equal Payments; the
first whereof to begin at the Purification of the Virgin next coming, after the
Date of the Treaty, or within Fifteen days after; and to be made at Berwic, if
in the hands of the English, otherwise at Norham-Castle in Northumberland, not
far from thence. 2. That there should be a Truce upon sufficient Security, by
Instruments and Oaths between King Edward and all his People of England,
Scotland, and the Isle of Man, and David de Bruys; and all the other People of
Scotland, and their Adherents by Land and by Sea, in all Places, without Fraud
or Deceit, until the said Sum was fully paid; and that Edward de Baliol, and
other his Allies and Adherents, should be comprised within the Truce. 3. That
all People of one Part, and the other, during the Truce, A Truce for 9 years
between England and Scotland; with the Articles.
might Negociate, and have intercourse one with another, by Land and by Sea,
except Castles and Fortified Towns and Places: And, that if during the Truce,
any Country, Town, Land, Burgh, Possession, Castle, or Person, of what Estate
or Condition soever he was at the Day of making this Agreement, should be taken
or received into the Faith or Peace of one Party from the other ( soit pris ou
receu de une Foi ou Pees a lautre) that full Restitution should be made,
without Delay, Contradiction, or Fraud, the same Hour they were demanded. 4.
That for the Payment of the Money according to the Agreement, David was to send
Twenty Hostages into England, who were Twenty of the Eldest Sons and Heirs of
the Earls and Best Men of Scotland, named in this Article, to remain there
until the Money was paid, etc. 5. That the said David, and the other Great Men
of the Kingdom of Scotland, as well Bishops and Prelates, as other Lords of the
Land, should be bound by Letters and Oaths in the best manner and form could
Merchants and Comunes of Aberdeen, Dundee, Perth, and Edinburgh, should be
bound accordingly for themselves and all other Merchants of that Kingdom, for
the Performance of the Payment and Truce. 6. That if the said David, or others
that should be bound for the Payment of the Money, should fail of Payment of
any of the Terms, then the Body of David was to be re-entred into the Castle of
Norham, within 7. That if there should be any Rebels in Scotland against David
(item in cas que auscuns Rebelx Descoce soient contre le dit David) they should
not be received, maintained, ir supported by any in the Faith of King Edward:
Or if any in the Faith of King Edward* should rise or rebel against him, or
his Officers, he should not be received, maintained, or supported by the said
David, or any in his Faith or Legiance. 8. By the Advice and Assent of the
Prelates, Great Men, and Sages of the Kingdom, King Edward accepted the Treaty,
and promised and granted in Good Faith, That if David, the Prelates, Great Men,
and others of Scotland of his Party, would observe and perform as much as
belonged to them, the Things treated and agreed upon, That he would King Edward
made his Letters Patents, Dated at Westminster on the 5th of October.
This Treaty, and all others before, proved ineffectual, Hect. Boeth. f. 326 b.
n. 50. A new Treaty.
because the Scots would not consent to the Terms and Conditions of the
Release: Yet the Endeavors and Mediation before mentioned October this Year,
Commissioners on both sides met at Berwic; for King Edward, Rot. Scot. 31 Ed
III. M M. 2. Dors. A. D. 1357. The Commissioners on both sides.
John Archbishop of York, Thomas Bishop of Duresme, Gilbert Bishop of
Carlisle, Henry de Percy, Ralph Neville, Henry le Scrope, and Thomas Musgrave:
For Robert Steward Guardian of Scotland, and the Prelates, Lords, and Commons
of that Kingdom, William Bishop of St. Andrews, Thomas Bishop of Catness,
Patrick Bishop of Brechin, Chancellor of Scotland, Patrick Earl of March,
Robert de Irskin, and William de Levington, Knights: When it was Agreed,

1. That King David should be Released, set Free, and Ransomed for The Articles
of a 10 years Truce. K. David to be released.
an Hundred thousand Mercs Sterling Money, to be paid yearly by Ten thousand
Mercs; the first Payment to begin at Midsummer then next following. 2. That
there should be a Truce kept and observed in England, Scotland, Isle of Man,
until the Money was paid: And, That Edward de Baliol, and all King Edward's
Allies, should be included in this Truce. 3. That for Payment of his Ransom,
Twenty Hostages should be delivered by King David, there named in the
Conditions of their Delivery. 4. That King David, the Prelates, and Peers of
Scotland, should This and the former Truce to be observed.
be bound by Writing and Oath, for Payment of the Money, and Observation 5.
That if the Money was not paid as agreed, they should be obliged to return the
Body of King David, who was to remain Prisoner while it was paid, according to
every Term of Payment. These and some other Articles were the Conditions upon
which he was released, after more than Eleven Years Imprisonment.
King David was no sooner returned into Scotland after his Deliverance, Hect.
Boeth. ut supra, n. 60, 70, 80. K. David punished such as deserted him at the
Battle of Durham.
such as deserted him, and left the Field at the Battle of Durham: And first he
deprived Robert Stewart of the Right of Succession, and declared Alexander
Sutherland (who was his own Sister's Son, his Successor, Robert Stewart being
Son to the Daughter of the First Wife of Robert Brus) and caused all the
Nobility of Scotland to Swear Fealty to him: But Alexander dying soon after, he
established Robert Stewart in the Succession, according to his Right, and
caused the Nobility again to Swear Fealty to him. He took away part of the Earl
of the Marches Estate, another Great Officer in the Army, and punished others
according to their Deserts.

It is not much to the Purpose of this History what the Troubles The Troubles
and Confusions in France, during King John's absence.
and Confusions were in France, and the Miseries of that Nation during King
John's Captivity, or rather his Absence only from French People; they may be
seen in the French Historians, by such as desire to know them. The bold
Behavior of the Provost of the Merchants and Parisians against the Dauphin,
the Insolence of the Rustics against the Nobility, Gentry, and Citizens in all
Places, and their Violence exercised upon the Peasants; the Practices of the
King of Navarre against the Dauphin and Government of France, by making
Divisions amongst the People, and driving them into Parties and Factions; the
Barbarity of the calling themselves Companions, and of the Soldiers Mezer. f.
76.
both Foreign and Domestics, who upon Truces made between the Parties, were
neither disbanded or paid. All these robbed and pillaged one another, committed
Rapin without distinction, wasted and burnt the Countries where they came,
until the Dauphin procured himself to be declared Regent of France by the
Parliament at Paris Ib. f. 377.
in the Year 1358. and some little while after, until the Nation was reduced to
some sort

The last-mentioned Truce being expired without hopes of Peace, Froys. lib. 1.
c. 201.
the King of England and his Son the Prince of Wales, the the King of France,
and James Earl of Bourbon, only amongst A Peace concluded.
themselves, Treated of, and agreed upon a Peace, and sent the Articles into
France to the Duke of Normandy the Dauphin and Regent. He assembled the
Prelates, Nobles, and People of the Towns; who upon debate of the Terms,
resolved to suffer The French refuse the Terms.
more than they had done, and permit their King to remain Prisoner, rather than
to submit to such Articles, as should so much lessen the Power of France. King
Edward, at the Return of the Messengers, understanding the Resolution of the
French, determined to enter France with such a Force as should make an end of
the War, or procure Peace according to his Desire. K. Edward raises a mighty
Army.


To put what he resolved on in execution, he raised an Army such as had not
been Froys. ^. 1. c. 205.
seen, and sent the Duke of Lancaster before him to Calais. ^. 174. li 5. a.
1100 Ships provided to transport that Army.
Walsingham says there was Eleven hundred Ships prepared at Sandwich to
Transport this Army; from which Port he set sail on the 28th of Claus. 33 Ed.
III. M 9. D^rs.
October, taking with him his Four Sons, Froys. ut s^pra, c. 207.
Prince Edward, Lyonel, John, and Edmond, Walls. f. 174. ^in. 3, 6. and 7.
with most of the Nobility ( fere Proceres omnes) leaving his young Song Thomas
of Woodstock not then four Years Guardian of the Kingdom, with a Council fit to
perform that Charge.

Before his Froys. l 1. c. 206. The King of France and his Son sent to the
Tower.
Passage, he sent the King of France and his Son from their loose Confinement
to the Tower, or more safe Custody, and the rest of the French Prisoners into
Places of Security.

With this Army, Ib. c. 209, 210* 211.
he marched into the middle of France, laying all waste as he marched. He was
entering Was f. 174. n. 10. K. Edward marches into the middle of France, burns
and wastes the Country. The French sue for Peace.
Burgundy when the Duke met him, and compounded with him for Seventy thousand
Florens to spare his Country from Burning and Rapin. The French kept themselves
within their Places of Strength, and filled them with Armed Men, and permitted
the Country to be harassed and ravaged by this Army.

The Miseries and Desolation of the Kingdom of France at this Duke of Normandy
and Regent, the Clergy, Nobility, and all sorts of People to be desirous of,
and sue for a Peace. Mezeray, f. 380.
Cardinal Simon de Langres the Pope's Legate, the Abbot of Clugny, and the
Dauphin's Commissioners, always followed King Edward's Camp, and earnestly
solicited for Peace. The [8] Duke of Lancaster, and other Lords, were
inclinable K. Edw. averse.
to a Peace, and pressed the King to hearken to it: He was averse, putting such
Terms upon the French they could not Lib. 1. c. 211. Was ^frighted into it by a
Tempest.
Froysard tells the Story) being before Chartres, there suddenly happened such
a Tempest of Thunder, Lightning, Rain, Hail and Stones, that it killed many of
his Men and Horses, when turning toward our Lady's Church there, and
steadfastly beholding it, he made a Vow to her to Consent to Peace: And being
then Lodged in a Village called Bretigny near Chartres, Commissioners were
appointed on both sides to Treat there accordingly.

This Famous Treaty of Bretigny, was managed by Rot. Cales de negotiis
comunibus, 3. a. Ed. III. M. 6.
the Prince of Wales, and Charles Regent of France, in the Names of both Kings.
Commissioners for the English were, Sir Reginald de Cobham, Sir Bartholomew
Burghersh, Sir Francis Hale, Banerets; [1] Rot. Fran. 34 Ed. III. M. 11. Dors.
The famous Treaty of Bretigny.
Sir Miles Stapleton, Sir Richard la Vache, and Sir Neel Loring, Knights, with
others of the King's Council: On the French Party were, the Elect of Beauves,
the Chancellor Charles Lord Momerency, Monsieur John de Meingre Marshal of
France, Monsieur Aynart de la Tour Lord of Vivoy, Monsieur Ralph de Ravenal,
Monsieur Simon de Bucy, Knights, Monsieur Stephen de Paris, and Peter de la
Charity, with many others of his Council, named by King John himself.

These Commissioners on both sides Mezeray, f. 380. A Peace made in 8 days.
met the first of May at Bretigny aforesaid, within a Mile of Chartres, and
concluded upon all the Articles of this Peace in eight Days time; which do here
follow, Translated from the French, with Notes where they were afterward
altered and corrected by the Two Kings Calais

Edward, Eldest Son Rot. de Tract at pacis Fran. 34 Ed. III. M. 10. See also
Leibnitz Codex juris Gentium, from f. 208, to f. 220.
to the King of France and England, Prince of Wales, Duke of Cornwall, Earl of
Chester; To all those who shall see these Letters, Greeting: We make you know,
That all the Debates and Disorders whatsoever, moved or stirred between our
Lord and Father King of France and England, on the one Part; and our Cousins
the King, his Eldest Son, Regent of the Realm of France, and all those it may
concern on the other Part. For the Good of Peace, it is Agreed, the 8th Day of
May, 1360. at Bretigny near Chartres, in the manner following:

1. First, Ibm.
That the King of England, with what he holds in Gascogne and Guyen, shall have
for him and his Heirs for ever, all those Things which follow, to hold them in
the same manner the King of France, or his Son, or any of his Ancestors Kings
of France, held them: That is to say, Those in Sovereignty in Sovereignty, and
those in Demain in Demain, according to the time and manner hereafter declared.
The City, Castle, Earldom of Poictiers, with the whole Land and Country of
Poictou; together with the Fief of Thouars, and Land of Belleville; the City
and Castle of Xaintes, and the whole Land of Xaintonge, on this side and beyond
the River of Charente; the City and Castle of Again, and the Land and Country of
Agenois; the City and Castle, and whole Earldom of Perigort, and the Land and
Country of Perigeux; the City, Castle, and whole Earldom of Limoges; the Land
and Country of Limozin; the City Castle of Cahors, and the Land and Country of
Cahorsin; the City and Castle, and Country of Tarbe, and the Land and Earldom
of Bigorre; the Earldom, Land, and Country of Gaure; the City and Castle of
Angolesm, and the Earldom, Land, and Country of Angolesmois; the City and
Castle of Rodes; the Land and Country of Rovergne. And if there be any Lords,
as the Earl of Foix, the Earl of Armagnac, the Earl of Lisle, the Earl of
Perigort, and Viscount of Limoges, or others, which hold any Homage to the King
of England, and all other Services and Devoirs due by reason of their Lands, in
the same manner they did in times past.

The First Article was corrected; and in instead of the Words, Those in
Sovereignty in Sovereignty, were inserted these, Those in Fee in Fee.

2. Also the King of England shall have all that any of the Kings of England
anciently held in the Town of Monstruel upon the Sea, with their Appurtenances.

3. Also the King of England shall have all the County or Earldom of Ponthieu
entirely; save and except, That if any thing of the said County or
Appurtenances have been alienated by the Kings of England for the time being,
and to other Persons than the Kings of France, the King of France shall not be
obliged to render them to the King of England: And if the France for the time
being without mean, and he does possess them at present, they are entirely to
be released to the King of England; except the Kings of France had them by
Exchange for other Lands of the Kings of England, then both were to release.
But if the Kings of England for the time being, had alienated any thing to
other Persons than to the King of France, and afterward they came into his
hands, he shall not be obliged to render France shall convey them to others,
who shall do it for the King of England: And if they do not owe Homage, the
King of France shall appoint a Trustee or Tenant to perform the Devoir, within
one Year after he shall part from Calais.

4. Also the King of England shall have the Castle and Town of Calais, the
Castle, Town, and Seigneurie of Merk, the Towns, Castles, and Lordships of
Sangate, Colongue, Hames, Wale and Oye, with Lands, Woods, Marshes, Rivers,
Rents, Lordships, or Seigneuries, Advowsons of Churches, and all other
Appurtenances lying between the Meeses and Bounds following; That is to say,
from Calais by the Course of the River that goes before Graveling, and also by
the Course of the same Langle, and by the River which goes beyond the Poil, and
by the same River that falls into the great Lake of Guisnes, and so to Fretun,
and from thence by the Valley about the Hill Calculy, enclosing that Hill, and
so to the Sea, with Sangate and all the Appurtenances.

5. Also the King of England shall have the Castle, Town and County or Earldom
of Guisnes, with all the Lands, Towns, Castles, Forteresses, Places, Men,
Homages, Lordships, Woods, Guisnes, lately dead, had them at the time of his
death, and the Churches and good People being within the Limits of the County
of Guisnes, of Calais, and Merk, and other Places abovesaid, shall obey the
King of England, as they obeyed the King of France, or Earl of Guisnes for the
time being; All which things of Merk and Calais, contained in this and the
precedent Article, the King of England shall hold in Demain, except Heritages
of the Churches, which shall remain to them entirely wherever they be; and
also except the Heritages of other People, of the Country of Merk and Calais
lying out of the Town of Calais, to the value of an Hundred Livres of yearly
Rent, or under, of Current Money of the Country, which shall remain to them.
But the Habitations and Heritages being in the Town of Calais, with their
Appurtenances, shall be to the King of England in Demain, to dispose of them at
his Guisnes, shall enjoy all their Demains entirely, and shall wholly be
returned to them, saving what has been said concerning the Borders, Meets, and
Bounds in the precedent Article.

6. Also it is agreed the King of England and his Heirs shall have and hold all
the Isles adjacent to the Lands, Countries, and Places before named, together
with all other Isles, which

7. Also it is agreed the King of France, and his Eldest Son the Regent, for
them, their Heirs and Successors, as soon as they can without deceit, and at
furthest by the Feast of St. Michael, in one year after the same Feast next
coming, shall render, tranfer, and deliver to the King of England, his Heirs
and Successors, all Honors, Obediences, Homages, Ligeances, Vassals, Fees,
Services, Recognisances, Mere, and Mixed Empire, and all manner of Jurisdiction
high and low, Resorts, Safeguard, Collations and Patronages of Churches, and
all manner of Seigneuries, and Soverainties, and all the Right they have, or
can have, appertains, or can appertain, to them, by what Cause, Title, or
Color of Right soever, or to the Kings and Crown of France, by reason of the
Cities, Counties, Towns, Castles, Lands, Countries, Isles and Places before
named, and all their Appurtenances and Dependances, and every one of them,
wherever they are, without retaining any thing to them or their Heirs and
Successors, or to the Kings or Crown of France. And also, That the King, and
his Eldest Son, should send their Letters Patents to all the Archbishops,
Bishops, and all other Prelates of Holy Church, and to the Earls, Viscounts,
Barons, Noblemen, Citizens and others of the Cities, Lands, Countries, Isles
and Places before-named, that they should obey the King England and his Heirs,
and their certain Command, in the same manner they had obeyed the Kings and
Crown of France; and by the same Letters they should quit and absolve them
after the best manner they could, from all Faiths, Homages, Oaths, Obligations,
Subjections and Promises made by any of them to the Kings and Crown of France,
in what manner soever.

This Article was corrected; The Word (Resorts) being left out in the Correct
Copy, and these Words or Sentence (and all manner of Seigneuries, and
Soverainties) and these Words or Sentence (without retaining any thing to them
or their Heirs and Successors, or to the Kings or Crown of France) also the
last Words ( in what manner soever.) 8. Also it is agreed, That the King of
England shall have the Cities, Counties, Castles, Lands, Countries, Isles, and
Places before named, with all their Appurtenances and Dependences, France held
them, and in the same manner, saving what has been said above, in the Article
of Calais and Merk; and also the Cities, Castles, Counties, Lands, Countries,
Isles, and Places before named, Rights, Mere and Mixed Empire, Jurisdiction and
Profits whatever, which any Kings of England held there, with their
Appurtenances and Dependences, any Alienations, Donations, France, in Seventy
years from that time, by whatsoever Cause or Form it was, all such Alienations,
Donations, Obligations or Encumbrances, are now, and shall be wholly annulled,
repealed, and made void: And all things so given, alienated, or encumbered,
shall be really rendered and delivered to the King of England entirely, and in
the same Condition they were Seventy years since, or to his special Deputies,
Michaelmass next come twelve-months, to hold them heritably and perpetually,
and to his Heirs and Successors, except what is said in the Article of
Ponthieu, which is to remain in its force, and saving all things given and
alienated to Churches, which shall peaceably remain to them in all Countries
before and after named, so as the Parsons of the Churches pray diligently for
the Kings as for their Founders, wherewith their

9. Also it is agreed the King of England shall have and hold all the Cities,
Counties, Castles, and Countries abovenamed, which anciently the Kings of
England had not, in the same Estate as the King of France and his Sons hold
them at present.

10. Also it is agreed, That if within the Limits of the Countries the Kings of
England anciently possessed, they should now have any thing that was not then
theirs, of which the King of France was in possession on the 19th of September
1356, they shall be and remain to the King of England and his Heirs as
abovesaid.

11. Also it is agreed, That the King of France and his Eldest Son the Regent,
for them and their Heirs, and for the Kings of France and their Successors for
ever, as soon as they could without deceit, and at furthest before Michaelmass
1361, should render and deliver to the King of England, his Heirs and
Successors, and transfer to them all the Honors, Ligeances, Obediences,
Homages, Vassals, Fees, Services, Recognisances, Oaths, Right, Mere and Mixed
Empire, all manner of Jurisdictions high and low, Resorts, Safeguards, and
Seigneuries, which can or may belong in any manner to the Kings or Crown of
France, France, at any time, in the Cities, Counties, Castles, Lands,
Countries, Isles and Places abovenamed, or in any of them, their Appurtenances
and Appendances whatsoever, or in Persons, Vassals, Subjects, or whosoever of
them, be they Princes, Dukes, Earls, Vicounts, Archbishops, Bishops, and other
Prelates of the Church, Barons, Noblemen, and others whosoever, without
reserving or retaining any thing to them, France or others, whatever it be,
whereby they, their Heirs, and Successors, or any Kings of France, or other
Person, under pretense of the King and Crown of France, may challenge, and
demand any thing in time to come, from the King of England, his Heirs and
Successors, or upon any of the Vassals and Subjects aforesaid, by reason of
those Countries and Places: Also all the before named Persons, their Heirs and
Successors, shall for ever England, his Heirs and Successors; and that he and
they shall hold all the Persons, Cities, Counties, Lands, Countries, Isles,
Castles, and Places before named, and all their Appurtenances and Appendances,
and they shall be and remain to them fully, perpetually, freely, in their
Seigneury, Soverainty, Obedience, Ligeance, and Subjection, as the Kings of
France had and held them in any time past; and that the said King of England,
France, without acknowledging any Sovereign, or performance of any Obedience,
Homage, Resort, Subjection, and without doing in any time to come any Service,
or making Recognisance to the King or Crown France, for the Cities, Counties,
Castles, Lands, Countries, Isles, Places, and Persons before named, or for any
of them.

This Article was Corrected, and at least Two Parts of Three left out of the
Corrected Letter (as then called) or Copy, the whole Article there being no
more then what follows:

Also, it is agreed, That the King of France, and his Eldest Son the Regent,
for them, and their Heirs, and for the Kings of France and their Successors for
ever, as soon as they can without fraud, and at furthest before Michaelmass
1361, shall render and deliver to the King of England, his Heirs and
Successors, and transfer to them, all the Honors, Ligeances, Obediences,
Homages, Vassals, Fees, Services, Recognisances, Oaths, Right, mere and mixed
Empire, all manner of Jurisdictions high and low, Safeguards and Seigneuries,
which can or may belong in any manner, to the Kings or Crown of France, or to
any other Person by reason of the King and Crown of France, (ou a aucun autre
person a cause du Roy and de la Coronne de France) at any time in the Cities,
Counties, Castles, Lands, Countries, Isles and Places abovenamed, or in any of
them, their Appertenences, and Appendences, whatsoever, or in Persons, Vassals,
Subjects, or whosoever of them.

12. Also, it is agreed, That the King of France and his Eldest Son, shall
renounce expressly all Resorts and Soveraignties, and all the Right they have
or can have in all those things, which by this Treaty ought to belong to the
King of England. And in like manner he and his Eldest Son shall renounce,
expressly all those things, which by this Treaty ought not to belong or be
delivered to him, and all demands he makes of the King of France, and
especially to the Name, and to the Right of the Crown of the Kingdom of France,
and to the Homages, Sovereignty, and Demain of the Duchy of Normandy, the
Duchy of Tourain, the Counties of Anjou and Main, the Sovereignty and Homage
of the Dukedom of Bretagne, and the Homages and Soveraignties of the Country
and County of Flanders, and all other Demands, he can or shall make of the King
of France, for what Cause soever, except what by this Treaty ought to remain
and be delivered to the King of England and his Heirs; and one Renunciations
shall be made, the Two Kings shall agree and appoint when they meet at Calais.

This Article was entirely left out of the Treaty corrected at Calais, when the
Two Kings met there.

13. Also, it is agreed, That to the end this Treaty may speedily be
accomplished, that the King of England, shall bring the King of France to
Calais, within three weeks after Midsummer, (there being no just hindrance) at
his own Expense.

14. Also, it is agreed, That the King of France shall pay to the King of
England, Three Millions of Crowns of Gold, whereof Two shall be of the value of
a Noble of English Money; whereof 600000 Crowns shall be paid to him or his
Deputies, King of France shall arrive at Calais, and within a year following
400000 Crowns to be paid at London, and so every year 400000 Crowns to be paid
there until the whole was discharged.

15. It is also agreed, That for the Payment of the 600000 Crowns at Calais,
and for the delivery of the Hostages hereafter named, within four months after
the King of France shall be come to Calais, the Town, Castle, and Fortresses of
Rochell, the Castles, Fortresses, and Towns of the County of Guines, shall be
rendered to the King of England, with all their Appertenences, and Appendences;
and the Person of the King of France shall be delivered out of Prison, but he
is not to Arm himself or People King of England, but is to accomplish what was
to be done by this Treaty; And the Hostages were the great Prisoners taken at
the Battle of Poictiers, and these following:

That is to say, Monsieur Lewis Earl of Anjou, Monsieur John Earl of Poicters,
the King's Sons, the Duke of Orleans the King's Brother, the Duke of Bourbon,
the Earl of Blois, or his Brother, the Earl of St. Paul, the Earl of Alan^on,
or Monsieur Peter of Alancon his Brother, the Earl of Harcourt, the Earl of
Portien, the Earl of Valentiniois, the Earl of Briene, the Earl of Vaudemont,
the Earl of Forest, the Viscount Beaumont, the Lord of Coucy, the Lord of
Fienne, the Lord of Preaux, the Lord of St. Venant, the Lord of Garencieres,
the Dauphin of Avergne, the Lord of Hangest, the Lord of Montmorency, Monsieur
William de Craon, Monsieur Lewis of Harcourt, Monsieur John de Ligny. The Names
of the Prisoners taken at Poictiers were these:

Monsieur Philip of France, the Earl of Eu, the Earl of Longueville, the Earl
of Ponthieu, the Earl of Joigny, the Earl of Sancene, the Earl of Dammartin,
the Earl of Ventadour, the Earl of Salbruche, the Earl of Auxerre, the Earl of
Vendosme, the Lord of Craon, the Lord of Darnalt or Rual, the Marshal of
Danchan, or d'Andeneham, the Lord of Aubigny.

16. Also, it is agreed, That the Prisoners aforesaid, which come to remain in
Hostage for the King of France, shall therefore May last past; and if any of
them be out of England, and not in Hostage at Calais, within the first month
after the said three weeks, after Midsummer, without just hindrance, he shall
not be quit of his Imprisonment, but be forced by the King of France to return
into England, and there remain Prisoner, or pay the Penalty by him promised and
incurred, for not returning.

17. Also, it is agreed, That in stead of those Hostages, which shall not come
to Calais, or shall dye, or shall remove out of the Power of the King of
England, the King of France shall deliver others of the same Quality, as soon
as may be within four months after the Bailey of Amiens, and the Major of St.
Omer, upon the King of England's Certificate, shall have notice threof; and the
King of France, upon his departure from Calais, may have in his Company Ten of
the Hostages, such Thirty may remain.

18. Also, it is agreed, That the King of France, within three months after he
shall be gone from Calais, shall send thither, to remain in Hostage, Four
Persons ( de la ville de Paris) of the Town of Paris, and Two of every Town
following, of St. Omer, Arras, Amiens, Beauvais, Lisle, Doway, Tournay, Remes,
Chaalons, Troyes, Chartres, Toulouse, Lion, Orleance, Compiegne, Roven, Caen,
Tours, Bourges; The most sufficient of these Towns for the Accomplishment of
this Treaty.

19. Also, it is agreed, That the King of France shall be brought from England
to Calais, and remain there for four months, but shall pay nothing the first
month for his Guard and Keeping, but for every one of the other months he shall
remain there, he shall pay 6000 Royals, as they shall be then current in
France, Calais, and so afterward for the time he stays there.

20. Also, it is agreed, That as soon as may be, within a year after the King
of France is departed from Calais, Monsieur John Earl of Montfort, shall have
the Earldom of Montfort, with all its Appertenences, doing Homage Liege to the
King of France, and his Devoir and Service in every Case as a good and Loyal
Vassal Liege ought to do to his Liege Lord by reason Earldom; and also his
other Heritages shall be rendered to him, that belong not to the Duchy of
Bretagne, doing Homage and other Dues belonging to them; And if he will demand
any thing in any of the Heritages belonging to that Duchy, out of the Country
of Bretagne, he shall receive good and speedy Reason from the Court of France.

21. Also upon the Question of the Demain of Bretagne, which is between
Monsieur John de Montfort, and Monsieur Charles de Blois, it is agreed, That
the Two Kings calling before them or their Deputies, the Parties Principals,
they shall inform themselves of their Right, and shall endeavor to make them
agree about all that is in Debate between them, as soon as they can: And in
case neither the Kings, or their Deputies, can make an Agreement within a year
after the King of France shall arrive at Calais, Friends on both sides may make
the best Agreement between them they can, and as soon as they can, executed by
the Two Kings; and in case they cannot end the Controversy in half a year, then
the Two Principal Parties of Blois and Here seems to be some inconsistency in
this part of the Article; but it is a true Verbal Translation from the ^r^nch.
Montfort shall do what seems best to them, and the Friends of one Part and the
other, shall assist which Part they please, without hinderance of the said
Kings, or without receiving any Damage, Blame, or Reproach from them; and if it
happen that one of the Parties will not appear before the Kings or their
Deputies, at the time appointed, and also in case the Kings or their Deputies
shall declare an Accord between the Parties, and shall give their Opinion of
the Right of one Sovereignty and Homage of the Duchy shall always remain to
the King of France.

22. Also, That all the Lands, Towns, Countries, Castles, and other Places
delivered to the King, shall enjoy such Liberties and Franchises as they have
at present, which shall be confirmed by the said Kings or their Successors, so
often as they shall be duly required, if they be not contrary to this Accord.

23. Also, the King of France shall render, or cause to be rendered, and confirm
to Monsieur Philip of Navarre, and to all his Adherents, after this time, as
soon as may be, without Deceit, and at furthest within a Year after the King of
France shall be gone from Calais, all the Towns, Fortresses, Castles,
Lordships, Rights, Rents, Profits, Jurisdictions, and Places whatever, which he
in his own Right, or in Right of his Wife, or his Adherents, held or ought to
hold in the Kingdom of France: And that he shall not do them any Damage or
Injury, or reproach them for any thing done before that time, and shall pardon
them Monsieur Philip and his Adherents return to their Homage, and perform
their Devoirs, and be Good and Loyal Vassals.

24. Also, it is accorded, That the King of England may give, for this time
only, to whom he please the Lands and Heritages that were Mons. Godfrey de
Harecourt's, to hold of the Duke of Normandy, Homage and Services anciently
accustomed.

25. Also, it is agreed, That any Man or Country, under the Obedience of one
Party, shall, by reason of this Accord, go under the Obedience of the other
Party, he shall not be impeached for any thing done in time past.

26. Also, it is agreed, That the Lands of the Banished, and Adherents of one
Party and the other, and the Churches of one King shall leave Calais, except
what is said in the Article of Calais and Merk, and the other Places named in
that Article; except also the Viscount of Fronsac, and Mons. John Gaillard, who
are not to be comprised in this Article, but their Goods and Heritages shall
remain as they were before this Treaty.

27. Also, it is agreed, That the King of France shall deliver to the King of
England, as soon as well he may, and at furthest Departure from Calais, all the
Cities, Towns, Countries, and other Places abovenamed, which by this Treaty
ought to be delivered to him.

28. Also, it is agreed, That upon Delivery of the Towns, Fortresses, and whole
County of Ponthieu; the Towns, Fortresses, and whole County of Montfort; the
City and Castle of Xainctes; the Castles, Towns, Fortresses, and all the King
held in Demain in the Country of Xaintogne, on both sides the River Charente;
the City and Castle of Angoulesme, and the Castles, Fortresses, and Towns which
the King of France held in Demain in the Country of Angoulmois, with Letters
and Commands of Releasing of Faith and Homage to the King of England, or his
Deputies. He at his proper Cost and Charge shall deliver all the Fortresses
taken and possessed by him, his Subjects, Adherents, and Allies, in the
Countries of France, Anjou, of Main, of Berry, Avergne, Burgoigne, Champaigne,
Picardy, and Normandy, and in all other Parts and Lands of the Kingdom of
France; except those of the Duchy of Bretagne, and those Countries and Lands
by this Treaty which ought to be and remain to the King of England.

29. Also, it is agreed, That the King of France shall give up, and deliver to
the King of England, his Heirs, or Deputies, all the Towns, Fortresses,
Castles, and other Lands, Countries, and Places before named, with their
Appertenances, at his proper Costs and Charge: And also if he shall have any
Rebels, or Disobedient, that will not render and give up to the the King of
England any Cities, Castles, Towns, Countries, Places, or Fortresses, which
ought to belong to him, the King of France shall be bound to cause them to be
delivered at his own Expense: And likewise the King of England shall cause to
be delivered at his Expense the Fortresses that by this Treaty ought to belong
King of France. And the said Kings, and their People, shall be bound to Aid one
another, when they shall be required, at the Wages of the Party that shall
require it, which shall be one Florin of Florence a Day for a Knight, and half
a Florin for on Escuyer, and to others And it is Agreed, That if the Wages be
too small, in regard of the Rate of Provisions or Victuals in the Countries,
they shall be ordered by Four Knights chosen for that purpose, Two of one
Party, and Two of the

30. Also, it is agreed, That all the Archbishops, Bishops, and other Prelates
and Men of Holy Church, by reason of their Temporalties, shall be subject to
that King under whom they hold their Temporalties; and if they have
Temporalities under both Kings, they shall be subject to each King for the
Temporalty they hold of him.

31. Also, it is agreed, That Good Alliances, Amities, and Kings and their
Kingdoms, saving the Conscience and Honor of one King and the other,
notwithstanding any Confederacies they have made on this side or beyond the
Sea, with any Persons, be they of Scotland or Flanders, or any other Country.

32. Also, it is agreed, That the King of France and his Eldest Son the Regent,
for them and for their Heirs Kings of France, as soon as it may be done, shall
declare themselves, and depart Confederacies they have with the Scots, and
promise, That they nor their Heirs, nor the Kings of France for the time being,
shall give or do to the King or Realm of Scotland, nor the Subjects thereof
present and to come, any Aid, Comfort, or Favor, against the King of England,
his Heirs and Successors, nor against the Kingdom, nor against the Subjects in
any manner; and that they make not other Alliances with the Scots in time to
come, against the Kings and Kingdom of England. And in like manner, as soon as
it may be done, the King of England and his Eldest Son shall declare
themselves, and depart from all Alliances they have with the Flemmings; and so
on in the same Words and Things concerning them, as the King of France engaged
to do in respect of the Scots.

33. Also, it is agreed, That the Collations and Provisions Kingdoms of France
and England, by one Party or the other, during the Wars, shall be quitted by
one Party and the other.

34. Also, That the Kings abovesaid shall be bound to cause to be confirmed
all the Things abovesaid by our Holy Father the Pope; Rome, and all other
Places, in the most strong manner that can be; and there shall be obtained
Dispensations, Absolutions, and Letters from the Court of Rome for perfecting
this Treaty, and they shall be delivered to the Parties, at furthest within
three Weeks after the King shall be arrived at Calais.

35. Also, That all the Subjects of the said Kings, which come Kingdoms of
France and England, shall enjoy the Privileges and Liberties of those Places
and Universities, as well as they might have done before the War, or as they do
at this present.

36. Also, it is agreed, That to the end the Things debated and treated of as
above, may be more established, firm, and valuable, there shall be made and
given the Securities which Kings and their Eldest Sons, the best that can be
made or directed by their Counsel. And the said Kings and their Eldest Sons,
and other Sons shall swear, and also those of their Lineage, and other great
Men of their Kingdoms, to the number of Twenty on each side, That they will
observe and keep, and help in the keeping of the Things treated and agreed,
inasmuch as shall concern them, and without Fraud or Deceit England or France,
which shall be Rebels, and will not agree to the Things abovesaid, the said
Kings shall use the Power of their Bodies, Goods, and Friends, to bring such
Rebels to Obedience, according to the Form and Tenor of the Treaty. And
further, the said Kings, their Heirs, and Kingdoms, shall submit themselves to
the Coertion Pope, that he may constrain by Sentences, Censures of the Church,
and all due ways, him that shall be Rebel, according to Reason. And according
to these Establishments and Securities abovesaid, both Kings and their Heirs
shall by Faith and Oath Renounce all Wars and Contention. And if by
Disobedience, Rebellion, or Power of any Subjects of France, or any just Cause,
the King of France or his Heirs cannot accomplish all the Things abovesaid,
the King of England, his Heirs, or any for them, shall not make War against the
King of France, his Heirs, or Kingdom; but both together shall endeavor to
bring the Rebels into true Obedience, and accomplish the Things abovesaid. And
if any of the Realm or Obedience of the King of England, will not render the
Castles, Towns, and Fortresses, which they hold in the Realm of France, and
obey the Treaty abovesaid, or for just cause cannot do that which by this
Treaty they ought to do. The King of France, nor his Heirs, nor any for them,
shall make War upon the King of England or his Kingdom; but both together shall
employ their Power to recover the Castles, Towns, and Fortresses; and that all
Obedience and Compliance may be given to the Treaty. And there shall be made
and given on both sides, according to the nature of the Fact, all manner of
Security that shall be Pope, the College of the Court of Rome, as otherwise,
holding and keeping the Peace perpetually, and all the Things as above agreed.

37. Also, it is agreed, That by this present Treaty all others, if any have
been made before, shall be null and void, and never be any Advantage to either
Party, nor cause any Reproach of one to the other for not observing them.

38. Also the present Treaty shall be Approved, Sworn to, and Kings, when
theyshall meet at Calais; and after the King of France shall be gone from
thence, and be in his own Power, within a Month next following, he shall make
Letters Patents of Confirmation, and send and deliver them at Calais to the
King of England, and receive such and the like from the King of England.

39. Also, it is agreed, That neither King shall procure, or cause to be
procured, by himself or others, any Injury or Molestation Church of Rome, or
any of Holy Church whoever they be, to, or concerning this Treaty, toward
either of the Kings, their Coadjutors, Adherents, and Allies, whoever they be,
or their Lands or Subjects, on occasion of the War, or other thing, or for
Service the Coadjutors, Adherents, or Allies of either side have performed; or
if our Holy Father will do it of himself, both Kings shall hinder it, as well
as they can without Deceit.

40. Also the Hostages that are to be delivered to the King of England at
Calais, the manner and time thereof the Two Kings shall there direct.

Note, That in the Corrected Instrument or Letters of this Treaty, the Words
Resort and Sovereignty, are always, and in all Articles, omitted, in respect to
the King of England's enjoying them in the Places

And then it follows at the latter end, or bottom of the Articles:

And We King of England aforesaid, having seen and considered the said Treaty
made in our Name and for us, for the Good of Peace, and for as much as it
concerns us, do Agree unto, Ratify, Confirm, and Approve all Things
above-written; and by our Royal Authority, with the Deliberation, Counsel, and
Consent of many Prelates and Men of Holy Church, Dukes, Earls, as well of our
Lineage, as others, and many Peers of England, as of other Great Barons,
Noblemen, Burgesses, and other Subjects of our Realm, do Consent to, and
Confirm the said Treaty, and all Things contained in it: And we Swear, upon the
Body of Jesus Christ, in the Word of a King, for us and for our Heirs, to
Observe, Accomplish, and Keep it, without ever doing any thing to the contrary,
by our self or others. And that we may firmly and perpetually maintain and keep
the Things abovesaid, and every one of them, we bind Us, our Goods present and
to come, (nos biens presens and advenir) our Heirs and Successors, to the
Jurisdiction and Coertion of the Church of Rome; Willing and Consenting, that
our Holy Father may Confirm all these Things, by giving General Monitions and
Commands for the Accomplishment of them, against Us, our Heirs, and Successors,
and against our Subjects, Communities, Colleges, Universities, or particular
Persons whatsoever, in pronouncing Sentences General of Excommunication,
Suspension and Interdict, to be incurred by us and them, so soon as we or they
shall attempt or seize on Fortresses, Towns, Castles, or other Things
whatsoever, or shall Do, Ratify, or Agree unto any thing, or shall give
Counsel, Favor, Comfort, or Aid, secretly or openly, against the said Peace:
From which Sentences, none to be absolved, until they have given full
Satisfaction to all those that shall sustain Damage by such Practices. And
further, That this Peace may be more firmly kept for ever, We Will and Consent,
That all Agreements, Confederations, Alliances, and Covenants, howsoever they
may be termed, any way prejudicial to the said Peace at present, or afterward,
supposing they be valid, and confirmed by Penalties or Oath, or ratified by our
Holy Father the Pope, or others, they shall be cassated, and made null and
void, as contrary to Common Good, and a Peace Common and Profitable to all
Christendom, and Displeasing to God. And all Oaths made in such case shall be
released, and our Holy Father the Pope shall decree by his Letters, That no Man
shall be bound to keep such Oaths, Alliances, or Covenants, and prohibit that
no such or the like be made for the future. And if any one shall do to the
contrary, it shall at that very moment be null and void; and nevertheless we
shall punish them, as Violators of the Peace, in their Bodies and Goods, as the
Case and Reason shall require. And if We shall do or procure, or suffer any
thing to be done to the contrary (which God forbid) we will be holden and
reputed False and Perjured; and we shall be willing to incur such Blame and
Infamy as a Crowned King ought to incur in such case. And We will cause the
Things abovesaid to be Sworn unto, Kept, and Observed by Our most Dear Eldest
Son the Prince of Wales, and Our Younger Sons Leonel Earl of Ulster, Edmond of
Langley; and Our Cousins Monsieur Philip de Navarre, the of Lancaster and
Bretagne; the Earls of Stafford and Salisbury, the Lord of Manny, Guy de Brian,
Reginald de Cobham, the Captal de Bruche, the Lord of Montferrat, James Audley,
Roger de Beauchamp, Ralph Ferrers Captain of Calais, Eustace Dambreticourt,
Frank van Hall, John de Moubray, Henry de Percy, Nicholas de Tamworth, the Lord
of Cominges, Richard de Stafford, William Grandison, Ralph Spigurnel, Gaston de
Greyly, and William Burton, Knights. And We will also cause to be Sworn in like
manner, so soon as We can, our other Children, and the greatest Part of the
Churches, Earls, Barons, and other Noblemen of our Realm.

Given or Dated at our Town of Calais, under the Testimony of our Great Seal,
the 24th of October, in the Year of Grace 1360.

Instruments (or, as they were Transcripts and Originals of many Instruments
concerning the Treaty and Peace at Bretigny, where to be found.
then called, Letters) concerning this Peace at Bretigny, there are upon the
Rolls in the Tower of London, in the 34th and 35th Years of Edward III. most of
the Originals whereof under the Great Seals of both Kings and their Eldest
Sons, are to be found in a thick, long Box, with this Title: Hi^ continetur Pax
fact a Cales, inter Reges and Regna Angliae and Franciae, die 24 Octobris, Anno
Domini 1360. within a great Chest in the Chapter House at Westminster,

The Articles of Peace uncorrected, being the same concluded The Contents, or a
short Account of them. [5] Append. n. 93.
at Bretigny the 8th Day of May preceding, which the King of France delivered
to the King of England at Calais, the 24th of October, 1360. with the
Attestation of the Abbat of Clugny the Pope's Nuncio, that they were delivered
in his Presence, Dated the 25th of the same Month, part of the Label of the
Seal remaining

The Articles corrected at Calais, owned by the King of France and his Son, and
delivered to King Edward, October. 24. in the Presence of the same Nuncio [5]
Androynus Abbat of Clugny, whereof his Certificate bears Date the next Day at
the same Place, with the Articles recited in it, and his Seal hanging to it
with a Parchment Label.

The Articles of Accord between King Edward and John King France, about the
Delivery of Countries, Fortresses, Castles, Towns, and Places one to another,
according as they are named in the Treaty of Bretigny, and according to the
29th Article of that Treaty, the 7th, 11th, and 12th Articles thereof not being
mentioned in this Agreement, King Edward to deliver them to King John, etc. at
or before Candlemas next following the Date thereof, and King John to him
within a Month after, with the Hostages Names on either side to be given for
Performance, and King of France, Sealed with his Seal at Calais, October. 24.
1360. Par le Roy,

In these Articles King Edward's Letter of the same Accord

The King of France his Letter of Renunciation, Testified by the Pope's Nuncio
the Abbat of Clugny, in which the Renunciation it self is recited, Dated at
Calais October 24. the Nuncio's Testification bearing Date at the same Place
the Day following, with his Seal hanging to it by a Parchment Label.

Note, That by Renunciation is meant, the Delivery, Releasing, Cession from,
and Transferring of Countries, Cities, Towns, Castles, and Fortresses, with
their Rights and Appertenences, from and by one King to the other. The
Attestation of the Pope's Nuncio of the Peace concluded King Edward and King
John, with King Edward's Renunciation according to the 11th and 12th Articles
of the Peace of Bretigny, which are inserted in it, as also King John's Letter
of Renunciation of the same Tenor, both dated at Calais, October 24, the
Attestation bearing date the 25th of the same month at the same place.

King John's Append. n. 94.
Oath for the performance of the Treaty in many Articles worth notice, dated at
Calais the 24th of October

Articles of the Peace and Treaty at Bretigny confirmed by King John, as they
were Corrected at Calais, dated at Bologne the the 26th of October. Par le Roy,

This Instrument is much torn, and the Seal gone, but there

The King of France his Letter or Chart, That he will perform all the Articles
of the Treaty of Bretigny, as they were Corrected at Calais, as also all
Renunciations, Covenants, etc. contained in one special Deed, Letter or Writing
between the Two Kings, dated at Bologne, October 26. with his Seal hanging at
it, with Par le Roy,

Articles of the Treaty and Peace of Bretigny, confirmed by King John and his
Son Charles without Correction, both dated at Bologne, October 26. 1360. Par
Monsieur le Duc, with his Seal And many Articles of the said Accord having been
afterward Corrected at Calais in certain manners, for that the Renunciations
which were to be made by one Party and the other according to the said Treaty,
were not made purely and simply we being at Calais; (that is, Prisoner, and not
in his own Power) We make it known, That we will agree, and are pleased, that
afterward the Cessions, Renunciations, Transports, and Releases, shall be made
by one Party Bruges, as it is contained in Letters made about this Matter,
sealed with the Seals of us and our Brother, that the same Articles as they
were passed and agreed at Bretigny, and as they are above recited, shall be
given and delivered to our said Brother, sealed with our Seal, and the Seal of
our most Dear Eldest Son Charles Duke of Normandy, and Dauphin of Vienne. And
this we promise to give and deliver at Bruges one year after the Feast of St.
Andrew next coming, (that is, on St. Andrews-Day 1361.) in case that our said
Brother shall send us the Renunciations which he is to make on his part, and
deliver them to us or our People at the place aforesaid; as also Letters of the
Tenors of the said Treaty and others sealed with his Seal, and with the Seal of
our Nephew his Son; and we will that the things abovesaid, done and
accomplished as abovesaid, the said Articles as above incorporated, as if they
had not been Corrected. And we promise truly in good Faith, and Swear without
Deceit, to keep, observe, and accomplish without fraud what is abovesaid.

In Witness whereof we have put to our Seal to these Letters. Given at Bologne
upon the Sea the 26th of October, in the year of Grace 1360.

And then follows his Son's Confirmation: And we will with all our Power
observe and accomplish all that our Lord and Father has and have Sworn, and do
Swear upon the holy Body of Jesus Christ, to hold and accomplish as much as
shall or may concern us, all and every of the things as written in the Letters
above, according to the Manner and Form therein comprised, without doing or
causing to be done any thing to the contrary in any manner for the time to
come.

In Witness whereof we have caused our Seal to be put to these present Letters.
Given at Bologn the 26th day of October, in the year of Grace Par Monsieur le
Duc, N. de Vienes.




Charles, Eldest Son to the King of France, and Regent, his Confirmation of his
Father's Grants, in which is contained the Peace and Treaty of Bretigny, with
the Articles as they had been Calais, dated at Bologn, October 26. 1360. with
his Seal hanging at it with Red and Green twisted Silk.

The great Append. n. 95.
Letter (or Instrument) of Renunciation, according to the Treaty of Bretigny,
of John King of France, without Correction of the 7th and 11th Articles, which
are entirely recited in it, the 12th Article being wholly omitted, dated at
Bologn, October. 26. 1360. his Seal affixed with Red and Green Silk twisted
together, and signed Le Roy.

Also his Letters of Renunciation, with the 11th and 12th Articles of the
Treaty of Bretigny entire, upon Condition King Edward and his Son, made their
Renunciations, and sent them to the Augustine Friars at Bruges, sealed with
their Seals on the Feast of St. Andrew, in one year after the same Feast next
coming, dated at Bologne, October 26. 1360. with his Seal affixed as above, and
signed Le Roy. These Letters were to be of no effect, if King Edward and his
Son sent not their Renunciations to the place, and at the time therein
expressed.

Charles, Regent of France, his Confirmation of these Letters of Renunciation,
without Correction of Articles, and upon the same Conditions, dated at Bologn
the 26th of October 1360. Par Monsieur le Duc, with his Seal hanging at it with
Green and Red twisted Silk.

The King of France his Acknowledgment, the King of England had performed his
Agreement in setting him free, dated at St. Omers the first of November, 1360.
with his Seal hanging to it as before. Par le Roy,

Charles, Duke of Normandy, (King John's Eldest Son) his Certificate St. Omers,
November. 2. 1360. Par Monsieur le Duc, with his Seal of Red Wax hanging at it by
a Parchment Label.

The Amities, Append. n. 96.
Alliances, and Confederacies, between the Two Kings, confirmed by the Duke and
Regent at Bologn, dated October 26. 1360. the Seal affixed with Green and Red
twisted Silk; And many other Letters and Instruments there are relating to
particular Letters of Renunciation for every Country, Castle, City, Town,
Fortress, and Place mentioned in the Articles of the Peace, which may, with
others upon many and diverse Subjects, be published in due time by my Worthy
Friend Mr. Rymer.

These Letters or Instruments seem to be very dissonant, and almost
contradictory one to another, tho dated on the same days Bretigny, others as
they were Corrected at Calais. In like manner the things comprehended in the
Letters or Instruments for the accomplishment of this Treaty, were to be
performed and executed after a quite different Method, by some according to the
Original, by others according to the Corrected Articles; but it is not very hard
to see through this Mystery, for both Kings and their Sons, were very strict and
exact in Confirming both Copies of Calais before the King of France had his
Liberty, and afterward at Bologn, when he was free from his Imprisonment, yet
were not so strict and just in the observation of their Oaths in the
performance and fulfilling of them, but used and made their advantage of the
different Copies of the Letters and Instruments as they served their turns.

All things at that time, relating to this Peace at Bretigny, that could be,
having been finished at Calais and Bologne, the Froysard, lib. 1. c. 213 f.
108. b. A. D. 1360. The King returns to England with the Hostages for the
Observation of the Peace of Bretegny.
King, his Sons, and others, with the Hostages of France, took Shipping on the
Eve of All Saints, or last of October, and came for England, where the Lords
and other Ibm. Their Freedom and Kind Reception in England.
Hostages had all the Enjoyments of the City of London, Hawked, Hunted, and
Visited the Ladies in the Country without any Restraint, the King's Favor
being so great toward them.

It was not long after this, Ib. c. 214. Du Chesne, f. 693. D. A. D. 1361. King
Edward ^^nt Commissioners into France, to take Possession of what had been
agreed on.
that King Edward sent his Commissioners into France, to take possession of
what was granted him, and what he was to enjoy according to the Peace; but
several Lords in Languedoc and Gascogne refused at first to be wholly under the
Power of the English, notwithstanding the King of France had Released their
Faith and Homage, which they affirmed Several Earls, Viscounts, and Lords,
refuse to become his Subjects. Yet at last submit against their Wills.
he could not do, nor make them Subjects to another Man; The Lords were the
Earls of March, Perrigort, Gominges, Arminac, the Viscounts of Chastillon and
Carmaing, the Lords of Pincornet, and d'Albret; yet at last pressed by the
King's Command, and prevailed upon by the King's Cousin James of Bourbon, who
was sent Express to them, they obeyed against their Wills.

The same Difficulties were found in Ibm. in both. The same difficulties of
non-submission in Poictou, etc.
Poictou, Rochelois, and Xantoigne; The Rochellers excused themselves often,
praying King John he would not put them out of his Power, that they might come
under the power of the English, showing to him they had rather every year be
Taxed to the half of their Goods, then come under their Power, yet at length
they submitted; declaring openly, That they would obey, but their Hearts could
never be moved. Froys. Ib. Du Chesne, f. 694. A. Further Difficulties about
Evacuating Garrisons.
This done, King Edward made Sir John Chandos his Lieutenant, who had
possession given him of all the Lands, Countries, Towns, and Fortresses, which
he was to have in France, by John de Maingre Marshal of France, and Received
the Fidelity and Homages of all the Earls, Viscounts, Barons, Knights, and
Esquires, Towns and Fortresses, making and appointing Seneschals, Bailiffs,
Governors, and all Officers, in all Places, in the Name of the King of England;
and made his own Residence at Niort, a City in Poictou.

Then these there were yet greater Difficulties, for notwithstanding English
and French Commissioners for evacuating the Garrisons held by, or for the
English, could do, Froys. Ib. f. 109. b. Robbers, Plunderers, and Disbanded
Officers and Soldiers.
there were some that would not yield, (but pretended they were employed by the
King of Navarre;) There were also many Strangers great Captains, and great Ibm.
Make a great Body, and call themselves Companions.
Robbers or Pillagers, as Almains, Brabanters, Flemmings, Haynalders, and
Gascoins, who would not quit their Employments, or the Kingdom of France; but
set up for themselves under the Name of Companions; and the Disbanded Soldiers
of such as gave up the Garrisons, and freely left their present Employments,
ran into them, chose new Captains, and formed themselves into a great Body of
Men, Ib. and f. 110. a.
so as it was feared in time they might do more Mischief in France, then the
War had done. Walsingh. f. 178. l. 9 and 13. f. 181. l. 9.
The greater part of their Leaders were English, or at least under the Dominion
of the King of England, yet would not obey his Orders, answering they must live
by what they got.

To reduce these, or expel them the Nation, Froys. Ib. c 215. f. 111. 4. James
of Bourbon sent with an Army to reduce them.
the King of France sent his Cousin James of Bourbon with an Army, which was
routed, and himself much wounded, of which Wounds he died three days after.
Ibm. which was routed, and himself killed. They divide into Two Bodies.
These Companions pillaged and plundered the Countries, and good Towns,
wherever they came, and by the encouragement of this Victory, or Advantage,
they grew very numerous, so as they divided themselves into Two Bodies; one
whereof lay at Ance upon the River Saone, not far from Lions, Ib. and f. 111.
b. One whereof marched toward Avignon And threatened the Pope and Cardinals.
the other marched down by the River Rhosne, leaving Lions toward Avignon, and
in their way took the Bridge and Town of Holy Spirit within Seven Leagues of
that Place, and other Fortresses, making themselves Masters of that River; in
this Place they found great Riches, and had contrived to proceed to Avignon,
and take it, or bring the Pope and Cardinals under their Mercy. Pope Innocent
and the Cardinals much disturbed at the Proceedings of these People, who
besides Robbing and Plundering, committed all sorts of Ibm. A Croysado Preached
up against them without effect.
horrid Villainies, preached up a Croysado against them, and absolved all from
Crime and Punishment (a culpa and poena) who would venture their Lives to
destroy them; Ibm. The Artifice to divert them.
but this Design did not take; and therefore they sent to the Marquis of
Montferrat, who had then War with the Milanese, to come to Avignon, Ibm.
where it was contrived, quitted the Town of St. Spirit and other Places, and
marched with him into Piedmont. The other Body of Companions would not stir out
of France, but kept possession of what they had got, and increased in their
Numbers and Outrages.

During these Confusions in France, King Edward sent his Commissioners, Sir
Thomas Vuedale, and Mr. Thomas de Dunclent, Licentiate in Laws, to the King of
France, to make certain Requests King Edward sends to the King of France, to
make good what was agreed by the Peace of Bretigny.
to him about the accomplishment, and a full effectual Dispatch of the things
agreed, promised, and sworn to upon the Peace made between them, and especially
that he would cause to be delivered and rendered entirely to him, or his
Deputies, all the Cities, Towns, Castles, Fortresses, Lands, Countries, Isles
and Places, Letters of him and his Eldest Son, which should be sent and
delivered at Bruges in Flanders on the Day of St. Andrew next coming, as well
those of the Renunciations, Cessions, Releases, and Transports, as of other
things that ought to be performed according to the Peace, under their great
Seals, in Manner and Form agreed between them, etc. This Commission was Dated
on the 15th of November 1361, and * Rot. Franc. 35 Ed. III. M. 3.
35th of Edward the Third, but whether the Commissioners went according to the
Commission, or what was done upon it, I have not seen.

This year there was a great Plague in England, which swept away many of the
Nobility and Bishops, and amongst the rest Henry Duke of Lancaster Dugd. Bar.
Vol. 1. f. 789. A great Plague in England.
on the 24th of March, or last day of the year, a Person of great Worth in all
respects.

On the 19th of July the year following, the Prince of Wales Rot. Vascon. 36
Ed. III. M. 16. A. D. 1362. The Prince of Wales made Prince of Aquitan. Homage
and Fealty done to him by the Noblemen. He kept his Court at Bordeaux.
Prince of Aquitan, and had all Guien and Gascogne given him during Life, the
Direct Dominion, Superiority, and last Resort of those Countries reserved to
his Father. Not long after this the Prince, his Princess, and Family removed
into Aquitan, where having received the Homages and Fealties of the Noblemen
and others, he kept his Court at Bourdeaux in great State and Splendour. He made
Sir John Chandos his Constable of Aquitan, and Guischard d'Angle (a Native of
France, but by the Peace of Bretigny a Subject of England) his Marshall, who
continued faithful.

This year Walsingh. f. 179. n. 10. Pope Innocent dies. An Englishman chosen
Pope.
died Pope Innocent the Sixth in August, to whom succeeded Gillerin, an
Englishman, and Benedictin Abbat, by the Name of Urban the Fifth, who was
Consecrated on the First of November.

King Edward was very kind to Four of the chief of the French Hostages, Froys.
c. 218. f. 113. 6. A. D. 1363. Great Liberty given to four French Hostages. The
Duke of Anjou made his Escape.
the Dukes of Orleans, Anjou, Berry, and Burbon, who gave them Leave to go over
to Calais, and stay there for some time, and to go about into the Country for 4
days at any time, so as they always returned to Calais before Sunset on the
last day of the four. The Duke of Anjou upon this Liberty made his Escape, the
others returned with the King of Cyprus into England.

Toward the Ibm. and c. 219. The King of France comes into England.
end of this year King John of France came for England, and landed at Dover the
day before the Eve of Epiphany, or 4th of January, upon the Mezeray, f. 382.
News he received of the Escape of his Son, the Duke of Anjou, to repair his
Honor, and show he had no Hand in that Act, and to dispose King Edward to the
Expedition of the Holy War, he having accepted the Command of Generalissimo, by
the Preaching and Persuasion of His Errand.
Pope Urban the Fifth: After he had been Nobly Treated here King and Nobility,
Ib. f. 383. A. D. 1364. He falls sick, and dies there.
he fell sick at the Savoy in London about Mid-March, and died on the 8th or
9th of April following, for whom the King of England made a Magnificent
Funeral, but his Body was carried into France, and interred at St. Denis upon
the 7th of May; and upon Trinity Sunday next following, His Son Charles Crowned
King.
his Eldest Son Charles the Regent of France, and Duke of Normandy, was Crowned
King at Rhemes.

This year the King held a Parliament, 15 days after Michaelmass, A Tax granted
to the King. Rot. Parl. 36 Ed. III. n. 35.
wherein * was granted unto him of every Sack of Wool Transported 20 s. of
every 300 Woollfells 20 s. of every Last of Leather 40 s. besides the Ancient
Custom.

Notwithstanding the Peace of Bretigny, wherein Mezeray, ^ol. 384. War in
Bretagne between Blois and Montfort.
were not comprehended the Naverrois and Dukedom of Bretagne, the War continued
there, Charles of Blois having been assisted by the French, and John de
Montfort by the English. After many Skirmishes, Sieges, and the Battles of
Cocherel and Auvray, in which Charles of Blois lost his Life, and then by a
Treaty at Guerrand a Peace was concluded Ibm. f. 385. A. D. 1364. Froy^. c.
229. f. 125. a. A Peace between them.
upon these Terms; That Montfort should enjoy the Duchy, upon Condition of
doing Homage and Fealty for it to the King of France; That the Widow of Charles
should enjoy the Title of Duchess during her Life; and in case Montfort died
without Heirs, the Duchy to remain to the Heirs of Charles of Bloys.

About the same time, or not long after, there was Peace Ibm. f. 125. b.
between France and Navarre, when many Soldiers and Companions knew not what to
do. Ibm. A Peace between France and Navarre. The Companions waste the Country.
They refuse to serve against the Turk.
Froysard says, most of the Captains of the Companions, who horribly wasted and
plundered the Country, were Englishmen, and Gascons under the Obedience of the
King of England, and that the King of Hungary wrote to the Pope, the King of
France, and Prince of Wales, that those People might be employed in his Service
against the Turks, who offered them Gold, Silver, and Passage, France, which
they called their Chamber.

Yet within a year or two, the Pope and King of France found an Opportunity to
employ these Companions they so much feared. Ib. f. 126. M^z^r. f. 386. An
Expedient to employ them.
Alphonso XI. King of Castile had by his Wife a Son called Peter, and by
another Woman had several natural Sons, or Bastards, the Eldest whereof was was
Henry. Peter had the Name Peter the Cruel King of Castile an Enemy to the
Church. Henry the Bastard Legitimated by the Pope, made King.
of Cruel and Wicked, from his Actions of the same Denomination, and was
reputed a great Enemy to the Church; whereupon great Complaints were made to
the Pope, who upon Summons refusing to come to Avignion, was by Advice of the
College declared an Infidel, Cursed, and Condemned, and Henry the Bastard
Legitimated, and made capable of Receiving the Kingdom. Froys. ib. The Kings of
France and Arragon make War against Peter, and drive him out of his Kingdom.
By this Encouragement the Kings of France and Aragon made Command of Bertrand
du * Guesclin, the Famous Commander of the Companions, a great Body of those
Men, and a great Number of other Volunteers under excellent Officers, to assist
the Bastard Henry against Peter, who drove him out of his Kingdom.

Peter applies himself to the Prince of Wales, Ibm. c. 231. A. D. 1366. He
applies himself to the Pr. of Wales, who undertakes his Quarrel,
who sends into England to his Father, and by his Advice, and the Concurrence
of the Gascon Lords, undertakes his Quarrel, upon Condition of King of Navarre
would permit them to pass through his Country. [2] His Brother the Duke of
Lancaster came to his Assistance out of England, and with as many Companions as
he could gather up, under the Command of Sir Hugh Caverly and others, the
Gascons, and Forces his Brother brought with him, he enters Castile. Ib. c.
234. Beats Henry,
(The March, Number of Men, and Chief Commanders, are described and named by
Froisard) on Saturday April 3. 1366. The Ib. c. 237, 238. and restores him.
Battle Navar and Navaret in Spain, where Henry the Bastard received a total
Rout, and Peter was restored to his Kingdom.

Some time after the Battle, Ib. c. 239. f. 142. The Pr. sends to K. Peter for
Pay for his Soldiers, and could not get it.
the Prince sent to King Peter for Pay for his Soldiers, who excused himself,
and let him know his People could raise no Money, so long as the Companions
were in the Country; and that they had three or four times robbed his
Treasurers coming to him with Money, and therefore desired

The Prince not being well, Ibm. The Pr. not being well, returns with his Army
into Aquitan.
nor the Air of Spain (then thought to be infectious) agreeing with him or his
Army, he was advised to return to Aquitan; and Order was given accordingly.
Upon his return, he promised the Army to pay them so soon as he got Money,
though King Peter had not kept his Promise. The Gascon Lords went to their own
Homes; the Ib. c. 240.
Companions kept together expecting their Wages, and exercised Robbing and
Plundering. The Prince desired Ibm. The Companions rob and spoil the Country.
them to leave his Country, it not being able to sustain them: Some staid;
others that would not displease him, marched toward France, under English and
Gascon Officers, passed the River Loire, and went into Champagne, where their
Numbers increased much, and they were so strong as none dare encounter them,
though many Complaints had been made to the King of France concerning them:
They harassed the Countries wherever they Ibm.
People wondered the Prince of Wales should send them thither to make War. * So
Mezeray; Froysard, Cl^squi; Walsingham, Cleikin; others Clequin and Guesciline.


Who wanting Money to pay his Debts, contracted by the The Pr. wants Money.
Spanish Expedition, and his own Expenses, and in some measure to satisfy his
Soldiers and Military Men, he was advised Ib. c. 241.
to call together the Bishops, Abbats, Barons, and Knights of Aquitan at Niort,
where Chimney-Money was propounded and urged by Chimney-money propounded; Many
dissatisfied about it:
the Bishop of Rhodes Chancellor of Aquitan, a Frank upon every Chimney. Some
consented to it, others dissented; but the main Answer was, They would consider
and advise about it; and Ibm. Yet it was exacted*
The Prince commanded them to return at a Day assigned: Many returned not, nor
would suffer Chimney-Money to be paid. Ibm. against the Advice of some of his
Council.
He rigorously exacted the Collection of it. Sir John Chandos, one of the Chief
of his Council, advised him to the contrary; but seeing he could not prevail,
left him, pretending Business in Normandy at his own Estate St. Saviors le
Vicount, where he abode six Months.

In the mean time, Ibm. Many Great Men of Gascon complain to the King of France
of the Oppressions of the Pr. of Wales
the Earl of Arminac, the Lord d'Albret, Lords Gomenges, Pincornet, and diverse
other Barons, Prelates, Knights, and Esquires of Gascon, made great Complaints,
and appealed to the French King as their Superious Lord, to whose Court was, as
they affirmed, the last Resort for maintaining their Liberties and Franchises
against the Oppressions and Evil Usages of the Prince of Wales. Ibm. The King
of France Summons him before him in his Chamber of Peers.
He managed them cunningly, giving them such Answers as satisfied them at
present; yet knew not his meaning, until he had covertly prepared for War; and
Ib. c. 243. and Du Chesue, f. 699. D. A. D. 1369. The Prince his Answer.
Summons to the Prince of Wales upon their farther Instance, Dated January 25.
at Paris, to appear there before him in his Chamber of Peers, and do the People
Right, according to their Complaints. His Answer was, That if he must come, he
would, attended with Sixty thousand Men.

This Summons was soon after followed with a Defiance, Froys. e. 246. Du Ches.
f. 700. D. The King of France desies the King of England: Invades Ponthicu and
Aquitan.
sent to the King of England, and the Invasion of Ponthieu and Aquitan.

The chief Reasons why the French King began the War again with England, were
(besides the abovementioned) a pretended Du Chesne, f. 693. B C. The Reason of
this War.
Agreement the Two Kings should make at Bologne, on the 26th of October, 1360.
when the Treaty at Bretigny had been corrected and confirmed by them both; by
which it was accorded, That whereas for some Difficulties which then happened,
the Renunciations Calais could not be perfected, both Kings in the Year
following should send their Deputies to Bruges, to be there on the Feast Day of
St. Andrew, bringing with them the Treaty of Peace and Renunciations, in
Letters Patents, Sealed with their Seals: And until that time, they should be
of no effect: And that to the King of France should remain the Resorts and
Soveraignties as before: Ibm.
That if any of the Subjects of one Party or the other should contravene the
Peace, exercising Robbing and Killing, Pillaging, Burning, or Taking or
Detaining Fortresses, Persons, or Goods, in one Kingdom or the other, upon the
Subjects, Adherents, or Allies, and should not cease, or make Reparation within
one Month after Demand. From thence they were to be holden as Banished both
Kingdoms, Guilty of Treason, and to be punished without Remission or
Connivance. And further, That one King do not Receive the Enemies of the other,
but preserve their Honor Reciprocally. And that King Ibm.
Edward on his Part deputed no body to Bruges at the time appointed, to make
the Exchange of the Treaty and Renunciations. Ib. f. 694. A. B.
That instead of delivering the Fortresses and Garrisons he held in France at
his own Charge, as he was expressly bound by the Treaty, he kept many in his own
Name under pretense of Wages due to the Soldiers as then unpaid; and seized
upon who changed their Names, and called themselves Companions; who would not
yield the Places they held, without an unreasonable Redemption or Payment for
the quitting of them. Further, That he took no notice of the Difference between
his Son-in-Law John Montfort, and Charles Earl of Blois, concerning the Duchy
of Bretagne, as by the Treaty he was equally bound to do, as the King of France
was, but suffered the War to continue there Force of France, and to prevent the
Return of the Companions into England, lest that might have been too great
Charge and Trouble to him. That he never kept his Faith with France. Lastly,
That he had done Homage and sworn Fealty to the King of France as to his
Superior Lord for the Duchy of Aquitan, Earldom of Ponthieu, etc.

Mezeray Fol. 388.
writes, That King Edward thought himself absolute Soveraignt in Guyen by the
Treaty of Bretigny; but as on King of France pretended that Treaty was null and
void; and that therefore he remained still a Vassal to the Crown. And that it
was upon this foot that All the Lands the King of England held in France
declared so feit, and to be confiscated for Rebellion, Contempt, and
Disobedience.
he sent to declare War against him. And afterward his Parliament being
assembled on Ascension-Eve, sitting in his Seat of Justice, made a Decree by
which for Rebellion, Contempt, and Disobedience, they declared forfeit and
confiscated all those Lands King of England held in France.

But beyond this Pretense, in the Declaration of the Confiscation of the
Dukedom of Aquitan, against King Edward and the Prince of Wales, by Charles V.
King of France, Dated at Vincennes the 14th of May, 1370. it is positively
affirmed, That the Superiority and Resort of the whole Dukedom of Aquitan, and
the other Lands delivered and assigned to the English by that Treaty, were
especially and expressly reserved to his Father, himself, and Successors. Codex
Juris Gentium Diplomaticus, Fol. 229. Paragraph 1. wherein they are said to
have violated the Peace they solemnly Swear to maintain; and for that their
Rebellion, (there so called) their Contempt, and Usurpation of the Superiority
and Resort of the Dukedom of Aquitan, and other Lands, and many other Crimes
there mentioned, that Dukedom, etc. was decreed Confiscate, and to be annexed
to the Crown of France.

The War being open, the King Claus. 43 Ed. III. M. 24. Dors. A. D. 1369.
Summoned a Parliament to meet on the Octaves of Holy Trinity, or the next
Sunday after that Feast, being May 27. this Year. Rot. Parl. 43 Ed. III. n. 1.
A Parliament called. The cause of Summons.
The King, Prelates, Dukes, Earls, Barons, Knights, Citizens, and Burgesses,
being in the Painted Chamber, the Bishop of Winchester, then Chancellor, showed
the cause of Summons, telling them, That the King in all his great Business
touching himself and the Kingdom, had in all times done and wrought ( de tout
temps ad fait and overs, etc.) by the Counsel and of the Great Men and Commons
of the Realm, who he found in all his Affairs Good and Loyal, for which he
thanked them, and would not any thing should be unknown to them. He further
told them, That with their Advice and An account of the Transactions between K.
Edward and his Adversary of France.
Counsel he had made Peace with his Adversary of France, upon certain
Conditions, That he should cause to be delivered unto Resort in all the Lands
and Countries of Gascon, and all the Lands and Countries which the King held
beyond Sea; and that he was to part with the Name and Title of the King of
France for the same time ( pur His unfaithful Dealing with K. Edw.
mesme le temps.) That his Adversary had wholly failed to make Delivery of the
Lands and Countries so Agreed to be Delivered Appeals of the Earl of Armynak
the Lord de la Bret, and others, which were the King's Lieges in Gascon, and by
virtue of their Appeals had caused to be Summoned the Prince of Gascoigne to
appear before him at Paris (le Prince de Gascoigne dapparer devant luy a Paris,
etc.) the first Day of May last past, to Answer their Appeals against the Form
of the Peace. Ibm. n. 2.
And further, That he had sent a great Number of Men at Gascoigne, and there by
force had taken Towns, Castles, Fortresses, and other Places; killed some of
the King's Liege People, taken others, and imprisoned them, in expectation of
great Ransoms. The like also he had done in Ponthieu. And because of these
things done in the Principality against the Form of the Peace, Ibm. n. 3.
the Prince sent solemn Messengers to inform the King, he had called to him the
most Wise Men of the Principality, and treated with, and retake upon him, and
use the Name of King of France; who answered and affirmed the King might do it
by Right and Good Faith ( de Droit and bon Foi) Ibm.
Upon which Point the Archbishop of Canterbury, and the other Prelates, were
charged by the King ( furent chargez par le Roy,) to treat and show their
Advice and Counsel ( lour Avys and Conseil.)

On Wednesday following, the Ibm. n. 8. King Edward by Adv^c^ of Parliament
retakes upon him the Title and Name of King of France.
Archbishop and Prelates, after mature Deliberation had upon the Charge, with
one accord answered and said ( respondrient and desoient) That the King for the
Causes abovesaid, might retake and use the Name of King of France, by Right
and good Conscience: To which Agreed the Dukes, Earls, Barons, and other Great
Men, and Commons in full Parliament; ( and a ce Ibm.
accorderent les Ducs, Countes, Barons, and autres Grants, and Comunes en pleyn
Parliament.) Which King of France he did retake, and had his Great Seal, and
other Seals altered, and that Title Ibm.
engraved upon them.

On the same [9] Day, and Thursday, the Estate of the King [8] Ibm. 9, 10.
was laid before the Great Men and Commons ( feust monstre as Grants and
Comunes lestat le Roy) and because the War was open, ( par cause de la Guerre
queste overte) he should be at great Charges as well by Sea and Land, which he
could not maintain without their Aid, he requested them they would treat and
advise how he might be best assisted to his greatest Profit, and the least
Charge and Damage to the People. The Prelates, Dukes, Earls, and Barons, by
themselves, and then the Commons of one accord, Granted ( les Prelates, Ducs,
Barons, par eux, and puys les Comunes A Subsidy of Wool, etc. granted to
maintain the War.
dun acord Granteront, etc.) to the King a Subsidy of Woolls of every Sack 43
s. 4 d. and of the Woollfels every Twelvescore l. which passed beyond Sea for
three Years, besides the ancient Custom, to begin at Michaelmas next coming, of
Denizons: Of Strangers, for every Sack of Wool 4 Marcs, of every Twelvescore
Woollfels, 4 Marcs, and of every Last of Leather 8 Marcs.

He not only provided for Money this Parliament, but Ib. n. 25. K. Edward's
Offer, To all Persons whatever that would maintain his Quarrel against France.
declared, That for the Compensation of such Lords, or others of whatsoever
Estate, Degree, Condition, or Nation they were, who would maintain his Party
and Quarrel against his Enemies of France, should hold Heritably what they
should Recover and Conquer, be they Dutchies, Earldoms, Vicounties, Cities,
Towns, Castles, Fortresses, or Lordships, situate in France, by what Name or
Title they were called, of him as of the King of France, by the Services and
Dues accustomed, except and reserved expressly to him and his Heirs, all his
Demeasn Royalties, Services, Homages, Dues, Resorts, and Soveraignties
belonging to the Crown of France; except also etc.

This Year Walls. f. 184. n. 20. The Death of the Queen. The Offer as above, no
advantage to K. Edward. [3] Froys. C. 272. Du Ches. f. 704. D. He sends his
Letters of Indemnity and Pardon into Aquitan.
on the Assumption of the Virgin Mary, or 15th of August, died Queen Philip,
Just and Sincere, as the Historians say, to the English Interest.

There is nothing extant which makes it appear, that the Offer King Edward's
Cause; and therefore next Year he sends his Letters of Indemnity and Pardon,
with great Promises of Reformation, into Aquitan: [3] That he being informed of
certain Troubles, Grievances, and Molestations done, or supposed to be done, by
his Dear Son the Prince of Wales in his Seigniory of Aquitan, being obliged and
desirous to remedy all things tending to evil Surmises, Hatreds, and
Contentions, between him and his Loyal Friends and Subjects, did Announce and
Pronounce, Certify and Ratify, of his mere Good Will, and by great
Deliberation of his Council, to that purpose called, and did Will and Command,
That the Prince of Wales should forbear and remit all manner of Actions done,
or to be done, and restore to all such as had been grieved or molested by him,
or by any of his Officers and Subjects in Aquitan, all their Costs, Expenses,
or Damages raised, or to be raised, in the Name of Aids or Chimney-Money. And
did further pardon all such as had revolted and forsaken his Homage and Fealty,
upon Condition, that after the sight of these Letters, within one Month they
returned to their Obedience. And if any Persons made any just Complaint against
his Dear Son the Prince, or any employed by him; that in any thing they were
grieved or oppressed, or had been in times past, he would cause them to have
reasonable Amends, for the maintaining of Peace, Love, Concord, and Unity
between him and his People of the Duchy. And that all Men might be satisfied
of the Truth of these Letters, he willed they should have Copies of them; and
then declared he had Sworn to maintain and make them good, by the Body of Jesus
Christ, in the Presence of his Dear Son John Duke of Lancaster, the Earls of
Salisbury, Warwick, Hereford, and many other there named. Dated at Westminster,
in the 44th Year of his Reign, on the 5th of November, in the Year of our Lord
1370.

Mezeray F. 389. The King of France joined Religion and Eloquence to his Arms;
And sent Preachers abroad, to justify his Cause.
taking notice of these Letters, tells us, That to King of France joined
Religion and Eloquence, which could do all things on the Hearts of the People.
He ordered Fasts and Processions to be made all over his Kingdom, and sometimes
went barefoot himself with the rest; when at the same time the Preachers made
out his Right and Title, with the Justice of his Cause, and the Injustice of
the English: Which had two Ends; the one to bring back again those French
Provinces, which had been yielded by the Treaty of Bretigny; the Archbishop of
Thoulouse alone, by his Persuasions and Intrigues, regained above Fifty Cities
and Castles in Guien; amongst others, that of Cahors. The King of England would
have practiced the same Methods on his part, and sent an Amnesty, or General
Pardon, to the Gascons, with an Oath upon the Sacred Body of Jesus Christ, to
raise no more new Imposts; but all this could reclaim those Minds, that had
bent themselves another way.

King Edward Ib. c. 249. 250. Forces sent into France to the Prince. Some of
the Companions joined with them.
sent Forces over to the Prince, with Edmond Earl of Cambridge his own Son, and
the Earl of Pembroke his Son-in-Law; who with a great number of Companions,
under the Command of Hugh Caverley, an Experienced Officer which came from
Aragon, Rendezvoused at Angolesm, and were put all under his Command by the
Prince. What things of Note they

Before this time, Ib. c. 241, 242. Henry the Bastard killed Peter King of
Castile, and fixed himself in the Throne
Henry the Bastard had, by the Assistance of Peter King of Aragon, the King of
France, and the Power of Bertrand de Guesclin and his Companions, seized the
Kingdom of Castile, and killed King Peter, and fixed himself in that Throne.
The King of France wrote to Henry to Ib. c 276. Bertrand de Guesclin and his
Companions serve the K. of France against K. Edw.
permit him, and to Bertrand himself, to come into France, and to enter into
his Service; who made all the haste he could, and came and joined Duke of Anjou
at Toulouse.

About the same time the Ib. c. 279. The Duke of Lancaster arrived at Bordeaux
with more Forces from England.
Duke of Lancaster arrived at Bordeaux with more Forces from England, who
marched forthwith to the Princes Rendezvous at Cognac, where he met with the
Earls of Cambridge and Pembroke; who all joining with the Forces of Xantong and
Poictou, which the Prince had Summoned in, made a great Body of Men.

In the mean time, Ib. c. 280. Limoges delivered to the French.
the Duke of Berry lay before Limoges, who being reinforced, with Forces sent
under the Conduct of Bertrand de Guesclin, caused the City to Treat, and was
soon delivered by the Bishop and Citizens into the hands of the French, to
whose King they gave their Faith and Homage.

While these things happened in Aquitan, the Command of the Ib. c. 280. Mezer.
f. 390. The English harass and burn the Countries about Paris.
Army about Picardy was given to Sir Robert Knolls, which terrified the Country
as far as the Loir; it harassed Vermandois, Champaign, la Brie, and the Isle of
France, burnt all round Paris, yet nothing could move the King of France to
send out of Paris any Force against them.

The Prince much enraged with Froysard, c. 283. The Prince enraged with
Limoges, takes it by Storm, puts to the Sword 3000 Men, Women, and Children.
Burns and destroys the Town.
Limoges for rendering as it did, was resolved to execute his Revenge upon it,
set his Miners Town was taken by Storm, and more than Three thousand Men,
Women, and Children, of the Inhabitants, put to the Sword, the Town burnt and
destroyed by the Prince's Command. The Bishop likewise should have had his Head
stricken off, had not the Duke of Lancaster begged him of the Prince, and the
Pope by sweet Words and kind Entreaty prevailed with the Duke to send him to
Avignon. Ib. c. 280. The weak Condition of the Prince. [4] Ib. c. 287. His
return to England.
The Prince at this time was carried in a Horse Litter, being so weak he could
not ride. This was the last Warlike Athievement of the Prince, being [4]
advised by his Physicians and Surgeons to return into England for his
Health's sake; He took their Advice, and with his Princess, his young Son
Richard, the Earls of Cambridge and Pembroke, came for England, leaving the
Ibm. A. D. 1370.
Affairs of Aquitan to the Management of his Brother John Duke of Lancaster. By
this Du Chesne, f. 707. B.
Bertrand de Guesclin had Baffled the Army of Sir Robert Knolls, that had
Braved all France, and recovered from the English many Towns and Fortresses,
for which Services he was Bertrand de Guesclin made Constable of France.
made Constable of France on the Second of October.

In the latter end of the 44th year of Edward the Third, on the 8th of January,
he Rot. Claus. 44 Ed. III. M. 1. Dors.
issued Summons for a Parliament to meet on Monday in the first week of Lent,
being the Feast of St. Matthias, or 24th of February, in the 45th of his Reign,
on A Parliament summoned.
which day the King, Prelates, Great Men, and Commons, (Grantz and Coes)
assembled in the Painted Chamber, Rot. Parl. 45 Ed. III. n. 1. The Cause of
Summons.
and the Bishop of Winchester, then Chancellor, declared the cause of Summons
to be, That by their assent last Parliament, the King did retake upon him the
Name of King of France, because his Adversary had broke the Peace, and used the
Resort, which by that belonged to him; for which cause and others he had been
at great Expenses, and sent some Great Men and others, to a great number, par
son droit avoir and conquer) and that the King had received News from his
Friends and Allies, That his Adversary had made himself stronger then he had
done before, ( que son adversair se fait plus fort, quil and fait devant) and
directed so great a number of People to be brought together, as seemed to him,
were able this year to put him out of possession of all his Lands and Countries
beyond Sea, as well in Gascoign, as at Calais, Guines, Pontheu, and other
Places; and Fleet ready, as seemed sufficient to destroy the whole English
Navy, ( a destruire toute la Navy Dengleterre;) and also, That he prepared to
send over a great Army into this Land, to destroy, conquer, and subject it to
his Power; Wherefore the King required and charged the Great Men and Commons, (
par quoi le Roi requert and charge les Grantz and Coes) That they would Advise
about these Points, and Counsel him, how the Kingdom might be safely guarded,
the Navy preserved from the Malice of his Enemies, how his Lands beyond Sea
should be kept, the War there maintained, and the Conquest of them carried on.

Upon these Ib. n. 8.
Causes thus propounded, and many ways of Aid, Touched, Treated of, and Debated
between the Great Men and Commons, ( and plusours voies de eide touchez,
tretez, parlez and debatuz per enter les Grantz and Comunes) in consideration
of the great Costs and Charges the King was to be at for the Causes abovesaid,
the same Great Men and Commons ( mesmes les Grantz A Subsidy of 50000 l.
granted to be levied ratably upon every Parish.
and Comunes) on the 28th day of March granted a Subsidy of 50000 l. to be
levied of every Parish of the Land 22 s. 3 d. so as every Parish of greater
value should contribute ratably to those of less value.

But at the Great Council holden at Ib. n. 6. A great Council at Winchester.
The number of Parishes could not answer 50000 l. as it was to be levied upon
them, and therefore they were Taxed higher.
Winchester Eight days Trinity Sunday, the Chancellor show the Great Men and
Commons there assembled, ( fust monstre par le Chancellor as Grantz and Comunes
illoeques assemblez) That the number of Parishes in England would not answer
the Sum of 50000 l. as might appear by the Certificates of all the
Archbishops, Bishops, and Sheriffs, made and returned into Chancery by the
King's Warrant; Ib. n. 10, ^1. Note, That the Transactions of this Council, and
the precedent Parliament, are entered in the same Roll, and the numbers
continued as if it were one and the same Assembly.
Which Certificates being Examined, ( and sur se plusors tretes and parlances
eues) and many Treaties and Conferences had upon the Matter; l. the said Great
Men and Commons ( les ditz Grantz and Comunes) granted of every Parish within
the Kingdom of England Cxvi^s. the Sum of 22 s. 3 d. first granted, being
comprised therein, except the County of Chester, and the Church Lands, which
were Taxed to the Tenth, so as always the Parishes of greater value should be
contributary to those of less value.

The Ib. n. 12, 13.
Commission of this Grant was read before the King, Great Men, and Commons, and
the Names of the Collectors given in by the Knights of the Shires, and also the
Names of the Lords and others that were assigned to see the Tax was duly and
reasonably Assessed and Levied; and the Petitions of the Commons that were not
answered in the preceding Parliament, were answered in this Council, amongst
which this following is very observable.

For that Ib. n. 15.
it had been declared to the King in this present Parliament by all the Earls,
Barons, and Commons of England, That The Commons Petition, that Laymen, and no
others, might be made the great Officers of the Kingdom.
the Government of the Kingdom had for a long time been managed by Men of the
Church, whereby many Mischiefs and Damages had happened in time to come, in
Disherison of the Crown, and to the great Prejudice of the Kingdom: It would
please the King, That Laymen, of sufficient Abilities, and no others, might for
the future be made Chancellor, Treasurer, Clerc of the Privy Seal, Barons of
the Exchequer, Chamberlanes of the Exchequer, Controller, and other and
Governors of the Kingdom, and that this Matter might be so Established, that it
might not be Defeated, or any thing done to the contrary in time to come,
saving to the King the Election and Removal of such Officers, yet so as they
should be Laymen.

The King's Answer was, Ibm.
He would do in this Point, what The King's Answer.
seemed best to him by Advice of his Council.

The Members of this great Council were, Rot. Clause 25 Ed. III. M. 29. Dors.
The Members of the great Council at Winchester.
four Bishops, four Abbats, six Earls, six Barons, and such, and so many of the
Commons as the King named in his Writs to the Sheriffs, which were of the last
Parliament; for Kent there were only Ibm.
Thomas Apuldrefeld, one of the Knights of the Shire, Edmund Horner, one of the
Citizens of Canterbury, and John Fynchynfeld, one of the Citizens Rochester.

About this time Froys. c. 295.
John Duke of Lancaster Married Constance, the Eldest Daughter of Peter the
Cruel, King of Castile, etc. the true Inheritrix of that Kingdom, and took upon
him the Title of King in her Right. Ib. John Duke of Lancaster's Title to
Castile. [9] Ib. c. 296.
Whereupon Henry the Bastard of Castile, made a League Offensive and Defensive
with the King of France. [9] After Michaelmas he came for England, for
Instructions how to carry on the Affairs of Aquitan, leaving Governors and
Deputies Guien and Poictou, his Wife and her Sister Isabel, who was afterward
Married to Edmond his Brother, Earl of Cambridge, came with him.

And this Winter Ibm. Two Armies to be sent into France.
were diverse Councils holden about the Affairs of Aquitan, and other Parts in
France, and how the War was to be maintained there next Summer; at last it was
resolved there should be Two Armies sent thither, one into Guien, and another
by the way of Calais.

In the Spring Rot. Vasc. 46 E. III (...) Henry the Bastard of Castile assists
the King of France with a Fleet.
the Earl of Pembroke was made Lieutenant The Earl of Pembroke Lieutenant of
Aquitan.
of Aquitan, and was ordered to go by Poictou into Guien, with a Fleet and
Forces, and to land at Rochell. The King of France knowing what was designed in
England, sends to Henry the Bastard of Castile to assist him with a Fleet, who
sent one greater and far more powerful than that of England. Froysard, c. 297,
298, 299. A. D. 1372. The English Navy destroyed. The Earl of Pembroke taken
Prisoner.
The Two Fleets met at the Entrance of the Bay of Rochell on the 22d of June,
where they fought two days; most of the English Navy Earl made Prisoner. The
Rochellers saw all this, but gave no assistance to the English, tho demanded of
them. The Ship also was sunk, in which the Treasure was for the payment of the
Soldiers in Aquitan. The Earl of Pembroke was sent Prisoner into Spain to Henry
the Bastard, who about Walsingh. y prodig. Neustr. f. 530. n. 10. He dies.
three years after sent him to Bertrand Guesclin for a Sum of Money he owed
him. The Sum of his Ransom was agreed on at Paris; but coming for England to
raise the Money, Calais, and the Constable of France lost the Price of his
Redemption.

After this Fight at Sea, and the Destruction of the English Fleet, Froysard,
c. 304. Rochell declares for the King of France.
Rochell declared for the King of France, and all Rochelois. In Poictou the
Constable reduced many Towns and Forts, and besieged Ib. c. 305. Mezer. f. 392.
The Town of Thovars forced to Capitulate. The Terms granted unto them.
Thovars, whither most part of the Lords and Chief Men of that Country were
retired, as to a Place of Security; In a short time they were forced to
Capitulate and Agree, City under the Obedience of the King of France, unless
upon their sending to the King of England, he himself, or one of his Sons, came
with an Army to relieve them by next Michaelmas-day.

The Messengers Froysard as above. King Edward resolved to go into France with
an Army.
sent from Thovars informed the King, Prince, and Council, of the Condition of
Poictou, and Xantonge, and especially of that Place: The King resolved to go
over himself, and was advised to take with him that Army which was to march
into France by the way of Calais; Ibm. He summons the Noble and Military Men,
to pass with himself and Prince of Wales.
and besides, he sent forth Summons for a very considerable number of the
Military Men, and many of the Nobility, to be ready to pass the Sea with him,
and the Prince of Wales, into Poictou.

On Rot. Clause 46 Ed III. M. 12. Dors. A. D. 1372. Prayers made for success.
Monday, August 30. (Orders having been given for Public Prayers to be made in
all Churches for good success upon the Voyage) he took Ship with many of the
chief Nobility, and with 400 Vessels Froysard as above. The Voyage unhappy by
reason of contrary Winds.
of all sorts, sailed toward the Coast of France, and Poictou, but the Wind was
always contrary, so as he could not land; Having kept the Sea about five weeks,
and the time limited for Relief, or Surrender of the Town, being past, he
returned to England in the beginning of October. Ib. c. 306. Poictou, Xantogne,
and Rochelois lost.
This unhappy Voyage, with the Disaster of the Earl of Pembroke, lost all
Poictou, Xantogne, and Rochelois.

On the very day Pat. 46 Ed. III. Part. 2. M. 25. Richard, Son to the Prince of
Wales, made Guardian and Lieutenant of England in his absence.
he put to Sea, he made his Grandchild Richard, Son to the Prince of Wales,
then scarce Seven years old, Guardian, and his Lieutenant of the Kingdom during
his absence, appointing him a Council fit for the Management of the Public
Affairs: Two days after, on the first of September, Clause 46 Ed. III. M. 11.
Dors. Summons of Parliament.
he issued Writs of Summons for a Parliament to meet 15 days after Michaelmass;
King Edward was come into England, and by his Ib. M. 10. Dors. Which Prorogued
by Writ.
Writs dated at Winchelsea on the 6th of October, he prorogued this Parliament
to the morrow of All Souls, or 3d of November.

Sir John Knivet Rot. Parl. 46 Ed. III. 11. 1, 2, 3. Further Declaration of
Summons.
declared in part the Causes of Summons, the Parliament being adjourned until
Friday; after that Monsieur Hugh Bryan, in the White Chamber, acquainted Ib. n.
7. The Revenues of Guien not sufficient to support the Government of it, etc.
the Prelates, Duke, Earls, Barons, and Banerets, ( les Prelates, D^^, Countes,
Barons, and Banerets) That the Prince, who had the Principality of Guyen by
the Grant of the King, had often signified to him, when there, by Letters and
Messengers, That the Revenues and Profits arising from the Principality did
not, nor could suffice to maintain him, and support the Government, and Wars
against their French Enemies, and other necessary Charges, without great
assistance from the King; and that the Prince having made these things appear
to the King and Council when England, had surrendered Ib. n. 8. The Prince
resigns it into the King's Hands.
into the King's Hands the Principality, and all he could claim there by virtue
of his Grant, in the presence of the King's Council, and some other Great Men.

On the next day, being Ib. n. 9. Yet a further Declaration of Summons.
Saturday, Sir Hugh Bryan, before the Prince, Prelates, Dukes, Earls, Barons,
and Commons, in the White Chamber, more especially declared the Causes of
Summons, That the King, by Advice of the Great Men, ( des Grantz) plusours des
Grantz) with sufficient Power, some into Gascoigne, others to Calais, to oppose
the Malice of his Enemies, and make War upon them by all the ways they could;
That afterward, for sudden News that came to the King, he made ready with all
his Power to put to Sea, or go to Sea, ( ove tout son poair daler sur la Mere)
against his Enemies, to do what he could against them, but by reason of the
Wind being contrary, and other Causes reasonable, ( par contrariousete de vent,
and autres causes reasonables) he came back into England, and caused to be
summoned and prorogued this Parliament, that the Great Men who were with him
upon the Sea might be there, that by the good Advice and Counsel of them and
others, and The French make themselves stronger by Sea and Land, then ever they
had done before.
also of the Commons, ( and anxi une la Coe) he might do the best he could for
the safety of the Nation, and to resist and oppose Malice of his Enemies, who
had made themselves much stronger by Land and Sea then ever they were before, (
qui plus safforcent de guerer si bien par terre come par Mere, que unques
fesoient a devant.)

And then Ibm.
beseeches the Prelates, Prince, Dukes, Earls, Barons, and Commons, on behalf
of the King, ( and supplia as ditz Prelates, Prince, Ducs, Countes, Barons, and
as Coes de par le Roi) that they would advise upon this Matter, and give such
Counsel and donner tiel conseil) and Aid to the King, as seemed to them best
profitable for the Nation, and to restrain the Malice of his Enemies.

Queux Ib. n. 10. These Commons were the Knights of Shires.
Prelates, Prince, Ducs, Counts, Barons and Coes eu sur les points de lour
charge, and as dependantz dycelles plein deliberation, etc. which Prelates,
Prince, Dukes, Earls, Barons, and Commons, having had full Deliberation upon
the Points of their Charge, and the Dependences thereon, and also considering
the great and King was to be at for the Defense of the Nation, and Maintaining
the War against his Enemies, granted him the Subsidy of Wool, Leather, and
Woollfells, A Subsidy upon Wool, etc.
for Two years, to begin at Michaelmass last past, of every Sack of Wool which
passed out of England 43 s. 4 d. of every Twelvescore Woollfells as much, of
every Last of Leather 4 l. of Denizens, besides the old Custom, and of
Strangers or Foreigners four Marks of every Sack of Wool, as much of every

And whereas Ibm. A Fifteenth granted.
the Subsidy and Custom so granted could not be sufficient for the great
Expense and Charge the King was to be at for the Causes abovesaid, as it was
openly showed unto them, the same Prelates, Prince, Dukes, Earls, Barons, and
Commons, having regard thereto, Ib. n. 11.
granted One Fifteenth for one year to be levied as the last was.

On the 23d of Ib. n. 12.
November the King, Prelates, Duke, Earls, Barons, and Commons, assembled in
the White Chamber, when the Chancellor declared to the King how kind the Lords
and Commons had been to him, in granting him the Subsidy and Fifteenth, who
much Thanked them for their great Aid; and and then the Ib. n. 13.
Petitions of the Commons were read and answered, when the Knights of Shires
had leave to depart, Ib. n. 14.
and sue out Writs for their Wages or Expenses, ( pour lour depenses;) Citizens
and Burgesses were commanded to stay, Ib. n. 15. The Grant of the Citizens and
Burgesses.
who the same day assembled before the Prince, Prelates, and Great Men, and for
the safe coveying of their Ships and Goods granted 2 s. upon every Tun of Wine
coming in, or passing out of the Kingdom, and 6 d. in the Pound of all Goods
for a year.

The next Year the King Rot. Fran. 47 Ed. III. M. 18. A. D. 1373. John Duke of
Lancaster the King's Lieutenant in France and Aquitan.
made his Son John King of Castile and Leon, and Duke of Lancaster, his
Lieutenant, as well in the Kingdom of France as in Aquitan ( tant en nostre
Roialme de France come in Aquitaigne) and other where, giving him Power to take
and receive in his Name, and by his Authority, to his Peace, Grace, Obedience,
and Subjection, all the Cities, Towns, Burghs, Castles, Fortresses, and Places
in those Parts, and their Inhabitants, that would come and return into his
Peace, etc. and to remit and pardon all manner of evil Practices The great
Power given unto him.
( toutes maneres de Malefices) Trespasses, Excess, Theft, Homicide, and all
manner of Treasons: To re-call all Banished and Exiled Persons, and to
re-establish and render to them all their Goods they had forfeited, and to
restore them entirely to their Countries, with all their ancient Privileges
they were used to enjoy. To give to those that deserved well in his Wars Towns,
Castles, Fortresses, Lands, and Rents, etc. in Heritage, during their
Westminster June 12. 1373. and 47th of his Reign of England, etc.

The Duke of Lancaster having this Power, Claus. 57 Ed. III. M. 25. Dors.
Prayers having been made for his good Success, Mezeray, f. 393. Froys. c. 310,
311.
arrived with an Army at Calais July, which he divided into three Bodies or
Battles, marched through, and pillaged Artois, Picardy, Champagne, Fores,
Avergne, and Limosin; and so into Guyen and to Bordeaux, where he came about
Christmas with a shattered and His ill Conduct.
unserviceable Army, having Walls. f. 187. lin. 16.
lost many Men, and most of his Horses, for want of Rest, Victuals, and Forage,
without any Battle or considerable Engagement.

Mezeray F. 393. The King of France his Policy
reports it to have been the constant Resolution King of France, not to hazard
any main Battle against the English; but directed his Forces should be so
lodged every Night, as next Morning to follow them, always galling and
disturbing them, falling upon their Parties, and Detachments keeping so near
them, as to prevent their being supplied with Provision and Forage, and by that
means to defeat great Armies by in marching his Army.
little and little, and make them unserviceable; which was the present case:
The Duke of Lancaster, though he marched Triumphantly Dukes of Anjou and
Burgundy, and Constable of France, his Army was baffled without Fighting, and
mightily weakened.

While the Duke of Lancaster marched thus through France Summons to Parliament.
from Calais to Bordeaux, his Father Summoned a Parliament to meet on the morrow
of St. Edmund the King, or 21st of November, which was that Year on Monday: In
the Writs of Rot. Claus. 42 Ed. III. M. 13. Dors. A. D. 1373.
Summons Ibm. What Knights, Esquires, Citizens, and Bur^^sses were to be chosen.
Quod de Comitatu tuo Eligi facias duos Milites Gladiis cinctos, seu Armigeros
de dicto Comitatu Digniores, and Probiores, and in actibus Armorum Magis
Expertos and Discretos, and non alterius Conditionis:) And of every City of
that County Two Citizens, and of every Burgh Two Burgesses ( de Discretioribus
and magis Sufficientibus, qui in Navigio, ac in Excercitio Merchandisarum
noticiam habent meliorem) of the most Discreet and Sufficient, who had the
greatest Skill in Shipping and Merchandising.

The King, Prince, Prelates, Earls, Barons, Great Men, and Commons, being
assembled in the Painted Chamber ( le Roi, Prince, Prelatz, Countes, Barons,
Grantz, and Comunes en la Chamber de Peinte assemblez) Sir John Knivet then
Chancellor, declared the cause of Summons, Rot. Parl. 47 Ed. III. n. 2. The
cause of Summons declared. The Peace broken by the French.
telling the Lords and Commons they knew well, That after the Peace between the
King and his Adversaries of France, apparently broken by them, the King had
many times sent great Numbers of Men at Arms, and others, over Sea to recover
his Rights, and to restrain the Malice of his Enemies; and lately had sent his
Son the King of Castile and Leon, and Duke of Lancaster, Malice of his
Adversaries, This must be in the beginning of their March, and before the
Armies of France attended their motion, and hindered their glorious and easy
Progress.
who by their Good and Noble Conduct ( queux par my lour bon and noble
Government) and Feats of Arms, have done great Damages and Destructions to his
Enemies, as they knew well, to the great Honor, Quiet, and Tranquillity of the
King, the Clergy, and all others of the Kingdom: That the Sum granted last
Parliament to the King in Aid of his Wars, though great and heavy upon the People,
yet the King exponded Ibm. n. 3.
That the Great Men and others, who ventured their Lives and Fortunes for, and
to defend them from their Enemies, ought to be well refreshed and comforted
with Force and Aid many ways ( busoignent bien de estre refreschez and
confortez de Force and de Eide par plusors vies) and that as speedily as might
be, as it was well known to many of them who had been in the same Condition.
The Enemy of France makes himself strong, etc.
That also the Enemy of France made himself as strong as he

Wherefore (he said) the King beseeched and charged them ( Ibm. n. 4.
par quoi nostre Seigneur le Roi, vous supply and charge) That considering the
Perils and Damages might happen to the Kingdom and all the People for these
Causes, they would consult upon the matter, and give the King such Advice, as
might be for the Safety of him, the Kingdom, and themselves.

And further said, Ibm. The King wills, That all Petitions and particular
Business remain in suspense, until his was dispatched.
That the Business requiring speedy dispatch, the King would that all manner of
Petitions, and other particular Business might remain in suspense, until this
had a good Issue: ( Le Roi voet que toutees manner de Petitions, and autres
singulers Busoignes de moergent en suspens tanque cette soit mys a bon fin.)
And then commanding the Commons ( and commanda as Comunes) to consider and give
good Counsel and Advice upon

At which time Ibm. n. 5. The Commons desire a Committee of Lords to treat with
them.
some of the Commons, in Name of the rest, went to the Lords, and prayed they
might have some Bishops, Earls, and Barons, with whom they might treat and
confer, for the better Issue of the Matter was enjoined them ( sur la matire
que lour estoient enjoynt) and desired the Bishops of London, Winchester, and
Bath and Wells, the Earls of Arundel, March, and Salisbury, Monsieur Guy Bryan,
and Monsieur Henry le Scrop. And it was agreed they should go to the Commons,
and Treat with them in the Chamberlain's Chamber. And there having been
Deliberation between the Great Men and Commons, until Tuesday the Eve of St.
Andrew, on which Day the King, Prince, Prelates, Great Men, and Commons, being
in the White Chamber, the Commons Granted les Comunes granteront) the King an
Aid for the Wars against his Enemies, and delivered a Schedule thereof to the
King, which was read, and begins thus: ( Les Seigneurs and Comunes Dengleterre
ont Grante a nostre Seigneur le Roi en ceste present Parliament la Quinzeine,
The Grant of a Tax.
etc.) The Lords and Commons of England have Granted to the King in this
present Parliament a Fifteenth, etc. The effect of the Grant was, Two 15ths to
be levied in two Years, according to the ancient manner; to be paid at the
Feasts of the Purification Penticost: If the War ended the first Year, the
Second 15th not be paid. Also Six pence upon every Pound value of Merchandise
going out of the Kingdom, except upon Woolls, Leather, and Woollfells, Wine,
etc. And of every Ton of Wine Two shillings for two Years, upon the same
Condition. Likewise the Subsidy of Wool to be received after Michaelmas next
coming, without Condition for the first Year, and under the same Condition for
the second. These were granted so as no England for those two Years. The
Commons prayed what was granted might be spent in maintaining the War; and that
no Knights of Shires or Esquires, Citizens or Burgesses returned for this
Parliament might be Collectors of this Tax.

All things now went backward in France; nothing from thence The French Towns
and Countries in Aquitan revolt.
but the loss of Towns and small Countries in Aquitan, either by Force or
Revolt, many voluntarily and by Inclination becoming French, and putting
themselves under the Obedience of that King. The Particulars might swell the
History; but the knowledge of them at present is not of much moment. Fol. 8^.
lin. 7.
Walsingham says, That when the Duke of Lancaster came out of Gascony into
England, in the 48th of Edward III. about the Month of July, all Aquitan
revolted from the King of England except Bordeaux and Bayon.

The Pope in this Posture of Affairs was very sollicitous to procure The Pope
mediates a Peace.
a Peace between the Two Nations, and used all Endeavors toward it, and
oftentimes prayed and required both Kings by his Letters, solemn Messengers,
and lastly by his Nuncio's, the Archbishop of Ravenna and Bishop of
Carpentras, who frequently went backward and forward between both Parties, to
make them inclinable and condescend to a good Peace and Accord between each
other, as may be seen in the Rot. Fr^n. 49 Ed III. M. 2.
Record of the following Truce, both in the Preface of the Commission to John
King of Castile and Leon, Duke of Lancaster, by Edward III. and in the
Commission of King Charles of France to his Brother Philip Duke of Burgundy: (
Savoir faisons que come nostre tresseint Pierele Pape, eit plusours foitz nous
pry and requis par ses Lettres and fait prier and requirer, par ses solennes
Messagers, and Darreinment par Reverentz Piers in Dieu l'Ercevesque de Ravenna,
and l'Evesque de Carpentras, de incliner and condescendre a bon Paix and Accord
ovesque nostre Adversair (so in both Commissions) etc. The Commission to the
Duke of Burgundy, bears Date at Paris the first of March, 1374. and 11th of
King Charles of France, and 48th of Edwad III. and that to the Duke of
Lancaster was Dated at Westminster, June 8. and 49th of Edward III.

This Ibm. A Truce in order to a Peace.
Treaty was managed chiefly by the Two Dukes before the Two Nuncio's, and by
their Mediation at Bruges in Flanders, Truce, in order to a Peace between the
Two Kings, their Subjects, Friends, Allies, Aidants, and Adherents, and for all
their Dominions, Lands, Countries, and Places whatsoever, Ibm. A. D. 1375.
to begin on the 27th of June, 1375. the Day of the Date of the Truce in 49th
of Edward III. and end the first Day of July, 1376. and 50th of Edward III. The
Heads of the Articles were these:

All taking of Persons, Fortresses, and other Places; Ibm. The Heads of the
Articles.
all Pillaging, Robberies, Burnings, and all other Feats of War (touz
Pilleries, Robberies, Arceurs, and tout autre fait de Guerre) through all the
Realms, Lands, and Dominions of one Party and the other, to cease during the
Truce.

Neither Party to suffer any Subjects or Allies of the other, to change their
Obedience, Subjection, or Alliance.

All Subjects of either Party to remain in the Countries of the other without
Arms, and to Trade and dispatch all other Business there without Disturbance;
but not to enter into Castles, Fortresses, or fortified Towns without License.

Prisoners taken to be released.

No New Forts to be erected.

None of the Subjects or Allies of one Party to do Injury to the Subjects or
Allies of the other, or their Friends, by way of Company, Robbery, or
otherwise; if they did, to be punished so soon as it came to the knowledge of
their Lords, without Request.

All Attempts and Injuries to be repaired without delay.

If the Lands of either Party were invaded by Companions, upon Request they
were to assist each other in freeing their Countries of them.

None to demolish the Houses of one Party or the other, nor destroy
Fruit Trees.

If any evil Action, Attempt, or Enterprise happen, it shall not be a Breach of
the Truce, nor shall War be made therefore. This Truce was Sealed by the Two
Dukes and Pope's Nuncio's at Bruges, on the 27th of June, 1375.

There were certain Ibm.
Mutations, Declarations, and Modifications made, by way of Supplement, in
reference to this Truce, by the Pope's Nuncio's of the same Date; namely,

That Henry King of Castile (the Bastard) and the Lands he held, should be
comprised in the Truce.

That the Duke of Bretagne should in like manner be comprised in it: That War
should cease there, and the King of England and Duke to remove their Forces out
of the Dukedom without delay during the Truce, all but 200 Men to guard the
Towns and Places the Duke held there.

The Two Kings to have Ibm.
Commissioners at Bruges on the 15th of September next coming, to Treat of
Peace. The residue of the Articles are of less moment.

These were confirmed by John King of Castile and Leon, Duke of Lancaster, with
Protestation, That the Title of King of France, given to King Charles,
Adversary to his Father, nor the Title of King of Castile, given to Henry his
Adversary, might in no manner prejudice either of them or their Titles.

In Winter, the 48th of Edward III. the Rot. Fran. 48 Ed. III. M. 6.
Earl of Cambridge and Duke of Bretagne were made the King's Lieutenants in
France; but went not till the next Claus. 49 Ed III. M 46.
Spring, for whose good Success Public Prayers were appointed to be made. In
this Expedition Froys. cap. 313.
there went with the Earl and Duke several Noblemen and Persons of Quality, and
in a short time he recovered many of his Towns in Bretagne; and had laid siege
to the Town of Campelly, Nicholas Carswell and Sir Walter Vrswick, were sent to
him by the Duke of Lancaster, to quit the Siege, and give over that War, as
being included in the Truce made at Bruges.

On the 28th of December next following the Truce, Claus. 49 Ed. III. M. 6.
Dors. Summons to Parliament.
Writs of Summons were sent forth for a Parliament, to meet on the 12th of
February: Afterward, before it met, by Writs Dated Ibm. M 4. Dors.
the 20th of January, the King thought fit to Prorogue it ( duximus
prorogandum) to the Monday after the Feast of St. George; but it sat not till
the next Day, when the Prelates, Dukes, Earls, Barons, and other Great Men, and
Commons, Justices, Sergeants of the Law, and others assembled in the Painted
Chamber before the King; Rot. Parl. 50 Ed. III. n. 2.
( A quel Lendemain s'assemblerent les Prelates, Ducs, Contes, Barons, and les
autres Grantz, and Comunes, Justices, Sergeantz de Ley, and autres, en la
Chamber de Peynte:) And there Sir John Knivet declared the Causes of holding
the Parliament; which

1. The First and Principal was, To advise about the Good Government The cause
of Summons.
and Peace of the Realm of England. 2. The Second, For the Defense and Safety
of the Kingdom, as well by Sea as Land. 3. The Third; To take Order for the
Maintenance of the War with France, and otherwhere, and how and in what manner
it might
And then told them expressly, That what the King always had done, was by their
good Counsel, Comfort, and Assistance ( tout dys par lour bons Conseilx,
Confortes, and Aides) for which the King The Lords advise by themselves, and
the Commons by themselves.
entirely thanked them, and desired they would diligently advise about these
Matters, the Prelates and Lords by themselves, and the Commons by their selves,
and give their Good Answer ( lour bone Responce) as soon as they well could.

The Commons Ibm. n. 8. A Committee of Lords assigned by Parliament to go to the
Commons, etc.
went to their ancient Place, the Chapter House of the Abbey of Westminster,
and the Prelates and Lords went by themselves; and there were assigned in
Parliament ( fuerent assignez in Parliament) the Bishops of London, Norwich,
Carlisle, and St. David's, the Earls of March, Warwick, Stafford, and Suffolk,
They agree about the Grant of a Subsidy.
the Lord Percy, Sir Guy de Bryan, Sir Henry Lescrop, and Sir Richard de
Stafford, to go to the Commons and assist them, in Treating, and Conferring
upon the things before declared: They agreed upon the Grant of a Subsidy, which
begins as follows:

Les Seigneurs and Coes Ib. n. 9.
assemblez en cest present Parliament eantz consideration.) The Lords and
Commons assembled in Parliament, King has, and must be at, for the maintaining
of his Wars, his Noble Estate, and otherwise, granted him the Subsidy of Of
Wool, etc.
Wool, Leather, and Woollfells, as it was granted him in the Parliament holden
at Westminster in the 47th of his Reign, from the Feast of St. Michael next
coming, when the Subsidy then granted ended, to the end of three years; and the
Commons humbly pray the King to be excused, That they gave him no other Subsidy
Pestilence, the Murrain among their Beasts, and destruction of their Grain and
other Fruits, that they could not do otherwise at present, but promised if any
extraordinary Case should happen, they would Aid him to the utmost of their
Power, as they had done before, beyond all the Commons of the World to their
Liege Lord.

After this the Commons considering Ib. n. 10.
the Mischiefs of the show unto the King and Lords of Parliament, That it would
be for the Honor and Profit of the King, and the whole Land, which is grieved
in diverse manners by many Adversities, as well by the Wars of France, Spain,
Ireland, Guyen, Britain, and other-where, so that the Officers about the King,
without The Commons pray Ten or twelve Persons may be added to the King's
Council, etc.
other assistance, were not sufficient for so great Business; wherefore they
pray the King's Council may be enforced or augmented with Lords, Prelates, and
others, to the number of Ten or Twelve, King, so as no great business should
pass, without their Assent and Advice, nor small Matters without the Advice and
Assent of Six or Four of them at least, as the Case required.

The which Request the King understanding Ibm. The King grants their Prayer
upon Condition.
it was honorable, and very profitable to him and the whole Realm, granted,
provided always that the Chancellor, Treasurer, and Privy Seal, and all other
the King's Officers, might execute their Offices, King was to assign from time
to time of such as he pleased, who were to be Sworn to keep this Ordinance, and
to do Right to every one, according to their Power, without receiving any
Reward for so doing.

That none of Ib. n. 11. The King's Officers not to receive Gifts, etc.
the King's Officers should receive any Gifts, Fees, or Rewards, other then
their Salaries, Liveries, and Traveling Charges.

The Commons make Protestation, Ib. n. 15. The Commons ready to aid the King
with Body and Goods. Complain of Evil Counselors and Officers.
That they were, and always have been, and will be ready to Aid the King with
their Bodies and Goods, to the utmost of their Power; but they say, it is true,
That if the King had always had about him Loyal Counselors and good Officers,
he had been very rich in Treasure, so as he should not have needed much to have
charged his Subjects with Subsidy, Taillage, or otherways, having respect to
the great Sums of Gold which were brought into the Kingdom for the Ransom of
the Kings of France and Scotland, and other Prisoners. They also say, it
further seems to them, That for the singular Profit and Advantage of some
Private Persons about the King, and their Confederates, the King and Realm were
much impoverished, and many of the Merchants undone; wherefore they thought it
a profitable thing to the King and his whole Kingdom, to have Commons promise
the King, That if he will do Justice, and speedy Execution upon such as should
be found Culpable, and do with them as Law and Reason required, they undertake
he would be so rich as to maintain his Wars, and support his other Affairs for
a long time, without any great Charge to the Commons; and they say further,
That in doing this, he should do a thing Meritorious and pleasing to God, and
much for the Encouragement Three special Points to be amended.
of them, freely to aid him according to their Power: And then propound Three
especial Points to be enquired into and amended.

First, Whereas Ib. n. 16.
the Staple of Wool and other Staple Merchandises and Bullion, was lately
ordained in Parliament to be at Calais, and no where else, for the great profit
of the King and Kingdom, the Advantage and Amendment of the Town, for the
Concourse of Merchants, and their continual Residence there, the said Staple,
Bullion Trade is removed from thence, and like to be lost, by the procurement
and counsel of the said Private Persons about the King, and their Confederates,
for their singular Profit, to the great damage and prejudice of the King and
his Realm, and destruction of the Town of Calais. Secondly, Whereas Ibm.
the King had need for diverse Sums of Money for his Wars and otherwise, some
Persons by consent and contrivance of the said Private Persons about him, made
agreement King upon Usury, taking more from the King for Interest then they
Bargained for, to the Deceit and grievous Damage of the King. Thirdly, Whereas
Ibm.
the King was Debtor to diverse People upon Record in great Sums several had by
Assent and Contrivance of the said Private Persons, bargained with his
Creditors for the 10th, 20th, or 100th Penny, and procured the King to pay the
whole Debt, in Deceit of the King, and his Creditors, for the singular Profit
of
Upon these, or some of these Points, Ib. n. 17. Richard Lion impeached by the
Commons.
several were impeached by the Commons; First, Richard Lion Merchant of London,
and Farmer of the King's Subsidy and Customs: He put himself upon the King's
Grace, and submitted his Body, Lands, and Goods to the King's Pleasure: Ib. n.
19. His Judgment.
He was adjudged to be Imprisoned during the King's Pleasure, to loose the
Franchise of the City, never to bear Office under the King, nor approach his

The Lord Latimer was Ib. n. 21. The Lord Latimer accused.
accused ( par clamor des Communes) by the Clamor of the Commons, upon the
Heads and Articles, and as a Confederate with Lion, who tho he seemed to make a
good satisfactory Defense, yet by the Prelates and Lords ( in plein Parliament)
in full Parliament, was adjudged Ib. n. 28. His Judgment.
to be Imprisoned, and make Fine and Ransom at the Will of the King; and
further, upon the Petition of the Commons, the King granted he should never
have Office under him, or be of his Privy Council: He was Ib* n. 29. His great
Bail.
Bailed by Four Bishops, the Archbishop of York being one, Three Earls, the
Prior of St. John of Jerusalem, and Twenty six Barons, with promise, That
during the Parliament he should appear before the King and Lords, to answer
further to the Articles, of which he was accused.

William Else Ib. n. 31. William Else accused.
of Great Yarmouth, was also accused ( par la surmyse des Communes) by the
Surmise of the Commons, as Deputy to Richard Lion, Farmer of the Subsidy of 6
d. in the Pound of all Merchandises granted to the King; of many Extorsions in
Collecting of them, and other Evil Practices: Ib. n. 32 His Judgment.
Notwithstanding his Answer, which seemed satisfactory and sufficient, he

It displeased the King Ib. n. 35. Alice Perer*s Forfeiture and Banishment.
that Women should pursue and solicit Business in the King's Court, and
therefore forbad all Women, especially Alice Perers, for the future to do it,
upon pain to forfeit whatever the said Alice could, and to be banished the
Realm.

Sitting this Parliament, the Prince of Wales, King Edward's The Death of the
Prince of Wales.
Eldest Son, died on the 8th of June, being Trinity Sunday: Ib. n. 50.
The Commons humbly pray the King, That for the great Comfort of the whole
Kingdom ( en grand confort de tout le Roialme) he would order the Noble Child
or Youth, Richard of Bordeaux, His Son Richard of Bordeaux brought into
Parliament, and made Prince of Wales, etc.
Son and Heir of Edward, late his Eldest Son, Prince of Wales, to come into the
Parliament, that the Lords and Commons might see and Honor him as the true Heir
apparent of the Realm; Which Request was granted; and at the same time the
Bishops, Lords Temporal, and Commons, applied to the King, to make him Prince
of Wales; Which was done.

The Commons Petition, Ib. n. 57. The Commons Petition about Justices of the
Peace.
That Justices of the Peace may be named in every County by the Lords and
Knights of the County in Parliament, and Sworn before the King's Council, and
not to be removed without consent in Parliament, and that they might be allowed
Wages.

The King's Answer was, Ibm. To. The King's Answer.
They should be named by him, continual Council, and as to Wages he would
advise.

The Major, Aldermen, and Commons of London, show unto the King, Ib. n. 143.
The Grievances of the City of London.
they were impoverished and brought to nothing by reason their Franchises
granted and confirmed by him and his Noble Progenitors, were restrained, and in
a great measure taken from them, and assign their chief Grievance to be, That
any Stranger might have a House and dwell in the City, be a Broker, and buy and
sell all sorts of Merchandises by Retail, and Stranger Franchises of the City,
by which the Merchants of the City were much impoverished, the Navy or Shipping
much impaired, the Private Transactions of the Nation discovered by those
Strangers to his Enemies, by Spies and others lodging in their Houses: And then
pray, it They pray Remedy.
would please the King and his good Council, in Charity, to order in that
Parliament, that Merchant Strangers should be restrained in these Practices, and
that the Major, Aldermen, and Commons of the said City, might enjoy their
Franchises, notwithstanding any Statute or Ordinance made to the contrary.

The King's Answer was, Ibm. To. The King's Answer upon Condition, etc.
That upon Condition the City good Government, to the Honor of him, and Profit
of the Kingdom, from thence forward no Stranger should have a House to be a
Broker, nor Sell any Goods by Retail within the City or Suburbs,
notwithstanding any Statute or Ordinance to the contrary, saving to the German
Merchants of the Ha^s-Towns, their Franchises, Granted and Confirmed to them
His Letters Patents to the same purpose.
by the King and his Progenitors. According to the Purport, and Effect of this
Answer, the Major, Aldermen, and Citizens of London obtained the King's Letters
Patents, Dated the 4th of November next following.

The Commons Petition the King, That whereas great Riots Ib. n. 164. The
Commons Petition against Riots.
were committed in several parts of the Nation, by great numbers of Armed Men,
that the Sheriffs might raise the Posse Comitatus, or Power of the County, to
suppress them, and that the Sheriffs and Justices of Peace might inform the
King's Council of such Rebels ( de tiels Rebels) as refused to go with them.

The Answer was, Ibm. To. The King's Answer.
The King by Advice of his great Council would order Remedy, if need were, but
in the mean time let the Statutes concerning that Matter be put in due
Execution. This Parliament ended July the 6th, in the 50th of Ed. III.

Whether the Two Kings sent their Commissioners to Bruges on the 15th of
September 1375, as was agreed on, or if so, what was done then, I find not,
however the Truce continued; for in The last Truce continued.
the next year, in a Commission to Thomas de Felton, Seneschal or Aquitan, and
others, Dated the 28th of May, in the 50th of Edward the Third, for Reforming
whatever had been done against the Form of the Truce in that Duchy, and
punishing the Offenders, it appears, that the Truce had then been lately
renewed and prolonged from the last day of June next coming, when it was to
have ended, to the first of April, which should be in the year 1377, or 51st of
Edward the Third. Holinshed Fol 411. col. 1. n. 60.
says, it was again continued to the first of May, and then the

But the King many months before the Expiration of the Truce, The King of
France designing against King Edward.
had notice of a Design forming against him by the King of France, having made
an Alliance with Spain and Scotland to that purpose, wherefore on the first of
December, in the 50th of his Reign, he issued Clause 50 Ed. III. M 6. Dors.
Part 2. He calls a Parliament.
Writs for a Parliament to meet on the Quinden of St. Hillary, or 27th of
January next coming, at Westminster, which was held by Commission to the Prince
of Wales, then about Bishop of St. David's being Chancellor.

Who Rot. Parl. 51 Ed. III. n. 11, 12, 13* The Declaration of the Causes of
Summons.
in his Declaration of the Causes of Summons, moved the Lords and Commons to a
due Love, Affection, and Obedience, toward the King and his Grandchild the
Prince of Wales, and then tells the chief Cause of Summons was for the Defense
of the Land, for that the King having at the Request of the Pope agreed to a
Treaty of Peace, and that there was a Truce made for a time, while a Peace
might be made, which Truce his Adversary of France had broken, and was
preparing for War, and by the assistance of Spain, Scotland, and other Enemies,
to destroy the King, Kingdom, and English Language; To obviate this Design, and
the Malice of his Enemies, and to Maintain the Peace of the Nation within and
without, by their Counsel and Advice, was his great Intention, as also to know
how the Expense Bishop to say any thing against the Pope, Monsieur Robert de
Ashton, Chamberlain to the King, was appointed to propound how further
Provision might be made against his Usurpations* as should by a Bill be showed
in this Parliament.

At another Ib. n. 18.
meeting of the Prelates, Lords, and Commons in Parliament, the Commons in the
King's Name were directed to go to their Old Place the Chapter House of the
Abbey of Westminster, treat and advise how due Resistance might be made to the
Enemies of the Nation, for the safety of the King, Kingdom, Navy, and
themselves, and how Money might be most speedily raised to the least Grievance
of the People; The Prelates and Lords Treating likewise about the same Matters,
there was A Committee of Lords appointed by Parliament to Treat with the Commons.
assigned in Parliament, to have Conference with the Commons for their better
Information, the Bishops of Lincoln, Chichester, Hereford, and Salisbury, the
Earls of Arundel, Warwick, Salisbury, and Stafford, the Lords Percy, Roos,
Fitzwalter, and Basset.

To Maintain his Ib. n. 19.
Wars, considering the great Charges the King was to be at for them, the
defense of the Kingdom and otherwise, the Lords and Commons Grant him Four
pence of the A Tax granted.
Goods of every Person ( des biens de chescune person) of the Kingdom, Male
and Female, above Fourteen years of Age, except very Beggars; and most humbly
pray their Liege Lord, he would please to excuse them, that they could grant
him no greater Subsidy, pur grands perdes sur la mere come autrement) that they
were unable at present.

And the Commons Ib. n. 20. Treasurers for the Tax.
prayed the King, he would please to Name Two Earls, and Two Barons, that
should be Treasurers as well of this Subsidy, as of that the Clergy was yet to
grant, and also of the Subsidy of Wool, Pelts, and Leather granted Treasurer of
England should receive nothing, or any ways meddle herein.

But afterward, when they had Ib. n. 21. Who were laid aside, and the High
Treasurer made Receiver.
considered what Sum, the Wages of such Four Treasurers, would amount unto by
the year, ( quel sum les Gaiges des sieux quatre Tresoiriers, resident ^ur
celle fait amonteroit per an) the Commons departed from this Request, and
prayed the High Treasurer might be Receiver to the use of the War in manner
accustomed.

The Ib. n. 32. The Commons Petition,
Commons in this Parliament beseeched the King, That the Patent lately granted (
viz. November the 4th, as above)* by the great Council, to the Major, Aldermen,
and Commons of the City of London, upon the Article, That no Strange Merchant
That the Patent granted to London, might be granted to other Cities and Burghs.
ought to Sell to another Strange Merchant, any Goods or Merchandise, to Sell
again, in manner as in the said Patent is more fully contained, might be
renewed, and granted as well to other Cities and Burghs as to them, with a
Charter or Clause of Confirmation; Of which Patent the Copy follows:

Edward Ib. Rot. Parl. 51 Ed. III. n. 33. The Patent it self.
King of England, etc. To whom these present Letters shall come, Greeting: Our
Beloved and Faithful the Major, Aldermen, and the rest of the Citizens of the
City of London, by their Petition exhibited before us and our Great Council,
containing amongst other things, That for that all Strangers do freely sell all
sorts of Merchandise whatsoever, within the Liberty of the said City, that they
may be sold again as the Citizens do; whereas the said Strangers, according to
the Liberty of the said City anciently obtained, ought not, nor could so do:
Whereby as well the said Citizens are much impoverished, and Goods and
Merchandise much more dear, etc. for Relief of the Citizens, and Common Profit
of our People, under a grievous Forfeiture to us to command they shall be
restrained. We being favorably inclined to the said Petition, Will and Grant,
That no Stranger within the Liberty of the City aforesaid, shall sell any
Merchandise to a Stranger, or any ways presume to do it, that they may be sold
again, until by the Noble and Great Men of our Kingdom (per Proceres and
Magnates Regni nostri) it shall be duly debated in our next Parliament, whether
our present Grant may for the future redound to the Disprofit, or Common Profit
of our People: Saving always to the Lords of our Kingdom, and all others, that
they may buy such Merchandise of all Men in Gross for their own Use; and saving
also to the German Hanse Merchants the Liberties Granted and Confirmed to them
by us and our Progenitors. In Witness whereof we have caused to be made these
Letters Patents. Witness our self at Westminster, November. 4. in the Year of our
Reign of England 50th, of France 37th.

The Answer to the Petition above, with which this Patent was delivered and
presented by the Commons, was,

Le Roy Ibm. To. The Answer to the Petition.
voet estre inform: The King will be informed.

At the same time the Ib. n. 34. A Petition of the Commons and Citizens of
London about their Corner.
Commons, with the Mayor, Aldermen, and Commons of the City of London, Petition
the King, That for diverse Mischiefs that often happened in the said City, by
reason the Coroner was not Justiciable ( nest pas justisable) by the Major,
Aldermen, or other Officers: That they might choose a Coroner of practiced in
many Cities and Towns of the Land, they answering to the King in manner as
appertained to the said Office. The King's Answer was,

Le Roy Ibm.
my voet, mye depart a son ancien Droit: The King The King's Answer to it.
will not depart from his ancient Right.

The Commons Petition the Ibm n 35. The Commons Petition that Foreigners might
be removed out of the Land, etc.
King, That for many Causes well known to his Privy Council as to them, That it
would be profitable Foreigners were commanded out of it during the Wars, unless
they were Merchants and Artificers which were not Adherents to his Enemies, and
such as their stay were advantageous to the Reaalm; and for that he was their
Liege Lord ( and pur le que voz esterz nostre Seigneur Liege, etc.) and had the
Power of doing Justice in Right of his Crown, in all things Temporal within his
Kingdom, and that they have no Obedience of any thing Temporal, but to him as
their King and Liege Lord: That he would please to Order and Command, That none
of his Lieges be Farmer or Servant to any that have Estates in England, unless
to such as inhabit there, or such as were in his Legiance, and had special
Leave to live out of the Kingdom: And that he would please to Command his Sage
Council, to add more to this matter, that might be needful for the Commons make
Protestations before God Himself, and all the Prelates and Clercs which were at
that Parliament, That their Intent and Will was, That the True Estate of Holy
Church shall not by them be Blemished in any Point, but otherwise preserved and
kept safe, according to your Pleasure. The Answer was,

Le Roy and les Ibm. To. The King's Answer.
Grantz de la Terre s'adviserent, and en ordeneront que mien and y soit
Affoire: The King and the Great Men of the Land will Advise, and order what is
best to be done.

And further in this case they Petition, Ibm. n. 36. They Petition against
Provisors.
That all Provisors of Benefices from Rome, and that their Officers or Servants
may be put out of the King's Protection, if they Sue, Prosecute, or any way
Disturb, or cause to be Excommunicated the True Patrons. This was the Answer:

The Pope has promised Redress, Ibm. The King's Answer.
and if he makes it not, the Laws in this case shall be in force.

Amongst their Petitions in this Parliament we find the Ibm. n. 75. The Commons
pray the Judgment against the Lord Latimer may be reversed.
Commons pray the King and Noble Lords of Parliament, That whereas in the last
Parliament, by untrue Suggestions, and without due Process, the Lord Latimer,
one of the Peers of the Realm, and sufficient to be of the King's Council, as
well for his Wars as otherwise, was outed of all Offices, and Privy Council
with the King (estoit oustrez de toutz Offices, and des Privez Consielx entrour
le Roy;) That he may by Award of this present Parliament, be restored to his
former Estate and Degree, to the great Profit of the Kingdom.

The King Ibm. To. The King grants their Prayer^
wills, at the Prayer of several Prelates and Lords of Parliament ( d'aucuns
Prelates and Seigneurs de Parliament) and also at the Prayer of the Commons.

In the last Day of the Parliament, when the Petitions of the Commons had been
read and answered, the Speaker Sir Thomas Ibm. n. 87. The Speaker prays, That
the Judgments against all such who had been Impeached last Parliament, might be
reversed.
Hungerford, said before the Prelates, Lords, and Commons, That whereas many
People, as well Men as Women, had been Impeached in the last Parliament without
due Process, and were Judged in certain Peynes, and foreclosed of the commune*
Liberty, which every Loyal Subject ought to enjoy; and therefore prayed it
would please his Majesty, to restore them to their former Estates, King
presently demanded, If their Request was made for all that were impeached? And
he answered, Their Request was all. It was then told them, They must declare
distinctly in Writing, for whom and why they Petitioned: And presently the same
Day Seven Bills ( i. e. Petitions) were delivered to the Clerk of the
Parliament, whereof the first Two do here follow:

To our most Ibm. n. 88. The same Prayer for the impeached Persons in
particular.
Dread and Noble Lord our Lord the King pray the Commons of your Realm, That
whereas your Liege Rich. Lion, by hasty Process was adjudged to the Tower of
London during your Majesty's Pleasure; That it would please your Gracious
Lordship (que ple a vostre Graciouse Seigneurie) to Grant him your Favor to be
restored to the Law, his Goods, Lands, and Tenements; for according to Law no
cause of Forfeiture could be found in him.

To their Ibm. n. 89.
most Dread and Gracious Lord the King and his Sage Council in this present
Parliament, his Commons make Supplication (supplient ses Comunes) That whereas
Alice Perrers, by untrue Suggestion, and undue Process, was in the last
Parliament foreclosed of the Common Liberty, which every Loyal Liege of the
King, as well Men as Women, ought freely to enjoy, unless they be convict of a
Crime or evil Deed, for which they are to forfeit it, they would please, for
the Love of God and right Justice, to have Consideration, That the said Alice
was never present in Parliament, nor otherwise duly admitted to answer any thing
for which she was Judged, and for this cause to repeal the Judgment, if any
were, and cause her to be restored entirely to her former Estate; the said
Judgment, or any Prohibition made against the said Alice in the same Parliament
notwithstanding.

The other Five Bills or Petitions were according to this Form for five other
Persons; namely, John de Leycester, Adam de Bury, Walter Sporier, John Peachy
of London, and William Else of Yarmouth.

But there was not, nor could be any Answer made to them, The Parliament ended.
Ibm. n. 95.
because the Parliament ended the same Day before any thing could be done in
them.

Sitting this Parliament, the Claus. 51 Edw. III. M. 16.
King was informed the French were gotten to Sea, and had done much hurt upon
the Coasts; prolong the Truce: To which purpose, on the 20th of Rot. Fran. 51
Ed. III. M. 7.
Feb. he appointed several Commissioners to Treat with the Commissioners of the
King of France, before the Pope's Legates; but nothing was done in the matter;
the Legates only propounded a Match between Richard Prince of Wales, and Mary
the King of France his Daughter. And afterward there The Truce continued.
was another Meeting of Commissioners at Monstreul, without other effect than
continuing the Truce until the first of May next following, Holinshed.

Mezeray Fol. 394.
says King Edward was now much desirous of Peace, and was willing to relinquish
many Articles of the Treaty of Bretigny; but was prevented by Death.

On the 26th of April, another Rot. Fran. 51 Ed III. M. 3.
Commission was made to the Bishop of St. David's, John Bishop of Hereford, and
others, by which Power was given them to Treat at Monstreul with the French
Commissioners, and to compose all Differences, Wars, and

This Year John Walls. f. 191, 192. Knighton, col. 2647. n. 10.
Wyclif was convented before the Archbishop of Canterbury and Bishop of
London, for his Opinions contrary to the Opinions of those Times, at the
Blackfriars, London, where were present John Duke of Lancaster and the Lord
Percy. How Wycliff behaved himself at this time. See the l^tter end of Church.
Affairs in this Reign. The Citizens of London their Rage against John Duke of
Lancaster.
The Duke gave the Bishop of London some harsh words; which gave the Citizens
such Disturbance, that they in a great Tumult would have murdered him, and
pulled down or set fire to his House called the Savoy, had not the Bishop
interposed, and kept them from doing it. To save himself he left his Dinner,
and gat privately away to Kemington near Lambeth, where the Prince was with his
Mother: So that not finding him, they only in the Holinsh. f. 412. n. 30.
Hypod. N^^str. f. 53. n. 40. King Edward's Death.
this the present Major and Aldermen were put out of their Places, and others
put in by the Duke's Power, who then in the King's Weakness and Infirmities was
his Assistant and Viceroy, and had Directed all the Affairs of the Nation for
some time; of which Infirmities and Sickness daily increasing, Walls. Hist. f.
192. n. 30. Hypod. Neustr. f. 531. n. 50.
he Died at his House of Shene, June 21. 1377. having Reigned 50 Years, 4
Months, and 28 Days.

Church Affairs.
THE old Controversy was still continued, inter Regnum and Sacerdotium,
between the Secular and Ecclesiastic Governments, or between the King and Pope
concerning the Regalia in Church Matters, and concerning the Clergy. In the 4th
of his Reign, the King Append. n. 97.
wrote to the Pope (which was John XXII.) concerning the Treasury of York
having been given by Provision Cardinal, against the Rights of his Crown and
Prerogative, and to the inestimable Damage of the Kingdom, that he would revoke
his Provision; and supplicates him to direct the Cardinal not to contend
against William de Maza his Clerk, that was in Possession of it by his
Presentation, about such a Novelty and Usurpation; it being his, and always had
been the Right of his Progenitors, in the Vacancy of the Archbishopric; and
to strengthen that Right, vouches a Precedent in the Court of King's Bench, in
the time of his Grandfather Edward I.

He also Ibm.
wrote to Robert de Wodehouse Archdeacon of Richmond, That he had notice, that
he and some others were contriving, by diverse Processes, to put the Cardinal in
corporal Possession of the Treasury of York, to the great Prejudice of his
Crown; and strictly prohibited him, That he should do nothing to the impairing
of his Right; and if any thing had been done by himself, or others by his
procuring, he should without delay revoke

The Archbishop of Canterbury, The Bishop of Lincoln, Manser Marmyon, The
Bishop of Worcester, The Bishop of Salisbury, The Prior of Lewis, The Prior of
Linton, The Dean of the Church of Aukland, Mr. Richard de Byntworth, The
Archdeacon of Lincoln, Mr. Ischer de Concoret, Mr. Guido de Calm.
In the 10th of his Reign, the King Append. n. 98.
wrote to the Pope ( Benedict X.) That his Progenitors had long since Founded
and Endowed the Church of England, and freely collated to the Cathedral
Churches by their Royal Right: That afterward upon the Petition of the Clergy,
and for the Reverence and at the Request of the Pope that then was, the King
that then was Granted to the Chapiters of the Cathedral Churches, Power of
Choosing a Bishop License to Choose a Bishop; and when he was Chosen, to present
him to the King for his Assent, before he proceeded further in the Business of
his Election: And then after he had been Confirmed, he was to request of the
King the Temporalities belonging to the Bishopric, and do him Fealty for them.
And what was done against this Bishopric of Norwich being vacant, he had given
the Prior and Chapter leave to Choose, who presented their Elect to him; but
having a desire to be fully satisfied concerning something he had heard of him,
before he gave his Consent, by the Advice of Wise Men, he gave him a short Day
to receive his Answer: But he scornfully rejected this way of Proceeding, and
prosecuted the Business of his Election in the Court of Rome, to his Reproach,
and in Contempt of his Royal Depression of his Royal Prerogative, and manifest
Danger of Disheritance. Wherefore he implored his Favor to take the Premises
into due Consideration, and deny him Audience for the Confirmation of his
Election, until he had obtained his Assent, according to the Form aforesaid;
which he was ready to grant without difficulty, if there was no reasonable
cause for which he ought not to do it: Concluding, That if he should not take
notice of this Supplication of the Elect of Norwich to the Pope, yet his
Subjects would not suffer it.

The King supposing Rot. Romans 16 Ed. III. n. 2.
his Sacred Palace (who were such to whom the Pope referred the Hearing of
Causes in his Palace) though otherwise good Lawyers, yet might be ignorant of
the Laws and Customs of England, wrote to them, and gave them notice, That all
Causes about Right of Patronage whatsoever, were pleaded, determined, and ended
in his Court before his Justices, and ought not to be discussed any Married a
Woman that was Patroness of any Church or Ecclesiastic Benefice, and had Issue
by her, and she died before him, upon any Vacancy he was to present during his
Life, and his Clerc was to be instituted by those unto whom it belonged: And
further, That if any Tenants in Capite died possessed of Lands, to which the
Patronage of any Benefices were annexed, that if there happened any Vacancies
after the Death of the Tenant, while the Lands were in the King's hands, it was
his Right to present to them. And therefore desired, that if any of these
Matters came before them, they might be duly considered, and nothing done in
prejudice of his Court, or the Laws of his Kingdom.

And in these Stat. at large, 14 Ed. III.
Presentiments, as also of those made in the Vacancies of Arch-Bishopricks,
Bishoprics, a Plenarty, or that the King, than if they had been made in Right
of his Crown, until by the Statute for the Ibm.
Clergy, made upon the Petition of the Archbishops, Bishops, and Clergy, in
the 14th Year of his Reign, Chap. 2. he granted it should be a Bar to him and
his Heirs. Before that, the King had his Remedy against the Incumbent, if he
had not been duly presented: For then Institution, though upon a wrong
Presentation against a common Person, Plenarty; but to make it against the
King, Induction or actual Possession of the Church, was also required: Yet
before this Statute neither could be pleaded against him.

In the 17th Year of his Reign, there was Complaint made in Parliament Ro^.
Parl. 17 Ed. III. n. 39.
of Strangers holding so many Benefices in England; That the Alms which wont to
be, were not performed; That much of the Treasure of the Land was carried
beyond Sea, for the Maintenance of the King's Enemies, the Secrets of the
Nation Clercs of the Nation the less advanced: That of late there were many
Cardinals made, to Two whereof the Pope had granted, by his Bulls, Benefices in
this Land, to the value of Six thousand Marks: ( Sur ce ore de novel plusours
Cardinalx sont faitz, don't le Pape par ses Bulls ad grantez as deux de eux,
Benefitz en ceste Terre a la Montance de vj. M. Marcs.) That the Commons
understood, that one of the Cardinals, namely, he of Perigort, was the most
fierce Enemy, King's Designs of any in the Court of Rome: That in time the
Nation by such Grants would be filled with Strangers, and in a short space no
Clerc of his Country, though the Son of a Great Lord, or other, would find any
Benefice to which he might be advanced; and this to the great Damage of the
King and whole Commons, by reason of such Reservations and Provisions: For
which things the Commons pray Remedy (par la dite Comune ne le poet, ne le voet
plus endurere) for that Foundations and Advowsons of Arch-Bishopricks,
Bishoprics, Abbeys, Priories, Churches Parochial, and the whole Spiritual
Revenue of this Land, were of the Foundations of the Kings, Earls, Barons, and
the Commons, (sont des Fundacions des Roys, Countes, Barons, and de la
Comunes:) That it would please the King to write to the Pope under his Great
Seal, and the Peers and Great Men of the Land under their Seals, That he would
cease from putting these Burdens Peers or Great Men would not Seal such a
Letter, the Commons would not hold him a Well-wisher to the King's Profit, or
theirs: And in case the Pope should not comply with what was desired, they pray
the King to encourage and maintain such as should, and would endeavor to
remove this Burden, and put such out of his Protection as would not. They also
pray him to Command all the Peers and Great Men of the Land, to stay at this
Parliament quietly, until these things should be perfected and sealed as above:
Et la Comune pri a nostre Seigneur le Roy qil voille comander as touz les Piers
and Grantz de la Terre qils demoergent en pees a le Parliament tanque ceste
chooses soient perfaites and enseales sicome desus est dit.) And for the great
Damage that might happen in the mean time, he would please to grant his
Prohibitions Ministers, and Proctors of the Great Bishops, not to meddle in
this matter, until the Pope had wrote back his Pleasure.

The Ibm. To.
Answer to this was, That the King understood the Mischief, and would that the
Great Men and Commons should order Remedy and Amendment, and he would agree to
it ( and voet que enter les Grantz and les Comunes soit ordeigner Remedy and
Amendment, and il sacorder.) And also the King would and Pope about this
matter, as well by himself, as also by the Great Men, and by the Commons.

And Ibm. n. 10.
then the Earls, Barons, and other Nobles, and the whole Communalty of the
Realm ( and puis fu prier a nostre Seigneur le Roy en ce Parliament par Counts,
Barons, and autres Nobles, and tote la Comunalte du Roialme) prayed the King,
That for to avoid and set aside the Damages, Grievance, and Oppression of the
England (and de Seint Eglise d'Angleterre) which were done there by the
Reservations and Provisions of the Court of Rome (par Provisions and
Reservations de la Court de Rome) as well of Benefices, as of First Fruits; and
by Impositions of Tenths, and other Burdens, in Disheriting as well the King
and his Crown, as the said Earls, Barons, and other Nobles, he would please to
command to be considered certain Petitions of the Earls, Barons, and Commons of
the Realm in the time of his Grandfather, Carlisle, in the 35th Year of his
Reign; and also the Agreement and Judgment made upon them in that Parliament.
Their Prayer was granted, and search was ordered to be made in the Rolls and
Remembrances of the said Parliament, where amongst other things it was found,
That upon the showing of the Earls, Barons, and Commons their Petitions, The
Statute of Provisors made at Carlisle, Ed. I.
That Holy Church in this Nation had been founded in the State of Prelacy, by
his Grandfather and his Progenitors, the Earls, Barons, Antecestors, to inform
the People in the Holy Faith, and for Prayers, Alms, and Hospitality, to be
made, done, and kept in the Places where the Churches were founded, for the
Souls of the Founders and their Heirs, and all Christians: And that certain
Possessions and Lands, in Fee and Advowsons, to a very great Value, were
assigned to the Archbishops, Bishops, Abbots, Priors, and other Houses of
Religion, by your said Grandfather and his Progenitors, Earls, Barons, and
other Great Englishmen, Writ of the King's Council.
who had Great Place with his Grandfather, and the Great Men abovesaid, for
their Knowledge and Advice, when they had occasion to make use of them: And
that the Pope that then was, had appropriated to himself the Gifts of such
Possessions and Benefices, by his Provisions and Reservations, and gave and
granted Dignities, Prebendaries, and Churches, to such as never Resided in
England, and to Cardinals and others, as well Strangers as Englishmen, which
could not Reside here, as if he had been true Patron and Advowee of Right, as
he was not: For which things For want of Bishops, and able Dignified Persons of
his own Nation, of which then the King's Council mostly consisted.
perish, England, (de seinte Esglise Dengleterre) and the Disinheriting of his
Grandfather and his Crown, (and des autres Nobles du dit Roialme) and of other
Nobles of the Realm, and in Offense and Destruction of the Laws and Rights of
the Kingdom, to the greatest Damage and Oppression of the People, and
Subversion of the State of the whole Nation, contrary to the Will and Ordinance

By the Assent of the Earls, Barons, Nobles, and Commonalty, considering
entirely the Errors and Damages aforesaid, in the said Parliament of Carlisle,
it was Provided, Ordained, Decreed and Considered, That the forenamed
Grievances, Oppressions, and other Damages and Errors aforesaid, from
thenceforth should not be suffered, to be done in any manner; Whereupon the
said Grandfather, by his Writs, forbad all such as it concerned, to

Wherefore our Lord the King, ( Edward the Third) in this present Parliament, at
the Suit of the Commonalty, making Suggestion, by their Petition before him and
his Council, of many Errors, Damages, and Grievances, that many times happened
by such Provisions and Reservations, as well of Benefices, as First Fruits, and
other things whatsoever; Of Impositions of Tenths, and other Burdens by the
Pope lately made; To the Slander, Dishonor, and Depression of the whole Church
of England, King and his Crown, and other Nobles of the Kingdom, and in Offense
and Destruction of the Laws and Rights thereof, and most grievous Damage of his
People, and Subversion of the State of the whole Realm, against the Will of
God, and the good Design of the Founders of these Benefices, and against the
Provision, Ordinance, Accord, Decree, and Consideration aforesaid, made by his
Grandfather and and Council; and they pray the King he would please to have
regard to the Church of England, to the Indemnity and Disinheriting of himself,
the Earls, Barons, Nobles, and Commonalty, and Ordain Remedy; He by assent of
the Earls, Barons, and Nobles, and the Commonalty of his Realm, Provided,
Ordained, Accorded, Decreed and Considered, That as well within the Franchise
of the Cinque Ports as other-where upon the Sea Coasts, Archbishops, Bishops,
Abbats, Priors, Earls, Barons, or any others within the Realm, and none by
virtue of such Provisions or Reservations receive Benefices of Holy Church, and
that none upon the forfeiture aforesaid, receive or take such Letters, Bulls,
Process, or Instruments touching such Provisions, and Reservations, nor by
reason thereof make Institution or Induction, or any other manner of Execution
of them; and that none do, or suffer to be done any other thing that may be
prejudicial to the King or his People, or Blemish the Rights of his Crown, or
the Provisions, Ordinances, Letters, Bulls, Process, Reservations, Instruments,
or other things prejudicial to the King or his People; and all those who by
them, receive any Benefices, and place themselves in, or be received into them;
And also Authority of such Letters, Bulls, Process, Reservations, or
Instruments, shall or do make any Appeals, Citations, or Process against the
Patrons of the Benefices, or those they have Presented, or any others, or shall
Prosecute or cause to be Prosecuted in any Court whatever, where they have
done, or procured to be done any thing in prejudice of the King, or the Earls,
Barons, Nobles, and Commonalty aforesaid, or of the Provisions, Ordinances,
Accords, Decrees, and Consideration, and Proclamation and Inhibition aforesaid,
shall be taken and arrested by their Bodies, and the Letters, Bulls, Process,
and Instruments upon such Provisions, and Reservations, shall be taken from
them, or others wherever they are to be found, and sent before the King's
Council with their Bodies, that brought them into England, Wales, Ireland, or
the County of Chester, or Prosecuted any Execution of them; with the Bodies of
all others that shall be taken and arrested for the cause abovesaid, to Court
shall award; and that hereupon Writs to that purpose be sent through the whole
Realm.

According to this Agreement, a Proclamation and Writs were issued, but without
effect; for in the Parliament Clause 18 Ed. III. Part 1. M. 14. Dors.
next year, which began Eight days after Holy Trinity, the Commons prayed the
King, Rot. Parl. 18 Ed III. n. 33.
That the Provisions, Ordinances, and Accord made in the Parliament of the 17th
year of his Reign, concerning the Provisions and Reservations ( de la Court de
Rome) of the Court of Rome, might be confirmed and made a perpetual Statute.

It was also Ib. n. 36.
ordered, That the King present to the Prebends, Dignities, Churches and
Chapels, of such as lived in his Enemies Countries, or seize them into his
Hands, and employ the Profits in Defense of the Land, and Holy Church, except
so Ib. n. 37.
and that any one who should bring any thing prejudicial to this Order from
beyond Sea, should be taken and carried back again.

And further, That these Writs, and Proclamation, were of no effect, it appears
by another Append. n. 99.
Proclamation this year, directed to the Sheriffs of London, in which all these
Provisions, Ordinances, and Agreements, are recited; and in which it is said
Provisors, (such as had received Benefices, etc. by the Pope's Provisions) as
well Strangers as Denizens, their Proctors and Messengers, not considering the
said Provisions, Ordinances, Concords, Decrees, Proclamation, and Inhibitions,
nor the Punishments contained in them, had brought Letters, Bulls, Process,
Reservations and Instruments into the Kingdom, prejudicial to the King and his
People, and had delivered them to Archbishops, Bishops, Abbats, Priors, and
others as well Denizens Strangers, to be Executed, since and contrary to the
Proclamation and Inhibition aforesaid; and the Archbishops, Bishops, and
others receiving them, by virtue thereof, admitted and inducted very many
Provisors and their Proctors, or Substitutes, into Benefices, which they
possessed, to the disinheriting and intolerable prejudice of the King, his
Crown, and People, against the Form of the Provisions, Concords, Decrees,
Considerations, Proclamation, and Inhibitions aforesaid. And you (that is,
Sheriffs of London) have attempted somewhat against that Proclamation and
Inhibition, and have hitherto neglected to obey our Command therein, at which
we are much troubled; and then he comes to the Inhibition according to the
Points of the former Agreement, Provision, and Ordinance, (including all those
that admitted or inducted any into Benefices according to the Pope's Bulls and
Reservations) under the greatest Forfeiture that could be made; and concludes,
They should so behave Witness the King at Westminster the 30th of January, in
the Eighteenth year of his Reign of England, and of France the Fifth.

By the King and the whole Council.

In the same manner all the Sheriffs of England received the King's Commands,
That they put in Execution the Proclamation in their several Counties and
Shires, and also Bartholomew de Burghersh Constable of Dover Castle, and Keeper
of the Five Ports.

In a Parliament holden on the 8th of September, in the 20th of his Reign, by
Leonel his Son, Guardian of England, Rot. Parl. 20 Ed. III. n. 30.
the Commons Petition, that the Alien Monks might be made to go out of England
before Michaelmass next coming, and that those that stayed beyond that Feast
might be Outlawed, and the Abbeys and Priories which they possessed might be
seized into the King's Hand, and Englishmen placed in them according to the
Advice of the Ordinary of the Place: For that the young English Priories were
in the Hands of Strangers, who carried the Revenues beyond Sea, so that for
this reason their Faith was like to come to nothing: That the strange Monks
were only Laymen, and the King their Patron.

The Ib. To.
Answer, That the Religious Aliens were Spiritual Persons, quele chose ne poet
Estre try en Parliament;) And as to their Lands and Benefices, they were in the
King's Hands, and he received the Profits of them, but as to Outing of them, it
could not be done without Consulting the King.

It was also Prayed, Ib. n. 32.
That Strangers, Enemies in England, who should remain there after St. Michael,
and should be Outlawed, Command might be given to seize their Possessions and
Englishmen to inform the Parishioners and support the Chanteries, for that
those that were advanced in England were Tailors, Shoemakers, and Chamberlains
to Cardinals, ( sont Taillours, Suours, and Chamberleyns as Cardinalx) so that
the Parishioners were not informed by them, and their Faith decreased daily.

The Ib. To.
Answer was near the same with the other, That they were Spiritual Persons, and
the King had taken the Profits as abovesaid,

Notwithstanding these Proceedings in Parliament against the Pope's Bulls, his
Provisions and Reservations, and the Proclamations and Inhibitions thereupon,
the same Course was continued; for in the 25th of his Reign Rot. Parl. 25 Ed.
III. Part 1. n. 13.
the Commons, in a long Petition to the King and Peers of the Land, ( Item pry
sa dite Comunes a nostre dit Seigneur le Roy and a les Pieres de la terre veer
and regarder un tres Grand Mischief, etc.) pray them to take notice of the
great Mischief and Destruction of late coming upon the Kingdom by the Pope's
Reservations, by Brocage, and purchasing his Provisions, and many of the former
Grievances complained of, which turned to a greater Ruin of the Nation then
the whole War, and Request the King would please with his Council to ordain
Remedy in that Parliament, for that the longer these things were suffered, there
would be the greater difficulty in Reforming Ibm.
Agreed the Answer to this Petition should be made a Statute; for which see
Statutes at Large, and Pulton in this year. And in a Second Parliament the same
year, the Commons Ib. Part 2. ^* 43.
pray this Statute concerning Provisions and Reservations might be published
and put in Execution against such as acted to the contrary.

The Answer Ibm.
was, That the Statute should be recited before the Council, and if need were,
it should be better worded and amended, so as the Estate of the King and
Kingdom might in all things be safe and preserved.

In the 27th of the King, Statute a^ Large, 27 E. III. c. ^.
upon the grievous Complaint of the Great Men and Commons, That diverse of the
King's People, had been drawn out of the Kingdom, to answer things, the
Cognizance whereof belonged to the King's Court; And that the prejudice and
disherison of the King and his Crown, and all the People of the Realm, in
destruction and undoing of the Common Law. It was accorded and assented by the
King, Great Men and Commons, That any of the King's Ligeance who should
practice such things, and upon warning given him to appear before the King and
Council, or before his Justices at the time appointed, to undergo the Law, and
did not, should be put out King's Protection, and his Lands, Goods and Chattels
forfeit to the King, his Body to be Imprisoned, and Ransomed at the King's Will.

During this Contest between the King and Pope, or Secular and Ecclesiastic
Power then so termed, the King was very kind to the Clergy, in confirming
their old, and granting them many new Liberties and Privileges, as appears by
the Statutes made for the Clergy in Print, in the Statutes at Large in the
14th, 18th,

From this time all things were pretty quiet, no considerable things complained
of in Parliament against the Pope and his Provisions, until the 47th of his
Reign, when the Commons Rot. Parl. 47 E. III. n. 30.
Request Remedy against them, for that by reason thereof he received the First
Fruits of Ecclesiastical Dignities, and by that Means the Treasure of the Realm
was conveyed away, which they could not bear.

The Answer was, Ib. To.
The King had Ambassadors at the Court of Rome concerning these Matters, before
whose Return he could not give them Satisfaction.

In the Fiftieth year of his Reign, Append. n. 100.
the Knights, Citizens and Burgesses, which came to this Parliament for the
Commonalty of the Realm, do pray the King and his Council, and supplicate on
behalf of the Commonalty, That he would please to have good Consideration to
the Things underwritten, and Faults following,

First, That he would please to think, and re-think, how his Noble Progenitors,
Kings of England, and other Great Men of and autres Grands de mesme la terre)
built Churches, and in process of time, by great Devotion endowed them with
Riches, Rents, Lands, and great Possessions, Franchises and Temporalities,
which, with what the King himself had given, amounted to more then the Third
part of his Kingdom; and think how all these things were given upon such
Devotion and Intent, that the Profits rising from them should be spent upon the
Places where they were given, to the Honor of God, and Maintenance of the
Places belonging to them in Hospitality and Alms, and diverse Works of Charity,
in the Service of God and Holy Church, in Chaplains, Clerks, and Poor, that
Prayed Night and Day, for their Holy Father the Pope, for Holy Church, for the
King and Kingdom, for Peace, for their Founders, Patrons and Benefactors, for
their Souls, and all Christian Souls. and autre Grands) by their great Devotion
and Gifts to Holy Church, were in peaceable possession to give the Churches,
and Benefices, as Holy King Edward gave the Bishopric of Worcester to St.
Wulstan; and afterward by Devotion of the Kings, it was granted, and by the
Court of Rome confirmed, That the Cathedral Churches should have free Election
of their Prelates, so as the Bishoprics by true Election, and other Benefices
of Holy le Roialme ad este plien des diverses adversitez) as Wars, Pestilence,
Famine, Murrein amongst Cattle, and other Grievances, whereby the Kingdom was
so much impoverished and destoyed, that there were not the Third part of the
People or other Things

Also it is to be thought on, That no Man in the World, who loved God, Holy
Church, the King, and Kingdom of England, but had great Reason to think
Sorrowfully of things, and Weep, That the Court of Rome, that was wont to be
the Fountain, Root, and Source of Sanctity, and Destruction of Covetousness,
Simony, and other Sins, had so craftily, by little and little, more and more in
process of time, gained the Collations of Bishoprics, Dignities, England, of
which the Pope always received the Tax or First Fruits, and by his Bulls made
several Translations that he might get the more, by which Means, and by other
Payments, and Charges, the Bishops became so much in Debt to the Court of Rome,
that they sold the Timber of their Bishoprics, had Aid of their Poor Tenants,
and the Clergy, and all Methods were taken, to destroy the Church, and Realm of
England.

Also it ought to be thought on, That there are many, that when they have
purchased one Benefice of the Court of Rome, and paid the Tax or First Fruits,
and the Brokers of Benefices residing in the Wicked City of Avinion, ( en la
pechere use Cite D'Avenon) they let them to Farm, and send the Rents to their
Brokers to purchase more and greater Benefices, even as a Caitif or miserable
Person not worth, or good for any thing, by Simony or Brokage, shall be
preferred to Churches and Prebendaries to the Value of 1000 Marcs, whereas a
Doctor of Decrees, and a Master in Divinity must be satisfied with a small
Benefice of 20 Marcs: So as Clercs lose all their Hopes of being advanced as
such. And for the same cause People forbear to put their Children to School; so
as the Clergy fails, which is the Support of the Church, and our Holy Faith
declines, and comes to

Also it ought to be thought on, That Strangers, Enemies to this Land, and
others beyond Sea, have Benefices, Riches, and Rents of Holy Church in England,
which never saw, or will see their Parishioners, whereby the Service of God and
Holy Church, and all Works of Charity are neglected, the Parishioners like to
suffer in Body and Soul, their only care being to get the Profits of their
Benefices out of the Kingdom: And so it is that Holy Turks and Saracens.

Also it is to be thought on, That the Law of Holy Church is such, that the
Benefices of Holy Church ought to be given freely out of pure Charity, without
Price or Prayer, without the Gift of Gold, Silver, or any thing else: And that
Law and Reason will, that what is given by Devotion to Holy Church, ought to be
spent to the Honor of God, according to the Devotion and Intent

Also it is to be considered, That God committed his Sheep to the Pope to
Pasture, and not to Shear them; and that the Lay Patrons followed these
Examples, and sold their Churches as God was sold to the Jews, who put him to
Death.

Wherefore they desired the King would please to observe this was the 50th*
Year of his Reign, which was called the Year of Jubilee, the Year of Grace and
Joy, and it would be the greatest King and Great Men should write to the Pope,
as had been before ordered in Parliament.

The King's Answer was, That he had ordained sufficient Remedy Pope concerning
this matter, and was fully resolved to do it from time to time, until he had
performed their Desires, as well concerning the things comprised in this large
Bill next foregoing, as that which was to follow, which was very near the same.

The Title of this Bill in the Todding, or in the Margin of the Parlement-Roll,
is, (Bill encontre le Pape, and le Cardinaux) The (Bills and Articles encontre
le Pape, and le Clergy.) To both which the King answered as above.

It is worth notice, That though the Second Bill was near the same with the
First, yet in that the Commons informed the King Rot. Parl. 50 Ed. III. n. 45.
104.
there were several Spies who resided in London, who had their Spies and
Informers in all parts of the Kingdom, that gave them notice when any Dignities
or great Benefices were void* that they might send to the Cardinals, and other
Persons residing in the Court of Rome, to purchase them of the Pope.

Seeing in these Complaints there has been so often mention Provisions and
Reservations, for the better understanding thereof, here follows the
Translation of one of them, according to the true Form:

John, Bishop, Append. n. 101.
the Servant of the Servants of God, to the future Memory of the thing: Whereas
we have understood, That the Church of Rochester, by the Death of Thomas Thomas
de Windham; he died the last of Feb. 1316. See G^dwin.
Bishop thereof, is at present void; We for the good Estate of that Church,
intending the Provision of it, for this Turn, for certain Causes that have
persuaded us to do so, Have, by the Authority of these Presents, fully Reserved
it to the Ordinance and Disposition of the Apostolic See, Decreeing whatsoever
shall be done, and by whomsoever, knowingly or ignorantly contrary to this
Reservation, void. It may not therefore any way be lawful for any Man to
infringe this our Reservation and Constitution, or rashly enterprise any thing
against it. But if any one shall presume to attempt any such thing, he shall
know that he incurs the Indignation of Almighty God, and of his Apostles St.
Peter and Paul. Dated at Avignion the 18th of March, in the first Year of our
Pontificate or Popedom, in the 9th of Edward II.

This Reservation Ibm.
was published at the Arches of London, on the 30th of March, and on the 31st
of the same at Rochester before the Monks: But they having Chosen their Prior
Hamon Heth Bishop, the Day before the Date of the Reservation and Provision,
after three Years Trouble in waiting at Avinion, and Pope confirmed him in the
Bishopric. See the History of this Provision and Reservation, in Historia
Sacra, Vol. 1. fol. 357.

In the 50th and 51st Years of this King, Walls. Hyp^d. Neustr. f. 531. n. 10,
20. A. D. 1377. John Wyclif.
John Wyclif, Doctor in Divinity, by Preaching and Reading at Oxford, published
many Opinions contrary to those of the then Church and Religion practiced here.
The Pope (Gregory XI.) hearing of it, sent his Opinions Spelm. Council. vol. 2.
f* 621.
to the Archbishop of Canterbury, and Bishop of London, to examine him and his
Opinions, and take his Confession concerning them. The Pope Ibm. f. 623.
wrote another Letter to them, That if they found his Opinions to be such as he
had enclosed to them, then they should keep him in Bonds and safe Custody,
until they should receive other Commands from him. He Ibm. f. 624.
wrote likewise a third Bull or Letter, to use all Diligence to preserve the
King, Queen, their Children, and the Great Men of England, from these Errors
and Heresies, and keep them steady in the Faith; and to require them strictly
(requiratis astrictissime) to show them Favor, and give effectual Assistance,
etc. All these Bulls or Letters are of the same Date at Rome, May 22. and
Seventh of his Pontificate, A. D. 1377.

Upon these Bulls, John Knight. col. 2647. n. 10, 20.
Wyclif was cited to appear before the Archbishop of Canterbury, and many
other Doctors, in the Church of the Friars Preachers in London, where he thus
explained himself concerning the Sacrament of the Altar, and in these Old
English Words:

I knowleche, Ib. n. 40, 50, 60.
That the Sacramens of the Aut^r is very Goddus Body in form of Bread; but it
is in another manner Goddus Body then it is in Hevene* For in Hevene it is seen
foot, in the forume and figure of Flesh and Blood; but in the Sacrament Goddus
Body is be miracle of God in form of Bread, and is he nouther of seen foot,
ne in Man's figure, but as a Man leves for to the^k the kind of an image,
whether it be of Oak or of Ash, and settys his thouzt in him of whom it is the
image; so myche more schuld a Man leve to thenk on the kind of Bread, but
thenk upon Christ; for his Body is the same Bread, that is the Sacrament of the
Autere, and withalle clemes all Devotion, and all Charity that God would gif
him, Worschippe he Christ, and then he receyves God gostly more medefully than
the Prist that syngus the Mass in less Charity. For the bodily etynge ne
profytes nouth to Soul, but in as myku^ as the Soul is fed with Charity.
This Sentence is provyde be Crist that may nouzt lie; for, as the Gospel says,
Crist that night that he was betrayed of Judas Scarioth, he tok Bread in his
Hondes, and blesside it, brak it, and gaf it to his Disciplus to ete; for he
says, and may not lie, This is my Body.

What Satisfaction this Explication gave to the Archbishop, and those before
whom he was convented, the Author says not: Hist. f. 191. n. 50.
Walsingham says it was feigned and vain, and that the Archbishop and all
others, the Duke of Lancaster, and Lord Henry Percy being present, commanded
Silence to Dr. Wyclif, forbidding him for the future not to meddle with, or
treat upon that matter, or suffer others to discourse or speak upon it; and
that he

He was neither imprisoned nor censured during his Life.

His Opinions are variously and differently worded and stated, as well those
that were reputed and censured as Heresies, as those accounted Errors; and so
involved in the Terms of Scholastic Divinity then used, as they are now scarce
intelligible. They are to be found in Spelman's Second Volume of the Councils,
Henry de Knighton, Wood his Antiquities of Oxford; but the Fol. 531. lin. and
Hist. Angl. f. 191. n. 30, 40.
Walsingham's Hypodigma Neustriae, which are here translated:

1. That the Eucharist in the Altar after Consecration, is not the True Body of
Christ, but its Figure. 2. That the Church of Rome is not the Head of all
Churches, more than any other Church; nor was there any greater Power given to
Peter than to any other Apostle. 3. That the Pope of Rome had no greater Power
in the Keys of the Church than any other Priest. 4. That the Temporal Lords
(that were Patrons) might lawfully and meritoriously take away the Temporals
from a Delinquent Church. 5. If a Temporal Lord knew a Church to be Delinquent,
he was bound, under the Pain of Damnation, to take the Temporal from it. 6.
That the Gospel was a sufficient Rule for the Life of a Christian, and that all
other Rules of Saints, under the Observation whereof diverse Religious live, add
no more Perfection to the Gospel than Whiteness to the Wall. 7. That the Pope,
nor any other Prelate of the Church, ought to have
These are all his Opinions Walsingham recounts in this Reign; yet he Taught
and Preached many more in the University of Oxford, where he had many
Followers, and some Learned Men, as likewise in other Places, which were
Censured in the next Reign.

Taxes in this KING's Time.
IN the 6th Year he had granted him a Fifteenth of Counties, and Walls. f. 132.
lin. 7.
a Tenth of Cities and Burghs, for one Year.

In his 8th Year he had the same, and a Tenth granted by the Ibm. f. 134. n. 10.
Clergy.

In his 10th Year he had the same Tax from Laity and Ibm. f. 136* n. 20.
Clergy.

In his 11th Year he had a three Years Tenth given him by the Adam Murymuth, A.
D. 1337.
Clergy in Convocation; a three Years Tenth given him by Citizens and Burgesses
in Parliament, and by others a three Years Fifteenth, France, and to pay
Germans, Brabanters, and other Confederates on the Borders of Germany, against
the King of France.

In the 13th Year the Great Men gave him the Tenth Sheaf of Rot. Parl. 13 Ed.
III. Part 1. n. 5.
all manner of Grain of their Demeasn Lands, except their Bond-Tenants the
Tenth Fleece and the Tenth Lamb. This was in the first Parliament this Year 15
Days after Michaelmas.

The Commons excuse themselves, and desire to go into the Ibm. n. ^.
Country, and endeavor to procure an Aid answerable to the King's Necessity.

A Parliament was Summoned to meet eight Days after St. Hillary, Rot. Parl. 13
Ed. III. Part 2. n. 5, 6, 7*
or 20th of January, in which the Commons gave the King 30000 Sacks of Wool.

In his 14th Year, the Prelates, Earls, Barons, for them and Ib. 14 Ed. III.
Par. 1. n. 5, 6, 7.
their Tenants, the Knights of Counties for themselves, and Commons (les
Chivalers de Countees pur eux, and pur les Comunes de la Terre) granted to the
King the Ninth Sheaf, Fleece, and Lamb; the Citizens and Burgesses gave the
very Ninth of all their Goods, according to the true Value, for two Years next
coming. Those that lived not in Cities and Burghs, nor lived upon Tillage or
Shop, paid the Fifteenth Part of all their Goods, according to the true Value.

Upon the King's writing to them for speedy Supply, seeing the Ibm. Part 2. n.
9, 10.
Ninths could not be levied time enough for his Service, the Lords and Commons
agreed to have 20000 Sacks of Wool speedily provided. Ibm. 15 Ed. III. n. 56,
etc.


In the 15th, the Ninths were revoked, in respect of this Grant of 20000 Sacks
of Wool.

In the 18th, the Clergy of the Province of Canterbury granted a Ib. 18 Ed.
III. n. 9, 10.
three Years Tenth, and the Commons granted for the Commons of the Two
Fifteenths, and Two Tenths of Cities and Burghs. And afterward the Commons
granted another Fifteenth. The Lords promised to go, or went with the King in
Person, and therefore gave nothing.

In the 20th Year, the Commons granted Two Fifteenths to be levied Ibm. 20 Ed.
III. n. 11.
in two Years, in Cities, Burghs, ancient Demeasns, as also of the Commons of
the Counties.

In the 22d Year the Commons granted Three Fifteenths, to be Ib. 22 Ed. III n.
4.


In the 25th Year, the Great Men of the Realm and the Communalty, Ibm. 25 Ed.
III. Part 2. n. n. 9, 10.
by the Advice of some Great Men sent to assist them, granted the King Three
Tenths and Three Fifteenths, to be paid in three Years.

In the 27th Year, the King made it his Request, That the Prelates, Ibm. 27 Ed.
III. n. 31, or 9.
Great Men, and Commons, would grant him the Subsidy of Woollfells, Leather,
for some time; to which Prayer they unanimously consented and granted that
Subsidy in manner as it had been received before that time for three Years.

In his 29th Year, the Commons came into the presence of the King, Ibm. 29 Ed.
III. n. 11.
Prelates, and Great Men, assembled in the White Chamber; and having there a
short Conference with the Great Men, granted unanimously of one accord the
Subsidy of Wool, Leather, and Woollfells, for six Years next coming, so as
during that time, no

In the 36th Year, the Great Men and Commons ( les Grantz Ibm. 36 Ed. n. 35.
and Comunes) granted unto the King of every Sack of Wool transported 20 s. of
every 300 Woollfells 20 s. and of every Last of Leather 40 s. besides the
ancient Custom of half a Marc a Sack of Denisons, and 10 s. of Strangers, half
a Marc of every 300 Woollfells of Denisons, and 10 s. of Strangers, and one
Marc s. of Strangers for three Years.

In the 42d Year, the Prelates and Great Men ( les Prelates and Ibm. 42 Ed. III
n. 9.
Grantz eu Deliberation plein ove les Comunes dune accord Granterent, etc.)
having had full Deliberation with the Commons, granted the Subsidy of Wool,
Woollfells, and Leather for two Years; of every Sack of Wool, and every
Twelvescore Woollfells, 36 s. 8 d. of every Last of Leather 4 l. besides the
ancient Custom as

In his 43d Year, the Lords and Commons granted to him the Ibm. 43 Ed. III n.
9, 10.
Subsidy as above for three Years; of every Sack of Wool 43 s. 4 d. which
passed beyond Sea; of every Twelvescore Woollfells as much, and of every Last
of Leather 4 l. besides the ancient Custom; of Strangers, for every Sack of
Wool four Marcs, of every Twelvescore Woollfells four Marcs, and of every Last
of Leather eight Marcs, besides the ancient Custom.

In the 45th Year, the Great Men and Commons granted a Subsidy Ib. 45 Ed. III.
n. 6.
of 50000 l. to be levied of every Parish of the Land 22 s. 3 d. so as the
Parish of greater Value, should contribute ratably to those of less Value.

This 22 s. 3. d. of every Parish, answered not the Sum of Ib n. 10, 11.
50000 l. and therefore not long after at Winchester the Great Men and Commons
granted 5 l. 16 s. of every Parish, the 22 s. 3 d. being comprised in it; so as
the Parishes of greater Value should contribute to those of less.

In the 46th Year, the Lords and Commons granted for two Years Ib. 46 Ed. III.
n. 10.
the Subsidy of Wool, Leather, and Woollfells, as it was granted in the 43d
Year.

And for that the Sum of this Subsidy was not sufficient for the Ib. and n. 11.
King's Expenses, they granted a Fifteenth for one Year, to be levied

The Citizens and Burgesses in this Parliament, for the safe Convoying Ib. n.
14, 15.
of their Ships and Goods, granted 2 s. upon every Ton of Wine, and 6 d. in the
Pound of all Goods for a Year.

In the 47th Year, the Lords and Commons granted a Fifteenth, Ib. 47 Ed. III.
n. 5.
as it had been in ancient manner levied, for two Years; they also gave Tonnage
and Poundage for two Years, as it was given last Year, of all Merchandise
exported and imported, except of Woolls, Woollfells, and Leather, and then
grant the Subsidy of them for the next Year coming.

In the 50th Year the Lords and Commons granted the Subsidy of Ib. 50 Ed. III.
n. 9.
Wool, Leather, and Woollfells, for three Years, as it had been granted in his
47th Year.

In his 51st Year, the Lords and Commons grant him 4 d. of every Ib. 51 Ed.
III. n. 19.
Person of the Kingdom, Males and Females, above the Age of Fourteen Years,
except very Beggars; and desire to be excused they

The Issue of Edward III. by Philippa of Haynalt.
HIS Eldest Son was Edward of Woodstock, so called because Walls. Hist. f. 130.
n. 40. Hypod. Neustr. f. 510. n. 50.
there, June 15. 1329. or 1330. He was Prince of Wales, and Married Joan
Countess of Kent (called for her great Beauty, The Fair Maid of Kent.) She was
Daughter to Edmond of Woodstock, sixth Son of Edward I. but second by his Queen
Margaret, Sister to Edmond Son of Edmond of Woodstock, and Sister and Heir to
his Brother John, who both died without Issue. Sandf. Geneal. Hist. f. 184, and
215.
She was first Married, after the 25th Year of her Age, Edward III. to Sir
Thomas Holland Knight of the Garter, and in her Right made Earl of Kent, by
whom she had Issue two Sons, Thomas Earl of Kent, and John Duke of Excester. He
died December. 26. in the 34th of Edward III. 1360. And her Second Husband was
William Montague Earl of Salisbury, from whom she was in a short time Divorced
by Consent. With this Lady the Prince fell in Love, and was Married to her in
the 31st Year of his Age, and 35th of his Father's Reign, 1361. By Walls. f.
180. n. 30. A. D. 1365.
her he had, first, Edward of Engolesm (so called because there born) who died
in the 7th Year of his Age. His second Son by her was Richard of Ibm. f. 181.
lin. 5. A. D. 1366.
Bordeaux (so also called because born there) succeeded his Father as Prince of
Wales, and his Grandfather in the Kingdom, by the Name of Richard II.

William of Hypod. Neustr. f. 512. n. 30.
Hatfield, Second Son of Edward III. born there

The Third Son of King Edward and Queen Philip Ibm. f. 513. n. 30.
was Livnell, born at Antwerp, Created Duke of Clarence, and Married to
Elizabeth de Burgh, Daughter and Heir of Sandf. ut supra, f. 219. 222.
William de Burgh, Earl of Vlster, Lord of Clare, Canaught, and Trim, by whom
he had only one Daughter named Ibm.
Philippa. She was by her Grandfather, after the Death of her Father, at the
Age of 13 Years, Married to Edmond Mortimer Earl of March and Lord Wigmore, in
the 42d of Edward III. 1368. by whom she had Roger Mortimer their Eldest Son
and Heir to both their Honors and Titles, who left Ibm. f. 225.
Edmond Mortimer his Son and Heir, Earl of March and Vlster, Lord of Wigmore,
Clare, Trim, and Canaught, and True Heir to the Crown of England after the
Death of King Richard II. He died without Rot. Parl. 39 Hen. VI. n. 18.
Issue, as also his Brother Roger and Sister Alianor, leaving Anne their Sister
sole Heiress to her Father Roger Mortimer and Brother to Edmond.

The Fourth Son of Walls. f. 148. n. 10.
Edward III. and and his Queen Philip, was John of Gaunt, born there: He was
first Earl of Richmond, and afterward Duke of Lancaster. He Married Blanch the
Daughter and Coheir of Henry Duke of Lancaster, with Maud her Sister, by whom
he had his only Son and Child Henry Earl of Derby, Duke of Hereford and
Lancaster, called Henry IV. King of England. After the Death of Maud without
Issue, he in Right of Blanch enjoyed all the vast Estate of her Father Henry
Duke of Lancaster, with his Titles, and was then, in the 36th of Edward III.
advanced to the Title of Duke of Lancaster, etc. Dugd. Baron. Tome II. Fol.
115. Col. 1.

The Fifth Son of King Edward and Queen Philip, was Hypod. Neustr. f. 514. n.
50.
Edmond of Langley, a Manor near St. Albans in Hertfordshire, where he was
born; by his Father made Earl of Sandf. ut supra. f. 357.
Cambridge, and by King Richard II. Ib. f. 358.
was Created Duke of York: He Married Ib. f. 360.
Isabel younger Daughter and Coheir of Peter King of Castile, Edward his Eldest
Son, who died Ib. f. 365.
without Issue. He had also by her Richard Earl of Cambridge, called of
Coningsburgh, a Town of that Name in Yorkshire. Brooks Catalogue of Hon.
He Married Anne Mortimer abovementioned, by whom he had Richard Duke of York
and Earl of Cambridge, Ibm.
who Married Cecilie Nevil, the youngest Daughter of Ralph Earl of Westmerland,
by whom he had Henry his Eldest Son, who died young, and Edward his second Son
Duke of York, and afterward King of England, by Edward IV.

William of Sandf. ut supra, 178.
Windsor (a second of that Name William) was their Sixth Son, who died so
young, as there is nothing memorable left of him.

The Seventh and Youngest Son of Edward III. and Queen Philip, was Ibm. and f.
227.
Thomas of Woodstock, there born, Duke of Gloucester. He Married Elianor the
Eldest of the two Daughters, and Heiress of Humphry de Bohun Earl of Hereford,
etc.

The Eldest Daughter of King Edward and Queen Philip, was Ibm.
Isabel Lady Coucy and Duchess of Bedford, Married to Ingelram Lord of Coucy
and Earl of Soyssons, who by her Father was Created Earl or Duke of Bedford.

Their Second Daughter Ib. f. 179.
Joan, had the Title of Queen of Spain; she was by Proxy Married to Alphonso
King of Castile and Leon,

Their Third Daughter Ibm.
was Blanch de la Tour, so named because born in the Tower of London; she died
an Infant.

Mary their Fourth Daughter, Ib. Hypod. Neustr. f. 516. lin. 9.
Duchess of Britan, was Wife of John Montfort Duke of Britain in France.

Margaret their Fifth and Sandf. ut supra.
Youngest Daughter, was Wife to John Hastings Earl of Pembroke.









A CONTINUATION of the Complete etc.
King RICHARD the Second.
KING Edward the Third Rot. Clause 1 Ric. II. M. 45. A. D. 1377.
died June 21st, Anno Domini 1377, and this young King, his Grandchild,
succeeded him in the Eleventh year of his Age, when it King Richards Coronation.
was agreed he should be Crowned on the 16th of July following. John, King of
Castile and Leon, Duke of Lancaster, came before King Richard and his Council,
and claimed as Earl [2] Ibm. Three Offices claimed by the Duke of Lancaster.
of Leicester the Office of Steward of England, as Duke of Lancaster, King's
principal Sword called Curtana, on the day of his Coronation, and as Earl of
Lincoln, to be the King's Carver the same day; all these Offices he pretended
to have in Right of his Wife Blanch then dead; and the Titles to them being
Examined by the most knowing of the King's Council, it was adjudged Ibm.
by the King and his Council, he might Execute them by himself, and sufficient
Deputies, Ibm.
and on the Thursday next before the Coronation, (which was also on a Thursday)
de precepto Regis) by the King's Writ, as Steward of England, to hear the
Claims of all that pretended to have Offices, and perform Services on that day.

On the very day Walsingh. Hist. f. 193. n. 40, 50.
of King Edward's Death, yet before he was known to be dead, there were sent
some of the chief Citizens by the City of London, to the Prince then at
Kingston with his Mother, who by John Philpot, that was one of them, acquainted
him, That his Father was undoubtedly dying, and had the manifest The Citizens
of London desire the King's Protection.
and Protection of the Citizens, and his City of London, which was his Chamber,
it being unspeakably disturbed he was so far from it, being ready not only to
venture their Estates, but also, if needful, to lay down their Lives for him;
with Request to him he would come and Reside there; and further prayed him, he
would vouchsafe to put an end to all Discords and Differences between the
Citizens and the Duke of Lancaster, Ib. f. 194. n. 10, 20.
which was London for that purpose.

Froysart F. 196. a. col. 2.
says, England was then to be Governed by the Duke of Lancaster, by Accord of
all the Land; yet soon after the Coronation, Walsingh. f. 198. n. 20, 30.
perceiving all things in the Kingdom were like to become new, and his Care not
to be valued amongst new Men, and fearing if any thing should happen amiss to
the King or Kingdom, it might be imputed to him, and that he should for the
good he did, receive small or no Thanks, with the King's The Duke of Lancaster
with the King's Leave, retired from Court.
Leave he retired from Court, and went to his Castle of Kenelworth; before his
departure, he promised the King, if he should need his assistance to come to
him, with a greater appearance then any Lord in England, or do any other thing
that might tend to his Profit or Honor.

The French on the 21st of August Ib. n. 40, 50. The French land in the Isle of
Wight.
landed in the Isle of Wight, burnt and plundered some Towns, and received a
Composition of the Inhabitants to save the rest; They then burnt Ib. f. 199. n.
20, 30.
Hastings in Kent, and endeavored to burn Winchelsey, but were repulsed, as
also at Southampton by Sir John de Arundel, the Earl's Brother.

On the 4th of that month Rot. Clause ^ Ric. ^I. M. 37. D^rs. A Parliament
called.
Writs were issued for a Parliament to meet Fifteen days after Michaelmass; The
Cause of Summons Rot. Parl. 1, 2* 3, 4, 5, 6.
Canterbury, and rehearsed by Monsieur Richard Lescrop, Ib. n. 11. The Cause of
of Summons.
which were, That the Commons would advise the King, how in the best manner his
and the Kingdom's Enemies might be resisted, and how the Expenses of such
Resistance was to be born with the greatest Ease to the People, and Profit and
Honor to the Kingdom.

The Commons Ib. and n. 12. The Commons desire to have a Committee of Lords for
their assistance.
pray the King, That for the Arduity of their Charge, that is, the Declaration
of Summons, ( que pur l'arduite de lour charge) and for the feebleness of their
Powers and Senses, ( and la Feoblesce de lours poairs and sens) That it would
please the King to grant them to have the Prelates and Lords underwritten for
their Aid and Assistance, to Commune or Treat especially with them in their
Affairs, for the more hasty and good Exploit of the Business wherewith they
were charged; Ib. n. 13.
that is, the King of Castile and Leon Duke of Lancaster, the Bishops of
London, Ely, Rochester, and Carlisle, the Earls of March, Arundel, Warwick, and
Angos, the Lord Nevill, Monsieur Henry Lescrop, Richard Lescrop, and Richard de
Stafford, which was granted by the King in Parliament.

The Duke of Lancaster immediately Ibm. The Duke of Lancaster makes his Excuse
to the King for not being of that Committee. His Relation how he had been
accused of Treason, and Excuse.
stood up, and falling upon his Knees toward the King, humbly prayed him to
hear him a little, in a weighty Cause that concerned himself; and then said,
the Commons had chosen him for one of the Lords to Commune with them of the
said Matters, but desired the King Commons had spoken Evilly of him, and so
ill, that he had committed manifest Treason, if their Report was true, which
God forbid, being always careful not to do any such thing, as the truth was
notably known; and said further, None of his Ancestors of No^e, T^^mas E^rl of
Lancaster, and his Brother Henry Grandfather to his Wife Blanch, in the time of
Ed. II.
one side or other, was ever Traitor, but good and Loyal, and it was a
mavelous thing he should stray out of the Line, ( and marveillous chose
serroit, sil vorroit forveier horse de line) for that he had more to loose
Estate or Condition soever he was, should be so hardy, as to affirm Treason or
other Disloyalty upon him, or His general Challenge to defend himself by his
Body.
other thing done by him, prejudicial to the Kingdom, he was ready to defend
himself by his Body, or otherwise by Award of the King and Lords, as if he were
the poorest Knight Bachelor of the Realm.

Whereupon Ib* n. 14. The Lords Excuse him.
the Prelates, and all the Lords stood up, and with one Voice Excused and
prayed him, to leave off such Words, for they thought no Man living would say
any such thing.

The Commons Ibm. The Commons Excuse him.
also said, it was apparent and notorious, that they thought him free from all
Blame and Defamation, ( les Comunes avoient le dit Duc excusez de tout Blasme
and Diffame) inasmuch as they had chosen him to be their principal Aid,
Comforter, Counsell^r in this Parliament, praying with one Voice to have them
excused.

Then the Duke said, the Words had been long thrown about the Kingdom falsely,
and he wondered how any Man could or would begin or continue such a thing, for
the Disgrace and Danger that might thence arise, because the first Inventor of
such Speeches, by which Debate might be moved between the Lords He moves for a
Law against the Inventors of such Reports.
of the Land, was a manifest and very Traitor, for such Debates Ordinance, and
a just and speedy Punishment might be provided in that Parliament, for such
Talkers and Inventors of Evil Reports or Dreams, ( sur tieux parlours and
trouvours de mesongs) to avoid such Mischiefs for the time to come; but for the
time past all should be forgiven, as to his own Person.

After this, Ibm. n. 17, 18. The Commons pray Three things of the King and
Lords. First, That Eight continual Counselors may be appointed.
for that the King at present was Innocent and Commons prayed the King and
Lords of Parliament for Three things especially:

First, That they would in that Parliament, Appoint and Name Eight Persons of
diverse Estates, to be the continual Counselors of the King, for the Business
of the Kingdom, together with the King's Officers, to be such Persons as best
knew, and most diligently Expenditors, and Directors of what was to be given
toward the Wars. Secondly, That they would please to Ib. n. 19. Secondly, Such
to be appointed as were to be about the King's Person.
Name and Appoint in that Parliament, such as should be about the King's Person,
People of Virtuous and honest Conversation, that might Educate him King's House
might be born with the Revenue of the Crown, so as what was granted for the
Wars might only be employed that way. Thirdly, That the Ib. n. 20. Thirdly,
That the Land might be observed.
Common Law and other Statutes, and Ordinances of the Land, might be Observed,
Ratified and Confirmed, and the People Governed by it, and that it might not be
defeated, with Masterships, and Singularities of any about the King, etc.
saving in all things the Regalities, and Dignity of the King, Commons would not
any prejudice should be done any way by their Demands.
The Answer to these Demands Ib. in the end of the number. The general Answer.
was, That the Prelates and Lords would Advise together, commanding the Commons
to return to their place, ( commandant as communes de retournir a lour place)
and Treat of their other Charges given to them, ( and tretir de lours autres
^^arges a lours douez) between that time and Thursday next, ( a quel jour ils
furent commandez a retournir en parliament, etc.) to hear the Answer to their
Requests.

The first Ibm. n. 21, 22. The particular Answer to the first Request.
Request of the Commons was Repeated before the King and Lords, and by them
granted, so as the Chancellor, Treasurer, and Keeper of the Privy Seal,
Justices of the one Bench, and the other, and all other Officers of the Realm,
may execute their Offices without the presence of such Counselors, who by
Lords were Ib. n. 23.
Nine, the Bishops of London, Carlisle and Salisbury, the Earls of March and
Stafford, Messires Richard de Stafford, and Henry Lescrop Banerets, and
Messires John Deverose, and Hugh Segrave Bachelors.

Which Ib. n. 25.
Nine Prelates, Earls, and others, chosen in Council for this year, ( esluz en
conseil pur ce^^ An) were Sworn before the King himself, to do what they were
chosen for, in the presence of many Lords of Parliament.

As to the Second Request, to [8] Name and Assign such as To the second Request.
should be about the King's Person, the Lords of Parliament there answered, That
it seemed to them for many Causes too heavy and hard a Request, ( trop
chargeant and dure Request) to place any Person about the King that should not
well please him; or to Remove any Officer or Servant, if it were not by his
Express Will, and for notable fault to be proved against such Officers and
Servants; Wherefore the Lords would not willingly meddle peront les Seigneurs
ne verroient voluntres enter mettre.)

To the other Ib. toward the end of the number.
part of this Request the Lords Answered, They would by good Deliberation speak
with the Great Officers of the King's Household, and if by their advice it could
be done, saving the State and Honor of the King, what they desired should be
performed.

For the Ib. in the end of the number. To the Third.
Third, at present it seemed reasonable to all the Lords it should be granted.

The Lords and Commons Ib. n. 27. Two Fifteenths and Two Tenths granted.
perceiving the great danger of Destruction the Nation was in, by reason of the
great Wars, as well by Sea as Land, for the defense of the Kingdom, and
resistance of its great Enemies, granted to the King Two Fifteenths without
Cities and Burghs, and Two Tenths within Cities and Burghs, for Two years;
praying the King, That as well the Money of the Tenths and Fifteenths, as the
Tenths granted by the Clergy, and Money for the Subsidy of Wool, might be in
the keeping of Especial Treasurers by the King's Appointment; which were
William Special Treasures appointed to receive them.
Walworth, and John Philypot, Merchants of London, who were to give an Account
of their Receipts and Disbursements, in manner as the King and his great
Council should order.

In this Ib. n. 41, 42, 43.
Parliament Alice Perrers was brought into the Lords House, where Sir Richard
Lescrop, Steward of the King's Household, by the Command of the Prelates and
Lords, Recited in the presence Alice, an See this Ordinance here in the 50th of
Ed. III. Alice Perrers accused in Parliament.
Ordinance made in the Parliament holden at Westminster in the 50th of Edward
the Third, That no Woman, especially Alice Perrers, should prosecute any
Business in the King's Courts by way of Maintenance, upon pain of forfeiture,
and Banishment out of the Kingdom; and the said Seneschal or Steward surmised
to the said Alice and the Lords, That she had incurred the pain of it, and
forfeited against the Ordinance in Two Points: First, That Sir Nicholas
Dagworth was ordered by the King's Council to go into Ireland upon several
great Matters profitable to the King and his Realm, the said Alice, after the
Ordinance made, persuaded the King, and procured at the Court at Havering by
her singular Suit, That the said Nicholas should be countermanded, and his
Voyage staid, to the great damage of the King and Realm. Secondly, That one
Richard Lions, King's Grace, viz. his Body, Lands, Tenements, Goods and
Chattels, so as he was imprisoned, and all his Lands, Tenements, Goods and
Chattels seized into the King's Hands, of which Lands and Tenements he gave
some to the Earl of Cambridge, and others to Thomas of Woodstocke, then Earl of
Buckingham, for Term of their Lives. All which Forfeitures and Imprisonment,
the King taking pity of the said Richard by Alice, and her singular Persuit and
Procurement, at his Court at Shene, with the assent of his Council pardoned,
and also pardoned the said Richard 300 l. due from him in the Exchequer, and
further granted 1000 Marks of his Treasure as a Gift, which things being
contrary to the said Ordinance, the Steward demanded of the said Alice, how she
would Excuse her self of the said Articles, who answered she was not culpable
Her Answer.
or guilty of these Articles, which she was ready to aver and Witness and
Testimony of John de Ipre, at that time Steward of the King's House, William
Sheet Controller, Sir Allen Buxhall, Nicholas Carren Keeper of the Privy Seal,
and others of the Court of the said King, and present at the time of the
supposed Forfeiture.

Upon this, Day Ibm.
was given her to Wednesday next after, in the mean time it was ordered by the
assent of the Lords, That the Articles should be tried by Witness, or by
Inquest of such as King, and thereupon certain Persons were Sworn, and Examined
before the Duke of Lancaster, the Earl of Cambridge, the Earl of March, the
Earl of Arundel, and the Earl of Warwick: First, Roger Beauchamp, late
Witnesses Sworn against Alice Perrers.
Chamberlain of the said King, being Sworn, said, That in the presence of Alice
Perrers, a Bill was given him to carry to the King at his Court at Havering,
which Bill he took, and as he understood it, it contained the Revocation of Sir
Nicholas Dagworth Ireland, because he was Enemy to Monsieur William de
Windsore, he refused to carry the Bill, because the Council had ordered the
contrary; and the said Alice requested him to do it, which he did, and the King
asked him what they talked about, which when he informed him of the Contents of
the Bill, he answered the Petition was reasonable; and when Monsieur Roger
replied, his Council had ordained to the contrary, the King answered, he was
Sovereign Judge, and it seemed to him the Bill Nicholas, which was done
accordingly. Concerning Richard Lions he said he knew nothing. The Duke of
Lancaster Examined, said, That one day he came to Havering, and found Dame
Alice Perrers there, when Roger Beauchamp showed him a Bill containing as
above, about which he fell into Discourse with the King, who concerning Sir
Nicholas Dagworth going to Ireland, said, it was not reasonable one Enemy
should Judge another, and there he thought fit to countermand his Voyage; in
which having satisfied the King, as done by his Consent in Council; but the
King not long after coming from Alice Perrer's Chamber, came to the Duke, and
prayed him dearly he would not suffer Dagworth to go toward Ireland, but the
Duke could not comply, by reason it was ordained by King and Council, and on
Monday King in Bed, he commanded him upon his Blessing he should not suffer
Dagworth to go toward Ireland, notwithstanding the Ordinance made the day
before; and also he was countermanded. And to the Article of Richard Lions, he
said, in his Conscience he believed Alice Perrers was the chief Promoter of
that Business, but was not present.

Monsieur Philip de la Vache Sworn, says nothing to the purpose.

Nicholas Carren Sworn, says, That he was commanded to come to Shene to the
King, where he found Richard Lions, and they were both commanded to come before
the King in Bed, where he found Dame Alice Perrers sitting at the King's Bed's
Head, where was showed, that the King would pardon the said Richard 300 l. due
to the King upon Account in the Exchequer, and also give him a Thousand Marks
of his Treasure, and restore him what was given him to his Sons the Earl of
Cambridge, and Tho. of Woodstock, Nicholas to let his Sons know so much; and
that the King rehearsed these Grants of his Grace, etc. before diverse Knights
and Esquires he called from behind the Curtains of his Bed to Witness the same.
Monsieur Alein Buxhall Swears the same; except Alice Perrer's sitting at the
King's Bed's Head; and further, That Alice desired him to acquaint the Earls of
their Father's Pardon to Lions, which at her Instance the King commanded him to
do. There were more Sworn, who said Duke and other Earls, Monsieur A Jury Sworn.
Roger Beauchamp, Alein Buxhall, John de Burle, Richard Stury, Philip de la
Vage, John de Foxle, Tho. Garre, Knights; Nicholas Carren, John Beauchamp of
Holt, John Beverle, George Felbrigge, John Salesbury, William Street, Piers
Cornwall, Tho. Lond^n, Helmin Leget, Esquires, of the King's House, Sworn, and
charged to speak plain Truth, whether the said Alice was culpable, who They
find her Guilty.
found her guilty, and accordingly to the intent of the Statute made 50 Edw.
III. considering the damages and villainies by her done, she was sentenced by
Parliament to be banished, her Lands, Her Sentence and Punishment.
Chattels, Tenements in Demesne and Reversion to be forfeited, and seized into
the King's Hands; And it was ordained by the King and Lords in that present
Parliament, That all her Land in Feoffees hands or purchased in Trust, should be
also forfeited. But it was the Intention of the King and Lords, and this Law,
made particularly Which was not to be made an Example for others.
for the prevention of such odious things, should not be made use of, or made
an Example against any other Person, or in any other Case.

The Commons Ib. n. 49.
pray, for that King Edward was guided by unfit Counselors, (par auscuns
Conseillers nient Covenables) as had been authentickly proved, That they might
be removed from all the King's Counsels, and so as such, nor other such, should
be King Edward guided by Evil Counselors, such to be removed from this Kings
Counsels. The King's Officers not to maintain Suits.
near him, nor in office with him, and that other fit Persons might be put in
their places; and that no Officers of the King's Court, great or small, do keep
up Quarrels or Suits in the Country by Maintenance, nor meddle with any thing
but what belongs to his Office.

As to the first Request, (le Roy le voet) the King wills; and as to the
second Request touching Maintenance, the King will forbid, any Counselor,
Officer, or Servant, or others [4] Ib. To. The King grants the first. And will
forbid the second.
with him, or in the Kingdom, to uphold any Quarrel, or Suit by Maintenance,
See Stat. at Large, first of Rich. II. cap. 4.
under pain of loosing their Offices, and Services, and to be Imprisoned, and
Ransomed at the King's Pleasure.

The Commons also Rot. Parl. 1 Ric. II. n. 50. The Commons pray all great
Officers of the Court and Kingdom may be appointed in Parliament during the
King's Minority.
pray, That during the King's Minority, the Chancellor, High Treasurer, Chief
Justices of one Bench and the other, the Chief Baron of the Exchequer, the
Steward and Treasurer of the Household, the Chief Chamberlain, and Clerk of the
Privy Seal, the Wardens of the Forests of this side Trent and beyond, might be
made and provided by Parliament; and if it should happen that any of these
Ministers or Officers should be laid aside, between one Parliament and another,
That then another be put in his place, by his great Council, until next
Parliament.

It was agreed, That Ib. To. It was agreed, that some of those Officers should
be chosen by the Lords in Parliament.
while the King was under Age, that the Counselors, Chancellor, Steward of the
Household, and Chamberlain, should be chosen by the Lords in Parliament, (soient
esluz par les Seigneurs en Parliament) saving always the Estate and Heritage of
the Earl of Oxford to the said Office of Chamberlain; and as to the other
Officers abovenamed, the King should make them by the assent of his Council.

The Commons of the Kingdom show to the King, and Council of Parliament, That in
many parts of the Kingdom of England, Ib. n. 88. The Commons complain of the
Practices of the Villanes.
A nostre Seigneur le Roi, and a Conceil du Parliament monstrent la Comune du
Roialme qen plusours parties du Roialm d'Engleterre, etc.) Villanes, and Land
Tenants in Villenage, as well of Holy Church, as Lay Lords, which owed Services
and Customs to their Lords, had withdrawn them of late, and did daily withdraw
them, by procurement of certain Advisers, Maintainers, and Abettors in the
Country who received Money of them, by color of Exemplifications purchased in
the King's Court out of Domesday Book, of the Manors and Towns where they
dwelt, by virtue whereof, and the ill Interpretations of them, they said they
were quit discharged of all manner of servage, as well of their Bodies as
Tenures, and would not suffer any Distress to be taken, or Justice done upon
them, threatening their Lords Servants to Kill or Maim them, and gathered
themselves together in great Routs, and agreed by Confederacy to aid one
another by force to resist their Lords; Therefore to prevent the Mischiefs
which might ensue, Ibm.
and to avoid the like Danger that lately happened in France, by such Rebellion
and Confederacy of the Villanes against Lords, they prayed due Remedy.

The Answer was, Ib. To. The Answer to the Complaint of the Commons.
That as to the Exemplifications, Grants, and what had been done in Chancery,
it was declared in Parliament, that they could not, nor ought not to be of any
value, or hold place, as to the freedom of their Bodies, nor change the
condition of their Tenure and Customs anciently due, nor do prejudice to their
Lords concerning them; who if they would, might have Letters Patents of this
Declaration under the Broad Seal; and also the Lords that found themselves
grieved, might have special Commissions to Justices of Peace, and others, to
enquire of all such Rebels, and their Offenses, and their Counselors,
Advisers, and Abettors; and to imprison all those that shall be brought before
them, without Bail, Mainprise, or otherwise, until they were prosecuted and
acquit, etc. See Statutes at large, Rich. II. which agrees with the
Parlement-Roll in many things, though not in all.

The Commons pray further, Ibm. n. 95.
That a Parliament may be holden The Commons Petition for a Parliament.
in a convenient Place once a Year, to redress Delays in Suits, and to end such
Cases wherein the Judges were of different Opinions.

They had this Answer: Ibm. To. The Answer to that Petition.
The Statutes therefore made shall be observed and kept; and as to the Place
where the Parliament King will do his Pleasure.

The Citizens of London demanded, Ibm. n. 131. The Citizens of London demand
they may have their own Interpretation of their Charters.
That upon the King's special Grace, for the Enlargement of the Franchise of
their City, that if any Article in the Charters granted by him or his
Progenitors to the said Citizens, should prove difficult or doubtful, and might
be taken in diverse Senses, then that the Sense they claimed to have it in,
might be allowed.

This was the Ibm. To. The Interpretation of Charters belongs to the King, etc.
Rencounters between the English and French, etc.
Answer: That the Interpretation of the King's Charters belonged to him; and if
any Doubt arose, the King, by Advice of his Council, would make such
Interpretation as should be according to Reason and Good Faith (and bone Foy.)

Several Walf. A. D. 1377, 1378. 1 and 2 R^^. II.
Rencounters, Burning and Plundering each others Towns on the Coasts, and some
in the Countries, taking and surprising of some small Towns and Castles
happened between the English and French at this time.

The Town of Ibm. The Town of Ard betrayed.
Ard was betrayed to the French. Sir Thomas de Hilton Governor of Aquitan,
marched with a few English against a Body of French, was overcome by them, and
taken Prisoner, with many Noblemen of that Country of the English Party. About
the same time the English having notice, that there were many Spanish Ships in
the Harbor of Sluse in Flanders, set out a great Fleet to surprise them, under
the Command of Thomas of Woodstock Earl of Buckingham, the Duke of Britan,
England, and others, which by Storm was scattered at Sea; but after the Storm,
came together again upon 8 Spanish Ships taken, and 22 of other Nations.
the Coast of England, where they suddenly refitted, and put to Sea again, and
took Eight Spanish Ships near Breast, and Twenty two others of several Nations
laden with French Goods.

Hugh Caverly Governor of Calais, burnt Twenty six French 26 French Ships
burnt.
Ships in the Haven of Bologne, burnt the Low Town, and returned with much
Plunder of Goods and Cattle.

The Men of Rye and Winchelsy sailed toward Normandy, landed The Men of Rye and
Winchelsy land in Normandy* kill and burn etc.
in a small Town and Port, where they killed all they met in the Streets,
except such as they thought able to redeem themselves by Money; those they
carried Prisoners to their Ships; and then burning the Town and Country,
returned home with a rich Prey.

About this time the Duke of Lancaster desired to have the Money The Duke of
Lancaster equips a great Fleet.
granted the last Parliament, upon promise to secure the Kingdom from Invasion
of all Enemies for one Year, and to do some other great Good to the Nation;
which at length he obtained; and provided a great Fleet, and also for his
Assistance hired Nine Ships at Bayon, which in coming hither encountered a Fleet
of Spaniards, and took Fourteen Ships laden with Wine and other Merchandise.

Henry the Bastard, that called himself King of Spain, hearing Henry the
Bastard King of Spain prepares a great Fleet to opposehim.
what those of Bayon had done, and that the Duke of Lancaster was putting to
Sea with a great Fleet and Force, fearing him, by reason of his Title to his
Kingdom, prepared a great Navy to oppose him, and if he could to take him
Prisoner. The Duke The Duke delayed his putting to Sea. The English Fleet
beaten^ by the Spaniards.
delayed the time of his putting to Sea; the Chief Officers of the Fleet were
disturbed at it, and sailed without him; and having been some days at Sea, met
the Spanish Fleet, by which they were Hugh Courtney, a Famous Soldier, taken,
with many others. This Misfortune, says Walsingham, was imputed to the Duke,
for that he made such long Delays; but whether he was in Fault, knew not.

And while he was thus Dilatory, John Mercer a Scot, with a Ships taken out of
Scarburgh Haven by John Mercer a Scot. J. Philpot sets out Men of War at his
own Charge; Takes Mercer with all his own and 15 Spanish Ships that had joined
him: Was questioned for it, but discharged.
small Force of French, Scots, and Spaniards, took some Ships in Scarburgh
Haven, killing some of the Mariners, and carried them with him to Sea.

John Philpot, a rich Citizen of London, considering the Negligence, if not the
Falsity of those who were to defend the Nation, and provide against such
Inconveniences, at his own Charge set out some Men of War, which met with
Mercer, and 15 Spanish Ships that had joined him, and behaving themselves
bravely, took him and all the Ships with him, recovering the Ships that were
taken at Scarburgh, and taking great Riches in the Spanish and other Ships.
John Philpot was taxed by the Lords for presuming without Advice of the King's
Council; but he made such a Defense before the Earl of Stafford, and others,
that called him to account, as he was suffered to depart, without further
Trouble for that matter.

Still the Duke delayed his going to Sea, it not being known for what Reason,
until the Spring and beginning of Summer were over; but by his Persuasion the
Earls of Salisbury and Arundel set sail, and landed in Normandy, who compounded
with the King of Navarre, then become Enemy to the King of France, for the Town
and Port of Cherburgh, then very considerable, in The King of Navarre sells
Cherburgh in Normandy to the English. The Duke of Lancaster puts to Sea; Lands
in Britany; Returns ingloriously.
which was placed a Garrison of English; and so the Earls returned.

At length the Duke of Lancaster went to Sea, and with him the Earls of
Buckingham, Stafford, Warwick, and others of the English Nobility, with a great
Force; they landed in Britany, where Sir Robert Knolls burnt several Towns, and
lost many of Duke besieged St. Malo; but it was so well defended as he raised
the Siege, and returned home. Walsingham says, at first the Townsmen would have
yielded, so as the Town might have been preserved from being burnt and
plundered. The Duke would not accept it, but upon Discretion, and that he might
do with it what he pleased. In the mean time the French landed in Cornwall, and
burnt Fowey, or Foy, and The French land in Cornwall; Burn Foy and other Towns.
A Truce between the English and Scots, who had burnt Roxburgh, etc.
and several other Towns, without Resistance.

The Scots taking the Advantage of the present time, burnt Roxburgh, and
spoiled the Country thereabout; whereupon a Truce was made between the English
and them for some time.

On Rot. Parl. 2 Ric. II. n. 1, 2. Part 1. A Parliament at Gloucester. The Scots
make Alliance with the French.
Thursday the 21st of October (it having met the Day before) the Parliament sat
at Gloucester, in the Great Hall of the Abbey there. The Bishop of St. David's,
then Lord Chancellor, declared Scots at Roxburgh; and that since, Ibm. n. 7.
notwithstanding the Truce, they had made Alliance with the French against
England.

Next Day Monsieur Richard le Scrop, Steward of the Household, enlarged upon the
Causes of Calling the Parliament; and making excuse for his own Inability, Ibm.
n. 15. Declaration of Summons.
told the Prelates, Lords, and Commons, as the Chancellor had said before, That
the Nation Ports of Cherburgh and Breast, which of a long time had not been in
the hands of the English, besides Calais, Bordeaux, and Bayon, with the
Countries about them, were very chargeable to maintain; Calais, with its
Marches, or Limits about it, stood the King in 24000 l. every Year, and Breast
12000 Marcs; and the other three Places according to the same Rate.

Afterward Ibm. n. 16 The Speaker's Request and Protestation in behalf of
himself and Commons.
Sir James Pickering, Speaker of the House of Commons, with the Commons came
before the King, Prelates, and Lords in Parliament ( and puis le Comunes
reviendrent devant le Roy, les Prelates en Parliament, and illoeques Monsieur
James de Pickering, etc.) making Protestation, as well for himself as for the
whole Commons of England: First, for the Commons, That if he should utter any
thing to the Prejudice, Damage, Slander, or Disgrace of the King or his Crown,
or in lessening the Honor or Estate of the Great Lords, it might not be taken
notice of by the King, and that the Lords would hold it for nothing, and
primerment pur la dite Comune, que si per cas il y did chooses que purreit
sooner en Prejudice, Damage, Esclandre, ou Villain de nostre Seigneur le Roy ou
de sa Corone, ou en anientisement del Honor and Estate des Grants Seigneurs du
Roialm, que ce ne feust acceptez par le Roy, and les Seigneurs eins te^^^ pur
null, come Riens nent este dit;) for that the Commons soveraignly desired (
soveraignment desirent) to maintain the Honor and Estate of the King, and the
Rights of the Crown in all preserve the Reverence due to the Lords in all
Parts. So much for the Commons. For his own Person, he made Protestation, That
if by Indiscretion he spoke any thing by Common Assent of his Companions, it
might be amended by them before their departure, or afterward*

He then Ibm. n. 17.
rehearsed in short Words the Articles of the Charge ( il rehearceast en
courts Paroles les Articles de les Chargez a eaux donez:) And first for the
Liberties and Franchises, for the Liberties and Franchise of the Church. Good
Laws and Customs.
Honor of God granted to Holy Church, and for the King's Promise of preserving
the Good Laws and Customs of his Kingdom entirely, and punishing such as should
any thing do against them; the Commons humbly thanked him with their whole
Hearts, kneeling upon the Ground ( les genulx a Terre) and praying God they
might be put in due Execution.

As to the Aid the King Ibm. n. 18. The Commons Pretenses why they ought or
could not grant an Aid.
demanded of his Commons, for the Defense and Safety of the Kingdom, and for
the Safeguard of his Lordships, Lands, Towns, and Forts beyond Sea, and toward
his Wars; the Commons said ( la Comune dit) That in the last Parliament in his
first Year, the same things were shown unto them in behalf of the King, at
which time they answered, It was apparent the King had not so great need for an
Aid, seeing he had in his hands the Priories alien, the Subsidies of Wool, the
Revenues of the Crown, the Lands of the Prince his Father, and many other Great
Lordships, by the Nonage of the Heirs of them; and that therefore there must be
great Plenty of Money in the Treasury. To which the King's Council then
answered, That lately the Charge of the Coronation had been very great, and
that the Money upon those Funds they mentioned came in very slowly, nor could
they be collected soon enough for an Expedition that Year. And it was then
further said, That if the Commons King with ^ great Sum of Money, to make such
an Expedition as might be for the Destruction of his Enemies ( en destruction
des ses Enemies) they hoped he might have Money sufficient afterward from time
to time to maintain the War and defend the Kingdom. And thereupon the Commons
then said, That in hopes of that Promise, to be discharged of Tallage for a
great time after, they granted a greater Sum than had been given to any King to
be levied in so short a time: And all Commons, that there must be a great Sum
in the Treasury, besides what had been expended in the last Voyage; so that the
King had no need to charge the Commons, who were in a lower Condition than
ever, by reason of that Payment, and lately by the Murrein amongst their
Cattle, and their Enemies Burnings upon the Seacoasts: That their Corn and
other Chattels were at so low a Rate, that no Money could be raised at present.
And hereupon they prayed the King pur pure Povertee.)

To all which, Ibm. n. 19. A full Answer to those Pretenses. The Commons
charged with untruth.
Monsieur Richard le Scrop answered, making Protestation, That he knew of no
such Promise made in the last Parliament; and saving the Honor and Reverence
due to the King and Lords, what the Commons said was not True; ( le dit de la
Comune en celle party ne contient my veritee:) And as to the Subsidy last
granted, that a great part of it was in the Treasury, to Testimony of William
Walworth and John Philpot, who by their Consent were appointed Receivers of
them, that every Penny thereof was expended upon the War, and that not one
Penny came to the High Treasurer of England, or any other to the Use of the
King: That the Revenues of the Crown, besides the Annuities and other Charges
upon them granted by his Grandfather and Father, were too Customs of Wool, and
Lands of the Priors aliens, the Honor and Estate of the King could not be
maintained: And therefore they were to know, that according to Reason they
ought to relinquish their Complaint, if they pleased ( a celle pleint vo^s faut
par Reason cesser, si vous plest.)

Whereupon the Commons, Ib. n. 20. The Commons request to know how the Money
had been expended; To know the Names of the Great Officers and Governors of
the King's Person for the Year ensuing.
after a short Deliberation, made it their Request to the King, he would please
to show them how and in what manner the great Sums given for the War had been
expended; and also, that he would please to let them know the Names of such as
should be the Great Officers of the Kingdom, and who his Counselors, and
Governors of his Person, being yet of tender Age, for the next Year, as it had
been before Ordained in Parliament.

To which it was Ib. n. 21. The Answer to both those Requests.
answered, on the behalf of the King, by the said Monsieur Richard, That though
there never was any account given of Subsidies, or any other Grant made in
Parliament or out of Parliament, to the Commons, or any other but to the King and
his Officers; yet he willed and commanded of his own motion, to please the
Commons, not that it was of Right for him so to do, or that he was forced to it
do, by reason of their Request William Walworth then present, with some of his
Council assigned thereto by him, should in Writing clearly show them the
Receipts and Expenses, so as it should not be drawn into Example for the future.

As to the Officers, the King had caused them to be chosen by the Advice of the
Lords: And as to his Counselors, they should be such as pleased him ( and
serra les Counselors de tieux come luy plerra) whose Names they should receive
in certain ( si plest au Roy.)

The King commanded, charged, and prayed them, and also all The Commons
commanded and prayed to dispatch their Parliament Business.
the Lords present prayed them, ( and nostre Seigneur le Roy vous command and
charge, enpriant, and ainsi vous priont touz les Seigneur cy presentz) That
having due Consideration of the great apparent Dangers on all sides, they would
provide for the Defense of the Kingdom, which not only concerned the King, but
all and every one of them, and think how the War might be maintained, and give
as speedy an Answer as they could, that the Parliament To save the Charge of the
poor Commons in paying their Wages.
might have an end, and good effect, in ease of the King, Lords, and
themselves, for the Profit of the Kingdom, and Discharge of the poor Commons,
that every day paid their Expenses during the Parliament; which was one of their
principal Charges given the first day. Another was, That if any Fault was found
in any part of the Kingdom, or Government, in the Laws, or any other manner,
that they would bring in their Petitions concerning it, and they

The Commons desire to have the time limited to bring in They desire the
Parliament may be continued to Nov. 2. It began October. 20.
their Common Bills, or Petitions; and that it might be prolonged to the Feast
of All Souls, or 2d of November next coming, that Day to be accounted in ( and
ce lour estoit ottroiez) which was granted.

Also the Ibm n. 22* They pray ^^ have a Copy of the Enrolment of the last
Subsidy of 15ths and 10ths. Granted it the King's Pleasure, not their Request.
Commons prayed the King to have a Copy of the Enrolment of the last Subsidy of
Fifteenths and Tenths, as enrolled upon the Roll of Parliament, for them to
advise upon ( and ce lour estoit ottroiez, come de la voluntee, nostre Seigneur
le Roy, and ne mye a lour Request:) And this was granted as the King's
Pleasure, and not upon their Request.

They pray Ib. n. 23. How and in what manner a Committee of Lords and Commons
were chosen to Treat and Confer. And the Reports to be made.
likewise, That Five or Six Prelates, and Lords, might come to the Commons to
Treat with them about their Charge; The Lords Answer, they neither ought or
would do it in that manner, which had never been seen but in the Three last
Parlements; but the Custom was, for the Lords to choose a small number of Six
or Ten, and the Commons as many of themselves, and Treat together without
noise, and report what they had done, to their Companions of one part and the
other; according to this Method the Lords would act, and no otherwise, and to
this the Commons assented, to proceed as had anciently been used.

After Ib. n. 24. The Commons upon Perusal of the Inrolment, pleased with the
Accounts. Say, they were not bound to bear any Foreign Charge.
the Commons had seen and Examined the Inrolment, Receipts, and Expenses, they
were well pleased with them, as honorable to the King and Kingdom; They only
said, That 46000 l. which was expended in keeping several Countries, Places,
and Forteresses, as the Marches of Calais, Breast, and Cherburgh, Gascoigny and
Ireland, was not to be charged upon them, nor as it seemed were they bound to
bear any Foreign Charge.

To which Ib. n. 25. The Answer to that.
it was answered, That Gascoigny, and the Forts beyond Sea, were Barbicans, and
as it were Outworks and Defenses to England, and if they were well Guarded, and
the Sea well kept, the Kingdom would be quiet, otherwise it could not be so.

The Commons Ibm. A further Proposition of the Commons to avoid an Aid. The
Answer to that.
then propounded this Charge to be born by the Goods of King Edward the Third,
which the King possessed,

Whereto it was answered, That those Goods were justly prised, and delivered to
those his Grandfather was indebted, except some Necessaries reserved for his
own House, for which he had paid in part, and was to pay in whole for the
satisfaction of his Creditors; and therefore the King commanded, and the
Prelates and Lords The King Commands, and the Lords pray them, to give an
effectual Answer to their Charge.
prayed them, as they had done before, ( and purce nostre Seigneur le Roy vous
command, and les Prelates and Seniors vous priont come devant, etc.) to advise
about their Charges, and give good and effectual Answers, with as much haste as
might be, for the common Profit of the Kingdom, and the Ease of the Lords, and
themselves.

At length, notwithstanding these Excuses, the Ib. n. 29.
Prelates, Lords and Commons, perceiving the great Perils wherewith the The
Prelates, Lords, and Commons, grant a Subsidy of Wool, Leather, etc.
Land was encompassed, and the great and outrageous Expenses the King was to be
at, for the Safety and Defense thereof, granted to Subsidy of Wool, Leather,
and Woollfells, for Three years; Of Wool 43 s. 4 d. the Sack; Of Woollfells as
much, that is, for every 240 of them, (accounting Sixscore to the Hundred;) and
for Leather 4 l. 6 s. 8 d. every Last, which were Exported by Denizens and
Strangers, besides the ancient Custom. And as an additional Grant, they gave
more 13 s. 4 d. for every Sack of Wool, as much for every 240 Woollfells, and
for every Last of Leather 26 s. 8 d. And 6 d. in the Pound upon Merchandise.


Also they Ib. n. 30.
gave 6 d. in the Pound for every Pound value of Merchandise, as well of
Denizens as Strangers, both Imported and Exported, for One year.

The Scots Walsingh. f. 219. n. 10, 20, 30, 40. A. D. 13^8.
on Thursday before St. Andrew, or the 30th of November, in the night,
surprised Berwick Castle, and killed Sir Robert Boynton the Governor, but
suffered his Wife and Children and their Friends to depart, upon Condition to
pay 2000 Marks Berwick surprised by the Scots.
within 3 weeks, or deliver themselves Prisoners; but the Earl of
Northumberland gathered a sufficient Force, and in Nine days retook it by
Assault, putting to the Sword all the Scots he found Retaken by Assault.
in it, except one that was to discover this Contrivance, and the Scots Designs.

The King of France Walsingh. f. 219. n. 50. The Britans forced to Swear to
deliver their Forts and Castles to the King of France upon demand.
about this time assembled a Parliament at Paris, when upon pain of Death he
forced the Noblemen of Britany that were there, to Swear to yield to him the
fortified Towns and Castles they held, whenever he would demand them* At their
return home, they Manned and Victualled their Castles, and Places of Strength;
To reduce them, he sent Bertrand de Clequi^ with a good Army, which the Britans
forced to retire out of their Country.

Sir Robert Rous Ib. f. 220. lin. 13. Governors of Towns changed.
was recalled from the Government of Cherburgh in Normandy, and Sir John
Harleston put in his place; Hugh Calverley, the Earl of Salisbury was made
Governor of Calais; who not long after his coming, entered into France beyond
the Marches, plundered the Country, and brought with him a great Prey.

Sir Hugh Calverley, Ib. n. 20, 30, 40.
and Sir Thomas Percy, were joined in Commission to keep the Sea, who with a
great Force of Armed Men sailed to the Coast of Britany, where they took Seven
Ships of Burden, and One Man of War, and sent them into Bristol; ad
depraedandune patriam couvicinam) who were all taken by Geffry Cormel, a
British Knight, that lay there in Ambush, who commanded his Men not to hurt any
of them; and by a safe Conduct from Sir Hugh Caverley, delivered them all to
The Britans offer to yield their Towns and Castles to the English.
him without Ransom, and informed him, That if he would land, it would much
please the Lords and Inhabitants of the Country, who were ready to deliver unto
him their strong Towns, and Castles, if he would remain there for the Guard of
the Country; who Excused himself, and said he had other Matters to prosecute,
and could not then satisfy their Desires.

The Duke of Britan, by his own Subjects, with the assistance A League
Offensive and Defensive between King Richard and the Duke of Britan.
of the King of France, had been forced out of his own Country in the time of
Edward the Third, and was now in England, and made a very strict League,
Offensive and Defensive, with King Richard, between them and their Subjects,
and no Peace to be France, but by mutual Consent; The Original being in the Old
Chapter House at Westminster, Dated March 1. in the Year of Grace 1379, at
Westminster.

Before this, Rot Clause 2 Ric. II. M. 13 Dors. A Parliament called.
on the 16th of February, Writs were issued for a Parliament to meet 15 days
after Easter, in which the Lords and Commons, considering the great Necessities
of the Kingdom, the Malice of it is Enemies, of France and otherwhere, upon
Condition the Mark upon every Sack of Wool, and the 6 d. in the given in the
last Parliament at Gloucester, should be remitted, did then grant Rot. Part. 2
Rich. II. n. 13. The Subsidy of Wool, etc. granted. And a Sum of Money upon
particular Persons.
the Subsidy of Wool for one year after the Feast of St. Michael next coming,
of every Sack of Wool, as it had been granted before the Parliament at
Gloucester, and likewise a Sum to be paid by diverse Persons of the Kingdom, as
there ordered and named. For which see the Appendix, Numb. 102.

Not long after this Parliament, the Walsingh. f. 225. n. 50. The Duke of Britan
called home. A. D. 1379. and 3d of Ed. III. A great Mortality in the North.
Britans called home their Duke, who was convoyed by Sir Thomas Percy, and Sir
Hugh Calverley, and landed at a Port near St. Malo on the 4th day of August,
where, and in all Places, he was received with a mighty Welcome, and strange
Rejoicings, as well of the Lords and Great Men, as Common People.

This Summer there happened Ib. f. 228. n. 10, 20, 30. The Scots harrass and
plunder the Country.
a great Mortality of People in the North parts of the Kingdom, whereby the
Country became Scots took this advantage, invaded the Borders, harrassed,
robbed, and plundered the same, killing many of the People that were left
alive, driving away vast numbers of Cattle, scarce leaving any thing behind
them, not so much as Hogs, which they never drove away before.

About the Ib. f. 231. n. 50. f. 232. n. 10, 20, etc. A Fleet and Army to
assist the Duke of Britan.
Feast of St. Nicholas, or 6th of December, this Third year of the King, a
Fleet, with an Army, to assist the Duke of Britan against the King of France,
who had invaded his Towns and Castles, was to have passed into that Dukedom,
under the Conduct of Sir John Arundel, Sir Hugh Calverley, Sir Thomas Percy,
Sir William Elinham, Sir Thomas Morews, Sir Thomas Banestor, and many other
Knights and Esquires, great Soldiers; so soon as they were out at Sea, there
arose an horrible Tempest, which scattered the Fleet, and The Fleet destroyed
by Tempest.
drove them they knew not whether, Sir John Arundel's Ship was lost, and
himself drowned, as likewise Twenty five more, and Thomas Percy, Sir Hugh
Caverley, and Sir William Elinham, with others of Note, hardly escaped.

At the same time, says F. 335. n. 40. The French and Spanish Fleet destroyed
by the same Tempest.
Walsingham, the Spaniards and French had brought together a mighty Fleet out
of France, Spain, Portugal, and other Countries subject to them, to hinder the
landing of the English in Britany, but met with the same Storm and Tempest, and
lost more Men and Ships then the English did.

On the 20th of October last past the King had sent forth Rot. Clause 3 Ric.
II. M. 32. Dors. A Parliament called.
Writs for a Parliament to meet on Monday next after St. Hillary, or the 14th of
January, wherein the Commons, by their Speakers, Rot. Parl. 3 Ric. II. n. 12.
A. D. 1380. The Commons pray the Continual Council may be discharged. The Five
great Officers not to be changed until next Parliament.
pray, That the Prelates and other Lords of the Continual Council, may be
discharged, and no such to be retained, seeing the King was of good Discretion
and Stature (de bone Discretion and Bell Stature) in respect of his Age, which
agreed with the Age of his Grandfather, at the time of his Coronation,
Counselors, but the Five Principal Officers of his Realm; Praying further,
Those Five Officers, that is to say, the Chancellor, Treasurer, Guardian of the
Privy Seal, Chief Chamberlain, and Steward of the Household, not to be renewed
or changed until the next Parliament.

They likewise Ibm. n. 13, 14. A Commission of Inquiry into Courts, the State
of the King's House, Receipts and Expenses, etc.
Pray a Commission to certain Commissioners, to Survey and Examine, in all
Courts and Places, the State of the King's Household, the Expenses and Receipts
in all the Offices, etc. This was granted, and a Commission made to the Earls
of Arundel, Warwick, and Stafford, William Latimer, Guy Bryan, and John
Montacute, Banerets, John Hastings, John Gildesborough, and Edward Dalyngrugge,
Knights, William Walworth, and John Philpot, Citizens of London, and Thomas
Graa, Citizen of York, etc.

Then the Ib. n. 16. The Lords and Commons grant a Fifteenth and half, and
Tenth and half. For an Expedition into Britany.
Lords and Commons, perceiving the King and Kingdom were set round with
Enemies, who with great Force endeavored all they could, as well by Land as
Sea, to destroy them both, and further to extinguish the English Language,
therefore for the Defense and Safety of the Kingdom, and for the good Success
of the Expedition ordered into Britany, and Destruction of the said Enemies,
grant freely, tho it was very hard to be born, to the King One Fifteenth and
half without Cities and Burghs, and One Tenth and half within Cities and
Burghs; with Prayer, That his Subsidy, and what was remaining of that given the
last Parliament might only be applied to the Expedition into Britany, and no
where else.

Considering also, Ib. n. 17. The Subsidy of Wool, and granted a further time.
that the Subsidy of Woolls, Leather, and Woollfells, was to end at Michaelmas
next coming, and that from thence the King was not able to endure the great
Charges he was to be at, to maintain the War in the Marches of ^alais, Breast,
Cherburgh, in Gascoigny, Ireland, and the Marches of Scotland, they grant him
the same Subsidies, from the time they were to end, until Michaelmass next
after; praying the King, there might not be a Parliament to charge the Poor
Commons, until a year after Michaelmas next coming.

The Scots toward the latter end of this Walsingh. f. 240. n. 30, 40. A. D.
1380. The Barbarity of the Scots in Cumberland and Westmerland.
Summer invade Cumberland and Westmerland, raging, killing, and burning every
where, and driving away, as the Historian says it was reported, Penreth, where
was then a great Fair and Conflux of People, they killed some, carried away
others Captive, and with them, all the Goods of the Town and Fair.

The Earl of Northumberland was preparing to Ibm.
drive them out of the Country and Borders, and force them to make
Satisfaction, Which was to be considered on the March-Day.
or do the same things in Scotland, when he received a Prohibition from the
King not to do any thing, but to expect the March Day, which was a day
appointed for the English and Scots to meet every year, and adjust things done
by either Nation upon the Borders.

In the same year, Mezeray, f 398. The Death of Charles King of France.
on the 16th of September, died Charles the Fifth King of France, called The
Wise; On his Deathbed he left the Regency to his next Brother the Duke of
Anjou, directing him to make some Agreement with the Duke of Britan if
possible.

His Eldest Son Ibm. f. 400, 401. His Son Charles succeeds him
Charles succeeded him, being then about Twelve years of Age, and was Crowned
at Rheims on the 4th of November.

At this time there were great Ib. and f. 402, 403. Great Tumults and Disorders
in France.
Tumults and Disorders in France, by reason the Duke of Anjou had not taken off
the Imposts, as his Brother had Commanded on his Deathbed, but settled new
ones, especially upon the City of Paris.

The like Ibm. and Walsingh f. 241. n. 20, 30. The same in Flanders.
Mutinies, Confusions, and Tumults, were then in Flanders, by the Seditious
People against their Earl, especially those of Ipre, and Gaunt, having received
great Provocations from him, as Walsingham relates it.

After the Froysard, c. 360.
Disaster of the Fleet and Army under the Command of Sir John Arundel, Sir
Thomas Percy, etc. the Duke of Britan this Summer about Whitsuntide, sent to
the King for Assistance against the King of France. Thomas of Woodstock; Earl
The Duke of Britan sends to the King for Assistance.
of Buckingham, Ibm.
as General, the Earl of Stafford, and many Barons, Knights, and Esquires, of
great Note and Skill in Arms, were appointed and retained for this Expedition,
and Ibm.
landed at Calais on the 19th of July 1380, and marched from thence into
Britany through Champagne, and other Countries, by small Marches, without any
considerable Disturbance, Ib. c 363, and 365.
wasting the Countries as they went, staying 2, 3, 4 days, or more, at every
Britany, the Englishmen wondered they Ib. c. 368. The Duke's negligence.
heard not from the Duke, the Earl sent to him Sir Thomas Percy, and Sir Thomas
Trivet, who met him on the way going to the Earl; When they came together at
Rennes, they resolved to besiege Nantes, as the most obstinate and Rebellious
Ib. c. 369. The English besiege Nants.
Town in Britany, the Duke to assist the Earl in this Siege with his whole
Force; The English remained 15 days at Rennes to Town had notice of these
things, who sent to the Duke of The Duke's further Negligence.
Anjou, to send them some French Officers and Soldiers, to join with them for
the Maintenance of the Place, and they had them. The English lay before Ib. c.
374. They raise the Siege.
Nantes Two months and four days, and never heard of the Duke or his Men, when
on the day after New-years-day they raised the Siege, and marched toward
Vannes, where the Duke was, and there, and several other Towns near Britany,
the English were Quartered all Winter. Ibm.
The Earl's intention was at the Spring to march into France, and to that
purpose sent into England for more Forces; The King and his Council approved
his Design, and engaged to send another Army to land at Cherburgh in due time
to join him.

All this while the Duke had Ibm. The Duke of Britan makes his Peace privately
with France.
had Commissioners at Paris, privately making his Peace with the Duke of Anjou,
which was concluded upon these Articles: First, it was agreed, That the Duke of
Britan should provide Ships to carry back the English into their own Country.
Secondly, That the Garrison of Cherburgh, The Articles of that Peace.
which was with the Earl before Nantes, should, if they would, return thither
by Land, and have Safe Conduct. Thirdly, That after the departure of the
English, the Duke to go into France, and do his Homage and Fealty to the French
King, as his Natural Lord. Ibm.
Soon after this Agreement, the Duke came to Vannes, and Earl with it, excusing
himself by the obstinacy of his People, and that otherwise he must have lost
his Country. Ibm.
On the 11th of April the Earl, with the English, set Sail from Vannes, and
other small Ports near, and came for England.

About Michaelmass Holinshed, f. 428. and Walsingh. f. 244. n. 20, 30. The Duke
of Lancaster went with a great Force into the North parts. And did nothing.
the Duke of Lancaster, the Earls of Warwick and Stafford, with other Lords,
and great Soldiers, with a great Force, went into the North Parts, to Account
with the Scots for their late Invasion, and lay so long in Northumberland, as
they ruined the Country more then a Scottish Irruption would have done; They
made a Truce with the Scots for half a year, and so returned, bringing nothing
from Scotland but some Horses, which they divided amongst themselves.

On Monday next after the To. Parl. 4 Ric. II. n. 1, 2. A Parliament at
Northampton.
Feast of all All Saints, there was a Parliament holden at Northampton, which
was adjourned until Thursday, at which time the Archbishop of Canterbury, then
Chancellor, tho many Temporal Lords were absent in the Marches of Scotland,
with the Duke of Lancaster, declared the Causes of their Meeting, Ib. n. 3, 4.
The Cause of Summons.
saying it could not be unknown to them, That the Earl of Buckingham had been
sent over into France with an Army, which had cost the King more then was given
him last Parliament, besides the Expedition into Scotland, the Defense of The
King's Necessities and great Charge. Forced to Pawn his Jewels.
Guien, and his Charge in Ireland, had put him to so great Expenses as he had
been forced to pawn his Jewels, the Subsidy of Wooll's coming to little by
reason of the present Riot or Confusion in Flanders; That the Soldiers in the
Marches of Calais, Breast, and Cherburgh, were in Arrear more then Three months,
and there was fear they might desert for want of their Pay; That they were to
Consider the King was mightily in Debt; That he Covenant and Indenture, to pay
the Earl of Buckingham and others in that Expedition, for another half year,
which was near ended; and that the King was to be at a very great Charge for
Guarding the Coasts; And at last desires them to Advise the King, how this
Charge might be born with the most Ease, and the Kingdom best defended against
all its Enemies by Land and by Sea, in as short time as they could.

And when the Ib. n. 10. The Commons, with with their Speaker, in presence of
the King. Prelates, and Lords. Desire to know what Sum was demanded, to supply
the King's Necessity.
Commons had Treated one day about their Et Apres les dites Comunes avoient
enter comuner and tretes un jour de lour dit charge) they returned into the
Parliament in presence of the King, Prelates, and Lords, and there Monsieur John
Gildesburgh, Knight. their Speaker, demanded a more clear Declaration of what had
been said to them, and especially what Sum they would demand to support the
Charge, praying no more might be required then was necessary, ( and illoeges
Monsieur Johan Gildesburgh Chivaler quavoit les paroles pur la Comune,
demandast de par la Comune illoeque davoir pluis clear Declaration de leur
dite, and per especial de la some totale, quelle leur verroit ore demander, pur
les ditz charges supporter empriantz que celle sum fuist tielment modefiez,
que pluis ny fust demandez que ne convendroit necessairement) for that the
Commons were poor, and of small Estate to bear the Charge any longer; Ib. n.
11. The Sum demanded was 160000 l.
whereupon a Schedule was delivered in by the King's great Officers, and
Council, containing the Sums necessary, which amounted to One hundred and sixty
thousand Pounds Sterling.

The Commons pray Ib. n. 12. The Commons think it an Outrageous and importable
Sum. And pray the Prelates and Lords would Treat and Propound the Ways how a
portable Sum might be levied.
the King, and Lords, ( la Comune empriantz a nostre Seigneur le Roy, and as
Seigneurs du Parliament) for that they thought the Sum demanded, was much
outrageous, ( que la sum de eulx ore demandez si est moelt outrageous) and
importable, That they would use such moderation, as nothing might be demanded
but what was portable, and necessary now to have, for the Causes above set
forth; And further, they pray, That Prelates and Lords would Treat by
themselves about the Matter, and propound the Ways by which any such Sum
portable might be levied and collected.

After the Ib. n. ^3: The Lords cause the Commons to come before them.
Lords had advised about the Matter, they caused the Commons to come before
them, ( ils firent la Comune venir autre foitz devant eulx) and told them what
they had thought on; First, That a certain Sum of Groats might be granted of
every Person of the Kingdom, Males and Females, the more sufficient to help the
less sufficient. Secondly, if that pleased And propound several Ways of raising
Money to them.
not, to have for a term an Imposition upon all manner of Merchandises bought
and sold through the Realm, every time they should be sold, to be paid by the
Vendor. And, Thirdly, Their Advice was to raise a certain Sum by Tenths, and
Fifteenths. But because the last were very grievous to the poor Commons, ( a la
pour Comune) and that Impositions had never been tried before, nor could it be
known to what Sum they would rise, nor in what time a notable Sum might be
raised, and therefore the Lords pitched upon the Groats, and propounded four or
five to be levied upon every Person as above, so as the most able might be
constrained to assist the less able; This way of Tallage seeming to them the
best and most easy.

The Ib. n. 14. The Commons desire One Third of the Tax might be born by the
Clergy.
Commons, when they had a long time Treated upon came into Parliament and made
Protestation, they came not to grant any thing that day, but they thought if
the Clergy would support a Third part of the Charge, they would grant 100000
l. to be raised by a certain number of Groats, so as the Laity might pay 100000
Marks, and the Clergy 50000, for that they possessed a Third part of the
Kingdom; and prayed the King and Temporal Lords, to move it to them, speedily
to resolve and take upon them the Charge.

To which the Clergy Ibm. The Clergy claim the Liberty of the Church, and
affirm their Grants ought not to be made in Parliament.
Replied, That their Grants were never made in Parliament, nor ought to be, and
that the Laymen neither ought or could constrain them in that Case, and claim
the Liberty of the Church, which it had enjoyed before that time, and desire
the Commons might be charged to do what they ought, and were bound to do, (
come ils deivent and sont Tenuz del fair) and they would do in the present
necessity as they had done before.

At last the Ib. n. 15. Three Groats granted upon every Person.
Lords and Commons agreed to give Three Groats Males and Females, of the Age of
Fifteen years, of what Condition and Estate soever they were, except very
Beggars; The Sufficient People in every Town to contribute to the assistance of
the less able, so as none paid above Sixty Groats, including those for himself
and Wife; The whole to be for the Support of the Earl of Buckingham, and the
other Lords, and People with him in Britan, and for Defense of the Kingdom, and
Safeguard of the Sea: Two parts to Hillary, and the other at Whitsunday next
after. No Knights, Citizens, or Burgesses of this Parliament to be Collectors of
this Money, but that the King would order through the Kingdom such as should
equally levy it, according to the meaning of this Grant.

Toward the latter end of this Fourth year of Richard the Second, Many Riots
and Insurrections in the Nation.
there happened many Riots, Insurrections, and Rebellions in many places of the
Kingdom; The Historians tell us this Groat Tax, and the Insolence, Incivility,
and Rudeness of the Collectors to young Maidens, was the cause of them; They
The Three Groat Tax the supposed cause of them.
might at first be the pretense, and give occasion to put in execution what the
Leaders and Contrivers of the intended general Insurrection of the Villanes,
Natives, Bond-Tenents, and Clowns, designed in the First of this King, the
Demands and Practices of these Men being built upon the same foundation.

These Insurrections began first in Kent and Essex: In Kent, under They began
in Kent and Essex, Wat Tiler, Jack Straw.
the Leading of Wat Tiler; in Essex, under the Conduct of Jack Straw. The Walls.
f. ^47. n. 40, 50. and f, 248. A. D. 1381.
Bulk of the People were Villains, Bond-Tenants, Country Clowns, such as were
in Debt, and knew not how to satisfy their Creditors, and Criminals, who
feared the Severity of the Law. The Kentish Rebels Rendezvoused upon
Black Heath, to a vast number, on Ibm. and f. 249, 250, 251, 252, 253, etc.
Their Pretenses.
Wednesday, June 12. Their Pretenses Liberty, changing the Evil Customs of the
Nation, and cutting off the Heads of all the Lawyers great and small, and all
that had any Offices in the Law, or Relation to it any way, wherever they
could find them; for that the Nation could not enjoy a true Liberty until they
were killed. Ibm.
The King sent to them to know the Reason of that Commotion, and the gathering
together of such a Multitude. They told the Messengers they met to speak with
the King about certain matters, and ordered them to go back, King persuaded him
to go forthwith: The Archbishop of Canterbury, Simon de Sudbury then
Chancellor, and Sir Robert Hales Prior of St. John's of Jerusalem, then Lord
Treasurer, earnestly dissuaded him, moving him rather to think of suppressing,
than going to speak with such a Rabble about Business. Ibm.
Of which these rude People having notice, they threaten to cut off their
Heads: And forthwith marching toward London, came to Southwark, where they
pulled down Froys. c. 383. Their Practices.
Houses, brake open the King's Prisons, and let forth the Prisoners, who joined
with them. The Bridge-Gate was shut against them; but by the Assistance of
their Friends in the City, and by their Menaces and Threatenings of the
Citizens, if they had not free Passage into the City, the Ibm. and Walls. ut
supra.
Gates were opened, and they passed backwards and forwards into and out of the
City as they pleased, giving out they came only to search for Traitors to the
Kingdom; and at that time paid for what they called for, which got them
Reputation with the low and ordinary Citizens, of whom a great many joined with
them. Next Day, which was the Feast of Corpus Christi, or 13th of June, they
marched through the City to the Savoy, the Duke of Lancaster's House, whom they
called Traitor, and hated above all Men: This Ibm.
House they burnt and beat down, and destroyed all the rich Furniture, throwing
his Gold and Jewels into the Thames, as likewise all his Plate, first breaking
it into small pieces, and made it by Proclaclamation Capital for any one to
retain any thing to his own use, that they might show the People what they did
was not out of Covetousness. Ibm.
From hence they went to the Temple, then an Habitation for Lawyers; this they
demolish, and burn all their Books and Papers, with the Records that were there
kept. Ibm.
From this Place they go to Clerkenwell, where they destroy all the Goods in
the Hospital of St. John, and set fire on that Ibm.
They now divided themselves into Three Bodies; one went to Heybury, a Manor
belonging to the Hospital of St. John's near London, where they were busy in
destroying and plundering all the Goods belonging to it, and pulling down a
Noble House that stood there. Ibm.
A second Body of them, which were most of Essex and the Countries adjoining,
lodged themselves upon Mile-end-Green; and the third about St. Katherines and
Tower Hill.

Next Day being Friday, and June 14th, Fr^^s. c. 384. Walls. ^t supra.
the King with several Noblemen went to Mile-end-Green, and telling them he was
their King, asked those People (being about 60000) what they would have? They
told him, They desired he would make them free, themselves, their Heirs, and
Lands, and that they might not be called or reputed Bondmen. The King granted
their Append. n. 103.
Charters of Freedom, Sealed with the Great Seal, which should contain what
they demanded. With this, and with mighty and most quick Dispatch, having
received some of their Charters, they were satisfied, and went to their own
Places and Countries.

At the very same time Froys. and Walls. ut supra.
the Kentish-men, and those with Tower Hill and about St. Katherines, went into
the Tower, the Gates being open without Resistance, though there were in it 600
Archers, and 600 other Armed Men, who were so terrified and astonished at the
Number, Noise, and Practices of this vast Multitude, that they never regarded
who went in, or who went out; from whence they took out the Archbishop of
Canterbury, Lord Chancellor, Sir Robert They cut off the Heads of the A. Bp. of
Canterbury, Sir R. Hale^, etc.
Hales Lord Treasurer, John Leg, one of the King's Sergeants at Arms, and a
Franciscan Friar, and upon Tower Hill cut off their Heads. After this they went
into the City, and cut off the Ibm.
Heads of many English and Flemings there. They drew out of the Church of the
Augustine Friars 13 Flemings, and out of other Churches 17 more, and cut off
their Heads in the Streets (that being their only way of Murder) with mighty
Shouts and Rejoicing.

Next Day, being the 15th of June, Ibm.
they began to do as King then sent to them to let them know their Companions
at Mile-end-Green, upon their receiving Charters of Freedom, were separated,
and gone home to live quietly, with offer to them of Charters according to the
same Form, if they would accept them. Ibm.
Wat Tiler their Great Leader replied, He would embrace Peace, if he liked the
Conditions: Thinking this way to have delayed the King and Council, so as kill
the King and the Great Men that adhered to him; to have pillaged, plundered,
and burnt the City, knowing all the poor People were with him. Ibm.
There were three several Charters sent, but none pleased him. The King at last
sent to him, that he would come and treat with him about the Articles he
insisted upon to have inserted in the Charter; and when the Messenger desired
him to make haste, he bid him if he were so much in haste, return King; he
would come when he pleased. Ibm.
When he came with his Multitude behind him into Smithfield, where the King
was, he behaved himself with such intolerable Rudeness toward the King and
those about him, and making such Demands as could not be granted; the King
commanded William Walworth Major of London to Arrest him, who with great
Courage struck him a Blow on the Head, with which he sunk upon his Horse, W^t
Tiler k(...)knight down by the Major of London, and killed.
and others of the King's Servants and Citizens thrust him through the Body in
diverse places, when he fell dead off his Horse almost under the King's Horse's
Feet; Ibm.
who finding his Followers much moved at their Captain's Death, lest they
should proceed to do further Mischief, rode up to them, with his Military Men
and Friends about him, and spoke to them not to be troubled for the Death of
such a Rogue and Traitor; telling them he was their King, and would be their
Captain and Leader, bidding them follow him into the Fields, where they should
have what they would ask. In the mean time, the Major of London got 1000 Men
into Arms, and put Sir Robert Knolls at the Head of them, His Followers lay
down Arms, and beg pardon.
who marching into the Fields in good Order, so daunted the Rustic Rebels, that
they threw down such Arms as they had, laid themselves upon the Ground, and
begged Pardon. Ibm.
Whereupon Proclamation was immediately made in London, that the Citizens
should have no Correspondency with them, nor permit any one of them to come
into the City. The Military Men about the King ask him to permit them to serve
the Rebels as they had served others, to cut off an Hundred or two of their
Heads. He would not consent, lest the Innocent might suffer The King's great
Mercy to them.
with the Guilty, many having been drawn in by Fear, and such fair Pretenses,
as they could not know but they might be Good and Loyal. And beyond this
unknown Mercy, he sent them Charter he had Granted to those of Essex and other
Countries.

At the same time, and on the same Days, Walls. f. 254 255, 256, 257, etc. The
villainous Practices of those about St. Albans.
the Tenants and Villains of the Abbey, and the Townsmen of St. Albans, with the
Rustics of the whole Shire of Hertford, and Countries near, assembled at St.
Albans, requiring of the Abbat and Convent to be Manumised and made Free; to
have the Liberties of the Town enlarged, and to have the Charters and Grants of
Privileges and Liberties Abbey delivered to them: Which by the King's Order were
so delivered, and were with great Triumph burnt in the Marketplace. They also
had from the Abbat and Convent Letters of Manumission and Freedom dictated by
themselves, threatening if they would not grant such, to burn and demolish the
Abbey, cut off the Heads of the Abbat and all the Monks. And in the mean time,
while they obtained these things, they cut off the Heads of such as they
thought were their Enemies, or would not do as they Wat Tiler, which they had
received from him, and seen practiced in London on Corpus Christi Day, many of
these Villains and Rustics and St. Albans-men being then The chief Leaders of
them.
there. William Gryndecobbe a Servant to the Abbey, and William Cadyndon a
Chandler in the Town of St. Albans, being the chief Men in this Tumult, who had
received their Instructions, as London. They made, Proclamation for all of
their own Condition to come in to them, with such Arms and Weapons as they had,
under pain of losing their Heads, having their Houses burnt, if they had any of
their own, and the loss of all their Goods found in them, These they caused to
make Oath they would adhere to King Richard, and the True Commons of England.
Wherever they came they broke open the Prisons, and set the Prisoners free.

Ib. f. 259. n. 40.
While they were in the height of these villainous Practices, they received news
of the Death of Wat Tiler, and that the Citizens of London assisted the King
against the Kentish and Essexmen that staid with them. This, and some sent from
the King to make Proclamation, upon forfeiture of Life and Member commanding
them to be quiet, and return to their own Homes, humbled and made them abstain
from their most barbarous and outrageous Actions. Yet they kept together, and
would not separate, though much persuaded to it, using their ordinary Practices
against the Abbat-Monks, their Friends, Lawyers, Gentlemen; and all that would
not do as they would have them. And for whatever they did, pretended the King's
Append. n. 104.
Consent, Order, and Authority; which caused the King, to undeceive the People,
to send his Ibm. They pretend the King's Order and Authority for what they did.
Writs to all Sheriffs, Majors, Bailiffs, and others his Faithful London June
17. in the 4th of his Reign.

At the same time, and on the same Days, as if Corpus Christi Day had been the
Signal Day, Walls. f. 261. n. 30, 40, 50. The same Tumults and Practices at St.
E^monas-Bury. y. Straw and R. Westbr^om their Leaders. They cut off the Heads
of the Chief Justice of England, the Prior; etc.
the same sort of People Tumultuated in Suffolk, under the Conduct of John
Straw a wicked Priest, and Robert Westbrom of Edmonds-Bury, where they
perpetrated the same Villainies, and committed the same Insolences, as in other
Places. They came to Bury, and got into their hands the Charters of Liberties
and Grants of Privilege to the Abbey there, to free, as they said, the Townsmen
from the Power and Jurisdiction of that Place. They cut off the Heads of Sir
John Cavendish Chief Justice of England, the Prior, and John de Lakinheath a
Monk of that Monastery, and set them on the Pillory in the Marketplace.

In Norfolk Ibm. f. 263. n. 10, 20, etc. The like People and Practices in
Norfolk, under the Conduct of John Liti^^er a Dyer;
at the same time a vast Number of such People, under the Conduct of John
Littister a Dier of Norwich, took upon them the same Pretenses, and were the
very same in all their Actions. These compelled the Lord Scales, Sir William
Morley, Sir John Brewes, Sir Stephen Hales, and Sir Robert de Salle, to remain
with them, who seemed to do and allow what they did; except Sir Robert Salle,
who publicly condemning and abhorring what they had his Brains beat out. The
other were Litister's Favorites, who now called himself King of the Commons,
who had his Royal Who styled himself King of the Commons, and had his Royal
Officers.
Officers, amongst whom Sir Stephen Hales was his Carver. These Rebellious
People. whether they were wearied with, or repented of what they wickedly had
done, and confidered what they must do, sent Two of the Knights, Sir William
Morley and Sir John Brewes, with Three of their own, in whom they put most
Confidence, to the King, wherever he should be, to obtain a Charter
Manumission and Pardon, and that it might be more large than the Charters
granted to other Counties. They had given them a great Sum of Money which had
been received of the Citizens of Norwich, to preserve their City from Burning,
Slaughter, and Plundering, that they might thereby obtain what they desired.

Henry Spencer Ibm. n. 50. f. 264 n. 10, 20, 30, 40. The Conduct, Courage, and
Bravery of H. Spencer Bishop of Norwich.
Bishop of Norwich being then in Rutlandshire, hearing of this Insurrection in
Norfolk, was coming thither with eight Lances only, and a few Archers at
Icklingham near Barton-Mills, he met with the Two Knights and their Three
Companions going to the King, and upon strict enquiry finding out the Three
Traitors, he presently caused their Heads to be cut off; and proceeded into
Norfolk, where the Military Men and Gentlemen came to, and marched with him to
North-Walsham, where the Rebels first Man that charged the Enemy, affaulted
their Trenches, and obtained the Ditch. The Fight was sharp for a while, but
the Rabble soon fled: In the pursuit many of them were killed. Litister The
chief Movers of this Rebellion drawn, hanged, and beheaded.
and the Chief Movers of this Rebellion were taken, who were Drawn, Hanged, and
Beheaded, with many others through the whole Country; by which means it was
reduced into a peaceable Condition. Col. 2639. n. 10.
Knighton says this Martial Bishop did the same things Cambridge and
Huntington-shires; if so, it is more than probable he also reduced those of Bury
St. Edmonds, and the whole County of Suffolk, being part of his Diocese, into
good Order. Commissions of Oyer and Terminer,


The Countries where these Insurrections and Tumults were being now pretty
quiet, Commissions of Oyer and Terminer were Issued for the Trials of the Chief
Contrivers and Managers of them. Walls. f. 267 n. 10, 20, 30. for the Trial of
the Rebels. Those taken in London tried before the Lord Major. J. Straw and
others beheaded.
Those of London, and such of Kent, Essex, Sussex, Norfolk, and Suffolk, as
were found within the Liberties of the City, were Major, of whom the Chief were
John Straw, John Kyrkeby, Alan Treder, and John Starling, who Gloried that he
Murdered the Archbishop. These had their Heads cut off, and several others
not named.

At St. Albans Ibm. f. 276. n. 30, 40. Gryndecobbe, Cadyndon, John the Barber,
and 15 others hanged at St. A^b^^s.
William Gryndecobbe, William Cadyndon, and John the Barber, with 15 others,
were Condemned, Drawn, and Hanged. Of the Chief Men of the Town were Imprisoned
Richard Walyngford, John Garlek, William Berewill, Thomas Putor, and other of
the ordinary sort. Of the Country were imprisoned 80 Persons, who afterward by
the King's Mercy were set at liberty.

John Ball Ib. f. 275, 276. John Ball a Priest hanged, drawn, and quartered.
also a Priest was taken at Coventry and brought to St. Albans, where he was
adjudged to be Hanged, Drawn, and Quartered, and was executed on the 15th of
July, having been some Days Reprieved by the Mediation of the Bishop of London.
Ib. f. 275. n. 10, 20. His Speech on Black Heath to the Malefactors.
This Man had Preached to please the People above Twenty Speech to the vast
Multitude of Malefactors at Black Heath, and took for his Subject the Old Rhyme,

When Adam Dalfe, and Eve Span,
Who was than a Gentleman?
From which he inferred, Ib. n. 30, 40. The Heads of his Speech.
That by Nature all Men were equal: That Servitude was introduced by the injust
Oppression of Wicked Men, against the Will of God; for if God had intended to
have created Servants in the beginning of the World, he would have appointed
who should have been Servants, and who Lords or Masters; advising them to
consider, that then was the time given them by God, in which they might shake
of the Yoke off Servitude if they would, and enjoy their long-desired Liberty.
And to this end further advised them to be Stout, and hasten to procure it;
first, by killing all the Great Men of the Kingdom; then the Lawyers, Justices,
and Jurymen; and lastly, to destroy all such as they knew would be injurious
to them for the future: So as then they might acquire Peace and Security; and
there would be equal Liberty, the same Nobility, the like Dignity, and the like
Power amongst them.

This Speech, with the Ibm. f 265. n. 20, 30, 40. John Straw's Speech and
Confession at the time of his death.
Confession of John Straw at the time of his death, discovers the full
Intention of these Riots, Rebellions, and Tumults. He said, that when they
assembled at Black Heath, and sent to the King to come to them, their Purpose
was to have slain all the Knights, Esquires, and Gentlemen that came with him;
and to have carried the King with them from Place to Place, that the Rabble
might with greater Boldness come to them, when they should see him, as it were,
the Author of their Insurrections: That when there should have been great
Numbers got together in all killed the Lords or Knights who were able to advise
against, or resist them; especially the Hospitalers. At last they were to have
killed the King, and all Bishops, Monks, Canons, and Rectors of Churches, that
were Endowed, and had Lands and Possessions, sparing only the Friars
Mendicants, who were sufficient to celebrate and perform Divine Rites through the
whole Nation. These things done, when there had been none Greater, none more
Potent, none more Knowing than themselves, made such Laws as they pleased, by
which the People were to be Governed. They intended also to have made Kings, as
Wat Tiler in Kent, and in every other County One. On the Night also of that Day
whereon Wat Tiler was killed, the poor Rabble being on their side, they
intended to have burnt the City of London, and to have divided all the Rich
Goods found there amongst themselves. This he affirmed to have been their
Design, as he desired God would help him at his going out of the World; W.
Walworth, and other chief Citizens of London Knighted.
and then had his Head struck off. For their Good Service in destroying Wat
Tiler, preserving the City, and giving him Assistance, the King Knighted Stow's
Annals, p. 463.
William Walworth Major, John Philpot, Nicholas Brembre, and Robert Laund,
Aldermen; and gave to Sir William Walworth 100 l. per Annum Land; and to the
other 40 l. per Annum to them and their Heirs for ever: And not long after,
Knighted Nicholas Twiford and Adam Francis, Two other Aldermen.

In the Walls. f. 278. n. 50. 279. lin. 4.
time of these Insurrections and Rebellions, the Duke of Lancaster was in
Scotland, where he concluded a Truce for Two Years, before they heard of the
Tumults and Riots in England. Ibm. n. 30, 40. A two Years Truce with the Scots.
A Quarrel between the D. of Lancaster and Earl of Northumberland.
In his return, he was denied Entrance into Berwic by the Earl of
Northumberland, which mightily incensed him against the Earl.

On the 16th of July Rot. Claus. 5 Rot. II. M. 40 Dors. A Parliament called.
Writs were sent forth for a Parliament Westminster, on Monday after the
Exaltation of Holy Cross, or 14th of September, which was afterward Prorogued
to the Ib. M. 39 Dors.
morrow of All Souls, which was Monday, when it was Rot. Parl. 5 Ric. II. n. 1.
Adjourned to the next Day, many Lords and Prelates being absent; and so unto
Wednesday, when by reason of the Quarrel between the Duke of Lancaster and Earl
of Northumberland, who came to the Parliament with great Force of Armed Men and
Archers, the King They came to the Parliament with great Force of armed Men.
caused the Parliament to be Adjourned unto Saturday, in which Walls. f. 280. n.
40, 50. The K. ends the Quarrel.
time the King composed the Differences between them, and ended the Quarrel.

The Cause of Summons was Rot. Parl. 5 Ric. II. n. 8. The cause of Summons.
declared to be, That they might consider how to procure the Quiet and Peace of
the Nation, and settle it after the late Tumults and Insurrections, to confirm
or repeal Revocation the King had made of the Grants of Liberty and Manumission
by Force and Coertion obtained by the Natives, Bond-Tenants, and Villains: That
the King was much indebted, and in great Necessity for Money to maintain his
Court and the Wars.

The whole Parliament, Lords and Commons, Ibm. n. 13. The Liberties and
Manumissions of the Villains, etc. repealed by Authority of Parliament.
declared the Grants of Liberties and Manumission, to Natives, Villains, and
Bond-Tenants, to be by Coertion in Disheritance of them, and Destruction of the
Realm, and therefore to be null, and repealed by Authority of Parliament.

The Commons Ibm. The Commons desire certain Prelates and Lds. to treat with
them. The King
prayed the King to have certain Prelates and Lords to comune with them about
their Charge, for that the Matters very highly concerned the State of the
Realm, and it was much to the Purpose to have their Advice.

The Answer Ibm. n. 14. grants their Request.
was, They should give in the Names to the King in Writing, of such as they
desired, that he might advise King granted their Desire; (le Roy lour Grantast
al Effect qils furent Demandez.)

And the Commons further Ibm. n. 16. The Commons pray the King the Prelates by
themselves, the Great Lds. by themselves, and the K^s. by themselves, and the
Justices by themselves, might treat about their Charge, and their Advice
reported to the^. This was contrary to the Practice and Custom of Parliament,
which the K. would have observed.
prayed the King, That the Prelates by themselves, the Great Lords Temporal by
themselves, the Knights by themselves, the Justices by themselves, and all
other Estates singly might be charged to treat and comune about their Charge,
and that their Advice might be reported to the Commons. King had charged the
Lords and other Sages, to comune and treat diligently upon the said Matters:
But the ancient Custom and Form of Parliament had always been, That the Commons
should first report their Advice, upon the Matters given them, to the King and
Lords of Parliament, and not on the contrary; and therefore the King would that
the ancient and good Customs and Form of Parliament should be kept and observed.

After the Commons had conferred Ibm n. 17. The Commons complain of the ill
Government of to^ Kingdom.
with the Lords, they returned into the Parliament, and made great Complaint of
the ill Government of the Realm, which if not amended, the Kingdom would be in
short time ruined. They complained of the Government about the King's Person,
his Court, the overgreat Number of his Servants, of the Chancery, King's Bench,
Common Pleas, Exchequer; of grievous Oppressions in the Country (par la
Outrageouse Multitude de Braceurs, des Quereles, and Mainteinours, qi sout come
Roys en Pais, que Droit, ne Loy est a poy fait, etc.) by the great Multitude of
Bracers of Quarrels, and Maintainers, who behaved themselves like Kings in the
Country, so as there was very little of Law or Right, and of other things,
which they said were the cause of the late Commotion, Rumor, and Mischiefs of
the Land, and requested they might be amended.

The King Ibm n. 18. Certain Lords and others assigned to survey and examine the
Government of the King's Person and Kingdom. These Lords and others were
assigned and chosen by the King. See n. 27.
by Advice of the Lords and his Council, granted that certain Prelates, Lords,
and others, should survey and examine the Government of his Person and Court,
and to think of sufficient Remedies. The Persons chosen to make this Enquiry,
were, The Duke of Lancaster, the Elect of Canterbury, the Archbishop of York,
the Bishops of Winchester, Ely, Excester, and Rochester; the Earls of Arundel,
Warwic, Stafford, Suffolk, and Salisbury; the Lords Zouch, Nevil, Gray of
Ruthin, and Fitz-Walter; Monsieur Richard le Scrop, Monsieur Guy de Bryan, and
others; and autres. Ibm. The King's Confessor not to come to Court.
The King's Confessor was charged to abstain from coming to, and remaining at
Court, by the Request of the Commons and Assent of the Lords.

The Commons Ibm n. 19, 20, 21, 22, 23. The Commons Petition the Duke of
Lancaster, and others, assigned to appoint Officers, etc.
Petition the Duke of Lancaster, and others, assigned by the King to that
purpose, to place the most valued Officers King's Person, and in his Court; to
appoint a Chancellor, Barons, and Officers in the Exchequer, Judges of one
Bench and the other; That they might know their Names, and what they were to
do, and the Method they were to take in the Regulation of the Nation, after
these things were done.

They also Ibm. n. 25, 26. They petition for an end of the War.
Petition an End might be made of the War, which was in great part maintained
by the Goods which the Enemies of English, to the great Slander of the
Government and Nation, and Destruction of the whole Realm.

They likewise Petition, That certain of the Chief Ibm. n. 28, 29. They
Petition certain Persons may inspect the Grievances above noted. No answer made
to this.
Clercs in Chancery, certain Justices, Barons of the Exchequer, and others
Learned in the Law not there named, might consult of the Grievances above; and
that certain Merchants not named, might declare the Causes of the Low Prices of
our Commodities, carrying over our Money, Washing and Clipping thereof. But I
find no report made of this Matter, or Remedy ordered: There is something in
the Statutes at Large in this Year, about Exportation of Money, and the
Exchequer, Cap. 2. and 9, 10, 11, 12, 13.

The Commons Ibm. n. 30.
brought into Parliament a Schedule, containing The Commons propound 3 sorts of
Pardons to be granted by the King. The first.
Three Articles for Three sorts of Pardons, if the King would please to grant
them: The first was, for the Lords, Gentlemen, and others, that in Resistance
of the Riotors and Traitors, caused some slain without due Process of Law; for
which see the Statutes at Large of this Year, Cap. 5. The Statute there exactly
agrees with the Record.

The second Ibm. The 2d sort.
to appease and quiet the wicked People concerning Treason and Felony committed
in the Riots and Tumults, which was granted Ibm. n. 32. Several Town, excepted
out of these Pardons.
to all and singular Persons, except such as were of the Towns of Canterbury,
St. Edmonds-Bury, Beverly, Scharburgh, Bridgewater, and Cambridge; except also
the Persons whose Append. n. And those that killed the A. Bo. etc.
Names were after written, and were brought into Parliament as the Chief and
Principal Excitors and Movers of the Insurrections in the several Countries;
and those that killed the Archbishop of Canterbury, Lord Chancellor, the Prior
of St. John's Lord Treasurer, and John Cavendish Lord Chief Justice; and except
such as had escaped out of Prison, and had not then rendered themselves:
Provided, that such as received Damages and Losses by these Insurrections,
Provided notwithstanding, those which had received Damages might recover
Recompense by Law.
should not by this Pardon be foreclosed from recovering Recompense by due
course of Law.

The Third was, for Ib. Rot. Parl. 5 Ric. II. n. 32. The Third sort of Pardons.
the good People that kept themselves in Peace, and were no ways consenting to,
or concerned in the Tumults and Insurrections. The Forms of the Pardons were
now drawn and read, tho the King had not yet passed them.

Afterward, upon Ib. n. 95. The Towns above all Pardoned, except St.
Edmonds-Bury.
the Petition of the Commons, That the Towns abovenamed might, with other
Towns, receive the Benesit of the Pardon, excedpt those Persons that were
specially excepted, which the King except the Town of St. Edmond's-Bury, that
for their outrageous Ibm. To. And except the Persons whose Names were delivered
into Parliament in Writing.
and horrible Wickedness, so long continued, he would not have comprised in his
Grace; and except also the Persons whose Names were delivered into Parliament as
the chief principal Beginners, Abettors, and Procurers of the late Outrageous
Treason.

After the Business of the Pardons, the Commons make a Ib. n. 34. The Commons
rehearse their Grievances.
Rehearsal of their Requests and Grievances they would have amended, and desire
to have a view of what was done in that Matter.

The King tells them, Ibm. and n. 35. The King tells them of his great Expenses
and Necessity.
he had been at great Expense in quieting Nation in the late Tumults, and
otherwise, as was declared to them before by his Officers, and that he was to
be at further great Expenses by reason of the Queen's coming, her Marriage and
Coronation, which were suddenly to be Celebrated; also in guarding the Seas,
and keeping his Fortresses beyond Sea, and for the defense of the Realm at
home, for the discharge of which Debts, and the supply of his Expenses, he had
nothing in Treasure or otherwise.

The Commons Ib. n. 36. They answer, they neither dare, or would grant any
Tallage.
answered, That considering the Evil Hearts, and Rancour of the People through the
whole Realm, they neither dare nor would grant any manner of Tallage.

They desire the Ib. n. 37, 38. They desire the Parliament may be adjourned, and
to see the Method of his Grace and Favor.
Parliament may be adjourned till after Christmas, which was granted; and then
they also desire again to see the Method of his Grace and Favor.

The King Ib. n. 39. The King advises of his General Pardon, until the Commoos
should do what belonged to them.
Replied, it was not the Custom of Parliament to have a General Pardon, and such
favor from the King, when the Commons would not grant him any thing; and told
them, he would advise of his Grace and Pardon until they should do what
belonged to them; and said further, it was Customary to grant Pardons the last
day of the Parliament, when he answered their Supplications and Petitions in
Writing.

Whereupon Ib. n. 40. The Prelates, Lords, and Commons, grant the Subsidy of
Wool.
the Commons came into Parliament before the Lords, saying they had advised, and
considered the great Charge of the King as well here as beyond Sea; and then
the Prelates, Lords, and Commons, granted a Subsidy of Wool, Leather, and
Woollfells, until Candlemass next coming, as it was last granted, which was
read in Parliament, as also the Declaration of the The Commons much joyed at the
King's Grace.
King's Grace, at which the Commons were much joyed, and thanked the King most
humbly and entirely for the same.

In this Ibm. n. 45. The Practice of the Town of Cambridge against the
University.
Parliament there were great Complaints made of the Mayor, Bailiffs, and
Commonalty of the Town of Cambridge, for their Evil Practices, as well out of
the Town in the Country, as in it, against the University, in the time of the
late Tumults, as by the Ib. n. 54.
Bill exhibited against them may appear, wherein it is Corpus Christi or
Benedict College, where they seized the Charters, Writings, Books and Records,
broke down the Scholars Chambers, and took and carried away Goods and Chattels
to a great value, (a grant value;) Also, That they compelled the Masters and
Scholars under Pain of Death, and Destruction of their Habitations, to renounce
all manner of Franchises and Privileges granted to them by any King whatsoever,
and submit to the Government of the Town for ever; Also, By threatening Death
they caused the Masters and Scholars to enter into Bonds to pay them great Sums
of Money, and forced them to give a General Acquittance and Release of all
Actions Real and Personal; Also, That by threatening Death they compelled the
Masters and Scholars to deliver to them their Charters and Privileges, which
they burnt in the Marketplace, contrary to the King's Proclamation and
Prohibition.

The King issued his Ib. n. 46, 47.
Writs, To John Masterman, the present Mayor, (who was then one of the Ib. n.
48.
Burgesses for the Town in and Bailiffs, and to Edward Lystere, the late Mayor,
and Bailiffs, when the Riot and Tumult was, to appear in Parliament, to acquit
themselves if they could before him and his Council, reciting in his Writs most
what they had done in prejudice of the Chancellor, Masters and Scholars of the
University; They appeared; and were ordered to deliver up the Renunciation
Bond, and Release abovementioned under the University Seals, which were
cancelled in Parliament, and are entered upon the Roll. The Bill against them
being then read in their presence in Parliament, they were asked what they had
to say, why their Franchises and Privileges should not be taken into the King's
Hands as forfeit; at that time they were not charged with any Crime, but, as
they were told, were only to answer concerning their Franchise, which they did
by Ib. n. 57.
Counsel, and denied the Matter of Fact; and further said, if any such things
were done, they were done by the Traitors and Malefactors of the Counties of
Essex, Hertfordshire, and Kent, which came to their Town in great numbers; but
it appearing they were always present at these Wicked Practices, and that the
Renunciation, Bond, and Releases of the University, were in their keeping, and
that upon the King's Precept they would not deliver them, it was thought
evidence enough that they were guilty of the whole; when they submitted
themselves wholly to the King's Grace, to do what he pleased with their
Franchise; some part whereof, by advice and assent of the Some of their
Franchises granted to the University.
Prelates and Lords, the King gave to the University, and the Residue he
re-granted to the Town.

On the 13th of December, because Ib. n. 64. The Parliament adjourned.
Christmas was near, and the time of the Queen's coming into England was also
near, and for that her Marriage and Coronution were to be solemnized, (le
Parliament soit ajourne par nostre seigneur le Roy de lassent des Prelates,
etc.) the King adjourned the Parliament by the assent of the Prelates, Lords,
and Commons, unto the Friday next before the Conversion of St. Paul; and did
Will and Command, That the All things by the King's Command to remain as they
were, until it met again.
Pleas, Causes, and other Matters moved in that Parliament, and were
undetermined, and all other things, with their dependences, should remain as
they were, in the same condition, until the Friday abovesaid.

At the meeting again Ib. n. 66. The Duke of Lancaster's Proposals of going
into Spain, etc.
of the Parliament, there was a great Dispute about a Voyage Monsieur Despainge,
the Duke of Lancaster, offered to make into Portugal, if the Kingdom would
provide him l. to pay the Wages of 2000 Men at Arms, and 2000 Archers, for half
a year. The Pretenses or Reasons for this Voyage were, for the saving of such
English as were then there, that he might recover his Right he had there; for
the safeguard of the Sea, and the Realm of England, (and si Dieux plest) and
if God pleased, for the greater destruction of its Enemies; Offering also to
repay this Sum in Three years, either in Money, or acceptable Service. Upon
this Offer and Voyage the Lords had a long Debate, some approved He obtained
not what he desired.
his Reasons, others not, so as he obtained not what he desired.

Yet the Ib. n. 67.
Lords and Commons, on the 25th of February, considering the Necessities of the
King, and the multitude of his The King's Enemies many by Sea and Land.
Enemies by Sea and Land, with the great Expenses he must be at for the defense
of the Kingdom, and resistance of such Enemies, granted on their Free Will to
the King the Subsidy of Wool, Woollfells, and Leather, as he received it upon
the last The Subsidy of Wool, etc. granted for Four years.
Grant, from that day until the Feast of St. John Baptist next coming, and from
thence for Four years. Whether such Defense or Resistance should be by the
Voyage of Monsieur de Lancaster into Spain, or any other manner whatever, with
this express Protestation of the Commons, That it was not their intention to be
obliged by any Words to Quarrel, Conquer, or have War with The Commons protest
against Quarrelling, etc. with Spain.
Spain particularly, any way whatsoever, but only for the Defense of the
Kingdom, and Resistance of its Enemies, by the advice Lords, as it should seem
best to them to ordain, (par lavis des seigneurs del dit Roialme come meultz
lour semblera a ordeiner.

Between the summons and meeting of the next Parliament, Walsingham, f. 290. n.
20, 30, etc. The Great Seal taken from Richard le Scrop.
the Great Seal was taken from Richard le Scrop, who had received it by
approbation of Parliament, because he would not pass some large Gifts of
Estates, which had escheated to the Crown, to some given to Robert Braybroke,
Cl. 6 Ric. II. M. 24. Dors. Which disquieted the Great Men.
Bishop of London, on the Vigil of St. Matthew the Apostle, or 20th of
September, by which action the King much disquieted the Great Men and Community
of the Kingdom.

In the Sixth of the King a Rot. Parl. 6 Ric. II. n. 1, 2. A Parliament: The
Cause of Summons, the Defense of the Land, and to provide Means to make it.
Parliament was summoned to meet on Monday, Eight days after Michaelmas, and was
adjourned Wednesday by the King's Command, when the King and Lords met in the
Painted Chamber, before whom the Names of the Knights, Citizens, and Burgesses,
were called over; The Bishop of London, then Lord Chancellor, amongst others,
declared the cause of Summons to be for the Defense of the Land against its
Enemies, and to provide Means to make it.

The Bishop of Hereford, by the King's Order, made a N. 9, 10. A further
Declaration of the Cause of Summons. Two ways propounded to deal with the
Enemies of the Kingdom.
further Declaration of the cause of Summons, and propounded Two ways to deal
with the Enemies of the Kingdom, one by making use of the Flemings, who offered
their Service; and the other, to close with the profer of Monsieur Despaign or
Duke of Lancaster, who offered to go into Spain for half a year with 2000 Men
at Arms, and as many Archers, if he might have 43000 l. to pay

These Matters being of so high a Nature, Ib. n. 14. The Commons desire such
Lords as they named to Confer with them about their Charge.
the Commons make their Request to the Lords, to have such as they named to
Commune with them about their Charge; which Request was granted, and the Lords
Names entered upon the Roll.

The Lords and Commons Ib. n. 15. A Fifteenth and Tenth granted.
upon Conference, granted a Fifteenth Tenth, by reason of the great danger the
Nation was in, for the Defense of it against the great Preparations of the
French, to be employed as the King, by Advice of his Council, and the Lords of
the Realm, should think fit.

After this the Ib. n. 23. The Lords inclinable to the Duke of Lancaster's
Proposal.
Duke of Lancaster's Profer came again into Consideration, upon which the
Question was put to every particular Prelate, Earl, Baron, and Baneret, whether
they thought his Voyage into Spain, with the number of Soldiers propounded,
would be profitable to the King and Realm, or not; They thought it might be so,
only believing the Force too small to make War with so strong a Kingdom.

At this time Mezeray, A D. 1381, 1382. great Riots and Tumults in France and
Flanders. The King of France subdues a great part of Flanders.
there were great Riots, Tumults, and Rebellions in France and Flanders; The
Flemings had driven their Earl out of his Country, he applies himself to the
King of France, as his Sovereign Lord, for Relief; They crave Assistance of the
King of England. The King of France marched into Flanders, and subdued a great
part of the Country; The Earl besieged Gaunt, which was the Head of the
Rebellion, and in danger to be taken.

To prevent the King of France his further Progress in Flanders, England, and
his Preparations to besiege Calais, as he had been informed, Rot. Clause 6 Ric.
II. Part 1. M. 4. Dors. King Richard offers to go in Person with an Army into
France.
as it is said in the Writ of Summons to another Parliament this year, to be
held on Monday in the third week of Lent, was the chief cause of calling it.
And the Bishop of London, Lord Chancellor, declared further, the King had
offered to go in Person into France with a Royal Army, but since that he
received news the French had overrun all Flanders except Gaunt, and therefore
this Parliament was Rot. Parl. 6 Ric. II. Part 2. n. 2, 3.
called King should go in Person to the Relief of Gaunt and Recovery of
Flanders, and how to provide wherewithal for the Performance.

After the Commons had advised two or three days ( sur lour charge) upon their
Charge, it being so great, and so highly concerned his Person, they Ib. n. 8.
The Commons pray some Lords named by them to Treat with them.
prayed the King, to grant certain Prelates, Earls, and Lords named by them, to
Treat with them about it, viz. The Archbishop of Canterbury, the Bishops of
Ely and Hereford, the Earls of Cambridge, Stafford, and Northumberland, the
Lords Nevill, Fitz-Walter, and Cobham; The which Prelates, Earls, and Lords,
the King granted to Treat with the Commons, ( Ibm. The King granted their
Prayer, tho it was in his choice to assign them, or name others.
combien que feust, est and doit estre, en le Election de nostre dit seigneur
le Roy d'assigner a ce les ditz Prelates and Seigneurs issuit nomez ou autres a
sa propre nomination) although it was, is, and ought to be in the Election of the
King to assign the Prelates and Lords for this purpose, or others of his own
proper Nomination.

When the Commons had Ib. n. 9. The Commons say, the ordering of the King's
Voyage belongs not to them.
Treated long with the Prelates and Lords, they by James Pickering, their
Speaker, said, The King's Passage, and the Ordaining of his Voyage, or any
other King himself and Lords, yet Ib. n. 10. But they say, neither he nor any
of his Three Uncles ought to leave the Kingdom at that time.
by way of Advice, and not by Counsel, seeing what Troubles were in every part
of the Land, and that the Accord and Truce with the Scots were near at an end,
and they were raising great Force toward the Borders, and it being doubtful,
whether they would now comply with any Proposals of Peace or Truce, unless
driven to it, they thought neither himself, nor any of his Three Uncles, of
Lancaster, Cambridge, or Buckingham, could be spared out of the Kingdom, until
that, and the Borders aforesaid, were well quieted and settled.

But advised him to accept of the Bishop of Norwich his Ib. n. 11. They advise
the King to accept the Bishop of Norwich his offer for the Relief of Flanders.
profer of raising 3000 Men at Arms, and 3000 Archers well mounted, to Relieve
Gaunt, Reduce Flanders, and afterward to War in France, upon condition he might
have the Fifteenth and Tenth granted by the Layety and Clergy, and the 2 s. per
Tun upon

The Ib. n. 19. They pray the King certain Lords might be assigned to be about
his Person to advise him, etc.
Commons pray the King, That for his Honor and Profit, and the Quiet and
Comfort of themselves, of his great Grace he would please to Command, that
certain Lords might be assigned to be about his Person, of the most Wise,
Honest, and Discreet Persons of the Kingdom, to advise and counsel him; and
advice of the Lords, so to order his Household, that he might live upon the
Revenues of his Realm, and that the Subsidy of Wool, Money arising from Wards,
Marriages, and Escheates, might be employed to support the War, etc.

The King Ibm. The King's Answer.
answered, That he would take such sufficient Persons, Lords and others, about
his Person, as seemed to him Government of his House, it should be done by the
Advice of the Lords and others of his Council, in such good order as should
seem best, saving his Honor.

The Bishop of Norwich Ib. n. 20. The Bishop of Norwich his 2d Offer. Accepted
by the King and his Council, and approved by the Commons.
having had time to consider of his first Profer, makes a second, To serve the
King one Year with 2500 Men at Arms, and 2500 Archers well Arrayed and Mounted,
for the whole Fifteenth granted by the Laity; of which Number, 1000 Men at
Arms, and 1000 Archers, should be ready to pass the Sea for the Relief of Gaunt
and the Country of Flanders, within 20 Days after the first Payment; and that
he would take upon him to pay the Charge of Shipping, and other Ibm.
This Profer was accepted by the King and his Council, and much approved of by
the Commons.

This Bishop some time before had received W^^s. f. 291. n. 30, 40. The Bishop
of Norwich had Bullsfrom Pope Urban for a Croysado, against the Antipope
Clement.
Bulls from Pope Urban for a Croysado, and to sign all with the Cross that
would go with him into France for the Destruction of the Antipope, who called
himself Clement; and to Sanctify the War against all his Adherents; which were
the Knighton, col. 2671. n. 20, 30, etc. The Ladies give their Jewels,
Necklaces, Rings, etc. toward this Croysado.
French, Scots, Flemings, and many other Nations. By virtue of these Bulls, he
collected a great Jewels, Necklaces, Rings, Dishes, Spoons, and other Silver
Implements, especially of Ladies and other Women: And many gave Ibm. to be
pardoned and absolved from their Sins.
beyond their Ability (as it was believed) to obtain the Benefit of Absolution
and Pardon for their Sins: For otherwise they were not absolved, unless they
contributed according to their Ability. Many found Men at Arms, others Archers,
and many went in their own Persons. The Form of Absolution was this:

By Apostolic Authority to me committed, Append. ^. 105. The Form of the
Absolution.
I do Absolve thee A. B. from all thy Sins which thou do with a contrite
Heart confess, or would confess if thou did remember them; and give thee a
Full Remission of them, the Retribution of the Just; and do promise the
Increase or Addition of eternal Salvation. And I Grant to thee the same
Privileges that are Granted to such as go to the Defense of the Holy Land; and
do impart to thee the Benefit of the Prayers and Suffrages of the Holy Catholic
Church.

To publish this Croysado, and to absolve according to this Form, there were a
sufficient number of Preachers sent beyond Sea, and all England over, besides
all the Mendicant Friars, to stir up the People to contribute, with a Clerc to
take the Names, and receive Money of the Contributors, not omitting Laborers.
Knighton, Col. 2673.

Toward the latter end of Walls. f. 298. n. 30, 40. The Bishop passes beyond
Sea with his Army.
May, the Bishop passed the Sea with his Army, staid a few Days at Calais,
besieged Graveling, and took it by Assault. Dunkirk yielded without much
trouble, where some Flemings joining with the French and Britans, to the number
of 30000, came toward the Town; Ibm. f. 301. lin. 11. Knight. ut supra, n. 50,
60. His great Success. He besieged Ypre.
against whom the Bishop, though but with a small Number in respect of theirs,
marched out of Dunkirk and gave them Battle, taking many, and killing 3000;
Walsingham says 12000. Afterward he took in Cassal, Dixmude, Burburgh, Fern,
Newport, and Popering. Then he besieged the Knight. ib. His Army left the
Siege, and revolted from him.
Town of Ypre a long time, assaulted it often, and was always repulsed and
beaten off; and at length, without his Knowledge, the Army left the Siege, and
Revolted from him. The Battering Engines were all left behind, with one great
Gun called Canterbury-Gun Ibm. col. 2672. lin 3.
( cum una magna Gunna vocata Gunna Cantuariensis.) The Bishop followed his
Army, and went to Dunkirk, with Sir Hugh Caverse and part of it, and from
thence to Gravelin. Sir Thomas Trivet, Sir William Elingham, and others, went
to Burburgh with other part of the Army, and fortified it. Ibm. n. 10, 20, 30.
The King of France takes Burburgh,
The King of France comes suddenly upon them with a great Army, besieged the
Town, assaults it, and was beaten off with loss: Yet within few Days they
treated, and yielded the Town to the King of France, upon Condition to march
away with Horse and Arms, and all their Calais.

After Walls. f. 304. n. 50. and f. 305. n. 10, 20, 30. and Gravelin.
Burburgh was taken, the French Army marched before Graveling, and summoned the
Bishop to yield the Town. The French offered him 15000 Marks to quit the Town,
with liberty to demolish it, and to depart and go whither he would, and all
with him, with all their Goods. He desired Time to consider of the Terms, and
appointed a Day to give his Answer; and in the meant time sent to England for
Relief; which not coming at or England after Michaelmas. And thus ended the
Croysado, or the Pontifical War.

Before the Return of the Bishop of Norwich, Writs Dated the 20th of August had
been Claus. 7 Ric. II. M. 37. Dors. A. D. 1384. A Parliament called. The Reasons
of calling it given in the Writ of Summons.
sent forth for a Parliament to meet on Monday before All Saints. In which
Writs, notice was given, That by Advice and Assent of the Council the Parliament
was called, for their Mediation and Assistance in a Treaty of Peace to be King,
his Kingdom, Dominions and Subjects on the one part, and Robert King of
Scotland, his Lands, Dominions, and Subjects on the other part; and for other
Difficult and Urgent Business which concerned him, the State and Defense of the
Kingdom, and Church of England.

Sir Michael de laPole then Chancellor, Rot. Parl. 2 Ric. II n. 3. The same and
other Causes of Summons declared by the Chancellor.
showed the Causes of Parliament to be, for that the Truce with the Scots was to
end at Candlemas next; and whereas the Duke of Lancaster had been Scots would
send Commissioners to London, to manage the Treaty about it.

Another Cause was Ib. n. 4, 5
to provide against Three Powerful Enemies, Spain, France, and lately Flanders:
And here he offered several Reasons to prove it was better for us to begin and
make War upon them, than they upon us, or suffer them to invade us: Further
showing, That these Wars were not to be imputed to King, seeing that with the
Crown they descended to him.

And the last Cause was Ib. n. 6.
for the Maintenance of good Laws, and Security of the Peace, when he put them
in mind of giving Aid to support these great Charges.

When the Duke of Lancaster Walls. f. 309. n. 20, 30, 40. Commissioners to be
sent to the Parliament of Scotland from England; and the same from Scotland to
English Parlements. The Scots k^pt not this Agreement.
was sent to Renew the Truce with Scotland, it was agreed, That for the Ease of
both Nations, and to save Charges, there should be sent Commissioners of both
Nations to every Parliament of either Nation, who should represent Borders, and
receive Satisfaction according to the Judgment of the Lords. The Scots sent not
to this Parliament, but did much Injury upon the Borders, and received a Force
from France, to join with them against the English: But hearing there were
Preparations making against them toward, or just after the end of the
Parliament, they sent their Commissioners, who were rejected, and sent home
without Treaty.

The Chancellor Rot. Parl. 7 Ric. II. n. 11. The Chancellor quickens the Lords
to dispatch the King's Business, etc. Laying aside other Debates.
spoke to the Lords a second time, and told them, The King commanded them to
have due Consideration of the necessary Matters that had been declared to them,
and of the apparent importable Mischief, and of the great Necessity he had for
Money to prevent them: And that they would Treat by themselves diligently upon
these things with as much speed as laying aside the Debate of any other Matter
in the mean time, and to report their Advice from time to time to him: And said
further, the King commanded them to treat from Day to Day, and dispatch what
they came for, and not to depart from Parliament without his special License,
under the Peril that might happen.

And then Ibm. n. 12, 13. The Lords and Commons grant 2 half 15ths.
the Lords and Commons considering the outrageous Charge the King was to be at,
by reason of the War on

In this Parliament Ibm. n. 18. The Bishop of Norwich accused by the Chancellor.
His Crime and Punishment.
the Bishop of Norwich was accused by the Chancellor in several Articles, for
his Miscarriages in his late Expedition: One was, That he had promised to serve
the King with such a Number of Men for a whole Year, and served but half a
Year; and then returned with his Army ruined, etc. Of which Article he could
not clear himself; Ibm. n 23.
and therefore was adjudged to make Fine and Ransom at the King's Pleasure, and
the Temporalities of his Bishopric to be seized for that Purpose.

Sir William Ellingham, Sir Thomas Trivet, Sir Henry de Ferrers, 4 Knights
accused for selling Fortresses.
and Sir William de Harnedon, were accused in Parliament before the Lords, Ibm.
n. 24.
for receiving Money for the Delivery of several Fortresses, the Sums in the
whole amounting to 20000 Franks in Gold. They all made pitiful Excuses, and
craved the King's Mercy. Ibm. n. 25. The Judgment against them.
Judgment was pronounced by the Chancellor, That they should refund what they
had received to the King, and remain in Prison until they had made Fine and
Ransom to him.

Before Walls. f. 308. n 10. A Truce with the French for half a year.
Christmas, the Duke of Lancaster went into France to Treat of Peace between
the Two Kingdoms; but brought back with him a Truce only until Midsummer next
following, return again upon the same Errand.

In the beginning of February, Ibm. n 20, 30. Sedition moved in the City of
London. A Shoemaker the great Promoter of it. How it was stayed.
John Northampton alias Comberton, who had been Major the Year before, moved
Sedition in the City of London, and went up and down the Streets often with
great Numbers of People following him; and when the present Major Sir Nicholas
Brembre prepared to oppose him, a Shoemaker, one of his Favorers, moved the
Rabble to stand by him; who by the Advice of Sir Robert Knolles, was taken out
of his Act stayed the Insurrection and Commotion of People at that time, who,
as it was then said, had conspired to Murder the Major and many other worthy
Men of the City.

This Shoemaker's Name was John Constantyn, who was the Cause of great
Disturbances, Commotions, and Insurrections in the City; who was not drawn out
of his House, and presently beheaded by the Advice of Sir Robert Knolles, though
very probably he might be the Person that did seize, or ordered him to be
seized; Pat. 7 Ric. Ii M. 16. p. 2.
but was taken on the 11th of February at the Head of the Rabble, and carried
presently to the Guild Hall, and arraigned as one of the first Movers of
Sedition, by Witnesses sworn adjudged to Death, and had his Head cut off; which
Judgment was presently Recorded, and was afterward confirmed by the King,
Claus. 7 Ric. II. M. 9.
on the 9th of February preceding. John Northampton was sent to Corfe-Castle,
there to be kept Prisoner until the King, by Advice of his Council, should
otherwise dispose of him.

In Lent the Duke of Lancaster, Walls. f. 308. n. 40, 50. and f. 309. The Duke
of Lancaster marched with a great Force into Scotland.
and his Brother the Earl of Buckingham, went with a very great Force toward
Scotland, of Knights, Esquires, and Archers; but staid so long upon the
Borders, as all the Victuals were consumed, whereby the Inhabitants received
more Injury than by the Invasion of the Scots. Toward Easter he entered
Scotland, where by his Delays the Scots had time enough to secure their Goods
and Persons; and finding nothing but Hunger and Cold, returned with a hard
Report, having lost Returns with a hard Report.
many Men and Horses. After their Departure, the Scots invaded the North Parts,
plundered the Country, and burnt Towns, as English had done in Scotland.

This Year Rot. Claus. 7 Ric. II. M. 10. Dors. A. D. 1385. A Parliament at
Salisbury. The Duke of Lancaster accused of Treason by a Friar. The Friar
murdered before he came to make good his Information.
there was another Parliament holden at Salisbury, on the Friday after St. Mark,
or 25th of April. In this Parliament, says Walsingham, Fol. 309. n. 20, 30, 40,
50. a Carmelite Friar accused the Duke of Lancaster, that he designed to kill
the King and usurp the Kingdom. The Duke desired he might be secured until he
made good the Accusation against him; and was so: But the Night before the Day
on which he was to do it, he was most murdered. Though he says he was accused in
Parliament, yet as he relates the Story, it was before the Council; and must be
so; for there is nothing of this Accusation on the Parlement-Roll.

About the Walls. f. 310. n. 30. A. D. 1385. 8 Ric. II. The Duke of Lancaster
goes into France; makes only a Truce for 3 quarters of a year. His extravagant
Expenses.
beginning of August, the Duke of Lancaster went into France to Treat about a
Peace, or Truce. He staid there long with many Noblemen, and made a Truce only
to the first of May next coming; and then returned, after the Expense of Marks.

While the Ib. n. 40, 50. John of Northampton's Trial and Judgment.
Duke was in France, the King called many of the Noblemen together at Reding,
where John of Northampton was Tried for his late Practices in London, when he
was Convicted by the Testimony of his Clerc; and Sentence was to be given upon
him in the King's Presence. He said such Judgment ought not to pass upon him in
the Absence of his Lord the Duke; which Judge told him, That he was to acquit
himself by Duel of the Crimes laid against him, or by the Laws of the Land to
be Drawn, Hanged, and Quartered. To which making no Answer, he was condemned to
perpetual Prison above 100 Miles from London, and sent to Tintagel-Castle in
Cornwall, and the Goods to be seized to his King's Use.

Some time after, the King Ibm. f. 314. n. 50. The Duke of Lancaster was to
have been Arraigned of High Treason.
intending to Arraign the Duke of Lancaster upon several Articles of Treason
before Sir Robert Trisilian Lord Chief Justice, whereas he ought to have been
Tried by his Peers; he Victualled and Manned his Castle of Pontfract, and stood
upon his Guard, until his Peace was made by the Princess of Wales his Mother.

On the Rot. Parl. 8 Ric. II. n. 1, 2, 3. A Parliament. The cause of Summons.
morrow of St. Martin, or 12th of November, a Parliament assembled at
Westminster. The Chancellor showed the King's Church, Commons, and Laws of
England; and further showed how the Nation was environed with Enemies, the
French, Spaniards, Scots, and Flemings; and that the chief cause of calling the
Parliament was, to provide for the Safety and Defense of the Kingdom; and to
consider how this Provision might best and most speedily be made, and so as the
poor People might be least burdened; and withal let them know the King offered
to go in his own Person for Defense of the Kingdom, Advice of his Council.

These things considered, Ibm. n. 10. Two 15ths granted.
the Lords and Commons granted the King, for the Defense of the Kingdom, the
Safeguard of the Sea and Marches of Scotland, Two Fifteenths; one to be paid at
Lady Day next coming; the other at Midsummer; upon condition, that the last
half Fifteenth granted at Salisbury might not be paid: And in case the King
went not in his own Person against his Enemies, or that Peace or Truce should
be made with

In this Parliament Ibm. n. 13. The Judgment against Alice Perrers repealed.
Alice Perrers, the Wife of Sir William Windsor, petitioned to have the
Judgment and Order made against her in the 50th of Edward III. and the Judgment
and Statute made against her in the first of this King, to be repealed; and
that she might be restored to all her Lands and Tenements. Ibm. To.
Which was granted by Advice and Assent of the Lords and Commons, so as the
Gifts and Grants of any of the Lands, Tenements, and Houses repealed, may
remain in force.

There is nothing more concerning Scotland and England in our Historians for
this Year, but alternate Invasions, as they found or made Opportunities, and
burning and plundering each others Countries.

Next Year Knight col. 2674 n. 60. The French and Scots join to invade England.
John de Vienna Admiral of France, came from thence with a great Fleet, and in
June transported an Army into Scotland to join with the Scots to invade
England. The King prepares an Army to march into Scotland, and sends the Duke
of Lancaster with a good Force before to secure the Borders. Ibm. col. 2675. n.
10. The King marches into Scotland with a great Army.
On the 7th of July, the King was at Leicester, and the Queen with him; and
there went before, came with, and followed him the Flower of the English
Militia, Earls, Barons, Knights, Esquires, Valets, and others to a vast Number.
With this Royal Army the King marched into Scotland; but could not Scots, or at
least could not follow them into the Woods, Forests, Fastnesses, or the
High-lands, whither they drove with them their great Cattle. Ib. n. 20, 30, 40.
The Scots fly into the Woods and High-lands.
Finding nothing in the Country, he burnt Edinburgh, and many other Towns, cut
down Woods, and burnt them likewise. While these things were doing by the
English toward the High-lands, about Edinburgh, and in the East-Marches, the
Scots and French slipped the English, entered the The French and Scots march into
England,
West-Marches, burnt Penreth, plundered the Country, took many Captives, and
made an Attempt upon Carlisle; but hearing of the coming of the English, got
again into their own Country, Walls. f. 317. n. 30. and do more Mischief there
than the King with his Army did in Scotland. A mighty Fleet prepared by
carrying more out of England, than the King with his Royal Army carried out of
Scotland.

While the English Army was in Scotland, the King of France Sluis in Flanders
to invade England. Froysart Vol. 2. cap. 53, 53, 54. the King of France to
invade England.
says this Navy was Twelve hundred and eighty seven Ships in September, 1386.
at Sluis and Blanqueberg; and adds, since God created the World there was never
seen so many great Ships together. The Landforces were according to this
mighty Fleet, and the King having notice of these vast Preparations, provided
accordingly both by Sea and Land, to intercept them or hinder their Descent.
Ibm. c. 59.
The Wind England until after St. Andrew, or 30th of November, when a Council
being called it was resolved, it being so late in the Year, the Expedition was
laid aside until April or May following. Ib. c. 60.
Froysard says he had an Account of the great Provision the Dauphin of Avergn
made for this Voyage from himself.

In the 9th of this King, a Parliament was Claus. 9 Ric. II. M. 45 Dors. A. D.
1386.
holden at Westminster on the Friday next after St. Luke, in which the Lords,
Rot. Parl. 9 Ric. II. n. 10. A Tax granted for the Duke of Lancaster's Voyage
into Spain.
(Memorandum quod Domini, Magnates, ac Comunitates Comitatuum, Civitatum and
Burgorum concesserunt Domino Regi, etc.) granted to the King for the Voyage of
John King of Castile and Leon Duke of Lancaster into Spain, and safe keeping of
the Sea and Marches of Scotland, a Tenth and Fifteenth, and half a Tenth and
Fifteenth; the 10th and 15th to be paid at Candlemas, and the half 10th and
15th to be paid at Midsummer; for the receipt and expending Ibm.
Voyage into Spain was agreed and granted by the King, Prelates, Noblemen,
Great Men, and Communities aforesaid in full Parliament.

In the King's Entrance into Knighton, col. 2675. n. 50.
Scotland, the King conferred several Honors upon the Persons following, at
Hounslow-Lodge in Tividale, says the Record, which were confirmed in this
Parliament.

The King's Uncle Rot. Parl. 9 Ric. II. n. 14. Several Titles and Honors
confirmed in Parliament.
Edmond Earl of Cambridge being created Duke of York, was confirmed in that
Title, and had from the King 1000 l. a Year to support his Dignity, to be paid
out of the Exchequer to him and his Heirs Male, until the King could settle
Lands upon him and his Heirs of the like Value.

Then also was Ibm. n. 15.
Thomas Earl of Buckingham and Essex the King's Uncle, being created Duke of
Gloucester, confirmed in that Title, with the like Gift and Settlement to
support his Dignity.

Michael de la Pole Ibm. n. 16.
being created Earl of Suffolk, was confirmed in that Dignity, and had for the
support of his Honor 20. l. a Year out of the Farm of the County, and 500 l. a
Year out of the Estate of the former Earl (which had escheated to the King for
want of Heirs) after the Decease of the Queen and Isabelle Countess of Suffolk.

The Earl of Ib. n. 17.
Oxford being created Marquess of Dublin, was confirmed in that Title, by
consent of the Prelates, Lords, and Commons, and had by the same consent, the
Land and Lordship of Ireland, etc. except some Royalties belonging to the
Crown, paying 5000 Marks yearly into the Exchequer.

In this Parliament the Ib. n. 32. The Commons Petition the King's Household
might be viewed every year, and if need were Regulated.
Commons Petition the King, That the State of his Household might be viewed
every year, by the Chancellor, Treasurer, and Clerk of the Privy Seal, and what
was Statutes of ancient time made concerning the Household, might be kept and
duly executed in all their Points.

As to the first Article of the Ib. To. The King's Answer.
Petition, The King will do it when he please; As to the second, Le Roy le
Voet, The King Wills.

It was also then Enacted, Ib. n. 33.
That all Lords and other Persons, having any Lands on the Marches beyond Tine,
do dwell King may show favor when he please.

The Commons desired to know, Ib n. 39.
who should be the King's Chief Officers, and Governors of the State of the
Kingdom.

The Answer Ib. To.
was, The King has enough sufficient Officers at present, and will change them
at his pleasure.

On Easter Knighton, col. 2676. n. 30, 40, 50, 60. A. D. 1387. The Duke of
Lancaster's
Day next following, the Duke of Lancaster, with his Wife, came to take his
Leave of the King, to whom Spain. Ibm. Voyage into Spain, and what he did there.
On the 9th of July, all things being prepared for the Expedition, he set sail
with 20000 Men for Spain, whereof in the Marshall's Roll 2000 were Men at Arms,
and 8000 Archers, in which Army several very great Men were the Chief Officers.
Ib. col. 2677. n. 10, 20.
He had with him his Wife Constance, the Eldest Daughter of Peter King of
Castile, etc. for his Tyrannies called Cruel, who died without Issue Male, by
whom he claimed that Kingdom, and Katherin his only Daughter by her, and Two
Daughters by his first Wife Blanch, Daughter and Heiress to Henry Duke of
Lancaster, Philip, and Elizabeth. Peter King of Castile was Son of Alphonso the
Sixth, King of Castile, etc. upon whom Henry II. a Bastard Son of Alphonso,
usurped the Kingdom. He Married his Daughter Philip, by his first Wife Blanch,
to the King of Portugal; and his Daughter Katherin, the true Heiress Castile,
by his Wife Constance, to John the Son of Henry the Bastard and Usurper,
Walsingh. f. 342. n. 30, 40.
but so as if they had no Issue, the Inheritance of the Crown was to be and
remain to the Son of Edmond Duke of York, Brother to the Duke of Lancaster, who
had Married Isabel the Younger Daughter of King Peter the Cruel. Upon these
Terms, and a mighty Sum of Money paid by Henry the Bastard to the Duke, and an
Annuity of 10000 l. a year to him and his Duchess Constance for their Lives, a
Peace Usurper and the Duke, and the Affair of Castile or Spain settled; after
which he went into Aquitan, and stayed there and in Spain more then Two years,
and then returned into England in the beginning of November 1389. Knighton Ut
supra.
says, the Money paid down to the Duke of Lancaster, was an immense Sum, and
that he was told by one of his Family and Retinue in this Voyage, that for the
second Payment the King of Spain sent him Forty seven Mules laden with Gold in
Chests. Walsingh. f. 323. n. 60, etc. Knighton, ut supra, n. 40, 50, 60.
As he sailed into Spain, he landed some Forces in Britany, and relieved Breast,
that was then besieged by the Duke of that Country.

This year Writs were issued for calling a Parliament on the First of October at
Westminster, dated Rot. Clause 10 Ric. II. M. 42. Dors. The Duke of Suffolk,
Michael de la Pole,
Aug. 8. wherein Michael de la Pole Earl of Suffolk, and then Chancellor of
England, impeached by the Commons in several Articles; Rot. Parl. 10 Ric. II.
n. 6. impeached by the Commons.
The first and chief Article was, That he was Sworn as Chancellor to procure
the Profit of the King, That he purchased of the King Land, Rents, and
Tenements to a great value, contrary to his Oath, not considering the Necessity
of the King and Kingdom, and that / he being Chancellor at the time of the
Purchase, caused the yearly Rent of the Lands to be undervalued, very much in
deceit of the King. The residue of the Articles were much of King, but in less
Matters, except one, wherein he was charged, That by his fault some of the Tax
given last Parliament was diverted to other Uses then for which it was given, so
as the Sea was not so well Guarded as it ought to have been.

To this he Answered, Ib. n. 7. His Answer to the Articles.
That while he was Chancellor, he neither purchased any Lands of the King, nor
did he give any to him, unless when he made him an Earl, yet confessed he had
Hull, whereof some part was assigned to him by one Tydeman de Limbergh, and
others before he was Chancellor, and some part came to him by Descent; and his
Brother in Law Sir Richard le Scrop, showed the said Earl, by his Valiant Acts
in sundry Battles, and his Worthy Behavior and Counsel in several Offices at
home, did justly deserve what he had; He Answered to every Article; Ib. n. 10.
The Commons not satisfied with his Answer.
he sufficiently proves the Oath had another intendment then what was then put
upon it, and further proves, that notwithstanding his Oath, he did both
lawfully take and buy. But the Commons were not satisfied with his Answers, and
therefore at their Request, by the King's Command, he was Arrested, and
committed to the Constable of England, and afterward let to Mainprise; and had
further Ib. n. 13. The Judgment against him.
Judgment, That for Breach of his Oath contained in the first Article, all the
Lands he had of saving to him the Name and Title of an Earl, and 20 l. a year
granted out of the Profits of the County of Suffolk. Ib. n. 14, 15, 16.
The like Judgment was given in every Case and Article, where he was charged
with Deceit of the King.

Sitting this Parliament the King was at Knighton, col. 2681. n. 30. The King
sent for to come to Parliament, by the Duke of Gloucester and Bishop of Ely
Eltham, his presence Thomas Duke of Gloucester, and Thomas Arundell Bishop of
Ely, were sent to him, who saluting him on behalf of the Noblemen and Commons,
related to him their Thoughts or Requests, in Words to the same sense that the
Historian writes their Speech in, Ibm.
Qui salutarent eum ex part procerum and Communium Parlementi sui sub tali
sensu verborum ei referentes vota eorum; and then begins Their Speech to the
King upon this Occasion.
the Speech, which was in such Language as Subjects in any times did not use
toward their Kings and Princes, so that it is most probable Knighton was both
the Author of the Words, and Speech, as indeed most Historians are of the
Speeches and Orations found in them. Ib. n. 40, 50, 60, etc.
The Speech reckons up all King Richard's Faults most severely, and what Wicked
and Evil Counsels he followed, and what desperate Courses he intended to
pursue, delivering what he had in France to, and putting himself under the
Protection of that King, threatening him several times with an old Statute, and
a laudable and approved Custom they had, which could not be gainsayed, to
warrant what they said to him, and urged him to perform; Ib. Col. 2683. I. 1.
And at last the Speechmaker, whether the Duke of Gloucester, or Thomas Arundell
Bishop of Ely, or Knighton, tells King Richard, they had one thing more to
intimate to him on behalf of the People in these Ib. I. 3.
Habent enim ex antiquo Statuto, and de facto non long retroactis temporibus
experienter, quod dolendum est, habito, si Rex ex maligno Consilio quocunque
vel inepta Contumacia aut Contemptu seu proterva voluntate singular aut quovis
modo irregulari, se alienaverit a populo suo, nec voluerit per jura Regni and
Statuta ac laudabiles ordinationes cum salubri Consilio Dominorum and procerum
Regni gubernari and Regulari, set Capitose in suis insanis Consiliis propriam
voluntatem suam singularem proterve Excercere, extunc licitum est eis cum
Communi assensu and consensu populi Regni ipsum Regem de Regali solio abrogare,
and propinquiorem aliquem de stripe regia loco ejus in Regni solium sublimare;
That is, For the People have it by an old Statute, and by The Case of Edw. II.
Fact, (which cannot be expressed without Grief) by Experience not very long
since committed, That if a King, by any Malignant Counsel whatever, or foolish
Contumacy or Contempt, or froward arrogant Wilfulness, by any singular or
irregular Means, did alienate himself from his People, nor would

On the 24th of October next following, Thomas Arundell, Bishop Clause 10 Ric.
II. M. 35. The great Officers of State changed.
Ely, was made Chancellor in the place of the Earl of Suffolk; and on the same
day John Gilbert, Bishop of Hereford, was made Pat. 10 Ric. II. p. 1. M. 16.
Treasurer instead of John de Fordham, Bishop of Durham; John de Waltham was
also made Keeper of the Privy Seal.

In the Pat. 10 Ric. II. p. 1. M. 7. Eleven Commissioners appointed to Govern
the Kingdom. Their Names.
Patents of this year, of his own free will, at the Request of the Lords and
Commons, the King changed these Great Officers; and further, by advice and
assent of the Lords and Commons in full Parliament, in aid of the good
Government of the Eleven Commissioners, William Archbishop of Canterbury,
Alexander Archbishop of York, his Uncles Edmond Duke of York, and Thomas Duke
of Gloucester, William Bishop of Winchester, Thomas Bishop of Excester, Nicholas
Abbat of Waltham, Richard Earl of Arundell, John Lord Cobham, Richard Lescrop,
and John Devereux, to be his great and Continual Council for one year next
coming after the date And Power.
of these Letters Patents; by which he gave them Power to Survey and Examine
all his Officers, Courts, Household, and the Government of the whole Kingdom; To
receive all his Revenue, as also all Subsidies, Taxes, and other Payments; To
do what they would in the Kingdom, and to amend all things according to their
Discretions; and these Powers, greater perhaps then any King ever exercised,
given to any Six of them, with his Three Great Officers; Willing, That if
diversity of Opinion happened between his Counselors and Officers, that the
Matter should be determined by the greater part of them; commanding and
charging all Prelates, Dukes, Earls, Barons, the Steward, Treasurer, and
Controller of his Household, the Justices of one Bench and the other, and other
his Justices whatsoever, Barons, and Chamberlains of the Exchequer, Sheriffs,
Escheators, Majors, Bailiffs, and all other his Officers, Ministers, Lieges
whatsoever, that they be attending, obedient, counselling, and aydant to the
said Counselors and Officers, so often and in what manner they should direct.
Dated at Westminster the 19th day of November. Upon this Commission a Statute
was made, and the whole Recited in it. See Statutes at Large, Cap. 1. in the
Tenth of Richard the Second, the Parliament Roll of this year, and the Pleas of
the Crown in the Parliament the 21st of this King.

This Parliament ended on the 20th of Rot. Parl. 10 Ric. II. n. 36 The King's
Protestation in Parliament.
November, and the last thing entered upon the Roll before that Memorandum is,
That the King made open Protestation in full Parliament with his own Mouth, That
for any thing was done Ib. n. 35.
in that Parliament, he would not that prejudice should come to him or his
Crown, but that the Prerogative and Liberties of his Crown should be safe and
preserved.

This year Richard Fitz-Alan, Earl of Arundel, was made Rot. Franc. 10 Ric. II.
M. 13. and M. 18.
Admiral of the whole Fleet in the West and North parts of March discovery was
made of a great Walsingh. f. 326. n. 10, 20, 30, 40. The English take an
Hundred and more Ships from the Flemings, French, and Spaniards.
Navy of Flemings, French, and Spaniards, laden with Wine, and well Guarded
with Men of War; after a sharp Engagement, wherein he took many Armed Ships,
killed and took many Soldiers of different Quality, the rest fled; he pursued
them two days, and in the whole took an Hundred and more Ships great and Small,
wherein were Nineteen thousand Tuns of Col. 2692. n. 40, 50, 60.
Knighton in his Relation of this Engagement says, there were One hundred
twenty six Ships taken, in which were about Twelve or thirteen thousand Tuns of
Rochel Wine, and that the Admiral of Flanders was taken with many others; Ib.
and Col. 2693. n. 10.
He refitted his Ships, and sailed into Britany, and relieved Breast besieged
the second time by that Duke, demolished the Castles he had built about it, and
between Lady Day and Midsummer took A. D. 1388.
One hundred and sixty Ships well laden.

This Summer the King with his Queen went Ib. n. 20, 30, 40, 50, 60. The King
and Queen's Progress. The Commission and Statute made last Parliament Questioned.
a Progress into the West and North Parts of the Kingdom; in his Return he held
a Council at Nottingham on the 21st of August, where many Questions about the
Commission and Statute made last Parliament, and those that procured and forced
the King to grant them, and how they were to be punished, were propounded to
the Two Chief Justices, and other Judges, who answered, they ought to be
punished as Traitors, as will be more fully related in the following Account of
this year. In this Council were present, Alexander Archbishop of York, Robert
de Vere Duke of Ireland, Michael de la Pole Earl of Suffolk, Robert Tresilian
Chief Justice of the King's Bench, and Nicholas Brembre of London, Knight, his
great Favorites and Advisers in all things, who were heard before all others,
and according to common fame only they.

On the Ib. Col. 2696. n. 40, 50, 60. The King splendidly received by the Major
and Citizens of London. The Duke of Gloucester, Earls of Arundel and Warwick,
march with a great Force toward London.
10th of November the King came to London, where he had a Wonderful Splendid
Reception by the Major and Citizens, who went out to meet him, says the
Historian, with an innumerable Multitude of Horsemen richly Clad, and conducted
him and his Queen to St. Paul's Church, and from thence to his Palace at
Westminster, his great unhappy Favorites accompanying him; Next day, on the
Feast of St. Martin, the King and his Favorites had notice the Duke of
Gloucester, the Earls of Arundel Warwick, were marching toward London with a
great Force, from Haringay Park near Highgate, who wrote Ib. Col. 2699. n. 30,
etc. Their Letter to the Major, Sheriffs, and Aldermen of the City.
to the Major, Sheriffs, and Aldermen of the City, to let them know, They were
and always would be Obedient and Loyal Lieges to the King, and that they ought
not to wonder at their assembling in such a manner, for that in the last
Parliament it was ordained by the King, That certain Lords there appointed and
Sworn for the Honor of God, the good of the King and Kingdom, to have the
Government of his Council and the Realm for one year; which Government had
been, and was then greatly disturbed by Alexander Archbishop of York, Robert
Vere Duke of Ireland, Michael de la Pole Earl of Suffolk, Robert Tresilian
false Justice, and Nicholas Brembre false Knight of London, all and every one
false Traitors to the King and Kingdom, who falsely and Traitorously by their
Engines, Counsel, and Conduct of the Honorable Person of the King, carried him
into diverse Parts far from his Council, in the Ruin of him and his Realm, and
falsely Counseled him against their Oath to do diverse things in Disheritance
and Dismembring his Crown, being in point to loose his Heritage beyond Sea, to
the great infamy and destruction of the whole Nation; and falsely made several
Differences between the King and Lords of his Council, so as some of them were
in fear and danger of their Lives, as they had informed the King by the
Archbishop of Canterbury, the Duke of York, the Bishops of Winchester, and
Ely, and diverse other great Lords. To Redress these things, and Punish the
Traitors according to Law, they were assembled, Requiring and Charging them
(the Major, etc.) by virtue of their Allegiance, That they should make full
Proclamation (vous requirons and chargeoms par virtue do vostre legiance que
vous eut facez plein proclamation, etc.) through the whole City, that this is our
intent and no other, and that for the Honor, Profit, and Salvation or Safety
of the King, Kingdom, and all his Loyal Lieges, and that you will be Aiding and
Comforting with all your Endeavor and Power, not favoring or aiding the
Traitors, nor any of them, as you desire the Honor of God, the King and
Kingdom, and the safety of your City, and that you neglect not this as you will
avoid the danger that may happen in time to come, and that you certify us in
this Matter on Friday next, which was the 15th of November.

On that day the Archbishop of Canterbury, the Bishop of Ely, and other Lords,
were Ib. col. 2700. n. 10, 20, etc. Several Persons sent to inquire after the
Duke and Earls. They Agree to come to the King. They pretend there were People
placed in several Places to surprise them, which were searched. The manner of
their Address to the King. His Kind Reception of them.
sent from the King, to inquire after the Duke and Earls, and having found
them, the Duke and Earls Agreed to come to the King on Sunday following, when
the King sat Two hours in his Throne in Westminster Hall expecting them: The
Reason of their Stay was, they had been informed, that at the Mews, and in the
Archbishop of York's House, there were Men placed to surprise them, which and
all other suspicious Places being searched, they came into the King's presence,
many Lords, Great Men and Commons accompanying them: When they came into the
Hall, and first saw the King, they saluted him on their Knees, and coming to
the foot of the Steps, or Stairs, up to the Throne, they again saluted him on
their Knees, and the King making Signs to them to come up the Steps, at the top
of them they the Third time saluted him on their Knees: The King arose, and
took every one by the Hand, as his Friend, and sat down again. They then
Excused themselves to the King, saying, They did not think or intend any Evil
against his Person, and told him their Grievance was concerning the Five
Traitors, and gave the King a full Account in Writing what they charged them
with; He then promised publicly, That he would cause them to appear And
Promise to them.
next Parliament, and stand to the Judgment of the Laws of the Land, and
prefix't a day for the meeting of the Parliament; Ib. col. 2071. n. 10. He
Excuses the Duke and Earls by Proclamation.
and set forth a Proclamation on the 19th of November to Excuse the Duke and
Earls, and that he thought them not Traitors, as he had been told by some of
his secret Advisers, but Worthy Men, and took them into his special Protection;
signifying also to the People, That Alexander Archbishop of York, Robert Vere
Duke of Ireland, Robert Tresilian Justice, and Nicholas Brembre Knight of
London, were also in his Protection until the next Parliament, when they were to
Answer what could be objected against them; and therefore commanded, That no
Man under any pretense Five Favorites absented themselves, and lay privately
where they could; Ib. col. 2072. n. 20, 30, etc. The Duke of Ireland sent into
Lancashire and Cheshire, to raise Forces for the Security of the King. The Duke
of Gloucester, the Earl of Derby, etc. raise a great Force.
only the Duke of Ireland went into Lancashire and Cheshire, where, as it is
said in this Author, the King wrote to Sir Thomas Molineux, Sir Ralph Vernon,
Sir Ralph Radcliffe, the Sheriffs and other Great Men of those Shires, to Raise
a Force, and Conduct him to him, which they did to the number of Five thousand
Men. The Duke of Gloucester, the Earls of Derby, Arundel, Warwick, and
Nottingham hearing of it, with what speed they could raised a great Force; in
the mean time the Duke of Ireland, on the Eve of St. Thomas the Apostle, or
Twentieth of December, was come into Oxfordshire, and intended to pass Ib. col.
2703. The Action at Radcot-Bridge.
the River Isis at Radcot-Bridge, upon which the Duke of Gloucester had placed a
Guard, and so Broken it, as it it was impassable; when the Duke of Ireland,
seeing the great Force of his Enemies, with very great danger adventured to
pass River on Horseback, and made his Escape.

The Duke of Gloucester and Earls Ibm. col. 2704. n. 10, 20, etc. The Duke and
Earls march with their Army to London.
went to Oxford, where they consulted what to do; from thence they marched to
St. Albans, and staid there on Christmas-Eve and Day, with their Forces. On St.
Stephen's Day they marched toward London, and show themselves before the City
in the Fields near Clerkenwell, with a delectable and incredible Force (cum
delectabili and incredibli Armata manu) divided into Three Bodies. From hence
Two Knights and some Squires were sent to the Major and other Chief Persons of
the City, to come to the Lords, to certify them, Whether they would stand with
them, and with the Commons of the Kingdom (and cum Communibus Regni) or with
the Duke of Ireland, and with the Traitors of the King and Kingdom. The Major
Nicholas Exton, with the Best Men of the City, came to them, delivered The
Major send them the Keys of the Gates.
the Keys of the Gates, submitted themselves to them, and offered them free
Passage into the City with all their People. But before they entered, they sent
in some Knights and Squires to search the Gates, Towers, and Strong Places,
lest by Treachery they might be assaulted; and when all things were found
secure, they entered and staid there. When it was agreed between the King and
What they did in the City.
Lords they might come and speak with him in the Tower, where he then was; Ib.
n. 40.
the King sent them the Keys of the Gates, and Munitions: And here again they
sent Knights and Squires to search all Places before they entered, lest there
should be any secret Practices and Treachery against them; and when they
thought themselves secure, the Duke of Gloucester, the Earls of Derby, Arundel,
They go into the Tower to the King. Their Discourses with him.
Warwic, and Nottingham, went into the Tower, and left their Army with the
Rabble in the Plain before it. After Salutation, the King took them into his
Chamber, where they had a long Discourse about what they came for; and he
seeing the imminent Dangers, favored them in what they desired. Ib. n. 50, 60.
He granted what they asked.
They asked of him, That all of his Court suspected of Treason and Falsity (de
proditione and falsitate suspecti) might be seized, and every one imprisoned in
several Castles. The King granted what they asked. The Earl of Derby persuaded
the King to go upon the Tower-Wall They show the King from the Tower-Walls
their Numbers.
to view the People gathered together for saving of himself and the Kingdom.
When he saw them, he wondered at the Number and Strength of the Kingdom. Then
the Duke of Gloucester Tenth Part of the People that would join with them to
destroy the false Traitors of the King and his Kingdom.

After this, Ibm. col. 2705. n. 10, 20, 30. Many sent to Prison; Others removed
from Court.
the King commanded many there named to be sent to the Castles of Nottingham,
Dover, Bristol, Rochester, Gloucester, etc. to be kept until next Parliament to
answer their Demerits. There were also then Removed from the Court John de
Fordham Bishop of Durham, the Lords Beaumont, Zouch, Burnel, Lovell, Sir Thomas
Camoys, the Son of the Lord Clifford, Sir Baldwin Bereford, the Bishop of
Chichester the King's Confessor, the Lady Mohun, the Lady Poynings, and the
Lady Molineux. Ibm. col. 2706. n. 10. The Judges taken off the Benches, and
sent to the Tower.
And on the first Day of the Parliament, Sir Roger Fulthrop, Sir Robert Belknap,
Sir John Carry, Sir John Holt, Sir William Burgh, all Judges, and John Loketon
Sergeant at Law, were taken off the Benches doing their Offices, and sent to
the Tower.

On the 17th of Claus. 11 Ric. II. M. 24. Dors. A Parliament called. The Cause
of Summons.
December. Writs were issued for a Parliament to February, or on the morrow of the
Purification of the Virgin Mary next coming. On that Day Thomas Fitz-Alan
Bishop of Ely and Chancellor of England, Brother to the Earl of Arundel (from
whence his Name of de Arundel from that Title) declared the cause of Summons to
be, Rot. Parl. 11 Ric. II. n. 1. part 1.
To consider by what means the Troubles in the Kingdom for want of good
Government might be ended, the King better Advised, the Realm better Governed,
Misdemeanors more severely punished, and good Men better encouraged; how the
Kingdom best defended, the Sea best kept, the Marches of Scotland best guarded,
Guyen preserved, and how the Charges of these things was most easily to be
born. And then gave notice, That who would complain in that Parliament of such
things as could not well be redressed by the Common Law, might carry their
Petitions to the Clercs in Chancery, there named, appointed to

Thomas Duke of Gloucester Ibm. n. 6. The Duke of Glocester's suspicion of
himself. The King declares him not guilty.
kneeled before the King, and said he understood the King had been informed,
that he was about to depose him, and make himself King; and proffered to stand
to the Award of his Peers in Parliament. The King declared openly, That he did
not think him Guilty, and had him fully excused.

The Lords Spiritual and Temporal then present, Ibm. n. 7.
claimed as Liberty and Franchise, That all great Matters moved in that
Parliament, and to be moved in other Parlements in time to come, touching Peers
of the Land, should be discussed and judged by the course of Parliament, and not
by the Law Civil, or the Common Law of the Land used in lower Courts of the
Kingdom: Which Claim, Liberty, and Franchise, the King (benignement) kindly
allowed and granted in full Parliament.

The Five Ibm. n. 8. The Protestation of the 5 Lords Appellants.
Lords Appellants Thomas Duke of Gloucester, Henry Earl of Derby, Richard Earl
of Arundel, Thomas Earl of Warwic, and Thomas Earl of Nottingham and
Earl-Marshal, made open Protestation in full Parliament, That what they did
touching their Appeal and Suit in that Parliament, and had done before, and all
the Men and People being in their Company (or of their Retinue or Assembly) and
with them in all that Affair, was done principally to the Honor of God, and in
Aid and Safety of the King and all his Kingdom, and the Safety of their Lives.

The Lords and Commons Ibm. n. 11. Half a 10th and half a 15th granted.
granted half a Tenth, and half a Fifteenth before the Parliament ended, with
Protestation, That it was done of Necessity; and that it might be no Prejudice
to the Lords and Commons in time to come, because it was granted: And further
they pray the King, That notwithstanding the Grant so made, the Parliament might
hold on its course, and be Adjourned, if need were; and that all things
touching the said Parliament might be done and executed as if the Grant had not
been made, King granted their Request, as a thing he ought to do of Reason.

Friday the 21st of March, which was the 46th Day of Parliament, Ibm. n. 12. in
fine. The Prelates, Lords, and Commons swear.
the Prelates, Lords, and Commons made the Oath following upon the Cross of
Canterbury in full Parliament.

Tou shall Append. n. 106. Their Oath.
Swear, That you will keep and cause to be kept the good Peace, Quiet, and
Tranquillity of the Kingdom: And if any will do to the contrary thereof, you
shall oppose and disturb him to the utmost of your Power. And if any People
will do any thing against the Bodies of the Persons of the Five Lords; that is
to say, Thomas Duke of Gloucester, Henry Earl of Derby, Richard Earl of Arundel
and Surrey, Thomas Earl of Warwic, and Thomas Earl-Marshal, or any of them, you
shall stand with them to the end of this present Parliament, and maintain and
support them with all your Power, to live and die with them against all Men, no
Person or any other thing excepted, saving always your Legiance to the King,
and the Prerogative of his Crown, the Laws and good Customs of the Kingdom.

The Lords and Commons grant to the King, in Defense of the The Subsidy of
Leather, Wool, etc.
Realm, a Subsidy upon Leather, Wool, and Woollfells, Rot. Parl. 117 Ric. II.
n. 16. granted upon condition.
upon Condition the Five Lords Appellants should have out of it 20000 l. by
Assent and Grant of the King, for their Costs and Labor, and Expenses before
that time, for the Honor, Profit, and Safety of the King and whole Kingdom.

The Commons Ib. n. 23. The Commons Request to the King.
pray, That no Person, of what Estate soever, do intermeddle with the Business
of the Kingdom, nor the Council of the King, but those assigned in his
Parliament, unless it be by Order of the Continual Council. And prayed also,
That they might have Power to remove all Persons from the King which they
thought fit to remove, and put others in their Places.

As to the first Point of this Article Ibm. To. His Answer.
(le Roy le voet) the King grants it. As to the second, if any Lord of the
Council, or other Lord of the Kingdom, will inform the King that he himself,
put in his Place.

In this Ib. part 2. Alexander A Bp. of York, the Duke of Ireland, and Earl of
Suffolk, accused.
Parliament, Thomas Duke of Gloucester, Constable of England, Henry Earl of
Derby, Richard Earl of Arundel and Surrey, Thomas Earl of Warwic, and Thomas
Earl-Marshal, did accuse and appeal Alexander Archbishop of York, Robert de
Vere Duke of Ireland, and Michael de la Pole Earl of Suffolk; saying,

I. That as False Traitors and Enemies to the King and Kingdom, taking
Advantage of his tender Age, and the Innocence of his Person, informed him, and
put upon him for Truth false things of their own Invention, against Loyalty and
Good Loyal Lords and Lieges, by whom he ought to have been Governed: And
encroaching to themselves Royal Power, in Disfranchising the King (en
Defranchisantz nostre dit Seigneur le Roy) blemishing his Sovereignty, and
lessening his Prerogative and Royalty, and made him so Obedient, as he was
Sworn to be Governed, Counseled, and Conducted by them; by virtue of which

II. Also whereas the King is not bound to make any Oath but on the Day of his
Coronation; or for the Common Profit of himself and Kingdom, the aforesaid
Alexander, Robert, and Michael, False Traitors, and Enemies to the King and
Realm, made him Swear and Assure them, That he would Maintain, Support, and
Live and Die with them: And also whereas the King ought to be of more free
Condition than any other of his Kingdom, they have put him more in Servitude
than any one, against his Honor, Estate, and Royalty, against their Legiance
as Traitors to him.

III. Also the said Robert, Michael, and Alexander, by the Robert Tresilian
false Justice, and Nicholas de Brembre false Knight of London, by their false
Contrivance would not suffer the Great Men of the Kingdom, nor good Counselors
to come near the King, nor would suffer him to speak with him, unless in their
Presence and Hearing, accroaching to themselves Royal Power, Lordship, and
Sovereignty upon the Person of the King, to the great Dishonor and Peril of
the King, the Crown, and his Realm.

IV. Also the said Alexander, Robert, Michael, Robert Tresilian false Justice,
and Nicholas de Brembre false Knight of London, by their false Wickedness
evilly advised the King, so as his appearance he ought to make to the Great
Lords and his People Liege, and the Favors and Right, to which they requested
his Answer, were not to be obtained, but at their Pleasure and Allowance, in
staying the King from his Duty, and against his Oath, and turning the Hearts of
the Great Lords from him, estrange his Heart from the Peers of the Land, to
have amongst them the sole Government of the Kingdom.

V. Also by the said Encroachment of Robert de Vere Duke of Ireland, and
Michael de la Pole, by the Advice and Counsel of Alexander Archbishop of York,
caused the King, without Assent of the Kingdom, by their Abetments, without any
Deserts of the Persons, to give diverse Lordships, Castles, Towns, Ireland, the
Town of Okeham, and the Forest thereof, and other Lands which were the Lord
Audley's, and other great Estates, to the said Robert de Vere, and others,
whereby they are greatly enriched, and the King become poor, and had not
wherewith to support and bear the Charges of the Kingdom, unless by
Impositions, Taxes, and Tributes, put upon his People, in Disheriting his
Crown, and undoing the

VI. Also by the Encroachment of the said Alexander, Robert, and Michael, by
the Assent and Advice of Robert Tresilian false Justice, and Nicholas Brembre
false Knight of London, caused the King to give diverse Lands, Manors,
Tenements, Re^^^, Offices, and Bailiwics, to People of their Kindred, and other
Persons, of whom they received great Bribes; and also to make them of their
Party in their false Quarrels and Purposes; Robert Manfield Clerc, John Blake,
Thomas Vske, and others, to the undoing of the King and Kingdom.

VII. Also, Robert de Vere, etc. Michael de la Pole, etc. Alexander
Archbishop, etc. by Assent and Counsel of Nicholas Brembre, etc. encroaching
to themselves Royal Power, caused the King to give very great Sums of Gold and
Silver, as well of his own Goods and Jewels, as the Treasure of the Kingdom, as
Tenths, Fifteenths, and other Taxes, granted by diverse Parlements, to be
expended in Defense and Safeguard of the Kingdom, and otherwise, which amounted
to the Sum of 100000 Marks and more, to Robert Vere Duke of Ireland, and
others: And further, they caused many good Ordinances and Purposes made and
ordained in Parlements, as well for the Wars as Defense

VIII. Also by the said Encroachment, and by great Bribes taken by the said
Robert, Michael, and Alexander, diverse Persons not sufficient or fit, had the
Guard and Government of diverse Lordships, Castles, and Countries of War, as in
Guyen and otherwhere, as well on this side as beyond the Sea; whereby the
People and Countries of those Parts, Liege and Loyal to the Scotland and
otherwhere, in Disherison of the Crown, and great Injury of the Realm, as in
the Case of Harpedene, Craddock, and others.

IX. Also by the Encroachment of the foresaid Alexander, Robert, Michael,
Robert, and Nicholas,, diverse People have been England, and put to great
Delays, Losses, and Costs; and Statutes, Judgments, justly made upon the
necessary Causes in Parliament, have been reversed and nulled, by Procurement of
the said Misdoers and Traitors, and this by Reason of the great Bribes by them
received, to the greatest Injury of the King and Kingdom.

X. Also the Five aforesaid accroaching to them Royal Power,

XI. Also, whereas the Great Lordship and Land of Ireland, has been beyond
Memory Parcel of the Crown of England, and the People thereof for all that time
have been the King's Lieges without mean to him or his Royal Progenitors; and
England, in all their Charters, Writs, Letters, and Patents, and also under
their Seals in Augmentation of their Names and Royalty, styled themselves Lords
of Ireland; the foresaid Robert Duke of Ireland, Alexander, etc. Michael, etc.
as false Traitors to the King by the said Encroachment, gave Advice that the
King, inasmuch as was in him, had granted, that Robert de Vere should be King
of Ireland; and to accomplish this wicked Purpose, England, or Land of Ireland,
in parting the King's Legiance in respect to both Nations, in decrease of the
Honorable Name of the King, and in open Disherison of his Crown of England,
and full Destruction of his Loyal Lieges and the Nation of Ireland.

XII. Also, whereas by the Great Charter, and other good Laws and Usages of the
Kingdom, no Man ought to be taken, put in Prison, or to Death, without due
Process of Law, the fore said Nich. Brembre false Knight of London, took by
night certain Persons out of the Prison of Newgate, Chaplanes and others, to
the Number of Twenty two, some Debtors, others accused Kent to a Place called
the Foul Oak, and there encroaching to himself Royal Power, as a Traitor to the
King, and without Warrant or Process of Law, caused their Heads to be cut off,
all but one, who was Appealed of Felony by an Approver, and him he suffered to
go at large at the same time.

XIII. Also the foresaid Alexander, etc. Robert, etc. Michael, etc. Robert,
etc. Nicholas, etc. Traitors to the King and Kingdom, took great Bribes in many
Cases, in the Name of the King, for Maintenance of Quarrels or Suits; and one
time took Bribes of both Sides or Parties, as shall be more fully showed, if
need be.

XIV. Also these Five caused some Lords and others Loyal Lieges to be put out
of the King's Council, and so as they

XV. Also, whereas in the last Parliament all the Lords, Sages, and Commons
there assembled, seeing the imminent Ruin of the King and Kingdom, by the
Perils and Mischiefs aforesaid, and for that the King had forsaken the Counsel
of the Kingdom, and holden himself altogether to the Counsel of the said Five
Evildoers and Traitors; and also for that the King of France with his Royal
Power was Shipped at Sea, ready to have Landed in England, to have destroyed
the Kingdom and Language thereof; and there was no Ordinance then made, or Care
taken for the Safety of the King and Kingdom; They knew no other Remedy than to
show the King fully how he was ill Governed, Led, and Counseled, by the
Traitors and Ill-doers aforesaid; requiring him most humbly as his Loyal
Lieges, for the Safety of him and his whole Realm, and to London to kill and
put to death all the said Lords and Commons, except such as

XVI. Also, That those Five Traitors, etc. when the Major and Good People of
London utterly refused, in the Presence of the King, to Murder the Lords and
Commons, by their said Traitorous Accroachment, falsely Counseled the King, and
prevailed with him to leave the Parliament for many Days; and caused him to
certify (and fist certifier) That he would not come to the Parliament, nor
Treat with the Lords and Commons of the Business of the Kingdom, for any Peril,
Ruin, or Mischief that might happen any ways to him or the Realm, if he were
not first assured, by the Lords and Commons, that they would not speak or do in
that Parliament against any of the Misdoers, saving Michael de la Pole; to the
great Ruin of the King and Kingdom, against the ancient Ordinances and
Liberties of Parliament.

XVII. Also the said Lords and Commons, after they understood the King's Mind,
by the wicked Excitation and Counsel of the Five, etc. was such, as he would
not suffer any thing to be commenced, pursued, or done, against the said Mis-
or (mesfesours) they dare not speak or proceed against the King's Will; and
then in Parliament was read the Counsel and Advice of the Lords and Justices,
and other Sages and Commons of Parliament, how the Estate of the King and his
Royalty might be best saved, against the Perils and Mischiefs aforesaid, and
they knew not how to find any other Remedy than to ordain, That Twelve Loyal
Lords of the Land should be the King's Council for One Year; and that there
should be etc. according to the Effect of the Commission and Statute; by which
Commission and Statute, no Man was to Advise the King against them, under
Forfeiture, for the first Offense, of his Goods and Chattels; for the second
Offense, Life and Member: Which Ordinances, Statute and Commission were made
agreeable to the Assent of the King, the Lords, Justices, and other Sages and
Commons

XVIII. Also, after this, the said Five Misdoers and Traitors, caused the King
to assemble a Council of certain Lords, Justices, and others, many times
without the Assent and Presence of the Lords of the Great Council; and made
diverse Demands of them very suspicious, of diverse Matters; by which the King,
Lords, and Common People were in great Trouble, and the whole Realm also.

XIX. Also to accomplish the said High Treason, the Misdoers Alexander, etc.
Robert, etc. Michael, etc. by the Assent and Counsel of Robert Tresilian, and
Nicholas Brembre, caused the King to go through the Kingdom with some of them,
and into Wales, and caused him to make come before him the Lords, Knights, and
Esquires, and other good People of those Parts, as well of Cities and Burghs,
as other Places; and made some to enter into Bond, others by their Oaths, to
stand with him against all People, and to effect his Purpose, which at that
time was the Will and Purpose of the said Misdoers and Traitors, by their false
Imaginations, Deceits, and Accroachments abovesaid: Which Securities and Oaths
were against the Good Laws and Usages of the Land, and against the Oath of the
King, to the great Ruin and Dishonor of the King and Kingdom.

XX. Also by force of such Bonds and Oaths, all the Realm was put into great
Trouble by the said Evildoers and Traitors, and in peril to have suffered many
importable Mischiefs.

XXI. Also, to bring about their Traitorous Purposes, the said Five caused the
King to go into several Parts of the Kingdom for some long times, whereby the
Lords assigned by the said Ordinance, Statute, and Commission,

XXII. Also the said Robert de Vere Duke of Ireland, by the Counsel and Abet of
the other Four Traitors, accroaching to himself Royal Power, without the King's
Commission, or other sufficient usual Warrant, made himself Justice of Chester,
and

XXIII. Also the said Traitors Robert de Vere, etc. Alexander, etc. Michael,
etc. by the Counsel and Abet of Robert Tresilian and Nicholas Brembre,
incroaching to themselves Royal Power, caused to be delivered John de Blois
Heir of Britan, who was France, the great Ruin of the King and Realm, and
against the Statutes and Ordinances aforesaid, made in the last Parliament.

XXIV. Also, the said Five Traitors caused the King to have a great Retinue of
late, of diverse People to whom he gave

XXV. Also the aforesaid Five Misdoers and Traitors, in full accomplishment of
all their Treasons aforesaid, and to make the King give Credit to them and
their Counsel, and hold them more Loyal and greater Sages then others of his
Kingdom, and the more to color their false Treasons, they caused the King to
make come before him in several Places of the Kingdom, diverse Justices and
Lawyers, Robert Tresilian, Robert Belknap, John Carry, John Holt, Roger
Fulthorp, William Burgh, his Justices, and John de Loketon, Sergeant at Law,
and with them John Blake Referendary, and others; which Justices, Sergeant, and
John Blake, being asked in the presence of the King by the Misdoers, Be it
Remembered, That on the Twenty first day of August, in the Eleventh year of King
Richard the Second, at the Castle of Nottingham before the King, Robert
Tresilian Chief Justice, and Robert Belknap Chief Justice of the Common Pleas,
John Holt, Roger Fulthorp, and William Burgh, Knights, Justices Associate of
Robert Belknap, and John Lokeson the King's Sergeant at Law, in the presence of
the Lords and other Witnesses underwritten, personally there being, were
required by the King upon their Faith and Allegiance to answer faithfully to
certain Questions, and speak the Law concerning them, according to their
Discretion.

First, It was demanded, Whether the new Statute, Ordinance, and Commission
made in the last Parliament at Westminster, The Opinion of Judges, etc.
concerning the Statute and Commission.
did derogate to or from the King's Royalty, and Prerogative? They unanimously
answer, It did, especially for that they were contrary to the King's Will.

2. Also it was demanded, How those were to be punished that procured the
Statute, Ordinance, and Commission to be

3. Also it was demanded, How they were to be punished that Excited the King to
Consent to the making of that Statute, Ordinance, and Commission? They
unanimously answer as to the last Question.

4. Also they were demanded, How they were to be punished, that forced or
straightened the King ( qui compiderunt sive Arctarunt Regem) to consent to the
making of the Statute, Ordinance, and Commission? They unanimously answer, They
were deservedly to be punished as Traitors. Likewise they were demanded, How
they were to be punished, who hindered the King from Exercising those things
which belonged to his Prerogative and Royalty? They also unanimously answer,
They were to be punished as Traitors.

5. Also it was demanded, Whether after the Parliament was to their own
Articles, notwithstanding the King had injoined them to the contrary? Then,
Whether the King ought to have the Government of the Parliament, and indeed to
govern effectually, so as upon the Articles limited by the King, they ought
first to proceed? Or, Whether the Lords and Commons ought first to have Answer
from the King to their own Articles, before there were further Proceedings? (
Nunquid Rex debeat habere in ea part Regimen Parliamenti, and de facto Regere
and effectum, quod super Articulis limitatis per Regem primo debeant procedere,
vel an Domini and Comunes primo debeant habere Responsum a Rege super Articulis
per eosdem expressis, antequam ulterius procedatur) They unanimously answer,
That in such Case the King should have the Government, and so in order in all
other Articles touching the Parliament to the end of the same; and if any one
acted contrary to this Government of the King, he was to be punished as a
Traitor.

6. Also it was demanded, Whether the King when he pleased might not Dissolve
the Parliament, and Command his Lords and Commons to depart from thence? They
unanimously answer, He might, and if any one afterward proceeded as in
Parliament against the King's Will, he was to be punished as a Traitor.

7. Also it was demanded, Whether when the King pleased to Remove any of his
Justices and Officers whatsoever, and

8. Also it was demanded, How he was to be punished who moved in Parliament,
that the Statute might be sent for, by which Edward the Second, the King's
Great Grandfather, was

9. Also it was demanded, Whether the Judgment given in the last Parliament at
Westminster against the Earl of Suffolk,

In Testimony of all which the Justices and Sergeant aforesaid Witnesses to the
Opinions of the Justices.
put to their Seals, these being Witnesses, the Reverend Fathers Alexander
Archbishop of York, Robert Archbishop of Dublin, John Bishop of Durham,
Thomas Bishop of Chichester, John Bishop of Bangor, Robert Duke of Ireland,
Michael Earl of Suffolk, John Ryppon Clerc, and John Blake Esquire Dated in the
Place, Day, Month, and Year aforesaid.

XXVI. These Five are Accused, That they drew away the Heart, and Good Will of
the King from the said Lords and others which agreed to make the Commission and
Ordinance in the last Parliament, who accounted them his Enemies and Traitors,
and being sure the Justices favored their Design, contrived that those Lords
and others should be Arrested, Endicted, and Attainted, by false Enquests of
Treason, and put to Death, and they and their Blood or Issue Disherited; and
London or Middlesex, and for that cause they made a False and Wicked Person,
one Thomas Husk, Undersheriff of Middlesex, who by their Assent, Procurement
and Command, undertook the said false Endictments and Attainders should be made
and accomplished, ( Emprist que les ditz faux enditements and atteinders
serroient faitz and accompliez.) And for the better accomplishment of their
Treason, the said Traitors caused the John Rypon false Clerc of their Covin, to
the Mayor of London, to Arrest the Duke of Gloucester and others, and by force
of those Letters, one John Blake carried to the Mayor a Bill of Information
against them, by which they were to be Indicted and Attainted; The Effect of
which Bill was, That it seemed for the better that certain of the Lords,
Knights, and Commons of the last Parliament, which were notoriously impeachable,
( les queux sount notoirement empeschable) should be privately Endicted in
London and Middlesex of Conspiracy and Confederacy, for that they at a certain
day there, Falsely and Traitorously Conspired between themselves, and
Confederated themselves to make in the same Parliament a Statute and Commission
against the Royalty of our Lord the King, and in Derogation of his Crown, and
procured the same Statute there afterward at a certain day to be made, and
also procured our Lord the King to assent against

And further, the said Evildoers and Traitors, ( Mesfesours and Traitors) set
a Watch to give notice of the Duke of Lancaster's England, that he might be
Arrested just upon his arrival.

XXVII. Also these Five Evil Doers and Traitors after having informed the King,
so as he believed the Statute, Ordinance, and Commission, were made in
Derogation of his Royalty and Prerogative, they strongly possessed him that all
those, who made or caused to be made the said Statute, Ordinance, and
Commission, had a purpose to Degrade and Depose him; and

XXVIII. Also, after this False and Traitorous Information, when the Five
aforesaid had procured the King to hold the Loyal Lords as Enemies and
Traitors, the said Misdoers and Traitors advised him by every way possible, as
well by the Power of his own People, as by the Power of his Enemies of France,
and others, to destroy and put to Death the said Lords, and all others who
assented to the making of the said Statute, Ordinance, and Commission, and that
it might be done so privately as none might know it but such as did it.

XXIX. Also, to accomplish the High Treason aforesaid, Alexander, etc. Robert
de Vere, etc. and Michael, etc, by their Advice, France, some by one Nicholas
Southwell Valet of his Chamber, and others, by other Persons of small Account,
well Strangers as English, requesting and praying the King of France, That he
would with all his Power and Advice be Aiding and Strengthening him to Destroy
and put to Death the Lords and other English, which the King held to be his
Enemies and Traitors as above, to the great Trouble and Dissatisfaction

XXX. Also the last named Three, encroaching to themselves Royal Power, caused
the King to promise the King of France by his Letters and Messages, That for
the Aid and Power he was to receive from him, to accomplish this High Treason
and Murder, he would give and surrender, and give unto him the Town and Castle
of Calais, and all other Castles and Fortresses in the Marches or Confines of
Picardy and Artois, the Castles Cherburgh and Breast, to the great Dishonor,
Trouble and Ruin of the King and Kingdom.

XXXI. Also, after the last named Three were sure of having Aid and Assistance
from the King of France, by Excitation and Contrivance of the said Traitors, a
Conference was to have been in the Marches of Calais about a Truce for Five
years, between the Two Nations, at which Conference both Kings were to be
present, and also the English Lords, which the King Thomas Duke of Gloucester
Constable of England, Richard Earl of Arundell and Surry, and Thomas Earl of
Warwick, and others, were to be put to Death.

XXXII. Also, for performance of this High Treason, the last named Three caused
the King to send for Safe-conducts to the King of France, some for himself,
some for the Duke of Ireland, and some for John Salisbury, John Lancaster,
Knights, France, to put in Execution this Wicked Purpose and Treason; which
Safe-conducts were ready to be produced.

XXXIII. Also the foresaid Nicholas Brembre false Knight of London, by Assent
and Advice of Alexander, etc. Robert de Vere, etc. Michael, etc. and Robert
Tresilian false Justice, encroaching to themselves Royal Power as before; some
of them went Personally into London, and without the Assent and Knowledge
King's Person or his Royalty, and that they were ready to live and die with
him, in destruction of all such, who did or should design Treason against the
King in any manner, and that they should be ready, and come readily to their
Mayor, for the time being, or that afterward should be, when and what hour
they should be required, to resist so long as they lived, all such as did or
should design any thing against the King in any of the Points aforesaid; at
which time the King London; and also, That by obscure Words contained in the
Oath, the Intent of the Misdoers and Traitors was to engage the People of
London to raise their Power to destroy the Loyal Lords.

XXXI^* Also, the said Nicholas, Alexander, Robert de Vere, and Michael,
Traitors to the King and Kingdom, encroaching to themselves Royal Power, of
their own Authority, without Warrant from the King or his great Council, caused
to be proclaimed through the City of London, That none of the King's Lieges
should Aid or Comfort Richard Earl of Arundell and Surry, a Peer of the Land,
and one of the Lords of the King's great Council, during the Commission, or to
sell him Armor,

XXXV. Also, the said Nicholas Brembre, by Assent and Counsel of Alexander,
Robert de Vere, and Michael, made to be proclaimed in the City of London, That
no Person should be so hardy to speak one Word of ill of the said Misdoers and
Traitors,

XXXVI. Also, the said Five Traitors to the King and Kingdom, caused the King
to send to his Council certain Persons to be Sheriffs through the Kingdom, named
to him by the Evildoers and Traitors, to the intent they might make such
Parliament Knights, as they should name, to the undoing of the good Loyal Lords,
and the good Commons, and also the good

XXXVII. Also, the Five Misdoers and Traitors, during the time of Protection,
to hinder the Appeal, falsely Counseled, and caused the King to Command by his
Letter diverse Knights and Esquires, his Sheriffs, and other his Ministers of
diverse Counties, to levy and assemble all the Power they could to come with the
Duke of Ireland against the Lords Appellants, to make sudden War upon and
destroy them.

XXXVIII. Also, during the time of Protection of the said Robert de Vere, etc.
Michael, etc. Alexander, etc. Nicholas, etc. caused the King by his Letters to
notify to the Duke of Ireland, they were all appealed of Treason, by Thomas
Duke of Gloucester Constable of England, Richard Earl of Arundell and Surry, and
Thomas Earl of Warwick, and how he had given them day until the next Parliament,
and how he had taken into his special Protection both Parties, with all their
Goods and Chattels; and it was further contained in the King's Letters, That if
the Duke of Ireland had sufficient Power, he should not cease to march on with
all his Force to come to him; and soon after they caused the King to write to
that Duke, That he should take the Field, with all the Force he could get
together, and that he would meet him with all his Power, and that he Lancaster
and Chester, and in Wales, as other Places of the Kingdom, to destroy and put
to death the Lords and all others who ordered and assented to the making of the
Statute, Ordinance and Commission, to the Ruin of the King and his Kingdom.

XXXIX. Also, the said Robert de Vere Duke of Ireland, false Traitor to the
King and Kingdom, assembled a great Power of Men at Arms and Archers in
Lancashire, Cheshire, Wales, and Thomas Duke of Gloucester Constable of England,
Henry Earl of Derby, Richard Earl of Arundel and Surry, Thomas Earl of Warwick,
and Thomas Earl Marshal, and other the King's Lieges, to the Undoing and Ruin
of the King and whole Kingdom, and so Rod or Marched with a great Force of Men
at Arms and Archers, from the County of Chester to Radcot-Bridge, accroaching
to himself Royal Power,

This Impeachment was Exhibited on Monday the first Rot. Parl. 11 Ric. II. Part
3. This Roll is not numbered. The Appealed summoned to appear.
day of the Parliament, being the 3d of February, when the Lords Appellants
affirmed they were ready to prove every Article as it should be awarded in
Parliament, to the Honor of God, the Honor and Profit of the King, and the
whole Realm; whereupon Westminster Hall, and at the great Gate of the Palace of
Westminster, to come and Answer the Appellants; and because they came not,
being so solemnly called, the Duke of Gloucester and the other Appellants prayed
the King, and Lords, to Record their Default, and proceed to Judgment;
Thereupon, Ibm.
the King Tuesday, when the Justices, Sergeants, and other Sages of the Law of
the Kingdom, and also the Sages of the Law Civil, were charged by the King to
give their Loyal Counsel to the Lords of Parliament, how they should proceed in
the Case of Appeal. The said Justices, Sergeants, and Sages of both Laws having
Deliberated, answered the Lords in Parliament, That How they were to be Tried.
they had noted and well understood the Tenor of the Appeal, and that it was
done, neither according to the Order of one Law or the other; Upon which the
Lords in Parliament Deliberated, and by the common assent of the King and Lords,
it was declared, That in such high Crimes which touched the Person of the King,
and the State of the whole Realm, perpetrated by Persons that were Peers of the
Realm, with others, Ibm.
intent that the King and Lords of Parliament shall not be Ruled or Governed by
the Civil Law, and also that so high a Case should be no where Tried but in
Nicholas Brembre, who was only in Custody, might be brought to answer; The
Appealed were again called to come and Answer to the said Appellants, and came
not, nevertheless the King and Lords advised for their better Deliberation
until the Morrow, being Wednesday the 5th of February, at which time the said
Appellants prayed the King and Lords in Parliament they would Record the Default
of the Appealed as before: Whereupon the Archbishop Canterbury for himself and
all other Bishops his Suffragans, and all other Lords Spiritual of his
Province, made Ibm. and Append. n. 108.
Protestation, and delivered it in Writing into Parliament, for the saving of
their Right of Peerage Sitting and Voting in Parliament, tho at present there
were such Matters there in Agitation as by the Sacred Canons they might not be
present.

Then the Appealed Ibm. The Appealed appear not.
by Command of the King and Lords, Nicholas brought to Answer. The King and
Lords took time to Consider and Examine the Articles, whether they Honor of
God, the Honor and Profit of the King, and the whole Kingdom. The King
Commanded the Lords to Examine the Articles, who did, with great labor and
diligence, until Thursday the 13th of February, and then declared many of the
Articles contained Treason, as the First, Second, Eleventh, Twelfth, Fifteenth,
and Sixteenth, as also the Eighteenth, Twenty ninth, Thirtieth, Thirty first,
Thirty second; the Thirty seventh, Thirty eighth, and Thirty ninth were
Treason. And then upon due Information of their Consciences, pronounced the
Appealed Guilty, and Judged them to be Ibm. Their Judgment.
Drawn and Hanged as Traitors and Enemies, to the King and Kingdom; and that
their Heirs should be Disherited for ever, and their Lands, Tenements, Goods,
and Chattels forfeited to the King; and that the Temporalities Honor of God,
and of Holy Church, and the Safety of the Laws of the Land.

Then the Duke and Earls Appellants prayed Sir Nicholas Sir N. Brembre brought
to answer.
Brembre might be brought to Answer; and on Monday the 17th February, the
Constable of the Tower brought him into Parliament, Ibm.
where the Articles of Appeal were read to him; to which he pleaded Not Guilty
in any Point of them; and said he was there ready to make good what he said by
his Body, as a Knight ought to do. The Lords answered, Battle did not lie in
that Case; and that they would examine the Articles touching the said Nicholas,
and take due Information by all true, necessary, and convenient Ways, that
their Consciences might be Honor of God, the Honor and Profit of the King and
his Kingdom, as they would answer it before God, according to the Course and
Law of Parliament.

During this Examination, on Wednesday the 19th of February, Sir Robert
Tresilian was taken, and brought into Ibm. Sir R Tresilian taken and brought
into Parliament.
Parliament; and being asked if he had any thing to say which had happened since
Judgment passed upon him, why execution thereof should Tower, and from thence
drawn through the City of London, and forward to the Gallows at Tyburn, and
there to hang by the Neck, and that the Execution should be done by the Marshal
of England, taking to his Assistance the Major, Sheriffs, and Aldermen of
London: And he was Executed the same Day.

On the morrow, Ibm. Sir N. Brembre Sentenced and Executed.
which was the 20th Day of February, Sentenced and Executed.
Sir Nicholas Brembre was brought into Parliament, when the Lords, by diligent
Examination, due Proof and Information, found him Guilty of High Treason; and
they Awarded, by Assent of the King, as a Traitor and open Enemy to the King
and Kingdom, he should be Drawn and Hanged, his Heirs for ever Disherited, and
his Lands, Tenements, Goods and Chattels forfeit to the King: And he was
Executed on the same Day, and in the same manner as was Robert Tresilian.

It was the Intention Ibm. The Parliament Judge the King innocent,
notwithstanding the Appeal and Articles*
of all the Lords of Parliament, Spiritual and Temporal, as well the Lords
Appellants as all others, and by them agreed, That considering the tender Age
of the King before that time, and the Innocence of his Royal Person, that
nothing contained in the Appeal, nor in any Article thereof, nor in the
Judgments given, should be accounted any Fault or Dishonesty in his Person in
no manner, for the Cause abovesaid, nor should turn in Prejudice of his Person
by any Contrivance or Interpretation whatever; but that the false Treason and
Default abovesaid, should be charged upon the Appealed, and that the Judgments
given against them, should have full Force and Virtue, notwithstanding any
thing could be said or alleged to the contrary.

Upon Ibm. Several others impeached by the Commons.
Monday the 2d Day of March next following, Sir Robert Belknap late Chief
Justice of the Common Bench, Sir Roger Fulthorp, Sir John Holt, Sir William
Burgh, late his Companions of the same Bench, Sir John Carry, late Chief Baron
of the Exchequer, and John Loketon, late Sergeant to the King, were accused and
impeached by the Commons in Parliament, for putting their Hands and Seals to the
Questions and Answers aforesaid, by the Procurement of the Appealed and
Convicted Persons of Treason, to cover and affirm their High Treasons, etc.
(pour coverer and affermir lour hautes Tresons) a Copy whereof was exhibited
and read before them; and they were answered, as was surmised by the Commons,
in the said Copy; and they answered, They could not gainsay it, but that the
Qustions were such as were asked them; but the Answers were not such as they
put their Seals to.

Sir Robert Ibm. Sir R. Belknap his Excuse.
Belknap pleaded, That the Archbishop of York, in his Chamber at Windsor told
him, That he devised the Commission Statute, etc. That the King hated him above
all Men; and that if he found not some way to make void the Statute and
Commission, he should be slain as a Traitor. He answered, That the Intention of
the Lords, and such as assisted at the making of them, was, That they should be
for the Honor and good Government of the State of the King, etc. That he twice
parted from the King dissatisfied, and was in doubt of his Life; and said the
Answers were not made by his Good Will, but contrary to Mind, by the Threats of
the Archbishop of York Duke of Ireland, and Earl of Suffolk; and that he was
Sworn and Commanded in the Presence of the King, upon pain of Death to conceal
this matter, as the Counsel of the King: And prayed for the Love of God he
might have Gracious and Merciful Judgment.

Sir John Holt Ibm. Sir J. Holt made the same Excuse.
alleged the same matter of Excuse, and made the same Prayer.

Sir William Ibm. Sir W. Burgh and Sir J Carry the same.
Burgh and Sir John Carry pleaded the same matter of Excuse, and made the same
Prayer.

Sir Roger Ibm Sir* R. Fult^orp and J. Loket^n the same.
Fulthorp and John Loketon make the same Excuse and Prayer.

To which Ibm. Notwithstanding their Excuses, the Commons pray they may be
Judged, Convicted, and Attainted as Traitors.
the Commons answered, They were taken and holden for Sages in the Law; and the
King's Will was, That they should have Answered the Questions as the Law was,
and not otherwise, as they did, with Design and under color of Law to Murder
and Destroy the Lords and Loyal Lieges, who were Aiding and Assisting in making
the Commission and Statute in the last Parliament, for the good Government of
the State of the King and Kingdom; and therefore the Commons pray they may be
Adjudged, Convicted, and Attainted as Traitors.

Upon Ibm.
which the Lords Temporal took time by good Deliberation to examine the Matter
and Circumstances of it, and for that they were at, and knew of the making of
the Statute and Commission, which they knew were made for the Honor of God,
and Their Judgment.
for the good Government of the State of the King and whole Kingdom; and that
it was the King's Will they should not have otherwise were by the Lords
Temporal, by the Assent of the King, adjudged to be Hanged and Drawn as
Traitors, and their Heirs Disherited, their Lands, Tenements, Goods, and
Chattels to be forfeit to the King.

On Ibm. J. Blake impeached.
Tuesday, March 3. John Blake and Thomas Vsk were brought into Parliament; and
first John Blake was impeached by Commons, That being retained of Council for
the King, drew up the Questions to which the Justices made Answer, and
contrived with the Persons Appealed, that the Lords and others the King's Loyal
Lieges, that caused the Commission and Statute to be made in the last
Parliament, to have them indicted in London and Middlesex for Treason; and that
they might be arrested, and falsely, traitorously and wickedly murdered; and
that he was aiding and advising in the Treasons aforesaid, to the Appealed.

Then Thomas Ibm. T. Usk accused.
Vsk was accused for procuring himself to be made Undersheriff of Middlesex,
to the end to cause the said Lords and Loyal Lieges to be Arrested and
Indicted, as has been said before, and was Aiding and Counselling the Appealed
in the Treasons aforesaid.

John Ibm. Their Answers*
Blake answered, he was retained of Counsel for the King by his Command, and
sworn to keep secret his Advice; and whatever he did was by the King's Command,
whom he Thomas Vsk gave the same Answer. Whereupon the Lords Temporal took
Deliberation until the morrow being the 4th of March, when the said John and
Thomas were again brought into Parliament; and good Advice and Deliberation
having been taken by the Lords, pronounced them Guilty of the things whereof
they were accused. Ibm. And Judgments.
And whereas they alleged for their Excuse the King's Command, it made their
Crime the greater; for that they knew well, that the Appealed and Adjudged
Royal Power, as said is before, and it was their Command, and not the King's;
and then the Lords Awarded, by Assent of the King, they should both be Drawn
and Hanged as Traitors and open Enemies to the King and Kingdom, and their
Heirs Disherited for ever, and their Lands, Tenements, Goods, and Chattels
forfeited to the King; and they were Executed the same Day.

On Ibm. Sir ^. B^^^n^p and 5 others*
Friday the 6th of March, Sir Robert Belknap, Sir Roger Fulthorp, Sir John
Holt, Sir William Burgh, Sir John Carry and John Loketon were brought into the
Parliament; and the Lords were advised, That they were at the making of the
Commission and Statute in the last Parliament, and Sir John Carry knew well they
were made to the Honor of God, and the good Government of the State of the
King and the whole Kingdom; and so on as before. And then they had Judgment
again passed on them as before; By the Mediation of the Bishops, had their
Lives spared.
and at that very Moment came the Archbishop of Canterbury, and all the
Bishops of both Provinces, and prayed the Lords Temporal, the Execution as to
their Lives might be respited, that they might obtain their Lives of the King.
He ordered Execution should be stayed, and granted them their Lives: As to the
other part of their Sentence, that was to remain in force, and their Bodies in
Prison during the King's Pleasure; until the King, Lords, should direct
otherwise concerning them.

On the same Ibm. The Bp. of Chichester and the King's Confessor impeached.
Friday, Thomas Bishop of Chichester and the King's Confessor, impeached and
accused by the Commons, That he was present at the Places and Times, when the
Questions were put to the Justices, etc. and the Answers made, and excited them
by Threats to answer as they did, knowing the false Purposes and Treasons
designed by the Traitors adjudged; and Ibm.
To which the Bishop answered of his own free Will, That he did not excite them
to do or say any thing: And further said, They were not excited or charged to
say any thing but what the Law was. And touching the Concealment of the
Treasons, he had made such Assurance and Affiance as he could not discover. And
said further, That the Traitors were about the King, and had such Power over
him, before he had so great Interest in the King, as to prevent such Mischiefs
as might come upon him. The Commons replied, He had upon the Matter confessed
himself Guilty, and prayed he might be Attainted. Upon this Answer of the
Bishop, the Replication of the Commons, and all Circumstances of the
Accusation, the Lords took time to give such Judgment as might be for the
Honor Ibm. Sir S. Burley and 3 others impeached.
During which time* on the 12th of March, Simon Burley Knight. John Beauchamp of
Holt, Knight. John Salisbury Knight. and James Barners Knight. were brought into Parliament,
and at the Request of the Commons impeached.

The Articles exhibited against them were Sixteen: Ibm. The Articles against
them.
The first Article in the Appeal was the first Article in this Impeachment. In
the second Article they are accused as Traitors and Enemies of Simon Burley and
John Beauchamp, were Principal Actors in all the Treasons. In the eighth
Article they were accused for Conspiring and Designing, with the Five Appealed,
to destroy and put to Death those who were Assenting to the making of the
Commission and Statute in the last Parliament. The rest are of less moment; Ibm.
They all answer, Not Guilty. The Commons replied, They were Guilty. The Lords
take time to examine and consider the Impeachment. Upon this, and the Bishop of
Chichester's Impeachment, the Lords Temporal until Friday the 20th of March, on
which Day the Parliament was Adjourned unto the Monday next after, or on the
morrow of the Quinden of Easter, or 13th of April. On which Monday, the Lords
Temporal took time to Deliberate upon these Matters until the 5th of May, when
Simon Burley was brought into the Parliament, and the Lords by due and
sufficient Examination and Information, found him Guilty of what he was
Impeached in the eighth Article, which had been adjudged Treason; and by Assent
of the King Awarded he The Judgment against Sir S. Burley, who was executed.
should be Drawn, Hanged, and his Head Chopped off. The King Pardoned his
Drawing and Hanging; but his Head was Chopped off the same Day on Tower Hill: His
Heirs were Disherited for ever, and his Lands, Tenements, Goods, and Chattels
forfeit to the King, as part of the Judgment.

On the 12th of Ibm. The 3 others had the same Judgment, and executed.
March, John Beauchamp, John Salisbury, and James Barners, were brought into
Parliament, and had the same Judgment. Beauchamp and Barners had their Drawing
and Hanging Tower Hill; and were all Executed on the same 12th of March.

On the same Day the Ibm. Judgment against the Bp. of Chichester.
Bishop of Chichester was sent for into Parliament, where the Lords Temporal
found him Guilty of Treason, as it was laid in the Impeachment, and by Assent
of the King they Awarded his Heirs should be Disherited, his Lands, Tenements,
Goods and Chattels forfeit to the King, and the Temporalties King's hands. As
to his Person, the Lords would advise what to do for the Honor of God and Holy
Church, and the Safety of the State of Prelacy, and of the Laws of the Land.
And then in the same Parliament it was Ibm. He was with 6 others banished into
Ireland.
Ordained, That this Bishop, Sir Robert Belknap, Sir Roger Fulthorp, Sir John
Holt, Sir William Burgh, Sir John Carry, and John Loketon, should be sent into
Ireland to several Towns and Places, there to remain during their Lives. Ibm.
Their allowance from the King by Order of Parliament.
And it was also then Robert Belknap and Sir Roger Fulthorp, for their support
during their Lives, should have Forty Pounds a Year; Sir John Holt and Sir
William Burgh Forty Marks a Year; Sir John Carry and John Loketon Twenty Pounds
a Year of the King's Gift; and each of them to have Two Servants to wait on
them: And that the Bishop of Chichester might have annually Forty Marks for his
Sustenance during his Life, if any of his Friends would give him so much.

Upon Stat. at Large, 11 Ric. II. c. 1. Four Petitions of the Commons, R^^*
P^rl. 11 R c. II* part 1. n. 37. That the Commission and Statute should be
confirmed. Also what the Duke of Gloucester, Earls of War^^^* Ar^^d^^, D^^by*
and Notting^^m did.
Petition of the Commons, the Ordinance and Commission made the last Year, were
confirmed, and all that was done in that Parliament; and also what the Duke of
Gloucester, Earls of Warwick and Arundel did, and all that the same Duke and
Earls, with the Earls of Derby and Marshal, or any of them did, or any other of
their Company, or of their Aid, or of their Adherents, or any of them, by their
Assemblings, Ridings, Marchings in Honor of God, the Safety of the King,
Maintenance of his Crown, and Safety of the whole Kingdom. And also in
pursuance of the same Petition, had a full Pardon for all things they had done
or committed.

Upon a second Petition of the Commons, Ib. chap. 2. n. 38. That several should
be pardoned.
all those that had been of the Retinue, Company, Force, Aid, Counsel, Assent,
or Adherence, of them that were Attainted or Judged in this Parliament, for all
things they had done were pardoned, except some there named.

A third Ib. chap. 3. n. 38. That what was done in the last Parliament should be
confirmed,
Petition was delivered in the same Parliament, That the Appeals, Pursuits,
Accusations, Process, Judgments, and Executions made and given in this
Parliament, be Approved, Affirmed, notwithstanding the Lords Spiritual were
absent; and that by Imagination, Interpretation, or any other Motion, none of
the same be reversed, broken, or annulled in any manner. And whosoever should
make pursuit to break, annul, or reverse any of them, shall be judged to have
Execution as a Traitor: Provided always, that this Acceptance, Approbation,
Affirmance, That what was done in that Parliament, not to be drawn into Example
for the time to come.
and Stablishment touching the Assemblies, Appeals, Pursuits, Accusations,
Process, Judgments, and Executions, be in force in Case only, and that they be
not drawn into Example or Consequence in time to come. And though diverse Points
were declared for Treason in that Parliament, which were not declared by Statute
before, That no Justice have Power to give Judgment of other Case of Treason,
nor in other manner than they had before the beginning of this Parliament.

A fourth Ib. chap. 3. and n. 38, 39. That none of the Appealed or Impeached to
be restored to the Law.
Petition was then also delivered, That none of the Traitors attainted by the
Appeal or Accusations of the Commons, who restored to the Law, by Pardon or any
other manner, saving the Grace and Pardon that was made in this Parliament; and
any one that should endeavor to have such a thing done, should be Judged and
have Execution as a Traitor.

The Ib. and Ro^. Parl. 11 Ric. II. n. 10. n. 39. To.
Answer to all these Petitions, was, That the King, The K. grants all four
Petitions.
upon the Assent of the Lords and Commons, granted the Petitions in all Points,
and willed his Grant should be firm and stable, according Contents of the
Petitions, without blemish for ever.

Then the Rot. Parl. 11 Ric II. n. 46. The Commons petition the King to renew
his Coronation Oath, the Prelates their Fealty, and Lords Temporal their Homage.
Commons humbly pray the King, for the nourishing of greater Love, Peace, and
Quiet for the future in all Parts of the Nation, That he would please to renew
his Coronation Oath; and that the Prelates might renew their Fealty, and the
Lords Temporal their Homage, notwithstanding they had done it before.

The Preparation and Introduction to this great Ceremony, was the Mass of the
Holy Ghost sung in the Church of Ib. n. 47, Which was done.
Westminster, on Wednesday the 3d of June, and in the 121st Day of the
Parliament; and a Sermon Preached by the Archbishop of Canterbury, when the
King of his Free Will, after Mass and Sermon were done, did renew His Oath with
great Solemnity in the said le Roy de sa Franche volunte, renovella son dit
serement ove grant Solemnity en la Eglise de Westminster) at which time the
Prelates swear Fealty to him, and the Temporal Lords did him Homage. This done,
the Prelates, Lords Temporal, and Commons, made openly a New Oath, as follows:

You shall Append. n. 107. A new Oath.
Swear, That you shall not Assent or Suffer, as much as in you is, that any
Judgment, Statute, or Ordinance made in this present Parliament, shall in any
manner be annulled, reversed, or repealed, in any time to come; and further,
That you shall support the Good Laws, and Vsages of the Kingdom, and to your
Power firmly keep, and cause to be kept, the good Peace, Quiet, and
Tranquillity of the Kingdom, without disturbing it in any manner. So God help
you, and the Saints.

And the Rot. Parl. 11 Ric. II. n. 49. Those that brake the new Oath
Excommunicated.
Archbishop of Canterbury, and Prelates, Excommunicated all such as should
break the Peace and Quiet of the Realm, and do contrary to this Oath. On the
next day this Parliament ended, being Thursday the 4th of June, which, says
Knighton, was called the Unmerciful Parliament, Parliamentum sine Misericordia,
Col. 2701. line 2.

This Oath was urged Clause 11 Ric. II. M. 13 or 14 Dors. in Cedula. This Oath
generally administered to Gentlemen, etc.
upon all Gentlemen and Dignified Persons of the Clergy in all Counties in
England, and upon all the Majors, Bailiffs, and Aldermen of all Cities, Burghs,
and Towns, by the King's Writ directed to the Sheriff, and one special
Commissioner to administer it, dated June the 4th, 11th of Richard II.

This year the Knighton, col. 2728. n. 40. The Scots enter England, burn and
waste the Country. A Battle between the English and Scots.
Scots invaded the West Marches of England near Carlisle, burnt and plundered
the Country, and carried away with them Three hundred Persons. They also about
the beginning August invaded the East Marches, and burnt, plundered, and wasted
the Country. In this Invasion were many of the most considerable Men in
Scotland, with the Chief Strength of that Kingdom; Henry Percy, Son and Heir to
the Earl of Northumberland, called Hot spur, opposed, and fought with them
near Newcastle, he with his own Hand killed Earl Douglas, the most Potent of
the Scots, and Mortally wounded the Earl of Murry, yet he himself was taken,
with his younger Brother, and Scotland. There were also many Scots taken,
amongst whom was was James Lindsey, the Queen's Brother. This Fight was on the
Ib. c. 2729. l. 2. A. D. 1389. 12 Ric. II. A Truce made at Leulingham for 3
years, 1^ R. II.
Wednesday before St. Laurence, or 10th of August, in the 12th of Richard the
Second. The number of the Slain were Eleven hundred.

This year there was a Truce concluded at Leu Linghame, a Place between Calais
and Boloign, from the First of August, A. D. August 1392, between the King of
France and all his Allies, the Kings of Spain, of the Romans, Portugal, the
King of Scots, etc. And the King of England and all his Allies, The Original in
the Chapter House at Westminster.
confirmed by the King of Scots at Perth on the 16th of July 1390.

About the Walsingh. f. 342. n. 10. The Duke of Lancaster's Return into England.
beginning of November this year, the Duke of Lancaster returned from Gascony
into England, where and in Spain he had been Three years; and about the
beginning of December the King was at Reding, Ib. n. 40. He reconciles the King
and Great Men.
where he called a great Council; The Duke of Lancaster being there, reconciled
the Mind of the King to the Great Men, and their Minds to him; and so as they
seemed after the Dissolution of the Council to depart satisfied.

The King while he was at Reding issued his Rot. Clause 13 Ric. II. M. 5. Dors.
A. D. 1390. A Parliament called. The King declared to be of Age.
Writs on the 6th of December for a Parliament to meet at Westminster on the
Monday next after the Feast of St. Hillary, William of Wickham, Bishop of
Winchester, was then Chancellor, who by the King's Command, in opening the
Cause of Summons before all the Estates, declared the Rot. Parl. 13 Rich. II.
n. 1. And takes upon him the Government.
King of full Age, and that he intended to Govern his People in Peace and
Quiet, and to do Justice and Right to all Men, and that as well the Clergy as
Layty should enjoy all their

On the 20th of Ib. n. 6, 7. The Chancellor and Treasurer quit their Places, as
also all Privy-Counsellors.
January, and Fourth day of the Parliament, the Bishop of Winchester delivered
the Seal to the King, and the Bishop of St. David's being Treasurer, delivered
the Keys of the Exchequer to the King, and all the Lords of the Council prayed
the King to be discharged, and that others might be put in their Places; When
they were discharged, they required openly in Parliament, That if any Person
could, he would Complain of any thing ill done by them; both Lords and Commons
affirmed all things well done; Whereupon the King delivered the Seal again to
the Bishop of Winchester, and the Keys of the Exchequer to the Bishop of The
King receives them again into their Places, and the Privy Council.
St. David's, and received those to be his Counselors that were so before,
together with his Uncles of Lancaster and Gloucester, and made Protestation,
That for any thing then done, he would at Pleasure retain, or put out of their
Offices those Counselors.

In this Parliament Ibm. n. 21, 22. John Duke of Lancaster made Duke of Aquitan.
John Duke of Lancaster was made Duke Aquitan by the King, with Consent of the
Prelates, Lords Temporal and Commons, to hold the Dukedom of the King as of the
King of France, saving only to him as to the King of France the Direct
Dominion, Superiority, and Resort of the same Duchy: He there did Homage to
the King, and Humbly and Heartily Thanked him for it, and the Honor he did
him, and declared, That though he could not maintain the State of the Dukedom in
time of War without the Aid of the King and Realm, yet he King told him, the
Charges should be born, as between the Duke and his Council should be agreed;
To which the Commons affented.

The King by assent of Ib. n. 23. Edward. Son to the Duke of York made Earl of
Rutland. The Two Archbishops and
Parliament created Edward, the Eldest Son of the Duke of York, Earl of Rutland,
and gave to him during the Life of his Father 800 Marks issuing out of the
Castle, Town and Dominion of Okeham in that Shire, and the Office of Sheriff.

The Archbishops of Canterbury and York, for themselves and whole Clergy of
their Provinces, made their Protestation in open Parliament, Ib. n. 24. Clergy's
Protestation not to assent to any Law made against the Pope.
they intended not, nor would assent to any Statute or Law to be made against
the Pope's Authority, which at their Request was entered upon the Roll.

In the Rot. Parl. 14 Ric. II. n. 1. A. D. 1391.
Parliament on the Morrow of St. Martin, or 12th of November, in the Fourteenth
of this King, the Bishop of Winchester Chancellor, declaring the Cause of
Summons, took notice Truce with France, and that about Candlemass the King
would send to make a final Peace.

The Duke of Ib. n. 12. The Dukes of York and Gloucester desire 1000 l. a year
to be settled on each of them.
York and Gloucester desire the King's Assistance of a Thousand Pounds a year to
each, according to his Promise, in Tale special; He ordered the Justices to
draw such Assurance, and commanded they might be readily paid.

And it is to be remembered, ( Ib. n. 15. The Prelates, Lords and Commons pray,
That if any thing had been done against his Prerogative, it might be redressed.
Fait a Remember, etc.) That the Prelates, Lords Temporal and Commons, prayed
the King in full Parliament, That the Royalty and Prerogative of him and his
Crown, might always be safe, and preserved, and that if any thing had been done
or attempted contrary to them, it might be Redressed and Amended; and further,
That he should be as Free in his time, as any of his Noble Progenitors, Kings
of England, were in their prayer seemed Honest and Reasonable to the King, and
therefore granted it in all points.

The Judgment against Ib. n. 36. The Judgment against John of Northampton
repealed.
John of Northampton, late Major of London, Repealed upon the Petition of the
Commons, and Oath made by the then Major, and all the Aldermen of London, That
he was not guilty of the Treasons, etc. for which he was condemned.

These things done, the Lords and Commons Ib. n. 37. The ^ords and Commons
Thank the King for his Good Government, etc.
gave humble Thanks to the King for his good Government, and his Zeal shown to
them, and he gave them Thanks for the Grants to him made.

In the Parliament holden on the 2d of November, in the 15th of King Richard,
the Ibm. 15 Ric. II. n. 15. A. D. 1392. The Duke of Lancaster sent into France
to Treat of Peace.
Commons propound to the King, Monsieur de Guyen, (that is, the Duke of
Lancaster) to go Treat with his Adversary of France about a Peace, and it was
granted.

The Commons Petition the King, That no Native or Ib. n. 39. The Commons
Petition Villans may not purchase Land in sec. nor send their Sons to School.
The King's Answer.
Villan, of Bishops, Abbats, or other Religious Persons, might purchase Lands
in Fee; and, That no Villan might put his Son to School, whereby he might
obtain Learning, and this for the maintenance and safety of the Honor of all
the Freemen of England. To this it Le Roy sad visera: The King will Advise,
which was a Denial.

The Knights of Shires Ib. n. 51. The Knights of Shires Petition Villans may
not have the Privilege of Cities and Burghs. The King's Answer.
Petition the King and Lords, That such Lords whose Villans went from them into
Cities and Burghs, where they lived as Freemen under the protection of their
Franchises, and were detained by the Inhabitants of those Places, might have
power to enter such Places, and seize and bring away Villanes. The Answer was
the same with the foregoing.

According to the Request of the Commons the Walsingh. f. 347. n. 10, 20.
Mezeray. f. 413. The Truce between England and Fr. continued for a year longer.
Duke of Lancaster went into France to Treat of a final Peace, he was
splendidly received at Amiens, by the King, and chief Nobility of that Kingdom,
who met him there; The Issue of the Treaty was, That the Truce should continue
for One year longer; for the Observation of which both Kings made Oath.

The King about this time wanted Money, and sent to the City of London to
borrow a Thousand Pounds, who Knighten, Col. 2740. n. 10. etc. Walsingham, ut
supra. n. 50. etc. The City of London deny to lend the King a Thousand Pounds.
And almost killed a Lumbard that lent it him.
denied to lend him it, and abused and beat a Lumbard so grievously, that
offered to lend it, as they near killed him; for this and other things, by
advice of a great Council held at Nottingham, their Liberties were seized, and
being convinced they had forfeited them, Their Liberties seized. The Major and
Sheriffs imprisoned. Their Liberties restored by the Mediation of the Duke of
Gloucester.
the Major and Sheriffs were sent to Prison, and Sir Edward Dalyngrug was made
Guardian of the City; On the Assumption of the Virgin Mary, or 15th of August,
the King with a great Train of the Nobility, with his Queen, went into the
City, where he was most Honorably and Nobly Received, and Presented, both
himself and Queen; and not long after, by the Mediation of Friends, especially
the Duke of Gloucester, the Liberties of the City Restored, with Power of
choosing a Major as before.

In the Parliament holden on the Quindene of St. Hillary, in the The Earl of
Arundel against the Duke of Lancaster.
Seventeenth of this King, the Earl of Arundel declared several things the King
had done for the Duke of Rot. Parl. 17 Ric. II. n. 11. A. D. 1393, 1394. He
asks the Duke's Pardon in Parliament.
Lancaster, that were against his Honor and Profit, but they were such as the
King answered them all himself, and justified them; and he was by the King and
Lords ordered to ask his Pardon in full Parliament, which was done.

The King, Lords, Knights of Honor, and Justices in this Parliament, Ib. n. 16.
The King, Lords, etc. assent to a Peace to be made with France.
assented to a Peace, so as the King did not make Homage Liege, and saving also
and always, the Liberty of his Person and the Crown of England, and of his
Lieges of the same Kingdom; and that he and his Heirs might Resort and have
Regress to the Name, Title, and Right of the Crown and Kingdom of France, if
the Peace should be broken by his Adversary and his Heirs; and also, That such
Moderations and Modifications should seizure of the Duchy of Guyen) might
happen. Knighton says, this was only a Truce for Four years and four months, as
well by Sea as Land, Col. 2741. n. 20.

The King charged the Commons, to give their Ib. n. 17.
Advice in this Matter; They Answer by a Schedule given in by the Hands of Mr.
John Bussy their Speaker, wherein the said Articles of Peace between the King
and his Adversary of France, were read, Three Three Points too high for the
Commons to give their Advice in.
Points that were too high for them, upon which they dare not Treat or give
Advice; to wit, Homage Liege, Sovereignty, and Resort, yet referring all, and
giving their Consent (for the good of Peace) to what the Lords, Knights of
Honor, and the Justices had consented to before, so as Homage should be done
for, and have Relation to the Duchy of Guyen only, and in no wise to the Crown
and Kingdom of England. What the Articles of this

But the next year, by Edward Earl of Rutland, Thomas Earl Marshall and of
Nottingham, and Messire William Lescrop Commissioners for the King of England,
and the Dukes of Berry, Burgundy, Orleans, and Burbon, or any other Two or
three of them, Commissioners for the King of France, The Original in the
Chapter House at Westminster.
there was a Truce general by Sea and Land, agreed for 28 years, which was to
begin at Michaelmass 1398, when the Truce at Leulingham, and the prolongations
end. During which Truce, all taking of Prisoners, Goods and Chattels, Fortified
Towns, Fortresses, and other Places, all Pillagings, Robberies, Burnings,
Demolishing Houses, and Walls, destroying Fruit Trees and others, and all other
Feats of War, ( and tout autre faits de Guerre) were to cease between the
Kingdoms, Lands, and Seigneuries on both Parts, and between the Kingdoms,
Lands, Seigneuries, and Subjects of their Friends, Allies, Aydants, and
Adherents whatsoever: And that there should be freedom of Intercourse,
Commerce, Trading and Merchandising between the People and Subjects of one
Party and the other. In this Truce there is not any mention of Homage Liege,
Sovereignty, or Resort: The Treaty, Agreement, and Articles thereof was
Ratified by the King of France on the Eleventh of March 1395, and was
afterward Ratified by the King of England, and Feast of St. Simon and Jude, or
28th of October, both Kings at an Interview not far from Calais, swear to the
performance of them.

John Duke of Ib. 20, 21. The Dukes of Lancaster and Gloucester pray Judgment
against Sir Tho-Talbtt and others, for Conspiring their Deaths.
Guyen and Lancaster Steward of England, and Thomas Duke of Gloucester Constable
of England, Petition the King and Lords for Judgment against Sir Thomas Talbot,
and others not named, for Conspiring their Deaths, and raising Force to do it
in the County of Chester; That they would Declare the Nature Petition was open
and High Treason, and that it touched him and all the Realm; and he and all the
Lords Judged and Declared it to be so. And because the Matter contained in the
Bill of Complaint, was notorious and open known to the King and Lords, and all
the States of Parliament, and through the whole Kingdom, and therefore it was
ordered and awarded that Writs should issue returnable King's Bench, to take his
Body; That Proclamation should be made for him to render himself to stand to
the Law, if not he was to be holden for Convict, as attainted of Treason, and
all who received him were to incur the same Pain and Forfeiture he ought to do.

If the Ib. n. 52.
Suggestion of a Bill in Chancery was not true, the Chancellor had Power given
him to award Damages at his Discretion. See Stat. at Large, 17 Rich II. Cap. 6.

In the Eighteenth of his Reign the Knighton's Col. 2742. n. 10. Walsingh, f.
351. lin. 2. The King went into Ireland with an Army.
King about Michaelmass, went with an Army into Ireland, to subdue the Irish,
who were then in Rebellion, and with him went the Duke of Gloucester, the Earls
of March, Nottingham, and Rutland. The Duke of York Guardian of the Kingdom in
his absence, Rot. Clause 18 Ric. II. M. 23. Dors. A Tenth and Fifteenth given.
called a Parliament to meet Fifteen days after St. Hillary, to Consider of the
Prosperous and Happy Government of Ireland, and to that purpose sent the Duke
of Gloucester over into England, to procure Money from the Lords and Commons
Rot. Parl. 18 Ric. II n. 6. A. D. 1395. The King settled Ireland.
granted to the King a Tenth and Fifteenth for the Conquest of that Country;
and in May next following, having settled that Nation, and left the Earl of
March Deputy, returned into England.

In the Twentieth of King Richard, in the Parliament Ib. 20 R II. n. 14, 15, 16.
The Commons frame certain Articles against the King's Royalty and Liberty. The
Speaker charged to tell who brought in that ^^^l.
holden on the Feast of St. Vincent, or 22d of January, the Commons had framed
certain Articles in a Bill, as the King told the Lords he was informed, against
his Royalty and Liberty, such as his Progenitors and Commanded the Lords
Spiritual and Temporal to let the Commons know it; and Commanded the Duke of
Lancaster to Charge Mr. John Bussy, the Speaker, upon his Allegiance, to tell
who brought in the Bill. That which moved and troubled the King therein, was
about the Expenses of his House, and the Bishops and Ladies that frequented the
Court. The Commons made their Excuse and Submission to the King in manner
following.

On Saturday, the Morrow of the Feast of Candlemass, Ib n. 16. The Commons
deliver the Bill to the Lords.
the Lords Spiritual and Temporal were with the Commons, and show them the Will
and Command of the King, and they delivered the Bill to the Lords, and the Name
of him that brought it to them, to wit, Thomas Haxey; Which Bill was afterward
delivered Thomas Haxey brought the Bill into the House of Commons.
to the Clerk of the Crown by the Clerk of the Parliament King's Command, and
presently after the Commons came before the King in Parliament by his Command,
and there with all Humility and Obedience they could, show great Grief, as
appeared by their Countenances, for that the King had taken such conceit
against them, Humbly praying the King, to hear and accept The Commons Excuse
and Submission.
their Excuse; That it never was their Intent or Will to speak, show, or do any
thing which should be an Offense, or Displeasure to his Majesty, nor against
his Royal Estate or Liberty, and especially about this Matter touching his
Person and the Government of his House, or about the Lords and Ladies in his
Court, nor of any other Matter that touched himself, knowing well that such
things do not belong to them, but solely to the King himself, and his Ordering;
and that their Intention was, for the great Affection they bare to the King as
faithful Lieges, That the Lords might pray the King, to consider his Honorable
Estate, and do concerning it what he pleased; And upon this the Commons submit
themselves to the King's Will and Favor, humbly his Royal Majesty to have them
Graciously Excused, being always ready to save his Royal Estate and Liberty,
and to perform in Body and Goods as Loyal Lieges are bound, what shall be for
the Honor and Safety of his Royal Majesty.

Whereupon Ib. n. 17. The King fully Excuses them.
the Chancellor, by Command of the King, told the Commons, That upon his Royal
Benignity, and Gracious Seignoury, he had them fully Excused.

On Wednesday after Candlemass, Thomas Haxey, Clerc, was in Parliament Thomas
Haxey Judged a Traitor.
Judged to Ib. n. 23.
Death as a Traitor; and soon after Sentence, the Archbishop of Canterbury,
(Thomas Arundel) and all the other Prelates, came before the King in Parliament,
with great Humility, and made full Protestation, That their entire and full
Intention was, and always should be, That his Royal Estate and Royalty should
be always saved and preserved without diminution, Ibm. The Archbishops and
Bishops make Protestation, the King's Royalty ought to be preserved. They beg
the Life* Body, and Custody of Thomas Haxey, which were granted them.
(Et maintenant apres de Juggement rendu devers Thomas Haxey Clerc en Parliament
a la mort come traitor viendrent avaunt le Roy en Parliament ovek grant humilite
Lerceveque de Canterbris and touz les autres Prelates and firent plein
protestation, que lour entier and plein intention ^est and tout dis serraque le
Royal Estate and Regalie du Roy soit tout dis savez and Gardez sanz
Blemissement.) And then they pray the King to give them the Life of Thomas
Haxey, and the Custody of his Body, not as of right belonging to them, but of
his special Grace. Both which the King granted.

The King by assent Ib. n. 40. and Stat. at Large, 20 Rich. II. Cap. 6. Sir
Robert Belknap, etc. called out of Ireland.
of the Lords Spiritual and Temporal, Commons, of his Special Grace granted to
Robert Belknap, John Holt, and William Burgh, Knights, Banished into Ireland,
that they might return into England, and practice Law there without
impeachment, notwithstanding the Statute made in the Eleventh year of the
King's Reign, saving always against them all the other Points contained in the
Statute.

In the 21st of King Richard's Reign, Clause 21 Rich. II. Part 1. M. 27. Dors.
he summoned a Parliament A Parliament summoned.
to meet on the Monday after the Exaltation of Holy Cross, or 14th of September.

It was made into a Stat. at Large, 21 R. II. Cap. 1* Holy Church, the Lords,
and all Comonalties, to enjoy their Liberties and Franchises.
Statute this Parliament, That Holy Church, the Lords Spiritual and Temporal,
and all Cities, Burghs, and other Commonalties of the Realm, should have and
enjoy all their Liberties, and Franchises, as they had reasonably had and
enjoyed them in the time of his Noble Progenitors Kings of England.

For that several Judgments were heretofore undone, Rot. Parl. 21 Ric. II. n. 9.
because the Clergy were not present, the Commons prayed the King, they might
appoint a general Proctor, who might have sufficient Authority to act for them.

The Two Ib. n. 10. Sir Thomas P^r^y general Procurator for the Clergy.
Archbishops, and the Clergy of both Provinces, constituted and appointed Sir
Thomas Percy their Procurator, as by their Instrument does appear.

The Commission and Statute made upon it in Stat. at Large* 21 Rich. II. Cap.
2. This agrees with the Record. The Commission and Statute made in the 11th
year of the King Repealed.
the Eleventh prayer of the Commons, as being made Traitorously, by constraint
and compulsion, against the King's Will, his Royalty, Crown and Dignity, and it
was Ordained and Established by the King, with the Assent of the Lords and
Commons, That no such Commission, or the like, should be made, and that he that
should endeavor, or procure any such to be made, or the like, in time to come,
etc. being thereof duly Convict, should suffer as a Traitor.

The Pardons granted to the Duke of R^t. Parl. 21 Rich. II. n. 12, 13. The
Pardons to the Duke of Gloucester, Earls of Arundel, and Warwick* made void.
Gloucester, and Earls of Arundel, and Warwick, in the Parliament of the Eleventh
of this King, are made void, as done by force only against the King's Will, as
also the Pardon granted to the Earl of Arundel at Windsor, in the 17th year of
this King, is revoked and annulled.

On the Ib. n. 14. The Commons declare, with the King's Leave, their intent wa^
to accuse Persons during the (...) of this Parliament. They h^^ the King's Leave.
20th of September, the Commons made Protestation to the King in full
Parliament, That tho they would show and declare certain Matters and Articles
they had then Advised of, and Leave of the King, to accuse and impeach Person
or Persons as often as they should think fit, during the time of this
Parliament; (ne nit meins il feust and est lour intent and volonte par conge de
nostre Seigneur le Roy d'accuser and empescher person ou persons a taunts de
foitz come leur sembleroit affair, durant le temps de cest present Parliament)
And they prayed the King he would please to accept their Protestation, and that
it might be entered of Record on the Parliament Roll, which the King granted,
and commanded it to be done.

Then on the ^^ ^. 15. The Archbishop of Canterbury accused of Treason.
same day, before the King in full Parliament, they accused and impeached Thomas
Arundel Archbishop of Canterbury of High Treason, for that he being Chief
Officer of the King, (to wit) his Chancellor (when he was Bishop of Ely) was
Traitorously aiding, procuring, and advising in making a Commission directed to
Thomas Duke of Gloucester, Richard Earl of Arundel^, and others, Which
Commission was made in prejudice of the King, and openly against his Royalty,
his Crown and Dignity, and that the said Thomas put in Use and Execution the
said Commission.

Also, for that Ibm.
the said Thomas Archbishop, in the Eleventh year of the King, procured and
advised the Duke of Gloucester, and the Earls of Warwick and Arundel, to take
upon them Royal Power, and to Arrest the King's Lieges, Simon Burley, and James
Barners, and Judge them to Death contrary to the Will and Assent of the King;
and upon this the said Commons pray the King, the said Thomas may be put in
safeguard in an honest manner.

And the King Ibm.
said, because the Accusation and Empeachment touched so high a Person and Peer
of the Realm, he would be advised.

Also the Twenty first day of Ib. n. 16. The Commons pray Judgment against the
Archbishop of Canterbury.
September next following, the Commons prayed the King, That as they had
Empeached and Accused the Archbishop of Canterbury, that he had assented, or
was in the Contrivance to cause the Commission to be made (qil feust d'assent
de fair fair la dit Commission) on the Nineteenth of November, in the Tenth
year of the King, and of the Execution of the same, which was expressly against
the King, his State, and Dignity, That he would please to Ordain such Judgment
against him as the Case required; Hereupon the King caused to be Recorded in
Parliament, That the Archbishop was before him in the presence of certain
Lords, and confessed, (que en la use de la dit Commission il soy misprist, and
luy mist en la Grace du Roy.) That he was mistaken or erred in the use of the
Commission, and put himself

Whereupon the Ibm. He was adjudged Traitor, and to be Banished.
King and all the Lords Temporal, and Monsieur Thomas Percy, having sufficient
Power from the Prelates and Clergy, as appeared upon Record, in the said
Parliament, adjudged and declared the Article, which the Archbishop confessed
to be Treason, and touched the King himself, and also judged and declared him a
Traitor; and thereupon it was awarded in Parliament, That he should be Banished
out of England, his Temporalties seized, and his Goods and Chattels forfeited
to the King, who was to appoint the time of his Exile.

And then the King Ib. n. 17.
assigned him time of Passage from the Eve of St. Michael until Six weeks next
following, from the Port of Dover into France; and further, That he should
forfeit all his Lands, Tenements and Possessions which he had in Fee Simple, by
Descent, Purchase, or otherwise, at the day of the Treason committed or after,
or that any one held to his use, to

The Commons interceeded with the King for his Favor toward such as were named
in the Ib. n. 26. The Commons interceed with the King for such as were named in
the Commission, and did not act.
Commission, and made Commissioners, but neither procured it, consented to it,
or acted in the Execution of it; Three whereof were alive, the Duke of York,
the Bishop of Winchester, and Richard Lescrop Knight, and Four dead, William
late Archbishop of Canterbury, Alexander late Archbishop of York, Thomas late
Bishop of Excester, and Nicholas late Abbat of Waltham, whose Loyalty and
Innocence was acknowledged in Parliament; The Declaration whereof was made a
Statute by the King, with the Advice and Assent of the Lords, at the Prayer of
the Commons.

They further Ib. n. 27.
humbly beseech the King, That he would please to consider how at the time when
Thomas Duke of Gloucester, Richard Earl of Arundel, and Thomas Earl of Warwic,
did rise (soy leverent) and march against their Allegiance and the King, The
Commons move the King in behalf of the Earls of Derby and Nottingham.
the said Duke and Earls would have come and marched to have searched out the
King, if he could be found in England, and to have killed a very great Number
of his Lieges; and to have accomplished their evil Purpose and Intent, if they
had not been disturbed by the Honorable Persons of the King's Blood, Henry of
Lancaster, Earl of Derby, and Thomas de Mowbray Earl of Nottingham, conceiving
and understanding the Actions of the Duke and Earls were notoriously against
their Legiance, and the Estate of the King; and therefore willing to do their
Duty to him, departed from their Company, and came to the Honorable Presence
of the King, It would please him, the Commons having specially recommended the
Persons of the Earls of Derby and Nottingham (lour Estate, and le* The King's
Kindness and Favor to them.
Noun, and le Fame, and le Loyal Port de eux.) Whereupon the King sitting in
his Royal Dignity in Parliament, answered, This matter was better known to him
than any other; and witnessed and declared the good Behavior, Loyalty and Fame
of the Two Earls, and held them for Loyal Lieges, and that they should be
reported for such amongst all his Lieges through the Realm; and that they
should be excused without Impeachment, Molestation, or Grievance for the Cause
aforesaid in any time to come. And further, That the King, by Assent and Advice
of all the Lords in Parliament, and at the Prayer of the Commons, Ordained and
Established, That this Declaration and Grant should have the force of, and be
holden for a Statute.

That all Judgments, Ibm. n. 32.
Ordinances, Declarations, and Establishments of this Parliament shall have the
force of Statutes.

On Michaelmas-Day, being Saturday, Ib. n. 35. Henry Earl of Derby created Duke
of Hereford Several others created Dukes and Earls.
the King in Parliament Created Henry Earl of Derby Duke of Hereford, Edward
Earl of Roteland Duke of Albemarle, Thomas Holland Earl of Kent Duke of Surrey,
John Holland Earl of Huntington Duke of Excester, Thomas Mowbray Earl of
Nottingham Duke of Norfolk. The same Day John Beaufort Earl of Somerset was
Created Marquess of Dorset, Thomas de Spenser Earl of Gloucester, Ralph Nevill
Earl of Westmerland, Thomas Percy Earl of Worcester, and William le Scrop Earl
of Wiltshire.

On the same Day the King Ibm. n. 36. The Parliament adjourned to Shrewsbury.
Adjourned the Parliament unto the 15th of St. Hillary, or 27 of January next
coming, to Shrewsbury, all things to remain in the same Condition they were, to
be there finished and determined.

The next Day being Sunday, Ibm. n. 37. The Lords Spiritual and Temporal Swear
before the King.
the Lords Spiritual and Temporal, after Mass Celebrated in the Abby-Church at
Westminster, upon the Altar, before the Shrine of St. Edward, made Oath in the
presence of the King, in the Form following. The Prelates (savant L'oneste de
lour Estat) That is to say,

The Archbishop of York, The Bishops first.
The Bishop of London, The Bishop of Winchester, The Bishop of Ely, The Bishop
of Duresme, The Bishop of Salisbury, The Bishop of Excester, The Bishop of
Bangor, The Bishop of Worcester, The Bishop of Hereford, The Bishop of
Chichester, The Bishop of St. Asaph, The Bishop of Carlisle, The Bishop of
Landaf, The Prior of St. John of Jerusalem, The Abbat of Westminster, The Abbat
of Canterbury, The Abbat of St. Albans, The Prior of Canterbury.
The OATH.
You shall Ibm. n. 38. and Append. n. 109.
Swear, That well and truly you shall Hold, Sustain, and Maintain, without
Fraud or Deceit, all the Statutes, Establishments, Ordinances, or Judgments
made or given in this Parliament, without doing any thing to the contrary of any
of them, or the Dependencies on, or Parcel of them; nor that you will ever
Repeal, Revoke, Cassate, make Void, Reverse, or Adnull, nor ever suffer them to
be Repealed, Revoked, Cassated, made Void, Reversed, or Adnulled, so long as
you live; saving to the King his Royalty, Liberty, and the Right of his Crown.

And so soon as they had Sworn, the Lords Ibm. n. 39. The Lords Temporal take
the same Oath.
Temporal, in the

The Duke of Guyen and Lancaster, The Duke of York, The Duke of Hereford, The
Duke of Albemarle, The Duke of Surrey, The Duke of Excester, The Duke of
Norfolk, The Marquess of Dorset, The Earl of Oxford, The Earl of Stafford, The
Earl of Northumberland, The Earl of Salisbury, The Earl of Gloucester, The Earl
of Westmerland, The Earl of Worcester, The Earl of Wilts, The Lord de Camoys,
The Lord de Bourgchier, The Lord de Powys, The Lord Fitz-Walters, The Lord de
Roos, The Lord de Harrington, The Lord de Burnell, The Lord de Berkely, The
Lord de Darcy, The Lord de Willonghby, The Lord Gray of Codnore, The Lord Gray
of Ruthin, The Lord de Scales, The Lord de St. Amand, The Lord de Furnivall,
The Lord de Ferrers, The Lord de Seymour, The Lord de Lovell, The Lord de
Bardolph, The Lord de Morley, William Beaumont, Lord of Burgavenny, Ralph de
Cromwell, Ralph de Lumly, Philip le Dispenser,
And did Swear further in these Words: Ibm. n. 40. and Append. n. 110.
You shall Swear, That in time to come you shall never suffer any Man living to
do any thing contrary to the Statutes, Establishments, Ordinances, and
Judgments, made or given in this present Parliament, The Additioal Oath of the
Lords Temporal.
nor to any Dependencies on, or Parcel of them: And if any one shall do so,
and be duly Convicted, you shall use your entire Power and Diligence, without
Fraud or Deceit, to prosecute him before the King and his Heirs Kings of
England, and cause him to have Execution as an High and False Traitor to the
King and Kingdom; saving to the King his Regalie or Royalty, Liberty and Right
of his Crown.

Then the King asked the Knights of Shires there present for the Ibm n. 41. The
Knights of Shires affirm the said Oaths.
would hold and keep the same Oath? Who promised with loud Voices to keep it,
holding up their Hands on high, as a Sign of their Affirmance of their said
Oaths.

And immediately after, Monsieur Thomas de Percy Ibm. n. 42, 43. Sir Tho. Percy
made the same Oath for the Clergy.
made the same Oath the Lords Temporal had made, for and in the Name of the
Clergy, as their Procurator General, and by Authority abovesaid.

This done, the King, the Prelates, and Lords Temporal Ibm. The great
Excommunication pronounced against any one should do contrary to the Premises.
went from the Shrine of St. Edward, and came before the High Altar of the
Church, and there for the Establishmment and Affirmance of these things, the
Prelates and Ordinaries of the Provinces of Canterbury and York, with one
Assent did pronounce the Sentence of the greater Excommunication, against all
and every of the Subjects of both Provinces, that openly or privately, by Deed,
Counsel, or Advice, should contravene or do against any of the King's Royalty
and Prerogative in all things saved.

According to the Adjournment Ibm n. 44. 21 Ric. II. A. D. 1398. The Parliament
met at Shrewsbury.
the Parliament met at Shrewsbury on Monday after the Quinden of St. Hillary,
when the Chancellor told them, That at first this Parliament was Summoned for
the Honor of God, and that Holy Church might enjoy all its Liberties and
Franchises; and that all the Lords, Knights, Citizens, and Burgesses, should
have and enjoy all their Liberties Ibm.
Also that there should not be more Governors in the Kingdom than One; and
that the Laws might be duly obeyed and executed, as it was more fully contained
in the Beginning and Pronunciation of the Cause of this Parliament.

Also the Ibm. The King desired to know how the Charge for the Defense of the
War should be born.
Chancellor showed to the Commons, the King would be informed by them how the
Charge should be born for England, Ireland, Guyen, the March of Calais, and
also the March of Scotland, in case they kept not the Truce made for four
years, which was to end at Michaelmas next coming.

The Lords Appellants in this Parliament, Ibm. n. 47. and Stat. ac Large, 21
Ric. II. c. 12. The Lords Appellants in this Parliament, Moved the Parliament in
the 11th of this King, might be revoked.
Edward Duke of Albemarle, Thomas Duke of Surrey, John Duke of Excester, John
Marquess of Dorset, John Earl of Salisbury, Thomas Earl of Gloucester, and
William Earl of Wiltshire, Prayed the King, and showed Lords Convict and
Attainted, the Duke of Gloucester, the Earls of Arundel and Warwic, by Coertion
and Compulsion made him Summon a Parliament at Westminster, on the morrow after
Candlemas, in the 11th Year of his Reign; and then reciting what had been done
that Year, and particularly the Questions and Answers put to, and made by Sir
Robert Tresilian, the other Judges, and King's Sergeant at Nottingham, that the
whole Parliament might be revoked, the Commons joined with them in the same
Prayer, to which the Lords Spiritual and Temporal Assented.

After the Reading the Ibm. The Answers made to the Questions propounded at
Nottingham, judged good and lawful. The Judges, Justices, and Sergeants of that
Opinion.
Questions and Answers, as well before the King and Lords, as Commons, all the
Estates of Parliament were asked, What they thought of the Answers? And they
said, They thought the Justices made and gave their Answers duly King ought to
do. And Sir Thomas Skeleton, Learned in the Law, William Hankeford and William
Brenchly, the King's Sergeants, said, The Answers were good and lawful, and
that if the same Questions had been put to them, they would have given the
same. William Thirning, Chief Justice of the Common Bench, said, The
Declaration of Treason not declared, belonged to the Parliament; but if he were
a Lord or Peer of Parliament, if he had been asked, he would William Ri(...)ice
of the Common Pleas; and Sir Walter Clopton, Chief (...) of the King's Bench
said the same thing. Wherefore the (...) were judged and affirmed to be good
and sufficient in th^^ (...)meant.

(...)upon by Assent of the Lords Spiritual and Temporal, the (...) of the
Clergy, and Commons, and by Advice of the Justi(...) and Sergeants aforesaid
there being, it was Ibm. The Parliament as above annulled.
Awarded and Judged Ordained and Stablished, That the Parliament holden in the
said 11th Year, shall be clearly annulled, and holden for none, as a thing made
without Authority, and against the Will and Liberty of the King, and the Right
of his Crown; and that all the Judgments, Statutes, and Ordinances made in the
same, with all things depending upon them, shall be revoked and annulled,
reversed and repealed, and holden for none; and that all Lands, Tenements,
Fees, Advousons, and all other Possessions seized as forfeit Judgments, shall
be restored and delivered to them which were judged or put out, or to their
Heirs, and to them that have in other manner Cause of Action, or Title of
Right, with all manner of Liberties or Franchises as they had at any time, with
Restitution of Goods and Chattels.

On Wednesday the third Day of this Meeting, Ibm. n. 51. The Commons desire,
that the greatest Security that can be, may be given, for not undoing what was
done in this Parliament.
John Bussy the Speaker alleged, That before that time, many Ordinances and
Statutes made in diverse Parlements, had been reversed by diversity Opinions,
and other Reasons and Subtilties; and on behalf of the Commons prayed the King,
That the greatest Security that could be given, might be taken for the not
undoing the Ordinances and Judgments made in this Parliament. Whereupon the King
charged all the Estates in Parliament to give them their Advice for the best and
most firm Security in this case. The Lords Spiritual and Temporal answered,
That they had Sworn before to hold and keep the said Judgments, Establishments,
and Statutes, This Salvo was not in their Oaths.
which they would maintain with all their Power, as much as in them was. The
King also demanded of the Justices and Sergeants, If they knew any other more
secure way for the perpetual keeping and observing of the Ordinances and
Judgments, etc. Who answered, The greatest Security that could be, was
established by Parliament. And then the Lords Temporal and Spiritual renewed
their Oaths before the King in Parliament upon the Lords Spiritual and Temporal
renew their Oaths.
Cross of Canterbury; and also the greatest part of the Commons held up their
hands in Affirmance of their Oaths; and likewise the Proctors of the Clergy,
and the Knights being about the King. And then after Proclamation had been made
in audience of all the People, To know if they would Ibm. The People Consent to
these things.
Consent to this manner of Security? To which they answered, lifting their
Hands on high, and crying with loud Voices, It pleased them well, and

Thomas le Despenser Petitions Ib. n. 55. to the end of n. 66. The Repeal of
the Judgments against the Despensers, 14th and 15th of Ed. II. confirmed, and
the Reverse of that Appeal in the 1st of Ed. III. repealed.
the King in full Parliament, wherein he recites the Petitions of Hugh the
Father, and Hugh the Son, to the King in full Parliament holden at York three
Weeks after Easter, in the 15th Year of Edward II.

In which Parliament the Exile and Disherison of both were annulled for these
Reasons: First, They were not Appealed, or Prelates who were Peers of the Realm
(and que les Prelatz que estoient Piers du Royalm) did not Consent to the Exile
and Disherison (A dit agard de Disherison and Exile ne assenteront point.)
Thirdly, Because it was against Magna Charta, that any Man should be Exiled or
Tried, or otherways Destroyed, without Judgment of his Peers. This Adnullation
was afterward made void in 1 Edw. III. They pray that Statute may be

Et sur ceo le Roy fist examiner diligement les Prelatz, Ducs, Barons, and
Comunes Summonez a son Parliament, what they thought, whether the Statute of
Edward III. was defeasable? Who upon good Deliberation said it was, for the
Causes before expressed; also considering that the Repeal made by King Edward
III. was at such time as his Father Edward II. was living, being very King, and

The Record of this matter is long; and also the Proceedings against the
Spencers in the 14th and 15th of Edward II. and Statute the first of Edward
III. are recited, which see in those Years.

On Ibm. n. 67. The Duke of Hereford's Sulmission and Confession to the King on
his Knees. He begs pardon.
Thursday the last Day of the Parliament, the Duke of Hereford in full Parliament
humbly kneeled before the King, and said to him, My Liege Lord, I know well
that many Riots, Disturbances, and evil Deeds have been made and done within
your Kingdom, to the Offense of you and your Royal Estate, in the which I my
self was present amongst others; not with an ill Intent or Purpose to offend
you, not knowing then it was any Fault or Offense against you. But, Sir, since
I now know well, and confess my Offenses and evil The King's Mercy and Pardon
to him.
Deeds in so doing, I cry you Mercy, and beg your Pardon. Whereupon the King
graciously accepted the humble Prayers and Confession of the Duke, and granted
him Pardon in full Parliament, King granted him to be his Good Lord: And this he
declared to all the Estates in Parliament, how he had given him full Pardon for
the Matters aforesaid.

The Commons on the same Day by Ibm. n. 75. The Subsidy of Wool, etc. granted
to the King for Life, with a xth and half and xvth and half.
Assent of the Lords Spiritual and Temporal, granted to the King the Subsidy of
Wool, Leather, and Woollfells for his Life, and one 10th and 15th, and half a
10th and 15th.

Upon which Grants, Ibm. n. 76. Out of which the Commons pray the Sufferers of
Ratcot-bridge, etc. may have 3 or 4000 Marks.
the Commons prayed the King to bestow 3 or 4000 Marks on those that suffered
at Ratcot-bridge, and Lords Appellants their Expenses.

And then the same Day follows a Ib. n. 77. and Stat. at Large, 21 Ric. II. c.
15. A General Pardon*
General Pardon, for all things done before that Day, which was Thursday, as
above, the last of January, and last Day of Parliament; provided that they who
rode and gathered themselves forcibly against the King, in the 11th Year of his
Reign, with the Lords then Convict and Judged, should have no Benefit of the
Pardon, if they Sued not Charters between that and Midsummer.

Upon the Grant of this Pardon, Ibm. n. 78. Upon Condition.
the King by his own Mouth declared, That if the Lords and Commons, which in
time to come shall Sit in Parliament, should let or disturb him in the
Collection of the Subsidy of Wool, Leather, and Woollfells, so granted as
above, it should be void.

Also the same Ibm. n. 74. and 80. and Stat. at Large, 21 Ric. II. c. 16. A. D.
1398. Certain Persons appointed to determine all matters undispatched this
Parliament*
Thursday (the last Day of the Parliament) the Commons prayed the King, That
whereas they had before King, which for shortness of time could not well be
determined; It would please the King (que plerroit au Roy, etc.) to commit full
Power to certain Lords and others whom he pleased, to Examine, Answer, and
Dispatch the Petitions, Matters, and Things abovesaid, and all Dependencies on
them. To which Prayer the King Assented, Authority and Assent of Parliament,
Ordained and Assigned John Duke of Lancaster, Edmond Duke of York, Edmond Duke
of Albemarl, Thomas Duke of Surrey, John Duke of Excester, John Marquess of
Dorset, Roger Earl of March, John Earl of Salisbury, Henry Earl of
Northumberland, Thomas Earl of Gloucester, Thomas Earl of Winchester, and
William Earl of Wiltshire, or Six of them; John Hussy, Henry Green, John
Russell, Henry Chelmswike, Robert Tey, and John Golofre, Knights, coming for
Commons of the Kingdom to that Parliament, or Three of them, shall Examine,
Answer, and fully Determine all the said Petitions, and the Contents of them,
(come toutz autre Matiers and Chooses moevez And all other matters, having the
whole Power of Parliament deputed to them.
en Presence du Roy, etc,) as all other Matters and Things moved in the
Presence of the King, and all other Dependencies upon them not Determined, as
they shall think best by their Good Advice and Discretion in this behalf, by
Authority of the said Parliament: And then it was Dissolved.

On Wednesday the 30th of January, and Day before the Parliament ended, the Duke
of Hereford accused the Duke of Norfolk of Words, etc. spoken against the
King's Person, as will more fully appear in the Pleas of the Crown of this
Parliament.

On the first of August this Year at Nottingham, Pleas of the Crown* 21 Ric.
II. on the Parliament Roll. The Duke of Gloucester and Earls of Arundel appealed
of Treason.
before the King sitting with his Crown on, in the Great Hall of the Castle
there, Edward Earl of Rutland, Thomas Earl of Kent, John Earl of Huntington,
Thomas Earl of Nottingham, John Earl of Somerset, John Earl of Salisbury,
Thomas Lord Despenser, and William le Scrop the King's Chamberlain, brought a
Bill of Appeal of Treason, against Thomas Duke of Gloucester, Richard Earl of
Arundel, and Thomas Earl of Warwic. Ibm.
The Bill having been read, by Advice of the Lords and those of his Council
about the King, they had Day given them to the Parliament, which was to begin on
the Monday next after the Exaltation of Holy Cross, or 14th of September, which
was that Year on the Friday; so as the Parliament began the 17th of that Month.

First, the Bill Ibm. The Effect of the Bill of Appeal, and the Articles
against them.
sets forth, That the Duke of Gloucester and Earl of Arundel, designing to
accroach and have the Government of his Royal Person and Kingdom, his Liberties
and all his Westminster in the 10th Year of his Reign, sent a Peer of the Land
to him, who on their Behalf and by their Command told him, That if he would not
Consent to make to Them, and Others they should Name, such a Commission,
whereby they might have the Government, as above, he should be in Danger of his
Life; and the Lords and Commons of Parliament would depart without his Leave;
and then he should granted such a Commission as they desired. And then follows
the Commission Dated at Westminster, Nov. 19. in the 10 of his Reign; by virtue
whereof the Commissioners took the Government upon them.

Also, Ibm.
the Duke and Earl of Arundel, to accomplish their Traitorous Purpose, and to
have your Person ordered as they pleased, and the Government of your whole
State, Laws, Majesty, Thomas Earl of Warwic and Thomas Mortimer to join with
them in their Traitorous Design; who by Agreement, as Traitors to the King and
Kingdom, all met and assembled on the 13th of November, in the 11th Year of
your Reign, at Haringay in Middlesex, with a great Number of People Armed and
Arrayed: And made diverse of your Liege People, in several Parts of your Realm,
to rise, and march with them against you, contrary to their Legiance: And
Westminster, with great Force of Armed Men, and traitorously Constrained you to
take them into your safe Protection against your Will.

Also, Ibm.
the Duke, the Earls of Arundel and Warwic, and Thomas Mortimer, continuing
their Traitorous Purpose, by Force Simon Burley, and brought him to your
Parliament held on the morrow of the Purification, in the 11th of your Reign,
and there suggested diverse Points of Crime and Treason against him. And the
Advice of every Lord then present was asked, concerning the Crimes of the said
Simon; and afterward the Duke and Earls would know your Advice or Opinion,
(voloint savoir vostre avys) and you answered plainly, He was not Guilty in any
Point objected against him. And after that, the Duke and Earls caused you to
come into a secret Place at Westminster, and show you the Points of the Crimes
abovesaid. To whom you then answered, The said Simon was not any ways Guilty of
any of those Points. And there they took upon them traitorously to have you
constrained to have Simon. Yet nevertheless, ^^e said Duke and Earls took upon
them Royal Power, in Prejudice of you, and in Derogation of your Crown, and
without your Assent, and contrary to your Will, in your Absence, and in the
Absence of many other Peers of Parliament, without their Assent, and against
their Wills, awarded the said Simon should be Drawn, Hanged,

Also, Ibm.
the foresaid Duke, Earls, and Thomas Mortimer, continuing their Malicious,
False and Traitorous Purpose and Force, at Huntington, on Thursday after the
Feast of St. Nicholas (or 6th of December) in the said 11th Year, Traitorously
agreed and intended to have gone with their Force to any Place of Henry de
Lancaster Earl of Derby, and Thomas Mowbray Earl of Nottingham. And the Duke
and Earls continuing their Traitorous Intention and Force, by Agreement between
them, caused the Records in your Treasury, of the Time of your Great
Grandfather King Edward, to be searched, how he Westminster, in the time of
Parliament, in the 11th Year (coment vostre dit besail soy demyst de sa Coroun,
and monsterent en escript a vous tres redoute Sr. les causes del demys de sa
Coroun deinz vostre Royal Palyes de Westminster a dit Parliament lan unzisme.)
And they said falsely and traitorously, That they had Cause sufficient to Depose
you, but for the Reverence

Which Ibm.
Treasons so imagined (or contrived) done and perpetrated, by the foresaid
Duke, Earls, and Thomas Mortimer, against your Royal Person, Estate, Majesty,
and Dignity, as is above declared; We Appellants (there named) your Arundel and
Warwic, and Thomas Mortimer, as you, most Dread Lord, and this High and
Honorable Court your Parliament shall Order.

Thus far the Articles of the General Appeal against these Four Persons.

Which having been read, Ibm.
the Appellants prayed the King the Appealed might be brought before him in
Parliament to make their Answer: And accordingly Ralph Lord Nevill Constable of
the Tower there present, had Order to bring before the Parliament Richard Earl
of Arundel, then his Prisoner; and did so on the 21st of September. On the
fourth Day of the Parliament, The Trial of the Earl of Arundel.
when by Command of the King and the Peers, the Duke of Lancaster Steward of
England, told him, That he was Appealed of diverse High Treasons; and the Appeal
having been read to him, his Answer, That he had a General Pardon in the
Parliament, holden His Plea.
in the 11th of the King's Reign, and a Charter of Pardon made to him within
six Years, and prayed the Allowance of them. To whom it was said by the Duke of
Lancaster, by Command of Overruled.
the King, and Advice of all the Peers of Parliament, That the Pardon made in
the 11th Year, was made by constraint upon the King, by the Duke, Earls, and
others of their Party, accroaching Royal Power, in Prejudice of the King, his
Royal Estate, his Crown and Dignity: And that the Charter of Pardon was made in
Deceit of the King, and expressly against him, his Royalty (sa Regalie) and
Dignity; wherefore the said Pardon and Charter, by Assent of the King and all
Estates of Parliament, upon the Request of the Commons, had been in this
Parliament Repealed and made Void. And then the Earl was asked if he would say
any other thing; and Sir Walter Clopton Chief Justice of the King's Bench, by
King's Command, declared to him the Law, and the Punishment he must undergo, if
he said nothing else; and told him if he did not plead further, he would be
Convict and Attainted of all the Matters objected against him. Notwithstanding
this, and the Repeal of the Charter and Pardon, he demanded the Allowance of
them. The Appellants in their proper Persons prayed the King it would please
him to give Judgment upon him, as Convict of all His Judgment.
the Points he was Appealed. Whereupon the Duke of Lancaster, Command of the
King and all the Lords Temporal, and Sir Thomas Percy having Power sufficient
from the Prelates and Clergy, as appeared by Record in this Parliament, Awarded
the Earl of Arundel Culpable and Convict of all the Points of which he was
appealed, and adjudged him Traitor to the King and Realm; and that he should be
Drawn, Hanged, Headed, and Quartered; and because The Aggravation of his
Treasons.
the Treasons were so high as to have surrendered their Homage Liege, and
Deposed the King, and the Levying of War having notorious, the said Duke of
Lancaster, by Command of the King, the Lords Temporal, and Monsieur Thomas
Percy, having Power as above, by Assent of the King, Awarded, That all the
Castles, Manors, Lands, Tenements, Reversions, Fees, Advousons, and every
other manner of Inheritance, as well in Fee-taile as Feesimple, which were the
Earl of Arundel's on the 19th of November, in the 10th Year of the King, or
afterward; and also all the Lands and Tenements of which other Persons were
in^eo^^ed to his Use the said 19th of November, or afterward, should be
forfeit to the King and his Heirs; and also all his Goods and Chattels should
be forfeited to the King, who pardoned the Execution of his Judgment to be
Drawn, Hanged, and Quartered, but was Beheaded near the Tower of London on the
same Day. The King and Lords, as well Spiritual and Temporal, would not, nor
was it their Intention, that the Lands, and Tenements, Fees, Advowsons,
Reversions, or any other Inheritance the said Earl of Arundel was infe^^ed to
the use of another, by reason of this Judgment should in any manner be forfeit.

On the same day the Earl of Arundel was Append. n. 111.
brought into Parliament, Tried and Convicted, the King directing his Warrant to
Thomas Earl Marshall Captain of the Town of Calais, and to his A Warrant to the
Earl Marshall to bring the Body of the Duke of Gloucester into Parliament.
Lieutenant, That he should bring the Body of Thomas Duke of Gloucester in his
Custody, with all speed he could, to Answer to diverse Articles of Treason in
Parliament, according to the Law and Custom used in England, objected against
him by the Appellants; and to do further, and receive what should be ordered by
him and his Council concerning him in Parliament. Dated at Westminster the 21st
of September, in the 21st year of his Reign, by the King and Council in
Parliament.

The Ibm. The Earl Marshal returned he was dead.
Answer of the Earl Marshall was, That he could not King and his Council in
that present Parliament, for that he being in his Custody in the King's Prison
at Calais died there. This Return was made September 24.

Upon Pleas of the Crown. 21 Ric. II.
Reading of this Writ and Return in Parliament, the Appellants in their proper
Persons prayed the King, That the Duke of Gloucester might be declared Traitor
and Enemy to him, as having levied War in the Kingdom against his Person,
contrary to his Ligeance, and that all his Lands, Tenements, Goods, and
Chattels, as notwithstanding his Death might be forfeit; Whereupon the Commons
also of this Parliament prayed the King and Lords, That it being notoriously
known to the King and all the Estates of the present Parliament, and to all the
Kingdom, that the Duke and others of his Party assembled at Haringay in the
County of Middlesex, with a great number of People Armed and Arrayed, to make
War against the King, contrary to their Ligeance, and came with such Force into
the presence of the Person King* which was to levy War against their Liege
Lord; That he might be adjudged Traitor, and that his Lands, Tenements, Goods
and Chattels might be forfeit, notwithstanding his Death, as they ought in this
Case. Upon this all the Lords Temporal, and Monsieur Thomas Percy, having Power
as abovesaid, having been fully Examined, said, That the said Crime and Treason
were notoriously known to them, and the whole Kingdom; wherefore His Judgment.
all the Lords Temporal, and Monsieur Thomas Percy, by assent of the King,
declared him guilty of levying of War, and Traitor, and adjudged all his
Castles, Manors, Lands, etc. which he was possessed of on the 13th of
November, in the Eleventh year of this Reign, as in the Earl of Arundel's
Judgment, forfeit to the King and his Heirs; And that none of his Issue, or
Heirs of his Body, or their Issue or Heirs, in time to come, should ever bear
the Royal Arms of England entire, nor with difference, ( ne ove deference) or
in other manner whatsoever, nor should inherit the Crown of England.

Upon Ibm.
the 25th of September the Appellants in full Parliament prayed the King, That
if there were any thing upon Record, whether by Confession of any Person
appealed, or other Person whatsoever, touching their Appeal, that it might be
openly known, and declared in full Parliament; Then by Command of the King, and
Advice of all the Lords Temporal, Append. n. 112. The Confession of the Duke of
Gloucester, when Prisoner, before Sir William Rickhill.
a Commission bearing Date the 17th of August this year, was read, directed to
Monsieur William Rickhill one of the Justices of the Common Bench, and a
Confession made before him by Thomas Duke of Gloucester by force of that
Commission; and the Return of that Commission was then also Read, which follows
in these Words:

This is the Answer Pleas of the Crown in Parliament* 21 of Ric. II.
of William Rickhill to the Commission of his Liege Lord.
THomas Duke of Gloucester be the name of Thomas of Woodstok the zer of the King
Richard Twenty one, in the Castle Cales, by virtue of a Commission of the King,
as it is more plainly declared in the same, directed to William Rickhill
Justice has Declared.
I know and confessed to fore the same William all the Matters and Points I
wrote (that is, wrote) in this great Roll annexed to this Scedule, the which
Scedule and great Roll both Sealed under the Seal of the aforesaid William, and
all the Matters and Points I know (that is, declared) and confessed by the
foresaid Duke in the Castle of Caleys, the foresaid Duke be William Rickhill in
the presence of John Lancaster, and John Lovetot, and all that ever the
foresaid William Rickhill deed touching this Matter, it was I do (that is
done) in the presence of the foresaid John and John, and in none other manner.

I Thomas of Woodstok Ibm.
the Zer of my Lord the King William Rickhill Justice, the which is
comprehended more plainly in the foresaid Commission, knowleche that I was one
with sterynge of other Men, to assent to the making of a Commission, in the
which Commission I among other restreyned my Lord of his freedom, and took
upon me among other Power real, (that is, Royal) truly not knowing ^e witting
that time that I did against his

Also, in that time that I came Armed into my Lord's presence,

Also, in that I took my Lords* At R^d^^t Bridge.
Letters of his Messages, and opened them against his leave, I knowlech that I
did Evil, wherefore I put me lowly in his Grace.

Also, in that, that I sclaundred my Lord, I knowlech that I did Evil and
Wickedly in that that I spoke to him in sclaunderous wise in audience of other
folk, bot by the way that my Soul shall too, I meant none Evil therein,
nevertheless I wot and knowlech that I did evil and unkindly, wherefore I
submit

Also, in that I among other communed and asked of certain Clerks whither that
we might give up our Homage for dread of our Lives or not, and whither that we
were assentid thereto for to do it, trewly and be my troth, Ine have now none
full mind thereof (that is, he did not remember it) but I trow rather ye,
then nay, wherefore I submit me high and low evermore in his Grace.

Also, in that that I was in place there it was communed, and spoken in manner
of deposal of my Liege Lord trewly I knowlech well, that we were assentid
thereto for two days or three, and then we for to have done our Homage and our
Oaths, and put him as highly in his Estate as ever he was, but for south (that
is, sooth) there I knowlech that I did untrewly and unkindly as to him that is
my Liege Lord, and has been so good and kind Lord to me, wherefore I beseech
to him notwithstanding

And as of any new thing or Ordenance, that ever I should have witting or
known, ordained or assentid, privy or appert, that should have been against my
Lord's Estate, or his Lust, (that is, Will) or any that longs about him, sith
that day that I swore unto him at Langeley on God's Body, trewly and*

And as touching these Points that I have made Confession of, to for William
Rickhill Justice, in the which I wot well that I have offended my Lord,
unkindly and untrewly as I have said before, how that I have in all these
Points offended him, and done against him, trewly and as I will answer before
God, it was my meaning and my weaning (that is, weening or thinking)

And therefore I beseech my Liege and Sovereign Lord the King, that he will of
his high Grace and Benignity accept me to his Mercy and his Grace, as I that
put my Life, my Body, and my Goods wholly at his Will, as lowly as meekly as
any Creature can do, or may do to his Liege Lord, beseeching to his high
Lordship that he will for the Passion that God suffered for all Mankind, and
the Compassion that he had for his Mother on the Cross, and the Pity that he
had of Mary Magdalen, that he will vouchsafe for to have Compassion and Pity,
and to accept me to his Mercy and to his Grace, as he that has ever been full
of Mercy and of Grace to all his Lieges, and to all other that have naught been
so nigh unto him as I have been, though I been unworthy.


After this Return to the Commission had been read, the Apellants prayed, That
William Rickhill, approved for his Loyalty and William Rickhill declares in
Parliament the manner of the Duke of Glocester's Confession.
Discretion, might be commanded by the King upon his Ligeance, to declare the
truth touching this Confession, who in the presence of the King, the Lords
Spiritual and Temporal, and Commons, in Parliament, said, and declared, That
about Eight of the Clock before Noon, he came within the Castle of Caleys to
the Duke of Gloucester, being then in good Memory and out of Prison, ( esteant
alors en bone memory and horse de duresse de prison) and show him the
Commission and the cause of his coming to him in the presence of John Lancaster
and John Lovetoft, and prayed him that what he had to say he would put down in
Writing, and then departed. Then returning to him about Nine of the Clock
afternoon the same day, the Duke read in writing the said Confession with his
own Mouth, and gave the same to William Rickhill with his own Hand. And William
Rickhill said to the Duke, if there was any thing more touching this Matter he
would speak it in satisfaction to the King, for the knowledge of the whole
Truth of the Matter, whereupon the Duke said he had forgot one thing that then
came into his Memory, to wit, That he said to the King, that if he would be
King, he must not intercede for Sir Simon Beurle to save him from Death, and
prayed William Rickhill he would show this to the King by Word of Mouth, ( and
pria le dit William Rickhill qil verroit Monster ceste Matire au Roy par Bouch.)

On Ibm. The T^yal of the Earl of Warwick.
Friday the 28th of September, the Constable of the Tower brought into the
Parliament Thomas Earl of Warwick, who was told by the Duke of Lancaster Steward
of England, by Command of the King, and all the Lords Temporal, That he was
appealed by Edward Earl of Rutland, and the other Appellants there named, of
diverse High Treasons, which were comprehended in Two only Articles, That of
assembling with Force and Armed Men at Harringay, H^ pleads (...)y, and puts
himself in the King's Grace. His Judgment the same with the Earl of A(...).
Which the King Pardoned by the Mediation of the P^r^ement and Appellants. Being
to remain Prisoner (...) the Isle of W^g^^ during his Life.
etc. and that about Sir Simon Beurley, and were drawn up in the same Words as
in the Earl of Arundel's Case. To which he answered, That he well understood
those Treasons and Wicked Deeds, and was Guilty of them, and put himself in the
King's Grace. Wherefore the Duke of Lancaster, by Command of the King, all the
Lords Temporal, and Monsieur Thomas Percy, having Power as aforesaid,
pronounced the very same Judgment against him in all things as he had done
against the Earl of Arundel; Which King moved with Pity, to the Reverence and
Honor of God, at the prayer of the Appellants, the Commons of Parliament, and
the Lords Spiritual and Temporal, Remitted and Pardoned, and granted him his
Life; and his Sentence was, That he should remain Prisoner in the Isle of Man
so long as he lived, upon Condition, That if any Means were made to the King,
or his Heirs, for any further favor, or if he should make his Escape, then the
Judgment should be put in Execution, and the King's Grace should be void.

The Commons Ibm. Thomas Mortimer impeached by the Commons. He fled to the
Irish Rebels. Proclamation agreed in Parliament to be made for his Return and
Appearance in Parliament.
before the King in Parliament affirming the Appeal to be Good and Lawful,
impeached Thomas Mortimer of Treasons comprised in the said Appeal; but he
being in Ireland, fled unto the Mountains to the Irish Rebels: Proclamation was
agreed in Parliament to be made in England and Ireland, That he should be in
England within Three Months to answer to the impeachment Commons, or be
declared Traitor, and all his Manors, Castles, Lands, Tenements, etc. which he
was possessed of on the 13th of November, in the Eleventh of the King, together
with all his Goods and Chattels, forfeited to the King. The Appellants and
Commons had time given them until the meeting of the Parliament adjourned to
Shrewsbury to the Quinden of St. Hillary, or 27th of January, when he not
appearing, the Duke of Lancaster, and all the Lords Temporal, and William
Lescrop Earl of having sufficient Power from the Prelates and Clergy, as
appeared by Record in Parliament, by assent of the King, gave Judgment His
Judgment in his Absence.
against him according to the Tenor of the Proclamation.

On the Ibm. Sir John de Cobham impeached by the Commons.
28th day of January the Commons in the Parliament at Shrewsbury show the King,
how in the Parliament at Westminster they had accused and impeached John de
Cobham Knight, for that he had been counselling, aiding, and procuring the
Commission made, and caused himself to be put into it, being made in prejudice
of the King, and openly against his Royal Dignity and Crown, and for that in
the Eleventh year of the King, with others Convict in this Parliament,
accroaching to themselves Royal Power, sitting in Judgment, awarded, That the
King's Lieges, Simon de Buerle, and James Bernes, Knights, should be Drawn,
Hanged, and Beheaded, without the King's assent, and contrary to his will, in
his absence, and in the absence of many Peers of Parliament, who arose, and
would not sit in such Judgment, and against their Will traitorously against the
Peace, the King, his Crown, Majesty, and Dignity; And the same day the Duke of
Surry, in whose Custody he was, brought him into Parliament to answer, who was
told by the Duke of Lancaster, that he was accused and empeached by the Commons
of the Treasons aforesaid, and commanded him to answer at his Peril; Who
hearing the Impeachment, said, That as to the making of the Commission, he was
not guilty, and touching the use and exercise of said he would not use or
meddle with it without the King's Command, and therefore he went to the King
and told him, he with others were made Commissioners, but would not act
according to the Commission without his Command, who commanded him to act: To
that the King answered, he was under such Government at that time, that he
could say no otherwise, by reason of such as were then about him; and that the
Commission was made against his Will, the said John Cobham could not gainsay
it. Touching the Judgments and Award made against the said Simon and James, he
said he was told by those that then were Masters, that it was the King's Will
such Judgments and Award should be made. Then the Commons prayed the King to
give Judgment against him as Convict and Attaint of the use and exercise of the
Commission and the Judgments and Award given and made against the said Simon
and John, notwithstanding his Answers; Whereupon the Duke of Lancaster, by
Command of His Judgment.
the King, all the Lords Temporal and William Lescrop Earl of Wiltshire, having
sufficient Power from the Prelates and Clergy, as abovesaid, by assent of the
King, awarded the said John de Cobham Convict and Attaint of the use and
exercise of the Commission, and the Judgments and Award traitorously made
against the said Simon and James, and therefore adjudged him Traitor, and to be
Drawn, Hanged, Headed, and Quartered, and that all his Castles, Manors, Lands
and Tenements, etc. which he had on the 19th day of November, in the Tenth of
the King's Reign; and so on according Which was Pardoned by the King. Being to
remain Prisoner in the Isle of Jersey during Life.
to the Judgments given in the Earl of Arundel's Case. All which Judgments the
King of his special Grace Pardoned, yet so as he was to be Prisoner in the Isle
of Jersey during his Life, and upon the same Conditions the Earl of Warwick was
to be Prisoner in the Isle of Man.

On Wednesday the Ibm. The Duke of Hereford accused the Duke of Norfolk by a
Schedule in Writing.
30th day of January, in the Parliament Henry of Lancaster Duke of Hereford,
came before the King with a Schedule in his Hand, and said to the King he came
by his Command into his presence at Haywode, where he told him, he understood
Thomas Mowbray Duke of Norfolk, had spoken many dishonest Words in slander of
his Person, and that they were spoken to him as he was informed; Upon this the
King charged him upon his Ligeance, That he should truly repeat the Words as
they were spoken. The Duke of Hereford, not through Malice or Enmity, or obey the
King's Command, as he was bound, ( come il est tenuz) wrote down the Words
which the Duke of Norfolk spoke to him, as before he had conceived and born
them in his Memory, and were in the Schedule which he delivered to the King;
With Protestation to add or diminish at all times, and when he pleased, as it
should be needful, saving always the substance of the Libel: Which was this;
Sir, in the Month of The Tenor of the Schedule.
December, in the Twenty one year of your Reign, the Duke of Hereford
Traveling between Bramford and London, the Duke of Norfolk, with a great
Train, met and Discoursed with him of diverse Matters, amongst which he told him
they were in Point to be undone, and the Duke of Hereford demanded why? and he
answered, for the Fact at Radcot Bridge; The Duke of Hereford said, How can
this be, for he has done us favor, and declared us in Parliament to have been
good and loyal toward him. The Duke of Norfolk answered notwithstanding
Hereford replied, This would be a great Wonder, since the King had said it
before the People, that he should afterward make it be annulled. And further
the Duke of Norfolk said, This was a Mavelous World and false, for I know
well says he, That if (...) Monsieur, your Father, and you, had been taken or
killed, when you came to Windsor after the Parliament; Albemarle and Excester,
the Earl of Worcester and he, were agreed never to undo any Lord without just
Cause and Reasonable; and that the Malice of this Fact was in the Duke of
Surrey, the Earl of Wiltshire, and Earl of Salisbury, drawing to them the Earl
of Gloucester, who had Sworn to undo Six other Lords, that is to say, the Dukes
of Lancaster, Hereford, Albemarle, and Excester, with the Marquess and himself.
And also he said they purposed to Reverse the Judgment of Earl Thomas of
Lancaster; and hereby we and many others should be Disherited. The Duke of
Hereford said, God forbid; for it would be a great wonder if the King should
Assent to this; for it seemed to him, by his cheerful Countenance, and his
promise of being a good Lord, and also that he knew he had sworn by St. Edward
to be a good Lord to him, and all Norfolk answered, He had done the same to him
many times, and sworn by the Body of God; and that for this he was never the
better to be trusted. And further said to the Duke of Hereford, That the King
was about to draw the Earl of March and others, to the Agreement and Purpose of
the said Four Lords, to destroy the others aforesaid. The Duke of Hereford
replied, If it be so, we can never trust them. The Duke of Norfolk said, For
certain not; for

Hereupon, Thursday the 31st of January (and last Day of the Matters contained
in the Schedule how to be determined.
Parliament, it was Ordained by the King, with the Assent of all the Estates in
Parliament, That the Matters comprised in this Schedule, should be determined
and ended by the Good Advice and Discretion of the King, and certain
Commissioners Lancaster, the Duke of York, the Dukes of Albemarle, Surrey, and
Excester; the Marquess of Dorset; the Earls of March, Sarum, Northumberland,
and Gloucester, or Six of them; the Earl of Worcester, or the Earl of Wiltshire,
Procurators of the Clergy, or one of them; John Bussy, Henry Grene, John
Russel, Robert Teye, Richard Chelmeswyk, and John Golafree, Knights of the
Parliament, Four or Three

And afterward, on the 19th Day of March next following, The Dukes of Hereford
and Norfolk appear before the K. at Oswaldstre. Their Case to be tried by
Chivalry or Duel.
after the Dukes of Hereford and Norfolk had been before the King at
Oswaldstre, it was agreed by the King, and the Lords and Knights abovesaid,
That the Process in the Determination of these Matters, should hold the course
of the Law of Chivalry, if sufficient Proofs could not be found, until it
should be determided between the Dukes by course of Law.

Wherefore Ibm. 22 Ric. II. A. D. 1398.
on the 16th Day of September, in the 22d of the King's Reign, at Coventry, the
Dukes of Hereford and Norfolk were told by the King's Command, That on
Wednesday next after the Quinden of St. Hillary, or 27th of January, in the
Year of the King's Reign Twenty one, in the Parliament at Shrewsbury. The Duke
of Hereford delivered the King a Bill, the Tenor whereof follows;

and was the same Word for Word with the Schedule before translated from the
French

And then it follows, That after this Parliament was ended, the Dukes appeared
at Oswaldstre the 23d of February, when Day was assigned them to be at Windsor
on Sunday the 28th of April, where they both appeared, and had the next Day
assigned. In the mean time, the King and his Council held at Bristol, perusing
Battle ordered between the two Dukes. The Battle joined between them.
the Act at Oswaldstre, by Advice of Those that had the Authority of Parliament,
Ordained Battle between them, if sufficient Proofs could not be found. And on
Monday the 29th of April they both appeared, when the Battle was joined (a
quell Lundy fuist la Bataille joint) by Advice of the Dukes, Earls, Barons,
Banerets, and Chivalry of England there in great Number assembled for this
cause, as well as of those who had the Authority of Parliament; The Dukes ready
to perform what was ordered them at Coventry.
time. On the 16th of September, the Dukes were ready at Coventry (pour fair
lour Devoir) to perform what was ordered, when the King of his Especial Grace
took the Battle into his hand; ( nostre Seigneur le Roy come Droiturel,
Naturel, and Sovereign Seigneur de sa Grace especial prist la Batail en sa
mayn;) And it was said to the Duke of Hereford, That the King by full Advice,
Authority, The King, by Advice of those who had the Authority of Parliament,
stayed the Battle: And banished the Duke of Hereford for 10 years. Note, the
Duke of Hereford's Father, John Duke of Lancastir, was chief in this Advice and
Judgment. [6] Ibm. The Duke of Norfolk banished by the same Advice and
Authority.
and Assent of Parliament ( le Roy par plein Avys, Auctorite, and Assent du
Parliament) Willed, or Ordained, and Adjudged, for the Peace and Tranquillity of
him, his Kingdom, and Subjects, and to eschew Debates and Troubles, especially
between the Dukes, their Friends, and Well-willers, That the Duke of Hereford
should go out of the Kingdom for Ten Years, and be gone within Eight Days after
the Day of St. Edward the Confessor, or 13th of October, upon pain to incur
Treason by Authority of Parliament. Also it was Ordained by Authority, and under
the pain aforesaid, That the Duke of should not come in the Company of Thomas
Duke of Norfolk, nor of Thomas Arundel, nor send or cause to be sent, or
receive or cause to be received, by Message or otherwise, to or from either of
them.

It was then also [6] said to the Duke of Norfolk, That forasmuch as at Windsor
the 29th of April, in the 21st of the King, he had confessed certain Points of
the Appeal, or Schedule abovesaid, which he had denied at Oswaldstre, on the
23d of February King desiring to punish as Rightful Lord all such as were the
Authors of such Troubles and Debates, and also willing to avoid the Occasions
of them, Adjudged and Ordained by the same Advice, Authority, and Assent of
Parliament, That Thomas Mowbray Duke of Norfolk should void his Realm ( voidera
son Roialme) for term of Life, and that he shall be out of the Kingdom by the
20th of October next coming, and remain Germany, Bohemia, and Hungary, and in
other Parts of Christendom, upon pain to incur Treason by Authority aforesaid;
and that he should not come in the Company of the Duke of Hereford, nor of
Thomas Arundel, nor send or receive, etc. as before in the Duke of Hereford's
Case, upon the same pain. And it was Ordained by Authority of Parliament, as
above, That if either of the Dukes, or any other, do procure any thing to be
done against the least point, in the Ordinance, or what was September, shall
incur the pain of Treason, as if it had been done against any Ordinance of the
Parliament begun at Westminster, and adjourned to Shrewsbury; or if they or any
other for them shoulk seek for any manner of Pardon or License to return home,
they were to incur the same pain by the same Authority.

On Tuesday, on the morrow of St. Edward, the 14th of October next following,
the King with the Stat. at Large, 21 Ric. II. c. 16. These things, though in
the 22d year, are entered on the Parliament Roll 21st, as part of that Parliament.
Ordinances and Statutes made at Bristol.
Dukes of Lancaster, York, Albemarle, Surrey; and Excester; the Marquess of
Dorset, the Earls of March, Salisbury, and Gloucester; John Bussy, Henry Green,
and John Russel, by Virtue and Authority to them committed in Parliament at
Bristol, made certain Ordinances and Statutes, Five whereof are printed in the
Statutes at Large, Cap. 16, 17, 18, 19, 20. the last whereof relating only to
our Purpose, and varying in Print somewhat from the Roll, I have added to it
what was wanting: Also the King on the same Tuesday, on the morrow of St.
Edward, by the same Assent of the Lords and Knights of Counties so assigned by
the said Rot. Parl. 21 Ric. II. n. 85. so entered, though it was in the 22 Ric.
II Not to be repealed under pain of Treason.
Authority of Parliament, does Ordain, That every Person that procures or
pursues to Repeal or Reverse any of the said Statutes or Ordinances made by
the King, by the Assent of the said Lords and Knights, assigned by Power and
Authority of Parliament, and that duly

After this Provision made for the sure keeping of the Statutes The Oaths of
the Bishops and Lords enlarged.
and Ordinances made by the King, with the Assent of the Lords and Knights
assigned by Power and Authority of the Parliament, the Oath of the Bishops, when
they received their Temporalties of the Temporal Lords, when they had Livery of
their Lands and Tenements, were enlarged with these Additions:

To the Bishops Oath was added, Ibm. n 86. The Additions to the Bishops Oath.
You shall Swear, That well and truly (vous jurez que Bien and Loyalment,
Tendrez, Sustendez, and Esterrez sanz fraud on mal Engyn ove touz les
Estatutes, Establishments, Ordenances, etc.) you will Hold, Uphold, and Stand
with, without Fraud or Deceit, all the Statutes, Establishments, Ordinances, or
Judgments made and rendered in the Parliament summoned and begun at Westminster,
on the Monday next after the Exaltation of Holy Cross, in the Year of the Reign
of our Lord King Richard II. after the Conquest Twenty one, and from thence
adjourned to Shrewsbury, to the Quinden, or 15 Days after St. Hillary then next
coming, and there ended. And also all the Statutes and Ordinances made after
the said Parliament, by the King and Lords, and Knights of Shires coming for the
Commons to that Parliament, without going or doing to the contrary of any of
them, or the Dependants on, or Parcel them; nor that you will ever Repeal,
Revoke, Cassate, make Void, Reverse, or Adnull, nor ever suffer them to be
Repealed, Revoked, Cassated, made Void, Reversed, or Adnulled, so long as you
live; saving to the King his Regaly, Liberty, and Right of his Crown.

To the Oath of the Ibm.
Temporal Lords, was this further Addition: You shall Swear, That you will
never suffer in time to come any Man The Addition to the Oath of the Lords
Temporal.
living to go or do anything to the contrary of any of the Statutes,
Establishments, Ordinances, and Judgments abovesaid, nor any Dependants on, or
Parcel of them: And if any one shall do so, and be thereof duly Convict, you
shall use your utmost Power and Diligence, without Fraud or Deceit, to
prosecute him before the King and his Heirs Kings of England, and cause him to
have Execution as an High Traitor to the King and Kingdom; saving to the King
is Regalie, Liberty and Right of his Crown.

At Handenstank, on the 26th of October this Year, Commissioners A. D. 1398. 22
Ric. II. Commissioners of England and Scotland to take care of the Articles of
the late Truce.
for both Nations met: For Scotland, Sir William Bortwic, Sir John of Remorgny,
Knights, and Adam Forster Esquire: For England, John Bussy and Henry Green
Knights, William Feriby Clerc, and Laurence Drew Esquire. Their Business was to
take care of the Release and Exchange of Prisoners that had been taken on both
sides since the Truce of Leulingham in the Year 1389. and to regulate the
Practices of the Borders on both sides, and secure them from Rapin, Thefts,
Robberies, Burnings, and taking and carrying Truce between England and France,
which was effectually done in Eleven Articles. The Instrument it self under the
Seals of Scots Commissioners, in true Scottish Language, being with the
Under-Chamberlains in the Exchequer, in a little Box, tituled Scotia.

About Hypodig. Neustr. f. 553. lin. 5. The Death of the Duke of Lancaster.
Candlemas next following, John Duke of Lancaster died, and the King, with the
Committee that had the Authority of Parliament, Westminster on Tuesday the 8th
Day of March, when it was declared, That Henry Duke of Hereford, Rot. Parl. n.
87, 88.
after the Judgment given against him at Coventry, had procured Letters Patents
from the King, that during his absence, by his Attorneys he might Sue and have
Livery of any Lands descended to him, and his Homage respited. Which Letters
Patents were declared to be against Law. Whereupon the King, by Advice of the
Committee, and Assent of Parliament, Revoked those Letters Patents, like Letters
Patents made to the Duke of Norfolk.

On Plac^^. Coron. 21 Ric. II. n. Judgment against Sir R. Plesington.
the same Day Robert Plesington Knight, though dead before, was adjudged
Traitor for being in the Action with the Duke of Gloucester, Earls of Arundel
and Warwic, at Haringey, and all his Castles, Manors, Lands, Tenements, Goods
and Chattels to be forfeit. After which, many Bishops and Lords Temporal Swear
as follows.

Which Append. n. 113. The Oath of the Bishops, Lords, and Knights.
Judgments, Ordinances, and Establishments, so Made, Ordained, and Agreed on
the said Tuesday the 18th of March, and all the Statutes, Establishments,
Ordinances, and Judgments, Made and Rendered in the said Parliament, or at
Coventry, or otherwhere, by Virtue and Authority of the same Parliament, firmly
to hold and keep, as well the Lords Spiritual as Temporal, and certain Knights
for Counties, by Authority of Parliament there being, the same Tuesday were
Sworn in the Presence of the King Cross of Canterbury (de les tenir, sustenir,
and de esteer ove ycelles) to hold, uphold, and stand with them without Fraud
or Deceit, according to the Form and Effect of the Oaths by them made before,
as contained in the Parlement-Roll.

The Names of the Bishops, Lords, and Knights, do here follow:

The Archbishop of Canterbury, The Archbishop of York, The Bishop of London,
The Bishop of Winchester, The Bishop of Ely, The Bishop of Norwich, The Bishop
of Excester, Chancellor, The Bishop of Rochester, The Bishop of Hereford, The
Bishop of Salisbury, The Bishop of Lincoln, The Bishop of St. Asaph, The Bishop
of St. David's, The Bishop of Chester, The Bishop of Chichester, The Bishop of
Landaff, The Abbat of Westminster, The Abbat of St. Edmondsbury, The Duke of
York, The Duke of Albemarle, The Duke of Excester, The Marquess of Dorset, The
Earl of Stafford, The Earl of Salisbury, The Earl of Northumberland, The Earl
of Gloucester, The Earl of Westmerland, The Earl of Worcester, The Earl of
Wiltshire, Treasurer, The Earl of Suffolk, The Lord Gray of Ruthin, The Lord
Ferrers of Groby, The Lord Lovell, The Lord Camoys, Sir John Bussy, Sir Henry
Green, Sir John Russell, Robert Teye,
After this, the Chancellor by the King's Command required openly all those
that had been Sworn, and would observe the Judgments, Oath, and Ordinances,
should hold up their Right Hands; which was done by all the People in the
King's Presence.

On the 23d of April Placit. Coron. ut supra, n. The Judgment of H. Bowet.
following, the King, and Committee that had the Authority of Parliament, were
at Windsor, where Henry Bowet Clerc, was brought before them; where it was Duke
of Hereford, since the Judgment given against him at Coventry, had by Petition
amongst other things, obtained from the King Letters Patents, That if any Lands
of Inheritance descended or fell to him in his absence, for which he ought to
do Homage, he might by his Attorneys Sue for, and have Livery of them, and his
Homage and Fealty respited: Which Letters Patents being granted by
Inadvertency, without due Advice, or mature Deliberation, as they ought to
Judgment, because the Duke of Hereford, after that Judgment, was not a Person
capable to have or receive Benefit by the Leters Patents; and for that they had
been adjudged void, as appeared by the Parlement-Roll: And therefore because
Henry Bowet Clerc, had been the Chief Contriver and Manager of the said
Petition, the King, by the Assent of the Committee who had the Authority of
Parliament, adjudged him Traitor, and to be Drawn, Hanged, Headed, and
Quartered; and all his Lands and Tenements, as well in England as Gascony, and
all his Goods and Chattels to be forfeited. But because he was the King's
Chaplain, he pardoned the Execution of the Judgment, and granted him his Life,
with this, That he should be Banished England for ever.

While these things Hypodyg^^. Neustr. f. 552. n. 50.
were doing here, there came News from Ireland, That Lieutenant Roger Earl of
March was there slain by the Irish; To Revenge whose Death, and subdue the
Irish, the King levied a considerable Force, and went into Ireland with The
King goes into Ireland.
several Bishops, and many of the Nobility. Toward which Expedition he Raised
Money by undue Ways, and taking up Carriages, Victuals, and other Necessaries,
without paying for them, by which and many other Imprudent, Rash, and Unadvised
Practices, he had made himself and Government uneasy to the People.

The Duke taking advantage of King Richard's absence, thinks of coming for
England Walsingh. Hist. fol. 358. n. 10, 20, 30. The Duke of Hereford lands in
England.
to demand his Inheritance, with Thomas Arundel Archbishop of Canterbury, and
the Son and Heir of the Earl of Arundel, and a small Company, he took Ship in
France, and hovering a while about the English Coast to spy whether there were
any ready to resist them, at length landed at Ravenspur in Yorkshire, where
there came into him Henry Percy Earl of Northumberland, and Henry his Son,
Ralph Earl of Westmerland, and other Lords, so as in a short time he had an
Army of 60000 Men; They marched speedily to Bristol, and besieged the Castle,
and took it, and within it William Lescrop Treasurer, Sir John Bussy, and Sir
Henry Green, all the King's Counselors, who the next day by the Clamor of the
People had their Heads struck off. The Duke of York, the King's Uncle, and
Guardian of the Kingdom, with several Bishops, Noblemen, and the King's
Council, consulted oppose the Duke, but could do nothing.

King Richard, when he heard in Ireland of his Landing, Ibm. n. 40, 50. The
Nobility and People desert King Richard.
secured the Sons of the Duke of Lancaster and Gloucester in Trim Castle, and
with the Dukes of Albemarle, Excester, and Surrey, the Bishops of London,
Lincoln, and Carlisle, and many others, Shipped themselves with all speed, that
they might raise such a Force as might hinder the Duke's Progress. But when he
landed, understanding his own Condition, That the People and greater part Lords
had forsaken him, and gone in to Duke Henry, he laid by all thoughts of
Fighting, and likewise dismissed his Family, giving them notice by his Steward
Sir Thomas Percy, That they might provide for, and reserve themselves for
better Times. The King shifting up and down, here and there for many days, the
Duke always following him with his Army, at length fixed at Conway Castle, and
desired to have Discourse with the Archbishop and Earl of Northumberland, to
whom he declared, He would quit his Government, if he might have his Life
secured, and an Honorable He offers to Quit his Government, his Life and an
Honorable Maintenance secured. Which was Granted.
Provision made for himself, and Eight Persons he should Name; These things
granted and confirmed, he went to Flint Castle, where after a short Discourse
with the Duke of Lancaster, they mounted their Horses, and went to Chester
Castle that night, the Duke's numerous Army following him.

At Chester Clause 23 Ric. II. M. 3 Dors. Writs for a Parliament in King
Richard's Name: He is secured in the Tower of London.
summons were issued in King Richard's Name meeting of a Parliament on the
Morrow of St. Michael, or 30th of September, dated there on the 19th of August,
in the 23d of his Reign. In the mean time the King was brought to, and secured
in the Tower of London until the Parliament should sit.

Holingshed tells us, Chronicle, f. 501. a. col. 2. The Duke's Obeisance to
King Richard at their first meeting. And Declaration of the Cause of his coming
into England. The Duke received at London with great Rejoicing. ^ The
Instruments of the King's Resignation and Deposition contrived by his Order.
the Duke at the first meeting of King Richard, which was at Conway Castle in
Carnarvonshire, as he came toward him, made a Reverend Obeisance, and going
on, did so a second, and third time, the King taking him by the Hand, and
bidding him Welcome; whereupon humbly Thanking him, said, The Cause of his
coming was to have Restitution of his Inheritance, unto which the King readily
assented; and called for Wine, and when they had drank, mounting their Horses,
they rode to Flint, and to Chester, went from thence to Nantwich, and so the
common Rode to London, where the Duke was received with all imaginable
Expressions of Joy, and the King sent to the Tower, where we hear no more of
him until Michaelmass-Day, against which time the Instruments of his Cession,
Resignation, and Deposition, with the Articles against him, were prepared;
which are here recited from the Parliament Roll exactly Translated.

The Roll of Parliament summoned and holden at Westminster in the Feast of St.
Faith the Virgin (or 6th of October) in the Year of Henry the Fourth after the
Conquest the First. Membrane xx.
The Record and Process of the Renunciation of King This Record is Printed in
X. Authors, Col. 2744. and in Pryn's Plea for the Lords, p. 425. which I have
compared with the Original.
Richard the Second after the Conquest, and the Acceptance of the same
Renunciation likewise, with the Deposition of the same King Richard, as it here
follows.

BE it Remembered, Rot. Parl. 1 Hen. IV. N. 10.
That on Monday in the Feast of St. Michael the Archangel, in the Twenty third
year of the Reign of King Richard, the Lords Spiritual and Temporal, Lord
Richard le Scrop Archbishop of York, John Bishop of Hereford, Henry Earl of
Northumberland, and Ralph Earl of Westmerland, the Lord Hugh Burnell, Thomas
Lord Berkley, the Prior of Canterbury and Abbat of Westminster, William
Thyrninge Knight. and John Markham Justices, Thomas Stow, and John Burbache,
Doctors of Law, Thomas de Erpingham, and Thomas Gray, Knights, William de
Feryby, and Dionyse Lapham, Public Notaries, being Deputed to that Richard
within the Tower of London about Nine of the Clock, when the Earl of
Northumberland said before the King, That at Ib. n. 11.
Conway in North Wales, and then at Liberty, He promised to Thomas Archbishop
of Canterbury and himself, That he would Quit the Crown of England and France,
and Renounce all Right to it, and to Kingship, for the Causes there by himself
confessed of his Inability and Insufficiency, and this he would do after the
best Manner and Form he should be Advised by the Skilful in the Law. The same
King before the said Lords and others abovenamed, kindly answered, That he
would with Effect perform, what he had promised, but first desired to have
Conference with his Cousin Henry Duke of Lancaster, and the Archbishop of
Canterbury, before he did it; and desired a Copy of Ib. n. 12.
On the same day after Dinner, the King much desiring the coming of the Duke of
Lancaster, and long expecting him, at length he and the Archbishop of
Canterbury, with the Lords and Persons abovenamed, came to his presence in the
Tower, the Lords Roos of Willoughby, and Abergavenny, and many others then
being present. And after he had Conference with Lancaster and Archbishop,
looking about him with a Cheerful Countenance, as it seemed to the People about
him, the King called them all to him, and said publicly he was ready to make
his Renunciation as he had said before; and presently taking the Parchment
Schedule of his Renunciation into his Hands, tho it was told him, to spare the
Labor and Trouble of Reading it, he might have it done by another, he said he
would read it himself, which he did distinctly, and absolved Latin Record, the
Tenor of which follows.

The Resignation of Richard the Second.
IN Ib. n. 13.
Name of God Amen, I Richard by the Grace of God King of England and France,
and Lord of Ireland, do Absolve the Archbishops, Bishops, and other Prelates
whatsoever, of Churches Secular or Regular, of what Dignity, Degree, State, or
Condition they are; Dukes, Marquesses, Earls, Barons, Vassals, Valvassores, and
my Liege Men whatsoever, Ecclesiastic or Secular, by whatever Name they are
called, from the Oath of Fealty and Homage, and all others to me made, and from
all Bond of Ligeance, Regality, and Government or Command, by which they have
been, or may be bound to me; and them, their Heirs, and Successors for ever
from the same Obligations, Oaths, and other Things whatsoever, I free, release,
and quit, and make them free, absolved, and quit, as to my Person, according to
the whole Effect of the Law, which may follow from the Premises, or any of
them; And I do purely, freely of my own accord, simply and absolutely, in the
best Manner, Way, and Form that I can by this Writing, Renounce, wholly Resign,
and by Word and Deed, put from me, and recede for ever, from all Royal Dignity
and Majesty, the Crown and Lordship, and the Power of the said Kingdoms, and
Lordship, and other my Dominions and Possessions which may any way belong to
me, and to all Right, Color of Right, and Title, Possession and Dominion, that
I ever had, have, or may have, in the same or any of them; also the Government
and Administration of the said Kingdoms and Lordship, and all mere and mixed
Empire in the same; and to all Honor and Royalty therein, saving to my
Successors Kings of England, in the Kingdoms, Dominions, and Premises, for
ever their Competent Rights. And I do Confess, Acknowledge, Repute, and truly
of certain Knowledge, Judge my self to be insufficient for the Government of
the said Kingdoms and Dominions, and for my notorious Demerits not unworthily
Deposed. And I Swear by these Holy Gospels of God by me Corporally touched,
That I never will Contravene this Resignation, Renunciation, Dimission, and
Cession, or will any way oppose them in Word or Deed by my self or others, nor
will suffer them to be opposed or contravened, as much as in me is, publicly
or privately, but the same Renunciation, Resignation, Dimission, and Cession,
will for ever hold firm, and will firmly hold and observe them in the whole and
every part, as God and his Gospels help me.

Ego Richardus Rex antedictus propria manu hic me subscribo. I King Richard
beforesaid write my self with my own Hand.

And Ib. n. 14.
presently he added to his Renunciation and Cession, That if it was in his
Power the Duke of Lancaster should succeed him, but seeing it was not, he
desired the Archbishop of York, and Bishop of Hereford, who he had appointed
to

On the Morrow, Ib n. 15.
being Tuesday, the Feast of St. Hierom, the Parliament met in Westminster Hall,
where the Archbishop of York, and Bishop of Hereford, publicly declared the
King's Lancaster. The Cession and Renunciation was first read in Latin, then in
English; and the States and People there present were asked, if for their own
Interest, and the Profit of the Nation, they would admit the Cession and
Renunciation, they unanimously answered, They would admit it.

After Ib. n. 16.
which Admission, it was publicly proposed, That besides that, it would be
much expedient, and advantageous to the Nation, and to take away all scruples
and sinister suspicions, that many Crimes and Defects committed by the said
King during the time of his Government, for which, as confessed in his Cession,
he might be worthily Deposed, might be drawn up in Writing, and publicly read
and declared to the People. The Tenor of all which Articles is such.

Here the Entry upon the Roll is confused and impertinent,

The Form Ibm.
of the Oath which the Kings of England usually take at their Coronation
follows, which is exacted and received from them by the Archbishop of
Canterbury, as it is contained in the Pontifical Books of the Archbishops and
Bishops; Which Oath was received from Richard King of England, the Second after
the Conquest, by the Archbishop of Canterbury, and afterward Repealed, as may
be found upon Record in the Rolls of Chancery.

Thou Ib. n. 17.
shall wholly preserve the Peace of the Church, and People of God, and Concord
in God, according to thy Power, and shall Answer, Thou shall cause to be done
in all thy Judgments, equal and right Justice, and Discretion in Mercy and
Truth according to thy Power, and shall Answer, I will do it. Thou do Grant
that just Laws and Customs are to be holden, and do Promise to Protect and
Confirm them to the Honor of God, which the Communalty have chosen, according
to your Power, and shall Answer, I Grant and Promise.

To these such Questions may be added which are just, which

The Objections against the King concerning his
FIrst, Ib. n. 18.
It is Objected to King Richard, That for his Evil Government, by giving the
Goods and Possessions of the Crown to Unworthy Persons, and indiscreetly
dissipating of them; and for this cause imposing grievous and intolerable
Burdens

Secondly, The same Ib. n. 19.
King lately at Shrewsbury, caused to come before him, and others that favored
him, in a Chamber many Persons, and the greater part of the Justices, where, by
Threats, and diverse Terrors, he induced, caused, and forced them singly to
Answer to certain Questions on his behalf, Thomas Duke of Gloucester, the Earls
of Arundel, and Warwick, and other Lords, with whom he was very Angry,
especially because they desired him to be under Good Government; but by Divine
Providence, and the Resistance and Power of the said Lords, the King could not
bring his Design to effect.

Thirdly, When the Lords Ibm. n. 20.
Temporal, in Defense of themselves, resisted his Malice and Craft, the said
King prefixed a Day for the Parliament to do them and others Justice, who upon
Faith and Confidence therein, remained quietly in their own Houses; the King
privately, with his Letters or Ireland into Cheshire, to raise Arms against the
said Lords, Great Men, and Officers of the Commonwealth, Publicly exciting his
Banners against the Peace he had Sworn to, from whence Homicides, Captivities,
Dissentions, and other infinite Evils followed in the whole Kingdom, for which
cause he incurred Perjury.

Fourthly, That although the said Ibm. n. 21.
King had Pardoned the Duke of Gloucester, the Earls of Arundel and Warwic, and
all Gloucester, and the said Earls of Arundel and Warwic; and sent the Duke to
Calais, to be imprisoned under the Keeping of the Earl of Nottingham, one of
his Appellants; and without Answer, or lawful Process, caused him to be
strangled, and inhumanly and cruelly murdered. Arundel Pleading his Charter of
Pardon, and Demanding Justice in Parliament, was encompassed with great Numbers
of Armed Men, and had his Head Damnably struck off; and committed the Earl of
Warwic and Lord Cobham to Perpetual Prison, confiscating their Lands, against
Justice, the Laws of the Land, and his express Oath, giving them to their
Appellants.

Fifthly, At the time Ibm. n. 22.
when in his Parliament he caused Gloucester, and Earls of Arundel and Warwic, to
be adjudged, that he might more freely exercise his Cruelty upon them; and in
others fulfill his injurious Will, he drew to him a great multitude of
Malefactors out of the County of Chester, who marching up and down the Kingdom
with the King, as well within his own House, as without, cruelly killed his
Lieges, beat and wounded others, plundering the Goods of the People, refusing
to pay for their Victuals; violating and

Sixthly, Though the said Ib. n. 23.
King caused Proclamation to Gloucester, and the Earls of Arundel and Warwic, to
be Arrested not for any Rebellious Congregations, or marching with Horse within
the Kingdom; but for many Extorsions, Oppressions, and other things done
against his Regality and Royal Majesty; And that it was not his Intention, that
any of their Company at the time of the Congregation and Marchching with Horse
aforesaid, should for that Reason be Questioned or Disturbed: Yet the same King
afterward, in his Parliament, Impeached the said Lords; not for Extorsions,
Oppressions, or other things aforesaid, but for Rebellious Tumults and
Congregations and Marching with Horse, adjudged them to Death; and caused many
of their Company for fear of Death, to make Fine and Ransom as Traitors, to the
great Destruction

Seventhly, After many of these Ibm. n. 24.
Persons who had paid their Fines and Ransoms, and had obtained his Letters
Patents of full Pardon; yet they received no Benefit by them, until they made
new Fines for their Lives, by which they were much impoverished: And this was
much in Derogation to the Name

Eighthly, In the last Ibm. n. 25.
Parliament holden at Shrewsbury, the same King propounding to Oppress his
People, subtly procured and caused to be granted, That the Power of
Parliament, by Consent of all the States of the Kingdom, should remain in some
certain Persons, who after the Parliament should be Dissolved, might Answer the
Petitions depending in Parliament, then undetermined, under pretense whereof
they proceeded

Ninthly, Notwithstanding the said King at his Ibm. n. 26.
Coronation Henry Duke of Lancaster then in Banishment; in so doing, he acted
against the Bond of Charity, and rashly violated his Oath.

Tenthly, That though the Ibm. n. 27.
Crown of England, the Rights Pope, or any other Foreign Power, had nothing to
do in them; yet the said King, for the confirming of his erroneous Statutes,
supplicated the Pope to confirm the Statutes made in his last Parliament;
whereupon he obtained his Apostolic Letters, or Bull, wherein were contained
grievous Censures against all such as should presume to contravene them. All
which things are known to be against the Crown and Royal

Eleventhly, Though Henry now Duke of Lancaster, Ibm. n. 28.
by the King's Command, exhibited his Bill or Accusation against the Duke of
Norfolk, concerning the State and Honor of the King, and duly prosecuted it,
so as he was ready to make it good by Duel, and the King had ordered it; yet
the same King put it by, and without any lawful Cause Banished the His own
Father John D. of Lancaster was the First Commissioner in this Judgment* in
Parliament. See Pleas of the Crown. 21 Ric. II.
Duke of Lancaster for Ten Years, against all Justice, the Laws and Customs of
the Kingdom, and the Military Law, Damnably incurring Perjury.

Twelfthly, After the said King had graciously granted Ibm. n. 29.
to the now Duke of Lancaster, by his Letters Patents, That while he was in
Banishment his Attorneys might sue for Livery of any Inheritance might fall to
him for which Homage was due,

Thirteenthly, Notwithstanding it had been Ordained, Ibm n. 30.
That every Year the King's Officers, with the Justices, and others of his
Council, should Nominate and Choose the Sheriffs of all Counties according to
their Discretion; yet he Commanded others of his Party, and such as would do as
he would have

Fourteenthly, That whereas Ibm. n. 31.
the said King Borrowed several Sums of Money from Lords and others by his
Letters Patents* promising faithfully to pay them at a certain Term; he did not
perform his Promise; whence his Creditors were much grieved; and not only they,
but many others thought

Fifteenthly, Whereas the Kings Ibm. n. 32.
of England used to live upon the Revenues of the Kingdom, and Patrimony of the
Crown in time of Peace, without Oppression of his People; yt the same King
during his whole time, gave the greatest part of his Revenue to unworthy
Persons, and imposed Burdens upon his Subjects as it were every Year; by which
he excessively oppressed his People, and impoverished his Kingdom; not
employing

Sixteenthly, The same King Ibm. n. 33.
not willing to keep and protect the Just Laws and Customs of his Kingdom, but
do what he pleased; when those Laws were declared to him by the Justices

Seventeenthly, That whereas Ibm. n. 34.
Laws made in Parliament do always bind, until revoked by another Parliament; yet
the same King, desiring to enjoy such Liberty as no Laws might bind him, and to
do what he pleased, he cunningly procured such a Petition, on behalf of the
Community of his Kingdom, to be exhibited in Parliament, and to be granted, That
he might be as free as any of his Progenitors before him. By color of which
Petition and Grant, he often commanded and caused many things to be done
contrary to the Laws not revoked, doing expressly and knowingly against the Oath
taken at his Coronation.

Eighteenthly, Though it had been Ordained, Ibm. n. 35.
That no Sheriff should continue in his Office above a Year, and could not be
again Chosen to that Office in three Years after, the same

Nineteenthly, Although by Law and Ibm. n. 36.
Custom, the People ought to be free to Choose Knights to represent them in
Parliament, to propound their Grievances, and provide Remedies for oppressing
the People.

Twentiethly, the same King, Ibm. n. 37.
that in all things he might act Arbitrarily, unlawfully made and commanded all
the Sheriffs to Swear beyond their usual Oath, That they would obey all his
Commands sent to them under the Great Seal, Privy Seal, or Signet; and in case
they should know any in their Bailiwics or Jurisdictions, should speak any Ill
publicly or privately to the Disgrace or Scandal of the King's Person, they
should arrest and commit them to Prison, there to remain while they

21. The same King, Ibm. n. 38.
that he might supplant his People, and get their Estates to enrich himself,
caused the People of Sixteen Counties, by Letters under their Seals, to submit
to him as Traitors; by color of which, he obtained of them great Sums of Money
to procure his Favor: And although

22. Although the same King Ibm. n. 39.
Swear at his Coronation to Preserve the Liberties granted to the Church of
England; yet by reason of his Voyage into Ireland, he by his Letters

23. In many Great Ibm. n 40.
Councils, when the Lords and Justices were charged to Counsel him faithfully,
in things t ha touched his own, and the State of the Kingdom, they were often
so sharply rebuked and reproved, that they dare not speak Truth, in giving
Advice concerning the State of the Kingdom.

24. The Treasure, Ibm. n. 41.
Relics, and Jewels of the Crown, which ought to be preserved in the Treasury
for the Honor Ireland, without the Consent of the States of the Kingdom;
whence the Kingdom had been greatly impoverished, if God had not otherwise
provided for the taking of those Goods from him against his Will. And further,
he caused the Records concerning the State and Government of his Kingdom to be
rased, in great Prejudice of his People, and Disinheritance of the Crown, and
very

25. He was so Variable Ibm. n. 42.
and Dissembling in Words and Writing, and so Contrary to himself, specially in
Writing to the Pope, Kings, and other Lords, without and within the Kingdom,
and also to his Subjects, that no Man living, knowing what he was, could
confide in him; yea, he was reputed so Unfaithful and Inconstant, that he was
not only a Scandal

26. Though the Lands, Tenements, Ibm. n. 43.
Goods and Chattels of all Freemen, by the Laws of the Land, ought not to be
seized without Forfeiture; yet the said King intending to enervate those Laws,
in the Presence of many Lords and others of the Community of the Kingdom, he
often said and affirmed, That the Life of every Subject, his Lands, Tenements,

27. Although it had been made a Ibm. n. 44.
Law, which had hitherto been confirmed, That no Freeman might be taken, etc.
nor any ways destroyed, nor that the King should proceed against him, but by
lawful Trial of his Peers, or the Law of the Land; yet according to the Will,
Command, and Appointment

28. Although the People of Ibm. n. 45.
England, by virtue of their Ligeance, were sufficiently bound to their King,
and if they offended in any manner, he might Correct and Punish them by the
Laws and Customs of the Kingdom; yet the said King desiring to supplant and too
much oppress his People, that he might more freely execute, and be able to
follow the Fancy of his foolish and unlawful Will, he sent his Letters into all
Counties of his Kingdom, That all his Lieges, as well Spiritual

29. When the Parties Ibm. n. 46.
contending in the Ecclesiastic Court, in Causes merely Ecclesiastic and
Spiritual, endeavored England, who out of Justice refused to grant them, yet
the same King often granted them under his Signet, wickedly infringing the
Church Liberties granted in Magna Charta, which he had Sworn to Preserve,
damnably incurring Perjury, and the Sentence of Excommunication Pronounced by
the Holy Fathers against the Violators of Church Liberties.

30. The said King in Parliament, Ib. n. 48.
compassed about with Thomas Arundel Archbishop of Canterbury, and his
Spiritual Father, being then absent by his Contrivance.

31. Upon perusal of the said Ib. n. 48.
Kings Will under his Great Seal, Privy Seal, and Signet, there was in it this
Clause. Also we Will, That the Debts of our House, Chamber, and Wardrobe being
paid, for which we allow Twenty thousand Westminster, and Bermondsey, for which
we allow Five or six thousand Marks. The Residue of our Gold shall remain to
our Successor, upon Condition he Approves. Ratifies, Confirms, Holds, and
causes to be Holden and Observed, all Laws, Statutes, Ordinances, and
Judgments, made, had, or done, in the Parliament held at Westminster on the 17th
of September, in the 21st of our Reign, and continued or adjourned Shrewsbury,
and all things done at Coventry on the 16th of September, in the 22d of our
Reign, as also what was done at Westminster on the 18th of March, in the same
year, by Authority of the same Parliament. But if he shall Refuse to do these
things, then we Will that Thomas Duke of Surrey, Edward Duke of Aumarle, John
Duke of Excester, and William le Scrop Earl of Wiltshire, my Debts, etc. as
aforesaid being paid, shall have the said Residue for the Defense of the
Statutes, Ordinances, Wicked, and Repugnant to all Law and Reason, not only in
his Life, but after he was Dead, neither regarding the Danger of his Soul, or
the utmost Destruction of his Kingdom or Liege People.

32. In the Eleventh year of the said Ib. n. 49.
King Richard, at his Manor of Langley, in the presence of the Dukes of
Lancaster and York, and many other Lords, desiring, as it seemed, That his
Uncle the Duke of Gloucester, there also present, might

33. After a Knight of the Shire, Ib. n. 50.
who had a Vote in Canterbury publicly before the King and all the States of
the Kingdom, upon certain Defects committed against the King, with little
Truth, as 'twas said: Although he offered presently to answer what was objected
against him, and desired to be admitted by the King so to do, sufficiently
trusting, as he said, to demonstrate his Innocence, yet the same King
contriving by all the Ways and Means he Norfolk, other Lords, and Great Men,
lamenting said, He was not the first had been Banished, nor Norfolk, and other
Lords, would follow him; and constantly told the King, That the Consequences of
the Premises would fall upon his own Head at last; To which the King, as if he
had been astonished, presently answered, he thought it might so happen, he
might be expelled his Kingdom by his Subjects; and further said, if it should
be so, he would go to the Place where he was; and that the Archbishop the
color of the Judgment of Banishment they might be seized; it being so done,
the King caused the Goods to be put in Coffers, which he caused to be Locked,
and Sealed by one of the Archbishops Clerks, by whom he sent the Keys to him;
and afterward caused the Coffers to be broken, taking the Goods, and disposing
of them as he pleased; The same King also faithfully promised the Archbishop,
That if he would go to the Port of Hampton, in order to go out of the Kingdom,
Easter next coming, without fail, he should return into England, nor should he
any way loose his Archbishopric: This he faithfully Promised, Swearing to it,
touching the Cross of Thomas the Martyr Archbishop of Canterbury: Which
Promises notwithstanding, the King caused the Archbishop to go out of the
Kingdom, and wrote to the Pope for his Translation;

These were the Thirty three Articles read in the Parliament against King
Richard.
And because it seemed Ib. n. 51.
to all the States of the Kingdom, for the greater Security, and Tranquillity of
the People, and Profit of the Kingdom, and accordingly appointed certain
Commissioners, the Bishop of Asaph, Glastonbury, the Earl of Gloucester, the
Lord Berkeley, Thomas Erpyngham, and Thomas Gray, Knights, and William Thirnyng
Justice, to pronounce Sentence of Deposition against King Richard, from all
Royal Dignity, Majesty, and Honor, in the Name, and by Authority of all the
States, as in like Cases, according to the ancient Custom of the Kingdom had
been observed. The Commissioners take upon them their Charge, and the
Commission being drawn up in Writing, the Asaph read it in these Words:

In the Name of God, Amen: Ib. n. 52.
We John Bishop of Asaph, John Abbat of Glastonbury, Thomas Earl of Gloucester,
Thomas Lord Berkeley, Thomas de Erpyngham, and Thomas Gray, Knights, and
William Thirning Justiciary, by the Spiritual and Temporal Peers and Great Men
of the Kingdom of England, and by the Communities of the same, representing all
States thereof, being specially deputed Commissioners for the things
underwritten, duly considering the many Perjuries, Cruelty, and many other
Crimes committed by King Richard in the time of his Government, and publicly
Exhibited and Recited before the States, which were so public, notorious,
manifest, and famous, as they could no way be denied; and also his Confession,
acknowledging, and truly of his own certain knowledge, judging himself to have
been altogether insufficient for the Government of the Kingdoms and Lordship
aforesaid; and that for his notorious Demerits he was worthy to be Deposed;
which things by his own Will and Command were published before the States.
Having had diligent Deliberation upon these things, for the greater Caution to
the Government of the Kingdoms, and Dominion aforesaid, the Rights and
Appertinences of the same, in the Name and Authority to us committed, do
Pronounce, Decree, and Declare, that very Richard to be Deposed deservedly from
all Royal Dignity and Honor, and for the like Caution, we Depose him by our
Definitive Sentence in this Writing, expressly inhibiting all and singular
Archbishops, Bishops, and Prelates, Dukes, Marquesses, Earls, Barons, Knights,
Vassals, and Valvassors, and all other Men and Subjects of the said Kingdoms
and Dominion or Places belonging to them, for the future to obey the said
Richard as King.

Furthermore, the said States Ib. n. 53.
desiring there might be Richard to resign their Homage and Fealty had been
made to him, and give him notice what had been concerning his Deposition and
Renunciation.

And presently it appeared from the Ibm.
Premises, and the England was vacant, when Henry Duke of Lancaster rising
from his Seat, and standing so right up, as he might sufficiently be seen of
the People, humbly crossing himself in his Forehead and Breast, first calling
upon the Name of Christ, challenged the Kingdom of England, being void, with
the Crown, and all its Members, and Appertinences, in his Mother Tongue, (
lingua materna) in this Form of Words.

In the Name of Fader, Ibm.
Son, and Holy Ghost, I Henry

After this Claim, Ibm. n. 54.
as well the Lords Spiritual as Temporal, and all States there present, were
asked, one by one, what they thought of it, who without any difficulty or
delay, unanimously consented the Duke should Reign over them; and immediately,
so soon as he show the States of the Kingdom, King Richard's Signet, which he
gave him as a Token of Henry by the Right Hand, led him to the Royal Throne,
and when the same King had Kneeled, and Prayed a while before it, the
Archbishop of Canterbury, the Archbishop of York assisting him, placed him
therein, the People for great Joy Shouting mightily.

When the Shouting was over, Ib. n 55.
the Archbishop of Canterbury made a short Preachment, or Collation, as it is
called upon the Roll; his Text, or Theme, was, Vir dominabitur Populo, 1 Samuel
c. 9. v. 17. The English Version of the whole Verse, according to the Vulgar
Edition, runs thus: And when Samuel saw Saul, the Lord said unto him, Behold
the Man whom I spoke to thee of, this same shall Rule over my People; Iste
dominabitur Populo meo. In this Collation he makes a Comparison between King
Richard, Henry a Perfect Wise Man. In this Comparison he makes use of several
Places of Scripture, but how properly, or how to the purpose, belongs not to
this Place to say: At length he insinuates, That by Childish Government the
Nation had been in great Danger; but now they were freed from it, because a Man
will Reign; to wit, he that says not as a Child, but one of Perfect Reason: I
came not to do my own (In sensu cogitabit circumspectionem Dei) He will in
earnest think of the Circumspection or Providence of God; (id est, circumquaque
diligenter aspiciet ut Dei voluntas non sua fiat;) that is, he will look
diligently every way about him, that God's Will, not his own, may be done; and
so in the Place of a wanton

Which Collation ended, Ib. n. 56.
King Henry, to quiet the Minds of his Subjects, said publicly these Words:

Thank God and zowe Spirituel and Temporel, and all the Astates of the Land,
and do zowe to wit, it es noght my Will that no Man thynk, that be way of
Conquest I would Disherit any Man of his Heritage, Franches, or other Ryghts
that him aght to have, no put him out of that that he has, and has had by the
good Laws and Custumes of the Rewme, except those Persons that has been agan
the good Purpose and the comune Profyt of the Rewme.

And forthwith Ib. n. 57.
it being considered that the Throne being Vacant, by the Cessation and
Deposition of King Richard, the Power of all the Justices, Sheriffs, and other
Officers through the Kingdom ceased, lest Justice might be delayed to the
Grievance of the People, he Named his Principal Officers and Justices, who took
the usual Oaths. And forthwith Proclamation was made by the King's Command,
That on Monday next after the Feast of St. Michael a Parliament should be held
in that Place; Monday next following, on the Feast of St, Edward, the
Coronation should be at Westminster; and that who claimed any Service, then
might put in their Petitions before the Steward, Constable, and Marshall of
England, where they should receive full Justice. And for the shortness of Time
assigned for the Sitting of the Parliament, the King made Protestation, it was
not his Intention it should be any Prejudice to the States of his Kingdom, or
that it should be made an Example for the future; but that it was only for the
Profit of the Kingdom, and specially to spare the Labor and Expenses of his
Lieges, and that the Grievances of the People might have speedy Remedy.

All which things being finished, Ibm. n. 58.
the King rose from his in Alba Aula) he had a great Entertainment for the
Noble and Gentlemen, who were there in great Numbers.

These things were done on Tuesday the 30th of September.

And afterward on the next day, Ibm.
being Wednesday, the Richard late King in the Tower, as they had been
enjoined, William Thirnyng Justiciary, for himself and Fellow-Proctors, in the
Name of all the States and People, notified to Richard, and fully declared the
Admission of his Renunciation, and the Manner, Cause, and Form of the Sentence
of his Deposition; and presently Resigned the Homage and Fealty that had been
made to the late King Richard, as follows.

The Words Ibm. n. 59.
which William Thirnyng spoke to Monsieur Richard late King of England, at the
Tower of London in his Chamber Note, this Wednesday was October. 1.
Wednesday next after the Feast of St. Michael the Archangel.
SIRE,
IT is well known to zowe, That there was a Parliament somond of all the States
of the Reaume for to be at Westmynstre, and to begin on the Teusday in the
morrow of the Fest of Seint Michell the Archaungell that was zesterday, by
cause of the which Sommons, all the States of this Land were there gadyrd; the
which States hole made these same Persons that been comen here to zowe now her
Procuratours, and gafen hem full Auctorite and Power, and charged hem for to
say the Words that we sall say to zowe en her Name, and on their Behalve; that
is to wytten, The Bishop of St. Assa for Ersbisshoppes and Bisshoppes; the
Abbot of Glastenbury for Abbotes and Priours, and all other Men of Holy Church
Seculers and Rewelers; the Earl of Gloucestre for Dukes and Earls; the Lord of
Berkeley for Barons and Banerettes; Sire Thomas Irpyngham Chamberleyn for all
the Bachilers and Commons of this Land be South, Sire Thomas Gray for all the
Bachilers and Commons by North, and my Felawe Johan Markham and me for to come
with hem for all these States; And so, Sire, these Words, and the doying that
we sall say to zowe, is not onlych our Words, bot the Words and the Doyings
of all the States of this Land, and our Charge and in her Name. And he answered
and said, That he wist well, that we would not say but as we were charged. Sire,
ze remember zowe well, That on Monday on the Fest of St. Michell the
Archaungell, right here, in this Chamber, and in what Presence ze Renounsed and
Cessed of the State of King and Lordeship, and of all the Dignite and Wyrshipp
that longed thereto, and assoiled all zour Lieges of her Legiance and Obeisance
that longed to zowe uppe the Forume that is contened in the same Renunciacion
and Cession, which ze read zour self by zour Mouth, and affermed it by zour
Oath and zour own Writing; upon which ze made and ordained zour Procurators the
Ersbysshopp of Zork, and the Bysshopp of Hereford, for to notify and declare
in zour Name these Renunciacion and Cession at Westmynstre, to all the Stotes
and all the People that was there gadyrd because of the Sommons foresaid; the
which was done zesterday by these Lords zour Procuratours, and well herd and
understonden, these Renunciation and Cession were pleinelich and frelich
accepted, and fullich agreed by all the States and People foresaid. And over
this, Sire, at the instance of all these States and People there were certain
Articles of Defauts in zour Governance read there, and though well herd and
pleinelich understonden to all the States foresaid, hem thought hem so true and
so notoric and known, that by the Causes, and by mo other os thej said, and
having consideration to zour own Words in zour own Renunciacion and Cession,
that ze were not worthy, no sufficient ne able for to Govern for zour own
Demerites, os it is more pleinerlich contened therein, hem thought that wos
reasonable und cause for to Depose zowe, and her Commissaries that her made and
ordained, os it is of Record there declared and decreed, and adjudged zowe for
to be Deposed and Pryved, and in deed Deposed zowe and Pryved zowe of the
Astate of King, and of the Lordeship contened in the Renunciacion and Cession
foresaid, and of all the Dignity and Wyrsshipp, and of all the Administration
that longed thereto. And we Procuratours to all these States and People
foresaid, os we be charged by hem, and by her Auctorite gyffen us and in her
Name, zelde zowe uppe for all the States and People soresayd Homage Liege, and
Feaute and all Legeance and all other Bonds, Charges, and Services that long
thereto; And that non of all these States and People fro this time forward ne
bear zowe Feyth, ne do zowe Obeisance os to thar King. And he answered and
said, That he looked not thereafter; but he said, That after all this, he hoped
that is Cosyn would be good Lord to him.

And further to complete his Design, on the Rot. Claus. 1 Hen. IV. part 1. M.
37. Dors. Summons of Parliament.
30th of September, he, by Information of the Archbishop, That by the
Acceptance of the Renunciation of King Richard, his Cession and Deposition,
this Parliament was determined, issued in his own Name Writs to the Lords, and
for Elections of Members, Knights, Citizens, and Burgesses of the House of
Commons, to meet on Monday next following, being the Day of St. Faith; and all
this to be done, and Returns made in six Days time. So as these were the same
Members who had been Summoned by King Richard to meet on the morrow of St.
Michael, as appears beyond Contradiction from the Writs Append. n. 114.
for their Expenses, which were Dated on the 19th of November, the last Day of
the Parliament, and they were allowed their Expenses for Fifty one Days, besides
the time of coming to, and returning from Parliament; in which Fifty one Days
was included the 30th of September, and all the Days between that and St.
Faith's Day, the 6th of October, to make up the Number.

In this Parliament Rot. Parl. 1 Hen. 4 n. 1. Pronunciation du Parliament, or
Declaration of cause of Summons. The Cause of Summons.
Summoned and Holden at Westminster by King Henry IV. on Monday, the Day of St.
Faith, which was the 6th of October, in the first Year of his Reign, sitting on
his Royal Seat in the Great Hall at Westminster; in the Presence of him and all
the Lords Spiritual and Temporal, and Commons, and many Thomas de Arundel
Archbishop of Canterbury declared the Cause of Summons, and rehearsed how on
Tuesday last past, on the morrow of St. Michael, King Richard II. after the
Conquest, summoned his Parliament to be then holden, which Summons was of no
force or effect, by reason of the Acceptance of the Renunciation made by King
Richard, and the Deposing of him, as without doubt he had informed King Henry
before he issued his Writs for this Tuesday, Ibm. n. 2.
in Presence of King Henry, the Lords Spiritual, Temporal, and Commons, he
showed, that this Honorable Kingdom of England, being the most abounding Angle
with Riches, had been a long time Governed by Children and the Counsels of
young People, so as the Kingdom was in point of Perdition and great Desolation
and Mischief, mightily to be lamented, if it had not been that Almighty God of
his Great Grace and Mercy had sent Ibm. n. 3.
( Et sur ceo mesme Lercevesque prist pur son Theme le Parole de Machabeorum
primo in disent Incumbit nobis ordinare pro Regno.) And then the Archbishop
took for his Theme the Words in the first of Machabees, saying, Incumbit nobis
ordinare pro Regno, 1 Mac. Chap. 6. Verse. 57. They are the last Words of a very
long Verse, and nothing to his Purpose, nor what went before, or what The
Affairs of the Realm depend upon us. But to go on with his Harangue, Incumbit
nobis ordinare pro Regno ( cest a dire, etc.) That is to say, It is the King's
Will to be Counseled and Governed by the Honorable Sages and Discreet Persons
of his Kingdom, and by their Common Counsel and Assent, do the best for the
Government of himself and his Realm, not desiring to be Governed by his own
Will, voluntary Purpose, or singular Opinion, but by Common and mesme
Lercevesque dit outre) There was not such a Kingdom in the World, that could
live without the Assistance of other Kingdoms, so Honorably, so Graciously,
and so Fully ( si honourablement, ne graciousment, ne plentiousment) as might
the Honorable Kingdom of England, which God keep safe and maintain. Ib. n. 4.
And upon this he alleged certain Authority, saying, Quod inter omnia regna
hoc principatum tenet, Of all Kingdoms this is the chief; and showed, That to
the Government of every Kingdom, Three things especially were required, that is
to say, Justice, The Observation of the Laws, And, that every Person should
rule and govern himself according to his Estate, and Degree, alleging many
Causes for which this Kingdom ought to be graciously cherished and held in the
greatest by the help of God; and further said, That it was the King's Will in
especial, that Holy Church should have and enjoy all her Liberties and
Franchises; and that all the good Statutes and Ordinances made in the time of
his Noble Progenitors, should be firmly observed and kept, and that all the
Lords Spiritual and Temporal, Cities and Burghs, and all others, should have
and enjoy their Liberties and Franchises, according to the Grants made by his
Noble Progenitors abovesaid. And that no Man ought to speak of, or Censure any
thing done this Parliament, for it was the Will of the King in his Faith and
Conscience to do equal Justice to all Parts, according to the Will, Aid, and
Grace of God given unto him. This was the Archbishops Discourse upon his
Theme: Ib. n. 5.
And then he told the Lords and Commons, That on Monday next King Henry, by the
Grace of God, purposed to be Crowned at Westminster, for the Performance of
which Solemnity, Advice and Deliberation de continuer cest Parliament) until
Tuesday the Morrow after the Coronation, and after that day forward the King
would use his Diligence for the Exploit of Parliament, ( and que de celle jour
en avaunt mesme le Roy ferroit sa diligence pur lesploit de Parliament) that is,
for the Dispatch of Parliament Business. Whereupon, by the King's Command, Henry
Percy Earl of Northumberland and Constable of England, asked all the Lords
Spiritual and Temporal and Commons, if they agreed to the Continuance, who
severally Examined, ( queux ont severalment examinez) agreed to the said
Continuance.

After this follows the Names of the Triers of Petitions in Parliament, and the
whole Process against Richard the Second, tho Transacted on Michaelmass-Day and
the day following, a Week before this Parliament began, as has been shown.

And immediately the Rot. Parl. 1 Hen IV. n 66. The Parliament 21st of Rich. II.
annulled.
whole Parliament of the 21st of Richard the Second, with all Circumstances and
Dependences thereupon, were revoked and annulled for ever.

And the Parliament holden Ib. n. 67. The Parliament of the 11th of Richard II.
confirmed.
in the Eleventh year of King Richard the Second was revived and confirmed to
be kept according to the effect and purport of the same, as being for the good
and common profit of the Kingdom ( pur le bien and comune profit du Roialme.)

The Lords and others Ib. n. 68. The Lords and others Judged 21st of Rich. II.
restored, etc.
and their Heirs, etc. that were forejudged in the 21st of Richard the Second,
are restored to the same State and Condition they were in at the time of their
Judgments given.

Upon Ib. n. 71. Henry's Eldest Son made Prince of Wales, and Heir of the Crown.
the Motion of the Archbishop of Canterbury, the Lords and Commons having
severally been asked about the King's Eldest Son, answered and assented, That
Henry his Eldest Son should be made Prince of Wales, Duke of Cornwall, and Earl
of Chester, and also if his Father should dye, he being alive, they would
accept him as Right Heir of the Kingdom and Crown, and obey him as their King
and Liege.

On Thursday the 23d of October Append. n. 115.
the Archbishop of Canterbury, on behalf of the King, charged all the Lords
Spiritual and Temporal, and all others there, being upon their Allegiance, that
what should be then spoken or propounded should be kept secret, and no ways
discovered to any Man living; and then it was demanded by the Earl of
Northumberland, for the security of the King, and all the Estates of the
Kingdom, what should be done with King Richard to keep him in safeguard,
saving his Life, which the King would have done by all means. To which Question
all the Lords Spiritual and Temporal, whose Names do there See Appen. as above.
King Richard ordered to be imprisoned.
follow, being severally Examined, answered it seemed to them, he should be put
into safe and secure Guard, and in such a Place where there was no Concourse of
People, and that he be kept by sure and sufficient Persons, and that none that
had been Servant to him, should be about his Person, and this should be done in
the most secret manner that might be.

Upon propounding this Question, Thomas Merks Bishop of Carlisle, gave his
Reasons against these Proceedings in the following The Bishop of Carlisle's
Speech thereupon.
Speech, as it is to be found in the First Part of Sir John Hayward's P. 100,
101, 102, etc. The Speech.
Life of Henry the Fourth, Printed at London 1599.

This Question, Right Honorable Lords, concerns a Matter of great
Consequence and Weight; the determining whereof will assuredly procure, either
safe Quiet, or dangerous Disturbance, Richard be sufficiently Deposed, or no?
Secondly, whether King Henry be with good Judgment, or Justice, chosen in his
Place? For the first Point we are to Examine, Whether a King being lawfully and
fully instituted by any just Title, may upon imputation either of Negligence,
or of Tyranny, be Richard has omitted in the one, or committed in the other,
for which he should deserve so heavy Judgment? I will not speak what may be
done in a Popular State, or in a Consular, in which although one bears the
Name and Honor of a Prince, yet he has not Supreme Power of Majesty; but in
the one the People have the highest Empire, in the other the Nobility and Chief
Men of Estate, in neither the Prince. Of the first sort was the Lacedaemonians,
who after the Form of Government which Licurgus framed, oftentimes Fined,
oftentimes Fettered their Kings, and sometimes Condemned them to Death: Such
were also in Caesar's time, the Petty King's of every City in France, who were
many times Arraigned upon Life and Death, and (as Ambiorix Prince of Leodienses
confesses) had no greater Power over the People, then the People had over
them. Of the second Condition were the Roman Tranquil. in Caligula. Tacitus in
prooemio.
Emperors at the first, of whom some, namely, Nero and Maximinus were openly
condemned, others were suddenly surprised by Judgment and Authority of the
Senate; and such are now the Emperors of Germany, whom the other Princes by
their Aristocratical Power do not only restrain, but sometimes also remove from
their Imperial State; Such are also Denmark, and Swevelande, who are many
times by the Nobility dejected, either into Prison, or into Exile; Such
likewise are the Dukes of Venice, and of some other Free States in Italy; and
the chief Cause for which Jews Earl of Flaunders was lately expelled from his
Place, was for drawing to himself Cognizance in Matters of Life and Death,
which high Power never pertained to his Dignity.

In these and such like Governments, the Prince has not Judea and Isreal, and
is now in the Kingdoms of England, France, Spain, Scotland, Muscovia, Turkey,
Tartaria, Persia, Aethiopia, and almost all the Kingdoms of Asia and Africa;
although for his Vices he be unprofitable to the Subjects, yea hurtful,

it is a common saying, Thought is free; free indeed from Punishment of Secular
Laws, except by Word or Deed it break forth into Action; Yet the secret
Thoughts against the Sacred Majesty of a Prince, without attempt, without
endeavor, have been adjudged worthy of Death; and some who in Auricular
Confession have discovered their Treacherous Devices against the Person of
their Prince, have afterward been Executed for the Nebuchadnezzar King of
Assyria wasted all Palestine with Fire and Sword, oppugned Jerusalem a long
time, and at last expugned it, slew the King, burnt the Temple, took away the
Holy Vessels and Treasure, the rest he permitted to the Cruelty and Spoil of
his Unmerciful Soldiers, who defiled all Places with Rape and Slaughter, and
ruinated to the Ground that flourishing City. After all the glut of this Bloody
Butchery, the People which remained, he led Captive to Chaldea, and there
erected his Golden Image, and commanded, That they which refused to Worship it,
should be cast into a Fiery Furnace.

What Cruelty, what Injustice, what Impiety is comparable to this? And yet God
calls Nebuchadnezzar his Servant, and Jeremiah and Baruch, did write unto the
Jews, to pray Jerem: 25. 9. Ezceh. 29 18. Jerem. 29. 7. Baruch, 1. 11.
for the Life of him, and of Baltazzar his Son, that their days might be upon
Earth as the days of Heaven: And Ezechiel with bitter Terms abhors the
Disloyalty of Zedechia, because he revolted from Nebuchadnezzar, whose Homager
and Tributary he was. What shall we say of Saul? Did he not put all the Priests
to Execution, because one of them did Relieve David? Did he not violently
Persecute that his most Faithful Servant and Dutiful Son in Law? During which
Pursuit, he fell twice into the Power of David, who did not only spare, but
also Protect the King, and reproved the Pretorian Soldiers for their Negligent
Watch, and was touched in the Heart for cutting away the lap of his Garment;
and afterward caused the Messenger to be slain, who upon Request, and for
Pity, had So did Domitian put to death Epaphroditus, Nero's Libertine, because
he helped Nero (although in Love) to kill himself. So did Se^erus kill all the
Kill^rs of Pertinax his Pred^^^ss^r; and likewise. Vitellius did put to Death
all the Murderers of Galba. Theophilus Emperor of Graecia caused all those to
be s^ain, who had made his Father Emperor by killing Leo Armenius. And
Alexander the Great put to cruel Execution those that had s^ain Darius, his
Mighty and Mortal Enemy.
forward the voluntary Death of that Sacred King. As for the contrary Examples,
as that of Jehu, who slew Jehoram and Ahazia Kings of Israel and Juda, they
were done by express Oracle and Revelation from God, and are no more set down
Egyptians, or any other Particular and Privileged Commandment; but in the
general Precept, which all Men must ordinarily follow, not only our Actions,
but our Speeches also, and our very Thoughts are strictly charged with Duty and
Obedience unto Princes, whether they be Good or Evil: The Law of God ordains,
Deuteronomy. 17. 12. Psalm. 105. Exodus 22. 28. Act. 23. 5. Roman. 13. 1, 13. Titus 3.
1. 1 Pet. 2. 13, 14, 17. 2 Timothy 2. 2.
That he which does Presumptuously against the Ruler of the People shall dye:
And the Prophet David forbids, to touch Romans 13. 2. John 19. 11.
and Authority of Wicked Princes, is the Ordinance of God; Pilate, That the
Power which he had, was given him from above; and the Prophet Esaias calls
Cyrus, being a Profane and Heathen Prince, the Lord's Anointed. Esaias 45. 1.
For God stirs up the Spirit, even of Wicked Princes, to do his Will, and
(as Johosaphat said to his Rulers) they execute 2 Chronicles. 36. 22.
not the Judgment of Man, but of the Lord; in regard whereof David calls them
Gods, because they have their Rule and Psalm. 28.
Authority immediately from God; which if they abuse, they are not to be
adjudged by their Subjects, for no Power within their Dominion is superior to
theirs, but God reserveth them to the sorest Trial: Horribly and suddenly
(says the Wiseman) Sap. 6.
shall the Lord appear unto them, and a hard Judgment shall they have.

The Law of God commands, That the Child should be put to Death for any
contumely done unto the Parents: But what if the Father be a Robber? If a
Murderer? If for all excess of Villainies, odious and execrable both to God and
Man? Surely he deserves the highest degree of Punishment, and yet must not the
Son lift up his Hand against him, for no Offense is so great as to be punished
with Parricide; but our Country is dearer unto us then our Parents, and the
Prince is Pater Patriae, the Father of our Country, and therefore more Quintil.
in declam. offic. lib. 1.
sacred and dear to us then our Parents by Nature, and must not be violated,
how Imperious, how Impious soever he be: Does he Command or Demand, our Persons
or our Purses, we must not shun for the one, nor shrink for the other; for (as
Nehem. 9. 37.
Nehemiah says) Kings have Dominion over the Bodies, and over the Cattle of
their Subjects, at their Pleasure. Does he enjoin those Actions which are
contrary to the Laws of God? we must neither wholly obey, nor violently resist,
but with a Alphons^ a Castro in lib. de haeresi, in Verb Tyrannus. Dom. S^to.
lib. 5. de just and jure.
hold that a Prince may be Slain or Deposed by his Subjects for any Disorder or
Default, either in Life, or else in Government, there will be Faults so long as
there are Men; and as we endure with Patience a Barren year, if it happen, and
unseasonable Weather, and such other Defects of Nature, so must

But, alas, good King Richard! what such Cruelty? What such Impiety has he
ever committed? Examine rightly those Imputations which are laid against him,
without any false Circumstance of Aggravation, and you shall find nothing
objected either of any Truth, or of great Moment. It may be that many Errors
and Oversights have escaped him, yet none

But let it be, that without Authority in us, or Desert in him, King Richard
must be Deposed, yet what Right had the Duke of Lancaster to the Crown? Or,
what Reason have we without his Right to give it to him? If he make Title as
Heir unto King Richard, then must he yet stay until King Richard's Death, for
no Man can succeed as Heir to one that Lives. But it is well known to all Men,
who are not either wilfully Blind, or grossly Ignorant, that there are some now
alive, lineally descended from Lionel Duke of Clarence, whose Offspring was by
Judgment of the High Court of Parliament holden the Eighth year of the Reign of
King Richard, declared next Successor to Richard should die without Issue.
Concerning the Title from Edmund Crouchbacke, I will pass it over, seeing the
Authors thereof are become ashamed of so absurd Abuse, both of their own
Knowledge and our Credulity, and therefore all the Claim is now made by Right
of Conquest, by the Cession and Grant of King Richard, and by the general
Consent of all the People. It is a bad Wool that can take no color; but what
Conquest can a Subject pretend against his Sovereign, Richard made, being a
pent Prisoner for the same Cause, it is an Act exacted by force; and therefore
of no force or validity to bind him; and seeing that by the Laws of this Land,
the King alone cannot alienate the ancient Jewels and Ornaments pertaining to
the Crown, surely he cannot give away the Crown it self, and therewithal the
Kingdom.

Neither have we any Custom that the People at Pleasure Scilla by Terror of
his Legions, obtain the Law of Velleia to be made, whereby he was created
Dictator for Fourscore years; and by like Impression Caesar caused the Law of
Servia to be promulged, by which he was made Perpetual Dictator; but both these
Laws were afterward adjudged void. As for the Deposing King Edward the Second,
it is no more to be urged, than the Poisoning of King John, or the Murdering of
any good and Lawful Prince; We must live according to Laws, and not to
Examples, and yet the Kingdom was not then taken from the Lawful Successor: But
if we look back to Times lately past, we shall find that Stephen, then they are
in the Duke of Lancaster; for King Henry the First being at large Liberty,
neither restrained in Body, nor constrained in Mind, had appointed him to
succeed; (as it was upon good Credit certainly affirmed) the People assented to
this Designment, and thereupon without Fear and without Force, he was Anointed
King, and obtained full Possession of the Realm: Yet Henry (Son of the Earl of
Anjowe) having a nearer Right by his Mother Stephen, that there was no end of
spoiling the Goods and spilling the Blood of the unhappy People, besides the
ruins and deformities of many Cities and Holds, until his Lawful Inheritance
was to him assured. It terrifieth me to remember how many Flourishing Empires
and Kingdoms have been, by means of such Contentions, either torn in pieces
with Intestine Division, or subdued to Foreign Princes, under Pretense of
Assistance and Aid; and I need not repeat how sore this Realm has heretofore
been shaken with these several Mischiefs; and yet neither the Examples of other
Countries, nor the Miseries of our own, are sufficient to make us to beware.

O Englishmen! worse bewitched than the foolish Galathians!

Certainly I fear that the same will happen unto us, which Aesop fableth to
have been fallen unto the Frogs, who being desirous to have a King, a Beam was
given unto them: The first Fall whereof did put them in some fear; but when
they saw it lie still in the Stream, they insulted thereon with great Contempt,
and desired a King of quicker Courage; and then was sent unto them a Stork,
which stalking among them with stately Steps continually devoured them. The
Mildness of King Richard has bred in us this Scorn, interpreting it to be
Cowardice and Dullness of Nature. The Next Heir is likewise rejected. Richard,
or to Elect Duke Henry in his Place; That King Richard remains still our
Sovereign Prince, and therefore it is not lawful for us to give Judgment upon
him: That the Duke whom you call King, has more offended against the King and
the Realm, than the King has done either against him or us; for being Banished
the Realm for Ten Years by the King and his Council (amongst

disposed of Richard II. and done for Henry what he could desire, the Commons
petitioned, That all such as came into the Kingdom with him, or came to him
afterward, and acted with him and against King Richard, might not be impeached,
grieved, or vexed, but pardoned.

The King's Answer was Roi. Parl. 1 H n. IV. n. 139. The Confederates and
Followrs of Henry IV. pardoned.
(le Roy voet fair pardon en manners come fust fait l'an primere le Roy Edward
teirce) The King wills to give such a Pardon as was made or given in the
first Year of Edward III. for which see Statutes at Large, 1 Edw. III. Cap. 1.
and 1 Hen. IV. Cap. 2. where are both Pardons in the same Words, only what
ought to be altered as to Names and Circumstances, was altered.

The Deposed King, after the Sentence of his remaining in secure K. Richard
sent to Leeds-Castle, and from thence to Pontfract.
Leeds in Kent, and from thence to Pontfract-Castle in Yorkshire. The King of
France, whose Daughter he had Married, prepared a great Fleet, and raised an
Army, to invade England, and destroy him and the Church of England, also the
People of the Kingdom by Sea and Land, as it is said by King Henry in his Writ
Append. n. 116. King of France prepares to relieve K. Richard.
to the Archbishop of Canterbury, to cause all the Ecclesiastics of his
Province to Arm and Array what Men they could January 17. in the first of his
Reign. After this, and before the 29th of the same Month, the King of France
had notice of King Richard's Death. Append. n. 117. His Death changes his Mind.
How K. Richard was Murdered not certain.
Upon which Day he confirmed the Truce he had made with him in the Year 1396.
for 28 Years.

How this unfortunate Prince died, was killed, or murdered, it is uncertain:
Many say he had Meat set before him, but not being

Walsingham Histor. f. 363. n. 50.
says, he voluntarily starved himself, and died on St. Valentin's Day, or the
14th of February, in Pontfract-Castle; which agrees not with the Date of the
King of France's Instrument, as above, unless it might be given out he was dead
before he really was so.

Hollinshed Chronic. f. 517. col. 1.
tell us, That one Writer (but names him not) that pretends to know more of
King Richard's Death than others, King Henry sitting at Dinner, fetched a great
Sigh, and spoke these Words: Have I no faithful Friend that will deliver me of
him, whose Life will be Destruction to me, and Disturbance to the Kingdom! Upon
which Speech, one Sir Pierce de Extone presently left the Court, and went with
Eight Men all Armed to Pontfract-Castle, entered the Chamber where King Richard
was Prisoner, and beat out his Brains.

Mr. Camden in his Britania, F. 567.
speaking of Pontfract-Castle, Hic Richardus Secundus Rex Angliae, quem
Henricus Regno spoliavit, fame, frigore, and in auditis tormentis scelerate
sublatus est. Here Richard II. from whom Henry IV. took or robbed him of the
Kingdom, with Hunger, Cold, and unheard of Torments, was wickedly killed.

Froysert, who was then Writing his Chronicle, Vol. 2 c. 249. f. 319. f. col. 1.
says, he could not tell by what means King Richard died.

The Parliament N. 9.
Roll, in the first of Edward IV. speaks thus Henry IV. taking upon him
Vsurpously the Crown and Name of King of England, and Lord of Ireland, and not
therewith Satisfied or Content, but more grievous Things attempting, Wickedly
of Unnatural, Unmanly, and Cruel Tyranny, the same King Richard Anointed,
Crowned, and Consecrated, and his Liege and most High Lord in the Earth,
against God's Law, Man's Allegiance, and Oath of Fidelity, with uttmost
Punition attormenting, murdered and destroyed with most vile, heinous, and
lamentable Death.

Church Affairs.
AS in the last Reign, so in this, the Pope practiced his Encroachments upon
the Church and State. In the First Parliament King, the Rot. Parl. 1 Ric. II. n.
77.
Commons Petition, That whereas in the Treaty between King Edward and the Pope,
he granted to abstain from all manner of Provisions, by way of Reservation of
Benefices, especially of such Dignities as were Elective; yet the Court of Rome
had no regard to the King's Messengers sent thither about this matter; and the
Pope continued his Practice, contrary to the Treaty, Grant, and Accord with
King Edward, to the great Prejudice of the King and his Subjects, whereof they
pray Remedy.

What Remedy they had, I find not; but next Year against certain Rebel Ib. 2
Ric. II. n. 78.
Cardinals, there was an Act passed, That Urban was duly Chosen Pope, and that
he was True Pope, and as so, and Head of Holy Church, ought to be Accepted and
Obeyed: And to this all the Prelates, Lords, and Commons Agreed.

The next Year the People Stat. at Large, 3 Ric. II. c. 3.
Complained and Petitioned, showing, That Cathedral and Collegiate Churches,
Abbeys, and England, but only of the King's Subjects, without his special
License by Advice of his Council; nor send out of the Kingdom any Gold, Silver,
or other Treasure or Commodity, by Bill of Exchange, Merchandise, or any other
manner; And those that did the contrary, to incur the Pain and Punishment
contained in the Statute of Provisors.

This Prohibition, upon Complaint and Petition of the Commons, Assent of the
King and Lords Temporal, proved ineffectual for the End intended, and therefore
it was reinforced: And it was agreed by the King in his 7th Year, the Lords
Temporal and Commons, that the same Ib 7 Ric. II. c. 12 and Roi. Pa^l. 7 Ric.
n. II. 49.
Statutes shall keep his Force and Effects in all Points; and that all Aliens
that have purchased or shall purchase any Benefice, Dignity, or Thing of Holy
Church, and in his Proper Person take Possession of the same, or use it himself
within the Kingdom to his own Benefit, or of any other without special License
of the King, shall be comprised in the same Statute.

But this Reinforcement had not its due Effect; Ibm. 12 Ric. II. c. 15.
and therefore it was Ordained and Assented, That no Liege-man of the King, of
what Estate or Condition that he be, great or little, should pass over the Sea,
or send out of the Realm of England, without special Leave of the King himself,
to provide or purchase for himself Benefice of Holy Church, with Cure or
without Cure: And if any do, and by virtue of such Provision, accept by him or
any other, any Benefice of the same Kingdom, that at that time the same
Provisor shall be out of the King's Protection, and the same Benefice void; so
that it should be lawful to the Patron, as well Spiritual as Temporal, to
present to the same an able Clerc at his Pleasure.

Nor could this hinder Provisions, Gifts, and Sale of Benefices of all sorts by
the Pope; for in the Ibm. 2d Statute made 13 Ric. II. c. 2. and Rot. Parl. n.
32.
next Year, the Commons require the King the Statute of Provisors, made in the
25th of Edward I. might be recited in Parliament; and then it was Ordained and
Established, That if any make Acceptance of any Benefice of Holy Church,
contrary to that Statute, and duly proved, and be beyond Sea, he should abide
Exiled and Banished out of the Realm for ever, and his Lands and Tenements,
Goods and Chattels forfeit to the King: And if he be within the Kingdom, he
should be also Exiled and Banished, and incur the same Forfeiture, and avoid
the Realm within six Weeks next after such Acceptance. And if any one receive
such Person after that six Weeks, he shall be Banished, and incur the same
Forfeiture.

And it was then also Ib. c. 3. and Rot. Parl. n. 44.
Ordained and Established, That if any Man brought or sent within the Kingdom
or the King's Power, any Summons, Sentence, or Excommunication against any
Person, cause of making Motion, Assent, or Execution of the Statute of
Provisors (as above) he should be Taken, Arrested, and put in Prison, and
forfeit all his Lands and Tenements, Goods and Chattels for ever; and moreover
incur the Pain of Life and Member. And if any Prelate make Execution of such
Summons, Sentences, or Excommunications, That his Temporalties be taken and
abide in the King's hands, till due Redress and Correction be thereof made: And
if any Person of Estate than a Prelate, of what Condition that he be, make such
Execution, he should be Taken, Arrested, and put in Prison, and make Fine and
Ransom by Discretion of the King's Council.

Notwithstanding this Care, and these Laws made against the Pope's Practices in
this Kingdom, Ibm. 16. Ric. II. c. 5. and Rot. Parl. n. 20.
the Commons in the Parliament, in the 16th of this King, showed unto him,
grievously Complaining, That forasmuch as he and all his Liege People ought of
Sue in the King's Court to recover their Presentiments to Churches, Prebends,
and other Benefices of Holy Church, to which they have Right to Present, the
Conisance of Plea of which Presentment belongs only to the King's Court, of
the old Right of his Crown used in the time of his Progenitors Kings of
England; and when Judgment was given in the same Court upon such a Plea and
Presentment, the Archbishops, Bishops, and other Spiritual Persons which had
Institution of such Benefices within their Jurisdictions, were bound and had
made Execution of such Judgments by the King's Commands all the time aforesaid
without interruption; for no Lay Person could make such Execution; and also
were bound of Right to make Execution of many other of the King's Commands, of
which Right the Crown of England has been peaceably seized Processes have been
made by the Bishops of Rome, and Censures of Excommunication upon certain
Bishops of England, because they had made Execution of such Commands, to the
open Disherison of the Crown, and Destruction of the King, his Laws, and all
his Kingdom, if Remedy be not provided. Ibm.
They further Complain of the Pope's Translation of Bishops from Bishopric to
Bishopric, and sending some out of the Kingdom who were fit to be of the
King's Council, and able Advice without his Assent and against his Will. Ibm.
So that the Crown of England which has been so free at all times, That it
has been in Subjection to no So the Words in the Parlement-Roll, 16 Ric. II.
n. 20.
Earhtly Sovereign, but immediately Subject to God and to none other, in all
things touching the Regaly, or Royalty of the Crown, should be submitted to the
Bishop of Rome, and the Laws and Statutes of this Realm by him defeated and
destroyed at his Will, in perpetual Destruction of the King, his Crown, and
Regaly, and all his Realm, which God forbid. Wherefore they Ibm.
declare, That they and all the Liege Commons of the Kingdom, would be with the
King his Crown and Regaly in the Cases aforesaid, and in all other Cases
attempted against him, his Crown and Regaly in all Points to live and die. Ibm.
And further they pray the King, and him require by way of Justice, That he
would ask all the Lords in Parliament, as well Spiritual as Temporal severally,
and all the States of Parliament, What they thought of the Cases aforesaid?
Whereupon the Lords Temporal so asked, answered every one by himself, That the
Cases aforesaid were clearly in Derogation of the King's Crown, and of his
Regaly, as it was well known, and had been a long time known, and that they
would be with the Crown and Regaly in these Cases especially, and in all others
which shall be attempted against them in all Points, with all their Power. The
Answer of the Lords Spiritual to the King's Demands, much to the purpose of
that of the Lords Temporal, will best appear from the Archbishop's
Protestation (so called) upon the Parlement-Roll, as it is transcribed Appendix,
n. 118. and there translated.

After which Answers given, Ibm.
the King, by Assent of the Lords Spiritual and Temporal, at the Prayer of the
Commons, Qrdained and Established, That if any Purchase or Pursue, or cause to
be Purchased or Pursued in the Court of Rome or elsewhere, any such
Translations, Processes, and Sentences of Excommunications, Bulls, Instruments,
or any other things which touch the King, against him, his Crown, Regaly, or
Kingdom, as is aforesaid; they that bring them within the Realm, or receive
them, or make thereof Notification, or any other Execution within the Kingdom,
or without, they, their Notaries, Procurators, Maintainers, Abetters, Fautors,
and Counselors, shall be put out of the King's Protection, their Lands and
Tenements, Goods and Chattels forfeited, and also attached by their Bodies, if
to be found, and brought before the King and his Council, there to answer; or
that Process be made against them by Praemunire facias, io manner as it is
Ordained in other Statutes of Provisors. After this, there is nothing further
that I have seen about these Controversies, the Pope being quiet all his Reign;
yet I shall take notice of some things done by the King relating to these
Affairs, which were omitted in their due Place.

He caused James Dardain Rot. Claus. 12 Ric. II. M 39. Dors.
the Pope's Collector in England, Faithful to him and his Crown; That he would
not do, permit, or procure to be done any thing Prejudicial to him, his
Kingdom, Laws, and Rights; And that he would not put in Execution any Papal
Letters or Mandates, or permit them to be put in Execution, that were
Prejudicial to the King, his Regaly or Royalty, Laws or Rights, or to his
Kingdom; That he would not receive or publish any of the Pope's Letters, but
such King's Council as soon as he could; That he would not send any Money or
Plate out of the Kingdom, unless he had special License from the King or his
Council; nor that he would introduce any Novelties by or without Command,
without the King's License; And that he would keep the King's Laws and Rights
without violation. This Oath was taken August 27. in the 12th of Richard II.
before his Council, as appears by the Record it self.

Then he wrote to Ib. 13 Ric. II. part 1. M. 17. De decimis Papae non solvendis.
William Archbishop of Canterbury, That he could not but know that he was
bound by Oath, for the Conservation of the Rights and Customs of the Kingdom,
and for the Indemnity and Right Government of his People; and also that no
Impositions upon the People could be made or levied any ways whatsoever,
without Common Counsel or Consent of the Kingdom. And further, That he had been
Petitioned by the Commons lately assembled in Parliament at Westminster, Pope's
Bulls to levy such Impositions or create such Novelties not formerly used,
which might bring Damage to him or his Kingdom, nor should publish such
Impositions and Novelties, or collect or levy them, should be adjudged and
suffer as a Traitor to him and his Kingdom. And it was granted by him, with
Assent of the Pope, which by his Authority, or the Authority of his Suffragans
by his Command, was to be levied without Common Advice and Assent of the
Kingdom, which he might not suffer to be done, saving his said Oath: And then
Commanded, by the Faith in which he was Westminster, the 10th Day of October.

The like Writ and of the same Date Ibm.
was directed to the Archbishop of York, and all the other Bishops of England,
as also to the Guardians of the Spiritualities of the vacant Bishoprics; and
several Collectors of this Imposition.

The like Writ was likewise directed to James Dardain, then the Pope's Nuncio;
Rex Ibm.
Jacobo Dardain Nuncio Domini summi Pontificis in Anglia, etc. to desist in
exacting of this Imposition, sub forisfactura Vitae and Membrorum, under the
Forfeiture of Life and Members, and all things he could forfeit. Witness as
before.

This Imposition was the Payment of a Tenth by the Clergy to the Pope, by him
laid upon them, as appears by the Todding or Title of the Record, De Decimis
Papae non solvendis, Concerning Tenths not to be paid to the Pope. In the 14th
of his Reign, Ibm. 14 Ric. II. M. 13. Dots. De Proclamatione.
he caused Proclamation to be made through England, to call from Rome, under
forfeiture of England by the Feast of St. Martin November) at furthest: And
that no Man, of what State or Condition soever he was, should bring any Pope's
Bulls, Processes, or Instruments for the Adnulling or Vacating of any the
Statutes, Laws, or Customs aforesaid, or obey them, or put them in Execution
under the Forfeiture aforesaid. Witness the King at Westminster the 3d Day of
May.

By the King Himself and Council.



This Proclamation Ibm.
was directed to the Sheriff of Kent, and all other Sheriffs of England; to his
Uncle John Duke of Lancaster, or his Chancellor in that Dukedom; and to John
Stanley his Justiciary in Ireland, or his Lieutenant; and also his Justiciary
of Chester, or his Lieutenant.

The Statutes the Persons recalled by this Proclamation, went to Rome to have
made void by the Pope, were the Statute of Provisors last made; the Statute of
Quare impedit, and Praemunire facias, others like to them, which the Pope said
were against and injurious to Ecclesiastic Liberty. For the particular Account
whereof, see Walsingham's History, Fol. 344. n. 40, 55. and Fol. 345. n. 10. A.
D. 1391. 14 Ric. II.

In the 20th Year Ibm. 20 Ric. II. M. 3. Dors.
of his Reign, on the 19th of September, he caused Lewis Bishop of Vultura in
Apulia, the Pope's Collector, to take the same Oath before himself in Chancery
which James Dardain had taken in the 12th of his Reign before his Council.

John Wyclif and his Followers.
THE Opinions of John Wyclif prevailed very much in the University of Oxford,
and not a few Learned Men maintained William de Berton, Speim. Council. Vol. 2.
f. 267.
Chancellor of the University, calling together many Doctors of Divinity, and
many Professors of, and Skilful in the Canon Law, they Judged upon Examination
of those Opinions, That they were Erroneous, Repugnant to the Determinations of
the Church, and Contradictory to Catholic Verity; and therefore forbade every
one, of what Degree or Condition soever, under the pain

Upon the further spreading of these Opinions, amongst the Great Men and
Populacy, Ibm. f. 629, 630, 631.
William Courtney Archbishop of Canterbury, and Seven other Bishops of this
Province, Fourteen Doctors of Canon and Civil Law, Seventeen Masters of
Divinity, and Six Baccalaurs of Divinity, on the 17th of May, 1382. met in a
Chamber of the Frier-Preachers in London, where having considered unanimously,
on the 27th of the same Month, Declared and Decreed some of them Heretical,
others Erroneous, and contrary to the Determinations of the Church.

The Heretical Opinions were these:
That the material Substance of Bread and Wine, remained after Consecration
Also, That the Accidents do not remain with a Subject after Consecration in the
same Sacrament. Also, That Christ is not in the Sacrament of the Altar,
Identically, Truly, and Really in his proper Corporeal Presence. Also, That if
a Bishop or Priest be guilty of mortal Sin, he can neither Ordain, Consecrate,
or Baptize. Also, That if a Man were duly Contrite, all external Confession was
Also, Pertinaciously to assert that Christ Ordained Mass, had no
Gospel-Foundation. Also, That God ought to Obey the Devil. Also, If the Pope be
an ill Man, and by consequence a Member of the Devil, he has no Power over the
Faithful of Christ given him by any one, unless perhaps by Caesar. Also, That
after Urban VI. no Man is to be received as Pope, but Graecians under our own
Laws. Also, To assert, That it is against Holy Scripture, that Ecclesiastics
should have Temporal Possessions.
The Pernicious Erroneous Conclusions were these:
That no Prelate ought to Excommunicate any one, unless he first knew he was
Excommunicated by God. Also, That any one who did so Excommunicate, became
thereby an Heretic, and Excommunicate himself. Also, A Prelate Excommunicating
a Clerc, who Appealed to the Also, They that leave off Preaching or Hearing the
Word of God, or Gospel Preached, for the Excommunication of Men, are
Excommunicated, and shall be had for Traitors to God in the Day of Judgment.
Also, To assert that it is lawful for any one, though a Deacon or Priest, to
Preach the Word of God, without Papal or Episcopal Authority, or Also, To
assert that none is a Civil Lord, none is a Bishop, none is a Prelate, while he
is guilty of Mortal Sin. Also, That Temporal Lords may at their Pleasure take
away Temporal Goods from Ecclesiastics, being habitual Delinquents, or that the
Populacy, when they will, may correct Delinquent Lords. Also, That Tithes are
pure Alms, and that the Parishioners for the Sins of their Curates may detain
them, and as they please give them to Also, That particular Prayers applied to
one Person, by Prelates or Religious, are no more Benefit to that Person, than
general Prayers are to him, caeteris paribus, all other things being equal.
Also, In that very thing, that any one takes upon him whatsoever private
Religion, he is made more unfit and unable to observe God's Commandments. Also,
Saints instituting whatever private Religions, as well those Also, That
Religious, living in Private Religions, are not Christians. Also, That Friars
are bound to get their Food by the Labor of their Hands, and not by Begging.
Also, He that gives Alms to Friars, or to a Frier-Preacher, is Excommunicate,
and he that receives it.
On the 20th Day of June, Ibm. f. 631, 632.
in the same Year and Place, Nicholas Hereford, Philip Rapy^gdon a Canon
Regular, both Professors of Divinity, and John Ayshton Master in Arts, and
Scholar in Divinity, the Chief Followers of VVyclif, appeared Personally before
the Archbishop, the Doctors, and others. When Nicholas and Philip were
commanded to answer, and to speak fully and plainly what they thought of the
Conclusions intended to be Humble and Faithful Sons of the Church, and of Holy
Scripture, and obey in all things the Determinations of the Church; and if they
should commit any Error against this Intention in Word or Deed, they submitted
themselves to the Correction of the Archbishop, and all others to whom it
belonged to Correct them. This Protestation premised, they Answer, That the
Substance of material Bread and Wine remains in the Sacrament of the Altar
after Consecration; Ad sensum contrarium isti Decretali, Firmiter Credimus,
Concedimus, quod est Haeresis. To the contrary Sense of the Decree, we firmly
believe (that is a Decree that began with those Words, Firmiter Credimus) We
grant it is Heresy.

To the Second Conclusion, That the Accidents do not remain Ad sensum
contrarium isti Decretali, Cum Marthe a Decree in the Decretals that began with
those Words) Concedimus quod est Haeresis. To the contrary Sense of that
Decretal, Cum Marthe, We grant it Heresy.

To the Third Conclusion, Quod Christus non sit in eodem Sacramento, identice,
vere, and realiter in propria praesentia corporali; That Christ was not in the
same Sacrament Identically, Truly, and Licet ista conclusio sit ad verba
incomposita and intelligibilia, tamen ad sensum contrarium illi Decretali in
Clementinis, Si Dominum (a Decretal that began with those two Words) Concedimus
quod est Haeresis. Although that Conclusion consists of uncouth and
unintelligible Words, yet to the contrary Sense of that Decretal in the
Clementines (Si Dominum) We grant it Heresy. And briefly, as to the whole
Matter of the Sacrament of the Altar, and every other, Agree with the Holy
Scripture, the Determinations of the Church, and Opinions of the Holy Doctors.

The Fourth and Fifth Conclusions they plainly granted to be Heresies.

To the Sixth, That God ought to Obey the Devil, they answer, Ad hunc sensum,
quod Deus in propria Persona vel Essentia debet obedire Diabolo obedientia
necessitatis, concedimus est Haeresis; According We grant it is Heresy. And
thus Evasively and Sophistically they Answered to most of the Conclusions or
Opinions, both Heretical, as they are termed, and Erroneous.

Their Answers pleased not the Archbishop and his Assessors; they desired them
more express. They said they then knew not how Answer to the Three First,
because they answered in Writing, and would Answer no otherwise.

To the Sense and Text of the Sixth Conclusion, because they had not answered
fully and expressly, they were asked, Whether God ought any Mode or Manner of
Obedience to the Devil; Interrogati an Deus debeat aliquem modum Obedientia
Diaboli, respondetur quod sic. They answered, Yea; to wit, the Obedience of
Charity; scilicet Obedientiam Charitatis; because he loved him, and punished
Quia diliget eum and punit eum ut debet. And to prove that God ought thus to
Obey the Devil, they offered themselves against any Man, under pain of being
burnt; Obtulerunt se sub poena incendii ad quemcunque.

After these first and second Answers, the Archbishop asked all the Doctors,
what they thought of them, who said one by one, That the answers to the first,
second, third, and sixth Conclusions, were insufficient, heretical, and
deceitful, and to the others erroneous and perverse.

Whereupon the Archbishop again admonished them to answer fully, plainly, and
expressly, without subtle, sophistical, or logic words, and gave them eight
days time to do it, but they refused to do it; Ashton answered more
impertinently, and nothing to the purpose, as if he understood not what was
demanded of, or said to him.

The first we hear of them further is from the King's Append. n. 119.
Writ, dated July 13. in the Sixth of his Reign, which was July next following,
in which and in several others about this Matter, the King takes upon him the
Title of Defender of the Faith, before the Pope's pretended gift of that Title
to Henry the Eighth. This Writ was directed to the Chancellor and Proctors of
the University of Oxford, to inquire after all such of whatever Profession, or
Degree, or others within the Limits and Jurisdiction of the University, that
favored or believed any Heresies or Errors, and especially such as had been
condemned by William Archbishop of Canterbury, and his Assessors, or that
believed, held, or defended any of those Heresies, Errors, or the like, or that
received John VVyclif, Nicholas Herford, Philip Reppydon, or John Ashton, or
any one noted of the same Heresies or Errors, into their Houses, or conversed
with them, or defended, and show them favor. And if they found any such, to
banish and expel them the University and Town of Oxford, within seven days
after they knew any of them, until before the Archbishop of Canterbury for the
time being, by manifest Purgation, or denial of their Opinions, they show their
Innocence; and they were further to search the Colleges and Halls for Books
Composed by John VVyclif, and Nicholas Herford, and to do all this upon the
Faith and Ligeance they were bound to the King. and under forfeiture of the
Liberties and Privileges of the University, and what else they might or could
forfeit; With Command to the Sheriff of the County, and Major of Oxford, and
all other Sheriffs, Majors, Bailiffs, Officers, and other his Subjects, to obey
and assist them in the Execution of the Premises.

Mr. Wood in his History and Antiquities of Oxford, Lib. 1. fol. 192. col. 2.
tells us, That John Ashton made his Recantation and Confession before the
Archbishop of Canterbury on the 19th of July following in Latin and English,
whereupon, by his Letters, he was restored to his University Exercises and
Reading in the Schools, which he performed without the least touch of Heresy.

Henry de Knighton Reports Col. 2655* 2656.
the Recantations and Confessions of Nicholas Herford, and others, and of John
Ashton, in the English of those times.

In the Name of God, Amen. Wytes all christian men that we Nichol of Herford,
and my fellow Pristus, unworthy in presence of our gostely fader the
Erchebishop of Canturbery the nyngtende day Juny, eer of grace a thousand three
undred fourscore and two, in the house of the Freres prechoures at London, when
we weren required to said what we felyde of diverse conclusions we maden this
Protestation and it we maken, That our intent was and is to be true sons and
meke of holy Church and if happy as God schilde that we erren agaynes this
intent in wordus or in workus, we submytte us mekelyche to the correction of
our forsayde fadur the Erchebishop of Canturbery, and of all other to whom it
longyth to Marye, and that sufferide death on the cross for man kind, and that
lay in the sepulcre, and that ros fro death to lyve the thridde day,

In the Name of God, Amen. Y John Aston, Prist, unworthely required of my Lord
the Erchebishop of Canturbery the nyntene day of June in the er of grace, etc.
ut supra, in the house, etc. to say what I felyde in the matyr of the Sacrament
of the autere. Y have knowlechyde and it I do that the self bred that the
Prist holds in his hondes is made thorou the virtue Marye, and takun and
suffrede death on the Cross, and three days lay in the sepulcre, and the thridde
day ros from death to the lyve, and steyed up into Heven, and syttes on the
right hond of God, and in the day of dome schal come to dome the quikke and the
ded, and over this I beleve generally all that holy writ determynet in word
and in understonding, or what ever holy Kirk of God determynes in this matyr I
beleve and of this matyr or of any other touching the right beleve of holy
Kirk, that is nout expresside in holy writ, I beleve as our modur holy Kirk
beleves, and in this belyve I will dye, and of this thing I beseke all men and
all wymmen to whom this confession come to, to bear me witness before the
highest juge at the day of dome.

As Wyclifs Followers increased very much, their Opinions multiplied, different
Opinions one from another. Col. 2657. n. 60. 2658, 2659, 2660, 2661.
The same Author notes above Sixty he heard preached at Le^^este^, different
from, or over and above what were first published by Doctor Wyclif.

And further this Author Reports, Col. 2706. n. 60. 2707, 2708.
That the number of the Lollards mightily increasing, they also taught many new
and very strange Opinions, Twenty five he notes, whereof several not taught
before, amongst which, with some others, the Sixteenth is Quakers about
Swearing. Quod non licet aliquo modo jurare; it is not lawful to swear in any
manner, and when they witnessed any thing, these were their Words, I am sykyr
it is soth, I am sure it is Truth; Or thus, Without doubt it is so.

All I find further of the Wyclyfists or Lollards in this Reign, are chiefly
several Writs or Commissions upon the Archbishop's Petition granted to him,
and his Suffragans and others, to imprison the Preachers and Dispersers of
Errors and Heresies, Pat. 9. Ric. II. M. 12.* Also a Commission to certain
Persons to search for, and seize Books containing Heresy, etc. and bring them
before the Council, and make Proclamation, That none should buy or sell them
under Pain of Imprisonment, and to arrest and imprison all such as complied not
with the Proclamation, Pat. 11. Ric. II. M. 20. There were many in the City of
London about this time, that frequented Conventicles in Private Places, where
the Opinions and Conclusions of VVyclif and his Followers were King sends his
Writ to the Major and Sheriffs of London, to make Proclamation from time to
time within the City and Liberties, That no one of whatever State, Degree, Sex,
or Condition they might be, should presume to make any such Conventicles or
Meetings under pain of forfeiting, whatever they could forfeit, and
impris^nment of their Bodies, during the King's Pleasure. Claus. 15. Ric. II.
M. 18. Dors. in all these Writs and Commissions, King Richard took upon himself
the Title of Defender of the Faith, in these Words, as an Introduction to what
he would do against Errors and Heresies, (Nos zelo fidei Catholicae, cujus
sumus and esse volumus Defensores) We for the Zeal of the Catholic Faith, of
which we are, and will be Defenders. I shall mention one Record more of a
Memorandum of an unusual Oath taken by some of this sort of Men, when they
relinquished what they had defended and taught, and returned to the Practices,
Opinions, and Vsages of the then Church.

Be it remembered, Clause 19 Rich. II. M. 1^.
that on the First day of September, in year of the Reign of King Richard the
Second after the Conquest the 19th, William Dynett, Nicholas Taylour, Nicholas
Poucher, and William Stey^our of Nottingham, personally appearing in Chancery,
every one by himself took an Oath in the Form following:

I William Dynett before yhowe Worschipfull Fader and Lord Archbishop of
^borke, and yhour Clergy, with my free will and full avysede swear to God and
to all his Seyntes upon this holy Gospelle, that fro this day forthward I shall
worship images with preyng and offering unto hem in the worshipp of Seintes
that they be made after. And also I shall never more despise pygremage ne
states of Holy Church in no degree. And also I shall be buxum to the Laws of
Holy Church, and Lollards ne swych conclusions and techynges that men clepeth
Lollards Doctrine. Ne I shall her books ne swych books, ne hem or any suspect
or diffamede of Lollardery resceyve ne company withal wittingly or defend in
tho Matters: And if I know any swych,

Et ex habundanti idem Willielmus Dynett eodem die voluit and recognovit quod
omnia bona and catalla sua mobilia nobis sunt forisfacta in casu quo ipse
juramentum predictum, seu aliqua in eodem juramento contenta de caetero
contravenerat ullo modo.
And moreover the same William Dynett, the same day, granted and acknowledged,
that all his Goods and Chattels were forfeit to us, in case he any ways
contraven'd
Taxes in this KING's Reign.
THE Lords and Commons perceiving the great danger of Rot. Parl. 1 Rich* II. n.
27.
Destruction the Nation was in, by reason of the great Wars, as well by Sea as
Land, for the defense of the Kingdom, and resistance of its great Enemies, they
granted to the King Two Fifteenth without Cities and Burghs, and Two Tenths
within Cities and Burghs, for Two years: Praying the King, that as well the
Money of the Tenths and Fifteenths, as the Tenths granted by the Clergy, and
Money for the Subsidy of Wool, might be in the keeping of Especial Treasurers,
by the King's appointment, which were William Walworth, and John Philypott,
Merchants of London, who were to give an Account of their Receipts and
Disbursements King and his great Council should order.

In this Parliament the Commons, for the arduity of their Charge Ib. n. 11, 12.
and feebleness of their Powers and Knowledge, prayed the King to have John
King of Castile, and Leon Duke of Lancaster, and Four Bishops, Four Earls, and
Four Barons, there named by them, for their Aid, and to confer with them about
the hasty and good exploit, or dispatch of the things wherewith they were
charged.

In the Second of Richard the Second in Quindena paschae, part Rot. Parl. 2 Ric
II. n. 13. in quindena Paschae.
2. n. 13. upon Condition the Marc a Sack added upon Wool, and Sixpence the
Pound upon Merchandise given in the last Parliament at Gloucester, might be
remitted, the Lords and Commons granted the Subsidy of Wool, as it was before
that Parliament, for One year, from Michaelmas next coming, and likewise a Sum
upon diverse Persons of the Kingdom, for which see the Appendix, n. 102.

The Prelates, Lords, and Commons, perceiving the great Perils Rot. Parl. 2
Ric. II. Die Mercurii prox* post Festum Sancti Lucae, p. 2. n. 29.
with which the Land was environed, and the great and outrageous Expenses the
King was to be at for the salvation and defense thereof, granted to him the
Subsidy of Wool, Leather, and Woollfells for Three years, of Wool 43 s. 4 d.
the Sack, of Woollfells as much for every Two hundred and forty, (accounting
Sixscore to the Hundred) and for Leather 4 l. 6 s. 6 d. every Last which were
exported by Denizens and Strangers; and as an additional Grant they gave more
13 s. 4 d. for every Sack of Wool, as much Woollfells, and for every Last of
Leather 26 s. 8 d.

Also they gave Sixpence in the Pound for every Pound value Ibm. n. 30.
of Merchandise, as well of Denizens as Strangers, imported or exported, for
One year.

The Lords and Commons upon the same Reasons and Suggestions, Rot. Parl. 3 Ric.
II. n. 16. Die lunae prox* post festum sancti Hillar. Ibm. n. 17.
as in the last Parliament, granted the King One Fifteenth and half without
Cities and Burghs, and One Tenth and half within.

And seeing the King could not Maintain the Charge of the War without them,
they granted the Subsidy of Wool, Woollfells, and Leather for One year, after
the Term the last granted should expire.

The Lords and Commons gave Three Groats of every Lay Person Rot. Parl. 4 Ric
II. Die Lunae prox. post Festum omnium Sanctorum.
of the Nation, Males, and Females, except very Beggars, and so as the richer
or more sufficient in every Town, should help the poorer, so as no one paid
above Forty Groats.

In the Fifth year the Parliament began on the Morrow of All Souls, Rot. Parl.
^* Ric. II. n. 4^. and 67.
or 3d of November, in which the Lords and Commons granted the Subsidy of
Wool, Woollfells, and Leather, as it was last granted, until Candlemas next:
On the 25th of February, it grant the same Subsidy as it was last received, to
Midsummer next following, and from that time for Four years.

In the Sixth of Richard the Second, in the First Parliament that Rot. Parl. 6
Ric. II. n. 15.
year, the Lords and Commons perceiving the danger the Nation was in, granted a
Fifteenth, and a Tenth.

In the Seventh of Richard the Second, in the First Parliament Ib. 7 Ric. II. n.
13.
that year, the Commons with the assent of the Lords, gave Two Fifteenths.

In the Second Parliament this year holden at Salisbury, the Lords Ib. 7 Ric.
II. n. 10.
and Commons considering the great Charge the King had been, and was to be at
for Maintaining his Estate, his many Wars, and Defense of the Kingdom, granted
Half a Fifteenth, and Half a Tenth.

In the Eighth of Richard the Second, the Lords and Commons Ibm. n. 10.
grant Two Fifteenths upon Conditions there mentioned.

In the Ninth of Richard the Second, the Lords, Great Men, Ibm. n. 10.
and Communities of Counties, Cities, and Burghs, granted to the King for the
Voyage of the Duke of Lancaster into Spain, keeping of the Sea, and Marches of
Scotland, a Tenth and Fifteenth, and Half a Tenth and Fifteenth.

And then the Prelates and Noblemen, and Great Men, (Proceres Ibm. n. 11.
and Magnates) and the Communities aforesaid, granted to the King the Subsidy
of Wool, Woollfells, above the ancient Custom s. 8 d. a Sack, 42 s. 4 d. of
Denizens, and 46 s. 8 d. of Strangers, and of Leather and Pelts or Woollfells,
(pellibus lanutis) in like manner according to the Rate.

In the Tenth of Richard the Second, the Lords and Commons Ibm. n. 18.
grant to the King Half a Tenth, and Half a Fifteenth, also Three Shillings per
Tun upon Wine, and Twelvepence in the Pound upon other Merchandise, coming in
and going out, upon Condition the the Commission made to Fourteen continual
Counselors might no ways execute the Power granted by that Commission without
disturbance.

In the Eleventh of Richard the Second, the Parliament began Ibm. n. 11.
on the Morrow of the Purification, or 3d of February: the Lords and Commons
then granted Half a Tenth, and Half a Fifteenth.

The Lords and Commons also grant until Whitsunday next coming Ibm. n. 12.
3 s. per Tun upon Wine, and a Shilling in the Pound upon Goods; also they
grant the Subsidy of Wool, Leather, and Woollfells, for

The Lords and Commons then likewise grant to the King 43 s. Ibm. n. 16.
4 d. the Sack upon Wool, above the ancient Custom upon Denizens, and 46 s. 8
d. upon Strangers, upon every Two hundred and forty Woollfells, or Woollskins,
the same Duty, upon both Denizens and Strangers, as upon Wool.

Upon every Last of Leather Six Marks, and 6 s. 8 d. upon Denizens, besides the
ancient Custom, and upon Strangers Seven Marks besides the ancient Custom, from
Whitsunday (which was this year the 23d of May) until Midsummer, and from
thence to Midsummer next following.

The Lords and Commons grant a Subsidy of Wool Transported, Rot. Parl. 13 Ric.
II. n. 20.
etc. 33 s. 4 d. the Sack upon Denizens, and 36 s. 8 d. the Sack upon Aliens.

In the Fourteenth of Richard the Second, the Lords and Commons Ib. n. 14 Ric.
II. n. 16, 17.
grant the King for Three years a Subsidy of Wool, etc. Three Shillings upon
every Tun of Wine, and Twelve Pence upon every Pound of Merchandise, as in the
Eleventh year, so as the same may be only employed for the defense of the
Realm, etc.

In the Fifteenth of Richard the Second, the Lords and Commons Ib. 15 Ric. II.
n. 10.
grant Half a Fifteenth, and Half a Tenth, if the King went into France in his
own Person to Treat of Peace or Truce; whole Fifteenth and Tenth if there
should be War.

In the Sixteenth of Richard the Second, the Commons by assent Ib. 16 Ric. II.
n. 11.
of the Lords Spiritual and Temporal, grant to the King for Three years the
Subsidy upon Wool, etc. Three Shillings the Tun upon Wine, Twelve Pence per
Pound upon Merchandise.

In the Seventeenth of Richard the Second the Lords and Commons Ib. 17* Ric.
II. n. 12.
grant to the King for Three years, Six Pence upon every Pound of Merchandise,
and One Shilling and six pence upon every Tun of Wine.

In the Eighteenth of Richard the Second, the Lords and Commons Ib. 18 Ric. II.
n. 6.
grant to the King a Tenth, and a Fifteenth for the Conquest of Ireland.

The Commons by assent of the Lords Spiritual and Temporal, Ib. 20 Ric. II. n.
18.
granted to the King Twelve Pence in the Pound of all manner of Merchandises,
and Three Shillings of every Tun of Wine for Three years.

The Commons on the last day of the Parliament at Shrewsbury, Ib. 21 Ric. II. n.
75.
which was Thursday the last of January, by assent of the Lords Spiritual and
Temporal, granted to the King the Subsidy of Wool, Leather, and Woollfells
during his Life, and One Tenth, and One Fifteenth, and Half a Tenth, and Half a
Fifteenth.

His Wives.
THE First was Walsingh. f. 281. n. 40.
Ann, Daughter to Charles the Fourth Emperor of Germany, who having been his
Wife Ib. f. 350. n. 40.
Twelve years, died without Issue.

His Second was Ib. f. 353. n. 30.
Isabell, Eldest Daughter to Charles the Sixth King of France, to whom he was
Married the 28th of October Seven or Eight years of Age, and therefore never
Bedded her, having been Dethroned and Murdered about Three years after.

FINIS.
The Authors and Records from whence the Materials are taken.
NIcholas Trivet, a Monk of Bridlington, wrote the Life of Edward the First,
and lived in or about the time, a Manuscript in the Norfolk or Arundell Library
in Gresham-College, London, N. 220. the second Treatise, page 52. This is
Transcribed by Walsingham.

Adam Murimoth was a Canon of London, and as he writes of A Manuscript in the
Prologue to his History.
himself, was of sufficient Age to consider what Authors wrote, and to write
himself; he begins his History in A. D. 1303. and the first Three years Story
he had out of the Chronicles of Westminster; The residue he wrote was, what he
saw and heard in his own time, which was to the Twenty first of Edward the
Third, in the Custody of Dr. Covell Master of Christ's College in Cambridge;
Much of him also Transcribed by Walsingham.

Robert of Avesbury wrote the Life of Edward the Third, and P. 76. in the
Rubric to the first Chapter. Pitsaeus, P. 899.
as he Reports of himself, was Keeper of the Registry of the Court of
Canterbury, he lived in the time of Edward the Third; a Manuscript in Sir
Simmonds Dewes's Library at Stow Lanthorn Suffolk.

Thomas de la More Knight. Servant to Edward Second, and outlived him, Printed at
Francfort, A. D. 1603.

Friar John Trokelow's Annals of Edward the Second, a Manuscript in the Cotton
Library, Claudius D. 6.

Puteanus, or Monsieur Dupuy, Counselor and Library Keeper to the King of
France, wrote the History of the Condemnation of the Templars, from the great
Register of the Process against French King's Treasury of Records, from Page
113, to Page 222; and out of the Inventory of the King's Papers and Instruments
concerning the same Matters, from Page 70, to Page 111.

Froysard was a Clerk in King Edward's Court, and Servant to Queen Philip, and
often in King Richard's Court, as he says of himself in the last Chapter of his
Second Volume.

Ranulph Higden, or the Monk of Chester, Matthew of Westminster, Walsingham, are
known Authors, and mentioned before in my First Volume of this History.

The Close, and Patent Rolls, the Rolls of Rome, France, Gascoign, Scotland,
the Parliament Rolls, and others in the Tower of London.

Advertisements to the Candid READER.
THE Church Affairs are mostly such as happened, and were Contested inter Regnum
and Sacerdotium, between the Ecclesiastic and Secular Government, relating to
the Politic State of the Kingdom, or indeed between our Kings and the Popes:
For certainly all our Intestin Troubles, Commotions, and Wars, in some of the
Former Reigns, and in These, were Fomented, Managed, and Carried on, in a great
measure, by the then Clergy, and even those called the Barons Wars; who to make
their Own Advantage, and repair their Fortunes, when reduced to a low Condition
by their own Vanity and Profuseness, were their great Assistants, with Religion
and Holy Church in the Front of their Designs.

That the Translations of the Latin and French are Literal and Verbal, as near
as might be, according to the very Meaning of the Words.

And, That some particular Parts of the Citations in Latin and French, are more
frequent than they might have been; because many Men, without the Words of the
Authors themselves, are loath to understand or believe such things as are
delivered by them.

The INDEX.
A.
ABbeys in England to pay no Taxes to foreign Houses Fol. 87, D Adam Bishop of
Hereford accused of High Treason Fol. 147, DE His Excuse for not answering Fol.
Ib. His Lands adjudged to be seized Fol. 148, A His Endeavors to incense the
Nobility against the Spencers, and the Queen against the King Fol. Ib. BC His
motion in Parliament whether King Edward II. or the Prince his Son should Reign
over them Fol. 161, D He, with the Bishops of Winchester and Lincoln, the
Contrivers of King Edward's Deposition Fol. 162, E
Adolphus the Emperor deposed, and the manner of it Fol. 63, D The occasion of
his being deposed Fol. Ib. F
Alexander III. King of Scotland dies without Issue Male Fol. 14, F His
Granddaughter Margaret the Maid of Norwey his Heir, Fol. Ib.
Anglesey Isle, when taken Fol. 7, F Appellant Lords in Richard II.'s Reign,
with their Protestation, Fol. 371, C The Lords and Commons Oath to stand by
them, Fol. Ib. F Their Articles against several Lords and others, Fol. 372,
etc. Their Impeachments exhibited Fol. 383, E They desire that what was done in
Parliament, 11th of King Richard, might be revoked, Fol. 401, F
Appealed Lords and others refuse to appear, Fol. 384, E Judgment pronounced
against them Fol. 385, A None of them to be restored, Fol. 390 C
Ard betrayed to the French Fol. 333, D Articles of Peace between King Edward
III. and John King of France, Fol. 263, etc. Artois (Robert de) his Advice to
Edward III. to claim the Crown of France Fol. 198, E Arundel ( Richard Earl)
restored by Edward III. to the Blood, Lands, and Goods of his Father Fol. 191,
C He is made Admiral, and his great Success at Sea Fol. 367, DE One of the
Appellant Lords in Richard II.'s Reign Fol. 371, C Is appealed of High Treason,
Fol. 405, A His Trial and Judgment Fol. 407
(Thomas) Bishop of Ely made Chancellor Fol. 366, E Is Archbishop of
Canterbury, and Impeached of high Treason, Fol. 397, B Is adjudged a Traitor,
and to be Banished Fol. 398, C His Preachment upon the Deposition of King II.
Fol. 433, A His Speech at the opening the first Parliament of Henry IV. Fol.
436, A
Ayston (John)a Wyclivite in Oxford Fol. 459, F Proceedings against him Fol.
460, 461 His Confession and Recantation Fol. 462


B.
Baliol (John) and Brus (Robert) their Titles to the Crown of Scotland, how to
be Examined; the main Question and their Pedigrees Fol. 25, A C E John his
Title adjudged good by Edward I. King of England, Fol. 28, D Possession granted
him by King Edward's Writ Fol. 29, A He swears Fealty to King Edward Fol. Ib. C
The Form of his Homage, and by whom Witnessed Fol. Ib. E He appears at London
on the Earl of Fife's Complaint Fol. 31 E His Plea granted by King Edward Fol.
32, A He excuses his Appearance in the English Parliament Fol. Ib. F His Demands
of Satisfaction for Injuries Fol. 33, A He Confederates with the King of France
Fol. Ib. C He returns his Homage, and defies King Edward Fol. 34, D He is
beaten, and submits: He renounces all Confederacies against King Edward Fol.
36, C E He is committed to the Tower at London Fol. 38, A He is again released,
and on what Conditions Fol. 66, A His Character of the Scots Fol. Ib. C Edward
his Son claims and recovers the Crown of Scotland Fol. 194, E F He does Homage
and Fealty to Edward III. King of England Fol. 195, A B His Grant to King
Edward for his Assistance Fol. 196, A B His ill Usage by his Subjects, and
Grant of the Crown of Scotland to King Edward Fol. 256, BC
Ball (John) his Speech to the Rabble Fol. 349, E Bannock-Bourn Battle Fol.
120, B Barons. See Nobility. Bateman (William) Bishop of Norwich his Death Fol.
253, B Beauchamp (Sir John) made Governor of Calais Fol. 246, F Belnap
(Robert) and other Judges Opinions concerning the Statute and Commission Fol.
378, C The Witnesses to their Opinions Fol. 379, F They are accused of High
Treason Fol. 380, A His Excuse Fol. 386, C Sentence against him Fol. 387, A His
Life spared upon Mediation of the Bishops Fol. 388, A He is Banished into
Ireland Fol. 389, C He is again recalled Fol. 396, F
Bereford (Simon) adjudged a Confederate of Mortimer's, and executed Fol. 190,
BC Berkley (Tho.) acquitted of the Murder of Edward II. Fol. 191, B Bertrand
de Guesclin made Constable of France Fol. 290, C Berwick surprised by the
Scots, and retaken by the English Fol. 256 A, 339 A Bigod (Roger) Earl of
Norfolk and Marshal grants his Lands, etc. to the King and his Heirs Fol. 74, D
He surrenders his Earldom and Marshalship, with the occasion of it Fol. 75, AB
Regranted to him by the King Fol. Ib. C
Bintly (Sir Walter) his Victory over the French Fol. 251 C Blake (John)
Impeached, with his Answer and Sentence Fol. 387, BD Bohun (Humphrey) grants
his Lands, Honors and Offices to the King Fol. 76, D He is restored upon
Marriage of the King's Daughter Fol. ib. E
Bouler (Robert) made Lord Chancellor Fol. 211, B The Archbishops Letter to
him to preserve the Liberties of the Church Fol. ib. C
Bowet (Henry) adjudged a Traitor for his Advice to King Richard, in favor of
the Duke of Hereford Fol. 418, D Brabason (Roger) his Answer to the Scots
Petition to King Edward, Fol. 30, C Brember (Sir Nicholas) accused of Treason
by the Lords Appellants Fol. 373, 374 He pleads Not Guilty, but is Condemned
and Executed Fol. 385, BE
Bristol taken by Queen Isabel Fol. 158, C Brittans offer to yield their Towns
and Castles to the English Fol. 339, D Their Duke's Alliance with King Richard
Fol. ib. E He sends to England for Assistance and makes a Peace with the French
King Fol. 342, AD
Bruce alias Brus (Robert) his Title to the Crown of Scotland Fol. 26, B He is
excluded by King Edward I. Fol. ib. E He is made King of Scotland, and Crowned
Fol. 84, B He is put to flight by the English Fol. 85, A 92 C He reduced the
greatest part of Scotland to obey him Fol. 119, E F He is Excommunicated, but
does not regard it Fol. 123, E His Confederate Thomas Earl of Lancaster Fol.
135, E He obtains a Truce with England for 13 Years Fol. 147, A David his Son
denies Homage to Edward III. Fol. 196, E He submits, and owns him his Superior
Fol. 198, C
Burgh (Sir William) impeached of High Treason Fol. 386, A His Excuse in answer
to it Fol. ib. E He is condemned Fol. 387, A His Life spared Fol. 388, A He is
banished into Ireland Fol. 389, C He is recalled Fol. 396, F
Burley (Simon) and others impeached Fol. 388 He is found Guilty, Condemned,
and Executed Fol. 389, A

C.
CAlais besieged by Edward III. King of England Fol. 237, E Is in great
distress Fol. 241, E Is surrendered Fol. 242, D
Cambridge Rioters their Practices against the University Fol. 354, A How
punished Fol. Ib. E
( Edmund Earl) the King's Uncle created Duke of York Fol. 369, E Cardinals
Pentionars to King Edward I. Fol. 76, A Nine Months in Choosing a Pope Fol. 78, C
Carlisle ( Tho. Merks Bishop) his Speech in behalf of Richard II. Fol. 438, D
Carry (Sir John) impeached, his Answer and Excuse Fol. 386, A E Sentence against
him Fol. 387, A His Life spared Fol. 388, A He is banished into Ireland Fol.
389, C
Cavendish (Sir John) Lord Chief Justice Beheaded by Rebels Fol. 348, D Caverly
(Hugh) Governor of Calais Fol. 333, F His Success against the French by Sea
Fol. Ib. and 339, C
Chandois (Sir John) Governor of King Edward III.'s Dominions in France Fol.
281, B Is made Constable of Aquitain Fol. 282, F
Charles Crowned King of France Fol. 283, B His Declaration of War against
England, and on what account Fol. 285, D He sends out Preachers to justify his
Cause Fol. 289, A His great Preparation both by Sea and Land Fol. 294, A His
Policy in marching his Army Fol. 295, D E His Death Fol. 341, E
Charles his Son succeeds Fol. Ib. He prepares a great Fleet to invade England
Fol. 363, A
Charter of the Forest and the Great Charter, with some Articles added,
confirmed Fol. 59 D, 67 E F, 72 F To be published four times in the Year by the
Sheriffs Fol. 59 D Three Knights chosen to see them performed Fol. 69 A
Of London, its Interpretation belongs to the King and Council Fol. 334, C

Church Affairs in the Reign of Edward I. Fol. 93, etc. In the Reign of Edward
II. Fol. 165, etc. In the Reign of Edward III. Fol. 308, etc. In the Reign of
Richard II. Fol. 445, etc.
Clergy deny King Edward I. a Subsidy Fol. 40, E He shuts up their Barns and
Granaries Fol. Ib. F Their Reasons for not granting an Aid Fol. 44, A Their
Lay-Fees seized, and are put out of the King's Protection Fol. 45, A B Those of
York, and many others, comply, and are received, Fol. Ib. E F What they paid
for the King's Protection Fol. 49, B Are forbidden to Ordain any thing in their
Synods against the King or his Affairs Fol. 50, C Are imprisoned for publishing
the Pope's Bull, and on what Terms released Fol. 51, A Would not grant an Aid
without the Pope's License Fol. 73 A They write to the Pope about their
Oppressions Fol. 90, A Such as oppressed them declared Excommunicate Fol. 211,
D They refuse to be Taxed by the Commons Fol. 344, C They protest against any
Law to be made against the Pope's Authority Fol. 392, E
Cobham (Sir John) impeached Fol. 412, C Judgment given against him pardoned
Fol. 413, A
Colepepper (Tho.) Executed Fol. 134, B Commissioners sent from England to the
Scots Parliament Fol. 359, F Appointed by King Richard II. to govern the Kingdom
Fol. 366, F Their Names and Power Fol. 367, A Declared Traitorous and void by
the Judges, etc. Fol. 368, A Their Names that were appointed to Depose King
Richard Fol. 431, D
Commission: See Statute Committee of Lords and Commons how chosen Fol. 338, A
Common People refuse to pay an Aid given by Parliament to Edward II. Fol. 120, F
Their Complaints and Petition in Parliament to Edward III. Fol. 239
Commons in Parliament assembled grant an Aid upon Conditions Fol. 245, 250
Their Petition against Churchmen being made great Officers, Fol. 291, E Their
Complaint against Evil Counselors, and ill Management of the King's Revenue
Fol. 300, 301 They Impeach several for Mismanagement Fol. Ib. Their Petition
about Justices of the Peace, and for Allowance of Wages Fol. 302, D Their
Petition to remove Foreigners Fol. 305, F They desire a Committee of Lords for
their Assistance Fol. 327 B Their Petition about the Government of the Realm
Fol. 328, D, etc. The Answer they received Fol. 329, A, etc. They pray that
Great Officers may be chosen in Parliament during King Richard II's Minority
Fol. 332, B Their Complaint against Villans Fol. Ib. F They Petition for a
Parliament to be held every year Fol. 333, A Their Reasons against granting an
Aid Fol. 336, A They require to know how Money granted was Expended Fol. 337, A
The Answer they received by Richard le Scroope Fol. Ib. Their Proposals to
Excuse an Aid Fol. 338, C They grant a Tax of Three Groats on every Person Fol.
344, D Their Complaint of ill Government Fol. 351, E Their Petition for Three
sorts of Pardons Fol. 352, E They refuse to grant any Tallage Fol. 353, D They
Protest against a Breach with Spain Fol. 355, D They Petition for a yearly
Review of the King's Household Fol. 364, A They Swear to stand by the Lords
Appellants Fol. 371, F They confirm the Statute and Commission, and their
Proceedings Fol. 389, F They would not have what was done made a President Fol.
390, B They Assert King Richard's Prerogative, and Thank him for his good
Government. Fol. 395, A, B They Petition that Villans may not have the
Privilege of Cities and Burghs Fol. Ib. E The Three Points they thought too
high for their Advice Fol. 394, D They frame Articles against the King's
Royalty Fol. 395, F Their Excuse and Submission for the same Fol. 396, B They
declare void the Statute and Commission Fol. 397, B Their Petition to the King
in behalf of several Lords Fol. 398, F They Petition in behalf of such as came
along with Henry IVth. into England Fol. 451, F
Competitors for the Crown of Scotland Fol. 21, A, 23, F Common (John) Pardoned
by King Edward I. Fol. 82, F Is Murdered by the Scots Fol. 84, B His Murderers
Excommunicated Fol. 85, E
Cressy's great Battle Fol. 237, B
D.
DAgworth (Tho.) his Victory in Bretagne Fol. 241, D Is slain Fol. 247, E
Darby ( Henry Earl of) sent with an Army into Gascony by King Edward III. with
his Success Fol. 235, E His great Victories there Fol. 240, D, E Is one of the
Lords Appellants Fol. 371, C
Dardain (James) the Pope's Collector and Nuncio in England, his Oath to King
Richard II. Fol. 448, A David, Brother to the Prince of Wales, Judicially
Condemned and Executed Fol. 11, A King of Scotland overthrown and taken
Prisoner Fol. 240, F He is sent to the Tower at London Fol. 241, A Is released
of his Imprisonment, and on what Conditions He returns into Scotland, and
punished Deserters Fol. 260, E He declares Robert Steward his Successor Fol.
261, A

Despencer: See Spencers Dynet (William) accused for being a Wyclivite. Fol.
463, F His Oath of Abjuration Fol. 464, A

E.
EDward I. beyond Sea when his Father died. Fol. 1, C The Nobility Swear Fealty
to him when absent Fol. 1b. He does Homage to the French for Aquitain Fol. 2, F
He received the Homage and Service of his Vassals there Fol. 3, A His Return
into England, and Coronation, and Inquiry into the Rights of the Crown Fol. 1b.
C, D Is Summoned into France, and sends his Excuse Fol. 1b. E He Prorogues his
first Parliament before their Meeting Fol. 4, A Excellent Laws made in his first
Parliament Fol. 1b. E etc. His Usage of the Welsh Fol. 7, A The Earldom of
Poictou comes to him by his Queen Fol. 8, A He gives up his Right in Normandy
Fol. 1b. B His Summons to the several Counties, Cities, and Burghs Fol. 10, A
He demands a Subsidy, and injoins the Form of it Fol. 1b. E, F He undertakes
the Croysado, and forbids the sending the Money collected for it to the Pope
Fol. 11, C, D His Answer to the Pope's Letter Fol. 12, A His Son Prince Edward
born in Wales Fol. 13, F He goes into France, and stays there 3 years Fol. 14,
E He punishes his Justices at his return for Bribery Fol. 1b. F He demands
Margaret, Granddaughter to Alexander III. King of Scotland, for his Son Fol.
15, A His Concessions to the Scots for promoting the Match Fol. 16, F He
appoints a Lieutenant in Scotland for Queen Margaret He Claims the Crown of
Scotland on Queen Margaret's Death Fol. 18, A His Title. Fol. 19, A He receives
and restores the Guardianship of Scotland Fol. 22, F The Scots Swear Fealty to
him Fol. 23, A His Sentence against Ten of the Competitors Fol. 27, E, F He
Adjudges the Right to John Baliol Fol. 28, D He grants him Possession, and
receives his Fealty Fol. 29, A, D His Protestation to the Scots Petition Fol.
30, E He hears and grants the King of Scots Plea Fol. 32 He is Defied by the
King of Scotland Fol. 34, D He Beats the Scots to a Submission Fol. 36, A He
sends their King to the Tower, and appoints them a Governor Fol. 38, A The
Peace between him and the French broken Fol. 1b. C His Alliance with the
Emperor Fol. 1b. F He shuts up the Barns and Granaries of the Clergy for
refusing him a Subsidy Fol. 40, E His Alliance with the Earl of Flanders Fol.
42, A His Son Prince Edward to Confirm it, when at Age Fol. 43, A He is angry
with the Clergy Fol. 45, A His Pilgrimage to Walsingham in Norfolk Fol. 44, D
His Writs to restore the Clergy that complied Fol. 46 And against Spreaders of
False News and Publishers of Excommunications Fol. 47, 57 His Orders for
fitting out his Fleet Fol. 51, E All of 20 1. per Annum to provide to go with
him Fol. 52, A His Summons to his whole Military Service Fol. 1b. Several Lords
refuse their Duty and Service Fol. 53, E His Grant of a general Protection to
the Clergy Fol. 54, A His Unwarrantable Ways to Raise Money Fol. 1b. F His
Declaration concerning such as refused their Duty and Service Fol. 55 They
present him their Grievances Fol. 57, D He goes into Flanders, and Promises
Remedy at his Return Fol. 58, D He confirms the great Charter Fol. 59, F, 64,
65 A Truce between him and King Philip Fol. 60, C, etc. The Names of his Allies
and Confederates Fol. 1b. D He overthrows the Scots at Falkirk Fol. 64, B His
Marriage with the French King's Sister Margaret Fol. 67, B He grants the
Statute of Articles upon the Charters Fol. 68, B His march into Scotland with
an Army Fol. 70, D His Answer to the Pope's Claim of the Kingdom of Scotland
Fol. 71, C His Title to Scotland sent to the Pope, with an Account of their
Perfidiousness Fol. 73, C He grants a Truce to the Scots, and returns into
England Fol. 74, A His Messengers to the Pope Fol. 75, F He concludes a Peace
with France Fol. 77, A, B He accuses the Archbishop of Canterbury of Treason
Fol. 81, B His Ordinances for the Security of Scotland Fol. 85, F He Banishes
Piers Gaveston Fol. 92, A His Death Fol. 1b. D His Wives and Issue Fol. 98, 99
Prince Edward, Eldest Son to Edward I. made Guardian of England Fol. 59, A Is
Contracted to Isabel, Daughter to the French King Fol. 65, E Is made Prince of
Wales, and Earl of Chester Fol. 73, F Is Knighted with 300 more Fol. 84, F His
Familiarity with Piers Gaveston displeased the King Fol. 92, A II. began his
Reign Fol. 100, B His Marriage and Coronation, and Favors to Gaveston Fol.
101, A Ordinances for the Government of his Household Fol. 102, 103 His
Confirmation of them Fol. 110, E He recalled Gaveston Fol. 112, E He appoints
Commissioners to Correct the Ordinances Fol. 113, E He goes to Newcastle with
Gaveston Fol. 114, F His Request to the Lords to spare Gaveston, refused Fol.
115, D He Prohibits his Lords coming to him Armed Fol. 116, F He makes a Peace
with them Fol. 117, D He is overthrown by the Scots Fol. 120, B His Promise to
observe the Ordinances Fol. 121, E He Summons his whole Military Service
against the Scots Fol. 122, A His good will toward the Earl of Lancaster Fol.
1b. C His Indenture of Agreement with him Fol. 124, C He allowed the Lords
Petition Fol. 125, F He Pardoned the Earl of Lancaster and his Followers And
the Lords that Acted without Law against the Spencers Fol. 133, D He besieged
Leeds Castle, and takes it Fol. 134, A He revoked the Spencer's Banishment, and
marched with an Army against the Lords Fol. 1b. D He made a Truce with the
Scots for 15 years Fol. 147, A He excused his Homage to the French King, and
made a Truce Fol. 1b. B, C He quits Aquitain and Ponthieu to his Son Prince
Edward Fol. 149, A His Message to his Queen and Son to return into England Fol.
150, 151 His Queen's Behavior toward him Fol. 152, A He writ to the Pope
about the Affair of his Queen Fol. 1b. F He Proclaims Mortimer a Traitor, but
without effect Fol. 154, F, 155, B He retired into Wales Fol. 157, B He sent
the Great Seal to the Queen and Prince Fol. 159, A He is carried Prisoner to
Kenelworth Fol. 161, A He is Deposed, and for what Reasons Fol. 1b. E, F His
Resignation to his Son Prince Edward Fol. 163, C Is Inhumanely Treated and
Murdered Fol. 164, C, D, E His Issue Fol. 181, C
Prince Edward, Eldest Son to Edward II. contracted to the Earl of Haynault's
Daughter Fol. 154, D Is made Guardian of the Kingdom Fol. 158, F III. is
declared King Fol. 161, D His unwillingness to accept the Crown Fol. 163, B His
Affairs Managed by his Mother and Mortimer Fol. 182, C, 186, A He Pardoned
those that came over with the Queen Fol. 1b. He sent Mortimer and his Adherents
to the Tower Fol. 186, B He Tried and Executed several of his Father's
Murderers Fol. 190, 191 The Reward he gave for taking Mortimer Fol. 191, D, E
He Propounds to his Parliament the Business of France and Ireland Fol. 1b. F The
Advice he received Fol. 192, A, B, 194, B, C He assisted Edward Baliol to
recover the Crown of Scotland Fol. 1b. F He received his Homage and Fealty Fol.
195, A, B And 2000 1. per Annum for Assistance Fol. 196, A, B He besieged
Berwick, and beat the Scots Fol. 1b. F He concludes a Peace with them Fol. 197,
A He is advised to claim the Crown of France Fol. 198, E, F The Alliances he
made in order to it Fol. 199 He appoints Commissioners to Treat of his Right
Fol. 200, B He Constitutes the Duke of Lorrain Viceroy of France Fol. 1b. C He
is made Vicar General of the Empire Fol. 201, D His Title to the Crown of
France Fol. 1b. F He enters the French Dominions Fol. 202, C He acquaints his
Parliament with it, and demands an Aid Fol. 203, A His Debt to his Allies Fol.
204, C An Aid granted to clear it, and the Commons Request to him Fol. 1b. D, E
His great Victory over the French Fleet Fol. 205, C His Letter to his Parliament
for more Money, which was granted Fol. 206, A, E He Besieged Tournay, and
Challenged Philip of Valois Fol. 207, A, B He concludes a Truce Fol. 208, B, C
At his return into England he sent several of his Council to Prison Fol. 209, E
He is reproved by the Archbishop of Canterbury Fol. 210, D His Letter
concerning the Archbishop, and his Crimes Fol. 212, E His Letter answered, and
called a Libel by the Archbishop Fol. 215, B His Reply to the Archbishop's
Defense Fol. 218, B He presses for further Supplies Fol. 219, D His Answer to
the Statutes and Conditions Fol. 220, A His Revocation of them confirmed in
Parliament Fol. 222, C He refused the Emperor's Mediation for a Peace Fol. 223,
E, F He received the Homage of John Earl of Montfort for the Dukedom of
Bretagne Fol. 224, E He Married his Daughter to the Duke's Son Fol. 225, E He
enters Bretagne with an Army Fol. 226, A He agrees to a Truce with France for 3
years Fol. Ib. D He acquaints his Parliament with it, and their Agreement to He
appoints Commissioners to Treat of Peace without effect Fol. 229, A His
Parliament prays an end of the War, and grant an Aid Fol. 231, E He again sent
Defiance to Philip of Valois Fol. 232, C He Complains to the Pope against him,
and the Pope's Answer Fol. Ib. E, F, 233, C The Success of his Arms in
Gascoigny Fol. 235, E He and his Son Prince Edward land in Normandy Fol. 236, A
His great Successes there Fol. Ib. B, etc. His Victory over the French at
Cressy, and the Number slain Fol. 237, B, etc. His Answer to the Commons
Petition in Parliament Fol. 240, A He beats the French Army, and takes Calais
Fol. 242, C, D His Usage of the Calesians Fol. Ib. E, 243, A He agrees to a
Truce Fol. 243, B The Number of his Army, and their Pay Fol. Ib. C He refused
the Offer of the Empire Fol. 255, F He prevents the betraying of Calais Fol.
246, D His Usage of the French Prisoners Fol. Ib. E He Institutes the Order of
the Garter Fol. 247 His Title to France set forth in Parliament Fol. 248, E He
offered Terms of Peace to the French Fol. 252 His readiness to Remedy his
Subject's Grievances Fol. 250, 251 His Agreement to Peace refused by the French
Fol. 253, A, B 261, D His Expedition into France Fol. 254, F His Army wast and
destroy the French Country Fol. 262, A He concludes a Peace with France Fol.
Ib. C, D The Articles of the Peace Fol. 263, etc. He sent his Commissioners to
take possession of what was granted him by the Peace Fol. 278, F Some French
Lords refuse to become his Subjects, but are forced to it Fol. 281 His Kindness
to the French Hostages Fol. 283, A He assumed the Title of King of France by
the Advice of his Parliament Fol. 287, E His Offer to such as would Maintain his
Title Fol. 288, B His Letter of Indemnity sent into Aquitain Fol. Ib. D His
Voyage into France unfortunate Fol. 293, A, B He sent Assistance to his Son
Prince Edward Fol. 289, C His Answer to the Commons Petition Fol. 292, A His
Fleet beaten nigh Rochell Fol. Ib. D His Town in Aquitain Revolt Fol. 297, D He
agreed to a Truce with the French King Fol. 298, A His Answer to the Commons
and Londoners Petitions Fol. 302, 303, 305, 306 His Death Fol. 308, B His Issue
by Queen Phillippa Fol. 323
Prince Edward, Eldest Son to Edward III. made Guardian of England Fol. 204, F
His great Victory over the French at Cressy Fol. 237, C He prevents the
betraying of Calais Fol. 246, C His Expedition into France, and his Success
Fol. 255, E His Victory over the French at Poicters Fol. 257 His Civilities to
King John and his Son Philip Fol. 258, A He is made Prince of Aquitain Fol.
282, E He ayds the King of Castile, and restores him Fol. 284, C His Illness,
and return to Aquitain Fol. Ib. D His Necessities for want of Money Fol. 285, A
The Complaint of the French Nobility against him Fol. Ib. B His Answer to the
French King's Summons Fol. Ib. D He takes Limoges by Storm Fol. 290, A He
returns ill into England Fol. Ib. B His Death Fol. 302, C
Else William impeached for Extortion Fol. 302, B England's Superiority over
Scotland Fol. 35, B How to be divided if Conquered by France Fol. 238, F
English Women imitate the French in their Apparel Fol. 246, A
F.
FItz-Alan (Richard) Earl of Arundel Admiral of the English Fleet Fol. 367, D
He takes above 100 of the Enemies Ships Fol. Ib. E Is one of the Appellant
Lords Fol. 371, C
Flint Castle when and by whom built Fol. 7, A French King's Charge against
King Edward I. Fol. 38, D He seized on Gascony Fol. Ib. F He provides to invade
England Fol. 39, D
Fulthorpe (Sir Roger) impeached, and his Answer Fol. 386, A E Sentence against
him Fol. 387, A His Life spared Fol. 388, A

G.
GArter. See Order. Gascony restored to King Edward I. Fol. 77, C Gaston
Vicount Bearn refused his Homage to Edward I. Fol. 3, A Gaveston (Piers) his
Familiarity with Prince Edward Fol. 91, F Is banished by the King Fol. 92, A
His return into England, and is made Earl of Cornwall, and Lieutenant of the
Kingdom Fol. 100, D E His Destent and Marriage with the King's Niece Fol. 101,
B Is made Lieutenant of Ireland Fol. Ib. E The Nobility contrive to destroy him
Fol. Ib. F He fled out of the Kingdom, and is recalled Fol. 112, D He yields
himself to the Lords Fol. 115, D He is Executed without Judgment Fol. 116, A
Gloucester ( Thomas Duke) with other Lords march with great Forces toward
London Fol. 368, A Their Letter to the Mayor and Sheriffs Fol. Ib. B C Their
Approach to the King, with the manner of their Address and Reception Fol. 369,
A, B, C They are excused by Proclamation, yet march on toward London Fol. Ib.
F The Keys of the City-Gates delivered to them Fol. 370, A They go to the King,
and obtain what they asked Fol. Ib. B C He offers to purge himself, and is
declared Guiltless Fol. 371, A His desire to have 1000 l. per Ann. settled on
him by the King Fol. 392, F His Grants in Parliament repealed Fol. 397, C He is
appealed of High Treason Fol. 405, A His Death at Calais Fol. 408, B Is
adjudged a Traitor Fol. Ib. D His Confession before his death Fol. 409, D
Godfrey of St. Omar Founder of the Order of the Templars Fol. 165, A Gournay
(Tho.) one of the Keepers and Murderers of Edw. II. Fol. 164 C Judgment against
him for the same Fol. 191, A
Grievances of the Kingdom presented Fol. 57 D, 58 Guardians of the Kingdom,
who Fol. 1, D They proclaim the King's Peace Fol. Ib. They do the same for
Ireland Fol. 2, A Their Writ to assess Tallage, and suppress Tumults Fol. Ib. C
Guines surprised by the English Fol. 248, C Guy Earl of Flanders his Alliance
with Edward I. Fol. 42, A
H.
HAles (Sir Robert) Beheaded by the Rebels Fol. 346, C Haynault (Earl of)
furnishes Queen Isabel with Ships and Forces Fol. 154, D Haxey (Thomas) his
Bill in the House of Commons against the King's Royalty Fol. 396, A Is adjudged
a Traitor Fol. Ib. D
Hereford ( Henry Duke) his Submission to King Richard Fol. 403, E He accused
the Duke of Norfolk Fol. 404, F The Schedule of his Accusation Fol. 413, B The
matter contained in it to be determined by Duel, Fol. 414, D The King prevents
the Battle, and banishes him Fol. 415, B C He lands in England Fol. 419, B The
Nobility and People join him Fol. Ib. C D His Obeisance to King Richard, and
Reception at London Fol. 420, A He claims the Crown Fol. 432, D His Speech to
the Lords and Commons Fol. 433, D He summons a Parliament in his own Name to be
returned in six Days Fol. 435, E His Eldest Son made Prince of Wales Fol. 438,
A His Followers and Confederates pardoned Fol. 452, A Adam (Bishop.) See Adam.
(Nicholas) a Professor of Divinity in Oxford, a Wiclivite Fol. 459, F The
Proceedings against him Fol. 460, 461

Higden (Ran.) his Character of the Earl of Lancaster Fol. 139, C Holt (Sir
John) impeached, and his Answer Fol. 386, A E Sentence against him Fol. 387, A
His Life spared Fol. 388, A He is banished into Ireland Fol. 389, C He is again
recalled Fol. 396, F
Hugo de Paganis one of the Founders of the Order of the Templars Fol. 165, A
Hungerford (Tho.) Speaker of the Commons, prays the reverse of several
Impeachments Fol. 306, E
I.
JEws hanged for Clipping and Coining Fol. 8, C Maintenance allowed to the
Converted Fol. Ib. The Obstinate are Banished Fol. 9, A
John Duke of Bretagne died without Issue Fol. 224 The Competitors for his
Dukedom Fol. Ib. C King of France Crowned, Fol. 247, F He is Overthrown by
Edward the Prince of Wales Fol. 257 He and his Son Philip taken Prisoners Fol.
Ib. E They are brought to London Fol. 258, D And sent to the Tower Fol. 261, F
He agrees to a Peace with Edward III. Fol. 262, E His return into England,
Errand, and Death there Fol. 283, B
Isabel Queen to Edward II. denied entrance into Leeds-Castle Fol. 134, A She
writes to the Pope to Saint the Earl of Lancaster Fol. 138, E F She built a
Chapel on the Hill where he was Executed Fol. 140, A She obtains Leave to get
into France Fol. 148, E Her Excuse to the King for staying there Fol. 149, 150
She takes Mortimer into her Service Fol. Ib. D Her Behavior toward the King
Fol. 152, A She leaves France, and goes to the Earl of Haynault She lands at
Harwich, and is joined by the Nobility Fol. Ib. E F The Increase of her Army
and her Cause carried on by false Reports Fol. 155, C D Her Care of Holy Church
Fol. 157, E She takes Bristol, and marches into Wales to find out the King Fol.
158, C D She held a Parliament with the Prince her Son Fol. 161, B Her seeming
Sorrow for the King her Husband Fol. 163, A She and Mortimer has the whole
Government Fol. 186, A

K.
KEnt ( Edmund Earl of) Uncle to Edward III. adjudged to death in Parliament,
and for what Fol. 185, D His Son restored to his Blood and Lands Fol. Ib. F
Kilwardy (Robert) Elected Archbishop of Canterbury without the King's License
Fol. 93, B His Election protested against Fol. Ib. E
Knights Four summoned for every County Fol. 10, B Knivet (Sir John) Chancellor
his Declaration in Parliament of the Edward III. Fol. 293, 294, 296, A Knolls
(Sir Robert) Ravages and Burns the Country about Paris Fol. 290, A His great
Care to suppress Tumults Fol. 361, A

L.
LAncaster ( Thomas Earl of) resolved to defend Holy Church Fol. 114, E He
demanded Gaveston of King Edward II. Fol. Ib. F He marched after the King and
Gaveston Fol. 115, A A great Admirer of Robert Winchelsey Archbishop of
Canterbury Fol. 119, D He refused to serve the King against the Scots Fol. 120,
A Is made Chief of the Council to Edward II. Fol. 122, E And General of the
Army against the Scots Fol. 123, C The Agreement between him and the King Fol.
124, C He joins with the Earl of Hereford Fol. 134, F Is taken Prisoner,
Condemned, and Executed Fol. 135, B Miracles done by him after his Death Fol.
136, A His Image adored at St. Paul's Fol. 138, A Queen Isabel writes to the
Pope to Saint him Fol. Ib. D E The Archbishop of Canterbury does the same Fol.
139, A His Character by Higden Fol. Ib. C D
(Henry) his Son shows Compassion to Edward II. Fol. 164, B His Submission to
Edward II. and Queen Mother Fol. 185, B He died of the Plague Fol. 282, D
( John Duke) made Governor of Acquitain Fol. 290, C His Title to the Kingdom
of Castile Fol. 292, A Is made the King's Lieutenant in France Fol. 295, A His
ill Conduct in his Army Fol. Ib. C The three Great Offices he claimed at King
Richard's Coronation Fol. 326, C His Retirement from Court Fol. 327, A His
Challenge to his Accusers Fol. Ib He is chosen Head of the Committee for the
Assistance of the He sets out a Fleet, and is beaten by the Spaniards Fol. 134,
A B His Expedition against the Scots Fol. 342, F He concludes a Truce with them
Fol. 350, F The Quarrel between him and Northumberland ended Fol. 351, A His
Proposals to go into ^pain Fol. 355, A His Expedition against the Scots
unsuccessful Fol. 361, B He is accused of Treason by a Friar Fol. Ib. D His
extravagant Expenses in France Fol. Ib. E His Voyage into Spain, and Claim of
that Crown Fol. 364, C He is created Duke of Aquitain Fol. 392, C The Earl of
Arundel asks his Pardon in full Parliament Fol. 394, A He is made Lord High
Steward at the Trial of the Earl of Arundel and others Fol. 407, A He was First
Commissioner in the Judgment given against his Son Henry Duke of Hereford 415,
426, in the Margin.

Latimer impeached by the Commons Fol. 301, F Laws made in the First Purlement
of Edward I. Fol. 4, C Letters Pattents of Edward I. for the Establishment of
Scotland Fol. 82, A Lewelin Prince of Wales summoned to take the Oath of Fealty
to Edward I. Fol. 1, F His Marriage of Sim. Monfort's Daughter Fol. Ib. F He
surprised the King's Justiciary, and is slain Fol. 9, B E
Limoges delivered to the French Fol. 289, F Is retaken by Prince Edward Fol.
290, A
Lincoln ( Henry Earl) his Speech about Holy Church to Thomas Earl of Lancaster
Fol. 114, B Littister (John) King of the Commons, his Pretenses and Practices
Fol. 348, E Loketon (John) impeached, his Answer and Excuse Fol. 386, A E
Sentence against him Fol. 387, A Is banished into Ireland Fol. 389, C
Londoners join with the Lords in refusing to pay Taxes to Edward I. Fol. 58, F
They refuse to assist King Edward II. Fol. 155, F They Murder the Bishop of
Exeter, and a Servant of the Spencers Fol. 156, B They compel the Bishops to
swear to defend their Rights Fol. 164, A They present their Grievances to
Edward III. Fol. 302, E F Their Patent from him, and Petition about their
Coroner Fol. 305, A E They deny to lend King Richard II. a Thousand Pounds Fol.
393, F Their Liberties seized by him, and restored Fol. 394, A
Lords. See Nobility. Lion (Rich.) impeached by the Commons, and his Punishment
Fol. 301, F
M.
MAgdulph Earl of Fife his Appeal to King Edward I. Fol. 31, C Maltrovers
(John) one of the Keepers and Murderers of Edward II. Fol. 164, C Marchall
(John) Servant to the Spencers, murdered, and by whom Fol. 156, A Margaret Maid
of Norwey, Grandchild and Heir to Alexander III. King of Scotland Fol. 14, F
Articles of Marriage between her and Prince Edward Fol. Ib She died in her
Voyage to England Fol. 17, F
Marshal and Constable take Possession of the City-Gates Fol. 59, C D
Mautravers (John) his Practices against the Earl of Kent punished Merks
(Thomas) Bishop of Carlisle's Reasons against the Proceedings in Parliament
against King Richard II. Fol. 438, D Montacute (Will.) his Reward for taking
Mortimer Fol. 191, D Monfort his Controversy with the Earl of Blois for the
Dukedom of Bretagne Fol. 124, 125 Mortimer (Roger) taken into Queen Isabel's
Service Fol. 149, D Is proclaimed a Traitor by Edward II. Fol. 154, F His
Familiarity with the Queen Fol. 159, B His Management of Affairs under Edward
III. Fol. 182 B, 186 A He agrees to a shameful Peace with the Scots Fol. 184, F
He is sent to the Tower Fol. 186, C The Articles in Parliament against him Fol.
187, A Is condemned by his Peers, and executed Fol. 189, F
Mowbray (Tho) Duke of Norfolk accused by the Duke of Hereford Fol. 413, B The
matter contained in his Accusation to be determined by Duel Fol. 414, D The
King prevents the Battle, and banished him Fol. 415, B C D

N.
NAnts besieged by the English Fol. 342, B Nevill's Cross Battle Fol. 240, F
Nobility swear Fealty to Edward I. when beyond Sea Fol. 1, C Their Petition
against the Pope's Exactions Fol. 88, C And against sending Money out of
England Fol. 89, C Their Murmurs and Contrivance against Gaveston Fol. 101, D F
Their Ordinances for the Government of the King's Household Fol. 103, etc. Are
angry at recalling of Gaveston Fol. 112, F They order him to be executed
without Trial Fol. 116, A They demand of the King the Execution of their
Ordinances, and encourage the People to join them Fol. Ib. C E They treat with
the King about Peace Fol. 117, D Their Petition to him in Parliament Fol. 125, D
Their Confederacy against the two Spencers Fol. 127, etc. Their Message to the
King to banish them Fol. 129, A They come armed to Parliament, and their Award
against them Fol. Ib. B C They desire Security for their acting without Law,
Fol. 132 D Many of them Executed with the Earl of Lancaster Fol. 135, F They
join with Queen Isabel against Edward II. Fol. 154, D Several of them Executed
by Queen Isabel's Order Fol. 159, B They judge King Edward II. unfit to Govern
Fol. 163, A They renew their Fealty and Homage to King Richard II. Fol. 390, F
The Oath they then took Fol. 391, A Such as broke it to be Excommunicated Fol.
Ib. They again renew their Oaths to King Richard Fol. 400, 403 They join Henry
Duke of Hereford and Lancaster Fol. 419, C D
Northampton (John) a Mover of Sedition in London, and how appeased Fol. 360, F
His Trial and Judgment Fol. 361, F Judgment against him repealed Fol. 393, B
Nottingham ( Thomas Earl) one of the Lords Appellants Fol. 371, C
O.
OAths taken by the Lords Spiritual and Temporal Fol. 391, A Administered to all
Gentlemen, etc. Fol. Ib. B Renewed to King Richard II. Fol. 400 The Breakers
thereof Excommunicated Fol. 401, B
Great Officers of the Kingdom to be sworn in Parliament Fol. 220, E To be
chosen by the Lords in King Richard's Minority Fol. 332, C They resign their
Places to the King, and receive them again from him Fol. 392, B
Ordainers appointed, their Names Fol. 103 They decline to Treat with the
King's Commissioners Fol. 114, A
Order of the Garter instituted, when, and by whom Fol. 247, B Ordinances of
King Edward I. for Security of Scotland Fol. 85, F For Government of Edward II.
his Household Fol. 102, B Are confirmed by the King in Parliament Fol. 103, 110,
111, A Are examined and annulled Fol. 146, A Of Normandy, what it was Fol. 238,
D

P.
PArliaments held in the Reign of Edward I. Fol. 96, 97, 98 In the Reign of
Edward II. Fol. 180, 181 In the Reign of Edward III. Fol. 321, etc. In the
Reign of Richard II. Fol. 465, etc. That held in the 11th of Ricard II.
annulled Fol. 402 That again confirmed, and that held 21 Rich. II. annulled
Pavy (Amery de) made Governor of Calais Fol. 243, B His Design to betray it
prevented Fol. 246, C He is removed from the Government of it Fol. ib. F
Peacham (John) made by the Pope Archbishop of Canterbury Fol. 94, A His
Letter to the King about Church-Liberty Fol. 95, A
Perambulation of the Forest settled and confirmed Fol. 72, F Percy (Henry) his
Promise in behalf of Gaveston Fol. 116, A (Thomas) made General Procurator for
the Clergy Fol. 401, B
Perrers (Alice) banished Fol. 302, B She is accused in Parliament Fol. 329, F
She is found Guilty Fol. 331, E Her Sentence and Punishment not to be made a
Precedent Fol. Ib. Repealed in Parliament Fol. 362, D
Peter King of Castile Excommunicated by the Pope Fol. 284, A He craves and
receives Aid from Edward Prince of Wales Fol. Ib. He refused to pay the
Prince's Army Fol. Ib. Is slain by Henry Bastard of Castile Fol. 289, D
Philip the French King remonstrates against the Pope's Bull prohibiting Taxes
Fol. 55, B His Clergy does the like Fol. Ib. His Protestation against the
Pope's Power to make a Truce between him and Edward I. Fol. 61, F He corrupts
the German Princes Fol. 63, C Of Valois his Alliances against Edward III. Fol.
200, A His Commissioners appointed to Treat of Peace Fol. Ib. His Fleet beaten
by the English Fol. 205, C His Answers to Edward III.'s Challenge Fol. 207, D
He is overthrown by him at Cresly Fol. 237, B His attempt to relieve Calais
unsuccessful Fol. 242, B His Death Fol. 247, F
Philpot (John) set out Men of War at his own Charge Fol. 334, C Is questioned
for it, and discharged Fol. Ib. Pickering (Sir James) his Petition in behalf of
the Commons Fol. 335, C
Plesington (Sir Robert) adjudged a Traitor Fol. 407, D Pole (Sir Michael) made
Lord Chancellor Fol. 359, D He accuses the Bishop of Norwich Fol. 360, C His
Sentence against Four Knights Fol. Ib. D Is made Earl of Suffolk Fol. 363, F He
is impeached; his Answer and Judgment Fol. 365, ACE Is accused of High Treason
Fol. 372, D
Pope prohibits the Clergy from paying Taxes to Secular Princes Fol. 41, A His
Explanatory Bull Fol. 54, C He by his own Power declared a Truce for Two Years
between England and France Fol. 61, D Protested against by the French King Fol.
Ib. F Accepted as Mediator, and not as Judge Fol. 62 His Award between the Two
Kings Fol. 64, 65 He sent a Nuncio to complete it Fol. 66, E His Claim to the
Kingdom of Scotland Fol. 70, E He suspended the Archbishop of Canterbury Fol.
81, C He appointed Receivers of his Temporalities, but refused by the King Fol.
Ib. F He absolved Edward I. from his Oath Fol. 84, C His Exactions in England
Petitioned against by the Nobility Fol. 88, C He mediates a Peace between
Edward III. and King Philip Fol. 200 F, 202 D His Reservation of the Bishopric
of Rochester to the Apostolic See Fol. 319, B
Price of Provisions set by the King Fol. 120, C Revoked again by him Fol. 121,
D
Probi Homines in Scotland, who they were Fol. 31, F
R.
Rapyngdon (Philip) Professor of Divinity in Oxford, a Wyclivite Fol. 459, F
Proceedings against him Fol. 460, 461
Reading (Sim.) Executed for speaking ill of Q. Isabel Fol. 159, C Reynolds
(Walter) Archbishop of Canterbury, writes to the Pope to Saint Tho. Earl of
Lancaster Fol. 139, A Richard, Eldest Son to Edward Prince of Wales, Guardian
of England Fol. 293, C Is Created Prince of Wales Fol. 302, D
II. his Coronation Fol. 326, B His Command to his Parliament to dispatch their
Business Fol. 337, D His Necessities forced him to Pawn his Jewels Fol. 343, A
His Mercy to the Followers of Wat. Tiler Fol. 347, B He Knighted the Lord
Mayor, and other Citizens of London, for their Services in Suppressing them
Fol. 350, D His Grants of Liberties and Manumissions to Villans, revoked in
Parliament Fol. 351, B He appoints certain Lords to Examine into Mismanagements
of his Affairs Fol. 352, A He Excepted several Towns and Persons out of his
General Pardon Fol. 352, F His Offer to go in Person with an Army into France
Fol. 356, E The Parliament Advise him to the contrary Fol. 357, C His intent to
Arraign the Duke of Lancaster Fol. 362, A His Expedition into Scotland Fol. Ib.
F His Answers to the Commons Petition about his Household Fol. 364, A He is sent
for to Parliament by the Duke of Gloucester and Bishop of Ely Fol. 365, F He
changed the Great Officers of State Fol. 366, E He appointed Commissioners to
Govern the Kingdom Fol. Ib. F His Protestation in Parliament Fol. 367, C He
questioned the Commission and Statute made in the last Parliament Fol. Ib. F His
Judges Opinions of them Fol. 368, A His Reception by the Mayor, and City of
London Fol. Ib. He Excused the Duke of Gloucester and others by Proclamation He
granted their Requests Fol. 370, C He sent the Judges, taken off the Benches,
to the Tower Fol. Ib. E His grant of the Commons Petitions Fol. 390, D The
Lords Spiritual and Temporal renew their Fealty and Homage to him, and he his
Coronation Oath Fol. Ib. F Is declared to be of full Age Fol. 392, A He seized,
and restored the Liberties of the City of London He concluded a Peace with
France Fol. Ib. B He goes into Ireland Fol. 395, D His Kindness to several
Lords Fol. 399, B, C He made several Dukes and Earls Fol. Ib. D The Lords and
Commons Oaths to him Fol. 400, 401 He Pardoned the Duke of Hereford Fol. 403, F
He appointed, at the Commons Request, certain Persons to determine Matters
undispatched in Parliament Fol. 404, D He prevented Battle between Hereford, and
Norfolk, and banished them Fol. 415, B Statutes and Ordinances made by him and
others appointed Fol. 416, A He goes again into Ireland Fol. 419, A His
Nobility and People desert him, and join Hereford Fol. Ib. D He offered to quit
the Government Fol. Ib. E He is sent to the Tower, and a Parliament summoned in
his Name Fol. Ib. F The Process of his Renunciation, and Resignation Fol. 420,
421 Articles objected against him Fol. 423, etc. William Thyrning's Speech to
him in the Tower Fol. 434, E Bishop of Carlisle's Speech in his behalf Fol.
438, D He was removed to Ludlow, and from thence to Pontfract Fol. 452, A The
French King attempts his Relief, but without effect Fol. Ib. B The manner of
his Death uncertain Fol. Ib. D, etc. His Wives Fol. 467

Rickhill (Sir William) appointed to take the Confession of the Duke of
Gloucester at Calais Fol. 409, A His Declaration of the same in Parliament Fol.
411, B
Rioters how to be prosecuted Fol. 193 Rochellers declare for the King of
France Fol. 292, F Roger Earl of March slain in Ireland Fol. 419, A Rushook
Tho. Bishop of Chichester, Confessor to Richard II. impeached by the Commons
Fol. 388, A His Answer Fol. Ib. B Is found guilty and banished Fol. 389, C

S.
SCotland and Scots, their Agreement with Edw. I. about Margaret, Alexander
III's Grandchild and Heir Fol. 15, 16 K. Edward's Concessions to them about the
Match Fol. Ib. Their Nobility desire time to Consider of King Edward's Claim of
the Crown of Scotland after Margaret's Death Fol. 18, D, E The Competitors
produce nothing against his Claim Fol. 20 Their Names and Submission to King
Edward's Decision, and how their Rights were to be tried Fol. 21, A, B, D The
Guardianship of the Kingdom committed to King Edward Fol. 22, E They Swear
Fealty to him Fol. 23, B How the Right of Succession to be determined Fol. 24,
F The Kingdom not partible Fol. 27, B They send for Absolution to the Pope Fol,
35, A They Command the English to quit Scotland Fol. Ib. D They enter England,
are beaten, and then they submit Fol. Ib. and 37, E, and 64, B They again
Revolt and Submit Fol. 53, A They force the English out of Scotland Fol. 59, A
They apply themselves to the Pope Fol. 70, E The Terms of Peace granted them by
King Edward Fol. 77, F, 78, E The Names of Persons excepted Fol. 79, C, D What
Number to come to the English Parliament Fol. 80, C, D The Settlement they made
of the Kingdom Fol. 81, A The Articles of the Establishment Fol. 82, 83 They
break their Oaths, and Crown Robert Bruce Fol. 84, B Are routed, and many Tried
for Perjury, and Rebellion Fol. 85, B Their Submission, and Homage to King
Edward renewed Fol. 86, D They Ravage the English Borders Fol. 120, A, 340, A
Their great Victory over King Edward II. Fol. Ib. B The Kingdom Interdicted
Fol. 123, E They agree to a Truce for Two years, continued for 13 years Fol.
124, A, 147, A They break the Truce Fol. 184, B A Peace concluded with them by
Mortimer Fol. Ib. Their Country wasted and burnt by Edward III. Fol. 197, A
They agree to a Peace with him Fol. Ib. B Their Alliance with the French Fol.
335, A Their Barbarity in the English Borders Fol. 341, C Their Commissioners
sent to the English Parliament rejected Fol. 359, F They join the French to
invade England Fol. 362, E And are beaten Fol. 391, C
Scrope (Richard) Lord Chancellor, charged the Commons with untruth Fol. 336, E
His Answer to their several Petitions Fol. 337, B The Great Seal taken from him
Fol. 355, E
(Tho.) Earl of Wiltshire, made Procurator for the Clergy Fol. 412, B
Segrave (John) made Guardian of Scotland Fol. 76, F Sharewell (Sir William)
set forth K. Edward III's Title to France Fol. 248, E, F Soldiers how raised
against the Scots, and paid Fol. 121, F Southwell (Nic.) Valet to King Richard
II. Fol. 381, A Spanish Fleet beaten by the English Fol. 248, A Spencer (Hugh)
blamed for the Loss the English sustained from the Scots at Bannock-bourn Fol.
120, B Is made Chamberlain to Edward II. Fol. 126, E His Fathers Character Fol.
Ib. F How they provoked the Nobility Fol. 127, B, C The Lords Award against
Father and Son Fol. 129, C Their Banishment revoked Fol. 134, D Outrageous
Practices against them Fol. 141, 143 Errors of the Award against them assigned
Fol. 142, A And why it ought to be revoked Fol. 144, B The Award voided in
Parliament Fol. 145, C The Father made Governor of Bristol Fol. 147, C He is
taken and Executed Fol. 148, C The Son Executed Fol. 149, B The Judgment
against them both reversed Fol. 403, B
(Henry) Bishop of Norwich his great Courage and Conduct Fol. 349, A His Offer
for the Relief of Flanders Fol. 357, D His Proffer accepted by the King and
Council Fol. 358, A He Published a Croysado against the Antipope Fol. Ib. B His
great Success against the Flemings Fol. Ib. F He surrendered Graveling, and
returned into England Fol. 359, B His Accusation, and Punishment Fol. 360, C

Statute of Bigamy on what account made Fol. 5, B, D Of Winchester proclaimed
Fol. 68, F And Conditions where to be found Fol. 220, E Are revoked by the King
Fol. 221, C

Statutes and Commission what and when made Fol. 367, A Declared void in
Parliament Fol. 397, B And Ordinances made by the King and others appointed out
of Parliament Fol. 416, A Not to be repealed under pain of Treason Fol. Ib. The
Bishops and Temporal Lords Swear to observe them Fol. 417, F
Sterling Castle delivered to the Scots Fol. 67, D Besieged by, and yielded to
King Edward I. Fol. 78, A
Steward (James) his Submission to King Edward I. Fol. 37, C Stratford (John)
Archbishop of Canterbury his Behavior to Edward III. Fol. 210, 215 He
submitted, and begged the King's Pardon Fol. 218, D Proceedings against him
vacated Fol. 219, A Is forbidden to enter the Painted Chamber Fol. 222, F Is
permitted upon Mediation of some Great Men Fol. 223, A
Straw (Jack) his Pretenses and Practices Fol. 345, 348 His Trial and Execution
Fol. 349, C His Confession at his Execution Fol. 350, A
Sudbury (Simon) Archbishop of Canterbury, beheaded by the Rebels Fol. 346, C
T.
Talbot (Sir Tho.) accused for Conspiring the Death of the Dukes of Lancaster
and Gloucester Fol. 395, B Tarleton ( Adam Bishop) See Adam Taxes granted in
the Reign of Edward I. Fol. 96, 97 Taxes granted in the Reign of Edward II.
Fol. 180 Taxes granted in the Reign of Edward III. Fol. 321, etc, Taxes granted
in the Reign of Richard II. Fol. 465, etc. Templars by whom founded, their
Original, and Suppression Fol. 165, etc. Testa (William) the Pope's Agent,
convict of Crimes against the Crown Fol. 89, D His Officers questioned Fol. 90,
B The King granted him Protection, and License Ib. D. F
Thyrning (William) his Speech to Richard II. in the Tower Fol. 434, E Tiler
(Wat.) his Pretenses and Practices Fol. 345 His Insolent Behavior to the King
Fol. 346, F His Death Fol. 347, A His Followers pretended the King's Authority
for what they did Fol. 348, B
Tresilian (Robert) Lord Chief Justice, accused of Treason by the Lords
Appellants Fol. 373, 374 His, and the other Judges Opinions concerning the
Statute and Commission Fol. 378, etc. The Witnesses to their Opinions Fol. 379,
F Is brought into Parliament, Sentenced, and Executed Fol. 385, D
Trussell (William) his Speech against Hugh D'espencer the Son Fol. 159, E He
resigned up the Nobility's Homage to Edw. II. Fol. 162, D

V.
VAlentia (Aymer) sent against the Scots Fol. 84, F His Success against them
Fol. 85, A
Vere (Robert) Duke of Ireland, raised Forces in Lancashire and Cheshire, for
Richard II. Fol. 369, D He is accused of Treason Fol. 372, D
Usk (Tho.) impeached; his Answer, and Judgment Fol. 387, C, D, E
W.
Walworth (Wm) Lord Mayor of London, slew Wat. Tiler Fol. 347, A He is Knighted
by Richard II. for his Service Fol. 350, D
Walys (Wm) chosen by the Scots for their Leader Fol. 53, A Is beaten, and
flee's into the Woods Fol. 64, C Is taken and Executed Fol. 83, F Was one that
encouraged the Lords against Edw. II. Fol. 119, C
Warren (John) appointed Governor of Scotland Fol. 38, A He suppressed the
Scots Fol. 53, B
Warwick ( Tho. Earl) one of the Appellant Lords Fol. 371, C His Pardon revoked
Fol. 397, C Is appealed of High Treason Fol. 405, A Is Tried, and pleaded
Guilty Fol. 411, E His Life granted him by the King Fol. Ib. F
Welsh routed, and their Prince slain Fol. 9, C Are totally subdued Fol. 11, B
Writ for sending the same Knights, Citizens and Burgesses who were sent last
Parliament Fol. 69, F Wyclif (John) Convented before the Archbishop, and Bishop
of London Fol. 307, F He Explains himself concerning the Sacrament of the Altar
Fol. 320, A The Heresies laid to his Charge Fol. Ib. F Proceedings against his
Followers in Rich. II's Reign Fol. 458

FINIS.
THE APPENDIX.
N. 1. Claus 1. Ed. 1. M. 11. de pace Regis Edwar. Procl^^anda.
EDwardus Dei Gratia Rex Angliae, Dominus Hiberniae, and Dux Aquitaniae,
Vicecomiti Eborum Salutem.
Cum Defuncto jam celebris memoriae Domino Henrico Rege Patre nostro, ad nos
Regni gubernaculum Successione Haereditaria, See the meaning of the Words (ac
procerum Regni voluntate) in the next Record.
ac Procerum and Fidelitate nobis praestita sit devolutum, per quod Nomine
nostro qui in exhibitione Justitiae and Pacis conservatione omnibus and
singulis de ipso Regno sumus exnunc debitores, pacem nostram dicti Magnates,
and Fideles nostri jam fecerant Proclamari. Tibi praecipimus quod per totam
Ballivam tuam in singulis Civitatibus, and Burgis, Feriis, Mercatis, and locis
aliis pacem nostram public clamari, and firmiter teneri facias inhibendo
omnibus and singulis sub periculo exhaeredationis, vitae and membrorum pacem
nostram

Testibus W. Ebor. Archiepiscopo, E. Cornub. and Gloucest. Comitibus
apud Westminster. vicesimo tertio die November. Anno Regni nostri primo. Consimiles
literae diriguntur singulis Vicecomitibus per Angliam.



N. 2. Bundela Brevium, etc. An. 1. Ed. 1. N. 1. in the Tower.
EDwardus Dei Gratia Rex Angliae, Dominus Hiberniae, and Dux Aquitaniae,
omnibus ad quos praesentes literae pervenerint Salutem;
Cum defuncto jam celebris memoriae Domino Henrico Rege Patre nostro (cujus
animae propitietur Altissimus) ad nos Regni gubernaculum successione
haereditaria pervenerit, ob quod pacem nostram nomine Regio firmiter
observandam solempniter and public fecimus proclamari, ac Prelati, Comites,
Barons, and caeteri, Proceres regni Sacramentum fidelitatis, and alia quae
ratione coronae and dignitatis regiae, These words (Prompte and libenti animo)
expound and give the meaning of the Words in the former Writ, (ac procerum
Regni voluntate) i. e. readily, freely, on their own accord, without Direction,
or Command.
prompte and libenti animo nobis praestiterint; Ac dilectus and fidelis noster
Leulinus filius Griffini Principis Walliae, nobis consimile Sacramentum
fidelitatis praestare teneatur, dedimus dilectis nobis in Christo, Abbatibus de
Door, and de Hagenham, nomine nostro potestatem recipiendi fidelitatem ipsius
Leulini. Ita tamen quod si non ambo ipsorum Abbatum potuerint interesse, alter
eorum, qui praesens fuerit nihilominus plenam habeat potestatem recipiendi
Leulini praedicti. In cujus rei testimonium has literas nostras fieri fecimus
Patentes.

Datas per manum Walteri de Merton Cancellarii nostri apud novum Templum
Londini, 29 die November. Anno Regni nostri primo.
The Return to this Writ.
EXcellenti viro, and omni veneratione dignissimo, Domino W. de Merton. Domini
Regis Cancellario; suus semper R. Speinghose Constabularius de Montgomeri
Salutem, and devotam cum omni honor Reverentiam.
Venerandae Dominationi vestrae duxi significandum. Door and de Hagenham
Abbates juxta Mandatum Domini Regis per vos eis directum, in Octab. Sancti
Hilarii personaliter accesserunt ad vadum ultra Montgomeri, obviam Domino L.
filio Griffini Principis Walliae, ad accipiendum abeo, nomine dicti Domini
Regis Sacramentum fidelitatis, quibus associavi quosdam de hominibus* Ballivae
meae, qui apud dictum vadum multum ultra Horam Nonae ( much beyond Noon)
adventum dicti Domini expectantes: nec ipse venit, nec aliquod Mandatum eis
direxit ( sent them any Message) valeat Veneranda dominatio vestra semper in
Domino.

N. 3. Pat. 1. E. 1. M. 18. de Tallagio assidendo
REX Magistro Richardo de Clifford Eschaetori suo citra Trentam, salutem.
Sciatis quod assignavimus vos ad assidendum Callagium in Villa Bristoll, and
ad talliandum omnes illos in eadem Villa separatim per capita, vel in Communi
prout in aliis tallagiis villae praedictae fieri consuevit. Et ideo vobis
mandamus, quod praemissa saciatis in forma praedicta. Mandavimus enim omnibus
and singulis de

In cujus, etc, Dat. per manum W. de Merton, apud Westminst. vicesimo septimo
die Januarii.
N. 4. Pat. 1. E. 1. M. 16. de conservatione pacis per Angl.
REX Vicecomiti Surr' and Sussex salutem.
Intelleximus ex clamosa and gravi querimonia multorum, quod plures
Malefactores in Balliva tua commorantes, and per eam discurrentes,
depraedationes, homicidia, and alia cnormia perpetrant, contra pacem nostram,
quam tu depraedationibus, homicidiis, and transgressionibus depraedationibus,
and homicidiis consentientes exinde pro^edamus.

In cujus, etc. Dat. etc. apud Westminster. sexto die Junii.
N. 5. Bundela B^evium in Turr^ Land. N. 11.
EDwardus Dei gratia Rex Angliae, Dominus Hiberniae, and Dux Aquitaniae dilecto
Clerico and Cancellario suo Waltero de Merton Salutem.
Super diligentiam, quam circa nostra and Regni nostri negotia apposuistis
Grates vobis referimus speciales, rogantes, quatenus id, quod laudabiliter
inchoastis, saeliciter continuare curetis, in his, quae ad officium vestrum
pertinent. Cuicunque facientes Justitiam exhiberi, alios autem ad id pariter
inducentes; non parcentes conditioni Statui cujuscunque. Quin Rigor Juris ipsos
coherceat, quos aequitatis suavitas nequit ab injuriis cohibere. Ea namque quae
rite feceritis circa ista faciemus (disponente Altissimo) robur firmitatis
constantissime obtinere.

Dat. apud Melun. Super Sekene (i. e.) ( super Sequanam) or the River Seyne in
France. Nono die Augusti, Anno Regni nostri primo.
N. 6. Pat. 3. Ed. 1. M. 2
REgi Franc. Rex Angl. Salutem.
Mandatum vestrum nuper recepimus Parliamentum vestrum, omnium Sanctorum, viz.
in Crastino quindenae Festivitatis Beati Martini in hieme cognitioni causae,
quae vertitur in Curia vestra inter nobiles viros, Robertum, Ducem Burgundiae,
ex una part, and Robertum Comitem Nivernensem, and Yobendam uxorem ejus
Comitissam Nivernensem, ex altera super Ducatum de Burgundia ac pertinentias,
nec non processibus super hoc habendis persnaliter interessemus; verum quia ob
ardua Regni nostri negotia, quae habemus tractanda ad Dominationi vestrae
supplicamus, quatenus absentiam nostram in hac part si placet habere velitis
favorabiliter excusatam, dantes insuper, dilectis and fidelibus nostris
Mauritio de Credome, Ottoni de Grandison* and Rogero de Clifford* hujusmodi
excusationem nostram before faciendam, cum nostro mandato speciali plenariam
potestatem.

Test Rege apud Westminster' undecimo die Novembris.
N. 7. Rot. Wall. 11. Ed. 1. M. 4. Dors. N. 1.
REX Vicecomiti Norf. and Suff. salutem.
Quia Lewelinus filius Griffini, and alii Walenses Accomplices sui inimici, and
Rebels nostri, totiens temporibus nostris, and Progenitorum nostrorum Regni
Angliae, pacem Regni turbarunt, and rebellionem suam, and maliciam jam
resumptam continuare non desistunt, animo indurato, propter quod negotium, quod
ad ipsorum versutiam reprimendam jam incepimus de consilio procerum; and
magnatum regni nostri, necnon and totius Communitatis ejusdem ad praesens
proponimus, ad nostram and totius regni pacem and turbatione per Walenses ipsos
nunc habita pro voluntate sua futuris temporibus cruciari, prout tempore
nostro, and Progenitorum nostrorum contigit. Manifest tibi praecipimus,
firmiter injungentes quod venire facies coram nobis in Octab. Sancti Hilarii
Northampton, aut coram fidelibus nostris, quos ad hoc duxerimus deputand. Omnes
illos de Balliva tua ad arma potentes and aptos, qui habent ultra viginti
libratas terre and qui nobiscum in expeditione nostra Wall. non existunt, and
quatuor milites de utroque Comitatu praedicto pro Communitatibus eorund.
Comitatuum habentes plenariam potestatem. Et de qualibet Civitate, Burgo, Villa
Mercatoria, duos homines similiter potestatem habentes pro Communitatibus
eorund. ad audiend. and faciend. ea, quae sibi ex part nostra faciemus
ostendi. Et nulli de Balliva tua ultra viginti libratas terre habenti, and ad
arma potenti, and apto, amore, favore, and munere, seu timore, vel alia
quacunque ratione parcere vel differ praesumas. Nec etiam aliquem ultra
viginti libratas terre non habentem, licet ad arma aptus, seu potens suerit,
coram nobis, vel fidelibus nostris praedictis aliquatenus venire facias ex
causa praedicta. Et de nominibus omnium illorum, quos sic venire seceris, per
praefatos quatuor milites reddas certiores and habeas ibi nomina quatuor
militum illorum. Et hoc breve and haec omnia sicut te and tua diligis facere
non omittas.

Test Rege apud Rothelan. vicesimo quarto die Novembris. Eodem modo mandatum
est Vicecomitibus, Not. and Derb. Salop Staff. Cant. Hunt. Essex. Hertf. Buck.
Bedf. Somerset. Dors. Surr. Suss.



N. 8. Claus. 10. Ed. 1. M. 4. intus de decima extra Regnum non deferenda.
REX dilecto Consanguineo and Fideli suo Edmundo. Comiti Cornubiae salutem.
Quia quibusdam certis de causis, nolumus quod decima sex annorum nuper a Clero
Regni nostri in subsidium terrae sanctae periculo amissionis vitae and
membrorum, and omnium bonorum suorum, quae possident in Regno nostro,
inhibeatis ex part nostra, ne Pecuniam de dicta decima provenientem, nullo
modo deferant, aut deferri faciant, seu permittant extra Regnum. Et si quos
Mercatores aut alios Pecuniam de dicta decima provenientem, extra

Test rege apud Hertlebir. 24 die Maii. Et mandatum est Majori and
Vicecomitibus London. etc. Item mandatum est Stephano de Penchestre Custodi
Quinque Portuum, etc.



N. 9. Pat. 17. Ed. 1. M. 3, 4.
REX Praelatis, Magnatibus, ac toti Communitati Regni Scotiae salutem and
dilectionem sinceram.
Quia negotia quae contingunt Margaretam Dominam, and Reginam regni ejusdem ad
honorem Dei, and tranquilitatem totius Communitatis ejusdem regni, ac commodum
and profectum ipsius consanguineae nostrae, been and fideliter prosperari,
totis desideriis peroptamus; vos requirimus and rogamus attente, quatinus
Custodibus ad regimen dicti regni nomine praedictae nostrae consanguineae
deputatis, taliter intendentes sitis and obedientes. Quod nos and Domina vestra
antedicta possumus and debeamus fidelitatem vestrum merito habere commendatam,

Dat apud Clarendon. sexto die Novembr. These Letters were also entered upon the
Close Roll.



N. 10. Pat. 18. Ed. 1. M. 9.
REX venerabilibus Patribus Willielmo Sancti Andreae, and Roberto Glascuensi
Episcopis, ac nobilibus viris Johanni Common, and Jacobo Senescallo Custodibus
Regni Scotiae, cae^^r^^que Episcopis, Abbatibus, Prioribus totique Clero,
Comitibus, Baronibus, ac toti Communitati regni ejusdem salutem.
Cum ad leges and consuetudines Regni Scotiae observandas, ex Sacramenti,
praestiti debito teneamus, Nos de probata fidelitate, and nota industria
praedilecti nostri venerabilis Patris, Domini Antonii, Dei Gratia Dunelmensis
Episcopi plenissime Scotiae, ac etiam ad Supportationem oneris caeteris ipsius
regni Scotiae incumbentis, eundem Episcopum ad vos mittimus, and tenore
praesentium assignamus, ad tenendum in eodem regno locum, charissimae
consanguineae nostrae, Dominae Margareta* filiae magnifici Principis Domini
Erici, Dei Gratia Regis N^^w^giae illustris, Dominae and Reginae vestrae, ac
charissimi nati nostri Edwardi and ad justificandum, and ratificandum regnum
praedictum, una cum caeteris ipsius custodibus, Praelatorum and Magnatum
ejusdem regni, secundum leges and consuetudines inibi hactenus observatas.
Quare Vniversitatem vestrum attentius requirimus, and rogamus, quatinus ob
honorem nostrum, Dominae vestrae, and nati nostri, eundem Episcopum ad
praemissa benign and Curialiter, sitis intendentes, and obedientes eidem in
hiis omnibus, quae ad Gubernationem and statum ipsius regni pacificum
requiruntur.

In cujus, etc. Dat. apud North. 28 die Augusti.
N. 11. Rot. de Superioritate Regis Angliae in regno Scotiae, etc. Annis 19,
20, 21, 22, 23. Ed. ^. in Tur. Land. Et Mat. West. fol. 415. N. 10, 20.
A Tous iceulx qui ceste present Lettre verront ou orront Florence Count de
Holland, Robert de Brus Seigneur du val Danaund, Jan Baliol Seigneur de
Galewie, Jan de Hastings Seigneur de Abergenne, Jan Common Seigneur de Badenaw,
Patrique de Dunbar, Count de la March, Jan Vesey pur sen pere, Nichol de
Seules, and Guilaume de Ros, Saluz en Dieu.
Con nous entendons d'aver Droyt et Reyaume de Escoce celle droyt munstrer,
chalanger and averer devant celuy qui plus de poer Jurisdiction, and reeson
eust de trier nostre droyt, and le noble Prince Sire Edward par le Grace de
Dieu, Rey d'Angleterre nous eit inform per bons and suffisant reesons que a ly
appent and aver dict la Sovereing Seignorie du dit Reyaume d' Escoce, and la
conisance de Oir, Trier, and Terminer nostre Droyt. Nous de nostre propre
volunte sans nulle mane de force ou distress volons, ortions, and grantons de
receiver droyt devan luy come Sovereing Seigneur de la terre. Et volons ja le
menis, and promittons que nous averons etendrons ferm and stable son fait, and
qui celuy empertera

En Testimoyne de ceste chose nous avons mis nous Seaules a' cest Escript fait
and done a' Norham le Mardi prochien apres le ascenscion l' an de Grace 1291.
N. 12. lb* in Rot. etc. and Mat. West. N. 40, 50.
A Tous iceulx, etc. ( as above) Florence Count de Holland, etc. ( as before)
Saluz en Dieu.
Com nous avons otrie and grant de nostre bon volunte, and com une assent sans
nulle destresse a Noble Prince Sire Edward, par la Grace de Dieu Rey d'
Angleterre quil come Sovereign Seigneur de la terre D'escoce pensoier, trier
and terminer, nos Chalenges and nos Demandes que nous entendons Munstrer and
Averrer pur nostre droyt en la Reyaume D'escoce and droyt receiver devant luy;
Come Sovereign Seigneur de la terre promettant Sale m^ins que son ^^t aurun and
tendron ^erme and stable, and qui l'emportera le Reyaume a qui droyt le durra
devant luy. Mes pur ceo que l'avant dit Rey d' Angleterre, ne pust nule manner
conisance fair ne accomplier sans judgment ne dict estre sauns execution, ne
execution ne peut il feire duement sauns la possession and seysine de nesme la
terre, and de chasteaus: Nous volons, ottrions, and grantons, que il come
Sovereine Seigneur a per fair les chose avaunt dits and a la seysine de soul la
terre and de chasteaus D'escoce, tant que droyt soyt fait and performy a
Demandons en tell manner que avaunt ceo qu'il and la and a Gardens, and a comune
de Reyaume D'escoce, a feir la reversion de mesme la Royaume, and chasteaus ou
toute la Royaunte, Dignite, Seignorie, Franchices, Custume, Dreitures, Leys,
Vsages and Possessions, and toutes maneres de apurtenances en mesmes, l'estat
q'il estoient quant la seysine luy fust baille and livere a celuy qui le droyt
emportera par jugement de la Royaume save au Rey d' Angleterre, le homage de
celuy qui serra Roy Isynt que la reversion soit fait dedens les de uzmois,
aprez le jour que le assign a luy de par le Rey d' Angleterre, and de sous
lour seaus saune renable sustenance de la terre and des chasteaus and de
Ministers du Reyaume,

en Testimoyne de ceste chose avaunt dit nous avons meis nos seaus a' cest
escript fait and done Norham le Mercredie, apres l' Ascension l'an du Grace
1291.
This also was sent to several Monasteries by the King's Command, to be
Inserted into their Chronicles for perpetual memory.

N. 13. In Rot. de superioritate Reg. Angl. etc.
EDwardus, Dei Gratia, Rex Angliae, etc. and Superior Dominus Regni Scotiae
dilectis and fidelibus suis Willielmo Sancti Andreae, and Roberto Glascuensi
Episcopis, Johanni Common, Jacobo Seneschallo Scotiae, and Briano, filio Alani,
Custodibus suis Regni Scotiae,
Cum Johannes de Baliolo nuper in Parliamento nostro apud Berewicum super
Twedam, venisset coram nobis, and petivisset praedictum Regnum Scotiae sibi per
nos adjudicari and seisinam ipsius regni sibi ut proximiori Haeredi Margaritae
filiae Regis Norwegiae, Dominae Scotiae and Neptis, quondam Alexandri ultimi
Regis Scotiae jure Successionis liberari. Ac nos auditis, and intellectis
Petitionibus, and rationibus tam praedicti Johannis quam aliorum petentium
predictum regnum. Et eisdem Petitionibus, and rationibus diligenter examinatis,
Johannem de Baliolo esse propinquiorem Haeredem praedictae Margaretae quoad
dictum Regnum Scotiae obtinendum, propter quod idem regnum Scotiae and seisinam
ejuldem eidem Johanni salvo jure nostro and haeredum nostrorum reddimus. Vobis
mandamus quod seisinam praedicti regni Scotiae cum omnibus pertinentiis suis
infra idem regnum existentibus, and quae ad manus nostras tanquam ad Superiorem
Dominum ipsius regni Scotiae post mortem praefatae Margaretae devenerunt, sine
dilatione praedicto Johanni de Baliolo Releviis and Debitis quibuscunque quae
de exitibus supradicti regni Scotiae, usque ad diem confectionis praesentium
debebantur seu deberi poterunt quoquomodo.

Test meipso apud Berewick super Twedam, 13 die Novembris, regni nostri
vicesimo.
N. 14. Rot. de jurament. Homag. and Fidelit. etc. Rot. Scot. 24. Edw. 1. pecia
prima.
IN Nomine Domini Amen. Anno a Nativitate ejusdem 1296. indictione nona Mensis
Maii 13.
praesentibus venerabili in Christo Patri Domino Antonio permissione divina
Episcopo Dunelmensi, ac nobilibus viris Domino Johanne Warren, Rogero
Northfolch, Humphredo Hereford, W. de Warwick, Patricio de Dunbar and Marchia.
Gilberto de Anegos Comitibus, Testibus vocatis, and rogatis Baronibus, quam
Militibus, quam Clericis and Laicis in multitudine copiosa, praesente etiam me
Notario Subscripto. Nobilis Vir Dominus Jacobus Seneschallus Scotiae Miles, non
vi, nec metu coactus, ut dicebat, sed spontanea sua and libera voluntate venit
ad fidem and voluntatem Domini Regis Angliae, and confaederationes, contractus,
conventiones, and pacta quocunque nomine censeantur, si quae ipsius nomine vel
consensu cum Rege Francorum vel sibi adhaerentibus contra dictum Dominum suum,
Dominum Regem Angliae unquam annullavit, and invalida, and nulla fore
pronunciavit, sponteque pure and absolute quatenus de facto processerant,
eisdem cum omni commodo, quod exinde sibi and suis poterit aliqualiter
pervenire express renunciavit organo vocis suae. Et tactis sacrosanctis, and
osculatis Dei Evangeliis dicto Domino suo Regi Angliae fidelitatem fecit in
subscripta forma and super fidelitate sua sic facta suas Patentes Literas sub
nomine sua conceptas conficiens,

A Tous ceaus qui cestes Lettres verront ou orront James Seneschal D'escoce
saluz, pur ceo que nous sumes venut a la foy e la volunte du autres Noble
Prince Chier Signeur Sire Edward, par la Grace Dieu Roy D'engleterre, Signeur
D'irland, and Duc's D'aquitaigne, nous promettons pein de Cors e D'avoir e sur
quant que nous penssoms encoure que nous serroms en sa eide, e li serveiroms
bien and Leawment contre totes gentz qui perront vivre and morir totes les foiz
que nous serroms requis ou garniz de par nostre Signeur le Roy D'engleterre
avaunt dit ou de par ses Heirs; E que nous leur Damage ne scavoms que nous nel
destorbeoms a tot nostre poer e le leur faceoms assavoir, e a cestes Chooses
tenir e garder obligeoms nous e nos Heirs e tous nos biens e outre ceo avoms
jurez sur Seints

En Testmoyance de que chose nous avoms fait fair cestes Lettres overtes
Seals de nostre Seal. Donees a Rocksburgh le trezim jour de Maii, lan de regne
nostre Seigneur le Roy D'engleterre avaunt dit vintisme quart.
N. 15. Ibid. Rot. Scot. 24, 25, 26. Ed. 1. de juramen. and fidelit. etc.
POST haec vero ( That is, after the King, and the Steward of Scotland, with
many Noblemen, and others, had Renounced, done Homage, and Sworn Fealty,)
Indicto Domini Regis Angliae Parliamento consentientibus utriusque Regni
Nobilibus and Prelatis in Octavis assumptionis Beatae Mariae Virginis, Anno
Domini and Indictione prae notatis (i. e. 1296 Indictione 9.) apud Berwic super
Twede, congregatisque ibidem praedicti regni Scotiae tam Episcopis, Abbatibus,
Prioribus cum aliis Ecclesiarum Prelatis quam Nobilibus viris Comitibus,
Baronibus, and aliis Militibus, and Proceribus dicti regni cum Communitatibus
Civitatum and Villarum, vicesimo octavo die Augusti, praesentibus Nobilibus
viris Domino Johanne Warreniae, Domino Rogero Northfolck, Domino Willielmo de
Warwic, Patricio de Dunbar and Marchia, and Domino Gilberto de Anegos
Comitibus: Domino Johanne de Hastings, Domino Johanne Wake, Domino Hugone le
Despenser, Domino Briano filio Alani, Domino Petro Corbett, Radulpho, filio
Gulielmi, Johanne, filio Marmaduci, Walterd de Hundercumbe, and Roberto de
Hilton, Baronibus, cum Domino Rogero Brabanson, Milite and Magistro, Johanne de
Cadomo, Publico authoritate Papae Notario, Testibus ad Subscripta vocatis
specialiter, and rogatis cum aliis tam Militibus and Clericis quam Laicis in
Multitudine copiosa, and me Notario Subscripto, (i. e. Andrea Gulielmi de Tang,
Clerico, etc.) venerunt in dicto Domini Regis Angliae Parliamento memorato, non
vi, nec metu coacti set spontanea and libera sua voluntate supradicti Nobiles
and Praelati Scotiae, nec non and Milites, Proceres, and Regnicolae, qui
praefato Domino Regi Angliae fidelitatem fecerunt, ut praemittitur, diebus and
locis subscriptis, una cum omnibus, and singulis nominatis inferius, and
fidelitatem eandem praedicto Domino Regi Angliae prius factam ut praedicitur,
cum revocatione, cassatione, irritatione, and annullatione, confaederationum,
contractuum, conventionum and pactorum quorumcunque nomine censeantur, si quae
unquam suo nomine vel consensu clam, vel palam, cum Domino Philippo Rege
Francorum, Regem Angliae initae fuerant, qualitercunque sive per ipsorum vel
Domini Johannis de Baliolo, quondam Regis Scotorum Procuratores vel Nuncios,
generales vel speciales destinatos in Franciam; and renunciationes easdem
factas (ut suprascribitur) innovarunt, omologarunt, laudarunt and etiam
approbarunt. Et de communi omnium Praelatorum, and Nobilium dicti regni Scotiae
consensu unanimi, and voluntate praefato Domino Regi Angliae Fidelitatem
iterato and Homagium pro omnibus Terris suis infra dictum regnum Scotiae
existentibus fecerunt, and tactis Sacrosanctis and osculatis Dei Evangeliis in
forma Subscripta fidelitatem suam firmarunt corporalis vinculo juramenti, and
super fidelitatibus suis and homagiis sic factis, sicut infra patet, iterum
suas Literas Patentes fecerunt suis Sigillis pendentibus consignatas. Quarum
Literarum incipiendo primo ad Praelatos, Episcopos, Abbates, and Priores,
subsequenter vero ad Nobiles, Comites, Barons, and alios Milites, and sic
ultimo descendendo ad Communitates Villarum, and alios Incolas regni Scotiae
memorati seriatim

A Touz ceaus qui cestes Lettres verront ou orront Robert Evesque de Glasca,
Henry Evesque de Abirden, Thomas Evesque de Candida Casa, saluz.
Pur ceo que nous sumes venuz a la foi, e a la volunte due tres Noble Prince
nostre Chier Seignor Sire Edward par la Grace de Dieu, etc. Nous promettons par
nous e pur nous Successors peine de Cors, e d'avoir, etc. ( and as in that
before of James, Seneschal of Scotland, verbatim) e a cestes chooses tenir, e
guarder nos Oblegioms nous, e nos Successors e tous nos biens, e outre ceo
avoms jurez sur Saints Evangils, etc.

En Testimoignance des ques chooses nous avoms fait fair cestes Lettres overtes
de nos Seals. Donez a Berwic sur Twede, le vint Eutisme jour d' August lan du
Reign nostre Seigneur Roy D'engleterre avaunt dit vintisme quart.
After this manner are all the Fealties of the Bishops, Abbots, Priors, Earls,
Barons, Knights, Communities of Cities, and Towns, and other Inhabitants of
Scotland Recorded.

N. 16. Claus. 24. Ed. 1. M. 7. Dors. de Parliament. tenendo.
REX Venerabili in Christo Patri R. eadem gratia Cantuariensi
Vestra Paternitas plene novit qualiter vos, and alii Praelati and Clerus regni
nostri apud Westminster ( On Sunday before St. Andrew, or the thirtieth of
November, then last past, before the date of this Writ) ultimo congregati in
concessione decimae Redituum, and Beneficiorum vestrorum Ecclesiasticorum pro
defensione regni ejusdem usque ad Festum Sancti Michaelis proxime futurum nobis
facta, and a nobis sub spe uberioris subsidii Regem Franciae and Nos pacem
reformari vel treugas iniri contingeret dare promisistis unanimiter liberaliter
and libenter; cujus quidem reformationi Pacis vel initioni treugarum dictus Rex
Franciae hactenus non consensit; Quocirca vobis Mandamus in fide, and
dilectione quibus nobis tenemini firmiter injungentes quod in crastino animarum
proxime futuro apud Sanctum Edmundum personaliter intersitis praemunientes
Capitulum per Vnum, idemque Clerus per duos idoneos Procuratores plenam and
sufficientem potestatem ab ipsis Capitulo and Clero habentes una cum vobiscum
intersint modis omnibus tunc ibidem ad Ordinandum de quantitate and modo
subsidii memorati.

Test Rege apud Berwick super Twede, vicesimo sexto die Augusti.
N. 17. H. de Knighton, Col. 2489. N. 60. and in Biblioth. Cot. Tiber. E. 4. N.
2
BOnefacius, etc.

Ad perpetuam rei memoriam; Clericis Laicos infestos opido tradit antiquitas:
Quod and praesentium experimenta temporum manifest declarant, dum suis finibus
non contenti nituntur in vetitum, and ad illicita sua fraena relaxant, nec
prudenter attendunt quomodo sit iis in Clericos Ecclesiasticasve Personas and
bona interdicta potestas: quinimmo Ecclesiarum Praelatis, Ecclesiasticisve
Personis regularibus and secularibus imponunt onera gravia, ipsos talliant
Praelati, Ecclesiasticaeve personae trepidantes ubi trepidandum non est,
transitoriam pacem quaerentes, plus timentes Majestatem Temporalem offendere,
quam aeternam, talium abusibus non tam temerarie quam improvide adquiescunt,
sedis Apostolicae Auctoritate Nos igitur talibus actibus obviare volentes de
fratrum nostrorum consilio Apostolica Auctoritate statuimus, quod quicumque
Praelati Ecclesiasticaeve personae, religiosi vel seculares, quorumcumque
ordinum, conditionis, sive status, collectas vel tallias, dimidi am, decimam,
vicesimam seu centesimam suorum and Ecclesiarum sua rum proventuum vel bonorum
Laicis solverint, vel se soluturos concesserint, aut quamvis aliam quantitatem,
portionem, aut quicquam ipsorum proventuum vel bonorum aestimationem vel
valorem ipsorum sub adjutorii mutui, subventionis, subsidii, vel doni nomine,
seu quovis alio timore vel modo vel quaesito color, absque auctoritate sedis
ejusdem, necnon Imperatores, Reges seu Principes, Duces, seu Comites, vel
Barons, Proceres, Capitanei, Officiales vel Rectores, quocumque nomine
censeantur, civitatum, castrorum, vel quorumcumque locorum constitutorum
ubilibet and quivis alius cujuscumque qui talia imposuerint, and exegerint vel
receperint, aut apud aedes sacras deposita Ecclesiarum vel Ecclesiasticarum
personarum ubilibet arestaverint, seisierint, vel occupari mandaverint, aut
occupata, seisita, seu arestata receperint, necnon omnes qui scienter in
praedictis dederint consilium, auxilium, vel favorem public vel occulte, eo
ipso Sententiam Excommunicationis in current. Vniversitates quae in hiis
culpabiles fuerint Ecclesiastico supponimus interdicto.

Praelatis and Ecclesiasticis Personis in virtute obedientiae and sub
depositionis poena districte mandantes ut talibus absque expressa licentia
dictae sedis nullatenus adquiescant. Quodque praetextu cujuscumque
obligationis, promissionis, and concessionis factarum hactenus vel faciendarum
in antea priusquam hujusmodi constitutio, prohibitio, seu praeceptum ad
noticiam ipsorum pervenerit nil solvant, nec supradicti seculares aliquod
quoquo modo recipiant. Et si solverint vel praedicti horrendum secularium
potestatum abusum, nullatenus sub dissimulatione transire, non obstantibus
quibuscumque privilegiis, sub quibuscumque tenoribus seu modo aut verborum
conceptione concessis Imperatoribus, Regibus, and aliis supradictis, quae
contra praemissa in nullo volumus

Dat. Romae ad Sanctum Petrum Feb. 25. 1297. 24. Ed. 1.
VI. Kalendarum Marcii, Pontificatus nostri Anno secundo.
N. 18. Claus. 25. Ed. 1. M. 23. De Laicis feodis Cleric. capiend. in man. Reg.
REX Vicecomiti Lincoln. Salutem.
Propter aliquas certas causas tibi precipimus, quod omnia Laica feoda totius
Cleri de Balliva Archiepiscoporum, Episcoporum, and Religiosorum quam aliorum
Clericorum quorumcumque cujuscumque status existant una cum bonis and catallis
in eisdem inventis, sine dilatione capias in manum nostram and ea salvo
custodire facias, ita quod nec ipsi, nec aliquis per ipsos manum ad ea
apponant, donec aliud inde preceperimus. Et hoc nullatenus omittas.

Test Rege apud Ely, duodecimo die Februarii. Eodem modo mandatum est singulis
Vicecomitibus per Angliam.



N. 19. Pat. 25. Ed. 1. M. 14. intus. It passed under the Great Seal Feb. 18.
that Year.
EDwardus, etc. Capitaneo Marinariorum and eisdem Marinariis ac omnibus
Ballivis and fidelibus suis ad quos praesentes literae pervenerint, salutem.
Cum Praelati and Clerus Ebor. and Karliolen. Civitatum and Diocesium prudenter
intuentes inevitabilis necessitatis angustias quibus Ecclesiae suae and totum
regnum Angliae occulata fide exponuntur, and subjacent hiis diebus, usque ad
quintam partem Beneficiorum and bonorum suorum istius anni juxta taxationem
nuper factam resistendum machinationibus and invasionibus hostium, qui alias
applicantes in dictum Regnum, Dei timore postposito, Ecclesias combusserint,
vasa sacra and alia ornamenta divino dedicata cultui rapuerunt, personas
Ecclesiasticas etiam decrepitas in eisdem inhumaniter trucidarunt, quique
caparatis prioribus and novis and incognitis eidem regno navium and armorum
protectionem and defensionem nostram specialem, praedictos Praelatos and
Clerum, and singulos eorundem homines, terras, res, redditus, and omnes
possessiones suas: Et ideo vobis mandamus, quod praedictos Praelatos and Clerum
and singulos eorum homines, terras, res, redditus, and omnes possessiones suas
manuteneatis, protegatis, and defendatis, non inferentes eis, vel inferri
permittentes injuriam, molestiam, bladis seu aliis bonis and catallis
praedictorum Praelatorum and Cleri, seu alicujus eorum ubicunque consistant ad
opus nostrum aut aliorum quorumcumque fine licentia and voluntate eorundem
Praelatorum and Clericorum aliquid interim capiatis, seu capi faciatis, quo
minus de eisdem bonis and catallis suis libere disponere and ordinare,

Test meipso apud Walsyngham, 6 die Februarii, Anno regni nostri vicesimo
quinto.
N. 20. Pat. 25. Ed. 1. Part. 1. M. 15. de protectione Clericorum.
REX omnibus Ballivis and Fidelibus suis ad quos, etc.
Sciatis quod suscepimus in protectionem and defensionem nostram specialem
dilectum Clericum nostrum Iterium de Ingolisma Archidiaconum Bathou. homines,
terras, res, redditus and omnes possessiones suas. Et ideo vobis Iterium,
homines, terras, res, redditus, and omnes possessiones suas manuteneatis,
protegatis, and defendatis. Non inferentes eis vel inferri permittentes
injuriam, molestiam, dampnum aut gravamen. Et si quid eis forisfactum fuerit,
id, eis sine dilatione faciatis emendari. In cujus rei testimonium has literas
nostras fieri fecimus patentes usque ad festum omnium sanctorum proximo futurum
duraturas. Nolumus autem sed firmiter inhibemus, ne de bladis seu aliis bonis
and catallis ipsius Iterii ubicumque consistant ad opus nostrum Iterii aliquid
interim capiatis, seu capi faciatis quo minus de eisdem bladis, bonis, and
catallis suis libere disponere and ordinare, ac commodum suum facere possit,
prout sibi melius viderit expedire.

Test Rege apud Langeley decimo octavo die Februarii. Consimiles literas de
protectione habent subscripti, videlicet.
Johannes de Metingham. Lambertus de Trikingham. Magister Johannes de Lacy.
Radulphus de Staunford, Capellanus. Johannes de Drokenesford. Henricus de Lem.
Robertus de Walmesford. Thomas de Hoyvill, Clericus. Robertus de Scardeburgh.
Ricardus de Roffen. Willielmus de Burnton. Magister Edmundus de London.
Magister Thomas de Sodinton. Magister Adam de Aumodesham. Henricus de Gudeford,
Clericus. Elias de Bekingham. Magister Thomas de Hale, Clericus. Humfr. de
Waleden. Henricus de Lichefeld. Nicolaus Tutwyn de Louseby. David le Grant.
Henricus de Stanton. Magister Thomas de Lichefeld. Magister Thomas de
Abberbiry. Will. Bathon. and Wellen. Episcopus. Will. de la Dune. Nicolaus de
Bolyngbrok. Will. de Felstede. Nicolaus de Misterton, Clericus. Johannes de
Berwyk. Adam de Osgodby. Will. de Langele. Henricus de Dunolm. Prior de
Wymondham. Radulphus de Alegate. Magister Robert. de Sancto Albano. Nicolaus de
Misterton. Robertus de Middleton. Ricardus de Keston. Hugo de Hengham. Andreas
de Kenebolton. Johannes de Stafford. Robertus de Aete, Clericus. Henricus de
Skenhelt. Adam de Waldingfeld. Johannes de Certesey, Clericus. Magister Petrus
Aimerici, Parsona Ecclesie de Pecham. Magister Guido de Tillebrok, Cleric.
Johannes Episcopus Wynton. Phillippus de Wilughby. Will. de Burn, Clericus.
Egidius de Barenton. Magister Thomas de Erlee. Ricar. le Hostage de
Loutheburgh. Galfr. de Norwico, Clericus. Ricardus de Merton, Clericus.
Audoenus de Monte Gomeri. Johannes Skip de London. Robertus de Bardelby.
Henricus de Thurston. Magister Reginaldus de Braundon. Raulphus de Rimnale.
Petrus de Lyndeseye. Richar. Bernard de Hunnewyk. Johannes filius Johannes de
Arderne. Et idem Reginaldus habet aliam prtoectionem pro nomine suo solum.
Bartholomeus de Florentino. Magister Jacobus Sinebaud. Priorissa de Haliwell.
Will. de Canvil. Magister Radulphus de Juyngho. Gilbertus de Robiry. Walterus
de Wengham. Johannes Baldok. Magister Thomas de Abberbury. Will. de Norwico.
Thomas de Basing, Clericus. Robertus de Heriere. Galfridus de Farham. Simon de
Farham. Priorissa Sancte Helene London. Rogerus de Skermynger, Clericus.
Johannes de Silverston. Magister Walterus de Dounbrigge. Egidius de Audenardo.
Magister Andreas de Farentino. Magister Will. de Essex, Clericus. Magister
Thomas de Skerunge, Cler. Thomas de Lavenham. Walterus de Leycestr. Rogerus de
Leycestr. Clericus. Magister Simon, Parsona Ecclesie de Heyford Waryn. Henricus
de Hales. Walterus de Felstede, Clericus. Will. de Byrlay. Will. de Troubragg,
Clericus. Hugo de Notingham, Clericus. Magister Henr. de Bray, Clericus.
Magister Petrus de Dene. Simon de Wovecoto, Clericus. Hugo de Roubury,
Clericus. Willielmus Eliensis Episcopus. Johannes de Kirkby, Parsona Eccles. de
Northmimmes. Robertus de Mar. Robertus de Corneherth. Johannes de Wengham,
Precentor Ecclesie Sancti Pauli London. Magister Johannes de Sancto Claro. Will.
de Persoure. Henricus de Rolling. Henricus de Fodringey. Johannes de Reda.
Edmundus de Hoo. Magister Ricardus de Gravesend, Archid. London. Walterus de
Norwico. Henricus de Bacthorp, Clericus. Nicolaus de Remyn, Clericus. Nicolaus
de Hatfeld, Clericus. Johannes Chaynell. Abbas de Hyda Wynton. Nicolaus de
Burton. Nicolaus de Sparkford, Clericus. Magister Edmundus de London, Parsona
Ecclesie de Whitlisford. Idem Edmundus Canonicus libere Capelle Regis beat
Marie in castro Regis Hastings. Richardus de Bereford, Clericus.


N. 21. Pro Priore Hospital. Sancti Johannis Jerus. in Anglia. Claus. 25. Ed.
1. M. 22.
REX Vicecomiti Westmerland, salutem.
Licet tibi nuper preceperimus quod Laica feoda Archiepiscoporum, Episcoporum,
and totius Cleri in Balliva tua una cum bonis and catallis in eisdem inventis
in manum nostram caperes, and ea salvo custodires quousque aliud inde
precepissemus. Quia tamen dilectos nobis in Christo Priorem and Fratres
Hospitalis Sancti Johannis Jerusalem in Anglia per literas protectionem and
defensionem nostram specialem, omnibus and singulis inhibentes ne de equis vel
aliis averiis suis, carectis vel cariagio, seu bladis, lardario, aut aliis
bonis vel rebus suis quibuscumque ubicumque consistant ad opus nostrum aut
aliorum, quorumcuque sine licentia and voluntate ipsorum Prioris and fratrum,
aliquid interim capiant, seu capi faciant, quo minus de eisdem equis, and aliis
averiis suis, carectis, cariagio, bladis, lardario, and aliis bonis Laica feoda
ipsorum Prioris and fratrum in Balliva tua in manum nostram pretextu mandati
nostri predicti capta una cum bonis and catallis in eisdem inventis eisdem
Priori and fratribus sine diminutione aliqua restituens, nichil de equis, vel
aliis averiis, carectis, cariagio, bladis, lardario, aut aliis bonis, seu rebus
suis predictis capias, seu capi facias contra tenorem protectionis nostre
predicte.

Test rege apud Ambresbury, vicesimo quinto die Februarii. Consimiles literas
habent iidem Prior and fratres singulis Vicecomitibus per Angliam. Test ut
supra.



N. 22. Pat. 25. Ed. 1. Part 1. M. 12. De Recognitionibus a Praelatis and aliis
Personis Ecclesiast. recipiend.
EDward par la Grace Dieu, etc. a Monsieur Adam de Wells, and au Viscunte de
Nichole, saluz.
Come and gueres verse aucuns Clerks de seinte Eglise de nostre Roiaume
demorantz en nostre protection e en nostre defense, qui du tot refuserent a
fair aid a la defense de tot le Reaume e de Leglise dengleterre, eussoms
concevue pas sauwz deserte rancour e indignacion. Nous ja seit ce quil eent
este meyns remembrantz, e meyns conisantz les perils que porroient avenir a tot
le Reaume e a Leglise dengleterre e a eus meismes aussint par lur defaute lur
voillantz fair especiale Grace a ceste foiz tot nel eussent il deervie, Avoms
assign vous ambedeux, ou le un de vous, si ambedeux ne pussetz estre ensemble
a receyure en nostre noun reconisauncez de Prelatz e dautres Persons de seinte
Eglise qui quil soient en le Conte avantdit solouc lur richesses qui vodrount
aver nostre protection en la furme que vous est baillee and enjoynte de par
nous, e a certifier nostre Chancelier des nouns de ceus qui teus reconisances
averont faites e a certifier ausint le Tresorier and les Barouns Eschekier de
tieux reconissances eusint receues. Issent ne por quant que tieux maneres de
reconissances soient faites enter cy ce la Pasque procheynement avenir e ne mye
outre. E pur ceo vous mandoms que les avantdites chooses faces en la form
desusdite. En tesmoignance de que chose nous avoms fait fair cestes nos
Littres overtes a durer par le tenz avantdit.

Don a Clarendon le premer jour de Marz, lan de nostre Regne vintyme quint.
De promulgantibus Sententias and Excommunicationes in Ministros Regis
capiendis and imprisonandis.
EDward, etc. A Monsieur Adam de Wells e au Viscunte de Nicole, saluz.
Nous aparcevantz que troueurs de nouelles par les queux descord purreit surdre
enter nous, nos Prelatz, nos Contes, nos Barons, and nos autres grantz gentz,
safforcent a la subversion de nostre Roiaume e a la destourbaunce de nostre
pees nient meyns que ceux qui safforcent dassailer nous e nostre Roiaume par
mortele enemiste e par force darmes. Ne voillantz teu manner de malice passer
saunz estre refrenee, Assignoms vous pur enquere e serchier en totes les
meffeseours e disturbeours de nostre pees conteront nouelles and destraxions en
la form avantdite ou qui desturberont ou vouderont ou procuront desturber
lexecucion de nos maundementz, ou qui durront sentences de escumenge ou feront
monicions ou les sentences donees ou monicions faites priveement ou apartement
pronuncieront ou voudront puplier contre nos Ministres e nos sugges ou, contre
queux autres quil seient aerdauntz a nous e a nostre foi qui feront execucion
de nos maundementz pur le contre persons de seynte eglise qui se mettent en
nostre proteccion pur sauver e defendre eux e lur Eglises, ou qui feront rien
ou voudront fair par art ou par engyn, par quey la peisiblete de la pees e du
Roiaume seit desturbee e lexecucion de nos maundementz qui nous eoms commaundez
pur le pru du Roiaume e de tot nostre poeple soit rerie ou empeschie en nule
manner. E pur ceo vous maundoms que touz ceux de quel estat ou condition quil
soient, qui des chooses avantdites ou daucune de eles troessez copables, nostre
prison sauvement gardez taunt que vous eneez autre maundement de nous. E voloms
que si vous ambedeux ny peussetz entendre adonk lautre de vous qui serra pluis
pres des parties ou nules des chooses avantdites avendront face reddement e
saunz delay lexecution de cestes bosoignes en la form avantdite.

E feat a remember que les Chivalers, e les Viscontes de souz escritz sont
assignez en auteuz fourmes de suis escrites en les Contees de sous, Aleyn
Plokenet e le Visconte de Sumers e de Dors en memes les Contiez. Bueges de
Knouil e le Visconte de Salopshire e de Stafford en memes les Counteez. Johan
Tregoz e le Visconte de Hereford en meme la Countee. Thomas de Berkelee e les
Viscontes de Glouc. and Wynecestr. en memes les Counteez. Johan de Segrave e le
Visconte de War. e de Leyc. en memes les Counteez. Robert Fitz Pain e le
Visconte de Wilteshire en meme la Countee. Rauf Pipard e le Visconte de Bedf.
and de Buk. en memes les Counteez. Johan Lovel e le Visconte de Oxendord e de
Berk en memes les Counteez. Thomas de Furnival e le Visconte de Derb. en meme
la Countee. Johan de Bretun e le Visconte Middlesex en meme la Countee. Robert
de Tateshale e le Visconte de Norff. and Suff. en memes les Counteez. Johan
Engayne e le Visconte de Northt. e de Rotel. en memes les Counteez. Henr.
Tregoz e le Visconte de Surr. e de Sussex en memes les Counteez. Robert Fitz
Roger e le Visconte de Essex e de Hertf. en memes les Counteez. Reynald de
Argentem e le Visconte de Cantabr. e de Hunt. en memes les Counteez. William de
Leyburne e le Viscount de Kent en meme le Countee. Henr. Tieys e le Visconte de
South. en meme la Countee. Geffrey de Cammill e les Viscontes de Cornewayll e
Deveneshire en memes les Counteez. Johan de Lancastr. e le Visconte de
Lancastr. en meme la Countee. Reynard de Gray en la Countee de Cestr. oue les
quatre Cantredz. Johan de Havering en Norwales. Williame de Brehuse e Wauter de
Pederton en Westwales.


Fet a remembrer que les avantditz Chivalers e Viscountes frount le chooses sus
escrites solome les articles que sensiwent.

Ordene est que les Baneretz e les Viscountez qui sont a ceo assignez en les
Counteez preignent plegges des gentz lays tieux que seient suffisauntz pur les
somes reconues. E que les Clerks qui plegges lays ne poent trouer Baillent en
le poer le Visconte de lur chateus taunt com le grant quil frount amontera
jekes a taunt quil eent paiez.

E seit la chose demandee e prise en ceste form pur la defense de eus Prelat
ou parsone de Eglise ou Clerk beneficie, al amuntaunce du double del eyde que
chascum fist darrein au Roi, pur taunt que la busoigne est ore dassez greignure
que adonk ne fu.

E facent les Baneretz e les Viscontes enrouler les sommes reconues e Eschekier
pur les deners fere lever.

E facent les Baneretz e les Viscontes a chescun Clerk qui avera reconu en la
form avantdite, bille, seal de lur seaus au Chaunceler pur la protexion le
Roi aver, e pur les autres briess qui lour covendront.

REX Coronatoribus suis in Comitatu Surr. salutem.
Mittimus vobis duo paria literarum nostrarum patentium una cum forma
presentibus interclusa and tradenda Henr. Tregoz and Vicecomiti nostro Surr.
and Sussex vobis mandantes quod praedictas literas una cum forma praedicta
eisdem Henrico and Vicecomiti vice nostra tradatis and juramentum ab eis
recipiatis quod ea ad que per nos assignantur per easdem literas secundum
dictam formam fideliter facient and complebunt.

Test ut supra. Consimiles litere diriguntur Coronatoribus in Comitatibus
subscriptis quod in forma subscripta juramentum recipiant, etc. ut supra,
videlicet. Coronatoribus in Comitatu Derb. quod a Tho. de Furnival and Vicecom.
Derb. juramentum recipiant, etc. Coronatoribus in Comitatu Northampton* quod a
Johanne Engayne, and Coronatoribus in Comitatu Essex quod a Roberto filio
Rogeri, and Vic. Essex and Hertford, etc. Coronatoribus in Com. Middlesex quod
a Johanne le Bretun, and Vic. ejusdem Comitatus, etc. Coronatoribus in Comitatu
Kantie quod a Willielmo de Leyburn, and Vicecomite, etc. Coronatoribus in
Comitatu Lancastr. quod a Johanne de Lancastr. and




AU noble Peer discret Chanceler nostre Seignur le Roi, ou a son Lieutenant le
seon Gilbert de Knovil Viscount de Devon si luy plest, saluz.
E quant quil poet e fet de Reverence e d'onur sachez sire que le Abbe de seint
Dogmael pur les Procuraturs Roberd de la Pit, e William de Culecumb vint a
moi le primer jour de Averill, e ad grant a nostre Seigneur le Roi le double
del eyde que il fist derreinement pur

En testimoniaunce de queu chose jeo mis Envoy cest ma lettre patent e close.
A Sire Johan de Langeton Chaunceler, nostre Seignur le Roi, Johan de Segrave,
e le Viscounte de Warwick e Leyc. saluz.
Sachez nus aver recia Mestre Robert de Craft, person de Bedeworth, e de
Eylmerthorp a la protection nostre Seignur le Roi.

En temoigne de quele
William de Plympton person de West Bedeford devant. Seir Aleyn de Plokenet, e
le Viscounte de Somerset, ad fet fine de 8 s. ke est a Double de sa Dyme solom
sa Reconusance pur la protection le Roi aver e pur la defense de luy e sa
Eglise e pur le commun pru du Reaume plegg* de lafin Thomas de Kynghammere, e
Adam Vincen lays.

En temonaunce de ceste chose l^avantdit Seir Aleyn ad mis sun Seel a ceste
Bylle.
Venerandae discretionis viro Domino J. de Langeton Domini Regis Cancellario,
Adam de Well and R. le Vener Vic. Linc. ad recognitio*nes cleri in Com. Linc.
accipiendas Deputati, salutem.
Sciatis quod Willielmus de Brumpton finem fecit cum Domino Rege pro
protectione habenda, and laico feodo rehabendo and hoc vobis significamus.

A Sire Johan de Langeton Chaunceler nostre Seignour le Roy, Henr. de
Thistelden Viscounte de Oxenford, saluz.
Cum naggeres ke William Vikere del Eglise de Wytteneye vint devant moy a
Oxenford a la foy nostre Seignour le Roy e sa fin fist pur dise set souz e
quatre deners, ki est a la double de la Dyme, de la Vicarie a ce que il dit.

Jeo a memes cely William ceste Bille ay done pur la protection nostre Seignour
le Roy aver, selee de mon Seal. Done a le 12 jour de Mars le an du Reign le Roy
Edward vintyme quint.
N. 23. Pat. 25. Ed. 1. P. 1* M. 9. Defensio Regis ne Prelati aliquid ordinent
in prejudic. regis.
EDward par la Grace de Dieu Roy D'engleterre, etc. As honorables Peers en
Dieu Ercevesque Evesque and as autres Prelatz, and a touz ceus de la Clergy
qui a ceste demi quaresme prochein avenir serront a Londres assemblez, saluz.
Nous defendoms a vous touz and a chescun de vous, sur quanque vous nous
peussez forfaire que vous ne nules chooses ne ordenez, ne faciez, nassentez a
null ordeynement a la dite assemblee que peussent tourner a prejudice ou a
grevance de nous, ou de null de nos Ministres, ou de ceux qui sont a nostre pees
and a nostre foy and en nostre protection, ou de nos adherdantz ou a null de eux.

Donees a Sturmenistrum le 21 jour de Marz.
N. 24. Claus. 25. Ed. 1. M. 19. De capellanis deliberandis a prisona.
REX Vicecomiti Devon* salutem.
Precipimus tibi quod Capellanos illos quos nuper pro publicatione cujusdam
sententie and aliis contra nos and Coronam nostram per ipsos factis, ut
dicitur, cepisti and in prisona nostra detines, sine dilatione aliqua
deliberes, ab eadem recepta prius securitate ab eisdem de emendis nobis
faciendis pro transgressionibus predictis, si que fuerint cum inde loqui
voluerimus versus ipsos, secundum quod tibi injunximus before oretenus.

Test Rege apud Plympton undecimo die Aprilis.
N. 25. Cl. 25. Ed. 1. M. 18. De Clericis deliberan. a prisona per Manucaption.
REX Vicecomiti Cornubie, salutem.
Precipimus tibi quod si dilectus Willielmus de Bodrugan, Archidiaconus
Cornubie, velit manucapere coram te de habendo Magistrum Clement de Rupe,
Magistrum Radulphum de Treredenek, Willielmum Vicarium Ecclesie de Sancta
Sevara, Magistrum Marsilium, Johannem Vicarium Sancti Pauli, Reginaldum
Vicarium de Sancta Crewenna, David Capellanum Ecclesie Sancte Beriane,
Radulphum Capellanum Ecclesie Sancti Winieri, Ricardum Vicarium Ecclesie de
Launantha, Johannem le Petit Parsonam Ecclesie Sancti Melani, Ricardum Vicarium
de Morwinstowe, Petrum Capellanum de Kylkampton, Robertum Vicarium Ecclesie de
Stratton, Sampsonem Vicarium Ecclesie de Pokkewille, Philippum Vicarium
Ecclesie de Launceles, Robertum Capellanum de Marwinchurche, Ricardum
Capellanum de Wike, Willielmum Capellanum de Jacobstowe, Thomam Capellanum de
Wyteston, Ricardum Capellanum de Tamerton, Paganum Capellanum de Boy^on,
Magistrum Ricardum de Toliford, Simonem Capellanum de Eglosros, Nicolaum
Vicarium Ecclesie de Sancto Austolo, Johannem Vicarium Ecclesie Philippum
Vicarium Ecclesie de Sancto Winnoco, Gilbertum Vicarium Ecclesie de Dinloo,
Reginaldum Capellanum de Laureython, Willielmum Glise Capellanum de Autone.
Johannem Capellanum de Esse, Johannem Olivere Capellanum de Sancta Dominica,
Vincentium Capellanum de Suthylle, Ricardum Vicarium Ecclesie de Sancto David,
and Willielmum Vicarium Ecclesie de Sancto Genasio, captos and detentos in
prisona nostra de Launceneton pro publicatione cujusdam litere Papalis, ut
dicitur, coram nobis ad voluntatem nostram pro emendis de transgressionibus, si
quas contra nos fecerint in hac part nobis faciend. tunc ipsos Rectores,
Vicarios, Presbyteros, and Clericos, a prisona praedicta, si ea occasion and
non alia detineantur in eadem sine dilatione facias deliberari per
manucaptionem praedictam. Et hoc pro alio brevi nostro de manucaptione ab ipsis
prius pro facto illo capiend. tibi directo, nullatenus omittas.

Test Rege apud decimo septimo die Aprilis.
N. 26. Cl. 25. Ed. 1. M. 18. De Servitio and Navib. de Have. etc.
REX dilectis and fidelibus suis Baronibus and probis hominibus portus sui de
Hastings, salutem.
Propter aliqua arduissima negocia, nos and vos and omnes alios fideles nostros
de nostro regno tangentia hiis diebus: Vobis mandamus in fide qua nobis
tenemini firmiter injungentes quod totum servitium quod nobis debetur de vobis
and de navibus portus vestri praedicti habeatis coram nobis apud Winchelse in
promptum and paratum and been munitum ad eundum ubi tunc precipiemus. Ita quod
pro defectu servitii vestri predicti dicta negotia nullatenus retardentur.
Ceterum vos rogamus mandantes quod preter servitium vestrum praedictum, omnes
alias naves de portu vestro praedicto tam quadraginta dolia vini, quam
quadraginta dolia, and supra portantes coram nobis ad praedictos diem and locum
venire faciatis promptas and paratas and been munitas ad eundum cum aliis
navibus vestris in nostrum servitium

Test Rege apud Plympton vicesimo septimo die Aprilis. Consimiles literae
diriguntur Baronibus and probis hominibus portuum subscriptorum, videlicet.
Baronibus and probis hominibus de Faversham. Baronibus and probis hominibus de
Sandwico. Baronibus and probis hominibus de Hethe. Baronibus and probis
hominibus de Winchese. Baronibus and probis hominibus de Hastings. Baronibus
and probis hominibus de Romenhale. Baronibus and probis hominibus de Dovorr.
Baronibus and probis hominibus de Rye.




N. 27. Cl. 25. Ed. 1. M. 15. cedula Dors. De Summonitione eorum qui habent 20
libratas per annum.
REX Vicecomiti Eborum, salutem.
Cum pro dampnis and periculis que nobis and toti regni nostro per insidias
inimicorum nostrorum evenire possent cautius praecavendis nuper tibi precepimus
quod scire faceres omnibus illis de balliva tua infra libertates and extra qui
habent viginti libratas terre and redditus per annum, and illis similiter qui
plus habent, videlicet tam illis qui non tenent de nobis in in fide qua nobis
teneris firmiter injungentes quod omnes and singulos de Balliva tua tam infra
libertates quam extra, viginti libratas terre and redditus and amplius habentes
ut praedictum est de quocumque teneant, sine dilatione roges ex part nostra
and requiras, firmiterque injungas eisdem quod sint ad nos ad Londinum die
Dominica proximo post Octabas Sancti Johannis Baptiste, proximo futuras cum
equis and armis, videlicet, quilibet eorum prout statum suum decuerit, parati
transfretare cum corpore nostro ad parts praedictas, ad Dei, nostri

Test rege apud Londres quintodecimo die Maii. Consimiles literae diriguntur
singulis Vicecomitibus Angliae, and Reginaldo Gray Justiciario Cestriae.



N. 28. Cl. 25. Ed. 1. M. 16. Dors. De certificand. Regi de nom. habent.
viginti libratas Terrae and redditus.
REX Vicecomiti Lincoln. salutem.
Cum nuper tibi preceperimus quod omnes and singulos de Balliva tua infra
libertates and extra, tam illos qui viginti libratas terrae and redditus per
annum habent, quam illos similiter qui plus habent, de quocumque teneant, sine
dilatione rogares and specialiter requireres ex part nostra firmiterque
injungeres eisdem quod essent ad nos London die Dominica proxima post

Test apud Portesmouth vicesimo quarto die Maii. Consimiles literae diriguntur
Reginaldo de Gray Justiciario Cestriae, and singulis Vicecomitibus per Angliam.



N. 29. Claus. 25. Ed. 1. M. 21. Pro Cantuar. Arch. de Laicis Feod.
restituendi^.
REX Vicecomiti Kantiae, salutem.
Licet tibi nuper praeceperimus quod omnia laica feoda Archiepiscoporum,
Episcoporum, and totius Cleri de Balliva tua una cum bonis and catallis in
eisdem inventis sine R. Cantuar. Archiepiscopo, totius Angliae Primati, gratiam
facere specialem: Tibi praecipimus quod eidem Archiepiscopo omnia laica feoda
sua, una cum bobus, carucis and omnibus aliis bonis and catallis suis in eisdem
existentibus, quae praetextu mandati nostri praedicti in manum nostram cepisti
in eo statu quo nunc sunt restitui facias indilate.

Test rege apud undecimo die Julii. Consimiles literae diriguntur Vicecomiti
Surr. Sussex. Midd. and Essex.



N. 30. Claus. 25. Ed. 1. M. 9. Dors. pro clero protectionem Regis non habente.
REX Vicecomitibus London. salutem.
Licet aliqui de Clero qui sunt infra Ballivam vestram protectionem nostram
forsan non habuerunt tempore retroacto, ad instantiam tamen and rogatum
venerabilium Patrum R. Archiepiscopi Cantuar. and aliorum Episcoporum and
Prelatorum regni nostri nobis pro eodem Clero supplicantium. Volentes Clerum
eundem ab omni molestia and inquietantia indebita videlicet protegi and
defendi. Vobis mandamus quod omnes and singulos, Clero praedicto, homines,
terras, res, redditus and omnes possessiones eorundem in Balliva vestra
deinceps manuteneatis, protegatis, and defendatis, non permittentes quantum in
vobis est, quod Praefato Clero aut eorum alicui in personis and rebus inferatur
injuria, dampnum, molestia, vel gravamen, non obstante quod aliqui de Clero
praedicto protectionem nostram non habuerunt, sicut praedictum est.

Test rege apud Sanctum Paulum London. tricesimo primo die Julii.
N. 31. Pat. 25. Ed. 1. P. 2 M. 7.
PUR ceo que le Roy desire tutz jours la pees and la quiet e la bon estat de
tutes les gentz de sun Reaume e nomement que apres sun passage quil ly ore
fair al honur de deu e pur recoverir sun dreit heritage dunt il est par grant
fraud deceu par le Roy de France, e pur le honur e le commun profit de sun
Reaume tutes encheisouns par queles la dite pees ou quiet pussent estre en null
manner trobleez, soient du tut otes acunes gentz purroient dire and fere
entendre au paroles noun verrois des queles le mesme Puple purroit estre mu de
eux porter enuers lur seeing. liege autrement que fair ne dussent come endroit
de coe, que le Count de Hereford, e le Count Marshall, se aloyngerent and
guers de lui, ou endroit de autres chooses lui Rois sur ceo e sur lestat de lui
e de sun Reaume e coment les busoignes du Reaume sunt alees ja une piece, fait
afavoir and voet que tuz ensachent la verite la quele senseut. And guers quant
grant party de gentz darmes D'engleterre les uns par priere, les autres
somons* du Roy vindrent a Lundres, le Roi voillaunt purveer a la deliveraunce
de mesme les gentz, e aleviance de lur despens e de lur deseres: Maunda au ditz
Counteez come a Conestable e Marshall D'engleterre quil venissent a lui a
certain jour pur ordiner la deliveraunce des dites gentz, au queu jour le dite
Conte de Hereford e Monsieur Johan de Segrave qui escusa le Conte Marshall par
malady vindrent au Roi, e en lour presence e par lur assent fust ordine quil
feissent crier parmy la Cite de Londres que tutes les gentz que estoient
devaunt les ditz Conestable c Marshall pur savoir e metere en remembrance
coment e de cumbien chescun de eux voleit servir ou eyder le Roi en cest veyage
de la outre, e lur did le Roi que selon la dite ordinance la quele lur fust
baylle en escrit il feissent fair la dite cry. Et eux receu le dit
commandment e la dite bille sen alerent, puis mesme le jour a la nuyt les
dites Contes enveyerent au Roi par Monsieur Johan Esturmi Chivaler, une bille
escrit en ceste form. Pur Marshall par le Conestable e par une bille quil
feist crier parmy la Vile de Londres que tuz iceux que sunt venuz par vostre
somounse ou par priere fussent demayn devaunt eux a seint Poul a hour de prime
e quil feissent metere en roll combien des chivaus des uns e des autres e coe
vous faissent asavoir. Vous prient vostre Conestable e vostre Marshall que
ceste chose vousissez comaunder a autre de vostre Hostel. Et pur ceo sire que
vouz bien savez que eux sunt cy venuz par vostre priere e ne mye par somonse,
sil ceo faissent il entroyent en lur office pur service fere, par quay il vous
prient que vous les voillez comaunder a autre. Et le Roi resceu la dite bille e
en conseyl sur ceo, pur ceo quil lui semble quil avoient meyns avisement maunde
e ne volayt mye quil enfussent suspris enveya a eux Monsieur Geffrey de
Geneville, Mons. Thomas de Berkeley, Mons* Johan Tregoz, le Conestable de la
Tur, le Gardeyn de Lundres, Mons. Roger Brabazon, e Mons. Willame de Bereford,
pur eux meuz aviser sur ceo e quil purvessent en teu manner quil ne feissent
chose que peust turner en prejudice du Roi ne de lur estate demeyne, e si
autrement ne se vousissent aviser que lors lur fust demand sil avoueynt la
dite bille and les paroles iloques contenues les queles il avouerent tut outre.
Et quant ceste avo uement fust report au Roi il en sur ceo conseil mist en lu
du Conte de Hereford Conestable, Mons. Thomas de Berkeley, e en lu du Conte
Marshall, Mons. Geffrey de Geneville pur ceo que les ditz Contes aveynt requis
Roy comaundast a autres si com il est contenu en la dite bille e sur ceo
senaloyngerent les Contes du Roy e de sa ^urt. E tossed apres ceo le Ercevesk de
Caunterbur. e plusurs Eveskes D'engleterre vindrent au Roy e lui prierent quil
peussent parler as ditz Contes e le Roy lur granta, par quay le dit Ercevesk
and les autres Prelatz, prierent as ditz Contes quil lur faissent asavoir ou il
lur plerroit devenir pur parler a eux, e les Contes remaunderent par lur
lettres quil serroint a Waltham le vendredi Lendemayn de la feste de Seint Jak,
au queu jour les ditz Ercevesk and Eveskes vindrent a Waltham e les ditz Contes
ne vindrent mye, mes enveyerent illoges Mons. Roberd le fiz Roger, e Mons.
Johan de Segrave Chevalers, que distrent de par les Contes, quil ny purroyent
venir adunk par aucuns resuns. E pus a la priere des ditz Prelatz e des ditz
Chivalers qui vindrent au Roi a Seint Auban le dimayng procheynement, suant le
Roy graunta sauf conduct as ditz Contes e enbaylla ses lettres a ditz Chevalers
contenentz suffisent term denz le quel les ditz Contes peussent sauvement e
suz sun conduyt venir au Roi and Chevalers du Roy a cele foiz mes unques puis
les Contes au Roy ne vindrent, ne enveyerent, ne uncore, ne venent, ne enueyent
que le Roi sache; ore puit estre que acunes gentz unt feit entendaunt au pueple
que les Contes mustrerent au Roy certeins* articles pur le comun profit du
pueple e du Reaume e que le Roy les deveit aver refuse e escundit tut outre, de
quey le Roy ne seit reiens, kar riens ne lui mustrerent nene firent mustrer,
nene seit pur quey il se retrestrent. Eynx entendi acunes grevances, que le Roy
ad fait en son Reaume les queles il coneyt bien com des eydes quil ad demand
soventefeez de ses gentz la quele chose lui ad convenu fere par encheison des
gueres, qui lui unt este meues en Gascoyne, en Cales, e en Escoce and ayllurs
des queles il ne poeyt lui ne son Reaume defendre saunz eyde de ses bones
gentz, dunt il lui poyse mult, quil les ad taunt grevez and taunt travaillez, e
leur pry quil lui envoyllent avoir pur excuse, com celui que ad les defendre
lui e eux meismes e tut le Reaume.

Et si Dieu lui doynt james returner du veyage quil fait coe il voet bien que
tuz sachent quil ad volente e grant desir del amender bonement a la volente de
Dieu e au gre de son pouple tauntavant ou il devera. E sil avenist quil ne
returnast mye il vyt ordener que son Heir le fra ausi com sil meismes returnast
de ceo que fera amender, que son car il seit bien que null nest taunt tenuz au
Reaume nedeamer les bones gentz de saterre come il meismes. Dautre part puis
quil ont enpris depasser le outre pur eyder le Conte de Flandres, qui est son
alliez e nomement pur metere en la busoygne de lui e de son Reaume tele fin com
Dieu vodra kar meuz vant de mettre fyn in le busoigne au plus tossed que hom
purra, que de languy ensi longement les grant Seigneurs, Lundres oue lui pur
ceo que il virent bien quil ne poait nene puyt si grant chose pursuier ne
meyntenir du soin, e que le veyage est si hastif pur le grant peril en quey
les amys le Roy de dela sont, par les queux sil perdissent le Reaume purrayt
chayr en grant peril apres qui Dieu defend. E pur avec le confermement de le
grant Chartre des Fraunchises D'engleterre e de la Chartre de la Forest, le
queu confermement le Roys leur ad grant bonement, si li graunterent un commun
down tell com lui est mult bosoygnable en point de ore. Apostoil, sorsque en
article de mort sicome pert par une bulle que le Roy ad du temps le Pape
Clement, la quelle grant party les Prelatz and des autres grauntz Seigneurs
de ceste terre unt bien entenduz. Par quey il est mestier que chescun sen guard.
E pry le Roy tutes les bones gentz de son Reaume que pur ceo quil al honur de
Dieu e de lui e de eux e du Reaume e pur par-durable pees e pur metere en bon
estat son Reaume ad enpris cest veyage afere e il ad grant afiaunce, que

En tesmoigne, etc. Donez a Odymere le xii jour de Aug. Au tele lettres sount
envoiz a tous Viscontes de Engleterre.



N. 32. Claus. 25. Ed. 1. M. 8. Dors. Prohibitio Regis contra Excommunicat.
REX venerabili in Christo Patri R. eadem gratia Cantuar. Archiepiscopo totius
Angliae Primati, salutem.
Cum nos inevitabili necessitate cogente pro Regni and Haereditarii juris
nostri per Regem Francie and alios inimicos nostros invasi and hostiliter
impugnati defensione ac Ecclesie Anglicane and Personarum tam ecclesiasticarum
quam aliarum ejusdem regni presidio and tutela de bladis and aliis bonis
earumdem personarum, capi fecerimus and ad capiendum seu capi faciendum de
quibus bladis and bonis volumus and firmiter proponimus satisfactionem ut res
exegerit facere congruam and condignam, and jam intellexerimus quod vos contra
Ministros nostros, bladorum and bonorum praedictorum de mandato nostro captores
intenditis quandam Excommunicationis sententiam fulminare vel ipsos
Excommunicatos facere nunciari, quod si sic fieret in gravem and enormem
dignitatis and coronae nostre Regie lesionem, ac populi scandalum manifestius
redundaret and Clericos aut Laicos, aliquam Excommunicationis Sententiam
promulgetis seu etiam puplicetis aut promulgari seu publicari aliquatenus
occasion hujusmodi captionis faciatis, vel eisdem Ministris gravamen aliquod
inferatis maxim cum parati simus satisfacere ut est dictum.

Test apud Winchelse decimo nono die Augusti. Consimiles litere diriguntur
singulis Episcopis Anglie. Test ut supra.



N. 33. Claus. 25. Ed. 1. M. 6. Dors.
REX venerabili in Christo Patri R. eadem gratia Cantuar. Archiepiscopo Anglie
totius primati, salutem.
Quia super quibusdam arduis and urgentibus negotiis nos and vos ac totum
regnum nostrum Edwardus filius noster carissimus tenens locum nostrum in Anglia
vobiscum Colloquium habeat and tractatum. Vobis mandamus in fide and dilectione
quibus nobis tenemini firmiter injungentes quod in instanti crastino Sancti
Michelis London, ad eundem filium nostrum modis omnibus personaliter intersitis
cum eodem and ceteris de consilio nostro qui ibidem aderint super dictis
negotiis tractaturi, and vestrum consilium impensuri. Et hoc sicut honorem
Regis diligitis.

Apud Sanctum Paulum London nono die Septembris. Consimiles literae diriguntur
subscriptis, videlicet. Episcopis.
W. Bath. and Well. O. Lincolniensi R. Herefordensi R. Norwicensi Roffensi S.
Electo Sarum
Abbati de Sancto Edmundo. Abbati Sancti Augustini Cantuar. Abbati de Waltham.
Abbati de Sancto Albano. Abbati Westmonasteriensi. Abbati de Evesham. Abbati de
Burgo Sancti Petri. Abbati de Abyndon. Abbati de Ramsey. Abbati de Thorney.
Abbati de Malmesbury. Abbati de Cyrencester. Abbati de Croyland. Abbati de
Bardenay. Abbati de Rading. Abbati de Glaston. Abbati de Gloucester: Priori
Sancti Suithini Wintoniensi. Priori Ecclesie Christi Cantuariens. Priori
Eliensi. Priori Norwicensi. Priori Hospitalis Sancti Johannis Jerusalem in
Anglia. Magistro Militie Templi in Anglia. Johanni de Segrave. Johanni Lovell.
Roberto filio Rogeri. Roberto de Tateshale. Fulconi filio Warini. Edmundo de
Mortuo Mari. Alano la Zusche. Nichelo de Segrave. Rogero le Bigod Comiti
Norfolciensi, and Maraschallo Anglie. Humfrido de Bohun Comiti Herefordensi and
Essexensi.




N. 34. Rot. Stat. in Turri Land. M. 28. 25. Ed. 1
EDward par la Grace, etc. Sachies que come de par nos amez and Humfrey de
Bohun, Conte de Hereford and de Essex, and Conestable D'engleterre, and Roger
Bygod, Conte de Norff. and Mareschall D'engleterre nous seit fet entendaunt
quil se douterent que nous eussiens conceu verse eux rancour and indignation pur
aucunes desobesances quil avoient fetes, ne ad geres, a ceo que hom disoit i'en
ce quil ne vindrent pas a nous a nostre commandment, and a ce que hom disoit
quil avoient aucuns de nos Comandementz desturbez and targez and aucunes
aliances and assemblees des gentz darmes faites country nostre volunte and
Edward nostre chier fuiz and nostre Lieutenant en Engleterre, and des
honourables peers Willame Evesque de Ely, Willame Evesque de Ba and de Wells,
Richard Evesque de Londre, Wauter Evesque de Coventre and de Lichef. and Henry
Elit de Everwyke, and des nos ames and feaux Edmond Conte de Cornwaill, Johan
de Garenne Conte de Surreye and de Sussex, Willame de Beauchamp, Conte de
Warrewyke, releissoms and pardonoms pleinement as ditz Contez, and a Johan de
Ferrers, and a toutz leur menengs, and toutz leur aliez, tote manner de rancour
and de indignation qui nous avoms conceu verse eus si nule ensoit per les
enchesons avantdites ou nule de eles. Issint que null des dits Contes ne Johan
de Ferrers, ne null de leur menenges, ne de leur aliez avantditz, ne soient
chalenges, encheisonez ne grevez par nous ne par nos heirs en null temps pur
nule des chooses avantdites. E ausi perdonoms and releissoms a toutz autres de
nostre Roiaume qui furent somons ou priez de passer ovesque nous, and ne
passerent, totes maneres de rancour and de indignation, si nule eussiens conceu
verse eus per cele encheson.

En tesmoignance des queux chooses nous avoms fait fair cestes nos Lettres
overtes. Donees a Gaunt le quint jour de Novembr. L'an de nostre Regne vintisme
quint.
N. 35. Pat. 26. Ed. 1. M. 21. De inquirendo super Gravaminibus populo Regni
factis, in singulis Comitatibus Angliae.
REX dilectis and fidelibus suis Wilhelmo Inge, and Johanni de Cokefeld,
salutem.
Cum nuper ante transfretationem nostram in Flandriam habuerimus voluntatem and
desiderium gravamina populo regni nostri nomine, nostro facta, facere emendari
and super hoc miseri mus literas nostras patentes, per Comitatus singulos dicti
regni, Nos hujusmodi negotium effectui debito mancipari volentes assignavimus
vos in Comitatibus Lincoln, Roteland, Northampton, Norff. and Suff. Clericis
and religiosis quos locorum Diocesani ad hoc duxerint deputandos ad inquirendum
per Sacramentum proborum and legalium hominum de Comitatibus praedictis per
quos rei veritas melius sciri poterit: super hujusmodi gravaminibus, veluti de
rebuscaptis in Ecclesiis, necnon de lanis, pellibus, coriis, bladis,
animalibus, carnibus, piscibus, and omnimodis aliis rebus in Ecclesiis, and
extra similiter captis, and asportatis per Comitatus predictos tam de Clericis
quam de Laicis, sive pro custodia maris vel alio modo quocumque post guerram
inter nos and Regem Franciae inchoatam, and ad ea omnia and singula audienda
and terminanda, tam ex officio vobis per presents commisso, quam ad sectam
cujuslibet conqueri se volentis and ad faciendum ulterius in premissis juxta
formam ordinationis per nos and consilium nostrum inde factae, quam sigillo
nostro vobis mittimus consignatam, and prout de jure, and secundum legem and
consuetudinem regni nostri fuerit faciendum. Et ideo vobis mandamus quod ad
certos dies and loca quos ad hoc provideritis premissa faciatis in forma
predicta, salvis nobis amerciamentis and aliis Clericos and Religiosos cum vos
vel alter vestrum eis scire feceritis vel fecerit una vobiscum deputent ad
premissa.

In cujus, etc. Test rege apud Westmonasterium, quarto die Aprilis. Eodem modo
assignantur subscripti in singulis Comitatibus subscriptis, videlicet.
Willielmus de Den and Roger Bryan, in Comitatibus Essex, Hertf. Cant. Huntind.
Middlesex. Johan. le Savage Johannes Randulf and Ric. de Coleshull, in
Comitatibus Berk. Summers. Dors. Devon. Cornub. Ad. de Crokedayk and Rob. de
Knittele, in Comitatibus Glouc. Wigorn. Heref. Salop. Staff. Will. de S.
Quintino and Petrus Becard, in Comitatibus Eborum, Lanc. Notting. and Derb.
Johannes de Burn and Joh. de Toyleby, in Comitatibus Boking. Bedf. Oxon. Leyc.
War.




Ibid. Articles of Inquiry.
COme le Rey avaunt son passage verse Flaundres eust volunte and desir, de fair
redrescer and amender les grevances faites a son people, en noun de luy, e sur
ceo envoiast ses Lettres par tutz les Contes D'engleterre, pur ceste chose
mettre en effect ordine est par ly e par son conseil que les enquerrours que
sont assignez pur enquerre de tieu manner des grevaunces enquergent des chooses
prises horse de seinte eglise e des prises de leines, peaus, quirs, blees,
bestes, chars, pessons, Clers, and de Lais, puis la guerre commencie enter nous
and le Rey de France fust ceo pur guard de la mer ou en autre maniere. E
enquergent meismes ceaus par queux and as queux and de quei, and de combien,
and de la value, and coment, and queu maniere ices prises and grevances, furent
feites au people. E cestes chooses oont and terminent ausibien par office come a
suit de party e quant la verite de ces chooses serra atteinte, le quel que ceo
soit par garaunt ou saunz garaunt, ceo que serra pris saunz garant Viscuntes,
Clers, assignez, Baillifs, and autre tieu manner de Ministres respoignent pur
leur surmis qui averont feit tieu prises. E que de ceo que serra trove pris par
garaunt le Rey seit certify e il enfra taunt quil se tendront apaiez par
reason. Et fuerunt inde septem paria and fuerunt Patentes.

N. 36. Brevia 26. 27. Ed. 1. in Tur. Land. Pryns Ed. 1. F. 797.
A Tous ceus qui ces Lettres verront ou orront, Renaud par la suffrance de
Dieu, Evesque de Vicence, Messages nostre Seignour l' Apostoille, saluz en Dieu
pardurable.
Nous feisons savoir a vostre universite que venant a Whitesand en Royaume de
France a nostre presence Monsieur Robert de Bourghersh Chivaler Conestable de
Dovre, and procurator de tres^oble Prince and Roy D'engleterre, establiz en
ceste form Edward par la Grace de Dieu Roy D'engleterre, Seignour Robert de
Bourghersh nostre Conestable de Dovre, nostre certain Procuratour, and li
^onoms plener poair par ces presents de baillier and delivrer en nostre noun a
Whitesand Johan de Baillol, au reverent Piere Renaut, par la Grace de Dieu
Evesque de Vicence, Message l' Apostoille en la form que sensuit.
Cestassavoir que li dit Apostoille peusse dire and ordener tant soulment de la
Johan and des terres les queles meismes celi Johan out jadis en Engleterre,
sicome il plerra a la bone volunte du dit Apostoille en mesme la manner que
nous purriens dire, se meisme celui Johan demorast verse nous personalment en
Engleterre. Sauve a nous and a nos Heirs Rois D'engleterre, le Royaume
D'escoce, les hommes, les inhabitantz and totes les appourtenances des meisme
le Royaume. En tesmoignance des queux chooses nous avoms fait fair cestes nos
Lettres overtes. Donees a Canterbir le quattezime jour de juygnet, l'an de
nostre Regne vint and septisme. Rehercea and leust les paroles desouz escrites.
En noun de Dieu, Amen. Come Sire Johan de Baillol qui est ici presentz par
devent vous reverent Piere Evesque de Vicence, Message de nostre Seignour l'
Apostoille pur multz de trespass e treisons Inhumeinement demonstrez and faitz
par li a tresgrant Prince son Souveraigne Seignour sanz meyn Sire Edward par la
Grace de Dieu Roy D'engleterre encontre son hommage, and le devoir de sa feaute
purement par son gree and sanz condition souz meist du tot a la volunte du dit
Roy le Royaume Descoce du quel il estoit jadis Rois, and tout le droit quil
avoit en cel, ou a cel and au pueple de meisme le Royaume and a ce touz ses
biens, sauve tout soulement a li vie and membre, and non emprisonement. E que
puis il par son agreeable courage and par sa franche volunte purement and sanz
condition, se rendest a son Seigneur avantdite Roi D'engleterre, and le dit
Royaume Descoce, oue hommes and ses autres droitures and aportenances
universeles and sa Royale Dignity, and son Royale honeur and outre ce toutes
ses terres and totes ses possessions, oue touz ses moebles and non moebles and
soi movants, sicome appiert par un Instrument public fait de ce, a la
request du dit Johan de Baillol, je Robert de Bourghersh Procureur du
devantdit Roy D'engleterre, par commandment de li and come Procureour, bail
and assign lavantdit Johan present, a vous Sire Reverend Evesque de Vicence,
Message nostre Seigneur l' Apostoille, tres Seint Piere nostre Seigneur l'
Apostoille and de la Seint Eglise de Rome, es maneres and es conditions que
sensivient. Cest assavoir que nostre l' Apostoille peusse due and oideiner tant
soulement de la person le meisme Johan, and des terres les queles meismes celi
Johan ont jadis en Engleterre, sicomme a plerra a la bone volunte de nostre
Seigneur l' Apostoille, en mesme la manner que mon Seigneur li Rois
D'engleterre porroit dire si meismes celi Johan demorast verse luy personelment
en Engleterre. Sauve a mon Seigneur le Roy D'engleterre, and a ses Heirs Rois
D'engleterre le Royaume Descoce, les hommes, les Inhabitantz, and totes les
aportenances de mesme le Royaume. Cestassavoir and entendre que nostre Seigneur
l' Apostoille ne peusse oideiner ne dire du avantdit Royaume Descoce, des
hommes, des enhabitantz, ne des apportenances de mesme le Royaume pur le
devantdit Johan de Baillol. ne pur ses Heirs, qui sont, ou qui purroient estre,
ne pur null de ses appurtenances par quecunque cause, que ce soit. Et nous Johan
de Baillol a nous baille avoms ensi resceu en lieu and en noun de nostre
Seigneur l' Apostoille. En tesmoign des queux chooses nous avoms mis nostre seal
a ces presents Lettres. Donees a Whitesand le Samady devant la fest Nostre
Dame la Magdalene, au quel jour nous resceumes le devantdit Johan de Baillol en
la manner desusdite par le Procureur devantdit, l'an de nostre Seigneur, 1299.

N. 37. In Tur. Land. A. D. 1298. Pryns Ed. 1. Fol. 665.
IN Nomine Domini, Amen. Anno a Nativitate ejusdem millesimo ducentesimo
nonagesimo octavo, Indictione undecima prima die Mensis Aprilis in Camera
Hospitii venerabilis Patris A. Episcopi Dunelmensis extra London, ipse de statu
and condition Regni Scotiae and inhabitantium idem regnum coram nobili viro
Domino Johanne de Balliolo verba faciens -- Idem Johannes motu proprio in
praesentia mei notarii and testium subscriptorum inter alia quaedam verba ipse
dictum regnum Scotiae, ut Rex and Dominus ipsius regni tenebat atque regebat,
tantam invenit in hominibus ejusdem regni malitiam, fraudem, proditionem, and
dolum, propter eorum malignitatem, nequitiam, dolositates, and alia nonnulla
excrabilia and detestabilia facta ipsorum, qui eum tunc Principem eorum
potionari, sicut veraciter intellexerat, machinabantur, intentionis suae non
est praedictum regnum Scotiae, ingredi vel intrare aliquo tempore in futurum,
commune cum Scotis. Adjiciens idem Dominus Johannes quod alias rogaverat
praefatum Dominum Episcopum Dunelmensem ut magnifico Principi and Domino suo,
Domino Edwardo Regi Angliae illustri, hanc suam esse intentionem, voluntatem,
and firmum propositum explicaret, and adhuc sibi cum instantia supplicat,
quatenus praemissa eidem Domino Regi ex part sua dignetur and velit exponere
and Episopo Dunelmensi, and Nobili viro Radulpho de Sandwyco, Constabulario
Turris London, and nonnullis aliis existentibus tunc ibidem.

Et ego Johannes Erturi de Cadomo, Apostolicae sedis authoritate Notarius
Publicus, hiis omnibus interfui, propria manu scripsi, and mei signi
annotatione, in hanc publicam formam redegi.

N. 38. Claus. 34. Ed. 1. M. 6. intus Pryn ut supra F. 1124.
REX Vicecomiti Suth'ton. salutem.
Quia inimicum, rebellem, and proditorem nostrum Willielmum Episcopum Sancti
Andreae mittimus ad Castrum nostrum Wynton, carcerali custodiae mancipandum,
exigente hoc multiplici culpa sua, Tibi precipimus quod dictum Epscopum in tuam
custodiam recipias and corpus ejus infra turrim dicti Castri in loco tutiori,
and fortiori ejusdem turris includas, and compedibus ferreis custodias, sub
forisfacturo vitae and membrorum ac omnium terrarum and tenementorum, bonorum
and catallorum tuorum quae ex nunc forisfacta censemus, si de custodia
hujusmodi aliquod periculum immineat in futurum. Proviso, quod locus predictus
intus and exterius taliter muniatur, and firmetur quod de custodia ipsius
inclusi nullum timeatur periculum, quodque ad accedendum ad ipsum seu videndum,
vel etiam ad alloquendum nemini possit patere aditus vel facultas, set nec ipse
Episcopus quemquam videat, seu ad quam custodiam, fideles and bonos assignabis
sub fidejussoria cautione custodes, pro quibus tu ipse nobis volueris sub
praenotatis poena and periculo respondere. Ad haec quia complicem suum
consimili vel forte majori infamia maculatum Robertum scilicet Episcopum
Glasguensem fidelitatem suam erga nos and coronam nostram frequenter and temere
violantem, mittimus ad Castrum nostrum Porcester, incarcerandum ibidem, Tibi
precipimus, ut posito prius in tuto in turri Wynton, praefato Episcopo Sancti
Andreae modo and forma praeexpressis, dictum Episcopum Glasguensem in propria
persona tua, ducas salvo and secure usque Porcestre, and juxta tuam and
Custodis nostri Castri praedicti circumspectionem industrem, ipsum Episcopum in
tuciori and fortiori loco Castri praedicti, in compedibus ferreis includas,
locum insuper praedictum muniri and firmari vestro and ipsius Custodis Castri
praedicti periculo facias, modo quo superius exprimitur de Episcopo Sancti
Andreae, seu etiam meliori, quia tam te quam praedictum custodem Castri nostri
praedicti de custodia ipsius Episcopi volumus aequanimiter onerari.
sustentatione vero dictorum Episcoporum famulantium eis and Custodum suorum,
quam per te exhiberi volumus secundum Indenturam quam tibi mittimus
praesentibus interclusam cujus altera pars remanet penes tibi and dicti Custodi
Castri de Porcestre adjunxeris ad eandem, dicto These. nostro sub tuo and
illorum sigillis qui una tecum onus subibunt Custodiae memoratae significes,
sine mora.

T. R. apud Dunolm. 7 die Aug.
N. 39. Rileys Placita Parl. F. 379.
CUM in Parliamento Domini Regis apud Karliolum in Octabis Sancti Hillarii,
Anno Regni Domini Regis Edwardi 35. propositae fuerunt petitiones per Comites,
Barons, and alios Magnates, and Communitatem totius Regni Angliae pro statu
Coronae Regiae, necnon terrarum ipsius Regis Scotiae, Walliae, and Hiberniae,
and tota communitate praedicta super variis novis and intollerabilibus
gravaminibus, oppressionibus, injuriis and extorsionibus proefatis Comitibus,
Baronibus, Magnatibus, and communitate, authoritate and mandato Domini Papae,
ac Willielmum Cesta, Domini Papae Clericum, necnon ejusdem Magistri Willielmi
Commissarios, Ministros, seu Vices-gerentes and ipsius nomine illatis,
multipliciter in regno, and terris praedictis, prout in articulis contentis in
praedictis petitionibus, qui tales funt, inferitur.

N. 40. Ib. F. 381.
HAEC omnia ad extrahendam a regno pecuniam, ad exinanitionem exurgat Deus and
dissipentur inimici ejus, ut per secularem Principem and ipsius Consilium de
consensu Procerum and Magnatum tanta malicia reprimatur.

Super quibus oppressionem, gravaminum, and extorsionum and injuriarum
Articulis praefatus Magister Willielmus Testa quatinus ipsum contingunt in
pleno Parliamento praedicto allocutus, convictus extitit, nec inde se potuit
aliqualiter excusare, nisi tantum quod dixit, quod authoritate Domini Papae
praemissa fuerat executus. Et quia facta Magistri Willielmi Testa in
praemissis, si tolerarentur, manifest cederent in divini cultus diminutionem,
and Ecclesiae Anglicanae exinanitionem, Coronae, potestatis, jurisdictionis,
and dignitatis Regiae Anglicanae, destructionemque totius communitatis
praedictae, ac status regni, legum and consuetudinum ejusdem subversionem, quod
absit, perpetuam. Et unde majora pericula possent processu temporis evenire.

Demum, consideratis periculis praedictis, ex assensu Domini Regis, ac toto
Consilio Parliamenti praedicti, provisum fuit, concordatum, ordinatum,
Willielmo in Parliamento praedicto, quod de caetero contra provisionem,
concordiam, considerationem, praedictas, nec procedat, nec per se, seu alium
quemcumque in praemissis intromittat vel aliquo praemissorum. Et Injunctum est
eidem Magistro Willielmo, quod quicquid per ipsum, Collegas, Commissar.
Ministros, Vices-gerentes, aut alios quoscunque sibi adhaerentes, intendentes
attemptatum est, actum seu executum in praemissis, and quolibet praemissorum
revocet, ut cassum, irritum, and inane, and totam pecuniam per eos in hac part
levatam, salvo custodiri faciatis, and secure infra regnum praedictum, quousque
Dominus Rex, de Consilio praedicto, aliud super hoc duxerit ordinandum. Et ad
majorem hujus rei evidentiam, ordinatum est, and concordatum per Dominum Regem
and Consilium praedictum, quod Nuncii experti ad dictum Dominum Papam ex part
dicti Domini Regis, and totius communitatis praedictae, transmittantur ad
praedicta gravamina, oppressiones, extorsiones, and injurias notificanda and
exponenda. Et praeceptum est singulis Vicecomitibus regni praedicti, quod per
sacramentum proborum and legalium hominum de Ballivis suis, per quos rei
veritas melius sciri poterit, diligenter inquirant de nominibus Comissariorum,
and aliorum Ministrorum praedicti Magistri Will. Testa, qui praemissa,
oppressiones, gravamina, extorsiones, and injurias in Comitatibus praedictis,
taliter perpetrarunt aut fecerunt necnon, de nominibus eorum, qui coram Domino
Regi, quam aliis inde conqueri volentibus super praemissis. Et ad faciendum and
recipiendum quod Curia Regis consideraverit in hac part, and Vicecom. habeant
ibi nomina eorum quos inde culpabiles invenerint,

N. 41. Pat. 35. Ed. 1. M. 19. Riley ut supra. F. 383.
REX omnibus ad quos praesentes literae pervenerint, salutem.
Sciatis quod ob reverentiam sedis Apostolicae, and affectionem quam erga
Sanctissimum in Christo Patrem Dominum Elementem Divina Providentia Summum
Pon^ificem, gerimus and habemus, concedimus quantum in nobis est, quod dilecti
nobis, Magister Willielmus Testa Archidiaconus Dravensis, in Ecclesia
Coventrensi, and Petrus Amalmeni Canonicus Burdegalensis, sedis Apostolicae
nuncii fructus primi anni a tempore reservationis inde per Dominum Papam sibi
factae, de beneficiis Ecclesiasticis cum cura and sine cura, vacantibus in
regno nostro provenientes usque ad triennium secundum mandatum Apostolicum, non
obstantibus quibuscunque Prohibitionibus in Parliamento nostro inde factis: Ita
videlicet, quod de fructibus de Abbatibus seu Prioratibus vacantibus in eodem
regno provenientibus se nullatenus intromittant, ad opus dicti Domini summi
Pontificis, modo debito colligere custodireque valiant and tenere. Hoc tamen
observato, quod viam Cambii non deferant seu deferri faciant, quovis modo sine
licentia speciali.

Test Rege apud Carliolum quarto die Aprilis, Anno regni 35.
Per ipsum Regem.
N. 42. Riley ut supra, F. 384.
PRaetextu quarum literarum praefati Clerici Domini Papae non habentes
respectum ad prohibitiones eis inde in dicto Parliamento factas ad omnia
praedicta extorsiones and gravamina facienda reverterunt; and quia dicti
Clerici postea occasion prohibitionum illarum per plures de regno impediti
fuerunt, quo minus extorsiones suas and gravamina sicut prius facere possent:
Et idem Clerici in Concilio Domini Regis apud Westmonasterium, ad festum
Sanctae. Trinitatis proximo sequentis, quasdam petitiones super impedimento eis
facto porrexerunt, and protulerunt Concilio ibidem literas suas supradictas. Et
quia compertum fuit per easdem, quod Dominus Rex nichil rev^cavit de praedicta
Ordinatione facta in Parliamento nec aliquid eisdem Clericis concessit per
literas praedictas nisi quod primos fructus Ecclesiarum vacantium, quantum in
Rege fuit colligere, possint and habere, and super hoc quod nichil facerent,
nec attemptarent, quod cederet in praejudicium Coronae seu dignitatis Regiae,
aut aliorum fidelium Regis, and quod singula gravamina praedicta in
praejudicium Regis and aliorum fidelium mandato Domini Regis tunc apud
Karliolum existentis. Concordatum fuit in eodem Concilio quod praefati Clerici
nulla de gravaminibus praedictis facerent nec primos fructus Ecclesiarum de
patronatu Regis, pro eo quod in praejudicium Regis Coronae cederet, nec aliorum
haberent. Intelligentibus autem dictis Clericis de concordia hujusmodi,
petitiones suas ulterius in Concilio prosequi, seu ibidem ad responsionem
earundarum habenda accedere noluerunt. Ideoque ordinata fuit and facta eisdem
prohibitio subtus scripta.

N. 43. Cl. 25. Ed. 1. N. 13. Dors.
FET a remembrer que le dimeine le xxvi. jour de Feuerer a Lanercost nostre
Seigneur le Roy ordena e comanda par acunes resons que maintenant apres les
tres simeins apres le prochein tornement que serra ore a la Quinzeine de Pasque
prochein avenir Monsieur Piers de Gavastion seit pressed a passer la Mer a Dovre
verse Gascoign a demoergey sanz revenir pardecea tant que au repel nostre
Seigneur le Roy avantdit and par son conge, e a cele ordinance tenir sanz venir
encontre Piers fit Serment au jur e au leu desusditz. Sur le cors Dieu, sur la
croiz neitz, e, sur les autres relics nostre Seigneur le Roy. E outre ceo
Monsieur Edward Prince de Gales fiz nostre Seigneur le Roy fit sur le Serement
sur le cors Dieu e sur les autres Relics quil ne receitret, ne retendroit
pres de li ne ovesque li le dit Monsieur Piers contre Lordenance avantdite sanz
repel ou sanz conge de nostre Seigneur le Roy sicom est avantdit. E par
commandment du dit nostre Seigneur le Roy feust ordenez que le dit Monsieur
Piers Cen Mars De^terlings ou la value des chipoteis a resceivre des issues de
la terre de Gascoigne. E doit le primer an commencer le jour apres ceo qui
serra pass la mer a Dovre jusques a Whitesand pur aler en Gascoigne a demorer
y solonc la dite ordenance and dite prendre la dite sum a la volente le Roy e
tant que le Roy eit fit enquere ceo que le dit Monsieur Piers, ad pardecea e
pardela e des profitz quil Roy ensoit pleinement avise quil puisse ordener
dacrestr ou damenuser lestat du dit Mons. Piers solonc cco que plerra au Roy e
quil vorra que bon soit.

N. 44. Claus. 1. Ed. 1. M. 11. Dors. Pryns Ed. 1. F. 122.
CUM Ecclesiis Cathedralibus in regno Angliae viduatis, and de jure debeat and
solet de consuetudine provideri per electionem Canonicam petita tamen prius ab
Illustri Rege Angliae super hoc licentia and optenta, and demum celebrata
electione, persona Electi eidem Regi debeat praesentari, ut idem Rex contra
personam ipsam possit proponere, si quid rationabile habeat contra eam. Videtur
eidem Domino Regi, and suo consilio, quod sibi and Ecclesiae Cantuariae, cujus
ipse patronus est pariter and desensor fiat praejudicium in hac part,
praecipue si res trahitur in aliis Ecclesiis Angliae in exemplum, quod Summus
Pontifex hiis omissis in hoc casu, ubi nec in materia, nec in forma electionis
inventum est fuisse peccatum, nec in ipsius litteris expressum potestatem sibi
assumpserit ipsi Ecclesiae providendi. Unde ne de caetero ad consimiles
provisiones procedat Romana Ecclesia: Et si ad eas processerit, nec dicto
Domino Regi per eas praejudicium generetur, ut Temporalia alicujus Ecclesiae
Cathedralis sic proviso reddere teneatur, Domine Elect Cantuariensis
Temporalia Cantuariensis Ecclesiae idem Dominus Rex vobis concedit ad praesens
de gratia sua speciali. Iterus Bernard ejusdem Domini Regis Clericus vice and
nomine ipsius protestor, quod concessio Temporalium in casu consimili facta
Domino Nicholao Wintoniensi Episcopo, cum protestatione tamen, and nunc in
persona vestra denuo iterata, cum protestatione consimili, ad consuetudinem vel
exemplum futuris temporibus minime pertrahatur. Facta autem and lecta fuit ista
protestatio apud Westmonastr. in Capella Sancti Stephani die Lunae in vigilia
Sanctae Luciae Virginis, in praesentia fratris Roberti de Kilwardeby
Cantuar-Electi* praesentibus and ad hoc specialiter vocatis venerabili Patre W.
Dei Gratia Exon. Episcopo; and discretis viris Dominis W. de Merton Canc.
Angliae, Magistro Johanne de Chistall Decano Sancti Pauli London. R. Burnell
Eborum Archidiacono, Herveo de Borham, fratre Johanne de Derlington, Magistro
Willielmo de Cornera, Johanne de Kirkeby, Willielmo de Saham, and Johanne de
Shalemesford, Monacho Cantuar. and multis aliis. Anno Domini 1272.

N. 45. Claus. 7. Ed. 1. M. 1. Dors.
MEmorandum, quod venerabilis Pater J. Cantuar. Archiepiscopus, venit coram
Rege and consilio suo in Parliamento Regis Sancti Michaelis, anno regni Regis
septimo apud Westmonastr. and confitebatur and concessit quod de statutis,
provisionibus and declarationibus eorundem, quae per ipsum promulgatae fuerunt
apud Rading. mense Sententias Excommunicationis quas idem Archiepiscopus ibidem
promulgavit: Primo, deleatur and pronon pronunciata habeatur, illa clau^ula in
prima sententia Excommunicationis quae facit mentionem, de impetrantibus
literas Regias ad impediendum processum in causis quae per sacros Canones, etc.
Secun do, quod non excommunicentur Ministri Regis licet ipsi non pareant
mandato Regis, in non capiendo Excommunicatos. Tertio, de illis qui invadunt
Maneria Clericorum, ut ibi sufficiat poena per Regem Magna Charta de foribus
Ecclesiarum. Confitetur etiam and concessit, quod nec Regi nec Haeredibus suis,
nec regno suo Angliae, ratione aliorum Articulorum in concilio Rading.
contentorum, nullum generetur praejudicium in futurum.

N. 46. Pat. 8. Ed. 1. M. 10. intus.
REX Venerabili in Christo Patri J. Cantuar. Archiepiscopo totius Episcopis and
aliis Praelatis and absentium Procuratoribus London. conventuris, salutem.
Dilectos and fideles nostros Rogerum Extraneum and Hugonem filium Dttonis
Seneschallum hospitii nostri ad vos duximus transmittendos ad appellandum pro
nobis ne in Concilio seu Congregatione nuper apud London. convocata, contra
Coronam and Dignitatem nostram aliqua statuere praesumatis.

In cujus, etc. Test Rege apud Wynton. 6. die Januarii. Anno Regni nostri
octavo.
N. 47. Pat. 9. Ed. 1. M. 6. intus.
REX Venerabilibus in Christo patribus J. eadem gratia Cantuariensi
Archiepiscopo totius Angliae Primati and omnibus Episcopis and aliis Praelatis
in instanti concilio de Lambeth conventuris, salutem.
Vinculo juramenti nobis estis (ut nostis) astricti, quo nobis in omnibus ad
Coronam and dignitatem nostram spectantibus omnem quam poteritis fidelitatem
observare debetis. Quapropter vobis mandamus in fide and fidelitate quibus
nobis tenemini firmiter injungentes, quod ad defensionem paena amissionis
Temporalium quae de nobis tene^is, vobis omnibus and singulis firmiter
inhibemus, ne in praejudicium nostri vel ejusdem regni in concilio nunc apud
Lambeth convocato, nec etiam contra nos vel jura nostra, quibus praedecess^res
nostri Reges Angliae and nos ex antiqua and approbata consuetudine usi sumus,
procurare vel attemptare aliqua praesumatis; aut etiam alicui hujusmodi
procurare seu statuere volenti, assensum praebeatis, sic ergo vos habeatis in
hac part, quod vos debeamus potius specialiter commendare, quam de contrariis
quod absit, increpare.

Test Rege apud Lyndhurst 18. die Septembris.
N. 48. Rot. pat. 1. Ed. 2. part 1. M. 2. De Custode Regni Angliae constituto.
REX Archiepiscopis, Episcopis, Abbatibus, Prioribus, Comitibus, Baronibus,
Militibus, libere Tenentibus, Communitatibus, Vicecomitibus, and omnibus aliis
Ministris, Ballivis and fidelibus suis ad quos presents littere pervenerint,
salutem.
Sciatis quod cum nos pro quibusdam negotiis, nos and statum Regni nostri
tangentibus sumus ad parts transmarinas favente Domino in proximo profecturi.
Nos de circumspectione and industria and fidelitate dilecti and fidelis nostri
Petri de Gavaston Comitis Cornubie specialiter confidentes, ipsum Comitem
Custodem nostrum dicti Regni ac locum nostrum in eodem Regno Tenentem pro pace
and tranquillitate Populi dicti Regni nostri melius conservanda, constituimus
per presents, quamdiu in dictis partibus transmarinis moram fecerimus vel
aliud inde duxerimus ordinand. Et ideo vobis mandamus quod eidem Comiti tanquam
Custodi nostro dicti Regni and locum nostrum tenenti in eodem, in hiis quae ad
dictam custodiam pertinent, intendentes sitis and respondentes. In cujus, etc.

Test Rege apud Westmonasterium, dce xxvi. December.
N. 49. Rot. pat. 1. Ed. 2. part 2. M. 28. De potestate data Custodi Angliae,
ordinandi de custodiis and conferendi Beneficia.
REX Omnibus ad quos, etc. Salutem.
Sciatis quod nos de fidelitate and industria dilecti and fidelis nostri Petri
de Gavaston Comitis Cornubie, quem Custodem nostrum Regni nostri, dum nos in
partibus transmarinis ad quas jam profecturi sumus, morari contigerit, vel
aliud inde ordinandum duxerimus, constituimus specialiter confidentes eidem
Comiti concedendi, vice nostra licentiam eligendi, omnibus illis qui licentiam
hujusmodi ad futuros sibi eligendi Pastores, tam in Ecclesiis Cathedralibus
quam Conventualibus, quas interim Pastorum solatio destitui contigerit in forma
debita petierint, and postmodum Electionibus illis assensum nostro nomine
adhibendi, necnon ab Electis hujusmodi, fidelitates capiendi ac eifdem
Temporalia quae ipsis restituenda fuerint restituendi, and similiter Prebendas
Ecclesias and alia beneficia quecumque interim vacantia quae ad nostram
Collationem seu presentationem pertinuerint nostro nomine conferendi, seu ad ea
praesentandi and etiam ordinandi de custodiis and maritagiis que nobis interim
accidere contigerit, prout sibi per nos before est injunctum, necnon
fidelitates haeredum illorum qui de nobis tenent in capite vel alio modo, and
quos interim decedere contigerit,

In cujus, etc. Test Rege apud Dovor. xviii. die Januarii.
Per ipsam Regem.
N. 50. Pat. 3. Ed. 2. M. 16. intus. Ryley. plac. Parl. fol. 526.
LE Roy a touz ceux qui cestes lettres verront ou orront saluz.
Come nous al honur de Dieu, and por le bien de nous, and de nostre Roiaume,
eoms grantez de nostre fraunche volunte as Prelatz, Contes and Barons de nostre
dit Roiaume quil puissent eslire certeines persons des Prelatz, Contes and
Barons and des autres les queux il lour semblera suffisauntz dappeller a eux,
durant les temps de lour poiar, cest a saver jesqes a la feste de seint Michel
procheine avenir, and de la per ordener and establir lestat de nostre hostel,
and de nostre Roiaume, solonc droit and reason: Nous grantoms par cestes nos
lettres a ceux qui deyvent estre esluz, queux quil soient, par les ditz
Prelatz, Contes and Barons, plein poair de ordener lestat de nostre hostel, and
de nostre Roiaume desusditz, en tien manner que lour ordenances soint faites al
honur de Dieu, and al honor and au profit de seint Eglise and al honur de nous
and a nostre profit, and au profit de nostre people, solonc droit and reason and
le serment que nous feismes a nostre coronnement. Et voloms que les esluz and
toux ceux qui sont de nostre seigneurie, and de nostre ligeance les ordenaunces
que faites serront par les Prelatz, Contes and Barons qui a ce serront esluz,
and autres par eux a ce appellez, tiegnent and gardent en touz lour pointz, and
quil se puissent a ce asseurer, lier, and entrejurer, sanz challenge de nous. Et
si par aventure aviegne que party de ceux qui serront esluz, pur les dites
ordenaunces fair soient destorbez par mort, ou par malady, ou resnable
encheson que Dieu deffende, per quei il ne puissent les dites ordenances
appeller autres a eux, a celes ordenances fair solonc ce quil verront que-ce
soit plus a honur de nous, and au profit de nous, and de nostre people. Et en
tesmoignaunce de queu chose nous avoms fait fair cestes noz lettres overtes.
Don a Westminster. le xvi. jour de Marz.

N. 51. Registrum Winchelsey fol. 15. b. at Doctors Commons. Note that in this
Register, things are Entered Confusedly, neither according to the time when
done, or Order of the folio's.

A Touz ceuz que cest lettre verront ou orront R. par la soeffrance Ercevesque
de Canturburi etc. R. de London. J. de Nichol. S. de Sarum. H. de Wync. J. de
Norwyz. J. de Baa and Wells. J de Cicestre. W. de Wyrc. W. de Excestre. V. de
Saint Davi. par mesmes le soeffrance Esvesques. G. de Clare de Gloucestre and
de Herif. T. de Lancastr. H. de Lacy de Nichol. Humfr. de Boun de Heref. and
Essex. J. de Britania de Richmond. Adomar. de Valencia de Penbrok. Guy de
Beauchamp de Warwic and E. de Arundel Countes: H. de Lancastre. Henr. de Percy,
Hue de Ver, Roberd de Clifford and Roberd Fiz Pain, Will. le Marshall, John
Lovel, Rauf le fiz Will. Peyn de Tipetot, John de Botourt. Barth. de Badlesmer,
J. de Gray, John de Crumwell salutz in nostre Seygnr. Come nostre treschier
Seygnr par la grace Dieu Roy de Engleterre and al honor de Dieu and pur bien
dit Seygnr le Roy, e de son Royaume ait Grante de sa Franche volunte a nos e as
autres Prelates, Countes e Barons du dit Royaume: Que nous puissouns eflire
certeigns persons de nos and des autres les queux il nos semblera suffisaunz de
Apeler a nous durant le temps de nostre poer, cest a saver, jesque la feste
saint Michel proschein per Ordener Establier lestat del ostel du dit nostre
Seygnr. le Roi, e de scen Roiame solom Droyt e resoun, e que ceux qui deivent
estre eslutz qui quil soient eyent pleyn poer de ordener lestat del ostel du
dit nostre Seygnr. le Roi e de son Roiame desusditz en tieu manner, qui les
ordenances soient faites al honor de Dieu e al honor, e profist de saint
Esglise e al honor du dit nostre Seygnr le Roi, e a son profist, e al profist
de soen poeple solom droyt and resoun e la serment que le Dit nostre Seygnr. le
Roi fist a son Coronnement. Ea ceo le dit nostre Seygnr le Roi eyt volu que les
eslutz e touz ceux qui seyent sa seignurie e de la liaunce, les ordenances que
faites serrunt per les* Prelates, Countes, and Barons qui a ceo serrunt eslutz
e autres par eux a ceo apellez Teignent and Gardent en touz lur poinz, e quil
ceo puissent a ceo a seurer, -- lier, and entrejurer saunz chaleng du dit
nostre Seygnr le Roy ou de soens, e si lettres overtes que nostre dit Seygn r
le Roy nous ad fet sur les chooses desusdites; Nous Grantounz e pro mittons pur
nos, nos successors e nos heirs, Que le grant que nostre Seygnr. le Roy ad
fait en le manner desusdits ne soit autrefoits tret en custom, ne en usage ne
ne Turn en prejudice du dit nostre Seygnr le Roy ne de ces heirs, ne de nos,
nos successors and nos heirs.

N. 52. Rotulus Parliamenti de Anno quinto Edwardi Secundi.
LE Roy a tous ceux as queux cestes lettres vendront Saluz.
Sachez que come le seissizme jour de Marz l'an de notre regne ^ierce, al
honeur de Dieu and pur le bien de nous and de nostre royaume eussoms grant de
nostre fraunche volunte par nos lettres overtes as Prelates, Counts and Barons
de dit Royaume quil puissent eslire certeins persons des Prelates, Counts and
Barons les queux il lour sembleroit suffisaunt par le grace de Dieu Ercevesque
de Canterbirs Primate de tote Engleterre, Evesques, Countes, and Barons esluz
par la virtue de la dite commission ordinoms al honeur de Dieu and de seint
Esglise and lon^ur de Roy and son Royaume en la manner que ce ensuit.

1. De franchise de seint Esglise.
Enprimes nous ordenoms que les ordinances avaunt faites par nous and monstrez
au Roy soient tenuz and gardees les queux sont prescheinement souz escriptz.
Enprimes ordeine est que seinte Esglise

2. De la pees le Roy garder.
Derechief ordene est que la pees le Roy soit fermement guard par tout le
roiaume issent que chescune puisse sauvement alier, venir, and demorir solonc
la ley and lusage du royaume.

3. De douns faites par le Roy sanz assent des Ordenours.
Derechief ordene est par les dettes le Roi acquitier and son estat relever and
le plus honourablement maintenier, que null down de

4. Des custumes liverer a Leschequir.
Derechief est ordene que les Custumes du Royaume soient gardees, and resceuz
par gentz du royaume meismes and non a pas par aliens, and que les issues and
les profitz de mesmes les custumes ensemblement ove totes autres issues and les
profitts issauntz du royaume, des queux chooses que ces soient entierment
viegnent a^ Eschequier le Roy and par le Tresorer and les chamberleins soient
livereez pur loustiel le Roy meintenier and aillours a son profit, issint que
le Roy puisse vievre du soen saunz prisez fair autres que ancienes dues and
acustumez and

5. De Marchantz alienz arestoir.
Derechief ordeine est que toutes les Merchants aliens qui ount recenz les
profitz des custumes du royaume ou des autres chooses appurtenances au Roy puis
la mort Roy Edward piere notre Seigneur le Roy qui ore est, soient arestuzove
leur biens ou quil soient trovez denz le poer le Roy Dengleterre, jusques il
eient renduz reasonable accounte de quant quil eient recuz des issues du roialme
deinz le temps

6. De la graunde. Chartre tenir.
Derechief ordeine est que la graund Chartre soit gardee en toutz ses pointz en
tiex manner que sil yeit en la dite Chartre null point oscur ou dotif soit
desclaree par les ditz ordeinours and autres que il verront a eux a ce appeller
quant il verront temps and deurant leur poer.

7. De douns le Roy repe^^er.
Et puis derechief pur ce que la Corone est tant abeissee and demembree par
diverses douns, nous ordeinoms que tous les douns que sont donez au damage du
Roy and distress de la Coronne puis la Commission a nous faite de chasteux,
villes, terres, and tenements, and baillies, gardes and marriages eschetes and
reles, queconques queles soient, aussibien en Gascoigne, Irlande, Gales and
Escoce, come en Engleterre soient repellez. Et nous les repellons de tout sanz
estre redonnez a meismes ceux sanz comun assent en Parliament. Et que si tieu
manner des douns ou reles soient desoreines donez encountre la form avantdite
saunz assent de son Baronage and ce en Parliament tant que ses dettes soient
acquittes and son estat avenauntment relevez soient tenuz pur nuls and soit le
parvoar puny en Parliament par egard del Baronage.

8. De totes mane^es issues du roiaume liverer a Leschequir.
Por ceo que autrefoirz fut ordein que les coustumes du royaume fussent resceuz
and gardez par gentz du royaume and non pas par aliens, and que les Issues and
les profitz des meismes les custumes ensemblement ove totes les autres issues
and profitz issantz du royaume, queux que eux fussent, entierment venissent al
Eschequir le Roy and par le Tresorier and les Chambreleins fussent resceuz and
livereez pur loustiel le Roy maintenir and aillours a son profit issent

9. Que le Roy ne alier horse d^ royaume.
Por ceo que le Roy ne doit emprendre fait de guerre contre

10. Que totes prises cessent.
Et por ceo quil fait a dotier que le people de la terre seleve pur prises and
diverses oppressions faites einz ces heures, nomement pur ceo que autre foiz
estoit ordeine que nostre Seigneur le Roy resquist de soen saunz prises fair
autres que les aunciences dues and accust and totes autres se ceisassent and
noun M. Charta. c. 19.
Conestables des Chasteaux and leur bailiffs and estre la forsprise des prises
dues suisdites nient contreesteant commission que il eit, soit levee sur si la
menee par huy and cry and menes a la prescheine jail le Roy* and de luy soit
fait commune ley come de Rebour ou de laron si de ce soit atteint.

11. De noveles custumes and maltoutes leveez.
Ensement novelles custumes sont levees and auncienes enhauncees, come sur
leyns, draps, vins, avoir de poiz and autre chooses par quoy les Marchauntz
viegnent pluis rielment and meins de bien meignent en la terre and les
Marchauntz estrangers demorant plus longes quil ne soleint fair, par la quele
demore les chooses sont le

12. De damages aver de lattacheur.
Al honeur de Dieu and de seint Eglise encountre ceux qui par malice purchasent
prohibitions and attachements encountre ordeineirs de seint Esglise en cause de
corrections de peche and des

13. De mal conseilers le Roy ouster.
Et pur ceo que le Roy ad estee mal guide and consaillez par mauveis
conseillers come est susdit, Nous ordeinoms que tous les mauvais conseille
soient oustez and remuez de toutz issuit que eux ne autres tieux ne soient mes
pres de luy ne en office le Roy retenuz, and que autres gentz covenables soient
meis en lour lieus. Et en meisme la manner soit fait des menengs and des gentz
de office que sont en loustiel le Roy que ne sont pas covenables.

14. De officers and Ministers de Roy fair.
Et pur ceo que moultz des mauz sont avenuz par tieux conseillers and tieux
Ministers* Nous ordeinoms que le Roy face Chanceller, Chief Justice del une
Ba^ke and de lautre, Tresorier, Chancellier and Chief Baron del Eschequir,
Seneschal de son hostiel, Gardeyne de la Gardrobe and Contreroller, and un
Clerk covenable pur garder son Privy Seal, un Chief Gardeine de ses Forestes
de cea Trent and un autre dela Trent and aussi un Escheatour de cea Trent and
un autre dela, Chief Clerk le Roy en le commune Bank par le conseil and
consent de son Baronage and ceo en Parliament. Et sil aviegne par ascune
aventure que il covient mettre ascuns des ditz Ministres avaunt ceo que
parliament soit dunque le Roy permetter par le bon conseil que il averoit de li
jesques au Parliament. Et issint soit fait desoremes des tieux Ministres quant
mestier serra.

15. Del Gardeyns des Cynkports. Membr. secun. d^.
Ensement nous ordeinoms que touz les chief gardeyns des portz and chasteaux
sur la mere serront mis and faitz en la form susdite, Et que ceux gardens
soient de la terre mesmes.

16. De Ministres fair en terres.
Et pur ceo que les terres de Gascoigne, Dirland and Descoce sont en peril
destre perdues per defaute des bones ministers, nous ordeinoms que bones and
suffizantz ministres soient mis a la guard fair en les dites terres en la
form contenue en la

17. De Viscountes fair en counties.
Estre ceo nous ordeinoms que Viscountz soient desormes mis par la Chaunceller
and Tresorier and les autres de conseil qui serront presents. Et si Chanceller
ne soit present soient mys par le Tresorer and Barons del Eschequir and par les
Justices de Bank, Et que tieux soient mis and faitz qui soient covenables and
suffisantz and qui eient terres and tenements dount il puissent

18. De Gardeyns de forestes.
Por ceo que commune fame est and ovesque cemeinte de mounstrance ad este fait
que diverse oppressions come desheritaunces, faux enditements and
emprisonements sur ce grevous raunceo and des autres moultz de maneres des
grevaunces que

N. 19. Des Enditements de la Foreste.
Et pur ceo que plusours gentz sount desheritez, reintz and destruitz par les
sovuraines gardens des forestes de cea Trent and de la, and par les autres
ministers country la form de la Chartre de la Foreste and encountre la
declaracion que le Roy Edward fiz le Roy Henry fist en la form que ensuyt
cestassavoir nous volouns and grantouns pur nous and pur nos heirs que de
trespass faitz en nos forestes de vert and de venison que les forestiers en qui
baillies tieux trespass serront faitz presentent

N. 20. De Piers de Gaveston.
Pur ceo que conue chose est que par l'examinement de Prelatz, Counts and
Barons, Chivaliers and autres bones gentz du royaume trovez que Piers de
Gaveston ad malmenez and mal conseilez notre Seigneur

(...)

N. 25. De plez tenir en Eschequir.
Pur ceo que communes Merchantz and autres plusours du people sont resceuz de
pleder a Leschequir ples de debt and de trespass par le reason qu'il sont
avoues par les Ministres de la dite place plus avaunt que estre ne deveroient
dount les accomptes and les autres chooses touchantz le Roy sont se pluis
delaiez, and ovesque ceo moltz gentz du people grevez, Nous ordeinoms que
desormes ne soient tenuz plees en la dite plees del Eschequir, forsque les
plees touchantz le Roy and ces Ministres que sont responsables en Leschequir
par la reason de lour

N. 26 De plez tenir en la Mareschaux.
Ensement put ceo que le people se sent moult grevez que Seneschau and
Mareschaux tiegnent moultz des plees que a leur office ne

N. 27 De office de coroner deinz la verge.
Et pur ceo que avaunt ces heures moltz des felonies faitz de-deinz, la verge
ount este despunies pur ceo que les coroners du pays ne se sont pas entremys
denquere de tieu manner des felonies de deinz la ou des franchises par la ou
les morts serront trovez qui ensemblement ove le Coroner del houstiel face
l'office que append and le met en son roulle, et ceo que ne purra mye devant
le Seneschal estre terminez pur ceo que les felons ne purront estre attachez ne
trovez ne pur autre encheson demoerge le process a la commune ley. Issint que
les exigendes and les Utlagaries and les presentiments de ceo faitz soient
monstrez en lire par le Coroner du pais ansi come des autres selonies faites
dehors la verge, mes pur ceo ne soit less que les Attachements

N. 28. De les Chartres le Roy de sa pees.
Por ceo que le people se sent molt grevez de ceo que gentz sont embandiz de
tuer les gentz et robber per tant que le Roy par ^auve^s conseil leur donee si
legeirment sa pees contre form de ley Nous ordeinoms que null felon de futif
ne soit covert ne defendus desoremes de null manner de felony par la Chartre le
Roy de sa pees

N. 29. De Parliament tenir de an en an.
Por ceo que moltz gentz sont delayez en la court le Roy de leur demand

N. 30. De leschange de money.
Por ceo que a toutes les foites leschange de money se fait el roialme tout le
people est grantment grevez en moltz des maneres, Nous ordeinoms que quant
mestier serra and le Roy voille eschange fair quil la face par commune conseil
de son Baronage, and ceo en Parliament.

N. 31. De touz estatuz gardir.
Ensement nous ordeinoms que touz les estatutz que sont faitz en amendment de
la leie and au profit du people par les Auncestres nostre Seigneur le Roy
soient gardez and maintenuz, si avaunt come estre devient par lei and reason.
Issint que eux ne soient pas contraires a la grand Chartre ne a Chartre de la
foreste nencountre les ordeinments par nous faitz. Et si null Estatut soit fait
country la form susdite, soit tenuz pur null; and tout outrement defaitz.

N. 32. Que ley de terre ne soit delayez par Lettres du privy seal.
Por ceo que la ley de la terre and commune droit ount este sovent delayez par
lettres issuez dessus la privy seal le Roy a grant grevance du people Nous
ordeinoms que desoremes la ley de la terre ne commune droit ne soient delayez
ne destourbez par lettres du dit seal. Et si rien soit fait en nule des places
de la court notre Seigneur

(...)

N. 38. De la grand Chartre and la Chartre de la Foreste.
Ensement nous ordeinoms que la grant Chartre de Franchises and la Chartre de
la Forest, que le Roy Henry Fiz le Roy Johan fist soient tenuez en touz leur
pointz, and que les pointz que sont dotifs en les dites Chartres des Franchises
soient esclareriz en le prochein parliament apres cesti par lavisement de la
Baronage and des Justices and des autres sagez gentz de la leie, and ceste
chose soit fait pur ceo que nous ne avions mye en poer le fair le durant notre
temps.

N. 39. De serement de Ministres.
Ensement nous ordenoms que Chancellor, Tresorier, Chief Justices

N. 40. De gentz assignez en parliament.
Ensement nous ordenoms que en chacun Parliament soient assignez un Evesque,
deux Countes and deux Barons doier and terminer totes les pleintes de ceux qui
pleindre se vodrount des ministres le Roy queux quil soient qui serront
contrevenuz les ordeinaunces susdites, Et si les dites Evesque Countes and
Barons ne puissent touz entendre ou soient destourbez de oier and terminer les
dites pleints ad unque le facent trois ou deux de eux and ceux qui sont trovez
contrevenuz

N. 41. De commune ordenance publier.
Ensement nous ordenoms que les Ordenances suisdites soient maintenuz and
gardez en tous leur pointz and que notre Seigneur le Roy les face mettre desous
son grant seal and envoier en chescun Count Dengleterre a publier tenir et
fermement garder aussibien deinz franchises come dehors. Et en meisme la manner
soit maunde au

Nous meismes celes ordeinances a nous monstrees and le Lundy preschein devant
le fest de seint Michel dreinpasse publiez agreans acceptoms et affermoms et
voloms et grantoms pur nous et pur nous heirs que toutes les dites
ordeinaunces et chescune de les faites. solonc la form de nos lettres
avantdites, soient publiez par tout

En tesmoignance de queux chooses nous avoms fait fair cestes nos lettres
patents donez a Loundres le quint jour Doctobre lan de notre regne quint.
Finis de Anno 5o. Ed. 2di.
N. 53. Claus 5. Ed. 2. m. 15. Dors.
Le Roi au Visconte Deverwyke saluz.
Come Monseur Peers de Gaveston Count de Cornwall, nadgueres fust exile horse
de nostre Reaume contre les leis and les usages des memes le Roiaume as queus
garder et meintenir nous sumes tenus par le serment que nous feismes a nostre
coronement en le quel exil il fu nome autre que bon and leal and meismes celiu
Count par nostre maundement seit ja revenu a nous en dit Reaume pressed dester a
droit devant nous a touz que de rien li vodront chalenger solon les leis and
les usages avantditz par quei nous li tenoms bon

Au tieles lettres sont maundes as cliescunes Viscontes Dengleterre. ^et a
remembrer que le dit form fu fete par le Roy meismes and le seal et les breefs
par lin liver a lespigurnel pur sealer le jour et le lieu contenuz

N. 54. ibidem.
Rex vicecomiti Ebor. Salutem.
Quia inter cerera nostris curis incumbentia, corditer affectamus, et in summis
desideriis reportamus quod pax nostra ubique infra regnum et potestatem nostram
inviolabiliter observetur, et quod omnes leges et consuetudines que in eodem
Regno temporibus progenitorum nostrorum quondam Regum omnes ordinationes nuper
fact ad honorem Dei and sancte Ecclesie and nostrum and ad commodum nostrum
and populi regni ejusdem que in dampnum seu prejudicium nostriaut corone nostre
non redundent and legibus and consuetudinibus supradictis non contrariantur,
teneantur and observentur, tibi praecipimus, fir miter injungentes quod
praemissa omnia in pleno Comitatu tuo nec non in civitatibus, Burgis, villis
mercatoriis et locis aliis quibuscunque in eodem Comitatu tam infra libertates
quam extra, ubi expedire

Test Rege apud Eboracum xxvii die Januarii. per ipsum Regem. Eodem modo
mandatum est singulis Vicecomitibus per Angliam.



N. 55. Pat. 5. Ed, 2. part. 2. m. 17. intus. Ril. placita parl. f. 530.
Rex omnibus ad quos etc. salutem,
Sciatis quod cum quedam ordinationes per Prelatos, Comites, and Barons regni
nostri ad id electos viz. quod si in dictis ordinationibus alique nobis dampno
sa seu prejudicialia seu alias contra formam commissionis eis per nos in hac
part fact contigerit inveniri ea pro non concessis and non confirmatis
haberentur* reservata nobis in eadem protestatione potestate hujusmodi dampnosa
and praejudiciala per bonum consilium dictorum ordinatorum and aliorum
corrigendi, reformandi, prout in Instrumento publico inde confecto before
continetur. Nos de circumspectionis industria ac fidelitate probata venerabilis
J. Norwycen Episcopi, et dilectorum et fidelium nostrorum Guidonis Far,
Johannis de Crumbewell. Hugonis de Aldeley. Willielmi Deyncourt. Henrici
Spigurnel. Henrici le Scroop militum, ac dilectorum Clericorum nostrorum
Magistrorum Thome de Cobham. Roberti de Pikering. Walteri de Thorp. Gilberti de
Middleton. Johannis Fraunceys. and (...)

(...) ^int obedire, tune aliis secum venientibus inhibitionem ex part nostra
factam in forma superius annotata.

In cujus, etc. Test Rege apud Westminster. iii. die Septembris.
N. 59. Regist. Eccles. Christi Cantuar. f. 227. Litera Comitis Lancastrie pro
miraculis Domini Roberti Archiepiscopi.
A Gentz de honorable religioun et nos chers amiss le Priour et Convent del
Esglise de Centerbire Thomas Count de Lancastre et de Leycestre Seneschal
Dengleterre, saluz, et cheres.
tesmoigner per voie notoire et per vos lettres patentes queux miracles Dieux
oevere pur Lercevesque Robert de Canterberi quei darrein feust, et ad oevere
pur ly ausi bien en sa vie come apres sa mort, Et les miracles que pendent en
escrit devant sa ^ombe. Et vous enveyoms Sires nostre ame Clerk Mestre Rauf de
Ho^ghton, a qui Sires vous prions que vous voillez doner credence des chooses
que il vous dirra de par nous touchantz la dite besoigne. Sires

Don a nostre Chastel de Pountfr. le 7. jour daveril.
There is no Answer to this Letter to be found in the Register noted in the
Margin, nor any Account of the Archbishop's Miracles.

N. 60. Rot. Pat. 8. Ed. 2. part 2. m. 12 Dors.
REX Ballivis, Ministris et omnibus Ballivis et fidelibus suis de Comitatibus
Stafford et Salop, tam infra libertates quam extra ad quos presents Litere
pervenerint, salutem.
Cum nuper assignavimus Johannem Giffard de Chylington, et Johannem de Perton
in dicto Comitatu Staff. Willielmum de Lodelowe, et Reginaldum Charles in dicto
Comitatu Salop. ad vicesimam nobis nuper in Parliamento nostro per Communitates
Comitatuum Regni nostri concessam assidend. et taxand juxta formam ipsis inde
ex part nostra liberatam et ad pecuniam de predicta vicesima provenientem
colligend. et levand. et ad Scaccarium nostrum certis terminis liberand. unam
viz. medietatem in Quindena sancte Trinitatis proximo Johannes, Johannes,
Willielmus, et Reginaldus nobis significaverint, quod quidam ipsos quominus
vicesimam predictam ad opus nostrum Levare possunt impediunt, pretendentes
dictam vicesimam nobis per Communitates predictas sub certis conditionibus
concessam fuisse, viz. quod nos magnam Cartam de libertatibus Anglie, Cartam de
Foresta, et ordinationes per Prelatos, Comites et Barons de Regno nostro
factas et per nos approbatas observari Perambulationem de Forestis nostris
fieri faceremus, et quod nos premissa nondum fecimus executioni debite
demandari, super quo cogimur admirari vehementer, presertim cum nos Cartas et
Ordinationes predictas in omnibus suis Articulis observari mandaverimus et
quosdam fideles nostros assignaverimus in singulis Comitatibus Regni nostri ad
Perambulationes de Forestis nostris predictis faciend. Nos tam super
impedimento predicto, quam super nominibus impedientium certiorari volentes,
Assignavimus dilectum Clericum nostrum Adam Limbergh ad informand. se una cum
dictis Collectoribus super premissis et ad inquirendum si necesse fuerit per
Sacramentum proborum, et legalium hominum partium illarum, per quos rei veritas
melius sciri poterit, super omnibus et singulis Articulis premissa
contingentibus before veritatem et ad nos inde distinct et aperte
certificandos. Et ideo vobis mandamus quod eidem Ade et Collectoribus
predictis, in omnibus et singulis premissis sitis intendentes, consulentes, et
auxiliantes, quociens et quando per ipsum Adam ex part nostra super hoc
fueritis premuniti: Mandavimus enim vicecomiti nostro Comitatuum predictorum
quod eisdem Ade et Collectoribus in premissis pareat et intendat, et coram eis
ad certos dies et loca quos idem Adam eidem vicecomiti scire faciet venire
faciet, tot et tales probos et legales homines de Balliva sua per quos, etc.

Test Rege apud Thunderle viii. die Junii.
Per ipsum Regem and Concilium.
N. 61. Claus. 12. Ed. 2. m. 22. Dors Ril^eys placit parl. f. 560.
FAit a remember que come nadgaires certains Prelatz, Countes et Barons de la
volunte nostre Seigneur le Roy et assent des plusours grantz du Roialme et
autres du conseil le Roy lors estauntz a Norhampton suissent alez devers le
Count de Lancastre de parler et treter ovesques lui sur le profit et lonur
nostre Seigneur le Roy et de son Roialme, et en la parlannce et tretiz enter
les ditz Prelatz, Countes et Barons et le dit Count de Lancastre parle et
trete fust, que Evesques, Counts et Barons fuissent demorantz devers nostre
Seigneur le Roy pur lui conseiller es besoignes que li touchereient tantque en
son prechein Parliament et de ceo et dautres chooses endenture fait en la form
que sensuit. Ceste endenture tesmoigne coment les honurables Pieres
L'ercevesque de Dyvelyz, et les Evesques de Norwicz, Ely, et Cicestre, et les
Countes de Pembrocke, et Arundel, Monsicur Roger de Mortimer, Monsieur Johan
Somery, Sire Bartholm. de Badlesmere, Monsieur Rauf Basset et Monsieur Johan
Botetourt de la volente et lassent nostre dit Seigneur le Roy, unnt parle od le
Count de Lancastre sur les chooses touchantes le profit nostre Seigneur le Roy
et du Roialme en la form que sensuit, cest a saver que les Evesques de
Norwicz, Cicestre, Ely, Salesbury, seint David, Kardoil, Hereford, et
Worcestre, les Countes de Pembrock, Richemund, Hereford et Arundel, Sire Hugh
de Courteny, Sire Roger de Mortimer, Sire Johan de Segrave, Sire Johan de Gray,
et un des Banretz le Count de Lancastre quil voudra nomer, por un quartier,
demoergens pres de nostre Seigneur le Roy tantque a prechein Parliament, issint
que deux des Evesques, un des Countes, un des Barons et un des Banretz le dit
Count de Lancastre au meins demoergent pres du Roy adesseement, et que tutes
chooses que a charger facent, ce porront et deveront fair sanz Parliament, se
facent par lour assent, et si autrement soient fait, soit tenuz por nient et
adresce en Parliament, par agard des Peers, et par quarters, solonc se quil
serront esluz et assign en Parliament, a fair, et conseiller nostre Seigneur
le Roy en la form avantdite. Et les susditz Prelatz, Countes et Barons de la
volente et lassent nostre Seigneur le Roy unt enpris que le Roy fra au dit
Count de Lancastre et a ses gentz et ses meignees reles et acquitances de
totes felonies et trespass faitz country sa pees, tantque au jour de Seint Jak
cest an, et que les chartres de reles et acquitances soient simples et sanz
condition, et si meillur suerte pust estre trove por eux au dit prechein
Parliament soit fair a eux, et illuqes afferme devant nostre Seigneur le Roy,
et son Barnage. En le avaunt dit Count de Lancastre ad grant quil fra relees
et (...)

(...) ipsum Dominum Regem quod scrutatis rotulis Domini Regis E. patris Domini
Regis nunc de Cancellaria sua de anno predicto deportare faceret hic in
Parliamento, etc. recordum et processum predicta; qui quidem Cancellarius
postea recordum et processum predict a protulit hic in hec verba. Placita
Corone coram Domino Edwardo Rege filii Domini Regis Edwardi tenta in presentia
ipsius Domini Regis apud Pontem tractum die Lune proximo ante fe^^um
Annuntiationis beat Marie Virginis anno regni sui quintodecim^. Cum Thomas
Comes Lancastr. captus et proditionibus homicidiis incendiis depredationibus et
aliis diversis feloniis ductus esset coram ipso Domino Rege presentibus Edmundo
Comite Kanc. Johanne Comite Richemond, Adom^ro de Valentia Comite Pembr.
Johanne de Warenna Comite Surr. Edmundo Comite Arundel, David Comite Athol,
Roberto Comite Danegos, Baronibus and aliis Magnatibus regni, Dominus Rex
recordarur quod idem Thomas homo ligeus ipsius Domini Regis venit apud Burton
super Trentam simul cum Humfrido ob quod Dominus Rex propter predictam malitiam
and resistentiam dicti Comitis and aliorum reprimend. and pro tranquilitate and
pace regni and populi et jure Corone sue regie manutenend. and ad repellend. et
amovend. vim predictam seditione taliter congregatam quesivit transitum aliunde
ultra aquam de Trente et potenter exinde equitavit versus predictos diversas
depredationes and roberis, quousque idem Thomas Comes simul cum predictis
proditoribus cum equis et armis ac vexillis explicatis Comes simul cum aliis
proditoribus predictis ibidem confusus captus fuit et quidam ex illis
proditoribus capti et quidam interfecti fuerunt et quidam fugam fecerunt, et
sic non remansit in predicto Thoma Comite quin ipse simul cum aliis
proditoribus suis ipsum Dominum Regem superasset et devicisset. Que quidem
proditiones homicidia combustiones depredationes debellationes hostiles cum
equis et armis et vexillis explicatis manifesta sunt et notoria et nota
Comitibus Baronibus et aliis Magnatibus et i. e. The Robberies and Spoils they
committed in their flight, and setting upon, and Killing the Kings subjects at
Burgh Bridge.
fuga in hac part decapitetur. Et super hoc licet predictus Thomas Comes
temporibus retroactis nequiter et maliciose contra homagium et fidelitatem et
ligeantiam suam pluries male se gesserit et habuerit versus Dominum Regem,
scilicet cum Dominus Rex habuisset apud Novum Castrum super Tynam victualia
equos, and armaturas, jocalia and alia diversa bona ad magnam summam and
quantitatem, que quidem bona predictus Thomas Comes cum equis and armis et
magna multitudine armatorum cepit, depredavit and asportavit, quam quidem
depredationem et transgressionem ejusdem, Dominus Rex de gratia sua speciali
remisit and pardonavit predicto Thome Comiti and aliis malefactoribus ejusdem
depredationis ad attrahendum propositum ipsius Thome Comitis in melius, ac
insuper predictus Thomas Comes collegatis sibi diversis hominibus vi armata
venit ad diversa Parliamenta Domini Regis and pluries impedivit ipsum Dominum
Regem tenere Parliamenta prout ad ipsum and coronam suam tenere pertinebat, et
pluries ad hujusmodi Parliamenta juxta mandata Domini Regis venire non curavit,
set inobedienter contempsit ac etiam diversas congregationes and conventiculas
illicitas contra Dominum Regem sepius fecit per loca diversa and contra
prohibitionem Domini Regis. Item cum plures malefactores and pacis Domini Regis
perturbatores quos dictus Thomas Comes sibi attraxerat homicidia depredationes
and alias diversas felonias fecisset per quod judicium mortis subiisse
meruerunt, and idem Thomas Comes pro manutenentia and receptamento eorundem
malefactorum consimile judicium subiisse meruit secundum legem and
consuetudinem regni. Item cum Thomas Comes postea veniens ad Parliamentum
Domini Regis tentum apud Eborum cum magna multitudine armatorum induxit Dominum
Regem ad pardonandum sectam pacis sue versus ipsum and malefactores predictos
in premissis mill personarum, quamvis idem Thomas Comes prius juraverat de
quibusdam ordinationibus tenendis ne Dominus Rex sectam pacis sue remitteret in
hujusmodi casibus emergentibus de morte hominis. Item cum Dominus Rex pro
attrahendo ipsum Comitem in bonum ut predicitur ei toto posse suo contrariantem
diversa dona magna de terris dominii and libertatibus obtulisset per plures
vices et quedam dona diversas gratias and pardonationes per Cartas suas eidem
Thome Comiti fecisset, idem tamen (...) sum inde arrenavit seu ad responsionem
posuit prout moris est secundum legem etc. et sic absque arenamento et
responsione idem Thomas erronice et contra legem terre tempore pacis morti
extitit adjudicatus: unde cum notorium sit and manifestum quod totum tempus quo
impositum fuit eidem Comiti predicta mala et facinora in predictis recordo et
processu contenta fecisse et etiam tempus quo captus fuit et quo dictus Dominus
Rex pater etc. recordabatur ipsum esse culpabilem etc. et quo morti extitit
adjudicatu^, fuit tempus pacis, maxim cum per totum tempus predictum
Cancellaria et alie placee Cur. Domini Regis aperte fuerunt et in quibus lex
cuicumque fiebat prout fieri consuevit, nec idem Dominus Rex unquam in tempore
illo cum vexillis explicatis equitabat, predictus Dominus Rex pater etc. in
hujusmodi tempore pacis contra ipsum Comitem sic recordari non debuit nec ipsum
absque arenamento et responsione morti adjudicasse. Dicit etiam quod erratum
est in hoc quod cum predictus Thomas Comes fuisset unus Parium et Magnatum
regni, et in Magna Carta de libertatibus Anglie contineatur quod nullus liber
homo capiatur imprisonetur aut disseisiatur de libero tenemento suo vel
libertatibus seu liberis consuetudinibus suis aut utlagetur aut exulet nec
aliquo modo destruatur, nec Dominus Rex super ipsum ibit nec super eum mittet
nisi per legale judicium parium suorum vel per legem terre, predictus Thomas
Comes per recordum Regis ut predictum est tempore pacis erronice morti suit
adjudicatus absque arenamento seu responsione seu legali judicio parium suorum
contra Regem Proceres Magnates et totam communitatem regni in eodem Parliamento
quod predictum judicium contra predictum Thomam Comitem redditum, tanquam
erronium revocetur et adnulletur, et predictus Henricus ut frater et here is
ejusdem Thome Comitis, ad hereditatem suam petend. et habend. debito processu
inde faciendo prout moris est admittatur, et habeat brevia Cancellario et
Justiciar in quorum placeis dicta recordum et processus irrotulantur quod eadem
recordum et processus irritari faciant et adnullari etc. Nos autem ad majorem
securitatem ipsius Henrici predicta recordum et processus tenore presentium
duximus exemplificand.

In cujus etc. Test Rege apud Ebor' tertio die Marcii.
N. 63. Claus. 16. Ed. 2. m. 2. Dors.
REX venerabili in Christo patri Stephano eadem gratia Episcopo London,
salutem.
Auribus nostris intonuit, quod moleste gerimus quod pletique de populo Dei
vestro commisso regimini diabolica fraud decepti ad quandam tabulam in
ecclesia vestra Sancti Pauli London existentem in qua statue, sculpture, seu
imagines diversorum and inter cetera Effigies Thome quondam Comitis Lancastr'
inimici and rebellis nostri, sunt depicte, fat ue accedentes, eam absque
auctoritate Ecclesie Roman tanquam rem sanctificatam colunt and adorant,
asserentes ibi fieri miracula, opprobrium totius Ecclesie, nostri and vestri
dedecus, and animarum populi predicti periculum, manifestum ac perniciosum
exemplum aliorum: quodque vos scientes abusiones hujusmodi in populo vobis
vigere eas connivendo fieri permisistis, quin potius causa questus seu turpis
lucri fieri dissimulastis, de quo non mediocriter conturbamur. Vobis igitur
mandamus firmiter injungentes quatenus premissis deliberatione provida pensatis
advertentesque quod dicta Ecclesia de nostro patronatu existit, quodque vos
ratione fidelitatis nobis prestite tenemini honorem nostrum velle salvare,
nostrum dedecus declinare, dictum populum ne ad tabulam predictam accedere,
orationes, oblationes, seu alia ad cultum divinum tendentia absque auctoritate
ecclesie Roman ibidem facere presumant, modis omnibus cohibeatis, prout ex
officii vestri debito ad vos juxta canonicas sanctiones noveritis pertinere.
Taliter vos habentes in hac part quod Dei and nostram indignationem evitare
possitis, and populus predictus per vestre doctrine prudentiam salubriter
instructus, a predictis abusionibus penitus desistat, and vestre

Test Rege apud Eborum vicesimo octavo die Junii. Eodem modo scribitur Decano
and Capitulo Ecclesie Sancti Pauli London mutatis mutandis.



N. 64. Rot. Romans 1. Ed. 3. no. 15.
SAnctissimo in Christo patri domino Johanni divina providentia Sacro-Sancte
Roman ac universalis Ecclesie Summo Pontifici, Edwardus eadem gratia Rex
Anglie, Dominus Hibernie and Dux Aquit. devota pedum oscula beatorum.
Cum ad extollenda condignis laudibus Sanctorum merita, and veneratione celebri
recolenda, cunctis fidelibus sit eo frequentius insistendum quo per ipsorum
suffragia placato summo Judice, peccatorum remissio Thomam quondam Lancastr'
ipsumque consanguineum carissimum in Anglia suscitavit, qui dum rebus agebat
humanis, honestus extitit, affabilis, and benignus, justus, providus and
fidelis, pie compaciens and misericorditer intelligens super pauperes and
afflictos, ac divini nominis amore succensus and in soliditate fidei
confirmatus, quadam floruit prerogativa constantie singularis, nam statutis and
ordinationibus regni Anglie secundum Deum pro utilitate reipublice and
defensione libertatis Ecclesie, digesto regni consilio rationabiliter attritus,
et plerumque fictis allectus blanditiis, nec cessit adversitatibus, nec
peccatorum oleo mulcebatur: set tanquam rota regens et dirigens indirecta,
inceptum sue navigationis continuabat incessum, confi^ens semper de superni
Gubernatoris auxilio, et demum post plurima atque longa que sic in puritate
spiritus et spe celestis retributionis peregit certamina, justus ab injustis
capitalem devote subiit sententiam, et sic in Domino feliciter abdormivit, qui
jam velut fluvius de loco voluptatis ad irrigandum sancti sui sanguinis
effusione rubricatam, rore celesti temperat salubriter and fecundat, dum ad
piam ejus invocationem tot gloriosa supra naturam divinitus fi^i^t miracula and
infinita satis remedia, favente Deo, per ipsius preces and merita conceduntur.
Super quo fama celebris conscendens ex manifestis judiciis laudabiliter in
excelsum, devotionem populorum ad ipsius tumulum in non modica multitudine
confluentium in Domino confortat plurimum and accendit. Sanctitatem vestram cui
tantum negotium credimus divinitus reservatum, humilius quo possumus, exoramus,
quatinus famam tam publicam quam vos verisimiliter latere non credimus, ex hiis
nostris scripturis si placuerit assumentes and ad inquirendum primo canonice de
veritate premissorum aliquibus viris idoneis auctoritatem impendentes
Apostolice potestatis, circa ipsum probatis, que sufficere poterunt Magistrum
Walterum de Burle sacre pagine professorem, Dominum Willielmum Trussell
militem, ac magistrum Johannem de Thoresby Clericum vestre beatitudini
recommendamus and mittimus ad expeditionem congruam premissorum. Eternitas

Dat' London ultimo die mensis Februarii.
N. 65. Ibm. no. 15.
Pape Rex etc.
celestis altitudo consilii Electorum merita tam misericorditer quam just
discernens, multitudinem dulcedinis sue absconditam multifarie depromens,
disponit mirifice de mercede. Ecce disiderantissime pater quod felicis memory
Robertus Cant' Archiepiscopus qui super fidei and veritatis fundamento firmatus
pressuras varias, contumelias and injurias pro ipsa veritate sustinuit,
disponente veritate que Deus est, variis miraculorum jam fulget insigniis, ut
vite ipsius veritatem, virtutum, and opum veritas manifestet, hec equidem
attestetur ipsius in carne conversacio, in curam sanctitatis vestre satis nota.
Hec probat languidis innumeris sanitas restituta. hec referimus, and deferunt
in vestre sanctitatis notitiam Prelati and Proceres regni nostri, supplicantes
humiliter and devote quatinus ut lapidem tam pretiosum, ab hominibus
reprobatum, a Deo autem electum, and vestris jam temporibus pia Dei miseratione
revelatum, ascribere dignetur beatitudo vestra Cathalogo sanctorum venerando.
Conservet etc.

Dat' apud Westmonast. octavo die Martii.
N. 66. Pat. 1. Edw. 3 part 2. m. 14.
REX as touz ceux as queux cestes lettres vendrount, saluz.
Nous avoms regardez une endenture faite par le Priour et le Covent de
Pountfreit persons del eglise de Pountfreit et les Burgeis de mesme la ville
en les paroles que sensiuent: Acorde est et assentu devant nostre Seigneur le
Roy et ma Dame la Royne, et le Count de Lancastr, par le Priour et le Covent
de Pountfreit persons del Eglise de Pountfreit, and les Burgeis de mesme le
ville Pontecoste que Johan de Ipre Heremyte demoerge au Tertre on le Noble
Count de Lancastre fuist mis a la mort Accreaunt and purchaceaunt les
almoignes et les byen faitz quil purra Aperfaire une Chapelle illoeque, Et
aussint quil y demurge un Clerk que ma Dame la Royne et le dit Count vodrount
assigner ovesque un Moigne que le dit Priour voudra assigner, a receiure et
despendre a la fesaunce de la dite Chapelle les deners que vendrount au dit
Tertre par apport ou de donor ou en Priour et Covent ount grant a mesme
l'overaigne et de ceo le dit Clerk rendra loial account. Et aussint acorde est
quil y eyt un trunk ou boiste a trois loks que demerge au dit Tertre pur
receuir le dit apport et les offrendres que illoesque vendrount dount une clief
demerge devers le Moign, que serra depute depar le Priour and un autre clief
devers un Burgeis de mesme la ville et la tierce clief devers le dit Clerk le
quel Trunk on boiste soit remue de nuyt en nuyt si mestier Saunete en la dite
Priorie de souz la guard de eaux trois et chescun jour report au dit tertre et
chascune Symeigne une foiz ou deux void en la presence de eaux trois et les
devers liveres au dit Clerk par endenture a paier as ouerours par la surveue de
eaux et que la Count de mesmes les despens soit prise chescune Symeigne par
les ditz Moigne et Burgeis que prendrent devers eaux la sum de la Semaigne en
une roll et si par cas rien demoerge outre les despens a fin de chescune
symeigne depos en la Priorie de souz les Seals de eaux trois a rependre come il
verrount mestier, pur les dites oueraignes et prendra le dit Clerk que fra les
acountes et les despens iiiid. le jour et le Heremite iiid. du dit apport. Et a
fin del an soit lacounte oy par ascun que serra depute par ma Dame la Roigne et
par le dit Count and que mesme celi que serra assign Auditour eit poer de
remuer chescune de eaux sil troesse defaute en eaux et mettre autre convenable
en lour lieu Sauve le Moigne Priour pur sauver el garder le stat and les droitz
de lour eglise avantdite en tesmoignance de queu chose ma Dame le Roygne le dit
Count et le dit Priour a cestes endentures entrechaungeable ount mys lour
seals. Done a Euerwick la veille de la Pentecoste avantdite lan de reign
nostre Seigneur le Roy, Edward primer. Nous totes les chooses contenues en la
dite endenture et chescune de ycelles quant que en nous est ratefioms,
approvoms, et confermoms sicome

en tesmoignance de queu chose nous avoms fait fair cestes nos lettres
ouertes. Don a Euerwik le quint jour de Juyn.
N 67. Rot. pat. 17. Ed. 2. part 1. m. 12. Dors. De inquirendo de illis qui
fingunt Miracula fieri circa corpora apud Bristol suspensa.
REX dilectis and fidelibus suis Johanni de Docusser, Radulpho de Dereford et
Johanni le Botiller de Lamiltyt, salutem.
Sciatis quod cum nuper Henricus de Monte forti, and Henricus de Wylyngton
nuper inimici and Rebels nostri ea occasion per considerationem Curie nostre
per equos tracti and apud Bristoll suspensi fuissent, and virtute
considerationis in furcis pendentes remansuri quamdiu corpora eorum
subsisterent ut alii vitarent mala and facinora talia contra nos perpetrare:
Reignaldus de Monte-forti, Willielmus de Clyff, Willielmus Cur^eys, and
Johannes frater ejus una cum quibusdam aliis malefactoribus and pacis nostre
perturbatoribus causas fraudulosas per quas affectionem Populi a nobis clongare
and Populum eundem contra nos movere possent malitiose fabricantes Bristoll ad
locum ubi corpora dictorum Inimicorum et rebellium nostrorum adhuc suspensa
remanent pluries accesserunt, and miracula ibidem fieri falso fingentes
idolatry figmenta ibidem fecerunt and publicarunt, and per alios fieri and
publicari procurarunt et illos qui ad locum predictum pro hujusmodi figmentis
idolatry saciendis accesserunt contra alios qui sic accedentes pro nostre and
regie dignitatis nostre honores repellere nitebantur, vi and armis Justiciarios
nostros ad inquirendum per Sacramentum proborum et legalium hominum de Comitatu
Gloucestr. per quos etc. de nominibus malefactorum Reignaldo etc. et Johanne
contemptus and transgressiones predictos perpetrarunt, and de contemptibus and
transgressionibus illis before veritatem and ad eosdem contemptus and
transgressiones audiendos et terminandos secundum legem etc. Et ideo vobis
mandamus quod ad certos dies and lo^^ quos vos vel duo vestrum ad hoc
provideritis inquisitionem illam faciatis and contemptus et transgressiones
predictos audiatis and terminetis in forma predicta facturi etc. salvis etc.
Mandavimus enim Vicecomiti hostro Comitatus predicti quod ad

In cujus etc. Test Rege apud Liverpol xxiiii die Octobris.
N. 68. Claus. 20. Ed. 2. m. 7. Dors. Proclamatio contra Rogera De Mortuo mari
and alios Regnum Angliae hostiliter ingressos.
LE Roi au Viscont de Hereford salutz.
nos vos Mandoms et Chargeons firmement, Enjoignant sur queconque vos poes
forfaire devers nos de corpse and davoir, que vewes cestes letters

PUR ceo que Roger de Mortimer et altres Treitres et enemies de nos and nostre
Roialme sont entres nostre Roialme afforcement and ont menez ovesque eux aliens
Estrangers, Et se afforcent apprendre Roial poiar sur nos, pur que nos meismes
voloms afforcement aler sur nos Enemies, pur les arester et destru^e sicome
affiert and tout ceux qui sont en lour Compaigne on adherdants a eaux, sauve la
Roigne, son fitz, et le Countee de Kent, Queux defense de nos and de luy
meismes and du Roialme. Jademains noz de nostre Grace especiale grant a ore
voloms pur le eise de nostre people, Que toutz yceux auxibiens Gentz d'armes,
hobelours, and homes a pie armies, come arblasters, archers, and altres homes a
pie arraies qui vendront per devers noz daler ovesque noz sur noz ditz Enemies
auxint voloms noz que tote manner des Grants qui voillent aver nostre Chartre de
pees pur felony, ou adherdance a noz Enemies auxibien de temps pass, come a
temps de ore, on pur utlagarie pur queconque cause que se soit, forepris le dit
Treitre Roger de Mortimer, and les autres grants mesnours des gents qui sont
venues de outre mere en sa Compaigne. Et forspris ceux qui tueront Sir Roger de
Beler veignant au Chancellarie, and ejent lour Chartres, issint quils noz suent
a noz gages en destruction de noz Enemies. Et si ascun ou ascuns menent ou
rendrent a noz le corpse du dit Treitre Roger de Mortimer, ou noz port sa Test,
noz voloms quils eient noz chartres de pees de quiconque felony adherdance,
utlagarie, ou de autre chose faite country nostre pees, and grantoms de les
fair payer mill livres Dasterlings. Et les chooses susditz si peinblement and
diligeaument

Don souz nostre Grant seal a nostre Tower de Londres la xxviii jour de
Septembre. En mesme le manner est maunde a toutz les Vicountz de Angleterre,



N. 69. Inter Responsiones AdaeHerefordensis Episcopi in Author. December. Col.
2764.
ISabelle par la grace de Dieu Reyne Dengleterre, Dame Dirlande, Contesse de
Ponntiff, Et nous Edward aisne fiz au noble Roy Dengleterre Duces, de Guyenn,
Count de Cestre, de Ponntyf and Monstroyl, Et nous Edmund fiz au noble Roy
Dengleterre Count de Kent, a toux iceaux que cestes lettres vendrient salutz.
Por ceo que conue chose est notoriement que lestat de Seint Eglise and del
Roialme Dengleterre est en moult des maneres durement blemy and abesce par
mavoys counsel and abet Hugh le Despenser, que pur orgoil and coveytise de
Seigneutier and mestrier sur ad purpris roial poiar country droit and reason and
sa ligeaunce, and en tele manner le ad use par le mavoys consail R. de Baldock
and autres adherdans a ly, que seint Eglise est revile, and mise hountosement a
grant subjection and les Prelas de seint Eglise de lour biens country Dieu and
dreiture despoilez and en trops des maneres ledenges and dishonurez and le
Coronne Dengleterre destrue en diverse manners, en desheritaunce de nostre
Seigneur le Roy and de ces heirs les graunts du Roialme par envy and mavys
crualte de dit Hugh plusours saunz coupe and saunz cause a hountouse mort
liverez, les uns desheritez, les altres enprisonez, banniez, and exilez, veues,
orphanyns de lour droit a tort forjugiez and le people de la terre par diverses
taillages and noun dues exactions tropsovent reynez and par diverse oppressions
saunz nulle mercy grevetz. Par queax mesprises le dit Hugh se monstre apert
tyrant and enemy de Dieu and de seint Eglise de nostre treschier Seigneur le
Roy, and de tout le Roialme. Et nous and plusours autres que sount ovesque nous
e nostre Compaigne que loungement avoms este aloignez de la bone voillaunce
nostre dit Seigneur le Roy, par la fause suggestion and mavoys procurement des
avaunt dits Hugh, and Robert and lour adherdaunts sumes venuz en ceste terre
pur lever lestat de seint Eglise and del Roialme and le people de la terre del
dits meschiefs, and grevous oppressions garder and mayntener a nostre poiar,
lonur and profit de seint Eglise, and nostre dit Seigneur le Roy and de tout le
Roialme sicome est desutz dit. Pur quoi nous vos mandoms and prioms pur commun
profit de vous toux and chescun de vous endroit de sey nous soietz aidaunt bien
and leaument toutz les foitz, que vous verretz lieu and temps, and par toutes
les voies que vous saveretz and pourretz a ceo que les chooses desutz dites
puissent hastivement venir a effect and a bon fin, car soietz certaynes que
nous toux, and toux iceaux que sunt en nostre Compaignie ne enpensoms a fair
chose que ne serra pur lonur and le profit de seint Eglise and de toute le
Roialme sicome la verret and troveretz par temps, si Dieu plest.

Don a Wallingford le xv. jour Doctobre, lan del regne nostre treschier
Seigneur ly Roy vintysme.
N. 70. Claus. 20. Ed. 2. m. 3. Dors.
MEmorandum quod vicesimo sexto die Octobris Anno regni Edwardi filii Regis
Edward vicesimo, ipso Rege a regno Hugone le Despenser Juniore and Magistro
Roberto de Baldock inimicis Isabelle Reginae Angliae, consortis ipsius Domini
Regis and Edwardi filii ejusdem Domini Regis primogeniti, and Ducis Aquitaniae
and aliis eorundem Domini Regis and Ducis and Regni Angliae notorie inimicis
recedente, eodem regno suo sine regimine dimisso; Venerabilis Pater A.
Dublinensis Archiepiscopus, I. Wintoniensis, I. Eliensis, H. Lincolniensis, A.
Herefordensis, W. Norwicensis, Episcopi, and alii Prelati, and Dominus Thomas
Norfolciae, and Edmundus Cantiae, Comites, fratres ipsius Domini Regis, Et
Henricus Comes Lancastriae and Leycestriae, Thomas Wake, Henricus de
Bello-Monte, Willielmus la Zouch de As^bye, Robertus de Monte-Alto. Robertus de
Mor^e, Robertus de Watevile, and alii Barons and Milites tunc apud Bristol.
existentes in presentia dictae Dominae Reginae ac dicti Ducis, de assensu
totius communitatis dicti Regni ibidem existentis, eundem Ducem in Custodem
dicti Regni unanimiter eligerunt. Sic quod idem Dux and Custos nomine and jure
ipsius Domini Regis patris sui ipso Rege sic absente, dictum Regnum regat ac
gubernaret, and idem Dux eodem die regimen dicti regni in forma praedicta idem
assumpsit, Et ea quae juris erant sigillo suo privato in custodia Domini
Roberti de Wyvel Clerici sui existente, eo quod aliud sigillum pro dicto
regimine non adhuc habuit, exercere incepit. Postmodum vero vicesimo die
Novembris proxime sequentis, captis inimicis praedictis, and dicto Domino Rege
in dictum Regnum suum revertente, iidem Domina Regina and Dux, Prelatique, and
Proceres predicti, de assensu communitatis predicte tunc apud Hereford
existentes, pro eo quod potestas ipsius Custodis per adventum dicti Domini
Regis sic infra regnum suum cessavit, predictum Dominum Herefordensen Episcopum
ad ipsum Dominum Regem in nuntium miserunt, supplicando eidem Domino Regi, quod
et ipse precipere vellet, quod de magno sigillo suo penes dictum Dominum Regem
tunc existente, fierent ea quae pro pace in eodem regno Episcopus Herefordensis
dictum Dominum Regem apud Munemuth tunc existentem, and in praesentia dicti
Comitis Lancastriae and Leycestriae, and Magistri Thomae Chaundes Archidiaconi
Herefordensis, ac aliorum plurimorum, omnia sibi injuncta eidem Domino Regi
exposuit per ordinem. Et idem Dominus Rex auditis sic sibi expositis, habita
inde aliquali deliberatione, penes se, respondebat quod placuit sibi mittere
dictum sigillum suum magnum pre^atis consorti filio, Et quod iidem consors and
filius dictum sigillum sub privato ^uo sigillo tunc clausum aperire facerent,
and non solum ea quae jure and pace essent facienda, sed etiam quae gratiae
forent, sub dicto magno sigillo fieri facerent. Et idem Dominus Rex dictum
magnum sigillum liberari fecerit Domino Willielmo le Blunt Militi, deferendum
in comitiva dicti Domini Herefordensis Episcopi, ad praedict^m Reginam and
Ducem predictum forma iis liberandum. Quae idem Episcopus ad Reginam and Ducem
praedictos vicesimo sexto die Novembris proxime sequentis apud Martlee rediens
exposuit viva voce. Et nihilominus eadem in quodam instrumento publico inde
confecto continentur. Dictus vero Willielmus le Blunt predictum magnum sigillum
sub dicto privato sigillo sic clausum predicto die prefatis Reginae and Duci
apud Martley in praesentia dicti Herefordensis Episcopi liberavit. Die vero
Dominica proxime sequenti, viz. in i. e. 30. Novembris.
festo sancti Andreae Apostoli apud Cirencester in Camera ipsius Reginae infra
Abbatiam ibidem iidem Reginae and Dux existentes, dictum magnum sigillum sic
clausum in presentia Domini Rogeri de Mortuo-Mar^, Johannis Comitis Guarenne,
dicti Domini Roberti de Wyvell, Richardi de Ellesfold, and Johannis Gifford
Clericorum, et aliorum plurimorum tradiderunt ex part dicti Domini Regis
prefato Domino Norwicensi Episcopo, and praeceperunt sibi quod illud aperiret,
and faceret quod ad officium Custodis dicti magni sigilli pertineret. Et idem
Episcopus dictum magnum sigillum in manibus suis recepit, and eodem die in
Capitulo dictae Abbatiae sigillum illud aperuit, Brevia consignavit, and post
consignationem sigillum illud sub sigillo suo conclusit. Et sic remansit dictum
magnum sigillum in Custodia dicti Episcopi Norwicensis itiner andum per vias
versus Wodstocke usque ad i. e. ad quartum Diem Decembris.
diem ^ovis proxime sequentis, quo die ipse restituit sigillum illud sub
sigillo suo praefatis Rogero and Duci apud Wodestoke, Et occurrentibus negotiis
apertum fuit idem sigillum pro expeditione eorundem, and post consignationem
quamlibet reclusum fuit idem sigillum sub sigillo dicti Norwicensis Episcopi,
and restitutum prefatis Rogero and Duci custodiendum. Die vero Mercurii ante
festum sancti Thomae Apostoli proxime sequentis Mr. Henricus de Cliffe Custos
Rotulorum Cancellarie qui tunc venerat sigillum suum apposuit dicto magno
sigillo una cum sigillo dicti Norwicensis Episcopi, and iidem Episcopus and
Magister Henricus post consignationes, sigillis suis appositis, dictum sigillum
praefatis Reginae, and Duci singulis diebus restituere.

N. 71. Rot. Claus. 20. Ed. 2. m. 4. Dors. De prorogatione parliamenti.
REX venerabili in Christo Patri J. eadem gratia Episcopo Cicestr. salutem.
Licet nuper super diversis and arduis negotiis, nos et statum Regni nostri
tangentibus, Parliamentum nostrum apud Westminster. in Quindena Sancti Andreae
proximo futura, teneri and ibidem per ^sabellam Reginam Angliae consortem
nostram charissimam and per Edwardum filium nostrum primogenitum, Custodem
ejusdem Regni, nobis extra idem Regnum agentibus, ac per vos and Praelatos,
Proceres, and Magnates Regni praedicti haberi voluissemus colloquium and
Tractatum; vobisque mandassemus, quod dictis die and loco personaliter
interessetis, cum praefata Consorte nostra, and dicto filio nostro, Custode
Regni praedicti, and cum caeteris Praelatis, Proceribus and Magnatibus, dicti
regni super praedictis negotiis tractaturi. Quia tamen quibusdam de Causis
certis necessariis and utilibus, praedictum Parliamentum and Tractatum usque in
Crastinum Epiphaniae Domini proximo jam futurum, apud dictum prorogandum, vobis
significamus quod ad dictam Quindenam apud dictum locum Westminster. ex causa
Parliamenti and Tractatus praedictorum vos accedere non oportet: Vobis insuper
in fide and dilectione, quibus nobis tenemini, firmiter injungendo mandamus,
quod omnibus aliis praetermissis, in dicto Crastino personaliter sitis apud
dictum locum Westminster. nobiscum, si ibidem tunc personaliter simus, vel in
absentia nostra cum praefata Consorte nostra, and cum dicto filio nostro ac cum
caeteris Praelatis, Proceribus, and Magnatibus dicti Regni super dictis
negotiis tractaturi, vestrumque consilium impensuri; praemunientes Decanum and
Capitulum Ecclesiae vestrae predictae and Archidiaconos Clerumque vestrae
Dioceseos quod iidem Decanus and Archidiaconi in propriis personis suis,
dictumque Capitulum per unum, and Clerus praedictus per duos Procuratores, ab
ipsis Capitulo, and Clero sufficientem potestatem habentes, dicto loco in dicto
crastino intersint, ad con^entiendum hiis, quae tunc ibidem de communi consilio
contigerit ordinari: Et hoc nullatenus omittatis.

Test Rege apud Ledbury tertio die Decembris.
The Seal was not at Ledbury on the 3d of December, and therefore the Writ
could not be sealed there that Day, for the great Seal was then in the Custody
of the Bishop of Norwich, at Woodstock or in his Way thither, as appears by the
next preceding Record. and on the 4th of that Month was delivered to Roger
Mortimer and the Duke of Aquitain, afterward Ed. 3d. Woodstock, so that in all
probability* This Writ Issued without the Kings Privity or Knowledge.

N. 72. Authors December. Col. 2765. n. 50. 60.
Accord est que sire Edward fiz ais^e du Roy ait le government del Roialme
and soit Rois coronne par les causes que sensiwent.

1. Primerement. Pur ceo que la person ly Roy nest pas suffisaunt de governer.
Car en touz son temps ad il este mean 2. Item. Par tout son temps, il ne se
voloit doner a bon counsel ne le croire ne a bon government de son Roialme
meys se ad done toux jours as ouraignes and occupations nient covenables
entrelessaunt lesploit des bosoignes de son Roialme. 3. Item. par defaute de
bon government ad il perdu le Roialme Descoce, and autres terres and
Seignuries en Gascoyne and Hyrland, les quex son pere li lessa en pees and
amiste ly Roy, 4. Item. Par sa fierte and qualte and par mavoys consail ad il
destruit seint Eglise and les persons de seint Eglise tenuz en prisoun les
uns, et les altres en destresce, and auxint plusours graunts and nobles de sa
terre mys a hountouse mort enprisons exuletz and desheritez. 5. Item. la ou il
est tenuz par son serement a fair droit a 6. Item. Il deguerpist son Roialme
and fist taunt come en ly fust que son Roialme, and son people fust perduz, and
que pys est, pur la cruelte de ly and defaute de s^ person il est trove
incorrigible sauntz esperaunce de amendment, les quex chooses sount
N. 73. Knighton. Col. 2550. N. 10.
VEra series Procuratorii. Jeo William Trussel Procuratour des Prelatez, Contez
and Barons and altres gentz en ma procuracye nomes eyant al ceo plain and
suffisant pouare, les homages and fealtez au vous Edward Roy Dengleterre come
al Roy avaunt ces oeures depar les ditz persons en ma procuracye nomes, renk
and rebaylle sus a vous Edward and deliver and face quitez les ley et custom
donnent, E face protestacion en non de eaux quils ne voillent de^ormes estre en
vostre fealte, ne en vostre lyance, ne cleyment de vous come de Roy riens
tenir. Encz vous tiegnent deshorse priveye person sanz nule manner de reale
dignite.

REX vicecomiti Eboracensi salutem.
Quia Dominus Edwardus nuper Rex Angliae pater noster, de Communitatis consilio
Praelatorum, Comitum et Baronum, et aliorum Magnatum, nec non Communitatis
totius regni praedicti spontanea voluntate se amovit a regimine dicti regni
volens et concedens quod nos tanquam ipsius primogenitus and here is ipsius
Regni, gubernationem et regimen assumemus; Nosque ipsius patris nostri
Beneplacito in in hac part de consilio et advisamento Praelatorum, Comitum,
Baronum, Magnatum, et Communitatum praedictorum, annuentes, gubernacula
suscepimus dicti Regni, et fidelitates and homagia ipsorum Praelatorum, et
Magnatum recipimus, ut est moris. Desiderantes igitur pacem nostram pro quiet
et tranquillitate populi nostri inviolabiliter observari, tibi praecipimus quod
statim visis praesentibus per totam Ballivam tuam, pacem nostram facias public
proclamari universis et singulis ex part nostra inhibendo, sub poena, et
periculo exhaeredationis et amissionis vitae et membrorum, ne quis dictam pacem
nostram infringere seu violare praesumat, sed quilibet actiones et querelas
absque violentia quacunque pro sequatur, secundum leges et consuetudines Regni
nostri. Nos enim parati sumus et semper erimus omnibus et singulis
conquerentibus tam divitibus quam pauperibus in curiis nostris plenam justitiam
exhibere.

Test Rege apud Westmonasterium 29 Januarii.
N. 75. L'abbei Council. Tom. xi. part 2. col. ^534. B. C. D. Puteanus
Condemnation des Temples. 2. p. 29. 30. 31.
1. Cum ordinem cooptabantur in ipsis sacrorum suorum initiis

2. An Christum, vel Jesum, crucive suffixum verum Deum esse, vel passum pro
humano redimendo genere negassent?

3. An fuisse pseudo-prophetam, and pro suis ipsis afflictum criminibus
affirmassent?

4. An Ordinis magistrum, qui nullis erat sacris initiatus, crederent

5. An quae occulta habebantur in eorum legibus, ea orthodoxae Romanae
Ecclesiae vituperationi esse criminaque ac eorem fovere putarent?

6. An in ipso ordinis ingressu docerentur posse inter se luxuriose commisceri,
idque esse faciendum, neque ullum ob id perpetrari flagitium, and an haec
Tyrones etiam docerent?

7. An Ordinis, sui amplitudini studere vel contra quam fas esset jurassent ad
idque jurandum alios induxissent?

8. An qui cooptabant eos in Ordinem ne spem salutis suae in Christo Deo
positam haberent illis ediceret?

9. An conspuissent crucem imaginemve Christi Dei, aut pedibus protrivissent ac
conculcassent, and die veneris sancto, vel alio in eam minxissent?

10. An Cattum craniumve aut similacrum quodpiam and idolum hujusmodi fictum
and commentitium divina veneratione coluissent, in magnis comitiis, aliove
sracrum loco: divitiasque ab eo and terrarum arborumve uberes fructus
speravissent?

11. An quo cingulo interulam carnemve cingebant, eo idolum quodpiam hujusmodi
tetigissent?

12. An Tyrones, adolescentulos praesertim libidinose, intemperanterque, atque
alia quam deceat, part osculati fuissent?

13. An dum rem divinam facerent sacra mysteriorum, and consecrationis verba
omisissent?

14. An scelestum and nefarium facinus ducerent, haec committere?

N. 76. Rot. Claus. 7. Ei. 2. M. 11. 12. Dors.
CLemens Episcopus servus servorum Dei Charissimo in Christo filio Edwardo Regi
Angliae illustri salutem and apostolicam benedictionem.
Nuper in Generali Concilio per nos Vienne disponente Domino celebrato post
longam deliberationem prehabitam and maturam acceptabilius fore Altissimo magis
honorabili applicare tunc noster affectus speratum effectum super hoc optinere
nequivit. Tandem vero sic per Dei gratiam actum fore dinoscitur quod vi. Non.
praesentis mensis Maii eodem sacro approbante Concilio Hospitali seu ipsius
Hospitalis ordini supradictis praefata bona concedenda and applicanda duximus
ac etiam unienda, Bonis ejusdem ordinis militiae Templi in Regnis and terris
carissimorum in Christo filiorum nostrorum, Castelle, Aragonie, Portugallie,
and Maioricarum Regum illustrium extra Regnum

Dat' Liberon, Valenti. Dict. xvii. Kal.
N. 77. Registrum Winchelsey, et the Registers Office in Drs. Commons. fol 8.
2. b.
SAnctissimo in Christo Patri etc.
Sanctitatis vestrae mandatum sub literis vestris Bullatis clausis xvi. Kalend.
Martii Anno Domini 300o. 9o. michi per venerabilem patrem Dominum Piat Epm.
praesentatum recepi, continens Tenorem qui sequitur: CLEMENS etc. volens autem
Mandatum Apostolicum praedictum quantum ad me pertinuit exequi reverenter cum
nonnullis fratribus and suffraganeis meis qui mandatum consimile receperunt
palatium Domini E. Dei gratia Regis Angliae illustris apud Westmonasterium
juxta London in quo tunc temporis morabatur, quam citius ad ipsius praesentiam
accedere potui, quod fuit 3^. Kalend. Martii, eidem in presentia venerabilis
patris Domini Patriarchae Jerusalem and venerabilium fratrum suffraganeorum
meorum, scil. Dominorum London. Winton. Sarum, Lincoln, Norwic. Cicestrien.
Wigorn. Exon. Bathon and Wellen. and Meneven. Ecclesiarum Episcoporum, and
aliquorum Comitum and Baronum Regni Angl. contenta in eodem Mandato eidem
Domino Regi vice mei and confratrum meorum exposui, and in scriptis tam in
latino quam Gallico tradidi, Exhortationes and monitiones feci prout in
instrumento publico Rogav^ ut Ecclesiae Romanae and michi congruum and
conveniens responsum daret and faceret, ad sibi antea per me exposita, et
tradita, de quibus est mentio suprafacta, and tandem idem Dominus Rex michi,
and venerabilibus fratribus tunc praesentibus per dictum Dominum* The saurarium
and Johannem de Lonham de ordine praedicatorum Confessorem suum, Mandavit pro
tunc Respondere non potuit, pro eo quod contenta in Mandato vestro* Apostolico
praedicto, non solum Comites, Barons, and alios proceres regni sui tangebant,
Quorum omnium tunc praesentiam ad tractatum cum eis super mandatis vestris
Apostolicis, eidem Domino Regi per me prius tractatis and expositis ad
voluntatem suam non potuit obtinere. Et quorum praesentia in Responsionibus
faciendis sibi necessaria existebat. Sed sperabat quod super hoc remedium
ordinaretur per Dei gratiam infra breve prout in Instrumento publico quod de
hoc fieri feci before est contentum. respondit sub hac forma. Quod salvo jure
coronae suae voluit vobis and sanctae sedi Apostolicae, sicut Devotus filius
Ecclesiae quatenus poterit in omnibus obedire, adjiciens quod ante notitiam
vestrarum literarum, Discordia quaedam inter quosdam Proceres Regni sui exorta
extitit, quae usque ad diem praedictum sedata non fuerat vel sopita, propter
quod non potuit plene deliberare, ut ad singula in mandato vestro contenta
responsum

N. 78. Rot. pat. 12. Ed. 2. part. 2. m. 37. Ne aliquid attemptetur contra
Coronam in Congregatione Praelatorum.
Archiepiscopo Cantuar. totius Angliae Primati, and omnibus Episcopis
Cantuariensis Provinciae ac aliis Prelatis and Cleri absentis Procuratoribus
ejusdem Provinciae apud London in proximo conventur. Salutem. Mandamus vobis
firmiter inhibentes ne instanti congregatione apud London convocata, aliquid
contra Coronam seu Dignitatem nostram, vel statum Regni nostri statuere seu
attemptare aliqualiter praesumatis. Si quae autem statum Ecclesie aut vestrum
tangentia, seu alias erga nos habueritis prosequenda, ea in proximo Parliamento
nostro apud Lincoln, jam convocato ad quod vos Prelati summoniti estis, ad quod
quantum bono modo poterimus festinamus, in quo etiam interesse debetis,
tractari volumus, and super eisdem tunc ibidem fieri quod de communi salvis
statu and dignitate nostris fide faciendum.

In cujus etc. Test Rege apud Shene xvi die Februarii.
N. 79. Pat. 15. Ed. 2. part. 1. m. 8.
Per ipsum Regem.
REX venerabilibus in Christo patribus W. eadem gratia Archiepiscopo
Cantuariensi, totius Angliae Primati, ac caeteris Episcopis and Praelatis,
Cantuar. Provinciae ad concilium Provinciale apud London in proximo
conventuris: Mandamus vobis in fide and Dilectione quibus nobis tenemini,
firmiter inhibentes, ne in dicto Concilio quicquam in nostri aut status Coronae
nostrae, vel Regni nostri praejudicium statuatis, faciatis, seu quomodo libet,
ordinetis.

Test Rege apud Pountfreyt super Thamesiam 30. die Novembris.
N. 80. Spelman. Council. vol. 2. fol. 486.
Per ipsum Regem.
REX Justiciariis salutem.
quae mere sunt spiritualia, viz. de Correctionibus quas faciunt Prelati pro
mortali peccato, viz. pro Fornicatione, Adulterio and hujusmodi pro quibus
aliquando infligitur poena corporalis, aliquando pecuniaria; maxim si
convictus fuerit liber homo.

Item, si Praelatus puniatur pro Cimeterio non clauso, Ecclesia discooperta vel
decenter non ornata, in quibus casibus alia poena non potest infligi, quam
pecuniaria. Item, si Rector petat a Parochianis suis Oblationes, Decimas
debitas, and consuetas, vel Rector agat contra Rectorem de Decimis majoribus,
dummodo non petatur quarta pars alicujus Item, si Rector petat Mortuarium, ubi
Mortuarium dari consuevit. Item, si Prelatus, Advocatus Ecclesiae petat a
Rectore Pensionem sibi debitam, omnes hujusmodi petitiones faciendae sunt in
foro Ecclesiastico. Item, de violenta manuum injectione in Clericum, and in
causa Diffamationis, concessum fuit alias, quod Placitum inde teneatur in Curia
Christianitatis, dummodo non petatur pecunia, sed agatur de correctione
peccati. In omnibus predictis Judex Ecclesiasticus cognoscere debet, non
obstante Regia prohibitione, licet p^rrigatur, quod non faciat, nisi prius
habeat regiam consultationem etc.
N. 81. Claus. 1. Ed. 3. part prima. M. 23. Dors. petitiones pro illis qui
fuerint de Querela Thomae Comitis Lancastriae
FAit a Remember que le tierce jour de Feverer lan du Regne le Roi Edward fitz
au Roi Edward, fitz au Roi Edward, fitz a^ Roi Henry primer furent mostrez en
parliament ado^ques tenu a Westmr. ascunes petitions, per les Chivalers et le
Comune de la Querele le Count de Lancastre, en la form que ensuit.

A nostre Signeur le Roi etc. prient les Chivalers et le Comune a tort
Desheritez, Emprisonez, Bann^z: Exilez questeint de la Querele le noble Count
de Lancastre quils peussent estre Restitutez a leur ^erres ove les issues puis
le Temps que les furent a tort ^ei^iz.

A que^e peticion fust res pondu per comune assent de tot le parliament que
totes les terres et tenz que furent seisiz pur cause de la Querele la Count de
Lancastre la Quele pur tot le parlelement est afferme bone, auxibien, en
Ireland, Gales, come en Engleterre, soient Restitutez ove les issues et
arrerages de ferme D^nt le Roi ne fuist mie sei^.

N. 82. Rot. Claus. 4. Ed. 3. M. 19. Dors.
REX venerabili in Christo Patri S. eadem gratia Archiep^scopo Cantuar* totius
Anglie primati, Salutem.
Qualiter negocia de consilio and assensu Prelatorum, and Magnatum nobis
assistentium Parliamentum nostrum apud Westminster. die Lune proximo post festum
sancte Katerine virginis proximo futuro tenere, et vobiscum, ac cum ceteris
P^elatis, Magnatibus et Proceribus dicti regni habere super premissis cum
deliberacione plenaria, consilium et tractatum vobis in fide et dil^ctione
quibus nobis tenemini, firmiter injungendo mandamus, quatinus omni excusacione
voluntaria cessante dictis die et loco personaliter intersitis nobiscum, and
cum ceteris Prelatis, Magnatibus, and Proceribus predictis super premissis
tractaturi, vestrumque consilium impensuri. Et hoc sicut nos et honorem nostrum
e^ tranquillitatem dicti regni nostri diligitis nullatenus omittatis, Scientes
quod diem summo^icionis dicti Parliamenti, ob inten^um desiderium quod habemus
quod negocia statum ipsius regni nostri contingencia feliciter disponantur, de
assensu Prelatorum and Magnatum predictorum abreviavimus ista vice, and no^^mus
quod abre^iatio hujusmodi cedat alicui in prejudicium, vel trahatur in
consequentiam in futurum. Et praemunire die and loco intersint ad faciendum and
consentiendu^ hiis quae tunc ibidem de communi consilio, divina favente
clementia, ordinari contigerit super negociis antedictis.

Test Rege apud Leycestr. xxiii. die Octobris.
N. 83. Rot. Parl. 4. Ed. 3. n. 1. Judicium Rogeri de Mortuo Mari. Ces sont les
tresons felonies and malveistes a nostre Seigneur le Roi and a son people par
Roger de Mortymer, and autres de sa covyne.
Primerment par la on ^^dine feust al Parliament nostre Seigneur le Roy
prochynement tenuz apres son coronement a Westminster que quatre Evesques,
quatre Countes and sys Barons demoerreient pres du Roy pur luy conseyler issint
tote foiz que quatre y feussent, cestassauer, un Evesque un Count et deus
Barons au meyns et que nule gross busoigne soit faite sanz lur assent, et que
chescun respondesist de ses faitz pur son tems, apres quen parliament, de cez
Enemies de tieux quil ne poet ^ien fai^e de sa volunte forsque come un home que
demora

2. Item par la ou le piere nostre nostre Seigneur le Roy fust a Kenilworth par
ordenance et assent de peers de la terre a demorer illoeques a ses eses
parestre servi come afferoit a un tiel Seignour, le dit Roger par le roial poer
al acroche ne lessa tant quil le eust par devers lui a sa volunte et ordina
quil feust mande au Chastiel de Berkele ou par lui et par les sons feust

3. Item le dit Roger par le* dit Roial poer a lui acroche fist de^endre par
Brief le Roy desouz le grant Seal que null ne venist au parliament de Salesbirs a
force et arms sur quant quil poet forfaire devers le Roy la vynt le dit Roger
od autres de sa covyne a force et arms au dit parliament encountre le dit
defens par quoy plusours Peers de la terre, come le Count de devers le dit
parliament a Sa^esbirs, pur quoi le dit Count de Lancastre et autres Pieres,
pur eschure le peril quent pust estre a^enur a la reverence du Roy lur Seigneur
lige departerent and aillerent envers lour pays dolent quils ne poient a lur
Seigneur lige parler ne conseiller come ils deveyent.

4. Item le dit Roger par le dit ro^al poer a luy acroche fist le dit nostre
Seigneur le Roi chivaucher forciblement sur le Count

5. Item par la ou le dit Roger savoit bien que le piere nostre Seigne^r le Roi
estoit mort and enterre, il par autres de sa covyne en deceyvante manner fist
entendre al Count de Kent que le dit piere nostre Seigneur le Roi fist en vie
par quo^ le di^ Count de Kent feust molt desirous de saver la verite le quel
il fust en vie, on nemie, and ce fist espier par totes les bones voies

6. Item le dit Roger par son roial poer a sui acroche fist le Roi doner a lui
et a ses enfauntz et a ses alliez Chastelles, Villes et Manoirs fraunchises en
Engleterre, Ireland and Gales en descres

7. Item le dit Roger en deceyvante manner fist les Chivalers des Countez
grauntier au dit parliament de Wyncestre au Roi de chescun Ville Dengleterre que
respoint par quatre and le Provost en Air un homme darmes a lour coustages en
sa guerre de Gascoigne par un an la quele charge le dit Roger avoit compass a
tourner en autre profist pur ^ui and autres de sa covyne

8. Item le dit Roger par son dit roial poer fist mander lettres desouz la
targe as plusours grantz Chivalers et autres quils venissent au Roi queu part
quil feust et a ^ur venue les fist charger quils sadressassent daler en
Gascoigne ou quils feissent fynz et ransouns a sa volunte, des queux atoms
firent fynz et rannsouns et tot le plus est devenue au profist le dit Roger et
autres de sa

9. Item le dit Roger faussement and maliciousement mist descord enter le piere
nostre Seigneur le Roi et la Roine sa compaigne, et la fist entendre que si ele
feust venue a lui quil la eust tue dun cotel ou en autre manner de murdre, par
quoi par cele cause et par ses autres sotilitees si fist il tant que la dite
Roine vynt point devers son dit Seigneur a grant dishonor du Roi et de la
Roigne sa miere et grant damage de tut le roialme par ^as en temps a venir, que
dieux desend.

10. Item le dit Roger par le dit roial poer a lui acroche si ad pris et fait
prendre pur luy et les autres de sa covyne du

11. Item le dit Roger par son dit roial poer si ad fait prendre par devers lui
and autres de sa alliance xx^. mar^z que sont venuz horse Descoce pur la form
de la pees sanz ce que riens de ce soit venuz au profist le Roi.

12. Item le dit Roger par son dit roial poer fist ses prises parmy le roialme
si come il eust este Roi, et enter lui et ceux de sa covyne mesnerent al double
dez gentz et chivalx en la compaignie le Roi, que ne fist nostre Seigneur le
Roi en destruction du people sanz fair payment autre que a lur volunte
demeigne.

13. Item le d^t Roger par son dit roial poer fist le Roi granter

14. Item le dit Roger compassa dauer destrui^ les Nurriz le Roy and ceux que
furent ses plus secrez des queux le Roi plus Culpas. Culps. Coups. Litera. L.
in u. mutata.
coupes susescrites si est veritablement

Les queur Countes, Baronns and Piers les articles par eux examinez revyndren^
avaunt le Roi en mesme le parliament et disoient trestouz par un des Piers que
totes les chooses contenues es ditz Articles fuerent notoires et conues a eux et
au people, et nomement larticle tochant la mort Sire Edward piere nostre
Seigneur le Roi quore est; par quoi les ditz Countes, Barons et Pieres come
juges du parliament par assent du Roy en mesme le parliament agarderent et
ajugerent que le dit Roger come treitour et enemy du Roy et du Roialme feust
treyne et pendu, et sur ce estoit comande au Count Marshall

N. 84. Rot. parl. 4. Ed. 3. n. 16.
PLacita Corone tenta coram Domino Edwardo Rege tertio die Lune proximo post
festum Sancte Katerine Virginis Anno Regni Regis ejusdem Edwardi Quarto.
THomas de Berkele Miles venit coram Domino Rege in pleno Contra Thomam de
Berkele Gloucestr. Wygorn.
parliamento suo predicto and allocutus de hoc quod cum Dominus Edwardus nuper
Rex Anglie pater Domini Regis nunc, in custodia ipsius Thome and cujusdam
Johannis Mautravers idem Dominus Rex in custodia ipsorum Thomae and Johannis
extitit liberatus ad salvo custodiendum et ipsi custodiam ipsius Regis
receperunt et acceptarunt, qualiter se excusare possit, quin de morte ipsius
Regis respondere debeat. Et predictus Thomas dicit, quod verum est quod ipse
est Dominus Castri predicti et quod ipse simul cum Johanne Mautravers custodiam
ipsius Regis recepit ad salvo custodiendum, ut predictum est, set dicit quod eo
tempore quo dicitur ipsum Dominum Regem esse murdratum and interfectum fuit
ipse tali and tanta infirmitate apud Bradelye extra Castrum predictum detentus,
quod nichil ei currebat memory. Et super hoc dictum est ei quod ex quo
cognovit quod ipse simul cum dicto Johanne custodiam ipsius Domini Regis
optinuit, ut predictum est, et ipse Custodes et ministros sub se posuit ad
custodiam de eo faciendam si per aliquam infirmitatem se excusare possit quin
respondere debeat in hac part. Et predictus Thomas dicit quod ipse posuit
Custodiam ipsius Regis simul cum predicto Johanne Mautravers inde habuerunt.
Unde dicit quod ipse de morte ipsius Domini Regis, auxilio, assensu seu
procuratione mortis sue, in nullo est inde culpabilis. Et de hoc de bono et
malo ponit se super patriam. Ideo venit inde jurare coram Domino Rege in
Parliamento suo apud Westmonasterium in Octabis Sancti Hillar' proximo futuris
etc. ad quem diem venit predictus Thomas coram Domino Rege in pleno Parliamento
suo and similiter juravit, scilicet Johannes Darcy, Johannes de Wysham,
Willielmus de Trussel, Rogerus de Swynnerton, Constantinus de Mortimer,
Johannes de Sancto Philiberto, Richardus de Rivers, Petrus Husee, Johannes de
Brynnton, Richardus de la Rivere, Rogerus de Debenhale, and Richardus de qui
dicunt super sacramentum suum quod predictus Thomas de Berkele in nullo est
culpabilis de morte predicti Domini Regis patris Domini Regis nunc nec de
assensu, auxilio, seu procuratione mortis ejusdem. Et dicunt quod tempore
mortis ejusdem Domini E. Regis, patris Domini Regis nunc, fuit ipse tali
infirmitate gravatus apud Bradelye extra Castrum suum predictum, quod de vita
ejus desperabatur. Ideo idem Thomas inde quietus. Et Juratores quesiti si idem
Thomas unquam subtraxit se occasion predicta, dicunt ad custodiam de ipso
Domino Rege faciendam, per quos idem Dominus Rex extitit murdratus and
interfectus datus est ei dies coram Domino rege nunc in proximo Parliamento
suo, de audiendo judicio suo etc. Et predictus Thomas de Berkele interim
committitur Radulpho de Nevill Seneschallo Hospitii Domini Regis. etc.

N. 85. A. In a Box entitled Scotia within a great Chest of
DAvid Dei gratia Rex Scotiae omnibus ad quos praesentes Literae pervenerint,
Salutem. Sciatis ea consideratione quod predecessores and progenitores nostri
quondam Reges Scotiae ab antiquioribus temporibus tenuerunt and de jure
tenuisse debuerunt regnum Scotiae de Regibus Angliae per legium, bomagium and
fidelitatem and pro eodem regno simpliciter, pure and sponte, homagia, legia
and fidelitates quamplures eorum personaliter fecerunt prout per antiquiora
recorda and placita Coronae tam in Parliamentis quam in Itineribus Camerariorum
and Justiciariorum predecessorum and progenitorum nostrorum praedictorum nobis
satis constat. Concessimus and per presents obligamus nos, haeredes and
successores nostros Reges Scotiae tenere praedictum Regnum nostrum Scotiae de
excellentissimo Domino Edwardd Rege Angliae, haeredibus and successoribus suis
Regibus Angliae, tanquam de dominis superioribus regni Scotiae per legium,
homagium, and fidelitatem, and eisdem fidem tenere ac cum eisdem contra omnes
homines vivere and mori in perpetuum, omnibus and omnimodis relaxationibus
remissionibus, quietclamantiis and aliis literis quibuscunque per Reges Angliae
seu per aliquem eorum in contrarium Regibus Scotiae factis sive concessis non
obstantibus. In cujus rei testimonium has literas nostras ex consensu and
consilio trium statuum regni nostri in praesenti parliamento tento apud
Edinburgh existentem in presentia Henrici de Bellomonte Comitis de Bougham and
Constabularii Scotiae, Giiberti Vmfranvile Comitis de Ango^s Domini de Prudhow
and Mareschalli Scotiae, and Henrici Percy Domini de Alnewick ad hoc
specialiter deputatorum per Dominum Dominum nostrum and fratrom superior'
Dominum Scotiae.

Dat. primo Novembris in pleno Parliamento, Anno regni nostri quinto.
N. 85. B. Rot. Scot. 11. Ed. 3. m. 1.
EDwardus dei Gratia Rex Angliae and Franciae and Dominus Hiberniae and Dux
Aquitaniae, nobili and potenti viro Johanni Duci Brabant and Lotring,
consanguineo suo carissimo, Salutem.
Sciatis quod cum attendentes in^^ytum regnum Francie ad nos fore jure
successorio vos in regno predicto locum nostrum tenentem Capitaneum, and
nostrum Vicarium generalem facimus and praeficimus per presents, concedentes
and committentes vobis merum imperium and gladii potestatem ac jurisdictionem
omnem, altam and bassam, cognitionem and decisionem Mandavimus enim
Archiepiscopis, Episcopis, Ducibus, Marchionibus, Comitibus personis aliis
quibuscunque in dicto regno existentibus, ut vobis et deputandis per vos in
premissis pareant humiliter et intendant.

In cujus etc. Dat. apud Westmonast. viio. die Octobris. Item consimiles
commissiones fact fuerunt Gulielmo Marchioni Juliacensi fratri Regis carissimo
transpositis dictis nominibus, Rex Anglie and Francie, and Rex Francie and
Anglie.

Item consimiles commissiones Gulielmo Comiti Hanov. Holand. and Seland ac
Domino Friscie transpositis verbis etc. ut supra.

Item consimiles commissiones Wilhelmo de Bohun Comiti North ampt. consanguineo
regis carissimo etc. ut supra sub eadem data.



EDwardus Dei gratia Rex Anglie and Francie Dominus Hibernie and
Archiepiscopis, Episcopis, Ducibus, Marchionibus, Comitibus, Baronibus, and
personis aliis quibuscunque in dictoregno Francie existentibus, Salutem.
Cum nos attendentes inclitum regnum Francie ad nos fore jure successorio
legtime devolutum, ipsum regnum ut hereditatem nostram legitimam agnoverimus ut
eidem nos immiscere voluerimus sicut decet, and de debito regimine dicti regni
sum soliciti ac de probitate magnifica, fidelitate solida, and industria
circumspecta, nobilis and potentis viri Johannis Ducis Brabant. and Lotring.
consanguinei nostri carissimi intime confidentes ipsum in regno praedicto locum
nostrum tenentem Capitaneum and nostrum vicarium fecerimus and praefecerimus
generalem, concedentes and committentes eidem Duci merum imperium and gladii
potestatem ac jurisdictionem omnem altam and bassam, cognitionem and decisionem
omnium tam criminalium quam civilium questionum cum potestate Judices and
ministros prout expedire viderit deputandi, necnon plenum exercitium Vobis
omnibus and singulis firmiter injungimus, and mandamus quod prefatum Ducem ad
exequenda premissa libenter and devota recipitatis and sibi tanquam person
nostre sic pronis affectibus pareatis and intendatis humiliter in premissis ut
devotionis vestrae promptitudinem debeamus merito commendare, scituri pro certo
quod ad humiles esse volumus cum favoris exuberantia rebels prout exegerit
vestra protervia saevientes.

In cujus etc. Dat. ut supra. Item consimilia mandata diriguntur eisdem sub
nomine Gulielmi Marchionis Juliacen.



N. 86. Rot. Parl. 14. Ed. 3. part p. 9. 10. Stat. at large. 14. of Ed. 3.
EDward by the grace of God, King of England and France, and Lord of Ireland,
to all those which these Letters shall
Know ye, that whereas some People do think, that by the reason that the Realm
of France is devolute to us as right Heir of the same, and forasmuch as we be
King of France, our Realm of England should be put in Subjection of the King,
and of the Realm of France in time to come; we having regard to the Estate of
our Realm of England, and namely, that it never was, nor ought to be in
Subjection, nor in the Obeisance of the Kings of France, which for the time
have been, nor of the Realm of France. And willing to provide for the Surety
and Defense of the said Realm of England, and of our liege People of the same:
Will, and grant, and stablish for us and for our Heirs and Successors, by
assent of the Prelates, Earls, Barons, and Commons of our Realm of England in
this our present Parliament summoned at Westminster, the Wednesday next after
the Sunday in Middle-lent, the XIV. Year of our said Reign of our Realm of
England, and the first of France, that by the cause or color of that, that we
be King of France, and that the said Realm to us pertains, as before is said,
or that we do us to be named King of France in our Style, or that we have
changed our Seals, or our Arms, nor for Commandments which we have made, or
from henceforth shall make as King of France, our said Realm of England, nor
the People of the same, of what Estate or Condition they be, shall not in any
time to come be put in Subjection, nor in Obeisance of us, nor of our Heirs nor
Successors, Kings of France, as before is said, nor be Subject nor Obedient,
but shall be free and quite of all manner of Subjection and Obeisance
aforesaid, as they were wont to be in the time of our Progenitors Kings of
England for ever.

In witness of which things, etc. Dated at Westminster, etc. the XIV. Year of
our Reign of England, and the first of France.
N. 87. a. Avesbury. Cap. 31.
PHilip de Valois que long tems avoms pursui devers vos per messages toutz
altres voies que nos favoms-resonables a fin que voz noz vousistez avoir rendu
nostre droit heritage de France le quele voz noz avetz long tems detenu a
grant tort and coupe. Et pur ceo que nos veoms bien que voz estes en entente
de perseverer en votre injuriouse detenue, sauntz noz fear reason de nostre
demand, sumez noz entrez en la terre de Flaunders come Signeur Sovereign de
cele and passer permi le pais and voz signifioms que pris ovesque nous laid
nostre Seigneur Jhesu Christ and nostre droit ouesque le poar du dit pais and
ouesque noz gentz et aliez regard le droit que noz avomps a leritage que voz
noz detenez a vostre tort, noz treioms verse vouz pur mettre brief fin sour
nostre droiturele challenge si vouz vuilletz a proscher. Et pur ceo que si
grant poar des gentz assemblez que viegnent de nostre part, et que bien
quidoms que voz amesnetz de vostre part, ne se Chrestiens doit escheure et
specialement Princes et aultres que se teignent governors de gentz, si
desirroms moult qui brief point se priest et pur escheure mortalite de
Chrestiens, ensi come la querele est apparent a noz et voz, que la discucion de
nostre challenge se feseit enter nos deux corpse a la quele chose noz voz offroms
pur les causes susditz, comment que nos puissoms bien veer la grant noblesse
de vostre corpse vostre sen auxint and avisement, et en nostre chalange pur
affiner icelle battle de voz memes od cent persons des plus suffisauntz de
vostre part and nos mesmes od aultres tauntz de noz gentz lieges. Et si vous ne
voilletz lune voie ne lautre que vous noz assignez certain jour devant la ville
de Tourneye pur combatre poar encountre poar de deinz et jours proscheins apres
la date du ceste lettre, et nos offrez doz susditz voloms tut le mounde estre
conutz quest nostre desir ne mye pur orguille ne surquidance meas que pur les
causes susdites fin que la volente nostre Seigneur Jhesu Christ monstre enter
nous repos poet de pluis en pluis estre enter Chrestiens que le poar des enemies
Dieux feussent resistez et Christiente enfraunchie et lavoie sour ceo que
eslire voilletz des offrez des susditz noz voilletz signifier par le portour du
cestes lettres et par les vostres a lui fesant hastive deliverance.

Done soutz nostre grant seal a Chyn es Champs de leez Tourneye le xxvii. jour
du moys de Juyl, l'an de Grace 1340. seelee d'un grand seau de cire vert.
N. 87. b. Avesbury. Cap. 32. Responsio dicti Domini Philippi de Valesio ad
literam suprascriptam.
PHilip par la grace de Dieux Roi de France
a Edward Roy Dengleterre
Nous avomps veu voz lettres apportez a nostre court de part vous a Phelip de
Valeis en queles lettres estoient contenutz ascunes requests que vous feistes
al dit Ph. deValeis. Et pur ceo que les ditz lettres ne venoient pas a nous and
que les ditz requests nestoien^ pas faitez a nous come apeirt cleirment par le
tenor des lettres, noz ne noz feissoms null response nient mye pur ceo que noz
avomps entenduz par les ditz lettres et autrement que voz estez entrez en
nostre roialme de France emportant grant damage a nous et nostre roialme et a
nostre people, mes de volente sauntz null reason, and noun regardant ceo que
homme lige doit garder a son Seigneur, car vous estez entrez encontre vostre
homage lige en noz reconnissaunt sicom reason est Roi de France et promis
obeisaunce tiel come lon dit promettre a son Seigneur lige si com appeirt pluis
clerement par voz lettres patentz seals de vostre grant seal les queles noz
avomps depar devers noz et de queles vous devetz avoir a taunt devers vous
nostre entente si est quant bon nous sembler a de voz getter horse de nostre
roialme al honure de nous et de nostre roialme et en profit de nostre people,
and a ceo fair avoms ferme esperaunce en Jhesu Christ, dount Chrestiens mis a
mort le service divine apetisez and seint Eglise en meindre reverence. Et du
ceo questcript avoiez que vous entendez avoir lost de Flemyngz nous qui doms
estre certeins que les bones gentz et les Comunes du pais se porteront par
tiele manner par devers nostre Cousin le Count de Flaundres lor Signeur sauntz
meine et noz lor Seigneur Sovereign quils garderont

Done soutz les Camps pres de la Priorie Saint Andreu soutz le seal de nostre
secret en l'absence du grant, le xxxme. jour de Juyl, l'an du grace. M. CCC.
xl.
N. 88. Rot. Claus. 15. Ed. 3. part 3. m. 25. Dors.
REX venerabili in Christo patri J. eadem gratia Archiepiscopo
Cum pridem in Parliamento nostro apud Westmonast. in Quindena Pasche proxime
praeterito convocato, quedam, legibus and consuetudinibus regni nostri Angliae
express contraria, and regie dignitati nostre nedum valde prejudicialia set
probrosa fuissent minus importune petita, quae nisi per modum statuti tune
permisissemus consignari dictum parliamentum fuisset sine omni expeditione in
discordia dissolutum, and sic Guerre nostre Francie and Scotie, quas de
Consilio vestro ut scitis principaliter assumpsimus, fuissent Scituri quod si
secus feceritis ad vos ad inimicum nostrum and nostrorum violatorem jurium,
gravius quo licite poterimus capiemus.

Test Rege apud Westmonast. primo die Octobris.
N. 89. Rot. parl. 17. Ed. 3. n. 23.
ITem accordez est and assentuz que le statut fait a Westminster a la Quinziem
de Paske, l'an du Regne nostre Seigneur le Roy quinzisme soit de tout Repellez
and anientez and perde noun de statut, come celle qu'est prejudiciel and
contraire a leys and usages du Roialme and as Droigts and Prerogatives nostre
Seigneur le Roi, mes pur ce que ascunes Articles furent comprise en meisme le
statut que sont raisonables and accordantz a ley and a reason, il est accordez
per notre Seigneur le Roi and son conseil que des tieux Articles and autres
accordez en cest present Parliament soit fait Estatut de novell per l'avis des
Justices and autres sages and tenuz a touz jours.

N. 90. Avesbury. p. 97. b. c. 39.
LUdovicus dei gratia Romanorum Imperator semper Augustus, Praeclarus, Edwardo
Regi Angliae fratri suo charissimo, salutem, and sincerae dilectionis affectum.
Licet innumera grandiaque negotia nostris incumbant humeris and circa illa
multipliciter and assidue distrahamur, tamen cum discordia inter te and
preclarum Philippum Regem Franciae, affinem nostrum perdilectum, ex qua tibi
and tuo Regno quamplurima personarum and rerum dispendia ipsa non sedata in
futurum poterunt evenire, se nostris representat obtutibus, mentem nostram
Philippus ad requisitionem nostram dedit nobis suis literis potestatem
tractandi inter te and ipsum concordiam super discordiam inter vos suscitatam,
quam etiam tibi and tuo Regno pensatis diligenter omnibus conditionibus tuis
and alligatorum tuorum multipliciter expedire credentes amicitiae tuae
persuademus teque Philippum Regem Francorum praedictum, inita et contracta, nam
ex quo tu treugas et certos terminos ad tractandum de concordia inter Philippum
Regem Francorum accepisti absque nostro scitu, voluntate, et assensu de
consilio nostrorum Principum qui ligas pacta et uniones nostras, noverint
quibus visum fuit quod hoc salvo honor nostro facere possemus, concordiam et
amicitiam cum dicto Rege Franciae contraximus, et unionem inivimus,
vicariatumque tibi per nos commissum ex causis revocavimus praevocatis, pro
firmo sciturus quod in tractatibus nostris, sic tibi fraterne providemus,
Fratrem Eliarhardum lectorem ordinis fratrum heremitarum sancti Augustini,
specialem nostrae Curiae Capellanum, tuae fraternitati transmittimus quem
petimus super praemissis cum celeri expeditione remitti.

Dat. Franchinforde xxv. die mensis Junii, Regni nostri anno xxiv. Imperii
nostri.
N. 91. Ibm. p. 98. 2.
SErenissimo Principi Domino Ludovico Dei gratia Romanorum Imperatori semper
Augusto, Edwardus eadem gratia Rex Franciae et Angliae, et Dominus Hyberniae
salutem, et votivis semper successionibus gratulari.
Serenitatis vestrae literas reverenter recepimus inter alia continentes quod
praeclarus Philippus de Valesio ad tractandam inter nos et ipsum concordiam
dedit vobis ad requisitionem vestram suis literis potestatem. Et si placeret
nobis potestatem hujusmodi vobis dare, libenti vacaretis animo ad dictam
concordiam reformandum Philippum inita minime nos moveret. Nam ex quo sine
scitu et assensu vestro treugas et certos terminos ad tractandum inter nos et
dictum Philippum de pace accepimus, dictam amicitiam cum eo de consilio
Principum vestrorum quibus visum fuit quod hoc salvo honor vestro possetis
facere, contraxistis, vicariatum nobis per vos commissum revocantes. Et quidem
zelum quem habetis ad faciendam dictam concordiam plurimum commendamus,
volentes vestrae patere notitiae quod nos pacem Philippo semper optavimus, quam
in quantum decuit sumus cum justitia prosecuti. Et revera votivum nobis foret
admodum and acceptum si posset fieri per tanti mediatoris instantiam pax
optata. Sed quia scimus jus nostrum in Regno Franciae satis clarum, illud
arbitrio dubio non proponimus ducere alicui per literas nostras committendum.
Verum dum attenta meditatione pensamus qualiter vestra consideratio
circumspecta videns patentem nostram justitiam and dicti Philippi duritiem
obstinatam and injuriam nobiscum, Philippum vestra gratia ligam fecit in
specialem adoptionis filium, de dilectionis exuberantia nos admittentes, ut cum
pace vestra loquamur, mirari non sufficimus quod praepotens vestra sublimitas
quae ad laudem bonorum and vindictam malorum est divinitus instituta contra nos
dicto Philippo injuriatori nostro notorio se ligavit. Et id quod dicitur nos
sine scitu and assensu vestro cum praedicto Philippo treugas and tractatum
pacis iniisse, non debuit consideratis facti circumstantiis rationabiliter vos
movisse, quia dum obsidebamus Tornaceam, oportuit nos eorum sequi consilia, qui
nobis comitivam and auxilium tunc fecerunt, and hyemis subita vicinitas ac
locorum distantia vestram super hoc consulere celsitudinem minime permiserunt,
immo nobis alias si recolitis concessistis quod cum opportunitas arrideret
tractare possemus de pace, vobis inconsultis, ita tamen quod sine consensu
vestro pacem finalem cum dicto Philippo nullatenus faceremus, quam nunquam
facere proponebamus priusquam super hoc vestrum habuissemus providum consilium
and revocatio dicta vicariatus facta fuerat premature cum juxta sponsionem
super hoc per imperiales apices nobis factam, non debuisset fieri quousque
regnum Franciae vel majorem partem ejusdem pacifice fuissemus adepti. Premissa
quaesumus velit vestra nobilitas debite ponderare, and ulterius facere quod
debebit, quia per Dei gratiam vobis and vestris semper juxta mensuram impensae
nobis benevolentiae gratam faciemus pro viribus repensivam. Celsitudini vestrae
donet Altissimus votivae felicitatis augmenta.

Dat'. London. xviii die mensis Julii. Anno regni nostri Franciae ii. regni
vero nostri Angliae xv.
N. 92. E veteroi Rotula hujusce Temporis penes meipsum.
REtinentia Regis Edwardi tertii in exercitu suo, in partibus Normaniae,
Franciae, and coram Cales. Anno regni sui vicesimo.

Ad 20 s. per diem. Dominus Princeps. Ad 6 s. and 8 d. per diem. Episcopus
Dunolmensis. Ad 6 s and 8 d. per diem. Comites. 15. Ad 4 s. per diem. Barons,
and Baneretti. 44. Ad 2 s. per diem. Milites. 1046. Ad 1 s. per diem.
Scutiferi, Constabularii, Centenarii, and Ductores. 4022. Ad 6 d. per diem.
Vintenarii and Sagittarii equites. 5104. Ad 6 d. per diem. Pauncenarii. 355. Ad
6 d. per diem. Hobelarii 500. Ad 3 d. Per diem. Sagittarii, pedites. 15480.
Aliqui ad 12 d. 10 d. 6 d. 3 d. per diem. Cementarii, Carpentarii, Fabri,
Ingeniatores, Pavilonarii, Minarii, Armatores, Gunnatores and Artillarii. 314.
Unde ducenti Vintenarii 4 d. residui ad 2 d. per diem. Wallenses pedites. 4474.
Magistri Constabularii, Marinarii 700. Navium, bargearum, balingearum, and
vitellariarum. 16000. Summa totalis hominum predictorum praeter Dominos. 31294.
Summa totalis vadiorum guerrae cum vadiis Marinariorum a 4to. die Junii. Anno
20mo. dicti Regis Edwardi 3tii. usque 12m. diem l. 127201 -- s. 02 -- d. 9 --
06.

And that at Present we may know how the King in these Times was served in his
Wars by his Noble Men, and others, I have transcribed

Domino Edwardo Principi Walliae existenti in obsequio Dom Regis in partibus
Normanniae, Franciae, et coram Cales, cum retentione sua pro vadiis guerre ad
20 s. undecem Baneretti quolibet capiente per diem 4 s 102 milites quolibet ad
2 s. 264 Scutiferi, quolibet ad 12 d. 384 Sagittarii equites quolibet ad 6 d.
69 Sagittarii pedites quolibet ad 3 d. 513 Wallenses quorum unus Capellanus ad
6 d. unus medicus unus Proclamator, 5 Standardarii et 25 Vintenarii d. et 480
pedites quolibet ad 2 d. per diem.

Domino Henrico Comiti Lancastriae, existente coram Cales in obsequio Regis cum
retentione sua pro vadiis suis guerrae et unius Comitis utroque ad 6 s. 8 d.
11. Baneretti quolibet ad 4 s. 193. milites quolibet ad 2 s. 512. Scutiferi
quolibet ad 12 d. 46 homines ad arma equites and 612 sagittarii equites
quolibet ad 6 d. per diem.

Domino Wilhelmo de Bohonn Comiti Northampt. existenti in obsequio Regis in
partibus Normanniae, Franciae and coram Cales. 2 Baneretti. 46 Milites. 112
Scutiferi. 141 Sagittarii equites ad vadia ut supra.

Domino Thomae de Hatfeld Episcopo Dunolmensi ad 6 s. 8 d. per diem. 3
Baneretti. 48 Milites. 164 Scutiferi. 81 Sagittarii equites quolibet capiente
ut supra.

Domino Radulpho Baroni de Stafford existenti in obsequio Barons cum eorum
retentione.
Regis in partibus praedictis cum 2 Banerettis. 20 Militibus. 92. Scutiferis.
90 Sagittarii Equites quolibet capiente ut supra.

Domino Wilhelmo de Wareyne Militi and aliis. 95 Milites. Milites cum eorum
retentione.
313 Scutiferi. 394 Sagittarii, Hobelarii, Pauncenarii, Equites, and 46
Sagittarii pedites. de eorum retinentia quolibet capiente ut supra.

The Retinue of King Edward the third in his Army in Normandy, France, and
before Calais in the 20th Year of his Reign
The Prince by the Day. 20 s. The Bishop of Durham. 6 s. 8 d. Thirteen Earls
each by the Day. 6 s. 8 d. Forty four Barons and Baneretts Each by the Day 4
s. One Thousand forty six Knights Each by the Day. 2 s. Esquires, *Constables,
Captains and Constables were Officers and Commanders.
Leaders. 4022. each by the Day. 1 s. Vintenars that had the command of 20 Men
or as our Sergeants, and Archers on horseback 5104. each by the Day. 6 d.
Pauncenars, they were most strangers, but what 6 d. Hobelars 500. by the Day
each. 6 d. Archers on foot 15480. by the Day each. 3 d.

Masons, Carpenters, Smiths, Engineers, Tent-makers, Miners, The English had
five pieces of Cannon at the Battle of Cressy. Mezeray. f. 369.
Gunners armed, and those that had the Care of the Artillery. 314. some at a
Shilling others at 10 d. 6 d. and 3 d. by the Day.

Welshmen, foot 4474. whereof 200 Vintenars each by the d. the Residue each by
the Day. 2 d.

The whole Number of the Men of the Army was besides the Lords 31294. Masters,
Captains, Mariners and Boys for 700 Ships, Barges, Balingers and Victuallers
16000.

The Sum Total of the War, with the Wages of the Mariners from the 4th of June
in the 20th Year of Edward the third, to the 12th of October in the 21st Year
of his Reign, l. 2 s. 9 d. ob. as it appears in the Book of particulars of the
Account of Walter Wetewange, then Treasurer of the Household. Under the Title of
the Total of the Wages of the War in Normandy, France, and before Calais.

The following Instances makes this Service more plain
To Edward Prince of Wales being in the Kings service in Normandy, In eodem
Rotulo.
France and before Calais, with his Retinue for his Wages of War 20 s. a Day.
Eleven Banerets, every one taking 4 s. a Day. 102 Knights each 2 s. a Day. 264
Escuires, each 12 d. a day. 384 Archers on horseback each 6 d. a Day. d. a Day.
513 Welshmen, whereof one Chaplain at 6 d. a Day. One Physician, one Herald or
Crier. 5 Ensigns, 25 Sergeants or Officers over 20 Men each 4 d. a Day. 480
footmen each 2 d. a Day. To Henry Earl of Lancaster, being in the Kings
service before Earls and their Retinue.
Calais with his Retinue, for his wages of War, and one other Earl each 6. s.
8. d. a Day. Eleven Banerets each 4. s. a Day. 193 Knights each 2. s. a Day.
512 Escuires each 12 d. d. a Day. To William Bohun Earl of Northampton being
in the Kings service in Normandy, France, and before Calais. 2 Banerets. 46
Knights. 112 Escuires. 141 Archers on Horseback. For their Wages as above. To
Thomas Hatfield Bishop of Durham 6 s. 8 d. a Day. 3 Banerets. The Bishop of
Durham and his Retinue.
48 Knights. 164 Escuires. 81 Archers on Horseback, every one taking as above.
To Ralph Baron of Stafford, being in the Kings service in the Barons with their
Retinue.
places aforesaid, with 2 Banerets. 20 Knights. 92 Escuires. 90 Archers on
Horseback. Every one taking as above. To William de Wareyne Knight, and other
95 Knights, 313 Knights with their Retinue.
Escuires. 394 Archers, Hobelars, or Light-horsemen, Pauncenars on horseback.
and 46 foot Archers of their Retinue, every one taking as above.
The Chiefs of the Foreigners, and Strangers that were in the Kings service,
were commonly paid in Gross. So many Thousand or Hundred Pounds, for their own
Wages and their Men's: Pro vadiis suis and hominum eorum, According to their own
Quality, and the Numbers and Quality of those they brought with them.

N. 93. Look for this Number and Number 94 95. and 96. in the History, and a
Paragraph or two before this Number, and there are Directions where to find the
originals.
Litera super correctione Articulorum.
Frater Androynus miseratione Divina humilis Abbas Cluniacen' Apostolicae sedis
Nuncius Salutem in Eo qui est omnium vera salus.

Noveritis quod Illustrissimus Princeps and Dominus, Dominus Johannes Dei
Gratia Francorum Rex in Pace finali inter ipsum and Excellentissimum Principem
and Dominum, Dominum Regem Angliae noviter reformata, Literas suas eidem Regi
Angliae Nobis praesentibus

JEhan par la grace de Dieu Roy de France scavoir faisons a tous presens and
avenir, Que nous avons veu le Traicte d' Accort fait naguires par certains
Traicteurs and Procureurs enter nous and notre treschier Friar le Roy d'
Angleterre contenue la form qui s'ensuit.

Charles ainsne fitz du Roy de France Regent le Royaume Duc de Normandy and
Dalphin de Vienn. A Tous ceuls qui ces presents Lettres verrent, Salut.
Nous vous faisons scavoir que de tous les Debas and Descors quelconques menez
and demenez enter Monsieur le Roy de France and nous pour lui and pour nous and
pour touz ceuls a quil appartient d' une part, Et le Roy d' Angleterre et touz
ceuls a quil puit touchier de sa Party d' autre. Pour Bien de Paix est
accordes le viii. Bretigny de les Chartres en la maniere qui ensuit.

1. Premierement que le Roy d' Angleterre avec ce quil tient in Guienne and in
Gascoigne aura pour lui and pour ses Hoires perpetuelment a touz jours touts
les Chooses qui sensuivent a tenir par la maniere que le Roy de France and son
Filz ou aucune de ces Ancestres Roys de France les tindrent.

Cest ascavoir ce que en demain en demain and que en fie en fie and par le
temps and maniere dessus esclarciz la Cite le Chastel la Conte de Poictiers and
tout la Terre and le Pais de Poitou, ensamble le fie de Tovars, and la Terre de
Belleville, la Cite and le Chastel de Xainctes, et tout la Terre et le Pais de
Xaintonge, par de ca et par de la, la Charente et la Cite et le Chastel d'
Again, et la Terre et le Pais d' Again et la Terre et le Pais d' Agenois, la Cite
le Chastel et tout la Conte de Pierregort, et la Terre et le Pais de
Pierreguis, la Cite et le Chastel de Limoges, et la Terre et le Pais de
Limosin, la Cite et le Chastel de Caours, et la terre et le Pais de Caourcin,
la Cite le Chastel et le Pais de Tarbe, et la Terre et le Pais et la Conte de
Bigorre, la Conte la Terre le Pais de Gaure, la Cite le Chastel d' Angolesme,
et la Conte et la Terre et le Pais d' Angoulemois, la Cite and le Chastel de
Rodes, la Terre and le Pais de Rovargne and si il y a aucunes Seigneurs comme
le Conte de Fois, le Conte d' Armagnac, le Conte de Lisle, le Count de
Pierregort, le Viconte Limoges, ou autres qui tiennent aucunes Terres ou Lieux
dedans les Metes dez diz Lieux, il feront Homage au Roy d' Angleterre, and touz
autres Services et Devoirs deus a cause de leurs Terres and Lieux en la maniere
quil ont fait, ou temps pass.

2. Item aura le Roy d' Angleterre tout ce que le Roy d' An gleterre ou aucunes
des Roys d' Angleterre anciennement tindrent Monstereul sur la Mer et les
Appartenances.

3. Item aura le Roy d'Angleterre tout la Conte de Pontieu tout entierment sauf
et except que se aucunes chooses ont este alienees par les Roys d' Angleterre
qui ont este par le temps de la dicte Conte et appartenances et a autres
Persons que aus Roys de France le Roy de France ne sera pas tenuz de les
render au Roy d' Angleterre, et se les dictes alienations ont este faits aus
Roys de France qui ont este par le temps sans aucune moyen et le Roy de France
les tiegne avoient aliene ou transporte aucunes chooses en autres Persons que
aus Roys de France et depuis soient venues es mains du Roy de France eu aussi
par partagi le Roy de France ne sera pas tenuz de les render aussi se les
chooses dessus dictes devoient Hommage le Roy les baillera a autres qui en
feront Hommage au Roy d' Angleterre, et si ils ne devoyent hommage le Roy de
France baillera un tenent quil y en fera le devoir dedanz un an prochain, apres
ce quil sera partiz de Calays.

4. Item le Roy d' Angleterre aura le Chastel and la Ville de Calais, le
Chastel et la Ville et la Seignorie de Merk, les Villes, Chasteax et Seignories
de Sangale, Conloigne, Hames, Wale, et Oye, avec Terres, Bois, Mares, Rivieres,
Rents, Seignories, advoysons d' Eglises et toutes autres appartenances et Lieux
entregisans dedans les Mettes ou Bonnes qui sensuit.

Cest ascavoir des Calais jusques au Fill de la riviere par devant

5. Item le dit Roy d' Angleterre aura le Chastel and la Ville

6. Item est accord que le Roy d' Angleterre and ces Hoires auront et tendront
toutes les Isles adjacens aus Terres, Pais et Lieux avaunt nomes ensamble
avecques toutes les autres Isles les quelles le dit Roy d' Angleterre tient a
present.

7. Item accord est que le dit Roy de France and son ainsnez Fitz le Regent
pour eulx et pour touz leurs Hoires et Successeurs au plus tossed que lon pourra
sanz fraud et sans mal engine et a plus tard dedans la feste saint Michiel
prochain venant en un An rendront, bailleront, and delivreront au dit Roy d'
Angleterre and a ^ouz^es Hoires and Successeurs, and transporteront en eulx
toutes les Honneurs, Obediences, Homages, Ligeances, Vasseauls,

8. Item est accord que le Roy d' Angleterre aura les Contes, Cites,
Chasteaux, Terres, Pais, Isles and Lieux avaunt nomes avec toutes les
Appartenances and les Appendances quelque part quil soient a tenir a lui and a
tous ses Hoirs et Successeurs hereditablement and allienees aus Eglises qui
leur demourrant paisiblement en touz les Pais and Lieux ci dessus et dessous
nommes, si que les Persons des dittes Eglises prient diligement pour les diz
Roys comme par leurs fondeurs sur quoy leurs consciences en seront chargiez.

9. Item est accord que le Roy d' Angleterre toutes les Cites, Contes,
Chasteaux et Pais dessus nomez qui anciennement n'ont este des Roys d'
Angleterre, aura et tendra comme le Roy

10. Item est accord que se dedans les mettes des diz Pais qui furent
anciennement des Roys d' Angleterre auroient aucunes chooses qui autrefois n'
eussent est des Roys d' Angleterre don't le Roy de France estoit en possession
le jour de la battaille de Poitiers qui fu le xix. Jour de Septembre l' An Mil.
ccc. lvi. Else seront demourront au Roy d' Angleterre and a ses Hoirs par

11. Item accord est que le Roy de France and son ainsnez Filz le Regent pour
eulx and pour touz leurs Hoirs and pour touz les Roys de France and leurs
Successeurs a touz jours au plus tossed que se pourra fair sanz mal Engine and au
plus tard dedans la Saint Michiel prochain venant and un An, rendront and
bailleront au dit Roy d' Angleterre and a touz ses Hoirs and Successeurs and

The twelfth Article was entirely left out of the Treaty of Peace, Corrected at
Calais when the two Kings met there. 13. Item est accord a ^in que ce present
Craictie puisse estre

14. Item accord est que le Roy de France paiera au Roy d' Angleterre trois
Milions d' Escuz d' Or, don't les deux valent un Mil Escuz tells comme devant en
la ditte Cite jusques a tant que les diz trois Milions seront parpaies.

15. Item est accord que pour paiant les diz vi. Mil Escuz a Calais and pour
baillant les Hostages ci dessous nommes and delivront au Roy d' Angleterre
dedans les quatre Mois, acompter depuis que le Roy de France sera venuz a
Calais, comme dit est, la Ville le Chastel and les Forteresces de la Rochelle,
and les Chasteaux,

Cest ascavoir Monsieur Loys Conte d' An^ou, Monsire Jehan- Conte de Poitiers
Filz au Roy de France le Duc d' Orleans Friar du dit Roy, le Duc de Bourbon, le
Conte de Blois, ou son Friar, le Conte d' Alancon ou Monsire Pierre d' Alencon
son Friar, le Conte de Saint Pol, le Conte de Harcourt, le Conte de Portien, le
Conte de Valentmois, le Conte de Breine, le Conte de Vaudemont, le Conte de
Foreis, le Viconte de Beauont,

16. Item est accord que les dessus diz Prisonnes qui veuront demourer en
Hostage par le Roy de France comme dit est seront par mi ce delivres de leurs
Prisons sanz paier aucun Raencon par Couvenances faits par avaunt le tiers jour
de May dernierment

17. Item est accord que en Lieu des diz Hostages qui ne France a son
departure de Calais en mener en sa Compaignie dix des Hostages tells come les
deus Roys accorderont and souffira que du nombre de Quarante dessus dit en
demeure jusques au Nombre de Trente.

18. Item accord est que le Roy de France dedans trois Mois apres ce quil sera
partis de Calais rendra a Calais en Hostage quatre Personnez de la Ville de
Paris, and deux Persons de

19. Item est accord que le Roy de France sera amenez d' Angleterre a Calais
and demourra a Calais par quatie Mois apres

20. Item est accord que au plus tossed que fair se pourra dedans

21. Item sur la Questionne du demaine de la Duchy de Bretaigne que est enter
le dit Monsire Jehan de Montfort d' une party, and Monsire Charles de Bloys d'
autre party, accord est que les deux Roys appelez par devant euls ou leurs
Deputes especials especial au plus tossed qu'il pourront mettront les dittes
Parties a Accord en diront leur final avis sur le droit de l' une party and de
l' autre and ce sera exequte par les deux Roys, and en cas qu'il ne pourront
fair dedans demi An des lors prochain ensuit, adonc les deux Parties
principals de Bloys et de Montfort feront ce qui mieux leur ^amblera, and les
amiss d' une Party and d' autre aideront quelque party qu'il leur plaira sanz
empeschement des diz Roys, and sanz avoir en aucun temps damage, blasme, ne
reproach par

22. Item que toutes les Terres, Pais, Villes, Chasteaux and autres Lieux
baillies au diz Roys seront en tells Libertez and

23. Item le dit Roy de France rendra and fera render and restablir de fait a
Monsire Philippe de Navarre and a toux ses adherens en apres au plus tossed que
l' on pourra sanz mal engine and au

24. Item est accord que le Roy d' Angleterre pourra donner cest fois tant
seulement a qui qui li plaira en heritage toutes les Terres and Heritages qui
furent de fie Monsire Godefroy de Harecourt

25. Item est accord que null homme ne Pais qui ayt este en l' obeisance de l'
une party and vendra par c' est Accord a l' obeisance de l' autre Party ne
soit empeschiez par chose faite ou temps pass.

26. Item est accord que les Terres des Bannis and adherens de l'une Party et
de l'autre et aussi les Eglises de l'une Royaume et de l'autre, et que touz
ceulx qui sont desheritez ou Ostes de leurs Terres ou Heritages ou chargiez
d'aucune Pension, Taille, ou Redevance ou autrement grevez en quelque maniere

27. Item est accord que le Roy de France delivrera au Roy de Angleterre au
plus tossed qu'il pourra bonnement, et donra et au plus

28. Item est accord que en baillant au Roy d'Angleterre ou a autre par lui
par especial Deputez, les villes et Forteresces et toute la Conte de Montfort,
les villes et Forteresces et toute la Conte de Ponthieu, la Cite et le Chastel
de Xainctes, les Chasteaux, Villes, et

29. Item est accord que le Roy de France fera baillier et delivrer au Roy
d'Angleterre ou a ses Hoirs ou Deputez toutes les Villes, Traictie doyvent
appartenir au Roy de France: and seront tenuz les diz Roys and leurs Gens a
euls enter ayder quant a ce requis en seront aus gages de la Party que le
requerra, qui seront d'un Florin de Florence par Jour par Chevalier and demi
Florin par Escuyer and pour les autres au fuer and du surplus des doubles
gages: and est accord que si les gages sont trop petiz en regard au merchie
des vivres en pais, il en sera a l'ordenance de quatre Chevaliers pour c'es
leus c'est ascavoir deux d'une Party and deux d'autre.

30. Item est accord que les Arcevesques, Evesques, and autres Prelas and Gens
de Saint Eglise a cause de leur temporalite seront subgiez de celui des deux
Roys soubs qu'il tendront leur temporalite, and s'il ont temporalite soubs touz
les deux Roys il seront subgiez de chascun des deux Roys par leur temporalite
qu'il tendront soubz chascun diceulx.

31. Item est accord que bonnes, alliances, amitiez, and Confederations

32. Item accord est que le dit Roi de France and son ainsnez Filz

33. Item accord est que les Collations and Provisions faites d'une party et
d'autre des benefices vacans tant comme la Guerre adure tiennent et soient
valables, et que les frais issues, et revenues

34. Item que le Roys dessus diz soient tenuz de fair confermer toutes les
chooses dessus dittes par notre saint Pere le Pape et seront valles par
seremens, sentences, censures de Court de Rome et touz autres Lieux en la plus
fort maniere que fair se pourra et seront empitrees dispensations et
absolutions et Lettres de la ditte Cour de Rome touchant la perfection et
accomplissement de ce present Traictie et seront bailles aus parties au

35. Item que touz les Subgiez des diz Royaumes qui voudront estudier es
estudes and Universites des Royaumes de France and d'Angleterre joyront des
Privileges and Libertes des dittes estudes and Universites tout aussi comme il
povoient fair avaunt des presents guerres and comme il font a present.

36. Item a fin que les chooses dessus dittes Craictees and Parlees soient plus
fermes, estables and valables seront faites and donnees les fermetes qui
sensuivent.

C'est ascavoir Lettres Seelees de Seauls des diz Roy and des Ainsnez Filz
diceuls les meilleurs qu'il pourront fair and ordener mais touz deux ensamble
feront leur povoir de recourer les Chasteaux, Villes and Forteresces dessus
dittes, and que toute obeisance and accomplissement soient fais es Traicties
dessus dittes and seront aussi faites and donnees d'une Party and d'autre
selon la nature du fait toutes manieres de fermetes and seurtes que l'on pourra
and scaura ou pourra diviser tant par le Pape le College de la Court de Rome,
comme autrement pour tenir and garder perpetuelment la Paix and toutes les
chooses par dessus accordees.

37. Item est accord que par ce present Traictie et Accord, tous autres
accors, Traictes, ou Prolocutions se aucun en y a faiz ou pour parlez au temps
pass sont nulz et de nulle valeur, et du tout mis au neant et ne senpourront
jamais aidier les parties ne fair aucun reproach l'un contre l'autre pour
cause diceulx traictiez ou Accors, se aucun en y avoit comme dit est.

38. Item que ce present Traictie sera approve, jure, and conferme par les deux
Roys a Calais quant il y seront en leurs persons, et depuis que le Roy de
France sera partiz de Calais et sera en son povoir, dedans un mois prochain
ensuivant le dit departement le dit Roy de France en fera Lettres
confirmatoires et autres necessaires ouvertes, et les envoyra et delivrera a
Calais au dit Roy d'Angleterre ou a sees Deputez au dit Lieu, and aussi le dit
Roy d'Angleterre en prenant les dittes Lettres confirmatoires

39. Item est accord que null des Roys avaunt diz ne procurera ne fera procurer
par lui ne par autre que aucunes noveletes ou grefs se facent par l'Eglise de
Rome ou par autre de Saint Eglise quelconques qu'il soient contre ce present
Traictie sur aucun

40. Item des Ostages qui seront bailliez au Roy d'Angleterre et accomplir sanz
jamais venir en contre par nous ou par autre, et pour les chooses dessus dittes
et chascun dicelles tenir fermement a perpetuete, obligeons nous noz biens
presens et avenir, noz Hoirs et Successeurs et leurs biens, et souzmettons
quant a toutes ces chooses nous et noz Hoirs et Successeurs a la Jurisdition et
Cohertion d'Eglise de Rome, et volons et consentons que notre Saint Pere le
Pape conferme toutes ces chooses en donnant monitions, mandemens generals, sur
l'acomplissement dicelles contre contre notre dit Friar, ne contre ses Enfans
ou leurs Terres ou leurs Subgiez ne autrement qu'il n'ensoient expressement
exceptes. Et nous avons fait samblement Jurer toutes les chooses devant dittes
par noz Enfans le Duc d'Anjou et de Maine, le Duc de Berri et d'Auvergne, le
Duc de Tourainne, le Duc d'Orleans notre Friar, et noz Cousins le Duc de
Bourbon, Jaque de Bourbon, Jehan d'Arteis, Pierre d'Alencon, Jehan d'Escampes,
Guy de Bloys, le Conte de saint Pol, le Conte de Harecourt, le Conte de
Tancarville,

En tesmoing de la quelle chose nous avons fait mettre notre Donnees a Calais
le xxiiii. Jour d'Octobre l'An de Grace, mil trois cens Soixante.
In quorum omnium Testimonium Sigillum nostrum praesentibus Litteris duximus
apponendum. Datum apud Calesium Morinen' Dioc. Die xxv. Mensis Octobris Anno
Praedicto Millesimo ccc.
N. 94. See the Original in the Margin at the beginning of N. 93.
Serment que le Roy fist le xxiiii jour d'Octobre, A Calais sur les Articles ci
contenus, confirmant la Traitie.
This Oath was taken again in the very same Words and Articles at Bologne, 26th
of October without any alteration, as they here

JOhan par le Grace de Dieu, Roy de France a tous ceuls qui ces lettres verront
salut.
Scavoir faisons que par la paix fait and reformee enter nous and nostre
treschier Friar le Roy d'Angleterre la quelle nous desirons estre fermement and
perpetuelment gardee, nos avons fait certains Sermens sur le corpse Jesu Christ
sacre touchees les saints Evangiles de Dieu, c'est assavoir, que par la maniere
que il est escript and depuis corrige a Calais and ycellui en touz ses poins
and Articles pour tant come il nous touch Accomplirons et enterinerons et ne
vendrons encontre.

Item que nous ferons les Renunciations cessions et Transpors qui sont a fair
de nostre party, et accordees par nostre Conseil

Item que nous surserrons de user des soverainetez et Ressors quant aus chooses
que tient le Roy d'Angleterre et qui li serront baillees et le quelles li
doivent demourer par virtue du dit accord et Traitie par la form et maniere et
jusques au temps exprimes et contenuz es Lettres sur ce faites par les Consaux
de Parties.

Item que nous deliverons au Roy d'Angleterre les Chasteauls,

Item que nous deliverons and ferons delivrer au Roy d'Angleterre

Item que nous Renoncons a toute Guerre and process de fait contre le Roy
d'Angleterre and ses hoirs selon la form des lettres sur ce accordees.

Item avons Jure comme dit est les Alliances faites au Roy d'Angleterre per la
maniere que accordees sont avec le Modification que est faite des Escoz et de
Bretaigne.

Item que nous ferons et accomplirons par la maniere accordee tout ce que nous
devons et sommes tenuz de fair, des Ostages qui bailler devons au Roy
d'Engleterre.

Item que nous lairons et deliverons aus Eglises tout ce qui a este occupe du
leur, pour occasion de la Guerre, et a touz autres Allies ou adherens au dit
Roy d'Angleterre, et leur pardonne^ons

Item que les Sermens qui sont a fair par noz Enfans ou autres de nostre
party par la dit accord, nous les ferons fair au plus tossed que nous pourrons
bonnement et devrons par le dit Record.

Item que toutes les lettres que nous devons envoier ou bailler

En Tesmoin de la quele chose nous avons fait mettre nostre seel a ses
presents lettres done a Bouloigne le xxvi. Jour d'Octobre l'an de Grace Mil
C. C. C. Soixante.
Par le Roy Under the great Seal hanging at it with Silk twisted strings. J.
Math.

There is also the Confirmation of this Oath verbatim (it being recited in it)
by Charles his eldest Son, this being the last Clause.
ET nous volons de tout nostre povoir entermer tout ce que nostre dit Seigneur
et Pere a promis et covenancie promettons lojaument et en bonne foy et avons
jure, et jurons sur le Corpse Jesu Christ sacre tenir, garder, et accomplir
pourtant come il nous touch et pourra touchir tout et chascun les chooses
contenues es Lettres a dessus Transcripts et par le form et manner

En tesmoing de ce nous avons fait mettre nostre seel a ces presents lettres.
Done a Bouloigne le xxvi. Jour d'Octobre l'an de Grace Mil C. C. C. Soixante.
Par Monsieur le Duc Noevenes With his Seal hanging to it with yellow and green
silk strings twisted.
ANdroginus the Pope's Nuntio's Certificate Dated at St. Omers 8th of November
1360. That in his presence John King of France on the 24th of October 1360. at
Calais granted and delivered these very Letters or Articles of his Oath recited
in his Certificat or Testification to Edward King of England.

N. 95 See for the Original in the Margin at the beginning of Number 93.
La Grant Lettre de toutes les Terres. The great Letter of Renunciation of John
King of France etc. at Bologn 26 October 1360. the 7th. 11th. and 8th Articles
included, the 12th omitted.
JEhan par la Grace de Dieu Roy de France, a touz ceuls qui
Scavoir faisons que nous avons promis and promettons bailler ou fair bailler
and delivrer realment and defait au Roy d'Engleterre notre Friar ou a ses
Deputez en celle Party aus Freres Augustins dedenz la Ville de Bruges au jour
de la Feste de saint Andrieu prochain venont en un An Lettres Seelees de notre
grant seel en l'az de Soye and en cire vert en cas que notre dit Friar aura
faites les Renunciations que il doit fair de sa Party and notre treschier
Neveu son Filz ainsne and y celles

JEhan par la Grace de Dieu Roy de France a noz bien Amez les Arcevesques,
Evesques, Abbez* and autres Prelas, les Dolens, Prevos, Ch^pitres, and Convenz
and autres Persons d'Eglises, tant Cathedraux and Collegiauls que
Conventuauls, and autres Regulieres and Seculieres: Et a noz Amez and Feauls
les D^x, Contes, Vicontes, Barons, Chivalers and autres Nobles, les Mai^es,
Eschivins, Jurez, Consuls, Universites and Communautes and autres

LES Guerres qui ont longuement dure enter notre treschier Seigneur et Pere
jadis Roy de France lui vivant et apres son Deces enter nous de une Part et le
Roy d'Engleterre notre Friar, le quel reclamoit soy avoir droit au dit Royalme
d'autre part, ont port mult grans damages non pas seulement a nous and a vous,
mais a tout le Peuple de notre Royaume and des Royaulmes voisins et a toute
Christiante si comme vous meismes le savez bien, car par les dittes Guerres son
maintesfoiz avenues Batailles

PRemierement par le moien de honorables Peers en Dieu plusieurs Cardinauls et
Messagers de par nostre Saint Pere le Pape qui a grant diligence et instance y
traveillerent pour lors, Et depuis ce y ait en plusieurs traictiez parlez, et
plusieurs voies touchees enter nous et le dit Roy d'Engleterre notre Friar.

FInablement en mois de May darrein pass vindrent en France messages de par
notre Saint Pere le Pape noz chiers et feauls amiss L'abbe de Clugny, Friar
Simon de Lengres, Maistre en Durante, Maistre de Lorder des Freres prescheurs,
and Hugue on Renoncie a plusieurs Terres, Duches, Contes, Hommages, et
Souverainetez de notre dit Royaume que le dit Roy de Angleterre notre Friar
demandoit a avoir et es quelles il ^e disoit avoir droit. Et parmi ce nous li
aions octroie et promis a baillier, delivrer, et delaissier pour lui et pour
ses Hoirs* et Successeurs a tous jours certaines Terres, Cites, Chasteauls,
Villes, Contes, and Seigneuries en notre dit Royaume si comme plus a plain est
contenu en dit Traictie and Accord enter les quelles Terres,

1. PRemierement que le Roy d' Angleterre avec ce qu'il tient en Guienne and en
Gascoigne aura pour lui and pour ses Hoirs parpetuelment a tous jours toutes
les chooses qui s' ensuivent a tenir par la maniere que le Roy de France et son
Filz ou aucun de ses Ancestres Roys de France les tindrent,

2. ITem aura le Roy d' Angleterre tout ce que le Roy de Angleterre ou aucuns
des Rois d' Angleterre anciennement

7. ITem il est accord que le Roy de France et son ainsne Filz le Regent par
euls et pour tous leurs Hoires et Successeurs au plus tossed que IN en pourra
senz fraud et senz mal engine et au plus tart dedenz la Feste de Saint Michael
prochein venir en un an, rendront, bailleront et delivreront au dit Roy d'
Angleterre and touz ses Hoirs and Successeurs and transporteront en euls pour
quelque cause, tiltre ou couleur de droit a eux aus Rois ne a la Couronne de
France, pour cause des Cites, Contes, Chasteauls, Villes, Terres, Pais, Ylles
et Lieux avaunt nommez et de toutes leurs appartenances et appendences quelque
part qu'il soient et chascun dicelles senz y ^iens retenir a eulx a leurs Hoirs
ne Successeurs aus Rois ne a la Couronne de France, and aussi manderont les diz
Roy and son ainsne Filz par leurs Lettres patentes a touz Arcevesques,
Evesques, and autres Prelaz de Saint

8. ITem accord est que le Roy d'Engleterre aura les Cites, Contes,
Chasteauls, Terres, Pais, Ylles, et Lieux avaunt nommez avec toutes les
Appartenances et Appendences quelque part qu'il soient a tenir a lui et a touz
ses Hoirs et Successeurs heritablement et parpetuelment en demaine ce que le
Roy de France y avoit en demaine et aussi en fie, service, souverainete ou
Ressort

9. ITem est accord que le Roy d'Engleterre toutes les Cites, Villes,
Chasteauls and Pais dessus nommez qui anciennement n'ont este des Rois
d'Engleterre aura et tendra en l'estat and aussi comme le Roy de France ou ses
Filz tiennent a present.

10. ITem est accord que se dedans les metes des diz Pais qui furent
anciennement des Rois d'Engleterre avoit aucuns chooses qui autrefoiz n'eussent
este des Rois de Engleterre don't le Roy de France estoit en possession le Jour
de la battaille de Poitiers qui fu le xix. jour de Septembre l'An Mil C. C. C.
cinquante six, Else seront et demourront au Roy d'Engleterre and a ses Hoirs
en la maniere que dessus est dit.

11. ITem accord est que le Roy de France et son ainsne Filz le Regent pour
euls and pour leurs Hoirs et pour touz les Rois de France and pour leurs
Successeurs a touz Jours au plus ^ost que se pourra fair senz mal engine et au
plus tart dedenz la Saint Michiel prochain venant en un an, rendront et
bailleront au dit Roy d'Engleterre et a touz ses Hoirs et Successeurs et
transporteront Successeurs et transporteront en euls toutes les honneurs,
legalitez, obediences,

NOus voulans le Traictie accord et Paix dessus diz tenir, garder et acomplir
sur tous les Articles ci dessus escrips et chascun diceulx touz les Pais,
Cites, Terres, Contes et chooses dessus nommees es diz Articles et toutes les
Appartenances et Appendences quelque part que il soient baillons, rendons,
delivrons et delaissons pour nous noz Hoirs et Successeurs Rois de France au
dit Roy d'Engleterre par ces presents Lettres pour lui et pour ses Hoirs et
Successeurs et les transportons en lui

POurquoy nous, ne noz Hoirs et Successeurs ou autres Rois de France ou autre
que ce soit a cause de nous ou de la Couronne de France aucune chose ne
pourrons chalengier ou demander ou temps avenir sur le dit Roy d'Engleterre ses
Hoirs et Successeurs ou sur aucun des Vassauls et Subgiez avaunt diz pour comme
des Pais and Lieux avaunt nommez, ainsi que tous les avaunt nommees Persons et
leurs Hoirs et Successeurs parpetuelment seront Hommes Liges et Soubgiez du Roy
d'Angleterre and ou charges ont este faites par aucun des Roys de France qui
ont este pour le temps puis Sexante dix Ans en ca par quelconque form ou
cause que ce soit.

TOutes tells donations, alienations, obligations, et charges Nous des ores
rappelons, cassons and anullons du tout et toutes chooses ainsi donnees,
alienees, ou chargees, rendrons et baillerons realment et de fait au dit Roy
d'Engleterre ou a ses Deputez especiaulx a mesme l'entierete qu'il furent es
Roys d'Engleterre diz Seneschaulx, Baillis, Juges and Prevoz and a leur Deputez
and a chascun deuls and Jurons que jamais ne ferons ne soufferons estre fait
par nous ne par autre en prive ne en appert aucune chose contraire es chooses
devant dittes and aucunes dicelles.

En Tesmoing de la quelle chose nous avons fait mettre notre Seel a ces
presents Lettres. Donn a Bouloigne le xxvi Jour d'Octobre l'An de Grace Mil.
CCC. Sexante.
Et pour ce que les dittes chooses and chascun dicelles soient de point en point
and par la maniere and form dessus dittes tenues and acomplies nous obligeons
nous and noz Hoirs and touz les biens de nous and de noz Hoirs de notre dit
Friar le Roy d'Engleterre and a ses Hoirs, and Jurons aus sainz Euvangiles de
par nous corporelement touchees que nous par ferons attendrons and acomplirons
en cas dessus dit toutes les devant dittes chooses par nous

En Tesmoign de la quele chose nous avons fait mettre notre Seel a ces
presents Lettres. Done a Bouloigne le xxvi. Jour d'Octobre l'An de Grace Mil.
CCC. Soixante.
Par le Roy.
J. Math.

N. 96. See here for the Original in the Margin at the beginning of N. 93.
Les Amistees and Alliances d'entre les Roys d'Angleterre and de France.
CHarles Ainsne Filz du Roy de France, Duc de Normandy and Dalphin de Vienne.
Scavoir faisons a touz presens and avenir que nous avons veu and diligement
avise les Lettres de nostre treschier Seigneur and Pere contenens la Form qui
sensuit.

Jehan par le Grace de Dieu Roy de France a tous ceux qui ces presents Lettres
verront, Salut.
Scavoir faissons que Nous pensanz and consideranz que les Roys and les Princes
Chrestiens qui veulent bien governer le peuple qui leur est subjet, doivent
suyr and eschiver guerres, dissensions and discordes donc Dieu est offendu and
querre and avier pour eulx and pour leurs Subgez Paix, unite and concord par
la quelle l'amour du Soverain Roy des Roys doit estre acquise, les Subgez sont
gouvernez en tranquilite and aux perilz des guerres est obvie: Et Recordans les
grans maulx, domages, and afflictions que notre Royaume and noz Subgez ont
sustenu par long temps pour cause and occasion des guerres and discordes qui
ont dure longuement enter nous and notre treschier Friar le Roy d'Angleterre
and les Royaumes, Subgez, Amiss, aydenz

C'est ascavoir avec nous et touz noz Subgez tant Genz d'Eglise comme Seculeurs
sur toutes les confederations, aliances, Conventions, obligations, Lettres et
Seremenz qui estoient enter nous, notre Royaume et nos subgiez d'une Party, et
notre treschier Cousin le Roy d'Escoce son Royaume et ses Subgez d'autre party
comme le bien et l'effeit de la ditte Paiz enter nous et

C'est ascavoir que nous, noz Enfanz, noz Hoirs and Successeurs notre Royaume,
noz Terres and noz Subgez quelconques presens and avenir nez and a naistre
serons a tous Jours mais a notre dit Friar, ses Enfans, ses Hoirs and
Successeurs, son Royaume, ses Terres, and Subgez quelconques bons, vrays and
loyaux Amiss and alliez and leur garderons de tout notre povoir leurs honors
and leurs droiz ou nous les saurons leur dishoneur leur vitupere and leur
dommage empescherons loyaument de tout notre povoir a aucuns de leurs Ennemiz
presens and avenir nez ou a naistre, quelque il soient, aucun Conseil, confort
ou aid encontre eulx ou aucun d'eulx pour quelconques cause ou occasion que ce
soit ou puist estre par nous ou en appert nous ne donnerons ne ferons, ne
yceulx Enemis, au damage ou prejudice de notre dit Friar, ses Hoirs ou son
Royaume scieument recepterons, recevrons, ne recepter ne recevoir ferons ou
souffrerons en aucune faux, mauvais, and desloial parjur, and encourir tell
blasme and diffame eomme Roy sacre doit encourir en tell cas. Et par ces
presents Alliances nous n'entendons ne voulons que aucune prejudice^ se face a
nous a noz Hoirs and Subgez. Pourquoy nous et eux pourrions et pourront
recepter, porter, et tenir touz les Banniz et Fuitifs horse du Royaume
d'Angleterre presens et avenir nez et a naistre par quelconques cause ou
occasion que ce soit, par maniere que a este fait et acoutume de fair en temps

En Tesmoing des quelles chooses nous avons fait mettre notre Seel a ces
presents Lettres. Done a Bouloigne le xxvi. Jour d'Octobre l'An de Grace Mil.
CCC. Sexante.
Et nous Charles dessus dit voulons de tout notre povoir enteriner

En Tesmoing de ce Nous avons fait mettre notre Seel a ces presents Done a
Bouloigne le xxvi Jour d'Octobre l'An de Grace Mil. CCC. Sexante.
Par Monsieur le Duc
N. de Venes.

N. 97. Rot. Romae 4. Ed. 3. n. 2. John 22d then Pope.
PApae Rex etc.
Dum in recto considerationis examine, Nos ex debito suscepti regni nostri
gubernaculi ad defensionem jurium et prerogativarum regalium conspicimus
obligatos, dignum immo verius debitum reputamus, dicta jura deprimere
conantibus, viis licitis obviare. Sane licet donatio dignitatum, Prebendarum et
aliorum beneficiorum ecclesiasticorum quorumcumque ubicumque Archiepiscoporum,
Episcoporum, et aliorum Prelatorum Ecclesiarum Cathedralium et Monasteriorum
regni nostri, quorum temporalia de nobis tenentur in capite pertinerent ipsis
Ecclesiis vel Monasteriis vacantibus et ipsarum temporalibus in manu nostra
existentibus, ad nos et non ad alium de nobili prerogativa et jure Corone
nostre notorie pertineat et etiam pertinuit ab antiquo, fueruntque progenitores
nostri Reges Anglie a tempore cujus contrarii memoria non existit, et nos totis
nostris temporibus in plena and pacifica possessione vel quasi juris and
prerogative predictorum, Scientibus and tollerantibus sanctis Patribus summis
Pontificibus qui vos in eminentia celsitudinis apostolice precesserunt.
Vacantibus tamen dudum una vice tam Ecclesia Cathedrali Eborum per mortem bone
memory Domini J. Romayn dudum Eborum Archiepiscopi, quam Thesauraria dicte
Eborum Ecclesie per privationem Domini Johannis de Columpna felicis Bonifacius
Papa octavus predecessor vester, ipsam Thesaurariam de facto tantum, cum de
jure non potuit, contulit Domino Francisco Gaytam, sed Avus noster Dominus
Edwardus tunc Angliae Rex illustris ipsam Thesaurariam Clerico suo Domino
Waltero de Bedewynd donavit, prout ad ipsum ratione vacationis Archiepiscopatus
predicti pertinuit illa vice, pro qua donatione regia, servato processu
legitimo qui requiritur in hac part judicium redditum and diffinitiva fuit
lata sententia Curia regia, in qua duntaxat jura and prerogative Regis
hujusmodi debent, and non alibi pertractari. Virtute cujus Judicii idem
Walterus rite secundum jura regni nostri in dictam Thesaurariam inductus and
prefatus Franciscus amotus extitit ab eadem. Nuper vero quodam color quesito
de jure dicti Francisci Capellani vestri in dicta Thesauraria, licet nullum jus
in ea vel ad eam habuit, ut prefertur, Vestra Sanctitas in hoc, ut convincimur,
circumventa, dictam Thesaurariam tanquam per dimissionem dicti Christo patri
Domino Petro Dei gratia titulo sancti Stephani in Celio Monte Presbitero
Cardinali de facto contulit and sibi providit de eadem, qui dilectum Clericum
nostrum Magistrum Willielmum de la Mare possessioni dicte Thesaurarie ex causa
permutationis cum Domino Waltero supradicto ut dicitur rite fact incumbentem,
and in jus dicti Walteri succedentem, occasion dicte provisionis vestre
fatigat multipliciter and molestat in enervationem judicii predicti,
depressionem juris Corone nostre and regni nostri dampnum inestimabile, si
novitatibus and usurpationibus hujusmodi minime resistatur, quibus nuper in
Parliamento nostro apud Westminster. ostensis apercius and detectis, ac super hiis
deliberatione prehabita diligenti, proceribus and peritis ac toti regni nostri
videbatur consilio tunc ibidem, quod predictum incumbentem pro conservatione
juris nostri defendere debeamus. Quocirca vestre beatitudini votivis precibus
supplicamus, quatenus premissis clementer attentis and aequo libratis examine,
predictam provisionem de dicta Thesauraria ut predicitur in juris nostri
prejudicium per vos factam, dignemini cautius revocare, dicto Domino Cardinali
super hoc silentium imponentes, ut cessantibus lituum amfractibus and aliis
periculis majoribus que ex novitatibus et usurpationibus hujusmodi possint
verisimiliter provenire, cum nimium nos turbaret, si quod absit, corona regia
nostris temporibus suorum jurium pateretur eclipsum, in sinu solite

Dat. apud Westminster. quartodecimo die Decembr.
N. 98. Rot. Romae 10. Ed. 3. M. 3.
PApe Rex etc. beatorum.
Inter solicitudines varias que nos Anglicanam fundarunt et dotarunt Ecclesiam,
singulas Cathedrales Ecclesias nostri regni vacantes, olim libere contulerunt
regio jure suo. Et postmodum ad supplicationem Cleri, et reverentiam ac rogatum
domini summi Pontificis qui tunc universali presidebat Ecclesie, concessit
Dominus Rex Anglie, qui tunc erat Capitalis Ecclesiarum Cathedralium dicti
regni, cum Ecclesie dicte vacarent potestatem futurum Episcopum eligendi, salva
sibi et successoribus suis hac prerogativa quod cedente vel decedente loci
Pontifice, Capitulum ipsius Ecclesie significare debet Regi qui foret, pro
tempore, vacationem Ecclesie, et ab eo petere et habere licentiam futurum
Episcopum eligendi, et cum sic per licentiam Regis elegerit, teneretur
presentare Regi personam electam, et petere ac habere Papam tertium
predecessorem vestrum ex certa scientia confirmata, Norwicen. Ecclesia regni
nostri per mortem bone memory W. ipsius Episcopi, Prior et Capitulum ejusdem
ecclesie petita modo quo premittitur et optenta a nobis eligendi licentia,
subsequenterque presentata nobis electi persona, et petito ut regium preberemus
assensum, cum tam de electione predicta quam ipsius electi persona aliqua nobis
fide digna relatione suggesta fuissent, super quibus ante assensum nostrum
hujusmodi electus nostrum responsum vel dictum terminum non expectans, preter
assensum nostrum dedignanter recessit et ad prosequendum electionis sue
negotium ad Sanctitatis vestre Curiam, ut dicitur se divertit, in nostri
contumeliam and contemptum juris nostri Regii, prerogative nostre predicte
depressionem et exheredationis nostre periculum manifestum, de quo non
mediocriter conturbamur. Quam ob rem solidam Apostolice clementie justitiam
quam in conservatione jurium nostrorum Regalium invenire confidimus cum grato
favore propitiam humiliter imploramus, quatenus premissis in debite
considerationis examine revolutis, electo prefato, si sit contra jura nostra
Regalia supradicta que adeo sunt notoria quod nulla tergiversatione celari
poterunt, erga vos pro confirmatione electionis sue prosequi voluerit
audientiam denegare velitis quousque assensum nostrum in forma predicta
meruerit optinere, quem si peteret ut est moris sine difficultate prestabimus,
nisi subsit causa rationabilis propter quam id facere minime debeamus, hoc
autem quesimus facere dignetur optentu justitiae pro conservatione juris nostri
Regii, vestra benignitas gratiosa. Nam nimium nos tederet

Conservet etc. Dat. etc.
N. 99. Claus. 18. Ed. 3. p. 1. m. 20. Dors. De proclamatione facienda de
provisionibus.
REX Vicecomitibus London. Salutem.
Cum nuper in Parliamento celebris memory Domini Edwardi quondam Regis
Angliae, Avi nostri, Anno regni sui tricessimo quinto apud Carlisle, tempore
Domini Clementis divina providentia sacrosancte Avo nostro and consilio suo,
ibidem per Comunitatem regni sui exhibita, continente quod cum sacra Ecclesia
in statu Prelacie in regno Anglie per ipsum Avum nostrum, and progenitores
suos, Comites, Barons, and eorum Antecessores fuisset fundata, pro Catholice
fidei informatione, sibi and populo faciendum, and orationibus, elemosinis, and
hospitalitatibus in locis ubi Ecclesie fundate fuerint, pro ipsorum fundatorum,
and eorum heredum Archiepiscopis, Episcopis, Abbatibus, Prioribus and aliis
Domibus religiosis, per ipsum Avum nostrum and Progenitores suos, Comites,
Barons, and alios Proceres dicti Regni assignat, iidem Avus noster, Comites,
Barons, ceterique proceres dicti Regni, tanquam Domini and Advocati tempore
vacationum, habuissent et habere debuissent hujusmodi vacationum custodias,
Prebendarum, Ecclesiarum, and aliarum dignitatum quarumcunque de advocatione
Prelatorum predictorum existentium presentationes and collationes. Ac dictus
Avus noster and dicti Progenitores sui semper hactenus maximam partem Consilii
sui de dictis Prelatis ac ceteris indigenis ad hujusmodi beneficia promotis,
quod sibi pro Salvatione Regni predicti, fore conveniens summus Pontifex
donationem hujusmodi possessionum, and beneficiorum sibi appropriando, per
provisiones suas hujusmodi dignitates, prebendas, and Ecclesias, alienigenis
qui nunquam in dicto regno morabantur ac etiam Cardinalibus qui in eodem Regno
morare non potuerunt, and aliis tam alienigenis quam indigenis, ac si ipse
Patronus and Advocatus fuisset, cum de jure non extitisset, dederit,
concesserit and presentaverit, per que si tollerarentur, vix aliquod beneficium
infra modici temporis sp^tium remaneret, quin omnia beneficia ad donationem
hujusmodi Prelatorum spectantia, per provisiones hujufmodi in manibus essent
alienigenarum and indigenarum contra piam voluntatem fundatorum eorundem,
si^que electiones Archiepiscoporum, Episcoporum, and aliorum religiosorum
hujusmodi deessent; orationes, hospitalitates, and elemosine que in locis
predictis Avus noster and alii laici patroni hujusmodi vacationum temporibus,
presentationes and collationes suas amitterent, dictumque Consilium deperiret,
bonaque innumera extra dictum regnum asportarentur, in Sacre Ecclesie Anglicane
status adnullationem, necnon dicti Avi nostri and Corone sue, ac aliorum
procerum dicti Regni exheredationem, and in offensionem and destructionem Legum
and Jurium Regni ejusdem, and predicti populi maximum dampnum and depressionem,
and status assensu Comitum, Baronum, Procerum and dicte Communitatis, premistis
erroribus and dispendiis intime consideratis in pleno Parliament^ predicto,
provisum, ordinatum, concordatum, decretum, and consideratum fuisset, quod
premissa gravamina, oppressiones, and cetera dispendia supradicta in dicto
Regno, extunc fieri non permitterentur quovis modo. Et super hoc omnibus quorum
tunc interfuit, ex part dicti Avi nostri per brevia sua prohibitum fuisset, ne
quicquam quod in ipsius Regiae dignitatis lesionem, seu Procerum et populi sui
prejudicium cedere possit attemptarent, seu facerent aliqualiter attemptari: et
insuper singulis vicecomitibus dicti Regni per hujusmodi brevia extitit
demandatum, quod si quos per inquisitiones inde faciend. contrarium * fecisse
inveniri contingeret, tunc eos per eorum corpora caperent et salvo et secure
coram ipso Avo nostro ad certum diem tam dicto Avo nostro quam aliis versus eos
conqueri Curia sua consideraret in premissis. Ac jam in Ultimo Parliamento
nostro apud Westmonasterium in Quindena Pasche proximo preterito tento, ad
prosecutionem Communitatis dicti Regni per petitionem suam coram nobis et
consilio nostro exhibitam nobis sugg^r^ntis errores, dispendia, et gravamina,
in scandalum, dedecus, et depressionem totius Ecclesie Anglicane predicte, ac
exheredationem nostri and Corone nostre, and aliorum Procerum dicti Regni, and
^ssens^onem and destructionem Legum and Jurium regni ejusdem, and p^pu^^ nostri
dampnum gravissimum, et status totius Regni predicti subversionem, ac contra
Dei voluntatem, et ipsorum beneficiorum* fundatorum piam dispositionem,
accontra ordinationem, concordiam, decretum et considerationem predicta, and
provisiones et reservationes beneficiorum hujusmodi per sedem Apostolicam
factas multotiens evenisse, et nobis supplicantis ut eidem Ecclesie Anglicane
ac nostre Comitum, Baronum, ac aliorum Procerum et nos, Comites, Barons,
Proceres, et dictam Communitatem provisum, ordinatum, concordatum, decretum, et
consideratum, et tam infra libertatem quinque Portuum nostrorum quam alibi per
Costeras Maris totius Regni nostri Anglie et alios Comitatus Regni predicti
public proclamatum, et ex part nostra firmiter inhibitum fuisset, ne quis
cujuscumque status seu conditionis esset, sive fuerit Alienigena sive indigena
literas, bullas, processus, reservationes, hujusmodi beneficiorum instrumenta,
seu aliqua alia nobis seu Populo nostro prejudicialia infra idem Regnum nostrum
Angliae sub gravi forisfactura nostra deferret Archiepiscopis, Episcopis,
Abbatibus, Prioribus, Comitibus, Baronibus seu aliquibus aliis infra idem
regnum nostrum liberanda. Et quod nullus sub forisfactura nostra recipere
presumeret, nec quicquam aliud quod in nostri seu dicti Populi nostri
prejudicium vel jurium Corone nostre aut provisionum, ordinationum,
Concordiarum, Decretorum, and considerationum predictorum lesionem cedere
posset facerent, aut fieri procurarent quoquo modo. Et quod insuper diligens
Scrutinium in locis (ubi necesse esset) infra idem Regnum nostrum super omnes
and singulos infra dictum Regnum nostrum Anglie venientes fieret. Et omnes
illos quos contra proclamationem, inhibitionem, predictas literas, bullas,
processus, reservationes seu instrumenta aliqua vel aliud quodcunque quod in
nostri, seu dicti Populi nostri prejudicium deferentes contingeret inveniri,
statim per eorum corpora attachiarentur and in prisonis nostris salvo
custodirentur donec aliud inde precepissemus. Et Litere, bulle, processus,
reservationes, and instrumenta predicta ab ipsis caperentur et in Cancellariam
nostram de tempore in tempus mitterentur. Et nos de nominibus illorum sic
arrestandorum et aliorum Provisores tam Alienigene quam indigene et eorum
Procuratores et Nuncii dictas provisiones, ordinationes, concordias, Decreta,
Considerationes, proclamationes et inhibitiones non considerantes, nec penas in
eis contentas timentes, Literas, Bullas, Processus, reservationes et
instrumenta, et alia hujusmodi Nobis in dicto Populo nostro sic prejudicialia
infra idem Archiepiscopis, Episcopis, Abbatibus, Prioribus, et aliis tam
indigenis quam Alienigenis infra dictum Regnum nostrum Anglie, post et contra
proclamationem et inhibitionem supradictas liberarunt exequenda, ipsique
Archiepiscopi, Epi^copi, et alii predicti Literas, Bullas, processus et
instrumenta hujusmodi receperunt, et quamplures Provisores et Procuratores
Provisorum ad hujusmodi beneficia virtute dictarum Literarum, Bullarum,
Processuum, reservationum, et instrumentorum admiserunt and eos in beneficiis
illis induxerunt. Et sic dicti Provisores et Procuratores dicta beneficia
detinent occupata, in nostri et Corone nostre ac dicti populi exheredationem et
intollerabile prejudicium et contra formam provisionum, Ordinationum,
Concordiarum, Decretorum, Considerationum, Proclamationum et inhibitionum
predictorum, et vos quicquam contra hujusmodi proclamationem et inhibitionem
attemptantes, hactenus juxta tenorem mandati nostri vobis inde directi facere
non curastis, unde vobis mandamus firmiter injungentes, quod factis et iteratis
proclamatione, et inhibitione infra Civitatem predictam in locis ubi decet,
quod nullus cujuscunque status seu conditionis fuerit, sive fuerit indigena
sive Alienigena, hujusmodi Literas, Bullas, processus, reservationes,
instrumenta, seu aliqua alia Nobis seu dicto populo nostro prejudicialia, infra
idem Regnum nostrum deferat sub gravi forisfactura nostra, Archiepiscopis,
Episcopis, Abbatibus, Prioribus, Comitibus, Baronibus, Militibus, nec aliquibus
aliis infra idem Regnum nostrum liberanda. Et quod nullus sub recipere
presumat, et omnes illos quos hujusmodi Literas, Bullas, Processus,
reservationes, instrumenta seu alia quecunque nobis et populo nostro sic
prejudicialia postmodum infra dictum Regnum nostrum defer, Et ea alicui infra
idem Regnum liberare, seu ea ab eis admittere et virtute eorundem beneficia
aliqua recipere, seu aliquos in hujusmodi beneficiis occasion predicta
inducere contigerit invenire. ac etiam illos qui hujusmodi Literas, Bullas,
processus, reservationes, instrumenta, seu aliqua alia prejudicialia post
dictum Parliamentum nostrum, et contra proclamationem, inhibitionem,
provisiones, ordinationes, Concordias, Decreta et considerationes predicta
infra dictum regnum nostrum detulerunt, et virtute eorundem beneficia aliqua
admiserant, seu in hujusmodi beneficiis aliquarum hujusmodi provisionum virtute
se posuerunt, seu ad eadem admissi fuerunt, ac etiam illos quos virtute
Bullarum, Literarum, reservationum et provisionum hujusmodi appellationes,
citationes, vel processus aliquos Patronos seu eorum Patronorum presentatos vel
alios quoscunque in quibuscunque Curiis facere vel prosequi vel fieri, aut
procurari, seu aliud quodcunque quod in nostri seu dictorum Comitum, Baronum,
Procerum, Patronorum, vel dicte Communitatis aut provisionum, concordiarum,
Ordinationum, Decretorum, vel considerationum predictorum lesionem cedere
possit facere praesumpserit, facto in hac part diligenti scrutinio, habitaque
inde viis et modis Civitatem predictam, per eorum corpora capi et arrestari
faciatis, et eos una cum Literis, Bullis, processibus, reservationibus, et
instrumentis secum vel alibi infra Civitatem predictam inventis coram nobis et
consilio nostro statim cum eos capi et arrestari contigerit salvo et secure de
tempore in tempus duci faciatis, justitiam super hoc ibidem recepturi. Taliter
vos habentes in executione presentis Mandati nostri, ne

Test Rege apud Westmonasterium tricessimo die Januarii, Anno Regni sui Anglie
decimo octavo, et Francie Quinto.
Per ipsum Regem et totum Consilium.
Eodem modo Mandatum est singulis Vicecomitibus per Angliam

Eodem modo Mandatum est Bartholomeo de Burghersh Constabular. Castri Dovorr.
et Custodi quinque Portuum vel ejus locum tenenti.



N. 100. Rot parl. 50. Ed. 3. n. 94. Bille encontre le Pape et le Cardinaux.
A Notre Seigneur le Roy et son Conseil pra^ont Chevaleers des Countees,
Citizeins des Citees, and Burgeys des Burghs, que sont venuz a ceste Parliament
pur la Communalte de Royalme et suppliont de par la dite Communalte que lui
pleise avoir bone consideracion as chooses dessous escripts et a les defauts que
sensuent et ordeigner covenable remedy dicelx que serra la plus plesance chose
a Dieu, and a seinte Eglise plus graciouse, and plus profitable pur luy et pur
son roialme que unques fuit fait. Et cy est

Primes que lui pleise penser and repenser comment ses Progenitors nobles Roys
d'Engieterre and autres grands de mesme la terre avec l'aide and la devocion de
people cristien en auncien temps fesoient les Eglises en Angleterre puis pur
grand devocion par deverses foitz and process de temps donerent as ditz Eglises
riches, amontent a pluis que la tierce party de son roialme: Et penser comment
toutes cestes chooses sont donez pro tiele devocion and tiele intent que les
profitz ent sourdantz deussent estre despenduz sur mesmes les lieux as queux
ils sont donez al'honure de Dieu, come en maintenance des Eglises and places
appurtenantz en Hospitalitez, Pape and pur l'estat de seint Eglise, pur nostre
Seigneur le Roy, and pur l'estat de son roialme, and pur la Pees, pur lour
Foundours, Patrons, and pur touz ceux que ont donez les biens as ditz lieux
especialement et pur lour alms que la sont entres and touz Cristiens. Et
pensez coment les Roys and autre grands pur lour grande devocion and les Roy
seint Edward que dona Levesche de Wyrcestre a seint Wulston, and puis par
devocion de Roys fuit grante and par la Court de Rome conferme que les
Cathedralz Eglises averoient frank election de leur Prelatz selonc la ley Dieu
and de seint Eglise ent ordeigne parpetuelment adurer. Et si soloient les
Eveschees et verray election et les autres benefices de seint Eglise des
guerres et pestilences, feym, moreyns des bestes et de autres grevances par
quoi le roialme est si empovery et destruit qu'il ny ad mye la tierce party
des gentz, ne des autres chooses susditz, come soloit estre par la cause
susdite, et par enchesons desouz escriptz.

ITem fait a penser quil ny ad null homme de mounde que Ibm. n. 95.
eyme Dieu et de seint Eglise, le Roy et le Royalme d'Engleterre Court de Rome,
que deust estre fontaigne, racyne, et source de seintete, et destruction de
covetise, de symonie et des autres pecches ad si sotilment de poi en poi et de
plus en plus par process du temps par soeffrance et par Abbet des malveys ore
altrement a demesure que unques fuit devant attret a lui les collations des
Archeveschies et Eveschies, dignitez provendres et des autres benefices de
seint Eglise en Engleterre des queux tax amount a plus que cynk foitz le tax
des touz les profitz que appartenent au Roy per An de tout son roialme. Et de
chescun Evesche et des touz autres benefices que le Pape done il voet avoir la
tax. Et si Levesque devie devant ceo quil ad pay le tax le Pape le fait lever
ensemblement oue une novel tax de son Successor et pur plusiours taxes aver
le Pape fait d'une voidance deux ou trois par voye des translations et tantz
des taxes il voet aver et quant un Evesque ad ses bulls, Pape avoir le tax de
chescune dignite et benefice qu'il done.

ITem fait a penser quil y sont plusours que quont ils averont purchase un
benefice de la Court de Rome et pay le tax et Ibm. n. 96.
as brocours des benefices demorantz en la pecchereuse Cite Davenon lour sont
ils mettent lour benefices a ferme quele ferme serra* mande as ditz brocours
pur ent purchaser plusours benefices et greindres et greindres. Et tout einsy
par voie de Simonye et de bracage un cheitif que null bien soiet et riens ne
vant serra avance as Eglises et provandres a la value de mill marcez par la un
docture

Et par mesme la cause gentz lassent de mettre lour enfantz a l'escole et aensi
va Clergy quest la substance de seint Eglise, et de notre seint foy et declin
et anient.

ITem fait a penser coment alienes enemies a ceste terre, et autres demurrantz
outre mere ont benefices, riches, reintes de Ibm. n. 97.
seint Eglise en Engleterre que unques virent ne jammes ne verront lour
parochiens que ne font autre chose de lour benefice forsque southreient le
service Dieu and de Seint Eglise et touts oeveres de charity que soloient estre
faits illoeques et les places descheier parochiens propier en corpse et alme et
attreent a eux horse de roialme touz les profitz de ceux benefices en la bone de
ceste terre qu'est grande empouerissement et destruction a seint Eglise et a
ceste terre, et si est seint Eglise plus destruyt par tielx malvies Cristiens
que par touz les Jews and Saracyns de monde.

ITem fait a penser que la leye de seint Eglise est tiele que benefice Ibm. N.
98.
de seint Eglise doit estre done gracieusement par pure

ITem fait a penser come loy et reason et bone foy volent que ceo quest done a
seint Eglise pur devotion soit despendu al honure de Dieu solonc la devotion et
l'entent de donour et non pas horse de roialme sur nos enemies.

ITem fait a penser que dieux ad comys ses oweles a notre seint Ibm. N. 99.
Pere le Pape a pasturer et non pas a tounder.

ITem fait a penser coment les lais patrons de seint Eglise veantz tant de
covetise and Symonie regner verse gentz de seint Eglise prenent ensample deaux
and vendent les Eglises, don't ils sont Patrones, as gentz que la destruent come
une best, and comme Dieu fuit vendu a les Jews, qui lui mistrent a la mort.

ITem fait a penser quil ny ad null si rich Roy en toute la Ibm. N. 100.
Cristiantee quad la quart party tant de tresore come a de le horse de la
roialme d'Engleterre pur benefices de seint Eglise peccherousement par la
maniere susdite en empoverissement and destruction de roialme and de seint
Eglise par soeffrance and defaute du Conseil.

ITem fait a penser and grandement a douter que depuis que seint Eglise nostre
seint Miere en Dieu de qui nous per nous nostre baptism quest la port de tiel
espouse Jehu Christ par laquelle nous esperions estre sauvez si peccherousement
de mesme and touz les malx de monde venent de pecche, que si null pecche y
fuist, null male avenist.

ET tout temps ad este and touz jours serra que la ou reign

PAR quoi pleise a nostre Seigneur le Roy penser coment il Ibm. N. 101.
est ore l'an cyngantisme de son roialme quest appele l'an covenable remedy
des chooses susditz que si destruent le Roialme and seint Eglise and daver la
besoigne a coer.

ET par une lettre dessouth son seal en latin and par une autre Ibm. N. 102.
dessouth les sealx des Grands de Royalme en Franceys come autre foitz fuit
ordeigne en parliament comprenant ceste matiere prier a notre seint Pere le Pape
que pleise a la seintetee aver bone consideration as chooses susditz and
nomement a ceo que la Ibm. N. 103.
n'appertement per lettre de Lumbard n'en null autre manner. Et que null
Lumbard n'autre face tielx lettres sur mesme la pain and sur ceo soit bone
enquerre par Justices de la pees and

LE Roy ad fait ordeigner de remedy suffisant devant ceste Ibm. Romans
heure par estatuz and autrement and est en pursuant devers le seint Pier le
Pape pur mesmes les besoignes and est en perfect volontee de fair de temps en
temps tantque al final esploit dicelles

N. 101. In the Registers Office of the Archbishop in Drs. Commons, Registrum
Reynolds fol. 241.a.
JOhannes Episcopus servus servorum Dei, ad futuram rei memoriam.
Cum sicut intelleximus Ecclesia Roffensis per obitum bonae memoriae Thomae
ipsius Ecclesiae Episcopi vacare noscitur ad bonum statum ipsius Ecclesiae
intendentes provisionem ejusdem Ecclesiae hac vice certis de causis quae ad id
animum nostrum induxerunt, Ordinationi and Dispositioni sedis Apostolicae
auctoritate praesentium plenarie reservamus. Decernentes ex nunc irritum and
inane si secus contra hujusmodi nostrae reservationis tenorem per quoscunque
scienter vel ignoranter quovis modo contigerit attemptari. Nulli ergo omnino
hominum liceat hanc paginam nostrae Reservationis and Constitutionis infringere
vel ei ausu temerario contraire, Si quis autem hoc attemptare praesumserit,
indignationem omnipotentis Dei, ac beatorum Petri and Pauli Apostolorum ejus,
se noverit incursurum.

Dat. Avinion 14 Kal. Aprilis Pontificatus nostri primo. John 22d* who was
chosen Pope A. D. 1316 2d 1316. and the same year he was chosen.

Et memorandum quod 3 Kalend. Maii Publicatio facta fuit apud Arcus London. Et
secundo Kalend. Maii subsequente Publicata fuerat apud Roffam coram Monachis.

See the History of this Provision in Historia sacra, William de Dene.



N. 102. Rot. parl. 2. Ric. 2. part 2. n. 13. apud Westmonasterium.
ITem les Seigneurs and Communes du Roialme Dengleterre esteantz a ceste
Parliament granterent pur cux and pur tout la Communalte Dengleterre le subsidy
des Leynes, quirs, and peaulx lanutz, and un autre Subsidy a prendre des biens
des certeins persons permy le Roialme, soubz certeins form and manner
comprisez en

LES Seigneurs and Communes du Roialme Dengleterre considerantz les grandes
necessitees du dit Roialme, and la malice des Enemies de France, and aillours
entendantz grant recoverer au dit Roialme and destruction des ditz Enemies que
poent avenir per le grace de Dieu si suffisantie des Gentz d'armes and des
Archiers en Enemies pur eux grever and lour malice aresteer solonc la sage
discretion nostre tresredoute Seigneur le Roy et les Seigneurs esteantz a cest
present Parliament en lieu ou leur semblera a pluis necessaire et profitable en
esploit de nostre Seigneur le Roy et de son dit Roialme grantent que si la Marc
du Saak des Leynes and les sys deniers de la Livre que furent grantez au
darrein Parliament tenuz a Gloucestr' soient pardonez and adnullez a present la
Subside des Leynes adurer An entier apres la Feste de seinte Michel proschein
avenir, cestassavoir de chescun Saak tant come estoit grantez devant le dit
Parliament de Gloucestre and un sum d'argent a Lever des diverses persons du
Roialme en manner come ensuit sibien dedeins Franchises realx come dehors,
cestassavoir.

Le Duc de Lancastre et le Duc de Bretaigne chescun a. x. Marcz. Ib. N. 14.
Item chescun Count d'Engleterre. iiii l. Item chescun des Countesses veoues
en Engleterre a tant come les Countz. iiii l. Item chescun Baron et Baneret ou
Chivaler que poet a tant dispendre. xl s. The Duke of Lancaster and the Duke of
Bretaigne each. x. marks. Also every Earl of England. iiii l. Also every
Countess that is a Widow in England, as much as the Earls. iiii l. Also every
Baron and Baneret, or Knight of as good an Estate as a Baron or Baneret. xl. s.
And so on in the English exactly Translated from the French. Also every
Baroness, that is a Widow, shall pay as a Baron, and Baneress as a Banerett. xl
s. Also every Batchelour, and every Esquire, who by Statue ought to be made a
Knight. xx s. Also every Widow that was the Wife of a Bachelor, or Esquire. xx
s. Also every Esquire of less Estate. vi s. viii d. Also every Woman, Widow of
such an Esquire, or sufficient Merchant. vi. s. viiid. Item chescun Esquire; nient
possessionez des terres, rent, ne Chateux qu'est en service, ou ad este armez.
iii s. iiii d. Also every Esquire without Possessions, Lands, iii s. iiii d.
Also the chief Prior of the Hospital of Saint John, as a Baron. xl s. Also
every Commander of the same Order of England, as a Batchelour. xx s. Also every
other Brother, Knight of the same Order. xiii s. iiii. d Also all other
Brothers of the same Order, as an Esquire without Possessions. iii s. iiii d.
Also every Justice, as well of the one Bench, as of the other, and the chief
Baron of the Exchequer, each, c s. Also every Sergeant and great Apprentice of
the Law. xl s. Also other Apprentices which follow the Law. xx s. Also all
other Apprentices of less Estate, and Attourneys, each. vi s. viii d. Also the
Major of London shall pay as an Earl. iiii ^. Also the Aldermen of London, each
as a Baron. xl s. Also all other Majors of great Towns in England, each as a
Baron. xl s. Also other Majors of smaller Towns, according to the value of
their Estate. xx. s. x s. or vi s. viii d. And all Jurates of good Towns, and
great Merchants of the Realm, shall pay as Batchelours, xx s. Also other
sufficient Merchants, xiii s. iiii d. Also all lesser Merchants, and
Artificers, Husbandmen, or who live upon Tillage according to the value of
their Estate. vi. s. viii d. iii s. iiii. d. ii s. xii d. or vi d. Also every
Sergeant and Freeman of the Country according to their Estate. vi s. viii d. or
xl. d. Also the Farmers of Manors, Personages, and Granges, Merchants of
Beasts, and other Buyers and Sellors, according to their Estate. vi s. viii d.
xl d. ii s. or xii d. Also all Advocates, Notarys, and Proctors who are
Married, shall pay as Sergeants of the Law, Apprentices of the Law, and
Attourneys, each according to their Estate. xl s. xx s. or vi s. viii. Also all
Apparitors that are Married, according to their Estate. iii s. iiii d. ii. s.
or xii d. Also all Innkeepers that have not the Estate of a Merchant, shall
pay according to his Estate. xl d. ii s. or xii d. Also every Married Man, for
himself iiii d. And every Man and Woman unmarried, of such an Estate, and above
the Age aforesaid. iiii. d. Also every strange Merchant of what Condition
soever, shall pay according to his Ability, as other Denizens.

N. 103. Walsinghami Historia fol. 254. n. 10.
RIchardus Dei gratia Rex Angliae and Franciae, and Dominus Hiberniae,
omnibus ballivis and fidelibus suis ad quos praesentes literae pervenerint,
Salutem.
Sciatis quod de gratia nostra speciali, manumisimus universos ligeos and
singulos subditos nostros, and alios comitatus Hertfordiae, and ipsos and eorum
quemlibet ab omni bondagio exuimus and quietos facimus per praesentes, ac etiam
pardonamus eisdem ligeis ac subditis nostris omnimodas felonias, proditiones,
transgressiones and extortiones, per ipsos vel aliquem illorum qualitercunque
factas, sive perpetratas, ac etiam utlegariam vel utlegarias si qua vel quae in
ipsos vel aliquem ipsorum fuerint vel fuerit his occasionibus promulgata, vel
promulgatae, and summam pacem nostram iis and eorum cuilibet inde concedimus.

In cujus rei testimonium has literas nostras fieri fecimus patentes.
N. 104. Ibm. fol. 268. n. 10. 20. 30.
Test meipso apud London. 15. die Junii, anno regni nostri quarto. RIchardus
Dei gratia Rex Angliae and Franciae and Dominus Hiberniae,
universis and singulis Vicecomitibus, Majoribus and Ballivis, and aliis
fidelibus nostris comitatus N. Salutem.
Quia datum est nobis intellgi, quod diversi subditi nostri qui contra pacem
nostram and in turbationem populi in diversis Comitatibus dant intelligi and
affirmant se dictas congregationes and levationes ex nostris voluntate and
auctoritate fecisse and facere ac damna prepetrare. Vobis innotescimus per
praesentes, quod hujusmodi levationes, congregationes, and damna ex nostra
voluntate seu autoritate minime processerunt, prout-nec procedere aut fieri
debet, sed inde quantum plus levationibus, and damnis penitus desistentes, ad
propria se trahant, and ibidem in pace morentur, sub forisfactura vitae et
membrorum et omnium aliorum quae nobis forisfacere poterunt.

N. 105. Walsinghami Historia fol. 295. n. 10.
Test Rege apud Londonias 17. die Junii Anno regni nostri quarto.
AUthoritate Apostolica mihi in hac part commissa, te*A. B. ab omnibus
peccatis tuis ore confessis, and cord contritis, and tot privilegia quae in
terrae sanctae subsidium proficiscentibus conceduntur, tibi concedimus, ac
Ecclesiae universalis synodi, and Ecclesiae sanctae catholicae orationum and
beneficiorum suffragia tibi impartimur.

N. 106. Rot. parl. 11. Ric. 2. n. 13.
VOus Jurrez que vous garderez and ferrez garder la bone Pees, Quiet and
Tranquillite du Royalme, and si auscuns veulle fair encontre cela vous luy
contresterres, and destourberrez a tout votre poair, Et si aucuns Gentz veulent
Riens fair encontre les Corpse des persons des cink Seigneurs, cestasavoir,
Thomas Duc de Gloucestre, Henry Count de Derby, Richard Count d' Arundel and de
Surrey, Thomas Count de Warwick, and Thomas Count Marshall, ou auscun de eux,
vous esterres ove les dit cynk Seigneurs jusques

N. 107. Rot. parl. 11. Ric. 2. n. 48.
VOus Jurrez que vous ne assenterez ne ne seoffrez en quanque en vous est que
aucun Juggement, Estatute ou Ordenance fait ou renduz en cest present Parliament
soit aucunement annullez, reversez, ou Repellez en ascun temps avenir. Et
encontre que vous sustendrez les bones Loies and usages du Royalme avaunt ces
heurs faits and usez and fermement Garderez and ferrer Garder la bone pees,
Quiet and Tranquillite en le Roialme sanz destourber en aucune manner a votre
poair, si Dieu vous eid and les Seints.

N. 108. Rot. parl. 11. Ric. 2. n. 9.
IN nomine Dei amen. Cum de jure et consuetudine Regni Angliae Archiepiscopum
Cantuariensem qui pro tempore fuerit, necnon ceteros suos suffraganeos,
confratres, and Coepiscopos, Abbates, Priores, aliosque Prelatos quoscumque per
Baroniam de Domino Rege tenentes pertineat in Parliamentis Regiis quibuscumque
ut Pares regni nostri predicti personaliter interesse ibidemque de regni
negotiis et aliis ibi tractari consuetis, cum ceteris dicti regni paribus et
aliis ibidem jus interessendi habentibus consulere et tractare, ordinare,
statuere, et diffinire, ac cetera facere que Wilhelmus Cantuariensis
Archiepiscopus totius Anglie Primas, et Apostolice sedis Legatus pro nobis
nostrisque suffraganeis, Coepiscopis et confratribus, necnon Abbatibus,
Prioribus, ac Prelatis omnibus supradictis, protestamur, et eorum quilibet
protestatur qui per se vel Procuratorem hic fuerit, modo presens public et
express quod intendimus et intendit, volumus ac vult eorum quilibet, in hoc
presenti Parliamento et aliis, ut Pares regni predicti more solito interesse,
consulere, tractare, ordinare, statuere, et diffinire ac cetera exercere cum
ceteris jus interessendi habentibus in eisdem statu et ordine nostris et eorum
cujuslibet in omnibus semper salvis. Verum quia in presenti Parliamento agitur
de nonnullis materiis in quibus non licet nobis aut alicui eorum juxta sacrorum
Canonum inftituta quomodolibet personaliter protestamur, et eorum quilibet hic
presens etiam protestatur, quod non intendimus, nec volumus sicuti de jure non
possumus, nec debemus, intendit nec vult aliquis eorundem in presenti
Parliamento, dum de hujusmodi materiis agitur vel agetur quomodolibet
interesse, set nos et eorum quemlibet in ea part penitus absentare. Jure
Paritatis nostre et cujuslibet eorum interessendi in dicto Parliamento quoad
omnia et singula inibi exercenda nostris

Quelle protestacion lieu en plein parliament al' instance et priere du dit
Ercevesque et les autres Prelatz susdits est enroullez ycy en roulle du
Parliament per commandment du Roy et assent des Seigneurs temporels et communes.
Semblable protestation firent les Evesques de Duresme and Kardoyl, mutatis
mutandis.
N. 109. Rot. parl. 21. Ric. 2. n. 38.
VOus Jurrez que bien and Loyalment tendrez, sustendrez, and esterres sanz
fraud ou mal Engyn ove touz les estatutz, establissementz, ordenances, and
Judgments faitz ou renduz en cest present Parliament, sans jamais aler ou fair,
a lencontre de null dicell ou dependantz ou parcel dicell, ne que james vous
les repellerez, revokerez, casserez, irriteres, reverseres, ne adnullerez, ne
james soefferez repeller, revoker, casser, irriter, reverser ne adnuller a
vivre and murrir savant au Roy sa Regalie and liberty and la Droit de sa
Corone.

N. 110. Ibm. n. 40.
VOus Jurrez que jamais en temps avenir, vous ne soeffrez nully vivant aler ne
fair a lencontre de null des estatutz, establissementz, Ordenances, and
Juggements, faitz ou renduz a cest present Parliament ne a null Dependances ou
percell dicell. Et si nully le face and de ceo soit duement convict vous ferrez
votre entier poair and Diligence sanz fraud ou mal Engyn, Et persuerez devers
notre Seigneur le come haut et faux Traitor a Roy and au Roialme, sauvant au
Roy sa Regalie and Libertee, and le droit de sa Corone.

N. 111. Placit. Coronae in Parliamento 21. Ric. 2.
RIcardus Dei Gratia Rex Anglie and Francie, and Dominus Hibernie carissimo
consanguineo suo Thome Comiti Marescallo Capitaneo ville nostre Cales and ejus
locum tenenti, Salutem.
Cum carissimus frater Edwardus Comes Rutland, dilectus confanguineus noster,
Thomas Comes Kancie, carissimus frater noster, Johannes Comes Huntingdon,
dilecti consanguinei nostri Thomas Comes Notingham, Johannes Comes Summers,
Johannes Comes Sarum, and Thomas Dominus Despenser and dilectus and fidelis
noster Willielmus Lescrop, Camerarius noster, coram nobis in presenti
Parliamento nostro inter alios appellaverunt Thomam Ducem Gloucestr. in prisona
nostra sub custodia vestra de mandato nostro existentem de diversis
Prodicionibus per ipsum and alios, contra nos, statum, Coronam, and Dignitatem
nostram appellum suum predictum se optulerunt in Parliamento nostro predicto,
secundum legem and Consuetudinem in Regno nostro Anglie hactenus usitatam
prosecuturos, nobis humiliter supplicando, quatenus ipsum Ducem ad respondendum
sibi super appello suo predicto coram nobis in eodem Parliamento nostro
corporaliter venire jubere volumus, nos supplicationi predictae annuentes,
Vobis mandamus firmiter injungentes quod prefatum Ducem coram nobis and
consilio nostro in Parliamento nostro nos et dictum consilium nostrum in eodem
Parliamento nostro, de eo tunc contigerit ordinari. Et hoc nullatenus
omittatis, et habeatis ibi hoc breve.

Test meipso apud Westmon. xxi die Septembris. Anno regni nostri xxi.
Per ipsum Regem and Consilium Billingford.

Responsum Thome Comitis Marescalli infra nominati.
THomam Ducem Gloucestr. infra nominatum coram Vobis et Consilio vestro in
presenti Parliamento venire facere non possum ad faciendum prout istud breve
exigit et requirit, pro eo quod idem Dux mortuus est, et quem quidem Ducem ex
precepto excellentissimi Domini Regis habui in custodia mea in prisona Domini
Regis Ville Cales et ibidem in eadem moriebatur.

N. 112. Ibm.
RIcardus Dei gratia Rex Anglie et Francie et Dominus Hibernie Willielmo
Rykhill Salutem.
Sciatis quod quibusdam certis de causis assignavimus vos ad vos versus Villam
nostram Cales divertendos and colloquium cum Thoma Duce Gloucestr. ibidem
existente habendos, ipsumque de omnibus et singulis que vobis dicere sive
exponere voluerit audiendos, et nobis inde ac de toto facto vestro in hac part
in propria persona nostra ubicunque nos fore contigerit, sub sigillo vestro
distinct et aperte certificandos, Capitaneo nostro Ville predicte necnon
universis et singulis fidelibus et subditis nostris tenore presentium firmiter
in mandatis quod vobis in executione premissorum sint prout decet. In cujus rei
Testimonium has literas nostras fieri fecimus patentes.

Test meipso apud Wodstock xvii die Augusti, Anno Regni nostri xxi.
N. 113. Rot. parl. 21. Ric. 2. n. 89.
AS queux Juggements, Ordenances, et Establissements ensi faitz ordonez et
assentuz le dit Marsdi le xviii jour du Marce et toutz les estatutz,
establissements, Ordenances et Juggements faitz et renduz en dit Parliament, ou
a Coventre ou aillours per vertute et Authorite mesme le Parliament fermement
tenir et garder si bien les Seigneurs Espirituels Temporels et certain
Chevaliers pur Countes par auctorite de Parliament y esteants, mesme le Marsdi
furent Jurrez en presence du Roy sur la Croice de Cantarbirs, de les tenir and
sustenir et de esteer ove ycelles sanz fraud ou mal engyne solonc la form and
effet de les serments par eux faitz par devant come contenuz est en Roll de
Parliament. Des queux Seigneurs et Chevaliers les nous cy ensuant, Cestassavoir.

Lercevesque de Cantirbir. Lercevesque de Everwyk. Levesque de Londres.
Levesque de Wincestre. Levesque de Ely. Levesque de Norwic. Levesque de
Excestre Chancellor. Levesque de Roff. Levesque de Hereford. Levesque de Sarum.
Levesque de Nicholle. Levesque de St. Asaph. Levesque de St. David. Levesque de
Cestre. Levesque de Cicestre. Levesque de Landaffe. Labbee de Westminstre.
Labbee de St. Esmon. Le Duc d'Everwyk. Le Duc d'Albemarle. Le Duc d'Excestre.
Le Markys de Dorset. Le Count de Staff. Le Count de Sarum. Le Count de
Northumberland. Le Count de Gloucestre. Le Count de Westmerland. Le Count de
Wircestre. Le Count de Wilts Tresorer. Le Count de Suff. Le Sire de Gray de
Ruthin. Le Sire Ferrers de Groby. Le Sire de Lovell. Le Sire de Camoys.
Monsieur John Bussy. Monsieur Henr. Grene. Monsieur John Russell. Robert Teye.
ET apres cestes serements ensi faitz le Chanceller par Commandment du Roy
comanda overment que touz ceaux que furent Jurrez and vorroient tenir cestes
Juggements, Serements and Ordenances addresseroient en haut lour maynes
Dextres. Quele chose fait and assentuz par tout le People Dengleterre esteant
en presence du Roy.

N. 115. Rot. parl. 1. Hen. 4. n. 73.
JOefdy le xxiii jour d'Octobre Lercevesque de Canterbirs chargea de par le Roy
toutz les Seigneurs Espirituelx and Temporelx and toutz autres y esteantz sur
leur ligeance que ceo que lors serroit monstrez ou parlez illoques serroit
tenuz conseil and quil ne serroit ascunement discoverez a null vivant. Et puis
apres demandez fuist Cont de Northumb. par le Suertie du Roy and de toutz
estatz du Royalme coment leur semble que serroit ordeignez de Richard nadgaires
Roy pur luy mettre en saufe Guard sauvant sa vie, que le Roy voet que luy soit
sauvez en toutes maneres, sur quoi responduz fuest par toutz les Seigneurs
Espirituelx and Temporelx ent severalment examinez don't les noms si ensuent que
lour semble quil serroit mys en saufe guard and secre guard and en tiel lieu ou
null concours des Gentz y ad, and quil soit gardez par seures and sufficientz
persons, and que null quad est familiar du dit nadgaires Roy soit ascunement
entour sa person and que ceo soit fait en la plus secret manner que fire se
purra.

Les Noms des Seigneurs demandez and assentuz sur la Question suisdit cy
ensuant, Cest assavoir,
Lercevesque de Canterbirs. Lercevesque Deverwick. Levesque Londres. Levesque
Dely. Levesque de Nichol. Levesque de Norwiz. Levesque de Rouchestre. Levesque
de Sarum. Levesque d'Excestre. Levesque de Cicestre. Levesque de S. Asaph.
Levesque de Cestre. Levesque de St. David. Levesque de Landaff. Levesque de
Durham. Labbe de Westminstre. Labbe de St. Alban. Labbe de St. Austin. Labbe de
Bury. Labbe de St. Mary Deverwick. Labbe de Gloucestre. Labbe de Battle. Le
Prince. Le Duc Deverwick. Le Count de Arundell. Le Count de Warrwick. Le Count
de Stafford. Le Count de Northumberland. Le Count de Suff. Le Count de
Worcestre. Le Sire de Roos. Le Sire de Gray de Ruthyn. Le Sire de Cherlton. Le
Sir de Bardolf Le Sir de Willoyby. Le Sir de Furnivall. Le Sir de Ferrers. Le
Sir de Beamont. Le Sir de Berkely. Le Sir fitz Wauter. Le Sir de Mauley. Le Sir
de Scales. Le Sir de Morley. Le Sir de Burnell. Le Sir de Lovell. Le Sir de
Camoys. Le Sir de Seymore. Le Sir de Crombwell. Le Sir de Cobham. Monsieur
Henry Percy. Monsieur Richard Scrop. Le Sir fitz Hugh. Le Sir de Bergaveny. Le
Sir de Lomley. Le Baron de Graystock. Le Baron de Hilton. Monsieur Thomas
Erpingham Chamberlain. Monsieur Matthew Gurnay.
N. 116. Registrum Arundel part ima f. 550. b.
HEnricus Dei Gratia Venerabili in Christo patri Thome eadem Archiepiscopo
Cantuar. totius Angliae Primati Salutem.
Satis informati estis qualiter inimici nostri Franciae and alii sibi
adhaerentes facinora sua erga nos and ligeos nostros licet indirecte de Die in
Diem circumquaque ostendentes cum magna Class navium cum maxima multitudine
armatorum and Bellicorum supra mare congregati diversas villas super Costeris
Regni nostri Angliae invadere, ac nos and Regnum nostrum praedictum nec non
populum nostrum per terram et per mare destruere, and Ecclesiam Anglicanam
Ecclesiae sanctae contra malitiam ipsorum inimicorum opitulante Altissimo,
providere, per diversas Commissiones assign^^ vimus certos fideles nostros in
singulis Comitatibus regni nostri praedicti ad arraiandos and armari faciendos
omnes homines defensibiles, videlicet, quemlibet eorum juxta statum and
facultates suas, and eos arraiatos, armatos, and munitos in Arraiatione
hujusmodi teneri faciendos, sicque semper prompti sint and parati ad
proficiscendum in Defensionem Regni nostri praedicti, ubi, and quoties et
quando ex hostium incursibus periculum immineat, aut necesse fuerit aliquale.
Advertentes quodque vos and ceteri praelati ac totus Clerus dicti Regni, una
cum aliis fidelibus nostris ad resistendum dictis inimicis pro salvatione
sanctae Ecclesiae et ejusdem Regni omnes Abbates, Priores, Religiosos, et alias
personas Ecclesiasticas quascunque vestrae Dioceseos, quacunque dilatione
postposita, armari, arraiari, et armis competentibus, videlicet quemlibet eorum
juxta statum, possessiones, et facultates suas muniri. Et eos in Millenis,
Centenis, and Vintenis salvationem sanctae Ecclesiae et Regni nostri diligitis
nullatenus omittatis.

Test meipso apud Westmonast. 17. Die Januarii, Anno Regni nostri primo.
N. 117. in the Chapter House at Westminster. Confirmatio Treugarum inter
Richardum Angliae and Carolum Franciae Reges.
Roy de France, A tous ceulx qui ces presents lettres verront, Salut.
Comme l'an de grace Mil CCC. xx / iiii et xvi vivant lors feust nostre tres
chere et tres amez filz Richart nagueres Roy d'Engleterre que Dieu absoile,
certaines Treves Generales eussent estre prinses sur certain form enter nous
d'une part et nostre ditz filz d'autre, les queles Treves feurent solennelment
Jureez et promises a tenir voulons proceder de bonne foy n'entendismes oncques,
ne entendons venir aucunement contre ce qui en ceste matiere avons promis and
jure. Mais voulons tenir and fair tenir de notre part sans enfraindre les
dittes Trieves leur Temps durant ainsi comme promis and jure l'avons.

En Tesmoing de ce nous avons fait mettre a ces lettres nostre Seel. Done a
Paris le
Par le Roy en son Conseil. J. de Sanctis.

N. 118. Rot. parl. 16. Ric. 2. n. 20.
WIlliam Evesque de Cantirbirs baille avaunt une schedule en plein parliament
contenant ces responses a certaines Articles de luy demandez and en la form
and paroles qu'ensuent.

A notre Tresdout Seigneur le Roy en cest present Parliament son humble
Chappelein William Ercevesque de Cantirbirs Communes de Roialme en la quelle
Petition sont contenuz certeines Articles.

Cestassavoir, Primerement par la ou notre Seigneur le Roy, and toutz ses
Lieges de vient du droit and soleient de tout temps pursuer en la Court mesme
nostre Seigneur le Roy, pur recoverir leur presentmentz as Eglises, Provendres
and autres Benefices de seint Eglise as queux ils ont droit a presenter, la
connisance de plee de quele pursuit appartient soulement a Court mesme nostre
Seigneur le Roy d'ancien droit de sa Corone, use and approve en temps de toutz
ses progenitors Roys Dengleterre, and quant Jugge meant soit rendu en mesme sa
Court sur tiel plee and pursuit les Ercevesque, Evesques, and autres parsones
espiritueles quont institution de tiel benefice deinz leur Jurisdiction sont
tenuz and ount fait execution des tieux Juggements par mandement des Rois
defaitz and angutez and ses sages Lieges de son Conseil sanz on assent and
encontre sa volunte sustretz and esloynez horse de son Royalme and la voir and
tresor du mesme le Royalme, serroit en port et ensi mesme le Royalme destitut,
sibien du conseil come devoir au final destruction de mesme le Royalme, and
ensi la Corone d'Engleterre qui est si frank de toutz temp, quele and ceu nule
terene Soverein mes immediate susgit a Dieu en toutes chooses touchantes Regalie
de mesme la Corone, and a nule autre serroit submis Pape and les Leyes and
Estatutz du Royalme par luy defaitz et anientiz a sa volunte en perpetuell
destruction de la Sovereintie nostre Seigneur le Roy, sa Corone et sa Regalie
et tout son Royalme que Dieu defend, le dit Ercevesque fesant protestation quil
nest sa entention de dire ne affermer que notre dit seint Pere ne poet fair
translations des prelatz solonc la ley de seint Esglise, respoigne et dit qui
si ascuns Executions de tielx translations soient faitz d'aucuns prelatz de
mesme le Royalme queux

N. 118. Rendered in English. Rot. parl. 16. Ric. 2. n. 20.
WIlliam Archbishop of Canterbury brought a Schedule into a full Parliament
containing his Answers demanded to certain Articles, in the Form and Words
following.

TO our most redoubted Lord the King in this present Parliament William
Archbishop of Canturbury, to the petition brought into Parliament by the
Commons of the Kingdom, in which are contained certain Articles, that is to
say, first, whereas our Lord the King, and all his Lieges ought of Right, and
were wont in all times to proceed in the King's Court, to recover their
Presentations to Churches, Prebendaries, and other Benefices of holy Church, to
which they had right to present, the Cognizance of which Plea only belonged
England, and when Judgment was given in that Court upon such Plea the
Archbishops, Bishops, and other Persons Spiritual, who had Institution of such
Benefices within their Jurisdiction were bound, and had made Execution of such
Judgments by Command of the Kings for all the times aforesaid without
interruption; for a lay Person could not make such Execution, England had been
in peaceable Possession, as well in this King's Time, as the Times ^f all his
Progunitors, until this time. But of late diverse Processes have been made by
the holy Father the Pope, and Censures and Excommunications published against
certain English Bishops, for that they have made Execution of such Commands in
open Disheritance of the Crown, and Destruction of the King's Regalie, his Law,
and his whole Realm, if Remedy be not had.

To this Article the Archbishop making Protestation, that it was not his
Intention to say or affirm, that our Holy Father, the Pope, could not
Excommunicate a Bishop according to the England, or any other of the Kings
Lieges, because they made Execution of such Commands, he holds this is against
the King, as it is holden or affirmed in the Petition, and therefore he will
stand with the King, and with his Crown in the Case aforesaid, to his Power.

And also whereas it is said and contained in the same Petition, that Clamor
has been made, that the holy Father the Pope, had ordained and purposed to
Translate some Bishops of the Kingdom, some out of the Kingdom, and some from
one Church to another within, without the Assent and Knowledge of the King, and
without the Assent of the Prelate, which was England, which was so free in all
times, that it had no earthly Sovereign, but immediately subject to God, in all
things touching the Regalie thereof, and to no other: Should it be submitted to
the Pope, and the Laws and Statutes of the Kingdom by him be Defeated and
Annulled at his Pleasure, it would be to the perpetual Destruction of the Kings
Sovereignty, his Crown and Regalie, and of his whole Kingdom, which God forbid.

The said Archbishop making Protestation, that it is not his might be entered
on Record in the Parliament Role, which the King granted.

N. 119. Pat. 6. Ric. 2. Part. 1. m. 32.
REX Cancellario and Procuratoribus Universitatis Oxonii, qui nunc sunt, vel
qui pro tempore fuerint, Salutem.
Zelo fidei Christian cujus sumus and semper esse volumus Desensores, moti
salubriter and inducti volentes summo desiderio impugnatores predicta et quod
prefato Archiepiscopo et ejus mandatis licitis et honestis vobis in hac part
dirigendis pareatis prout decet. Damus autem Vicecomiti et Majori Oxoniensi pro
tempore existentibus ac universis et singulis Vicecomitibus, Majoribus,
Ballivis, Ministris, et aliis fidelibus et subditis nostris tenore presentium
in mandatis quod vobis in executione premissorum auxilientur, pareant et
intendant.

In cujus, etc. Test Rege apud Westmonasterium tercio-decimo die Julii.
Per Consilium.
FINIS.

