A JUST VINDICATION OF THE Church of England, FROM The unjust Aspersion of
Criminal SCHISM.

WHEREIN The nature of Criminal Schism, the diverse sorts of Schismatics, the
liberties and privileges of National Churches, the rights of Sovereign
Magistrates, the tyranny, extortion and Schism of the Roman Court, with the
grievances, Complaints, and opposition of all Princes and States of the Roman
Communion of old, and at this very day, are manifested to the view of the World.

By the Right Reverend Father in God, John Bramhall, Dr. in Divinity, and Lord
Bishop of Derry.

Pacian. in ep. ad Sempron. My name is Christian, my surname is Catholic. By
the one I am known from Infidels, by the other from Heretics and Schismatics.

LONDON, Printed for John Crook, at the sign of the Ship in S. Paul's
Churchyard, 1654*

THE Contents of the particular CHAPTERS.
CHAP. I.
THe Scope and sum of this Treatise. Page 1.
CHAP. II.
The stating of the question what is Schism, who are Schismatics, and what is
signified by the Church of England in this question. p. 6.
CHAP. III.
That the Separation from the Court of Rome was not made by Protestants, but
Roman Catholics themselves. p. 31
CHAP. IV.
That the King and Kingdom of England in their Separation from Rome did make
no new Law, but vindicate the ancient Law of the Land. page 54.
CHAP. V.
That the Britannick Churches were ever Exempted from all foreign
Jurisdiction, And so ought to continue. page 87
CHAP. VI.
That the King and Church of England h^d both sufficient authority and
sufficient grounds to withdraw their obedience from Rome. p. 1^6
CHAP. VII.
That all Kingdoms and Republics of the Roman Communion, Germany, France,
Spain, Portugal, Sicilly, Brabant, Venice, do the same thing in effect, when
they have occasion. p. 160
CHAP. VIII.
That the Pope and Court of Rome are many ways guilty of Schism, and the true
cause of the Dissensions of Christendom. Page 229
CHAP. IX.
An Answer to the Objections of the Romanists. p. 245
CHAP. X.
The Conclusion of the Treatise. p. 275.
Courteous Reader,
BY reason of the Author's Absence, and difficulty of the written Copy,
several Errata's have past the Press, which you are desired to amend, and
among the rest, these following.

Page 7. in Margin, Act. leg. Art. p. 13. line 17. Line, leg. kind, p. 13. in
marg. Manrit leg. Maurit p. 14 l 1 Schimse leg. Schism, p. 15 l. 15 Creed,
leg. Creeds, p. 18 l. ult. legemachies leg. logomachies, p. 21 l. 8. qui leg.
quis, p. 22 l. 4. teach for touch, p. 35 l. 8. these for those, p. 39. l. 31.
dele little, p. 42 in margin modo for nod^, p. 65 in margin 78 for 787, p. 67
Hes^is for Hosius in marg. p. 74 l. 1 sepultura for sepulchra, p. 79 l. 4
Asse^tie for Asserio, p. 85 l. 30 the for his Legates, p. 102 l. 25 as for or,
p. 113 in marg: lais for Caiet. p. 119 l. 2 novum for nonum, p. 121 l. 11 no
for had p. 140 for 138, p. 141 for 139, p. 144 for 142, p. 145 for 143, p. 914
for 149 p. 129 l. 23 chink for klink, and l. 25 despensations for
dispensations, p. 130 l. 10 Simoniae for Simonia, and l. 20 and 21 aliam and
nummam, for alium and nummum, p. 131 l. 1 conscivit for consuevit, p. 132 l. 16
singulta for singultu, and lin. 20 speculiem for speculum, p. 133 l. 28 papale
for papali, l. 29 rigar^ for rigore, line 30 praecipient for praecipiente, p.
138 l. 6. for [then the oath] read then that the oath, p. 142 l. 5 swear for
swear; And in the margent Hoops. for Harps. p. 153 l. 15 provisos for
provisors, And in the marg. theops, for the copy, p. 164 l. 10 deest [not] p.
165 l. 30 thar for that, p. 186 l 32 which leg. wherewith, p. 199 l. 14
Redimendum leg. Redimendam, p. 214 l. 4 leg. Placaert. l. 27 but for but, p.
217 in marg. Imprss. leg. Impress.

A JUST VINDICATION OF THE Church of England.
CHAP. I.
The Scope and sum of this Treatise.
1. NOthing has been hitherto, Nothing more probably objected to the Church of
England. then Schism.
or can hereafter be objected to the Church of England, which to strangers
unacquainted with the state of our affairs, or to such of our Natives as have
only looked upon the case superficially, has more Color of truth at first
sight then that of Schism, that we have withdrawn our obedience from the Vicar
of Christ, or at least from our lawful Patriarch, and separated our selves from
the Communion of the Catholic Church. A grievous accusation I confess, if it
were true: for we acknowledge that there is no salvation to be expected
ordinarily without the pale of the Church.

2. But when all things are Judiciously weighed in the Balance of right
reason, But nothing more unjustly.
when it shall appear that we never had any such foreign Patriarch for the
first six hundred years and upwards; And that it was a gross Violation of the
Canons of the Catholic Church to attempt after that time to obtrude any
foreign Jurisdiction upon us, That before the Bishops of Rome ever exercised
any Jurisdiction in Britain, they had quitted their lawful Patriarchate
wherewith they were invested by the authority of the Church, for an unlawful
Monarchy pretended to belong unto them by the institution of Christ; That
whatsoever the Popes of Rome gained upon us in after-ages without our own free
consent, was mere tyranny and usurpation. That our Kings with their Synods and
Parliaments had power to revoke, retract and abrogate whatsoever they found by
experience to become burdensome and insupportable to their Subjects; That they
did use in all ages, with the consent of the Church and Kingdom of England, to
limit and restrain the Exercise of Papal power, and to provide remedies against
the daily encroachments of the Roman Court, so a Henry the Eighth at the
reformation of the English Church, did but tread in the steps of his most
renowned Ancestors, who flourished whilst Popery was in its Zenith; And
pursued but that way which they had chalked out unto him, a way warranted by
the practice of the most Christian Emperors of old, and frequented at this day
by the greatest, or rather by all the Princes of the Roman Communion so often
as they find occasion. When it shall be made evident, that the Bishops of Rome
never enjoyed any quiet or settled possession of that power which was after
deservedly cast out of England, so as to beget a lawful prescription: And
lastly, that we have not at all separated our selves from the Communion of the
Catholic Church, nor of any part thereof, Roman or other, qua tales, as they
are such, but only in their innovations, wherein they have separated themselves
first from their Common Mother, and from the fellowship of their own Sisters; I
say, when all this shall be cleared, and the Schism is brought home and laid
at the right door, then we may safely conclude, that by how much we should turn
more Roman then we are, whilst things continue in the same condition; by so
much we should render our selves less Catholic, and plunge our selves deeper
into Schism whilst we seek to avoid it.

3. For the clearer and fuller discussion and demonstration whereof, I shall
observe this method in the Ensuing discourse.

First to state the question, The method observed in this Discourse.
and show what is Schism in the abstract, who are Schismatiques in the
Concrete; and what we understand by the Church of England in this question.

Secondly, I will lay down six grounds or propositions, every one of which
singly is sufficient to wipe away the stain and guilt of Schism from the
Church of England; how much more when they are all joined together? My six
grounds or Propositions are these: First, that Protestants were not the authors
of the late great separation from Rome, but Roman Catholics themselves, such
as in all other points were chief Advocates and Pillars of the Roman Church,
and so many, that the names of all the known dissenters might be written in a
little ring. Secondly, that in abandoning the Court of Rome, they did not make
any new Law, but only declare and restore the old Law of the Land to its
former Vigor; And vindicate that liberty left them as an inheritance by their
Ancestors, from the encroachments and usurpations of the Court of Rome.
Thirdly, that the ancient British and Scottish, or Irish Churches were
evermore exempted from the Patriarchal Jurisdiction of the Roman Bishops,
until Rome thirsting after an universal unlawful Monarchy, quitted their
lawful Ecclesiastical power; And so ought to continue free and exempted from
all foreign Jurisdiction of any pretended Patriarch for evermore, according to
the famous Canon of the General Council of Ephesus, which G^egory the Great
reverenced as one of the four Gospels. Fourthly, that though the Authors of
that Separation had not themselves been Roman Catholics, and though the Acts
or Statutes made for that end had not been merely declarative, but also
operative; And although Britain had not been from the beginning both de jure
and de facto exempted from Roman Jurisdiction, yet the King and Church of
England had both sufficient authority and sufficient grounds to withdraw their
obedience as they did. Fifthly, that all the Sovereign Princes and Republics
in Europe of the Roman Communion, whenever they have occasion to reduce the
Pope to reason, do either practice or plead for the same right, or both.
Sixthly, that the Papacy it self (qua t^lis) as it is now maintained by many,
with universality of Jurisdiction, or rather sole Jurisdiction, Iure divino,
with superiority above General Councels, with infallibility of Judgment, and
temporal power over Princes, is become by its rigid censures, and new Creeds,
and Exorbitant decrees, in a great part actually, and altogether causally,
guilty both of this and all the greater Schisms in Christendom.

3. Lastly, I will give a satisfactory answer to those objections, which those
of the Roman Communion do bring against us to prove us Schismatics.

CHAP. 2.
The stating of the question what is Schism, who are Schismatics, and what is
signified by the Church of England in this question.
EVery sudden passionate heat, Every passionate heat not Schism.
or misunderstanding, or shaking of Charity amongst Christians, though it were
even between the principal Pastors of the Church, is not presently Schism; As
that between Saint Paul and Barnabas in the Acts of the Apostles, who dare say
that either of them were Schismatics? or that between Saint Hierome and
Ruffinus, who charged one another mutually with Heresy. Or that between Saint
Chrysostom and Epiphanius, who refused to Join in prayers; Saint Chrysostom
wishing that Epiphanius might never return home alive; And Epiphanius wishing
that Saint Chrysostom might not dye a Bishop: both which things by the just
disposition of Almighty God, fell out according to the passionate and
uncharitable desires of these holy persons, who had Christian Charity still
radicated in their hearts, though the violent torrent of sudden passion did for
the time bear down all other respects before it. These were but personal heats,
which reflected not upon the public body of the Church* to which they were all
Ever ready to submit, and in which none of them did ever attempt to make a
party, by gathering disciples to himself, such a passionate heat is aptly
styled by the Holy Ghost, (...), Acts 15. (...) 39.
a paroxisme, or a sharp fit of a feverish distemper, which a little time,
without any other application, will infallibly remedy.

Secondly, Ecclesiastical quarrels of long continuance not always Schism.
every premeditated clashing of Bishops or Churches about points of doctrine or
discipline long and resolutely maintained, is not presently criminous Schism,
so long as they forbear to censure and condemn one another, and to expel one
another from their Communion, and are ready to submit to the determinations of
a general Council. Such were the contentions of the Roman and African Bishops
about rebaptization and appeals. It were hard to say, that those two blessed
Saints, Cyprian and Austine, and all those pious Prelates who joined with them
lived and dyed Schismatics. With this general truth agrees that of Doctor
Holden fully, Hen Holden Append. de Schis. Act. 1. page 484.
that when there is a mutual division of two parts or members of the mystical
body of the Church, one from the other, yet both retein Communion with the
Universal Church, which for the most part springs from some doubtful opinion,
or less necessary part of divine worship; quamcunque partem amplexus fueris
Schismaticus non audies, quippe quod universa ecclesia neutram damnarit,
whatsoever part one take he is no Schismatic, because the universal Church
has condemned neither part. Whether he hold himself to this principle, or
desert it, it is not my purpose here to discuss.

But this is much sounder doctrine then that of Mr. Knott, Infidelity unmasked,
Sect. 176. page 591.
that the parts of the Church cannot be divided one from another, except they
be divided from the whole, because these things which are united to one third,
are united also between themselves. Which error he would seem to have sucked
from Doctor Potter, Idem. page 516.
whom he either would not, or at least did not understand, That whosoever
professes himself to forsake the Communion of any one member of the body of
Christ, must confess himself consequently to forsake the whole. Of which he
makes this use* That Protestants forsake the Communion of the Church of Rome,
And yet do confess it to be a member of the body of Christ, therefore they
forsake the Communion of the whole Church. The answer is easy, that whosoever
does separate himself from any part of the Catholic Church as it is a part of
the Catholic Church, does separate himself from every part of the Catholic
Church, and consequently from the Universal Church, which has no existence but
in its parts.

But if one part of the Universal Church do separate it self from another part,
not absolutely, or in Essentials, but respectively in abuses and innovations,
not as it is a part of the Universal Church, but only so far as it is corrupted
and degenerated, it does still retein a Communion, not only with the Catholic
Church and with all Orthodox Members of the Catholic Church, but even with
that corrupted Church from which it is separated, except only in corruptions.
We may well enlarge the former ground, that if two particular Churches shall
separate themselves one from another, And the one retein a communion with the
Universal Church, and be ready to submit to the determinations thereof; And the
other renounce the Communion of the Universal Church, and contumaciously
despise the Jurisdiction and the decrees thereof; the former continues
Catholic, and the later becomes Schismatical. To show that this is our present
condition with the Church of Rome, is in part the Scope of this Treatise. They
have subjected Ecumenical Councels, which are the Sovereign Tribunals of the
Church, to the Jurisdiction of the Papal Court. And we are most ready in all
our differences to stand to the judgment of the truly Catholic Church and its
lawful Representative, a free general Council.

But we are not willing to have their virtual Church, that is the Court of Rome
obtruded upon us for the Catholic Church, nor a partial Synod of Italians for
a free general Council.

Thirdly, The Separaters may be free from Schism, and the other party guilty.
there may be an actual and criminous separation of Churches which formerly did
join in one and the same Communion; And yet the Separaters be innocent, and the
persons from whom the separation is made be nocent and guilty of Schism,
because they gave just cause of separation from them: It is not the separation,
but the cause that makes the Schism. Saint Paul himself made such a separation
among his disciples: Act. 19. 9.
And Timothy is expressly commanded, 1 Timothy 6. 5.
that if any man did teach otherwise, and consented not to wholesome words, even
to the words of our Lord Jesus Christ, and to the doctrine which is according
to godliness, (...), withdraw thy self, stand aloof, or separate thy self from
such persons. It is true, that they who first desert and forsake the Communion
of their Christian brethren, are Schismatics; but there is a moral defection
as well as local: It is no Schism to forsake them, who have first themselves
forsaken the common faith; wherein we have the confession of our adversaries,
Infid. unmasked, Chapter 7. Sect. 112. page 534.
They who first separated themselves from the primitive pure Church, and
brought in corruptions in faith, practice, Leiturgy, and use of Sacraments, may
truly be said to have been heretics, by departing from the pure faith; and
Schismatics, by dividing themselves from the external communion of the true
uncorrupted Church. It is no Schism to separate from heretics and
Schismatics in their heresy and Schism. This is all the Crime which they can
object to us. The Court of Rome would have obtruded upon us new articles of
faith, we have rejected them; They introduced unlawful rites into the
Leiturgies of the Church, and use of the Sacraments, we have reformed them for
our selves: They went about to violate the just liberties and privileges of
our Church, we have vindicated them. And for so doing they have by their
Censures and Bulls separated us and chased us from their communion; where lies
the Schism?

Fourthly, To withdraw obedience is not always criminous Schism.
to withdraw obedience from a particular Church, or from a lawful Superior, is
not always criminous Schism. Particular Churches may sometimes err, and
sometimes clash with the universal Church. Patriarchs and other subordinate
Superiors may err, and sometimes abuse their authority, sometimes forfeit
their authority, sometimes disclaim their authority, or usurp more authority
then is due unto them by the Canons. They would persuade us, Idem. page 481.
that obedience is to be yielded to a Church determining errors in points not
fundamental. But they confound obedience of acquiescence with obedience of
conformity. They forget willingly that we acknowledge not that they ever had
any lawful authority over us; par in parem non habet potestatem. Equals have no
Jurisdiction over their equals. The only difficulty is, that this seems to
make Inferiors Judges of their Superiors, the flock of their Pastor, the
Clergy of their Bishop, the Bishop of his Metropolitan, the Metropolitan of his
Patriarch; whereas in truth it only gives them a Judgment of discretion, and
makes them not to be Judges of their Superiors, but only to be their own
Judges, salvo moderamine inculpatae tutelae, to preserve themselves from sin or
heresy obtruded upon them under the specious pretenses of obedience and
Charity. This is not deficere, but prospicere; not to renounce due obedience to
their lawful Superiors, but to provide for their own safety.

Some things are so evident, that the Judgment of the Church or a Superior is
not needful. Some things have been already judged and defined by the Church,
and need no new determination.

If a Superior presume to determine contrary to the determination of the
Church, it is not rebellion but loyalty to disobey him.

When Eunomius the Arrian was made Bishop, Theod. l. 4. c. 14.
not one of his flock, rich or poor, young or old, man or woman, would
communicate with him in the public service of God, but left him to officiate
alone. When Nestorius did first publish his heresy in the Church in these
words, Cyril. ep. 18. ad Coelestinum.
If any man call the Virgin Mary the Mother of God, let him be accursed; the
people made a noise, run out of the Church, and refused ever after to
communicate with him. T^m. 1. Conc. lib. Romans P^^t. in Anast.
Valentinian the Emperor shunned the communion of Sixtus the third. Many of
the Roman Clergy withdrew themselves from the communion of Anastasius their
Bishop, because he had communicated with the Acatians. Rusticus and
Sebastianus, two of the Popes chiefest Deacons, did not only themselves
forbear the Communion of Vigilius, but drew with them a good part of the Church
of Rome, and other Occidental Churches.

It cannot be denied, Libel. ad mancit. apud Bar. to. 8. an. 590. nu. 39.
but that among many examples of this Line, some are reprehensible, not because
they did arrogate to themselves a liberty which they had not, but because they
abused that liberty which they had, either by mistaking the matter of fact, or
by presuming too much upon their own judgments.

To prevent which inconveniences, ^he eighth Synod decreed, not by way of
censure, but of caution, as a preservative from such abuses for the future,
that no Clerk before diligent examination and Synodical sentence, 8. Syn. c. 10.
should separate himself from the communion of his proper Bishop, no Bishop of
his Metropolitan, no Metropolitan of his Patriarch.

Then what is Schism? Schimse signifies a criminous scissure, What is single
Schism.
rent, or division in the Church, an Ecclesiastical Sedition, like to a mutiny
in an Army, or (...) in a State. Therefore such ruptures are called by the
Apostle indifferently (...), 1 Cor. 1. 10.
or (...), 1 Cor. 3. 3
Schisms or seditious segregations of an aggregate body into two opposite
parties: And there seems to me to be the same difference between heresy
properly so called, and Schism, which is between an inward sickness, and an
outward wound or ulcer. Heresy flows from the corruption of faith within;
Schism is an exterior breach, or a solution of continuity in the body
Ecclesiastic: Consider then by what nerves and Ligaments the body of the
Church is united and knit together, and by so many manner of ruptures it may be
schismatically rent or divided asunder.

The Communion of the Christian Catholic Church is partly internal, Wherein
internal Communion does consist.
partly external. The internal Communion consists principally in these things:
To believe the same entire substance of saving necessary truth revealed by the
Apostles, and to be ready implicitly in the preparation of the mind to embrace
all other supernatural verities when they shall be sufficiently proposed to
them; To judge charitably one of another; To exclude none from the Catholic
Communion and hope of salvation, either Eastern, or Western, or Southern, or
Northern Christians, which profess the ancient faith of the Apostles and
primitive Fathers, established in the first general Councels, and comprehended
in the Apostolic Nicene and Athanasian Creed, To rejoice at their well-doing,
To sorrow for their sins, To condole with them in their sufferings, To pray for
their constant perseverance in the true Christian Faith, for their reduction
from all their respective errors, and their reunion to the Church in case
they be divided from it, that we may be all one sheepfold under that one great
Shepherd and Bishop of our Souls. And lastly, to hold an actual external
Communion with them in Votis, in our desires, and to endeavor it by all those
means which are in our power. This internal Communion is of absolute necessity
among all Catholics.

External Communion consists first in the same Creeds or Symbols, Wherein
External Communion does consist.
or Confessions of Faith, which are the ancient badges or cognisances of
Christianity. Secondly, in the participation of the same Sacraments. Thirdly,
in the same external worship and frequent use of the same divine offices or
Leiturgies, or Forms of serving God. Fourthly, in the use of the same public
Rites and Ceremonies. Fifthly, in giving communicatory Letters from one Church
or one person to another. And lastly, in admission of the same discipline, and
subjection to the same supreme Ecclesiastical authority, that is, Episcopacy,
or a general Council; for as single Bishops are the heads of particular
Churches, so Episcopacy, that is, a general Council, or Ecumenical Assembly of
Bishops, is the head of the universal Church.

Internal communion is due always from all Christians to all Christians, even
to those with whom we cannot communicate externally in many things, whether
credenda, or agenda, External Communion may be suspended.
opinions or practices. But external actual communion may sometimes be
suspended more or less by the just censures of the Church, clave non errante.
As in the primitive times some were excluded a coetu participantium, Only from
the use of the Sacraments; others moreover, a coetu procumbentium, both from
Sacraments and Prayers; others also, a coetu audientium, from Sacraments,
Prayers, and Sermons: and lastly, some, a coetu fidelium, from the society of
Christians. And as external communion may be suspended, so likewise it may
sometimes be waved or withdrawn by particular Churches or persons from their
neighbor Churches or Christians in their innovations and errors. And
withdrawn.
Especially when they go about to obtrude new fancies upon others for
fundamental truths and old Articles of faith. Christian charity is not blind so
as not to distinguish the integral and essential parts of the body, from
superfluous wens and excrescences. The Canons do not oblige Christians to the
arbitrary dictates of a Patriarch, or to suck in all his errors, like those
servile flatterers of Dionysius the Sicilian Tyrant, who licked up his very
spettle, and protested it was more sweet then Nectar.

Neither is there the like degree of obligation to an exact Communion in all
Externals. There is not the like necessity of communicating in all Externals.
There is not so great conformity to be expected in Ceremonies, as in the
Essentials of Sacraments, (the Queens daughter was arrayed in a garment wrought
about, with diverse colors) nor in all Sacraments improperly and largely so
called by some persons at some times, as in Baptism and the holy Eucharist,
which by the consent of all parties are more general, more necessary, more
principal Sacraments. Neither is so exact an harmony and agreement necessary in
all the explications of articles of faith, as in the Articles themselves; nor
in superstructions, as in fundamentals, nor in Scholastical opinions, as in
catechetical grounds. Nor so strict and perpetual an adherence required to a
particular Church, as to the Universal Church; nor to an Ecclesiastical
constitution, as to a divine Ordinance, or Apostolical tradition. Humane
privileges may be lost by disuse, or by abuse. And that which was advisedly
established by humane authority, may by the same authority upon sufficient
grounds and mature deliberation be more advisedly abrogated. As the limits and
distinctions of Provinces and Patriarchates were at first introduced to comply
with the civil government, according to the distribution of the Provinces of
the Roman Empire, for the preservation of peace and unity, and for the ease and
benefit of Christians, so they have been often, and may now be changed by
Sovereign and Synodical authority, according to the change of the Empire, for
the peace and benefit of Christendom.

Neither the rules of prudence, Christian Communion ^mplies not unity in all
opinions.
nor the Laws of Piety, do oblige particular Churches or Christians to
communicate in all opinions and practices with those particular Churches or
Christians with whom they hold Catholic communion. The Roman and African
Churches held good communion one with another, whilst they differed both in
judgment and practice about rebaptization. Cannot one hold communion with the
Fathers that were Chiliasts, except he turn Millenary?

The British Churches were never judged Schismatical, because they differed
from the rest of the West about the observation of Easter. We see that all the
famous and principal Churches of the Christian World, Grecian, Roman,
Protestant, Armenian, Abissene, have their peculiar differences one with
another, and each of them among themselves. And though I am far from believing,
that when L^g^machies are taken away, their real dissensions are half so
numerous, or their errous half so ^oul, as they are painted out by their
adversaries; (aemulation was never equal Judge,) And though I hope Christ will
say, Come ye blessed, to many, whom fiery Zelots are ready to turn away with Go
ye cursed, yet to hold communion with them all in all things, is neither lawful
nor possible.

Yea, if any particular Patriarch, Prelate, Church, or Churches, how eminent
soever, shall endeavor to obtrude their own singularities upon others for
Catholic verities, or shall enjoin sinful duties to their Subjects, or shall
violate the undoubted privileges of their inferiors, contrary to the Canons
of the Fathers; It is very lawful for their own Subjects to disobey them, and
for strangers to separate from them. And if either the one or the other have
been drawn to partake of their errors, upon pretense of obedience or of
Catholic communion, they may without the guilt of Schism, nay they ought to
reform themselves, so as it be done by lawful authority, upon good grounds,
with due moderation, without excess, or the violation of Charity: And so as
the separation from them be not total, but only in their errors and
innovations; nor perpetual, but only during their distempers. As a man might
leave his fathers, or his brothers house being infected with the Plague, with a
purpose to return thither again so soon as it was cleansed. This is no more
then what Gerson has taught us in sundry places: Reg. mor. tit. p^aec. decal.
lib. de A. P. Cons. 14.
It is lawful by the Law of nature to resist the injury and violence of a Pope.
And if any one should convert his Papal dignity to be an instrument of
wickedness to the destruction of any part of the Church in temporalities, or
spiritualities; And if there appears no other remedy but by withdrawing ones
self from the obedience of such a raging power, until the Church or a Council
shall provide otherwise, it is lawful. ^e unit. eccl. cons. 10.
He adds further, That it is lawful to slight his sentences, yea to tear them
in pieces, and throw them at his head.

Bellarmine in effect says as much; Lib. 2. de Romans pont. c. 29.
As it is lawful to resist the Pope is he should invade our bodies; So it is
lawful to resist him invading of souls, or troubling the Commonwealth: And
much more if he should endeavor to destroy the Church; I say it is lawful to
resist him by not doing that which he commands, and by hindering him from
putting his will in execution. We ask no more. The Pope invaded our souls by
exacting new Oaths, and obtruding new Articles of faith. He troubled the
Commonwealth with his extorsions and usurpations: He destroyed the Church by
his provisions, reservations, exemptions, etc. we did not judge him, or punish
him, or depose him, or exercise any jurisdiction over him, but only defended
our selves, by guarding his blows, and repelling his injuries.

I may not here forget Saint Ignatius the Patriarch of Constantinople, whom
Pope John the eighth excommunicated for detaining the Jurisdiction of Bulgaria
from the Sea of Rome: But he disobeyed the Popes censures, as did also his
Successors, and yet was reputed a Saint after his death; whom Baronius
excuses in this manner, Bar tom. 10. an. 878.
Neque est ut qui ob litem hanc, etc. Let no man think that for his
controversy Ignatius was either disaffected to the Roman See or ungrateful,
seeing he did but defend the rights of his own Church, to which he was bound by
oath under pain of eternal damnation. If it be not only lawful but necessary
(in the Judgment of Baronius) yea necessary under the pain of damnation, for
every Bishop to defend the rights of his particular See, against the
encroachments and usurpations of the Roman Bishop, and to contemn his censures
in that case as invalid; How much more is it lawful, yea necessary for all the
Bishops in the world to maintain the right of their whole order, and of
Episcopacy it self, against the oppressions of the Court of Rome, which would
swallow up, or rather has swallowed up all original Jurisdiction, and the
whole power of the Keys. From this Doctrine Doctor Holden does not dissent,
Append. de Schismat. Art. 4. p. 516.
Non tamen is ergo sum, etc. Yet I am not he who dare affirm, that diseases and
bad manners and humors may not sometimes be mingled in any Society or body
whatsoever; yea I confess that such kinds of faults are sometimes to be
plucked up by the roots, and the over-luxurious branches to be pruned away with
the hook. It is true, he would not have this reformation in Essential Articles,
(we offered not to to^ch them) nor without the consent of lawful Superiors: we
had the free and deliberate consent of all our Superiors both Civil and
Ecclesiastical. A little after he adds, I confess also, that particular and
as it were private abuses, which have only infected some certain person^ or
Church, whether Episcopal or Archiepiscopal, or National, may be taken away by
the care and diligence of that particular Congregation: we attempted no more.

We see then what mere Schism is, The so^^^ of Schism.
a culpable rupture or breach of the Catholic communion; A loosing of the band
of peace, a violation of Christian charity, a dissolving of the unity and
continuity of the Church; And how this crime may be committed inwardly by
temerarious and uncharitable judgment; when a man thinks thus with himself,
Stand from me, for I am holier thou thou. By lack of a true Christian Sympathy
or fellow-feeling of the wants and sufferings of our Christian brethren: By not
wish^ng and desiring the peace of Christendom, and the reunion of the
Catholic Church. By not contributing our prayers and endeavou^s for the
speedy knitting together and consolidating of that broken bone. And outwardly
by rejecting the true badges and cognisances of Christians, that is, the
ancient Creeds. By separating a man's self without sufficient ground from other
Christians in the participation of the same Sacraments, or in the use of the
same divine Offices, and Leiturgies of the Church, and public worship and
service of Almighty God, or of the same common rites and ceremonies. By
refusing to give communicatory Letters to Catholic Orthodox Christians. By
not admitting the same discipline, and by denying or withdrawing our obedience
unlawfully from lawful Superiors, whether it be the Church universal, or
particular, essential or representative, or any single Superior, either of
divine or humane institution. By separating of themselves from the communion of
the Catholic Church, as the Novatians; or by restraining the Catholic Church
unto themselves, as the Donatists of old, and the Romanists at this day.

What the Catholic Church signifies, What the Catholic Church signifies.
was sufficiently debated between the Catholic Bishops, and the Schismatical
Donati^ts at the Colloquie of Carthage; Neither the Church of Rome in Europe,
nor the Church of Cartenna in Afrique, with the several Churches of their
respective communions, but the whole Church of Christ spread abroad throughout
the whole world. Collat. Carth. Col. 3.
Afrorum Christianorum catholicorum haec vox est, etc. This is the voice of the
African catholic Christians, we are joined in communion with the whole
Christian world; This is the Church which we have chosen to be maintained, etc.

Now the Catholic Church being totum homogeneum, Each member of the Catholic
Church is Catholic inclusively.
every particular Church, and every particular person of this Catholic
communion does participate of the same name inclusively, so as to be justly
called Catholic Churches, and Catholic Christians: But not exclusively, to
the prejudice or shutting out of other Churches, or other persons. As the King
of Spain styles himself, and is styled by others the Catholic King, not as if
he were an universal Monarch, or that there were no other Sovereign Princes in
the world but himself; So the Church of Rome is called a Catholic Church; and
the Bishop of Rome a Catholic Bishop: And yet other Churches and other
Bishops may be as Catholic, and more Catholic then they. I like the name of
Catholic well, but the addition of Roman is in truth a diminution.

Schism for the most part is changeable, Schism is changeable.
and varies its Symptoms as the Chamaelion colors. As it was said of the
Schism of the Donatists, that the passion of a disordered woman brought it
forth, Ambition nourished it, and covetousness confirmed it. And therefore it
is as hard a task to shape a coat for Schismatics, as for the Moon, which
changes its shape every day. The reason is, because having once deserted the
Catholic communion, they find no beaten path to walk in but are like men
running down a steep hill that cannot stay themselves, or like sick persons
that toss and turn themselves continually from one side of their bed to the
other, searching for that repose which they do not find: Hence it comes to
pass, that Schism is very rarely found for any long space of time without
some mixture of heretical pravity, And for the most part complicated with
heretical pravity,
it being the use of Schismatics to broach some new doctrine for the better
justification of their separation from the Church. Heretical errors in point
of faith do easily produce a Schism and Separation of Christians one from
another in the use of the Sacraments, and in the public service of God; As the
Arrian heresy produced a different doxology in the Church, The Orthodox
Christian saying. Glo^^ be to the Father, and to the Son, and to the holy
Ghost; And the heretical Arrian, Glory be to the Father by the Son, in the
Spirit. So of later times, the opinions of the lawfulness of detaining the cup
from the Laity, and of the necessity of adoring the Sacrament, have by
consequence excluded the Protestants from the participation of the Eucharist in
the Roman Church. Thus Heresy does naturally destroy unity and uniformity:
That is one Symptom of Schism.

But it destroys order also, and the due subordination of a flock to their
lawful Pastor, nothing being more common with heretics, then to contemn
their old guides, and to choose to themselves new teachers of their own
factions, and so erect an altar against an altar in the Church: That is another
principal branch of Schism. So a different faith commonly produces a
different discipline, and different forms of worship.

A man may render himself guilty of heretical pravity four ways. Four ways to
become heretical.
First, by disbelieving any fundamental article of faith, or necessary part of
saving truth, in that sense in which it was evermore received and believed by
the universal Church. Secondly, by believing any superstitious errors or
additions which do virtually by necessary and evident consequence subvert the
faith, and overthrow a fundamental truth. Thirdly, by maintaining lesser
errors obstinately after sufficient conviction. But because that consequence
which seems clear and necessary to one man, may seem weak and obscure to
another; And because we cannot penetrate into the hearts of men, to judge
whether they be obstinate, or do implicitly and in the preparation of their
minds believe the truth, it is good to be sparing and reserved in censuring
heretics for obstinacy. Fourthly, by maintaining lesser errors with
frowardness and opposition to lawful determinations. Though it be not in the
power of any Council, or of all the Councels in the world, to make that truth
fundamental which was not fundamental, or to make that proposition heretical in
it self, which was not heretical ever from the days of the Apostles; Or to
increase the necessary Articles of the Christian faith, either in number or
substance; yet when inferior questions not fundamental are once defined by a
lawful general Council, All Christians, though they cannot assent in their
judgments, are obliged to passive obedience, to possess their souls in
patience. And they who shall oppose the authority, and disturb the peace of the
Church, deserve to be punished as heretics.

To sum up all that has been said; Who are Catholics.
Whosoever does preserve his obedience entire to the universal Church, and its
representative a General Council, and to all his Superiors in their due order,
so far as by Law he is obliged, who holds an internal communion with all
Christians, and an external communion so far as he can with a good conscience,
who approves no reformation but that which is made by lawful authority, upon
sufficient grounds, with due moderation, who derives his christianity by the
uninterrupted line of Apostolical Succession, who contents himself with his
proper place in the Ecclesiastical body, who disbelieves nothing contained in
holy Scripture; and if he hold any errors unwittingly and unwillingly, does
implicitly renounce them by his fuller and more firm adherence to that
infallible rule, who believes and practices all those credenda and agenda,
which the universal Church spread over the face of the earth does unanimously
believe and practice as necessary to salvation, without condemning or censuring
others of different Judgment from himself in inferior questions, without
obtruding his own opinions upon others as Articles of faith, who is implicitly
prepared to believe and do all other speculative and practical truths, when
they shall be revealed to him: And in sum, Aug. l. 2. cont. cas^.
qui sententiam diversae opinionis vinculo non praeponit unit^^tis, that
prefers not a subtlety or an imaginary truth before the bond of peace; He may
securely say, My name is Christian, my surname is Catholic.

From hence it appears plainly, Who are Schisma^cks.
by the rule of contraries, who are Schismatiques; whosoever does uncharitably
make ruptures in the mystical body of Christ, or sets up altar against altar in
his Church, or withdrawes his obedience from the Catholic Church, or its
representative a General Council, or from any lawful Superiors, without just
grounds; whosoever does limit the Catholic Church unto his own sect,
excluding all the rest of the Christian world, by new doctrines, or erroneous
censures, or tyrannical impositions; whosoever holds not internal Communion
with all Christians, and external also, so far as they continue in a
Catholic constitution; whosoever not contenting himself with his due place in
the Church, does attempt to usurp an higher place, to the disorder and
disturbance of the whole body; whosoever takes upon him to reform without just
authority, and good grounds. And lastly, whosoever does wilfully break the line
of Apostolical Succession, which is the^very nerves and sinews of
Ecclesiastical unity and communion, both with the present Church, and with the
Catholic Symbolical Church of all successive ages; He is a Schismatic (qua
talis,) whether he be guilty of heretical pravity or not.

Now having seen who are Schismatics, for clearing the state of the Question,
Whether the Church of England be Schismatical or not, it remains to show in a
word, what we understand by the Church of England.

First, What is understood by the Church of England.
we understand not the English Nation alone, but the English Dominion,
including the British, and Scottish or Irish Christians; for Ireland was the
right Scotia major, and that which is now called Scotland, was then inhabited
by British and Irish, under the names of Picts and Scots.

Secondly, though I make not the least doubt in the world, but that the Church
of England before the reformation, and the Church of England after the
reformation, are as much the same Church, as a garden before it is weeded, and
after it is weeded, is the same garden; or a vine, before it be pruned, and
after it is pruned and freed from the Luxuriant branches, is one and the same
vine: yet because the Roman Catholics do not object Schism to the Popish
Church of England, but to the reformed Church, Therefore in this question, by
the Church of England, we understand that Church which was derived by lineal
succession from the British, English, and Scottish Bishops, by mixed
ordination* as it was legally established in the days of King Edward the
sixth, and flourished in the raigns of Queen Elizabeth, King James, and King
Charles of blessed memory, and now groans under the heavy yoke of persecution,
whether this Church be Schismatical by reason of its secession and separation
from the Church of Rome, and the supposed withdrawing of its obedience from the
Patriarchal Jurisdiction of the Roman Bishop? As for other aspersions of
Schism, of lesser moment, we shall me^^ with them in our answers to their
Objections.

CHAP. III.
That the separation from Rome was not made by Protestants, but by Roman
Catholics themselves.
THis being the state of the Question, Roman Catholics first authors of the
separation from Rome.
I proceed to examine the first ground or proposition: That the English
Protestants were not the first authors of the separation, but principal Roman
Catholics, great Advocates in their days, and Pillars of the Roman Church.
Whether the Act or Statute of Separation were operative or declarative,
creating new right, or manifesting, or restoring old right, whether the power
of the Roman Court in England was just or usurped, absolute and immutable, or
conditional and changeable; whether the possession thereof was certain and
settled, or controverted and unquiet, (though no man thoroughly versed in our
Laws and Histories can reasonably doubt of these things,) This is undeniably
true, that the secession and substraction of obedience was not made by our
reformers, or by any of their friends or favorers, but by their capital
Enemies and persecutors, by Zelots of the Roman Religion.

And this was not done secretly in a corner, but openly in the sight of the
Sun, disputed publicly, and determined beforehand, in both our Universities,
which after long deliberation, Act. and Mon p. 965. R^gist. epist. Vni. Oxon.
ep. 210.
and much disputation, done with all diligence, zeal and conscience, made this
final resolution and profession, Tandem in hanc sententiam unanimiter
convenimus, ac concordes fuimus, videlicet Romanum Episcopum majorem aliquam
Iurisdictionem non habere sibi a deo collatam in sacra Scriptura in hoc Regno
Angliae, quam alium quemvis externum Episcopum. That the Roman Bishop had no
greater Jurisdiction within the Kingdom of England confe^red upon him by God
in holy Scripture, then any other foreign Bishop. After this the same was voted
and decreed in our National Synods; Sac. Syn. an. 1530. et an. 1532.
and lastly, after all this, received and established in full Parliament, by
the free consent of all the Orders of the Kingdom, with the concurrence and
approbation of four and twenty Bishops, and nine and twenty Abbats, then and
there present. To pass by many other Statutes, take the very words of one of
the main Acts it self, That England is an Empire, 24 Hen. 8. c. 12. Romanists
first gave the King the title of Head of the Church.
and that the King as Head of the body politic consisting of the spirituality
and temporalty, has plenary power to render final Justice for all matters,
etc. First, England is, that is, originally, not shall be by virtue of this
Act; what is it? an Empire. If it be an Empire, then the Sovereigns thereof
have the same privileges and prerogatives within their own Dominions, which
the old Emperors had in theirs. If the King be head of the body politic
consisting of the spi^ituality and temporalty, then in England the King is the
political head of the Clergy, as well as of the Laity. So he ought to be, and
not he only, but all the Sovereign Princes throughout the World, by the very
Law of Nature.

What becomes now of that grand exception against Protestants, for making their
King the Head or Sovereign Governor (for these two are convertible terms) of
the English Church or Clergy? A title first introduced by Roman Catholics, and
since waved and laid aside by Protestants, not so much for any malignity that
was in it, as for the ill sounds sake, because it seemed to entrench too much
upon the just right of our Savior, and being subject to be misunderstood, gave
offense to many well affected Christians. And what does this Law say more then
a great Cardinal said not long after? One that was as near the Papacy as any
that ever mist it, and was thought to merit the Papacy as well as any that had
it in his days. I mean Cardinal Pool in his Book de concilio, Hoc munus
Imperatoribus Christi fidem professis Deus ipse Pater assignavit, Resp. ad
quaest. 74.
at Christi filii dei vica^ias parts gerant, God the Father has assigned this
office to Christian Emperors, that they should act the part of Christ the Son
of God, (in General Councels.) And yet more fully in his answer to the next
question, R^sp. ad qu. 75.
Pontifex Romanus ut caput sacerdotale Vicarias Christi very capitis parts
gerit, at Caesar ut caput regale, etc. The Pope as a Priestly head does execute
the Office of Christ the true Head; but we may also truly say, that the
Emperor does execute the office of Christ as a Kingly Head. And so he
concludes; Christ said of himself, All power is given me both in heaven and
earth: In utraque ergo potestate, etc. Therefore we cannot doubt but Christ
has his Deputies for both these powers; The Pope in the Church, the Emperor
in the Commonwealth. Thus writes the Popes own Legate to his Brother Legates
in the Tridentine Council, when he desired to favor his Master as much as he
could.

But I proceed to our Statute; The King of England has, that is, already in
present, by the fundamental constitution of the Monarchy; not shall have from
henceforth, plenary power, without the License or help or concurrence of any
foreign Prelate or Potentate; ple^ary, not solitary: To render final Justice,
that is, to receive the last appeals of his own Subjects, without fear of any
review from Rome, or at Rome, for all matters Ecclesiastical and temporal;
Ecclesiastical by his Bishops, Temporal by his Judges. There is great
difference between a Kings administering Justice in Ecclesiastical causes by
himself, and by his Bishops. Listen to the Canon of the Milevitan Council:
Conc. Mil. 2.
It has pleased the Synod, that what Bishop soever shall request of the
Emperor the cognizance of public judgment (in some cases) he be deprived of
his honor. But if he petition to the Emperor for Episcopal judgment, (that
is, to make Bishops his Deputies or Commissioners to hear it) it should ^not
prejudice him. They forbid a Bishop of his own accord, in these days, and in
some cases to make his first address for Justice to a secular Magistrate; But
they do not forbid him to appear before a secular Magistrate being cited; And
they allow him in all cases though of pure Ecclesiastical cognizance, to seek
to a Sovereign Prince for an equal indifferent hearing by Bishops delegated and
authorized by him.

The testimony of this Statute is so clear and authentic in it self, that it
need not be corroborated with any other acts of the same kind. Yet three things
are urged against it. First, that Henry the Eighth at this time was a favourer
of the Protestants. Secondly, that he cared not for Religion, but looked only
to the satisfaction of his own humors and lusts. Thirdly, that to withhold due
obedience, is as Schismatical as to withdraw it; And that the reformed Church
of England may be innocent of the one, and yet guilty and accessory to the
other.

To the first exception I reply, Henry the 8th no friend to the Protestants.
That Henry the eighth was so far both then and long after from being a friend
or favourer of the Protestants, that he was a most bitter persecutor of them.
After this the Pope himself, (though he was not well pleased to lose so sweet a
morsel as England was) so well approved of Henry the Eighth's rigorous
proceedings against the Protestants, that he proposed him to the Emperor as a
pattern for his imitation. Hist. Conc. Trid.
Insomuch as some strangers in those days coming into England, have admired to
see one suffer for denying the Popes Supremacy, and another for being a
Protestant at the same time. So though they looked diverse ways, yet like
Sampsons Foxes each had his firebrand at his tail.

But to clear this point home, there needs no more but to view the order of the
Statutes made concerning Religion and Ecclesiastical Jurisdiction in the reign
of that King.

The Act for no person to be cited out of his own Diocese, 23. H. 8.
except in certain cases. The Act prohibiting all appeals out of England to
the Court of Rome. 24. H. 8.
The Act for the submission of the Clergy to the King. 25. H. 8.
The Act for payment of first fruits to the Crown: 26. H. 8.
An Act for Exoneration from all exactions of the Court of Rome. The Act
declaring the King to be Supreme Head of the Church of England: An Act against
Popish Bulls, Faculties, and Dispensations: And the Act for utterly
extinguishing the usurped authority of the Roman Bishop were all* or the most
of them enacted before the eight and twentieth year of Henry the Eighth. 28. H.
8.
And if my notes fail me not; (for we are chased from our books) they were all
received and established in Ireland the very same year, the Lord Gray being
then Lord Deputy of Ireland. All this while there were no thoughts of any
reformation; All this while the Protestants found little grace from King Henry;
nor indeed throughout his whole reign, ordinarily.

As for the suppression of Monasteries in his time, The Authors op^nion of
Monasteries.
I shall deal clearly, and declare what I conceive to be the judgment of
moderate English Protestants concerning that Act. First, we fear that
covetousness had a great oar in the boat, and that sundry of the principal
Actors had a greater aim at the goods of the Church, then at the good of the
Church: Or otherwise why did they not (as they pretended and gave out) preserve
the spoils of the cloisters for public and charitable uses, as the foundation
of Hospitalls, and freeing the common Wealth from a great part of its necessary
charges? Supplication of beggars.
why did they not restore the appropriated, (or as we call them truly
impropriated tithes) to the Incumbents and lawful owners, who had actual cure
of souls? from whom they had been unjustly withheld, especially considering
that in some parishes the poor vicars stipend was not sufficient to maintain a
good Plowman. The Monks pretended that they had able members to discharge the
cure of souls, and what difference whether the Incumbent were a single person,
or an aggregated body? But what mere Laymen could pretend is beyond my
understanding.

Secondly, we examine not whether the abuses which were then brought to light
were true or feined; but this we believe, that foundations which were good in
their original institution ought not to be destroyed for accessory abuses; or
for the faults of particular persons. So we should neither leave a Sun in
heaven, for that has been adored by Pagans; nor a spark of fire, or any
eminent creature, how beneficial soever upon earth, for they have all been
abused. Therefore Licurgus is justly condemned, because out of an hatred to
drunkenness he cut down all the Vines in Sparta; whereas he should have brought
the fountains of water nearer.

Thirdly, when the Clergy in a Kingdom are really, (and not upon the feined
pretenses of Sacrilegious persons) grown to that excessive Grandeur, that they
quite overballance the Laity, and leave the common wealth, neither sufficient
men nor sufficient means to maintain it self, it is lawful by prudent laws to
restrain their further growth, as our Ancestors and all the nations of Europe
have done by prohibiting new foundations of Religious houses, and the
alienation of Lands to the Church, without special License; As we shall see
hereafter. And if the excess be so exorbitant, that it is absolutely and
evidently destructive to the constitution of the common wealth, it is lawful
(upon some conditions and cautions not necessary to be here inserted) to prune
the superfluous branches and to reduce them to a right temper and aequilibrium,
for the preservation and well-being of the whole body Politic. It has been
always held lawful in some cases to alienate some things, that had formerly
been given to the Church, as for the redemption of Christian Captives, for the
sustenance of poor Christians, who are living Temples, in the days of famine,
and for preservation of the Church it self from demolition; But Eradication, to
pluck up good institutions root and branch, is not reformation which we
profess, but destruction.

To conclude this digression. So as Monasteries were moderated in their number,
and in their revenues; So as the Monks were restrained from meddling between the
Pastor and his flock, that is the Bark and the Tree, as it was of old, Monachus
in oppido, Piscis in arido, a Monk in a great town was thought like a little
fish upon dry land. So as the abler sort, who are not taken up with higher
studies or weightier employments, were inured to bestow their spare hours from
their devotions in some profitable labor for the public good, that idleness
might be stripped of the cloak of contemplative devotion. So as the vow of
perpetual coelibate were reduced to the form of our English Universities, so
long a fellow, so long unmarried, or of the Canonesses and Biggins, on the
other side the Seas, which are no longer restrained from wedlock then they
retain their places or habits; So as their blind obedience were more
enlightened, and secured by some certain rules and bounds. So as their mock
poverty (for what is it else to profess want and swim in abundance,) were
changed into a competent maintenance; And lastly, So as all opinion of
satisfaction and supererogation were removed, I do not see why monasteries
might not agree well enough with reformed devotion.

So then Henry the eighth at the time of his secession from Rome, Henry the
8th. no friend to Protestants* 31. Hen. 8.
and long after, even so long as he lived, was neither friend nor favourer of
the ensuing reformation, nor ordinarily of Protestants in their persons. As may
yet more manifestly appear by that cruel statute of the Six Articles; which he
made after all this in the one and thirtieth year of his reign as a trap to
catch the Lives of the poor Protestants. A Law both writ in blood, and
executed in blood.

But suppose that Henry the eighth had been a friend to Protestants, Much less
those who joined with him in the separation from Rome.
what shall we say to all the Orders of the Kingdom? what shall we say to the
Synods, to the Universities, to the four and twenty Bishops, and nine and
twenty Abbats, who consented to this Act? were all these Schismatics? were
Heath, Bonner, Tonstall, Gardener, Stokesley, Thurleby, etc. all Schismatics?
If they were, then Schismatics were the greatest opposers of the reformation,
the greatest enemies of the Protestants, and the greatest pillars and upholders
of the Roman religion. These were they that granted the Supremacy to King Henry
the eighth, Archbishop Warham told him it was his right to have it before the
Pope. Act. and Mon. an. 1510. Conc. Tonst. et Longlands.
These were they that preached up the Supremacy of the King at S. Paul's
Cross, and defended his Supremacy in printed books. These consented to the
Acts of Parliament for his Supremacy, and the extinguishing of the power of the
Roman Bishop in England. These were they who helped to make the oath of
Supremacy, and took it themselves, and all others of any note throughout
England, except only Fisher Bishop of Rochester, and Sir Thomas Moor, Hist.
aliquot mart. et edit. an. 1550. Apol. sac. Reg. pro jur. fidel. p. 125.
who were in prison before it was enacted for opposing the Kings Marriage, and
the succession of his Children to the Crown, after it was ordained in
Parliament. And wise men have thought that the former had taken it, if he had
not been retarded by the expectation of a Cardinals hatt, which was come as far
as Calice.

Or rather what shall we say to the whole body of the Kingdom, England
unanimous in casting out the Pope.
if we may believe the testimony of Stephen Gardener Bishop of Winchester, a
learned person of very near relation to King Henry, and in all other things a
great Zelot of the Roman Catholic party, in his book of true obedience,
published with a Preface to it made by Bishop Bonner. de ver^^ obed.
Thus he, No foreign Bishop has authority among us; All sorts of people are
agreed with us upon this point with most steadfast consent, that no manner of
person bred or brought up in England has ought to do with Rome. A full
confession of an able adversary, to which I see not what can be excepted,
unless it be said of him, as it was of Aeneas Sylvius, Stephanus probavit,
Wintoniensis negavit, Doctor Gardener approved it, but the Bishop of
Winchester retracted it. Admit it were so, as it was indeed, what is that to
the steadfast unanimous consent of the whole Kingdom? which appears not only
from hence, but from Tonstal's Epistle to Cardinal Pool, and Bekenshaws
Commentary of the Sovereign and absolute power of Kings; C^ted by King James in
his triplici modo triplex cun^us print. an. 1609. p. 125. and Ireland.
As likewise of the difference between Kingly and Ecclesiastical power. And
lastly and principally, by a book set forth by the English Convocation, called,
The Institution of a Christian man. And to show yet further, that Ireland was
unanimo^^ ^^erein with England, we find in the three and thirtieth year of
Henry the eighth, which was before all thoughts of reformation, not the Irish
only, as the O Neales, Council book of Ireland 32, 33, 34. of Henry 8th.
O Relies, O Birnes, O Carols, etc. but also the English Families, as the
Desmonds, Barries, R^ches, Bourks, whose posterities do still continue Zealous
Romanists, did make their submissions by Indenture to Sir Anthony Sellenger,
then chief Governor of that Kingdom, wherein they acknowledged King Henry to
be their Sovereign Lord, and confessed the Kings Supremacy in all causes, and
utterly renounced the Jurisdiction of the Pope. So the Bishop of Winchester
might well say, that there was an Universal and steadfast consent in the
separation from Rome.

The second exception weighes so little, The pretended Crimes of Hen. 8. no
blemish to the Reformation.
that it scarce deserves an Answer. Admitting, but not granting, that any or
all the calumnies of that party against Henry the eighth were true, whereof
diverse by their impossibility and by the contradiction of their authors, do
carry their own condemnation written in their foreheads; And although Henry the
eighth had been our Reformer, as he was not, yet all this would signify
nothing as to this present question. God does often good works by ill agents.
Iehu's heart was not upright toward the Lord, yet God used him as an
Instrument to reform his Church, and to punish the worshippers of Baal. We have
heard of late of an aggregative treason, not known before in the world, But
never until now of an aggregative Schism. The addition of twenty sins of
another nature cannot make that to be Schism which is not Schism in it self.
We are sorry for his sins under a condition, that is, in case they were true,
which for part of them we have no great Reason to believe; But we are
absolutely without condition glad of our own liberty. The truth is, God
Almighty did serve himself of a most unlawful dispensation granted by the Pope
to King Henry the eighth, to marry his brothers Wife, as an occasion of this
great work. Holins. in Hen. 8. p. 923. Hall. 22. H. 8. p. 199.
I say unlawful, because it was after judged unlawful by the Universities of
England, France, Italy, after mature deliberation, and some of them upon oath,
and by above an hundred foreign Doctors of principal reputation for learning.
The coals of the Kings suspicion were kindled in Spain, France, and Flanders,
no enemies to the Pope, and blown by Cardinal Wolsey for sinister ends; But it
was Cranmer that struck the nail home. And God disposed all things to his own
glory.

To their third exception, That to withhold obedience is Schismatical as well
as to withdraw it. I answer first, that they cannot accuse us as accessaries to
Schism, until they have first condemned their own great Patrons, Champions and
Confessors for the principal Schismatics. Did Roman Catholics themselves
find right and sufficient reason to turn the Pope out of England at the
foredoor, in fair daylight, as an intruder and usurper? And do they expect that
Protestants who never had any relation to him, should let him in again by
stealth at the backdoor?

Turpius ejicitur quam non admittitur hospes. It is true, Queen Mary afterward
gave him houseroom again in England for a short time. But he raged so
extremely, and made such bonefires of poor innocent Christians in every corner
of the Kingdom, that it is no marvail if they desired his room rather then his
company.

I have often wondered how any rational man could satisfy himself so as to make
the severity of our Laws, Our Laws are not cruel against Roman Catholics.
or the rigor of our Princes since the reformation, a motive to his revolt
from our Church. Surely the Inquisition was quite out of his mind; but I meddle
not with foreign affairs. He might have considered, that more Protestants
suffered death in the short Reign of Queen Mary, Men, Women, and Children, then
Roman Catholics in all the longer Reigns of all our Princes since the
Reformation put together. The former by fire and faggot, a cruel lingering
torment, ut sentirent se mori, that they might feel themselves to die by
degrees. The other by the gibbet, with some opprobious circumstances, to render
their sufferings more exemplary to others. The former merely and immediately
for Religion, because they would not be Roman Catholics, without any the least
praetext of the violation of any political Law* The latter not merely and
immediately for Religion, because they were Roman Catholics, for many known
Roman Catholics in England have lived and dyed in greater plenty, and power,
and reputation in every princes reign, since the Reformation, then an English
Protestant could live among the Irish Roman Catholics, since their
insurrection. If a subject was taken at Mass it self in England, which was
very rare, it was but a pecuniary mulct. No stranger was ever questioned about
his religion. I may not here omit King James his affirmation, Apol. P. 153:
That no man in his Reign, or in the Reign of his predecessor Queen Elizabeth,
did suffer death for conscience sake or Religion.

But they suffered for the violation of civil Laws, as either for not
acknowledging the political Supremacy of the King in Ecclesiastical causes over
Ecclesiastical persons, which is all that we assert; which the Roman Catholics
themselves in Henry the Eighth's days did maintain as much, or perhaps more
then we. We want not the consent of their own Schools, or the concurrent
practice of Kings and Parliaments of their own communion, In Artic. 37. p. 419,
420, etc.
As Sancta Clara does confess, Valde multi doctores, etc. very many Doctors
do hold, that for the public benefit of the Commonwealth Princes have
Jurisdiction in many causes otherwise being of Ecclesiastical cognizance by
positive Divine Law, and by the Law of Nature. And though himself seem rather
to adhere to others who ascribe unto them merely a Civil power, yet he
acknowledges with the stream of Schoolmen, that by their Sovereign Office by
accident, and indirectly for the defense of the Commonwealth, and the
preservation of public Justice and peace, they have great power over
Ecclesiastical persons in Ecclesiastical causes, in many cases; As they may
command Bishops to dispose their spiritual affairs to the peace of the
Commonwealth, They may remove the froward from their offices, They may defend
the oppressed Clergy from the unjust oppressions of Ecclesiastical Judges, etc.
which he confesses to be as much as our Article sets forth. What the
practice of other Kings and Princes is herein, we shall see more fully when I
come to handle my fifth Proposition; Or else for returning into the Kingdom so
qualified with forbidden orders, as the Laws of the Land do not allow. The
State of Venice does not, the Kingdom of France has not abhorred from the like
Laws. Or lastly, for attempting to seduce some of the Kings Subjects from the
Religion established in the Land. In all these cases besides religion, there is
something of Election; He that loves Danger does often perish in it. The truth
is this, An hard Knott must have an heavy Mall; Dangerous and bloody positions
and practices produce severe laws. No Kingdom is destitute of necessary
remedies for its own conservation; If all were of my mind, as I believe many
are, I could wish that all Seditious Opinions, and over rigorous statutes, with
the memory of them, were buried together in perpetual oblivion. I hold him
scarce a good Christian that would not cast on one spade full of earth toward
their interrement; Pardon this digression, if it be one, Cruelty is a Symptom
of Schism.

Secondly, Though the first separaters were Schismatics, we are free.
I answer that though the Romanists could be contented to brand their own
friends for the principal Schismatics, yet they shall never be able to prove
us accessaries, or fasten the same Crime upon us, who found the separation made
to our hands, who never had any thing to do with Rome, who never ought them any
Service but the reciprocal duty of love, who never did any act to oblige us to
them, or to disoblige us from them; indeed it were something, if they could
produce a patent from Heaven of the Popes Vicariate General under Christ over
all Christians; (But that we know they can never do) Or but so much as an old
Canon of a general Council that did subject us to their Jurisdiction, So as
the same were neither lawfully revoked, nor their power forfeited by abuse, nor
quitted by themselves, until then they may withdraw their charge of Schism.

Nay yet more, though they could justify their pretended title, yet we acting
nothing, but preserving all things in the same condition we found them, are not
censurable as formal Schismatics, whilst we err invincibly, or but probably,
and are implicitly prepared in our minds, to obey all our just Superiors, so
far as by law we are bound, whenever we shall be able to understand their
right.

There have been many Schisms in the Roman Church it self. Sometimes two
Popes, sometimes three Popes at a time. One Kingdom s^bmitted to one, this to
another, that to a third, every one believing him to whom he submitted to be
the right Pope, and every one ready to have submitted to the right Pope, if
they had known who he was. Tell me, were all those that submitted to Antipopes
presently Schismatics? That were too hard a censure. The Antipopes themselves
were the Schismatics, and the Cardinals that Elected them, and all these who
supported them for avaritious, or ambitious or uncharitable ends.

We may apply to this purpose that which St. Austin said concerning Haereticks,
Qui sententiam suam quamvis falsam atque perversam nulla pertinaci animos^^ate
defendit, Aug. Epist. 162.
praesertim quam non audacia praesumptionis suae pepererit, sed a seductis et
in errorem lapsis parentibus accepit; quaerit autem cauta solicitudine
veritatem, c^rrigi paratus cum invenerit, n^quaquam est inter haereticos
deputandus. He that defends not his false opinion with Pertinacious animosity,
having not invented it himself, but learned it from his ^rring parents; If he
inquire carefully after the truth, and be ready to embrace it, and to correct
his errors when he finds them, he is not to be reputed an Heretic.

If this be true in the case of Heresy, it holds much more strongly in the
case of Schism, and especially that Schism which is grounded only upon Humane
constitutions. He that disobeys a Lawful Superior through invincible
ignorance, whom he deserted not himself, but found him cast off by his parents,
if he be careful to understand his duty, and ready to submit so far as in
justice he is bound, he is not to be reputed a Schismatic. If men might not be
saved by a general and implicit repentance, they were in a woeful condition,
Psalm. 19. 12.
for who can tell how often he offends? Cleanse thou me from my secret faults.
And if by general and implicit repentance, why not by general and implicit
faith? why not by general and implicit obedience? So as they do their
uttermost endeavors to learn their duties, and are ready to conform themselves
when they know them. God looks upon his creatures with all their prejudices,
and expects no more of them then according to the talents which he has given
them. If I had books for that purpose, I might have cited, many Laws and many
Authors to prove that the final separation from Rome was made long before the
reformation of the Church of England. But it is a truth so evident and so
undeniable by all these who understand our affairs, that I seem to my self to
have done overmuch in it already.

I do expect that it should be urged by some that there was a double separation
of the Church of England from Rome; Protestants no authors of the separation
from the Church of Rome.
The former from the court of Rome; The second from the Church of Rome; The
former in point of discipline; The latter in point of Doctrine; The former made
in the days of Henry the Eighth; The other in the days of Edward the sixth.
That if the Protestants were not guilty of the former, yet certainly they were
guilty of the later.

To this I give two answers: first that the second separation in point of
Doctrine does not concern this question, Whether the Church of England be
Schismatical, but another whether the Church of England be Haereticall, or at
least Heterodox, (for every error does not presently make an haeresy) which
cannot be determined without discussing the particular differences between the
Church of Rome and the Church of England. It is an undeniable principle to
which both parties do yield firm assent, Mr. Knot Inf. number. p. 534.
that they who made the first separation from the primitive pure Church, and
brought in corruptions in faith, Leiturgy, or use of the Sacraments, are the
guilty party. Yea though the separation were not local but only moral, by
introducing errors and innovations, and making no other secession: This is the
issue of our controversy. If they have innovated first, then we are innocent,
and have done no more then our duties. It is not the separation, but the cause
that makes a Schismatique.

Secondly I answer, that as Roman Catholics (not Protestants) were the authors
of the Separation of England from the Court of Rome, so the Court of Rome it
self (not Protestants) made the Separation of England from the communion of the
Church of Rome, by their unjust and tyrannical censures, excommunications, and
interdictions, which they thundered out against the Realm, for denying their
spiritual Sovereignty by divine right, before any reformation made by
Protestants. It was not Protestants that left the communion of the Church of
Rome, but the Court of Rome that thrust all the English Nation both Protestants
and Roman Catholics together out of their doors, and chased them away from
them, when Pope Paul the third excommunicated and interdicted England, Bulla
Pauli 3. apud Sander. de Schism. l. 1. p. 109.
in the days of Henry the eighth, before ever any reformation was attempted by
the Protestants. In that condition the Protestants found the Church and Kingdom
of England in the days of Edward the sixth. So there was no need of any new
separation from the communion of the Church of Rome, The Court of Rome had done
that to their hands. So to conclude my first Proposition, Whatsoever some not
knowing or not weighing the state of our affairs; And the Acts and Records of
those times have rashly or ignorantly pronounced to the contrary, it is evident
that the Protestants had no hand either in the separation of the English Church
from the Court of Rome; or in their separation from the Church of Rome; The
former being made by professed Roman Catholics, the later by the Court of Rome
it self, both before the reformation following in the days of Edward the
sixth, both at a time when the poor Protestants suffered death daily for their
conscience upon the six bloody Articles.

CHAP. IV.
That the King and Kingdom of England in the separation from Rome di^ make no
new Law, but vindicate their ancient Liberties.
THe second Conclusion upon examination will prove as evident as the former,
that Henry the eighth and those Roman Catholics with him, who made the great
separation from the Court of Rome, did no new thing, but what their
predecessors in all ages had done before them, treading in the steps of their
Christian Ancestors.

And first, Eminent persons have great influence without any Jurisdictions.
it cannot be denied, but that any person or Society that has an eminent
reputation of learning, or prudence, or piety, or authority, or power, has
ever had, and ever will have a great influence upon his or their neighbors,
without any legal Jurisdiction over them, or subjection due from them.

Secondly, The dignity of the Apostolical Church^s.
it is confessed, that in the primitive times great was the dignity and
authority of the Apostolical Churches, as Rome, Anti^ch, Ephesus, Jerusalem,
Alexandria, which were founded by the Apostles themselves; And that those
ancient Christians in all their differences did look upon the Bishops of those
Sees as honorable Arbitrators, and faithful Depositaries of the genuine
Apostolical traditions, especially wherein they accorded one with another.
Hence is that of Tertullian, ^^de praeser. advers. haeres.
Constat omnem doctrinam quae cum illis Ecclesiis Apostolicis, matricibus, et
originalibus conspi at, etc. Whatsoever doctrine agrees with those Apostolical
original mother Churches, is to be reputed true. And in this sense and no other
Saint Cyprian a great admirer and imitater both of the matter and words of
Tertullian, whom he honored with the title of his Master, L. 4. Epis. 8.
does call the Church of Rome a Matrix and a root. But if the tradition varied,
as about the observation of Easter, between Victor Bishop of Rome, and
Polycrates Bishop of Ephes^s, the one prescribing from St. Peter and S. Paul.
the other from S. John. The respective Churches did conform themselves to their
Superiors, or if they were free, (as the Britannique Churches were) to their
own judgment, or to the example of their neighbor Churches, or kept them to
the tradition delivered unto them by their first converters. As in this very
controversy about Easter, and some baptismal rites, the British and Scottish
Bishops always adhered to the Eastern Church. A strong presumption that thence
they received the faith, and were not subordinate to the Patriarchal See of
Rome. But yet all this honorable respect proceeded from a free prudential
compliance, without any perpetual or necessary subjection. Afterward some
Churches lost, some gained the place and dignity of Apostolical Churches,
either by custom, so Ephesus lost it; or by the Canons of the Fathers, so
Constantinople did get it: or lastly, Novel. 131. c. 3. et 4.
by Imperial privileges, so Iustiniana and Carthage obtained it.

Thirdly, it is not to be doubted of, but that after the year six hundred, It
is no marvel that the Pope winded himself into England by degrees.
after that Pope Boniface had quitted his Patriarchal dignity, by assuming a
more lofty title of universal Bishop, The succeeding Popes by the connivence,
leave or consent of our Kings, did sometimes more, sometimes less, upon
pretense of their universal Jurisdiction, by degrees thrust in their sickle
into the Ecclesiastical affairs of England. Whosoever shall ponder duly with
what a depth of prudence the Roman Court has mesnaged all occasions and
occurrences to the advantage and advancement of that See, and consequently to
the improvement of their own authority; whosoever shall weigh seriously with
what art and cunning the Papacy (as it now is) was tacked into the Church
contrary to wind and weather, and how their beginning of unity was scrued up to
an omnipotence, and universality of power; whosoever shall duly consider what
advantage they made to that See, and therein to themselves, by the only
countenancing of Phocas his base and bloody murder, or of Charles Martel his
more glorious and successeful revolt, will not wonder to observe, how they did
watch their times when we had Princes of weak Judgments, or necessitous, or
superstitious, or of unjust or Litigious titles, to wind themselves into
Britain. Nay rather he will admire that they did not radicate themselves more
deeply and more firmly therein; which without doubt they had effected, but for
their exorbitant rapines, whilst they thought that like Foxes they might prey
most boldly farthest from their own Kennel, Mat. Pa^. an. 1246.
Anglia vere hortus noster deliciarum, puteus inexhaustus est, ubi multa
abundant, multa de multis extorqueri possunt, That England indeed was his
garden of delight, a Well that could not be drawn dry. And where many things
did abound, out of much, much might be extorted.

But first this intrusion was manifest usurpation and tyranny; This was the
Gangrene of the Church, which no subsequent possession or submission could
warrant, no tract of time or prescription sufficiently confirm. Quod ab initio
fuit invalidum tractu temporis non convalescit, That which is not only unjust,
but invalid in its beginning, can never be made valid by the empty pretense of
a following custom or prescription. No Saxon, English, or British King ever
made any obliging submission to the Pope.
Neither do I find in truth that any of the petite Saxon Kings or their
Subjects, though some of them indebted to S. Gregory for their first
conversion, and all of them much weakened by their Sevenfold division, (for at
first of Seven Kings there was but only one who was a Christian, namely the
King of Kent; Neither was it any of his progeny who did afterward unite the
Heptarchy into a Monarchy,) much less that any of the succeeding Kings of
England, or of great Britain united, did ever make any Solemn, formal or
obliging acknowledgment of their submission to the Bishop of Rome.

But on the contrary, Bed^l. 1. c. 25.
when Austin first arrived in England, he stayed in Isle of Thanet, until he
knew the Kings pleasure, and offered not to preach in Kent, until he had the
Kings License for him and his followers to preach throughout his Dominions.
Bed. l. 1. chapter 26.
So not only their Jurisdiction: but even the exercise of their pastoral
function within that Realm, was by the Kings leave and Authority. The donation
and resignation of King John whereby he went about to make a free Kingdom
servile and feudatary to the Pope, did concern the Crown more then the Miter,
and was soon hissed out of the world to the perpetual shame and infamy of such
mercenary Pastors; yet to obtain this Ludibrious act the power of the Keys was
abused, and the Kingdom of England stood interdicted by the space of six years
and three Months. The Popes. power in England was of courtesy.


The Popes in later times had some power in England, of courtesy, not of Duty,
but never that omnipotence which they gaped after. Sometimes they sent their
Nuncios or Legates into England. So they did of old into other Patriarchates.
Sometimes they admitted appeals from England to Rome. So they did of old from
Africa. Sometimes they excommunicated the English Subjects. So did Pope Victor
long since excommunicate all the Asiaticks. But neither Asia nor Africa for all
that did acknowledge the Popes Jurisdiction. On the other side, sometimes their
Legates were not permitted to enter into the Realm, or after their arrival
thrust out of the Realm, unless they wo^ld give caution by oath for their good
demesnour. Sometimes their Bulls and excommunications were slighted or damned,
and they who procured them soundly punished for their labors. Sometimes all
appeals to Rome were prohibited under most severe penalties, and their decrees
rejected. All this while our Kings and Bishops called Counsels, the one under
civil punishments, the other under Ecclesiastical, made Ecclesiastical laws
and constitutions in their Synods and Parliaments, yea express constitutions
against the Court of Rome it self with as much tartness and vehemence as King
Henry the Eighth. And with this only difference that they endeavored to draw
the people out of the Popes claws at home, and he thought it more expedient to
throw the Pope over the British Sea, once for altogether. The old and lawful
Patriarchal power of the Roman Bishops within their own destricts, had been
renounced long before by themselves. Their new universal Monarchy, erected by
themselves, was not capable of prescription; or if it had, yet such a dubious
unquiet possession as the Popes did hold in England at the mercy and discretion
of the right owners, was not sufficient to make a legal prescription, or to
justify their pretended title, or to render them bonae fidei possessores,
lawful and conscionable possessours. This is that which I am now to demonstrate
in this second ground.

The most famous (I had almost said the only) appellant from England to Rome
that we read of before the Conquest was Wilfride Archbishop of York, Wilfride
the first great App^llant.
who notwithstanding that he gained sentence upon sentence at Rome in his
favor; And notwithstanding that the Pope did send express Nuncios into
England, on purpose to see his sentence executed, yet he could not obtain his
restitution or the benefit of his sentence for six years, during the Reigns of
King Egbert and Alfrede his son. Yea King Alfrede told the Popes Nuncios
expressly, That he honored them as his Parents for their grave lives and
honorable aspects, Sp^lm. conc. an. 705.
but he could not give any assent to their Legation; Because it was against
reason, that a person twice condemned by the whole Council of (...) English,
should be restored upon the Popes Letter. If they had believed the Pope to be
their competent Judge, either as universal Monarch, or so much as Patriarch of
Britain, or any more then an honorable Arbitrator, (which all the Patriarchs
were even without the bounds of their proper Jurisdictions) how comes it to
pass that two Kings successively, and the great Councels of the Kingdom, and
the other Archbishop Theodore with all the prime Ecclesiastics, and the
flower of the English Clergy, did so long and so resolutely oppose so many
Sentences and Messages from Rome, and condemn him twice, whom the Pope had
absolved? Consider that Wilfride was an Archbishop, not an inferior Clerk;
And if an appeal from England to Rome had been proper or lawful in any case, it
had been so in his case. But it was otherwise determined by those who were most
concerned.

Malmesbury supposes either by inspiration, or upon his own head, that the
King and the ^ Archbishop Theodore were smitten with remorse before their
deaths, for the injury done to Wilfride and the slighting of the Popes
Sentence, Letter and Legates. But the contrary is mo^^ apparently true; for
first, it was not King Alfrede alone, but the great Council of the Kingdom
also; nor Theodore alone, but the main body of the Clergy, that opposed the
Popes Letter, and the restitution of Wilfride, in that manner as it was decreed
at Rome.

Secondly, after Alfrede and Theodoret were both dead, we find the Popes
sentence and Wilfrides restitution still opposed by the surviving Bishops, in
the Reign of Alfredes son. To clear the matter past contradiction, let us
consider the ground of this long and bitter contention; Wilfride the Archbishop
was become a great pluralist, and had engrossed into his hands too many
Ecclesiastical dignities. The King and the Church of England thought fit to
deprive him of some of them, and to confer them upon others. Wilfride appealed
from their sentence unto Rome. The Pope gave sentence after sentence in favor
of Wilfride. But for all his sentences he was not, he could not be restored,
until he had quitted two of his Monasteries, which were in question,
Hongesthill deane, and Ripon, which of all others he loved most dearly, and
where he was afterward interred. This was not a conquest, but a plain waving
of his sentences from Rome, and a yielding of the question; for those had been
the chief causes of the controversy. So the King and the Church after Alfredes
death still made good his conclusion, That it was against reason, that a person
twice condemned by the whole Council of the English, should be restored upon
the Popes Bull. And as he did not, so neither did they give any assent to the
Popes Legation.

So unfortunate were appeals to Rome in those days: And as unfrequent as
unfortunate; for from that time until Anselmes days after the Norman Conquest
in the Reign of Henry the first, we do hardly meet with another appeal. Then
Pope Paschalis the second had devised a new Oath for Archbishops, when they
received their Pall; An oath much wondered at in all places, as a strange
innovation, Significasti reges and Regni maj^res admiratione permotos, De
el^ct. polest. c. 4. significasti, etc. Bar. An. 1102. nu. 8.
etc. You signified unto me that Kings and Nobles were moved with admiration,
that the P^ll was offered unto you by our Ministers, upon condition that you
should take an oath which they brought you written from us, etc.

This oath was that which animated Anselme to contest so hotly with the King.
The main controversy was about this very question of Appeals to Rome. The
King pleaded the fundamental Laws and Customs of the Land, consuetudo Regni
m^i est a Patr^ meo instituta, ut nullius praeter licentiam Regis appelletur
Papa. Qui consuetudines regni tollit, potestatem quoque and coronam Regis
violat, etc. (...). 1. de. Gest. Paul. Anglo^.
It is a custom of my Kingdom instituted by my Father, that no Pope may be
appealed unto without ^the Kings License. He that takes away the Customs of
the Kingdom, does violence to the power and Crown of the King. It is to be
noted, that the Laws established by his Father (that was William the
Conqueror) were no other then the Laws of Edward the Confessor, that is to
say, the old Saxon Laws. So he might justly say, both that it was an ancient
immemorial custom of the Kingdom, and also that it was instituted or
established by his Father. So Hoveden tells us, Hoved. in Hen. 2.
that at last he yielded to the request of his Barons, etc. that was by his
authority to confirm the Laws of King Edward. But the best was, that though
Anselme the Archbishop was obliged by oath to the Pope, yet the Bishops were
not so soon brought into the same bondage. And therefore the former Author
tells us, that In his exequendis omnes Episcopi Angliae Primati suo suffragium
negarunt, Malm. ibid.
In the execution of these things, all the Bishops of England did deny their
suffrage to their Primate. So unanimous were they in this point.

Which unanimity of the whole Realm both Clergy and Laity does appear yet more
evidently by the Statute of Clarendon, made in the Reign of the grandchild of
this King, when all the Prelates and Peers of the Realm did confirm the former
ancient British English custom, Math. Par. an. 1164.
not only by their consents, but by their oaths, whereof we shall have
occasion to speak more hereafter. And upon this custom was that Law grounded,
which our Histories do make mention of, Si quis inventus fuerit literas vel
mandatum ferens Domini Papae, Rog. Hoved. in Hen. 2.
etc. capiatur, et de eo sicut de Regis traditore and regni, sine dilatione
fiat justitia. If any one be found bringing in the Popes Letter or Mandate, let
him be apprehended, and let justice pass upon him without delay as a traitor
to the King and Kingdom. And generally every man is interdicted, or forbidden,
to app^al to the Pope. And the Legations from Rome were almost as rare as
appeals to Rome, Legations as rare as appeals.
during the raigns of all the British and Saxon Kings, until the Norman
conquest. As Gregory Bishop of Ostium the Popes own Legate did confess, That he
was the first Roman Priest that was s^n^ into those parts of B^i^tain, Spelm.
conc. an. 78.
from the time of S. Austin. And those Legates were no others then ordinary
messengers or Ambassadors, sent from one Neighbor to another* Such a thing as
a Legantine Court, or a Nuncios Court, was not known in the British world in
those ages, and long after. It is not enough to show that one Roman Bishop did
once send over one or two Doctors to help to propagate or confirm the faith, or
to lend their helping hands to Religion fainting.

This may well set forth their devotion, and our obligation. But further as to
the present question it signifies just nothing.

Favors cease to be favors, when they are done on purpose to deprive men of
their ancient liberties. The British Bishops, and English also, have done as
much for other Nations, over whom they did never challenge any Jurisdiction.
The French Church sent over Germanus and Lupus to help to root up the relics
of Pelagianisme in Britain, yet did never pretend thereby to any authority
over the Britains.

Add to this, Saxon Kings made Ecclesiastical Laws.
that during all the time from St. Gregory to the conquest, it was usual for
the British, Saxon, and Danish Kings, with their Clergy or great Council, to
make Ecclesiastical laws, and to regulate the external discipline of the
Church within their Dominions: Witness the laws of Ercombert, Ina, Withred,
Alfrede, Edward, Athelstan, Edmond, Edgar, Athelred, Canutus, and Edward the
Confessor, among whose laws one makes it the office of a King to govern the
Church as the Vicar of God. Another implies a power in the King and his Judges,
Chap. 15. Chap. 5.
to take cognizance of wrong done in Ecclesiastical Courts. It was to this Holy
King Edward the Confessor, that Pope Nicholas the second by his bull for him
and his Successors, granted this ensuing privilege to the Kings of England
for ever; Namely, the Advocation and protection of all the Churches of England,
Spelm. conc. An. 1066.
and power in his stead to make just Ecclesiastical constitutions, with the advice of their Bishops and Abbats. This grant is as full or fuller then that
which Urban the second made to Roger Earl of Sicily, from whence the Kings of
Spain at this day do not only Challenge, but enjoy in a manner all
Ecclesiastical power in Sicily. If the Pope had ever had any such right as he
pretends, this only Bull were sufficient to justify our Kings. But they
enjoyed this very power from the beginning, as an essential flower of their
Crowns, without any thanks to the Pope. To make just Ecclesiastical
constitutions in the Popes stead, says the Bull. To govern the Church as the
Vicar of God, says the law of the Land.

The Bishops of Rome have ever been very kind, An old Artifice of the Roman
Bishops.
in granting those things which were none of their own, and in making
deputations and delegations to them who stood in no need of their help, being
lawfully invested before hand by another title, in that power and dignity,
which the Popes pretended out of their goodness to confer upon them, but in
truth, did it only for the reputation of their See, and for maintaining the
opinion of their own Grandeur. Whether the deputation were accepted or not,
they did not much trouble themselves. So they dealt with (...) president in the
Council of Nice; So they dealt with the Patriarch of Iustiniana Prima; so they
served Good King Edward, and many others.

This Legislative power in Ecclesiastical causes over Ecclesiastical persons,
Norman Kings enjoyed the same power.
the Norman Kings after the conquest did also exercise from time to time, with
the advice and consent of their Lords spiritual and temporal. Hence all those
Statutes concerning Benefices, Tithes, Advowsons, Lands given in Mortmain,
prohibitions, consultations, praemunires, quare Impedits, privilege of Clergy,
extortions of Ecclesiastical courts or officers, and regulating their due
fees, wages of Priests, Mortuaries, Sanctuaries, Appropriations, and in sum
all things which did belong to the external subsistence, regiment, and
regulating of the Church, and this in the raigns of our best Kings, long and
long before the reformation.

Othobone the Popes Legate under Urban the fifth would have endowed Vicars upon
appropriated Rectories, Cap. quon. de App^^pr. 15. R. 2. c. 64 H. 4. c. 12.
but could not. But our Kings by two Statutes or Acts of Parliament did easily
effect it. With us the Pope could not make a Spiritual corporation, but the
King. The Pope could not exempt from the Jurisdiction of the ordinary, but the
King, who by his charter could convert Seculars into Regulars. 2. H. 4. c. 3,
2. H 4. c. 4.
The Pope could not grant the Privilege of the Cistercians and other orders,
to be free from the payment of Tyths; but the King. The Pope could not
appropriate Churches, but the King: we find eight Churches appropriated to the
Abbey of Crowland by the Saxon Kings, three Churches appropriated to the Abbey of
Battle by the Conqueror, and twenty by Henry the first to ^^e Church of
Sarisbury. The King in his great Council could make void the certificates of
Ordinaries in cases of Ecclesiastical cognizance, and command them to absolve
those persons who were judged by his authority to be unjustly excommunicated.
9. H. 6. c. 11. Co^k R^port. Cawdries case.
The Pope could not translate an Arch Bishopric or a Bishopric, but the King.
The disposition of Ecclesiastical preferments upon lapse accrued not to the
Pope but to the King; a plain evidence that he was the Lord Paramount. And the
King only could incur no lapse, Nullum tempus occurrit Regi; because the law
supposed that he was busied about the weighty affairs of the Kingdom. The
revenewes of a Bishopric in the vacancy belonged not unto the Pope; but to the
King, which he caused to be restored, sometimes from the time of the first
vacancy, sometimes from the time of the filling of the Church with a new
Incumbent according to his good pleasure.

The Canons of the Pope could not change the Ecclesiastical Laws of England*
but the King, Canon law of no more force in England then as it was received.
whose laws they were. He had power in his great Council to receive the canons
if they were judged convenient, or to reject them, and abrogate them, if they
were judged inconvenient. When some Bishops proposed in Parliament the
reception of the Ecclesiastical Canon for the Legitimation of Children born
before marriage (without such a reception the Canon was of no force in England)
All the Peers of the Realm stood up and cried out with one voice, Nolumus leges
Angliae mutari, We will not have the laws of England to be changed. 20. H. 3.
c. 9. 4. E. 1. c. 5.
The King and Parliament made a Legislative exposition of the Canon of the
Council of Lions concerning Bigamy, Bigamy.
which they would not have done, unless they had conceived themselves to have
power, according to the fundamental constitutions of the kingdom, either to
receive it, or reject it. Ejus est legem interpretari cujus est condere; He
that has authority to expound a law Legislatively, has power to make it. The
King and Parliament declared Pope Urban to be the right Pope in a time of
Schism, 2. R. 2. c. 6.
that is, in relation to England, their own Kingdom, not by determining the
titles of the Popes, but by applying the matter to the one, and substracting it
from the other. All these are so many evidences, that when Popery was at the
highest, the Bishops of Rome had no such absolute Ecclesiastical Sovereignty
in the Church and Realm of England. And that what power they exercised at any
time more then this, was by connivence, or permission, or violent usurpation.
And that our Primates had no foreign Superior Legally established over them,
but only the King as he was the Supreme head of the whole body politic.
Aedmer. in initio.
To see that every one did his duty, and enjoyed his due right. Who would not
suffer one of his Barons to be excommunicated from Rome, without his privity
and consent.

No Legate de latere was allowed by the law in England, but the Archbishop of
Canturbury. Placit an 1. H. 7. Pl. an 1. H, 7.
And if any was admitted of courtesy, he was to take his oath, to do nothing*
derogatory to the King and his Crown. Pl. an. 32. et 34. E. 1.
If any man did denounce the Popes excommunication without the assent of the
King, by the law he forfeited all his goods. Neither might any man appeal to
Rome without the Kings License. In the year 1420* the Pope translated the
Bishop of Lincoln to York. But the Dean and Chapter absolutely refused to
admit him, and justified their refusal by the Laws of the Land; And by the
favor of the country carried the cause. So as the Pope was forced to Recall
him to Lincoln. Ant. Brit. 279.


Having mentioned the statutes of Mortmain, The statute of Mortmain justified.
I cannot but do my native country, and the Church of England that right, to
clear it from an heavy accusa^ion framed against it upon mistaken grounds. That
the English protestants had made a Law to maintain and patronize Sacrilege,
that no man (how penitent soever) could restore any thing to the Church, which
had been formerly taken from it. God forbid. First the statutes of Mortmain
were not made by Protestants, but in the days of Henry the third, Edward the
first, and Richard the second, between the last of which, and Henry the eighth,
there reigned six Kings successively. That is one great mistake. Secondly, the
Statutes of Mortmain did not at all concern the restitution of any thing that
had been taken away. There was no use for that in those days. The only scope
of those Laws was to restrain the first donation of Lands to the Church
without royal assent, That is another mistake. Thirdly, these very Laws of
Mortmain are not so incredible, nor so hard to be believed, nor so altogether
destitute of presidents and examples, as that author does imagine, so as
posterity should scarcely believe that ever any such Law had been made.

He might have remembered the Proclamation of Moses, when the people had already
offered abundantly, for the adorning of the Sanctuary* Exodus 36. 6.
Let neither man nor woman make any more work for the offering of the
Sanctuary. So the people were restrained from bringing. He might have called to
mind a like law of Theodosius a godly Emperor, and propitious to the Church,
to moderate the peoples bounty, and the Clergies covetousness. Which Law Saint
Ambrose and Saint Hierome do so much complain of, (...).
not against the Emperor who made the Law, but against the Clergy, who
deserved to have such a Law made against them. He might have found the like Law
made by Nicephorus, Nicet. l. 7.
Phocas, and afterward revived by Emanuel Comenus. He might have remembered,
that the troubles between the Pope and the Venetians did spring partly from
such a Law.

Briefly, with a little search he might have found like Laws in Germany,
Poland, France, Spain, Consid. p. 49
Italy, Sicily; And if he will trust Padre Pa^lo, in the Papacy it self. The
Prince cannot wrong his Subject that is an owner or possessour of Lands or
haereditaments in a well ordered State. Then why should it be in the power of a
Subject that is an owner to wrong his Prince and his Country? But by such
alienations of Lands to the Church in an excessive and unproportionable
measure, the Prince loses his right, that is, both his tribute, and his
military service, and fines upon change of Tenants. The Commonwealth loses
its supportation and due protection. Therefore they were called the Laws of
Mortmain, because Lands so ali^nated to the Church were put into a dead hand,
from whence they never returned: And so in time the whole Signioury should be
the Churches, as it is elegantly expressed by the Venetian Orator to Paul the
fifth, Ne fortunis omnibus exuantur, Oration ad Paul 5. pro Rep. Veneta.
ne quicquid sub coelo Veneto homines arant, ferunt, aedificant, omnia veluti
quodam oceano Ecclesiae absorbeantur, ^ihilque sibi reliqui fiat unde
Rempublicam, patriam, tecta, templa, aras, focos, sepultura majorum defendere
possint, Lest the Citizens should be turned out of their estates, lest all
which men plow, sow, build under the V^netian heaven should be swallowed up
into the Ocean of the Church; And nothing be left where with to defend the
Commonwealth, their Country, their houses, their temples, their altars, their
fires, and the sepulchers of their Ancestors.

To prevent this great inconvenience, the Laws of Mortmain were devised
prudently, to balance the spiritualty and the temporalty, that the one do not
swallow up the other, to which all wise Legislators have ever had, and ought to
have a special regard.

In France no man can build a new Church without the Kings License verified in
Parliament: A new Monastery builded in Genua without License is to be
confiscated. In Spain without License Royal no new Religions can enter into the
Kingdom. The Fathers of Saint Francis de Paula began to build a Church in
Madrid, upon their own heads, but they were stopped. So aequitable, so
necessary, has this Law of Mortmain been thought to all Nations.

But to leave this digression, and to come up closer to the direct point
without any consequences. Mat. Pa^. an. 1164.
In the Reign of King Henry the second some controversies being likely to arise
between the Crown and Thomas B^cket Archbishop of Canterbury, The King called a
general Assembly of his Archbishops, Bishops, Abbats, Priors, and Peers of the
Realm, at Clarendon, where there was made an acknowledgment or memorial,
cujusdam partis consuetudinum and libertatum Antecessorum suorum, Regis
videlicet Henrici avi sui, and aliorum, quaeobservari debebant in Regno, and ab
omnibus teneri, of a certain part of the Customs and Liberties of his
predecessors, that is to say, his Grandfather Henry the first son of the
Conqueror, and other Kings. (A part) but ex ungue Leonem; from the view of
this part we may conclude of what nature the rest were (of the customs). The
customs of England are the Common Law of the Land. (of his predecessors) that
is to say, the Saxon, Danish, and Norman Kings successively. And therefore no
marveil if they ought to be observed of all.

This part of their ancient customs or liberties they reduced into sixteen
Chapters or Articles, To which all the Archbishops, Bishops and other
Ecclesiastics, with all the Peers and Nobles of the Realm did not only give
their acknowledgment, and consent, but also their oaths, for the due
observation of them. It would be tedious and impertinent to relate them all, I
will only cull out some of them. One was, that all appeals in England must
proceed regularly from the Archdeacon to the Bishop, from the Bishop to the
Archbishop, and if the Archbishop failed to do justice, the last complaint must
be to the King, to give order for redress, that is, by fit Delegates. But
there might be no further or other Appeals without the consent of the King:
whereby the Nunciature^, and Legantine Court, and the Court of Rome it self are
all at the Kings mercy. Wherein did the Popes great strength lie in those
days? when his hands were fast tied both at home and abroad.

Another Custom was, that no Ecclesiastical person might depart out of the
Kingdom without the Kings License (no not though he were summoned by the
Bishop of Rome.) And if the King permitted them to go, yet if he required it,
they must give caution or security to act nothing hurtful or prejudicial to the
King or Kingdom, in their going thither, abiding there, and returning home.
You see our Ancestors were jealous of Rome in those days. Whether it was their
providence or their experience that ^aught them this lesson, certainly their
prudence to prevent dangers was very commendable.

A third custom was, that the revenues of all Ecclesiastical dignities
belonging to the Kings demeisne, during the vacancy, were to be received by the
King, as freely as the rents of his own demeisnes. Tell me, who was then the
Patron and Political Head of the Church?

A fourth Custom was, that when an Archbishopric, Bishopric, Abbacy or
Priory did fall void, the election was to be made by such of the principal
dignitaries or members of that respective Church which was to be filled, as the
King should call together for that purpose, with the Kings consent, in the
Kings own Chapel. And there the person elected was to do his homage and
fealty to the King, as to his Liege Lord. That later form of, Dei and
Apostolicae sedis gratia, had taken no root in England in those days.

The rest are of the same nature, as that Controversies concerning Advowsons
ought to be determined in the Kings Court. Benefices belonging to the Kings
patronage could not be appropriated without his grant.

When a Clergy man was accused of any Delinquency, the Kings Court ought to
determine what part of his accusation was of Civil, and what part of
Ecclesiastical cognizance. And the Kings Justice might send to the
Ecclesiastical Court to see it ordered accordingly. None of the Kings Servants
or Tenants that held of him in capite might be excommunicated, nor their Lands
interdicted, before the King was made acquainted.

When it was questioned whether a Tenement were of Ecclesiastic or Lay fee,
the Kings Justice was to determine it by the oaths of twelve men. All
Ecclesiastical persons who held any possessions from the King in capite, were
to do suit and service for the same as other Barons did, and to join with the
Kings Barons in the Kings Judgments, until it came to sentence of death, or
diminution of member.

To this memorial all the Nobility and Clergy of the English Nation did swear
firmly, in the word of truth, to keep all the customs therein contained, and
observe them faithfully to the King and his heirs for ever. Among the rest,
Thomas Becket the Archbishop of Canterbury himself was carried along with the
crowd to take this Oath: Though shortly after he fell from it, and admitted the
Popes absolution.

By the Statute of Carlisle made in the days of Edward the first it was
declared, 35. E. 1. Statute of Carlisle.
That the holy Church of England was founded in the estate of Prelacy, within
the Realm of England, by the Kings and Peers thereof. And that the several
encroachments of the Bishop of Rome specified in that Act, did tend to the
annullation of the state of the Church, the disinheriting of the King and the
Peers, and the destruction of the Laws and rights of the Realm, (contra
formam collationis) contrary to the disposition and will of the first founders.
Observe [in the estate of Prelacy] not of Papacy. [within the Realm] not
without it. [By the Kings] not by the Popes, of whose exorbitant and
destructive usurpations as our Ancestors were most sensible; so they wanted
neither will nor power to remedy them.

To corroborate this Law by former presidents, and thereby to show that our
Kings were ever accounted the right Patrons of the English Church. Malm. de
Gest. Pont.
King Edelwalk made Wilfride Bishop of the South Saxons, Aug. p. 257.
now Chichester. Id. l. 2. p. 45. p. 242.
King Alfrede made Assertie Bishop of Sherburn: And Oenewulphus Bishop of
Winchester. Id. l. 1. p. 204.
Edward the Confessor made Robert Archbishop, whom before from a Monk he had
made Bishop of London. Thus the Saxon Kings in all ages bestowed Bishoprics
without any contradiction. The Norman Kings followed their example. No sooner
was Stigand dead, but William the Conqueror elected Lanfrank Abbat of Saint
Stephens in Caen to be Archbishop. William Rufus upon his deathbed elected
Anselme to be Archbishop of Canterbury. And until the days of Henry the
first, the Popes never pretended any right, nor laid any claim to the Patronage
of the English Churches.

The Articles of the Clergy do prescribe that elections be free, Articuli cleri.
so as the Kings conge d'eslire, or License to elect be first obtained, and
afterward the election be made good ^y the Royal assent and confirmation. 25.
E. 3.
And the Statute of provisors, Our Sovereign Lord the King and his heirs,
shall have and enjoy for the time the collations to the Archbishopricks and
other dignities elective which be of his Advowry, such as his progenitors had
before free election was granted. Since the first elections were granted by the
Kings progenitors upon a certain form and condition, as namely, to demand
License of the King to choose, and after choice made, to have his Royal assent.
Which condition not being kept, the thing ought by reason to return to its
first nature.

Further by the same Statute of provisors it is declaratively enacted, That it
is the right of the Crown of England, 25. E. 3.
and the Law of the Realm, that upon such mischiefs and damages happening to
the Realm, (by the encroachments and oppressions of the Court of Rome mentioned
in the body of that Law) The King ought, and is bound by his oath with the
accord of his people in Pa^liament, to make remedy and Law, for the removing of
such mischiefs. We find at least seven or eight such Statutes made in the
Raigns of several Kings against Papal provisions, reservations, and collations,
and the mischiefs that flowed from thence.

Let us listen to another Law, The Crown of England has been so free at all
times, 16. R. 2. C. 5.
that it has been i^ no earthly subjection, but immediately subjected to God
in all things touching its regality, and to no other, and ought not to be
submitted to the Pope. Observe these expressions, free at all times, free in
all things, in no earthly subjection, immediately subjected to God, not to be
submitted to the Pope. And all this in Ecclesiastical affairs, for of that
nature were all the grievances complained of in that Law, as appears by the
view of the Statute it self. Then if the Kings of England and the
representative body of the English Church do reform themselves according to the
word of God, and the purest Patterns of the primitive times, they owe no
account to any, as of duty, but to God alone.

By the same statute it is enacted, That they who shall procure or prosecute
any popish Bulls and excommunications (in certain cases) shall incur the
forfeiture of their estates, or be banished, or put out of the Kings
protection. By other statutes it is enacted. That whosoever should draw any of
the Kings Subjects out of the Realm, 27. E. 3. c. 1.
(to Rome) in plea about any cause, whereof the cognizance belongs to the
Kings Court, or should sue in any foreign court to defeat any judgment given in
the Kings court, (That is by appealing to Rome) they should incur the same
penalties. The body of the Kingdom would not suffer Edward the first to be
cited before the Pope. Henry the sixth, by the Council of Humphry Duke of
Gloucester the Protector, protested against Pope Martin and his Legate, That
they would not admit him contrary to the laws and liberties of the Realm, Act.
and. mon.
and dissented from whatsoever he did.

So we see plainly, that the King and Church of England ever enjoyed as great
or greater liberties then the Gallican King and Church. And that King Henry the
eighth did no more in effect then his progenitors from time to time had done
before him. Only they labored to damme up the stream, and he thought it more
expedient to stop up the fountain of papal Tyranny, not by limiting the
habitual Jurisdiction of the Roman Bishop, which was not in his power to do,
but by substracting the matter, and restraining the actual exercise of it
within his own dominions. And it is observable, that in the greatest heat of
these contentions, the Praelates of the Realm being present in Parliament
disavowed the Popes encroachments, and offered the King to stand with him in
these and all other cases touching his Crown and regality, as they were bound
by their allegiance. That is, according to the law of Fe^ds, according to their
homage done, and according to the oath which they had taken at their
Investitures into their Bishoprics.

Indeed, of later days during those bloody wars between the houses of York and
Lancaster, the Popes sometimes invaded this undoubted right of our Kings de
facto, not de jure, as was easy for them to do, And tendered to the Bishops at
their investitures another oath of their own making, at first modest and
innocent enough, that they should observe regulas Sanctorum Patrum, Pontif.
ve^us.
the rules of the Holy Fathers; But after they altered the oath, Pontif. novum.
and falsified their Pontifical as well as their faith, changing regulas
Sanctorum Patrum, into Regalia Sancti Petri, that they should maintain the
Royalties of St. Peter. A shameless forgery and admitting them to be the
interpreters of their own forms, opening a gap to rob Kings of the fairest
Jewels of their crowns, and Bishops not only of their Jurisdictions, but also
of their loyalty and allegiance to their lawful Sovereigns, unless they take
the oath with a protestation, as our Archbishop Cranmer did, Ex Regist. Cra^m.
P. 4.
That he would not bind himself to any thing contrary to the Laws of God or
the Realm, or the benefit thereof; Nor yet limit himself in the reformation or
Government of the Church. Hall in Henrico. 8. fol. 206.
Before which time two opposite and repugnant oaths were administered to the
Bishops, as Henry the eighth made it appear plainly in Parliament.

Many things in prudence might be done but for fear of such like alterations
and encroachments. Our Kings gave Peterpence to Rome as an alms; But in
process of time it was exacted as a tribute. The Emperors for more solemnity
chose to be sworn by the Pope at Rome* as the Kings of France at Rhemes, and
the Kings of England at Westminster. And this was misinterpreted as a doing
homage to the Pope.

Rex venit a^te fores jurans prius urbis honor^^,
Post homo fit Papae, sumit quo dante coronam.
The King does come before the gate,
first swearing to the Cities state.
The Popes man then does he become,
And of his gift does take the Crown.
Poets might be bold by authority: But it rested not there. Good Authors affirm
the challenge in good earnest. Occh. p^rt. 2. c. 22.
And Clement the fifth in one of his Canons or Decrees does conclude it, de
f^ill. and re^udic.
declaramus juramenta praedicta fide litatis existere e^ cerse^i debere, We
declare that the aforesaid oaths are and ought to be esteemed oaths of
allegiance. Lay these particulars together, The Sovereignty of our Kings in
Ecclesiastical causes over Ecclesiastical persons
Our Kings from time to time called Councels, made Ecclesiastical Laws,
punished Ecclesiastical persons, and see that they did their duties in their
callings, prohibited Ecclesiastical Judges to proceed, received appeals from
Ecclesiastical Courts, rejected the Laws of the Pope at their pleasure, with a
nolumus, we will not have the Laws of England to be changed, or gave
Legislative interpretations of them as they thought good, made Ecclesiastical
corporations, appropriated benefices, translated Episcopal Sees, forbid
appeals to Rome, rejected the Popes Bulls, protested against his Legates,
questioned both the Legates themselves, and all those who acknowledged them in
the Kings Bench; I may add, and made them pay at once an hundred and eighteen
thousand pounds as a composition for their estates, condemned the
excommunications and other sentences of the Roman Court, would not permit a
Peer, or Baron of the Realm to be excommunicated without their consents,
enjoyed the patronage of Bishoprics, and the investitures of Bishops, enlarged
or restrained the privilege of Clergy, prescribed the indowment of Vicars, set
down the wages of Priests, and made acts to remedy the oppressions of the Court
of Rome.

What did King Henry the eighth in effect more then this? He forbad all suites
to the Court of Rome by proclamation, which Sanders calls the beginning of the
Schism, diverse Statutes did the same. Antiqu. Brit. p. 325.
He excluded the Popes Legates, so did the Law of the Land, without the Kings
special License. King Henry 8. did no more then his predecessors.
He forbad appeals to Rome, so did his predecessors many ages before him. He
took away the Popes dispensations, what did he in that but restore the English
Bishops to their ancient right, and the Laws of the Country with the Canons of
the Fathers to their vigor? He challenged and assumed a political Supremacy
over Ecclesiastical persons in Ecclesiastical causes; So did Edward the
Confessor govern the Church as the Vicar of God in his own Kingdom. So did
his predecessors hold their Crowns as immediately subjected to God, not
subjected to the Pope. On the other side, the Pope by our English Laws could
neither reward freely, nor punish freely, neither whom, nor where, nor when he
thought fit, but by the consent or connivence of the State. He could neither do
justice in England by the Legates without controllment, nor call English men to
Rome without the Kings License. Here is small appearance of a good legal
prescription, nor any pregnant signs of any Sovereign power and Jurisdiction,
by undoubted right, and so evident uncontroverted a title as is pretended.

I might conclude this my second proposition with the testimonies of the
greatest Lawyers and Judges of our land. The judgment of our English Lawyers.
Artists ought to be credited in their own Art. That the laws made by King
Henry on this behalf were not operative but declarative; Fitzherb. Natu. brev.
44.
not made to create any new law, but only to vindicate and restore the ancient
law of England, Lord Cook, Cawdries ^ase.
and its ancient Jurisdiction to the Crown. There had needed no restitution if
there had not been some usurpation. And who can wonder that the Court of Rome
so potent, so prudent, so vigilant and intent to their own advantage, should
have made some progress in their long destined project, during the raigns of
six or seven Kings immediately succeeding one another, who were all either of
doubtful title, or mere usurpers without any title, Such as cared not much for
the flowers of the Crown, so they might but hold the Diadem it self from their
competitors?

Therefore our Ecclesiastical law was called the Kings law, because the edge
and validity of it did proceed from authority royal, our Ecclesiastical Courts
were styled the Kings Courts* by his Judges.

It is true, the habitual Jurisdiction of Bishops flows from their Ordination:
But the actual exercise thereof in Public courts, after a coercive manner is
from the gracious concessions of Sovereign Princes. In a word, the law being
merely intended as a remedy against usurpation, it cannot be a new Law, but
only a Legislative declaration of the Old Common Law of England.

I will conclude this Chapter with the words of Bishop Bilson: As for his
Patriarchate by Gods law he has non^; in this Realm for Six hundred years
after Christ he had non^; The true differ. Part 2.
for the last Six hundred years looking after greater matters he would have
none; Above or against the Princes Sword, he can have none; to the Subversion
of the Faith or oppression of his Brethren he ought to have none; you must seek
further for Subjection to his Tribunal; This Land ^weth him none.

CHAP. V.
That the Britanick Churches were ever exempted from foreign Jurisdiction, for
the first six hundred years, And so ought to continue.
THirdly, supposing that the reformed Church of England had separated it self
from Rome, and supposing that the municipal laws of the Realm then in force had
not warranted such a separation; yet the British Churches, that is the Churches
of the British Islands, England, Scotland, and Ireland, etc. by the
constitution of the Apostles, and by the solemn sentence of the Catholic
Church, are exempted from all foreign Jurisdiction, and cannot be Schismatical
in the lawful vindication of a just privilege so well founded: for the clearer
manifestation whereof let us consider. Cyp. de unit* Ecclesiae.


First, that all the twelve Apostles were equal in mission, Conc. Ephesians. in
Epist.
equal in commission, equal in power, Synod. ad N^stor.
equal in honor, equal in all things, Ambr. et alij. Bell de Pont. l. 4. ^ C.
22.
except priority of order, without which no Society can well Subsist.

So much Bellarmine confesses, that by these words, As my father sent me, so
send I you, Our Savior endowed them with all the fullness of power that
mortal men were capable of. And therefore no single Apostle had Jurisdiction
over the rest, par in parem no^ habet potestatem, The supremacy in the whole
College of the Apostl^s.
but the whole College of Apostles to which the supreme Mesnagery of
Ecclesiastical affairs did belong in common, whether a new Apostle was to be
ordained, or the office of Deaconship was to be erected, Act. 1.
Act. 6.
or fit persons were to be delegated for the ordering of the Church, ^ct. 8. st
1^. Act. 11.
as Peter and John, Judas and Sylas; Or informations of great moment were to be
heard* Act. 11.
as against Peter himself. Though Peter out of Modesty might condescend and
submit to that to which he was not obliged in duty; yet it had not become the
other Apostles to sit as Judges upon their Superior, Act 15.
placed over them by Christ. Or whether the weightier questions, of the calling
of the Gentiles, and circumcision, and the law of Moses, were to be determined,
still we find the Supremacy in the College.

Secondly, The other Apostles had Successors as well as S. Peter.
that drousy dream, that the plenitude of Ecclesiastical power and Jurisdiction
was given by Christ to Saint Peter as to an ordinary Pastor, to be derived
from him to his Successors, but to the rest of the Apostles as delegates for
term of life, to die with themselves, as it is lately and boldly asserted,
without reason, without authority, either divine or humane, so it is most
repugnant to the doctrine of the Fathers, who make all Bishops to be the Vicars
and Ambassadors of Christ, (not of the Pope) and successors of the Apostles,
indifferently, Vicaria ordinatione, who make but one Episcopacy in the world,
whereof every Bishop has an equal share. St. Peter was a Pastor, and the
Pastoral office is of perpetual necessity in the Church. True; But so were all
the rest of the Apostles Pastors as well as he. And if we examine the matter
more narrowly cui bono? for whose advantage this distinction was devised, it
was not for S. Peter's own advantage, who setting aside his principallity of
order) is confessed to have had but an equal share of power with his fellow
Apostles, but fors, the Popes advantage, and the Roman courts, whom they desire
to invest solely with the key of all original Jurisdiction.

And if we trace on this Argument a little further, Why the Bishop of Rome, S.
Peter's succ^ssour rather then of Antioch.
to search out how the Bishop of Rome comes to be Saint Peter's heir, ex ass^,
to the exclusion of his Elder Brother the Bishop of Antioch, they produce no
authority that I have seen, but a blind ill grounded legend, Plat. in vita Sti.
Pe^ri.
out of a counterfeit Heg^sippus, of Saint Peter's being about to leave Rome,
and Christ's meeting him upon the way and admonishing him to return to Rome,
where he must be crucified for his name; which reason halts on both sides; The
foundation is Apocryphal, and the superstruction is weak and unjointed without
any necessary connection.

Thirdly, The highest constitution of the Apostles exceeded not nat^onal
Primats.
it appears not to us, that the Apostles in their days did either set up any
universal Monarchy in the Church, or so much dilate the borders or bounds of
any one man's single Jurisdiction, as to subject so great a part of the
Christian World, as the Western Patriarchate, to his obedience. The highest
that they went, if any of those Canons which bear their names be genuine, was
to national or provincial Primates or Patriarchs; for a Protarch or Primate
and a Patriarch, in the language of the ancient Church signified one and the
same thing, in whose praeheminence there was more of order and care, then of
single Jurisdiction and power. Read their three and thirtieth Canon. Can.
Apost. 33.
It behooves the Bishops of every distinct Nation to know him who is their
first, (or Primate) and to esteem him as their head. And to do nothing that is
of difficulty, or great moment contrary to his opinion. But neither let him. do
any thing without the opinion of all them. This National Primacy, or
Protarchat^, or Patriarchate under which the Britannique Churches flourished
for many ages, is the very same which we contend for.

Fourthly, How some Primates came to be more respected in the Church then
others.
it is worthy of our inquiry, how in process of time some Primates did obtain
a much more eminent degree of honor, and a larger share in the government of
the Church then others. And of this their adventitious Grandeur, we find three
principal fountains. First, ancient customs. Secondly, the Canons of the
Fathers. And thirdly, the edicts of Christian Princes.

First, Either by custom.
ancient customs. Upon this ground the first general Council of Nice settled
the authority and priveledges of the three Patriarchal Sees of Rome,
Alexandria, and Antioch, Con. Nic.
Let ancient customs prevail. And these customs commonly proceeded either
from the memory of the Apostles, who had founded such Churches, from whence as
from Apostolical fountains their neighbors did fetch sound doctrine, and
reciprocally paid to them due respect. So Hosius proposed in the Occidental
Council of Sardis, in favor of the Sea of Rome, Does it please you that we
should honor the memory of St. Peter? Or from the Grandeur of the City.
Or from the more powerful principallity of the City, which is alleged by the
Council of Chalcedon as a reason of the greatness both of the Sees of Rome and
Constantinople, Conc: Chal. (...) etc.
because they were the seats of the Emperors.

Secondly, Or by decrees of Councels.
the Canons of the Fathers, either without custom or against custom. Thus the
Bishop of Jerusalem, an Apostolical See, was raised above the Bishop of
Cesarea an Imperial City, notwithstanding the contrary custom. Thus
Constantinople, because it was newly made the seat of the Empire, was equalled
to an Apostolical See, that is Rome, and preferred before all the rest, by the
general Councels of Constantinople and Chalcedon, notwithstanding the
opposition of the Bishop of Rome by his Legates, who grieved the more to see
Thracia, which he conceived to belong to his own Jurisdiction, to be annexed to
a rival See.

Lastly, Or by Edicts of Princes.
the Edicts of Sovereign Princes, who out of favor, either to the place of
their Birth, or of their residence, or of their own foundation, or forth
Weal-publick, and better accommodation of their subjects; have enlarged or
restrain (...) Patriarchates within their own Territories, and raised up new
Primats or Patriarchs as they thought fit: But of this more in my next
conclusion.

Fifthly, Many Pr^mats subject to none of the five great Patriarchs.
notwithstanding the pre-eminence of the five great Patriarchs of Rome,
Constantinople, Alexandria, Antioch and Hi^rusalem; and their great power and
authority in the Church, especially in general Councels; yet there were many
other Protarchs or Patriarchs, who had no dependence upon them at all out of
Council, nor ought them any obedience, but only a precedence and honorable
respect.

Ruffinus a Priest of the Roman Church who lived not long after the council of
Nice; Ruff. hist. Eccl. l. 1. c. 6.
And one who understood the ancient proper bounds of the Roman Patriarchate as
well as any man, does limit it to the Suburbicary Churches* that is a part of
Italy, and three Islands, Sicily, Sardinia, and Corsica. Africa had a Primate
of their own at Carthage; the rest of Italy at Millaine; France at Arles or
Lions; Germany at Vienna; Britain was removed far enough out of this account.

But this appears most clearly in the case between the Patriarch of Antioch and
the Cyprian Bishops, The case between the Patriarch of Antioch and Cyprian
Bishops.
sentenced in the general Council of Ephesus. The Patriarch of Antioch
challenged the ordination of the Cyprian Bishops, and consequently a
Patriarchal Jurisdiction over them; for all other Rights do follow the right of
ordination. They denied both his right of ordination and jurisdiction, The
difference was heard. The witnesses were examined for matter of fact, And a
sentence was given* not only in favor of the Cyprian Bishops, but of all
others which were in the same condition. Among which number were our
Brittannique Churches, as shall evidently appear in this ensuing discourse.

But first let us listen to the words of the Council; Conc. Ephesians. part. 1.
Act. 7.
Since common diseases do need greater remedies, because they bring greater
damage; If it be not the ancient custom that the Bishops of Antioch ordain in
Cyprus, as the Council is sufficiently satisfied; The Cyprian Praelates shall
hold their rights untouched and unviolated, according to the Canons of the holy
Fathers, and the ancient custom, ordaining their own Bishops. And let the same
be observed in other Diocesses, and in all Provinces, That no Bishop occupy
another Province, which formerly and from the beginning was not under the power
of him, or his predecessors. If any do occupy another Province, or subject it
by force, let him restore it, that the Canons of the Fathers be not slighted,
nor pride creep into the Church under the praetext of worldly power, lest by
little and little that liberty be lost which Christ purchased for us with his
blood. Therefore it has pleased the Holy Synod, that every Province enjoy its
rights and customs unviolated, which it had from the beginning. These words
from the beginning (...), are twice repeated. It is no marvel if some addicted
to the interest of Rome have gone about by Slight of hand, but very
unsuccessefully to shuffle this Canon out of the Acts of the Council. If the
Fathers in that Holy and ecumenical Council, were so tender and sensible of
pride creeping into the Church in those days, and of the danger to lose their
Christian liberty in the case of the Bishop of Antioch, who neither pretended
Divine right, nor universal Jurisdiction, nor superiority above Councels, what
would they not have said or done in this present case of the Bishop of Rome,
who challenges not only the right of ordaining, but the grace of ordination,
and Sovereign Jurisdiction, not over Cyprus only, but over the whole Christian
world; not from custom, or Canons, or edicts, but from the institution of
Christ, who makes all the validity of the decrees of those ecumenical Councels
which his Predecessors received and reverenced as the Gospel, to depend upon
his own confirmation?

To apply this home to the question. Greg. L. 1. Ep. 24.
The General Council of Ephesus declared, that no Bishop should occupy any
Province, The case of the Cyprian Bishops applied.
which before that Council and from the beginning, had not been under the
Jurisdiction of him or his Predecessors; And that if any Patriarch usurped any
Jurisdiction over a free Province, he should quit it, for so it pleased, not
the Pope, but the Holy Synod, that every province should enjoy its ancient
rights pure and inviolate. Now if it shall evidently appear, that the Bishops
of Rome never exercised any manner of Jurisdiction over the Britannique
Churches from the beginning, no nor yet before the general Council of Ephesus,
nor for six hundred years after Christ, that is, until they themselves had
disowned their Patriarchal right, when Pope Boniface the third who entered into
the Roman See about three years after the death of Gregory the great, obtained
from Phocas an usurping Emperor to be universal Bishop, that is to say, an
usurping Monarch over the Church, which fell out so soon after the arrival of
Austin in England, that there wanted time to have settled the Roman
Patriarchate in Britain, though the Brittons had been as willing to receive
it, as they were averse from it: and if no true general Council since that time
has ever subjected Britain unto the Roman Court; Then the case is clear, that
Rome can pretend no right over Britain, without their own consents, nor any
further, nor for any longer time then they are pleased to oblige themselves;
Then the subsequent and violent usurpations of the Roman Bishops cannot render
them Bonae fidei possessores, lawful owners, but that they are always bound
to quit their encroachments, and the Brittannique Churches, and those who
derive by succession from them, are always free to vindicate and reassume
their ancient rights and privileges.

In this controversy by law the burden of the proof ought to rest upon them,
The proof in this cause ought to rest upon our adversaries,
who affirm a right and challenge a Jurisdiction; not upon us who deny it. Men
are not put to prove negatives. Let them produce their Registers, and show for
the first six hundred years what Ecclesiastical Courts the Roman Bishops or
their Legates have held in Britain, what causes they have removed from thence
to Rome, upon appeals, what sentences given in Britain they have repealed
there, what British subjects they have excommunicated, or summoned to appear at
Rome; let them show what Bishoprics they have conferred in Britain in those
days, what British Bishops did then entitle themselves to their Bishoprics,
by the Grace of God and of the Apostolic See; let them declare to the world
how many of our British Primates or Patriarchs of York* London, or Caerleon,
have constantly, or at all repaired to Rome, to be ordained, or have received
Licenses, or dispensations thence for their ordination at home, or elsewhere,
for ordinationis jus caetera jura sequuntur, He who is necessarily by law
obliged to have recourse to a foreign Prelate for his ordination, is thereby
employed to be inferior or subject to his ordainer. If they can say nothing to
any of these points, they may disclaim their Patriarchall right in Britain,
and hold their peace for ever.

The reasons why I set York before London in the order of our British
Patriarchs or Primates are these; First, because I find their names subscribed
in that order in the Council of Arles, held in the year 314. consisting as some
say of 200. as others say of 600. Bishops, convocated by Constantine the great,
before the first Council of Nice, to hear and determine the appeal of the
Donatists, from the sentence of the Imperial delegates, whereof Melchiades the
Bishop of Rome was one. It were a strange sight in these days to see a Pope
turn Legate to the Emperors in a cause of Ecclesiastical cognizance.
Secondly, for the same reason that Rome and Constantinople in those days of
the Roman Puissance were dignified above all other Churches, because they were
then the seats of the Emperors. York was then an Imperial City, the Metropolis
of the chief Britannick Province, called at that time maxima Caesariensis,
where Severus the Emperor died, and had his funeral pile upon Severs hill, a
place adjoining to that City, where Constantine the great was born, in domo
Regali vocata Pertenna, in the Royal Palace, whereof some poor remainders are
yet to be seen, then called Pertenna, now a small part of it called vulgarly
Bederna, a very easy mistake, if we consider that the British Pronounce P. for
B. and T. like D. situate near Christ's Church in Curia Regis or in the Kings
Court, on the one hand, and extending it self near to St. Helens Church upon
the walls, now demolished, on the other hand.

Although their silence alone to my former demand, (at least of so many whom I
have seen that have written upon this Subject) be a sufficient conviction of
them, and a sufficient vindication of us, yet for further manifestation of the
truth; Let us consider first, The Brittannique Church ancienter then the Roman.
that if we compare the ages and originals of the Roman and Britannique
Churches, we shall find that the Britannique is the more ancient and Elder
Sister to the Roman it self; Gild. de e^id. et conq^. Brit.
The Britannique Church being planted by Joseph of Arimathea in the reign of
Tiberius Caesar: where as it is confessed that Saint Peter came not to Rome, to
lay the foundation of that Church, until the second year of Claudius, secundo
Claudii anno in Italiam venit. So if we look to the beginning, Plat in vita
Sancti. Petri. Bar. an. 44.
according to the direction of the Council of Ephesus, the Britannique Church
in its first original was free from the Jurisdiction of the Bishop and Court of
Rome, where there was neither Bishop, nor Court, nor Ecclesiastic Jurisdiction
at that day.

Secondly, The Brittannique Churches sided with the Eastern against the Roman.
that it continued free in ensuing ages appears evidently by that opposition
which the Church of Britain maintained against the Church of Rome, siding with
the Eastern Churches about the question of those times, concerning the
observation of Easter, and the administration of Baptism, wherein Austine
about the six hundredth year labored to conform them, but in vain. Is it
credible that the whole British and Scottish Church should so unanimously have
dissented from Rome, for many hundred years together, if they had been subject
to the Jurisdiction of the Roman Bishop, as of their lawful Patriarch, or that
the Bishop of Rome in all that time should never so much as question them for
it, if they had been his Subjects? Even then when Pope Victor durst attempt to
deny or withdraw his communion from all the Asiatick Churches, about the same
business. Neither were the British Churches at last conformed to Rome by any
Patriarchall power, but by many conferences, by the necessity of their civil
affairs, and by long tract of time, some sooner, some later. A long tract of
time indeed, when some in the most Septentrionall parts of these Provinces were
not reduced until a little before the late reformation.

Thirdly, among the principal privileges of patriarchall power is the right of
ordination. British Bishops ordained at home.
That all Metropolitans at least should either be ordained by the Patriarch; or
by License from the Patriarch.

This appears clearly in the dispute between the Patriarch of Antioch and the
Cyprian Bishops; But where the Bishops were (...), and (...) independent upon,
not subject unto any foreign Prelate there, they ordained at their own
pleasures, needed no License. Such were our British Primates ordained always,
or ordinarily at Rome, according to the Cyprian privileges, creating new
Bishoprics, ordaining new Bishops at their own pleasures, without giving any
account to Rome. So we read of St. Telaus, who had been driven out of his own
Country by an Epidemical sickness for a long time, Reg. Land. apud Vsh. d^prim.
that at his return he consecrated and ordained Bishops as he thought fit. That
he made one Hismael Bishop of St. David's. Eccl. Brit. p. 56.
And in like manner advanced many other men of the same order to the same
degree, sending them throughout the country, and dividing the parishes for the
best accommodation of the Clergy and of the People. And if there were no other
proof of our exemption but only the small number of the Bishops that were
ordained by all the succeeding Popes for about the first three hundred years
until the death of Marcellinus: It were sufficient to show that the Bishops of
Rome in those days had little or nothing to do out of their own Province, and
that their jurisdiction extended nothing near so far as Britain.

Saint Peter Ordained but three in his supposed five and twenty years, that is
Linus and Cletus, Plat.
ut sacerdotale Ministerium Romano populo and advenis been sentientibus
exhiberent, and Clement, to whom he bequeathed his Episcopal Chair. Linus but
eleven, Clement but fifteen, Anacletus but six, Evaristus but five, Alexander
but five, Sixtus but four, etc. These were few enough for their own Province,
and none to spare for Britain. In the whole term of three hundred years there
were few above two hundred Bishops Ordained at Rome. Italy alone may brag well
near of as many Bishops at one time, as many succeeding Popes did ordain in all
their ages. Let them not tell us of the scarcity of Christians in those days.
The writings of Tertullian and Saint Cyprian, and the Councels held within the
time limited, do evince the contrary. No, the first badge of their Patriarchal
authority in Britain was sending of the Pall, as the only badge during the
times of the Britons and Saxons; And the first Pall that came into Britain was
after six hundred years.

But this does yet appear much more clearly from the answer of Dionothus the
Reverend and learned Abbot of Bangor, The answer of Dionothus.
which according to the manner of those times was an University or Seminary of
Learning and piety among the Britons, and he the well deserving Rector of it,
made in his own name, and in the name of the Britons, when they pressed him to
submit to the Romaen Bishop as his Patriarch, that he knew no obedience due to
him whom they called the Pope, Spelm. Conc. An. 601.
but the obedience of love; And that under God they were to be governed by the
Bishop of Caerleon.

Observe first, what strangers the Britons were to the Papacy, That man whom
you call the Pope. Secondly, that they acknowledged no subjection or
subordination, no obedience whatsoever due from them to Rome, but only the
reciprocal duty of love, that was just the same that Rome did owe to them.
Thirdly, that under God, that is immediately without any Foreign Prelate or
Patriarch intervening, they were to be governed by the Bishop of Caerleon, as
their only Primate and Patriarch. Which privilege continued to the succeeding
Bishops of that See for many ages afterward, saving that the Archiepiscopal
Chair was removed from Caerleon to St. David's in the Reign of King Arthur. And
lastly, observe the time when this answer was made, after the first six hundred
years were expired. So it is a full demonstrative convincing proof for the
whole term prefixed.

But lest any man should cavil and say, Confirm by two British Synods.
that Dionothus was but one man, and that the body of the British Clergy might
be of another mind; that which follows strikes the question dead: That Austin,
Saint Gregory's Legate, proposing three things to the Britons. First that they
should submit to the Roman Bishop. Secondly, that they should conform to the
customs of the Roman Province about the observation of Easter, and the
administration of Baptism. And Lastly, that they should join with him in
Preaching to the Saxons: all the British Clergy assembled themselves together,
Spel. eon. an. 601.
Bishops and Priests in two several Synods, one after another, Galt. mon. l. 2.
c. 12.
to deliberate hereupon, and after mature consideration, they rejected all his
propositions Synodically, Beda and omnes alii. Resp. Greg. ad. 8. quest.
and refused flatly and unanimously to have any thing to do with him upon those
terms. Insomuch as St. Austin was necessitated to return over the Seas, to
obtain his own consecration, and after his return to consecrate the Saxon
Bishops alone, without the assistance of any other Bishops. They refused indeed
to their own cost, twelve hundred innocent Monks of Bangor, Bed. l. 2. c. 2.
shortly after lost their lives for it. Rome was ever builded in blood;
Howsoever these words [quamvis Augustino prius mortuo] have since been forged
and inserted into venerable Bede, to palliate the matter, which are wanting in
the Saxon Copy. Ant. Brit p. 48.
The concurring Testimonies of all our Historiographers witnessing the absolute
and unanimous refusal of the Britons to submit to Rome, and the matter of fact
it self, do confirm this for an undoubted truth beyond all exception. So clear
a truth it is, that the British Churches for the first three hundred years
neither ought nor paid any subjection to Rome. Whence might well proceed that
answer of Elutherius to King Lucius (if that Epistle be not counterfeit) when
he desired him to send over a Copy of the Roman Laws, That he should choose a
Law [Ecclesiastical] out of holy writ by the Council of his Kingdom, that is
principally of his Bishops, for (says he) you are the Vicar of Christ in your
Kingdom. The same in effect which is contained in the Laws of Edward the
Confessor. Hence it is that both our Histories and our Laws do style our
Archbishops Pri^ates, Malm. prol. ad. lib. de gest. pont.
which in the Language of the Primitive times signifies as much as Patriarchs.
Aug. Glos. juris C. Cleros did: 21.
And sometimes call them expressly by the very name of Patriarchs it self. Hence
Urban the second entertained and welcomed Anselm our Archbishop of Canterbury
into the Council of Bar, tanquam alterius orbis Papam, as the Pope of another
world; Or as others relate the passage, as the Apostle of another world, and a
Patriarch worthy to be reverenced.

CHAP. VI.
That the King and Church of England had both sufficient authority and
sufficient grounds to withdraw their obedience from Rome, and did it with due
moderation.
SO from the persons who made the separation, from the Laws and Statutes of
our Realm which warranted the separation, and from the ancient Liberties and
privileges of the Britannick Churches, Sovereign Princes have power to alter
whatsoever is of humane institution in Ecclesiastical discipline.
I proceed to my fourth ground drawn from the Imperial prerogatives of our
Sovereign Princes; That though we should wave all the other advantages, yet
they had power to alter in the external discipline and regiment of the Church,
whatsoever was of humane institution, for the benefit and advantage of the body
politic.

Doctor Holden proposes the case right by way of Objection, Append. de Schism.
Art. 4. p. 526.
But peradventure the Protestants will say, that the King or supreme Senate of
every Kingdom or Commonwealth have power to make Laws and statutes, by
which, either directly, or at least indirectly, as well the Clergy as the Laity
of that Kingdom or Commonwealth are bound to reject all foreign Jurisdiction,
superiority and dependence. And that his Legislative power is essentially
annexed to every Kingdom and Commonwealth, seeing that otherwise they cannot
prevent those dangers which may spring and issue from that fountain, to their
destruction and ruin.

The Protestants do say indeed without all peradventure, upon that very ground
which is alleged in the objection. Neither do the Protestants want the
suffrage of Roman Catholics therein. Suar. l. 3. de prim. summi Pontificis
cap. 1. number. 4.
Because humane nature (says one) cannot be destitute of necessary remedies to
its own preservation. And another, To whom a Kingdom is granted, of necessity
all things are esteemed to be granted without which a Kingdom cannot be
governed. Morl. in Emp. jur. p. 1. tit. 2. Citati a Sanc. cla^. in Art. 37.
And a Kingdom cannot be governed, unless the King enjoy this power even over
Clerks, etc. Necessary remedies are no remedies, unless they be just, but
worse then the disease. And being just, the Subject is obliged to active
obedience.

But let us see what the Doctor pleads in answer to his own objection. Append.
de Schism. p. 527.
First he passes by the native power of civil Sovereign Empire, which ought
not to have been omitted; for therein consists the main force of the argument.
But as to the Ecclesiastical part, he says he could demonstrate clearly, if it
were needful, that the dependence of Bishops, and other Orthodox Christians
upon the Pope, being rightly conceived as it is, and as it is really necessary,
according to the certain and true princ^ples of Catholic Religion, does not
bring any the least shadow of danger to the Commonwealth, though in hostility
with the Pope, or of a different communion from the Pope. If we lived in
Plato's Commonwealth, where every one did his duty, this reason were of more
force. Far be it from us to imagine, that the right exercise of any lawful
power, grounded upon the certain and true principles of Catholic Religion,
should be dangerous to any Society. But this is not our case. What if the
Bishops and Court of Rome have swerved from those certain and true principles
of Catholic Religion? or have abused that power which was committed to their
trust by Christ, or by his Church? Or have usurped more authority then did
belong unto them? Or have Engrossed all Episcopal Jurisdiction to themselves,
leaving the Bishops of the Land but Ciphers in their own Diocesses? Or have
hazarded the utter ruin and destruction of the Church by their Simony,
extortion, provisions, reservations, and exemptions? Or have obtruded new
unwarrantable Oaths upon the Subjects, inconsistent with their allegiance? Or
have drained the Kingdom of its treasure by pecuniary avaricious arts? Or have
challenged to themselves a negative voice against the right heir of the Crown;
Or authority to depose a crowned King, and absolve his Subjects from their
Oaths and allegiance to their Sovereigns? And have showed themselves
incorrigible in all these things. This is our case. In any one of these cases,
much more in them all conjoined, it is not only lawful, but very necessary for
Christian Princes to reform such gross abuses, and to free themselves and
their Subjects from such a tyrannical yoke, if they can by the direction of a
general Council, if not of a Provincial. And it is not Schism but Loyalty in
their Subjects to yield obedience.

The same Author proceeds, P. 528.
That no civil power how Sovereign soever can correct the fundamental articles
of Christian faith, Protestants in their reformation have altered no Articles
of Religion nor sacred rites, nor violated Charity.
nor pervert the order of sacred rites received by universal tradition as
instituted by Christ, nor justify any thing by their Edicts which is against
Christian charity. To all this we do readily assent, and never did presume to
arrogate to our selves, or to exercise any such power. But still this is wide
from our case. What if the Bishop of Rome have presumed to coin and attempted
to obtrude upon us new Articles of Faith, as he has in his new Creed, and to
pervert the sacred rites instituted by Christ, as in his withholding the Cup
from the Laity? Then without doubt not we, but he is guilty of the Schism;
Then it is lawful to separate from him in his innovations, without incurring
the crime of Schism. This is laid down by the Author himself as an evident
conclusion, and we thank him for it; p. 533.
That it is necessary for every Christian to acknowledge no authority under
heaven, either Ecclesiastical or Civil, that has power to abrogate those
things that are revealed and instituted by Christ, or to determine those things
which are opposite unto them, quod Schismatis origo foret, which should be the
original of Schism. But where that Author infers as a corollary from the
former Proposition, p. 528.
That no Edict of a Sovereign Prince can Justify Schism, because all Schism
is destructive to Christian charity; I must crave leave with all due respect to
his person, to his learning, to his moderation, and to his charity, to rectify
that mistake. If by Schism he understand criminal Schism, that which he says
is most true; That were not only to Justify the wicked, which is an
abomination to the Lord, but to justify wickedness it self: But every
separation or Schism taken in a large sense is not criminal, nor at all
destructive to Christian Charity. Sometimes it is a necessary, Christian,
charitable duty. In all the cases that I have supposed above, and shall prove
hereafter, they that make the Separation continue Catholics, and they that
give the cause become the Schismatiques.

But it may be urged, That this proceeds from the merit of the cause, not from
the authority of the Sovereign Prince.

I answer, It proceeds from both. Three things are necessary to make a public
reformation lawful; Just grounds, due moderation, and sufficient authority.
There may be just grounds without sufficient authority, and sufficient
authority without just grounds; and both sufficient authority and just grounds
without due moderation. But where these three things concur, it justifies the
reformation before God and man, and renders that separation lawful, which
otherwise were Schismatical.

Lastly, p. 530.
it is alleged, That the power of the Sovereign Magistrate is not so absolute
that he can command any thing at his pleasure, so as to oblige his Subjects to
obedience, in things repugnant to the Law of nature, or the positive Law of
God. No Orthodox Christian can doubt of this truth. Augustine
The authority of the inferior cease, where the Superior declares his
pleasure to the contrary. Nor swerved from the Law of nature, or positive Laws
of God.
Da veniam Imperator, tu carcerom, ille gehennam minatur, Pardon me O Emperor,
thou threatenest me with imprisonment, but God Almighty with hellfire. But
this is nothing to our case, neither the Law of Nature, nor the Law of God does
enjoin British Christians to buy pardons, and indulgences, and dispensations,
and Bulls, and Palls, and privileges at Rome, contrary to the fundamental Laws
of the Realm. Boniface the eighth by his Bull exempted the University of Oxford
from the Jurisdiction of the Archbishop of Canterbury, Ex Archivis Turris
Londinensis citat author Antiquit.
whereupon did grow a controversy between Thomas Arundel Archbishop, Acad.
Cantab.
and the University; And the said Bull was decreed to be void by two succeeding
Kings, Richard the second, and Henry the fourth in Parliament, as being
obtained in praejudicium Coronae suae, and Legum and consuetudinum Regni sui
enervationem to the prejudice of his Imperial crown, and to the weakening of the
Laws and Customs of his Realm.

But this disobedience to the decrees of Sovereign Princes must be joined with
passive obedience, In cases doubtful we may not disobey the King and the Laws.
Exodus 1. 17. 1 Samuel 22. 17.
it must be only when and where their commands are evidently unjust, such as
Pha^aohs commanding the Hebrew Midwives to kill all the Male children, or Saul's
injoyning his guard to slay the Priests of the Lord, or like N^buchadnezzars
idolatrous edict, charging all men to fall down and worship his golden Image.
For otherwise if the case be doubtful, it is a rule in Case divinity, Subditis
tenentur in favorem Legis judicare, Subjects are bound to judge in favor of
the Law; Otherwise they run into a certain crime of disobedience, for fear of
an uncertain. A War may be unjust in the Prince, and yet the Soldier be
guiltless. Nor is the Subject obliged to sift the grounds of his Sovereigns
commands too narrowly. It happens often, that reum facit Principem iniquitas
imperandi, August. Unjust commands may be justly obeyed*
innocentem subditum ordo serviendi, The Prince may be unjust in his commands,
and yet the Subject innocent in his obedience. Take the case at the worst, it
must be doubtful at the least, the Popes Sovereignty and the Jurisdiction of
the Roman Court being rejected by three parts of the Christian world, and so
unanimously shaken off by three Kingdoms. And in such a case, who is fittest to
be Judge, the Pope, the People, or the King; Not the Pope, he is the person
accused, And frustra expectatur cujuslibet authoritas contra seipsum, It is in
vain to expect that one should employ his authority against himself. Not the
people; would a Judge take it well, that a Jailer should detain the Prisoner
from execution, until he were satisfied of the justice of his sentence? Or a
Pilot that he may not move his Rudder according to the alterable face of the
heavens, but at the discretion of the ordinary Mariners? No, whenever any
question has been moved between any kingdom or Republic of what Communion
soever and the Court of Rome, concerning the liberties and privileges of the
one, or the extortions and encroachments of the other, they have evermore
assumed the last Judicature to themselves, Pr^nces are obliged to protect their
subjects from the ^yranny of Ecclesiastical Judges. Pa^s. lait etc. Citati a
Sancta Clara in Art 37. p. 420. 421.
as of right it does belong unto them.

The Romanists themselves do acknowledge that Sovereign Princes by the Law of
God and nature, not only may, but are in justice obliged to oppose the tyranny
of Ecclesiastical Judges, and to protect and free their subjects from their
violence and oppression. Parsons himself wondreth that any man should deny this
power to Kings in their own kingdoms. But we are fully satisfied and assured,
that that universal power which the Pope claims by Divine right over all
Christians, and particularly over the Britannique Churches without their
consents; And much more that Jurisdiction which de facto he did, or at least
would have exercised there, (and less then which he would not go) to the
destruction of their natural and Christian liberties and privileges, was and
is a tyrannical and oppressive yoke. If all Christians were as well satisfied
of the truth of this our assumption as we are, this controversy were at an
end. And thus far all Roman Catholics not interessed, nor prepossessed with
prejudice, do accord fully with us, that by whomsoever Papal power was given,
whether by Christ, or his Apostles, or the Fathers of the Church in succeeding
ages, it was given for edification not for destruction. And that the Roman
Court in later days has sought to impose grievous oppressive and intolerable
burdens upon their subjects, which it is lawful for them to shake off, without
regarding their censure, as we shall see in the next proposition. But because
all are not so well satisfied about the just extent of Papal authority and
power, we must search a little higher.

Secondly, we do both agree, that Sovereign Princes may by enabled, and
authorized, either by concession or by prescription for time immemoriall,
Sancta Clara p. 146. and 417.
(perhaps it were more properly said by virtue of their Sovereign authority
over the whole body politic, whereof the Clergy are a part) ^o exercise all
external acts of Ecclesiastical coercive Jurisdiction, Kings may exercise
exernal acts of Ecclesiastical jurisdiction by fit delegates.
by themselves, or at least by fit delegates, praecipiendo suis subditis
Sacerdotibus, ut excommunicent rebels and contumaces. And this is asserted in
the case of Abbesses, which being women are less capable of any spiritual
Jurisdiction. The truth is, that as all Ecclesiastical Courts, and all
Ecclesiastical coercive jurisdiction did flow at first either from the Bounty
and goodness of Sovereign Princes to the Church, or from their connivence, or
from the voluntary consent and free submission of Christians; Volenti non fit
injuria, consent takes away error, (I except always that jurisdiction which
is purely spiritual, and an essential part of the power of the Keys, whereof
Emperors and Kings are not capable.) So whenever the Weal-publick and the
common safety of their people does require it, for advancement of public peace
and tranquillity, and for the greater ease and convenience of the subject in
general* according to the Vicissitude and conversion of humane affairs, and the
change of Monarchies, they may upon well grounded experience in a National
Synod or Council, more advisedly retract what their predecessors had advisedly
granted or permitted. And alter the face and rules of the external discipline
of the Church, in all such things as are but of humane right, when they become
hurtful or impeditive of a greater good: in which cases their subjects may with
good conscience, and are bound in duty to conform themselves to their Laws.
Otherwise Kingdoms and Societies should want necessary remedies for their own
preservation, which is granted by both parties to be an absurdity.

Weigh all the parts of Ecclesiastical discipline, The Emperors of old did the
same.
and consider what one there is which Christian Emperors of old did not either
exercise by themselves, or by their delegates, or did not regulate by their
Laws, or both, concerning the privileges and revenues of holy Church, the
calling of Councels, the presiding in Councels, the dissolving of Councels, the
confirming of Councels, concerning holy Orders, concerning the patronage of,
and nomination to Ecclesiastical benefices and dignities, concerning the
Jurisdiction, the suspension, deposition, and ordering of Bishops, and Priests,
and Monks, and generally all Persons in holy orders, concerning Appeals,
concerning Religion and the Rites and Ceremonies thereof, concerning the Creeds
or common Symbols of faith, concerning Heresy, Schism, Judaisme, the
suppression of Sects, against Swearing, Cursing, Blaspheming, Profaneness,
and Idolatry, concerning Sacraments, Sanctuaries, Simony, Marriages, Divorces,
and generally all things which are of Ecclesiastical cognizance, wherein he
that desires satisfaction, and particularly to see how the coercive power of
Ecclesiastical Courts and Judges did flow from the gracious concessions of
Christian Princes, may (if he be not too much possessed with prejudice) resolve
himself, by reading the first Book of the Code, the Authentiques or Novels of
Justinian the Emperor, and the Capitulars of Charles the great, and his
successors Kings of France. We have been requested, said Justinian, by Menna
the Archbishop of this City, Novel. 83.
beloved of God, and universal Patriarch, to grant this privilege to the most
reverend Clerks, etc. in pecuniary causes referring them first to the Bishop,
and if he could not compose or determine the difference, then to the secular
Judge; And in criminal causes if the crime were civil, to the civil Magistrate,
if Ecclesiastical, to the Bishop. By the Council of our Bishops and Nobles
(said Charles the great) we have Ordained Bishops throughout the Cities, Lib.
5. ca. pit.
(that is, we have commanded and authorized it to be done.) And do decree to
assemble a Synod every year, that in our presence the Canonical decrees, and
Laws of the Church may be restored. I beseech you, what did our King Henry and
the Church of England more at the reformation?

It is true, Sovereign Princes are not said properly to make Canons, because
they do not prescribe them under pain of Excommunication, or suspension, or
degradation, or any spiritual punishment. But to affirm that they cannot make
Ecclesiastical constitutions, under a civil pain, or that they cannot
(especially with the advice and concurrence of their Clergy assembled in a
National Synod) reform errors and abuses, and remedy encroachments and
usurpations, and innovations, either in faith or discipline, and regulate the
new Canons, or Customs of Intruders and Upstarts, by the old Canons of the
primitive Fathers, is contrary to the sense and practice of all antiquity. King
Solomon deposed Abiathar from the high Priesthood and put Sadoc in his place.
Popes convented, impris^ned, deposed by Emperou^s.
Nor want we Presidents of Popes themselves who have been convented before
Emperors, as Sixtus the third before Valentinian, though Platina mince the
matter a little too much, (damnatur Bassus calumniator iniquus annuente
Valentiniano etc.) Leo the third before Charles the great. That have been
banished by Emperors, as Liberius unjustly banished by Constantius, and more
unjustly restored, Sylverius justly banished by Justinian. That have been
imprisoned by Sovereign Princes, as Pope John the first by Theodoric. That have
been deposed by them, As John the twelfth by Otho the great, and Gregory the
sixth by Henry the second, Henricus secundus in Italiam cum magno exercitu
veniens, Platin. in Gr^g. 6.
habita Synodo, cum Benedictum novum, Sylvestrum tertium, Gregorium sextum,
tanquam tria teterrima monstra abdicare se magistratu coegisset etc. Henry the
second coming into Italy with a great army, having convocated a Synod, when he
had compelled Benedict the Ninth, Sylvester the third, and Gregory the sixth,
as three most filthy monsters to quit their government, he created Syndeger
Bishop of Bamberge, afterward Clement the second Pope. Of old when any Schism
did infest the Roman Church, (as I think no See in the World has been oftener
rent asunder by pretenders to the Papacy) the Emperors when they pleased did
assume unto themselves the cognizance thereof, and determine the succession
either by themselves, Plat. in Bon. 1. Plat. in Sym.
or by their Exarch, or Delegates, as Honorius between Boniface the first and
Eulalius, Theodoric the King between Symmachus and Laurentius. The Exarch of
Ravenna between Sergius the first and Paschalis. Otho the third between John
the Seventeenth and Gregory the fifth. But when these imperial acts are done
in Synods, they are more authentic and more conform to Antiquity.

Thirdly, our learned and ingenuous countryman Davenport, under the name of
Franciscus a Sancta Clara, (far be it from me to censure Christian charity and
moderation for lukewarmnesse, or Atheistical neutrality, like those whose chief
religion consists in crying up a faction, I rather wish he had been more
universally acquainted with our English Doctrine) in his paraphrastical
exposition of our English Articles, to this question, P. 425.
How and whether it be lawful in points of faith to appeal from the Pope, and
to decline his Judgment, cites the resolution of Gerson in these words
following, Hoc etiam practicatum est per quoscunque Reges et Principes, etc.
This also has been practiced by all Kings and Princes, who have withdrawn
themselves from the obedience of those whom such or such did Judge to be Popes,
which substractions nevertheless were approved by the sacred Council of
Constance, some expressly, An. 1110*
some implicitly. The most Christian King Lewis the twelfth convocated a
National Council of the French Church at Towers, The Council of Towers
allows to withdraw obedience from the Pope in certain cases.
wherein sundry Articles were proposed, deliberated of, and concluded, touching
these affairs. The third Article was, that if the Pope should invade another
Prince in an hostile manner, and excite other Princes to invade his
territories, whether that Prince might not lawfully withdraw himself from the
obedience of such a Pope; where observe, that though this case alone be
specified, as being fitted to that present controversy between the King of
France and the Pope; yet all other cases of the same nature or consequence are
included, Conc. Turon. R^sp. ad Art. 3.
And conclusum est per Concilium principem posse ab obedien^ia Papae se
subducere ac substrahere; non tamen in totum et indistincte, sed pro tuitione
tantum ac defensione jurium suorum temporalium. It was concluded by the
Council, that the Prince might withdraw himself from the obedience of the Pope;
yet not totally, nor indistinctly, but only for the defense of his temporal
rights. The fourth proposition was, when such a substraction was lawfully made,
what the Prince and his subjects, more particularly Prelates and other
Ecclesiastiques, ought to do in such things, for which they had formerly no
recourse to the Apostolic See. Resp. ad Art. 4.
And conclusum est per concilium servandum esse jus commune, antiquum, et
pragmaticam Sanctionem regni, ex deeretis Sacro-Sancti concilii Basiliensis
desumptam. It was concluded by the Council, that the ancient common right was
to be preserved, and the pragmaticall Sanction of the Kingdom, taken out of the
Decrees of the Sacred Council of Basil. The eighth proposition was, if the
Pope proceeding unjustly, and by force should pronounce any censures against
such a Prince, whether they ought to be obeyed. Resp. ad. Art. 8.
And conclusum est unanimiter per concilium talem sententiam nullam esse, nec
de jure vel alio quocunque modo ligare. It was concluded unanimously by the
Council, that such a Sentence was of no force, not binding in law, or any
other way; which opinion or resolution of theirs the above-men^tioned Author
says, he ought not to condemn whilst the Church does tolerate it.

Behold a principal cause of the separation of the English Church from the
Pope, the usurpations and encroachments of the Roman Court upon the Political
rights of the Crown, which they would not let go, until they were quite shaken
off.

Anthonius de Rosellis a zealous assertour of the Papal authority concludes,
that the Pope being an heretic, or an Apostate, though but in secret, it is
lawful (without any sentence or declaration preceding) for any of his Subjects
that know it, In tract. de potest. Papae et Imperat.
Especially for Kings and Princes, to depart from him, and withdraw themselves
from under his power by that natural right which they have to defend
themselves.

This may well be doubted of in the case of private persons, before sentence,
by those who believe him to be constituted by Christ the Sovereign Monarch of
the Universal Church; But in the case of Sovereign Princes with Provincial
Counsels, when General Counsels cannot be had, and much more when General
Counsels have given their sentence formerly in the case (as the Counsels of
Constance and Basil have done concerning the Papacy,) Princes may reform new
Can^ns by old.
And with us who are sufficiently resolved that St. Peter had no pre-eminence
above his fellows, but only principality of order and the beginning of unity;
And that whatsoever power the Bishop of Rome has more then any other Bishop,
it is merely from the customs of the Catholic Church, or from the Canons of
the Fathers, or from the Edicts of Princes, and may be taken away, upon
sufficient grounds, by equal authority to that by which it was acquired; I say
in this our case there can be no doubt at all. And yet it can much less be
doubted whether a Sovereign Prince with a National Synod may remedy the
encroachments and usurpations of the Roman Court, within his own dominions, or
exclude new Creeds and new Articles of faith, Part. 2. Act. 6.
C. 7. de. resol. fid. l. 1. C. 8. P. 152.
lately devised and obtruded, contrary to the determination of the General
Council of Ephesus, of which let us hear what is Doctor Holdens opinion, Notum
est inter Catholicos omnes tanquans axioma certissimum, etc. It is known that
all Catholics do hold this as a most certain axiom, that nothing ought or may
be maintained for a Christian revealed truth, but that which was received by
our Ancestors, and delivered from one generation to another by continued
succession from the times of the Apostles. This is all that we have done, and
done it with due submission to the highest Judge of Ecclesiastical
controversies upon earth, that is a general Council. If the Court of Rome will
be humorous, like little children, who because they cannot have some toy that
they have a mind to, do cast away all that their parents have given them, we
cannot help it.

Over and above all the former grounds which the Romanists themselves do in
some sort acknowledge. I propose this further, that Patriarchal power in
external things is subject and subordinate to Imperial. Patria^^hal power
subject to Imp^rial.
When Mauritius the Emperor had made a Law that no Soldier should turn Monk,
until his warfare were accomplished, St. Gregory Bishop of Rome disliked the
Law, and represented his sense of it to the Emperor, but withal according to
his duty published it, Lib. 2. Ep. 61.
Ego quidem missioni subjectus eandem legem per diversas terrarum parts
transmitto, and quia lex ipsa omnipotenti deo minime concordat, Ecce per
suggestionis meae paginam dominis nunciavi; utrobique ergo quae debui exolvi,
qui and Imperatori obedientiam praebui, and pro deo quid sensi minime tacui. I
being subject to your command have transmitted your Law to be published through
diverse parts of the world. And because the Law itself is not pleasing to
Almighty God; I have represented my opinion thereof to my Lords; wherefore I
have performed my duty on both sides, in yielding obedience to the Emperor,
and not concealing what I thought for God. A most rare and Christian president
of that great Patriarch, and fit for our observation and imitation in these
days; He acknowledged the Emperor to be his Lord, and himself to be subject
to his commands. And though no humane invention can warrant an act that is
Morally evil in it self, yet if it be only impeditive of a greater good, as
that blessed Saint did take this Law to be, the command of a Sovereign does
weigh down the scale, and obliges a Patriarch to obedience in a matter that
concerns Religion. How much more does the command of the English Monarch and
the English Church disoblige an English subject from a foreign Patriarch, whose
Original right is but humane at the most, and in the case in question between
Rome and England none at all.

But to come up yet closer to the question. Emperors have changed Patriarcha^s.
The general Councels of Constantinople and Chalcedon, with the presence,
concurrence and confirmation of Theodosius the great and Martian the Emperors,
notwithstanding the opposition of the Roman Bishop by his Legates, Conc. Constable
can. 3. Conc. Chalc. Can. 8.
did advance the Bishop of Constantinople from being a poor Suffragan under
the Metropolitan of Heraclea, to be the second Patriarch, and equal in dignity
power and all manner of privileges, to the first, and assigned unto him for
his Patriarchate Pontus, and Asia the less, and Thracia, and some other
countries, part of which territories they subtracted from the obedience of the
Roman Bishop, at least over which the Roman Bishops challenged Jurisdiction,
and part from other Patriarchs. And the reason of this alteration was the same
for which Caesarea of old was a long time preferred before Jerusalem, and
Alexandria before Antioch, and Rome before all others, to conform the
Ecclesiastical regiment to the Political, because Constantinople was made of
a mean City the seat of the Eastern Empire, and had as many Diocesses and
Provinces subject unto it as old Rome it self.

But lest it may be conceived, that this was not done at all by Imperial power,
but by the authority of the Ecumenical Synods, we may observe further, that
Iustini^n the Emperor by his sole Sovereign Legislative power did newfound
the Patriarchate of Iustiniana prima, By their authority. Novel. 11. et.
and assign a province unto it, and indow it with most ample privileges,
Novel. 131.
freeing it from all appeals, and all acknowledgment of superiority, giving the
Bishop thereof equal power with that which the Bishop of Rome had in his
Patriarchate. The same privileges and prerogatives were given by the same
Emperor, by the same Legislative authority, to the Bishop of Carthage,
notwithstanding that the Bishops of Rome did always pretend that Carthage was
under their Jurisdiction. I deny not that Vigilius and Gregory succeeding Popes
did make deputations to the Bishop of Iustiniana, to supply their places. But
this was but an old Roman fineness. The Bishops of Iustiniana needed none of
their Commissions. Justinian the Father and founder of the Imperial Law knew
well enough how far his Legislative power did extend. And though the Act was
notorious the whole world, and inserted into the body of the Law, yet the
Fathers of that age did not complain of any innovation, or usurpation, or
breach of their privileges, or violation of their rights.

King Henry the Eight had the same Imperial power, English Kings as Sovereign
^s the Emperou^s.
and was as much a Sovereign in his own Kingdoms, as Justinian the Emperor in
his larger Dominions, (as William Rufus, Son and successor of the Conqerour
said most truly, that the Kings of England have all those liberties in their
own Kingdoms, which the Emperors had in the Empire) and had as much authority
to exempt his own subjects from the Jurisdiction of one Patriarch, Math. Paris.
and transfer them to another, especially with the advice, consent and
concurrence of a National Synod. So King Arthur his predecessor removed the
Primacy from Ca^rleon to Saint David's, and another of them to Canterbury, for
the advantage of their subjects according to the exigence of the times.

If the Pope had been the King of Englands Subject, as former Popes were the
Emperors, he might have served him as they did some of his predecessors,
called a Council, regulated him, and reduced him to order and reason; or, if he
proved incorrigible, have deposed him. But the Pope being a stranger, all that
he could justly do was what he did, rather then to see his royal prerogative
daily trampled upon, his Laws destroyed, his Subjects oppressed, rather then
to have new Articles of faith daily obtruded upon the English Church, rather
then to incur the peril of willful Idolatry, against conscience and therefore
formal, to Cashier the Roman Court, with all their pardons and indulgences and
other Alchymistical devices, out of his Kingdoms, until time should teach them
to content themselves with moderate things, which endure long. Or until either
a free Ecumenical Council, or an Europaean Synod should settle controversies,
and tune the jarring strings of the Christian world. In the mean time we pity
their errors, pray for their amendment, and long for a reunion.

Now the just grounds of such subduction or separation are of two sorts; Two
sorts of grounds for sustraction of obedience.
either the Personal faults of the Popes, or their Ministers, as in the case of
Simony and Schism, which ought in justice to reflect upon none but the persons
who are guilty; Or else they are faulty principles and rules, as well in point
of Doctrine as of Discipline, such as the obtruding of new Creeds, the pressing
of unlawful oaths, and the palpable usurpation of the undoubted rights of
others. And these do justify and warrant a more permanent separation, that is,
until they be reformed. Wherefore having taken a view of the sufficiency of
the authority of our Princes to reform; In the next place it is worthy of our
serious consideration what were the true grounds of the separation of the
Kingdom and Church of England from the Court of Rome. And secondly, whether in
the subduction or substraction of their obedience or Communion they observed
due moderation.

The grounds of their separation were many, Our first ground.
first the intolerable extortions and excessive Rapine of the Court of Rome,
committed in that Realm, by their Legates and Nuncios, and Commissioners, and
Collectors, and other inferior Officers and harpies, enough to impoverish the
kingdom, and to drain out of it all the treasure that was in it, and leave it
as bare as a Grasshopper in winter, by their indulgences and pardons for all
kind of sin at a certain rate, Registered in their penitentiary tax. Yea as
Ticelius, the Popes pardoner made his bragg in Germany, though a man had
ravished the Mother of God, yet so soon as the money did but chink in the
bottom of the Basin, Chemnit. Exa. Conc. Fred.
presently the soul flew out of Purgatory. To these we may add their
despensations of all sorts, and Commutations, and Absolutions, and
Contributions, and Reservations, and Tenths, and first Fruits, and Appeals, and
Palles, and a thousand other Artifices to get money. As Provisions, Collations,
Exemptions, Canonisations, Divolutions, Revocations, Unions, Commendams,
Tolerations, Pilg^images, Jubilees, Nulla hic arcana revel^ says Mantuan. Mant.


-- Venalia nobis
Templa, Sacerdotes, altaria Sacra coronae,
Ignis thura, pre^es, coelum est venale deusqque
Temples, Priests, Altars, Myters, holy Orders, Prayers, Masses, Heaven, and
God himself are salable at Rome. It is no marvel, they that buy must sell; And
whilst I am writing these things comes fresh intelligence of a Book lately set
forth, de Simoniae praesentis Pontificis, (they say) not penned, but dictated
by such as know right well the most secret Cabales, and Intriques of the
Conclave. Nam propius fama est hos tangere Divos; which I can easily impute
more to the fault of the place, then of the man. The oblation of the body and
blood of Christ is sold, fastings and penitentiary works are sold, qui non
potest jejunare per se, potest jejunare per aliam, vel potest dar^ nummam pro
jejunio. The merits of the Saints being alive are sold, their relics being
dead are sold, Scapulars and Monastic garments are sold. The Jews with their
Oxen, Sheep, and Doves, were but petty Merchants in comparison of these great
bankers. Did any man desire a pall? the Law it self did direct them what to do,
pallium non datur nisi fortiter postulanti; Did. 100. C. 2.
The Pall would not be given but to those that knocked hard with a silver
hammer. Was any man a Suppliant to the Court of Rome? Matthew Paris puts him
into a right way, Tunc seeds clementissima quae nulli de^sse conscivit, In H^n.
1. an. 1103.
dummodo albi aliquid vel rubei intercedat, prescriptos P^ntifices and Abbates
ad pristinas dignitates misericorditer revocavit; Then the most pitiful See,
which is not accustomed to be wanting to any suppliants, so they bring white or
yellow advocates along with them, did mercifully restore the said Bishops and
Abbats to their former dignities. It is almost incredible what a mass of
treasure they collected out of England in a short time only from investitures,
Ant. Brit. page 326.
and some other exactions from Bishops, in four years, no less then an
hundred and sixty thousand pounds sterling as was ^ound by inquisition.
Archbishop Cranmer paid for his Bulls that concerned his Consecration and Pall
nine hundred Ducats, To such an height were the extortions of the Roman Court
mounted. Ex ungue leonem, Judge by this what the Popes yearly income or revenue
out of England might be, by all these arts which we have formerly mentioned,
and many more. Sometimes under pretense of recovering the holy Land. Sometimes
to relieve the poverty of the Roman Court, Sometimes in palfries, Sometimes in
forged bills of Exchange, Sometimes in extorted subsidies, Sometimes to a
certain sum, Sometimes to the fifth part of their goods, Sometimes to the
third part of Residents, and the half of non-residents, Sometimes in yearly
revenues, as two Prebends of every Bishop, and the value of the maintenance of
two Monks from every Abbat, Sometimes out of the goods of rich Clergy men who
died intestate, Sometimes a years wages for payment of Soldiers; some five,
some ten, some fifteen according to their estates, Sometimes in Jewels, of all
which he that desires to be more fully informed, needs but to read Matthew
Paris who describes the abuses and extortions of the Roman Bishops Graphically
throughout his History; And in one place he bemones the condition of England in
these words, Erat igitur videre dolorem praecordialem genas sanctorum irrigare,
Math. Paris. an. 1237.
querelas erumpere, suspiria multiplicare, dicentibus multis cum singulta
cruentato, melius est nobis mori quam videre malagentis nostrae and Sanctorum.
Vae Angliae quae quondam princeps provinciarum, domina gentium, speculiem
Ecclesiae, religionis exemplum, nunc facta est sub tributo, conculcaverunt eam
ignobiles, and facta est in praedam de generibus, etc. Therrfore a man might
see sorrow of heart, water the eielids of holy men, complaints break out, and
groans multiplied, many saying with bloody sighs, It is better for us to die
then to see the misery of our Nation, and of holy persons. Woe be to England
which once was the Princess of Provinces, the Lady of Nations, the glass of
the Church, a pattern of Religion, but now is become tributary, Ignoble
fellows have trodden her under foot, And she is made a prey to base persons.

Neither was this the complaint of the Vulgar only: All conscientious men were
of the same mind. Who has not heard of the bitter complaints and free
declamations of Grosthead the learned and Religious Bishop of Lincoln, against
the Tyranny and Rapine of the Roman Courts, both in the time of his health, and
upon his deathbed? for which he was styled Romanorum malleus, Math. Par: in H.
3. an. 1253.
The hammer of the Romans, whereby he so much irritated the Pope, that he would
have deposed him, and accursed him in his life time, if he had not been
dissuaded by his Cardinals in respect of the learning, and holiness, and
deserved reputation of the Bishop; And after his death would have had his Corpse
disinterred and buried in a dunghill, but that the Bishop appeared to him the
night before, and gave him, or seemed to give him such a shrewd remembrance,
Idem. An. 1254.
partly with words, and partly with his crosier staff, that the Pope was much
terrified and half dead, so that he could neither eat nor drink the day
following.

The Pope excommunicated Sewalus the Archbishop of York with Bell Book and
Candle, But non curavit voluntati papale relicto Iuris rigare muliebriter
obedire. Quapropter quant^ magis praecipient Papa maledicebatur, Idem. An. 1257.
tanto plus a populo benedicebatur tacit tamen propter metum Romanorum. He
cared not to submit womanishly to the Popes will, leaving the straight rule of
the Law. wherefore the more he was accused by the Popes command, the more he
was blessed of the People, but secretly for fear of the Romans. In his last
sickness he summoned the Pope before the Tribunal of the high and
incorruptible Judge, and called Heaven and Earth to be his witnesses how
unjustly the Pope had oppressed him, Dixit Dominus Petro, etc. The Lord said
unto St. Peter, Id. An. 1258.
feed my sheep, not clip them, not flea them, not unbowell them, not devour
them. They who desire to know what opinion the English had of the greediness
and extortion of the Court of Rome, may find them drawn out to the life by
Chaucer in sundry places. Plowmans tale and else where.


Such thriving Alchymists were never heard of in our days, Our second ground.
nor in the days of our Forefathers, that with such ease and dexterity could
change an ounce of lead into a pound of gold. So they had great reason to say
of England that it was a Well that could not be drawn dry. And England had as
much reason to whip these Buyers and Sellers out of the Temple. This complaint
is neither new nor particular as we shall see further in due place.

The second ground of our Ancestors separation of themselves from the Court of
Rome, were their most unjust usurpations, and daily encroachments and
intrenchments, and extreme violations of all sorts of rights, civil and
Ecclesiastical, sacred and profane. They endeavored to rob the King of the
fairest flowers of his Crown, As of his right to convocare Synods, and to
confirm Synods within his own dominions, of his Legislative and judiciary power
in Ecclesiastical causes, of his Political Jurisdiction over Ecclesiastical
persons, of his Ecclesiastical Feuds and Investitures of Bishops, of his just
Patronages of Churches founded by his Ancestors, and of the last appeals of his
subjects. And as if all this had been too little, taking advantage of King
John's troubles, they attempted to make the royal Sc^pter of England Feudotary
and tributary to the Crosier staff of Rome at the annual rent of a thousand
marks. Neither is this the case of England alone, Episo. Eleiensis.
seeing they make the like pretensions in matter of fact almost to all Europe.
To say nothing now of that Dominion which some of them have challenged
indirectly, others directly over Sovereign Princes, Nos imperia, regna,
principatus et quicquid habere mortales possunt, Plat. in Greg. 7.
au^erre et dare posse. We have power to take away and to give Empires,
Kingdoms, Principalities, and whatsoever mortal men can have; because I
confess that it is not generally received by the Roman Church.

Mr. Blackwell made Archpriest of England by Clement the eighth, Larg. Exam. p.
18.
cites Cardinal Allen, with much honor to his memory, but much scandalized
at his doctrine, that none can be admitted King of England without the Popes
leave: His words are these, Without the approbation of the Sea Apostolic,
none can be lawful King or Queen of England by reason of the ancient accord
made between Alexander the third the year 1171. Admon. to the Nobility by Card.
Allen. 1. 8.
and Henry the second then King, when he was absolved for the death of St.
Thomas of Canterbury, That no man might lawfully take that Crown, nor be
accounted as King till he were confirmed by the Sovereign Pastor of our souls
which for the time should be. This accord afterward being renewed about the
year 1210. by King John, who confirmed the same by oath to Pandulphus the Popes
Legate, at the special request and procurement of the Lords and Commons, as a
thing most necessary for preservation of the Realm from unjust usurpation of
Tyrants, and avoiding other inconveniences which they had proved, and might
easily fall again into, by the disorder of some wicked King. To which he adds
with the like disapprobation a like testimony of Stanislaus Christa novic a
Polonian author, who infers upon the former ground that the Pope may depose the
King of England, as being but a tributary King, his words are these, Exam.
Cathol. p. 34.
Illud impie Legislatores per jusjurandum extorquent a Catholicis, etc. The
lawmakers do impiously by an oath extort this from Catholics, to deny that the
King may be deposed by the Pope, and his Kingdoms and Countries by him
disposed of. For if by an Honorable and pious grant the Kingdom have become
tributary to the Pope, why may he not dispose of it? Why may he not depose the
Prince being refractory and disobedient? Thus a bold stranger altogether
ignorant of our histories and of our laws shoots his bolt at all adventures
upon the credit of a shameful fiction: but from whom did they learn this
lesson? even from the Pope himself. Bishop Grosthead had been a little bold
with the Pope for his extorting courses, calling him Antichrist, and murderer
of Souls, and comparing the Court of Rome to Behemoth, that puts his mouth
to the river Jordan thinking to drink it up, and stiling the oppression of the
English Nation an Aegiptian Bondage. Math. Paris. an. 1244.
He had good reason, for the Court of Rome in those days was grown past shame,
(rubore deposito) and consequently past grace. The Pope irritated with this
usage breaks out into this passionate expression, Nonne Rex Anglorum noster est
Vasallus, et ut plus dicam mancipium? Is not the King of England our Vassal, or
rather our Slave? Idem. an. 1253.
Or rather are these fit guests to be entertained in a Kingdom that make no
more of our Sovereign Princes then their Vassals and Slaves, who can neither be
admitted to the Crown without their leave, nor hold it but by their grace?

This relation of Cardinal Allen brings to my remembrance the question of
Neoptolemus to Ulysses when he should have taught him the Art of lying, how it
was possible for one to tell a lie without blushing? The Archpriest is much
more ingenuous, affirming that the assertions touching both the said Kings for
matter of fact were untrue. That Henry the second never made any such accord
with Alexander the third, for ought that he could ever read in any Chronicle of
Credit. Then the oath which Henry the second did take for himself, (not for his
heirs,) was this, that he would not depart from him or his successors, To.
Houed. Annal. fol. 303.
so long as they should entreat him as a Catholic King. That the fact of King
John is of more probability, but of as little truth, which he confirms by the
testimony of Sir Thomas Moore a Lord Chancellor of England, a man of
Extraordinary learning, of great parts, of so good affections to the Roman See,
that he is supposed to have died for the Popes Supremacy, and is commended by
Cardinal Bellarmine to Mr. Blackwell as a Martyr, Ep. Card. Bell. ad G.
Blackw. Archpr.
and a guide of many others to Martyrdom, cum ingenti Anglica nationis gloria,
certainly one who had as much means to know the truth, both by view of records,
and otherwise, as any man living: Thus writes he, If he, (the author of the
beggars supplication) say as indeed some writers say, Supplic. of souls, p. 296.
that King John made England and Ireland tributary to the Pope and the Sea
Apostolic, by the grant of a thousand Marks, we dare surely say again, that
it is untrue, and that all Rome neither can show such a grant, nor ever could;
And if they could, it were nothing worth. For never could any king of England
give away the Realm to the Pope, or make the Land tributary, though he would.

As to that of Henry the second, without doubt the Archpriest had all the
reason in the world for him. Cardinal Allen did not write by inspiration, and
could expect no more credit then he brought authority. There is a vast
difference between these two, that no man shall be accounted King of England
until he be confirmed by the Pope: And this other, that the King in his own
person would not desert the Pope, so long as he entreated him like a Catholic
King. The former is most dishonorable to the Nation, and Diametrally opposite
to the fundamental Laws of the Land. The later we might take our selves
without offense to God or our own consciences. But to make our Kings their
vassals and their slaves, to impoverish their Realm, and to commit all those
exorbitant misdemeanors against them, which we have related in part, and shall
yet describe more fully, was neither to entreat them like Catholic Kings, nor
like Christian Kings, nor yet like political Kings.

And for his Saint Thomas of Canterbury we do not believe that the Popes
Canonisation, or to have his name inserted into the Calender in red letters,
makes a Saint. We do abhominate that murder as Lawless and Barbarous, to
sprinkle not only the pavements of the Church, but the very altar with the
blood of a Prelate, And we condemn all those who had an hand in it: But we do
not believe that the cause of his suffering was sufficient to make him a
Martyr, namely to help forraign^rs to pull the fairest flowers from his Princes
Diadem by violence, and to perjure himself, and violate his oath given for the
observation of the Articles of Clarendon. Hoveden Annal. p. 292.
All his own Suffragan Bishops were against him in the cause, and justified the
Kings proceedings as appears by two of their letters, one to himself, the
other to Pope Alexander the third. The Barons of the Kingdom reputed him as a
Traitor quo progrederis Proditor? Expecta et audi judicium tuum. Idem.
Whither go thou Traitor? stay and hear thy judgment. This is certain, The
first time that ever any Pope did challenge the right of investitures in
England was in the days of Henry the first, and Paschal the second was the
first Pope that ever exacted an oath from any foreign Bishop, above Eleven
hundred years after Christ. Before that time they evermore swore fealty to
their Prince, Plat. in pasch. 2.
de Homagiis, de Feudis, de sacramentis Episcoporum, Laicis antea exhibitis,
There was great consultation about the homage, and Fealty, and oaths of Bishops
in former ages sworn to Laymen. These new articles of faith are too young to
make Martyrs.

Concerning the second instance of King John, though I attribute much to the
authority of Sir Thomas More in that case, who would never have been so
confident unless he had supposed that he had searched the matter to the
bottom, yet his zeal to the Papacy and his unwillingnesse to see such an
unworthy act proceed from that See might perhaps mislead him: Math. Paris. an.
1212.
for I confess sundry authors do relate the case otherwise. That there was a
Prophecy or Prediction made by one Peter an Hermit, that the next day to
Ascension sunday there should be no King in England, That Pope Innocent the
third being angry with King John excommunicated him, interdicted the Kingdom,
deprived him of his Crown, absolved his subjects from their allegiance,
animated his Barons and Bishops against him, gave away his Realm to Philip King
of France; sent Pandolphus as his Legate into England to see all this executed,
The King of France provides an Army accordingly. But the crafty Pope underhand
gives his Legate secret instructions to speak privately with King John, And if
he could make a better bargain for him, and draw him to submit to the sentence
of the Pope, he should act nothing against him, but in his favor. They do
meet, King John submits, The Pope orders him to resign his Crown and Kingdoms
to the Sea of Rome, so (they say) he did, and received them the next day of the
Popes grace as a feudatary at the yearly rent of a thousand Marks, Math. Paris.
an. 1253.
for the Kingdoms of England and Ireland, And did homage and swear fealty to
Pope Innocent.

But whereas the Cardinal adds upon his own head that this was done at the
special request and procurement of the Lords and Commons, it is an Egregious
forgery and well deserves a whetstone, for all the three Orders of the kingdom,
Bishops, Barons, and Commons, Hoops. ad. saecul. 14. c. 5.
did protest against it in Parliament notwithstanding any private contract that
might be made by King John; Citat. Sanct. Clara.
And that they would defend themselves by arms from the temporal Jurisdiction
of the Pope. But the other answer of Sr. Thomas More is most certain and beyond
all exception, that if either Henry the second, or King John had done any such
thing, it was not worth a rush, nor signified any thing, but the greediness
and profaneness of these pretended vicars of Christ, who prostituted and
abused their Office, and the power of the Keys, to serve their base and
avaritious ends, and lets the world see how well they deserved to be thrust out
of doors. What? That no man might be crowned, or accounted King of England,
until he were confirmed by the Pope? By the Law of England, Rex non moritur
the King never dies. And does all acts of Sovereignty before his Coronation as
well as after.

They robbed the Nobility of their patronages, Those Churches which their
Ancestors had founded and endowed, being by provisions from Rome frequently
conferred upon strangers, which could not speak one word of English nor did
ever tread upon English ground; Insomuch, that at one time there were so many
Italians beneficed in England, that they received more money yearly out of it,
Math. Paris. in H. 3. An. 1245.
then all the revenues of the Crown, to the high disservice of Almighty God,
the great scandal of Religion, the decay of hospitallity, and the utter ruin
of the English Church.

But the least share of their oppressions did not light upon the Bishops, who
by their dispensations, and reservations of cases, and of pensions, and
exemptions, and inhibitions, and visitations, and tenths, and first fruits, and
provisions, and subsidiary helps, were impoverished and disabled to do the
duties of their function: They take their aim much amiss who look upon
Episcopacy as a branch of Popery, or a device of the Bishop of Rome to advance
his own greatness. Whereas the contrary is most certain, that the Pope is the
greatest Impugner of Bishops, and the Papacy it self sprung from the unjust
usurpation of their just rights. Let it be once admitted, that Bishops are by
divine right, and instantly all his dispensations, and reservations, and
exemptions, and Indulgences, and his Conclave of Cardinals, and the whole
Court of Rome shrink to nothing. This was clearly perceived by both parties in
the ventilation of that famous question in the Council of Trent, concerning the
divine right of Bishops, proposed by the Almaines, Polonians and Hungarians,
seconded bravely by the Spaniards, prosecuted home by the French, owned by the
Archbishop of Paris as the doctrine of Sorbone, and only crossed by the
Italian faction, to preserve the glory of their own country, and the
advantages which that nation does reap from the Papacy. By whose frowardness
and prevarication (in all probability) the reunion of the Church, and the
universal peace of this part of Christendom in necessary Truths, was hindered at
that time.

I presume the case was not so very ill in foreign parts, but yet ill enough.
Or otherwise St. Bernard would not have made so bold with Eugenius, Bern. L. 3.
de consideratione.
adding that if the days were not evil, he would speak many more things, Why
do you thrust your sickle into other men's harvest, etc. He complains of the
confusion of appeals, how they were admitted contrary to law and right, besides
custom and order, without any distinction of place, or manner, or time, or
cause, or person. He complains further of the exemption of Abbats from their
Bishops, Bishops from their Archbishops, Archbishops from their Primates. And
this he styles Murmur and communem querimoniam Ecclesiarum, The murmuring and
common complaint of the Churches.

Lastly, they cheated and impoverished the people by their dispensations and
commutations, and pardons, and indulgences, and expeditions to recover the holy
Land, and Jubilees, and pilgrimages, and agnus Dei's, and a thousand pecuniary
Artifices. So as no sort of men escaped their fingers.

The third ground of their separation from Rome was, The third ground*
because they found by experience that such foreign Jurisdiction so exercised
was destructive to the right ends of Ecclesiastical discipline, which is in
part to preserve public peace and tranquillity, to retein subjects in due
obedience, and to oblige people to do their duties more conscienciously. Far
be it from any Christian to imagine that policy is the Springhead of Religion;
There never was yet any one Nation so unpolitick and brutishly barbarous, but
they had some Religion or other; they who obeyed no governors but their
parents, paid religious duties to some God; they who wanted Clothes to their
backs, wanted not their sacred Ceremonies; they who were without municipal
Laws, were subject of themselves to the law of conscience. But where Religion
has lost its influence and vigor by contempt, and much more where the
influence of Religion is malignant; where Policy and Religion do not support
one another, but interfere one with another, Societies are like Castles builded
in the air, without any firm foundation, and cannot long endure, like as that
single Meteor Castor appearing without Pollux portends an unfortunate voyage.
Let us flatter our selves as much as we please (said Tully to the Romans) we
have not overcome the Spaniards in Number, nor the Galls in Force, nor the
Carthaginians in Craft, nor the Grecians in Art, nor the Italians in
Understanding, but the advantage which we have gained over them was by
Religious pi^ty. So great an influence has Religion upon the body Politic.

Wherefore our Ancestors having seen by long and costly experience, that the
tyrannical Jurisdiction of the Roman Court instead of peace and tranquillity
did produce disunion in the Realm, factions and animosities between the Crown
and the Miter, intestine discord between the King and his Barons, bad
intelligence with Neighbour-Princes, and foreign Wars. Having seen a stranger
solicited by the Pope, either to destroy them by War, or to subdue them to the
obedience of the Roman Court. Having seen their native Country given away as a
prey to a foreign Prince Philip of France; And the Pope well near seated in
the Royal Chair of Estate, for him and his successors for ever, to the
endless dishonor of the English name and Nation, by the cheating tricks of
Pandolphus his Legate, having seen English Rebels canonized at Rome, and made
Saints, it was no marvel if they thought it high time to free themselves from
such a chargable and dangerous guest.

Fourthly, The fourth ground.
besides the former bad influence of foreign Jurisdiction upon the body
Politic, they found sundry other inconveniences that incited them to separate
from Rome: They must have been daily subject to have had new Creeds and new
Articles of faith obtruded upon them: They must have been daily exposed to
manifold and manifest peril of Idolatry, and sinning against God and their own
consciences: They must have forsaken the Communion of three parts of
Christendom, which are not Roman, to join with the fourth: They must have
approved the Popes apparent rebellion against the supreme Ecclesiastical power,
that is, a general Council: And their Bishops must have sworn to maintain him
in these his rebellious usurpations, whether they should prefer their native
and Christian liberty, or give them up for nothing; whether they should
preserve their Communion with the Catholic Church, or with the Court of Rome;
whether they should desert the Pope, or involve themselves in Rebellion,
Schism, Sacrilege, and Perjury, the choice was soon made.

Lastly, they see that the Popes had disclaimed all that just power which they
had by humane right, and challenged to themselves a spiritual Monarchy or
Sovereignty by divine right, whereby their sufferings which in themselves were
unsupportable, were made also irremediable, from thence. Wherefore they sought
out a fit expedient for themselves, being neither ignorant of their old
Britannick exemption and liberties of the English Church, nor yet of the
weakness of the Roman pretenses. Our progenitors knew well enough that their
authority extended not to take away any the least particle of divine right, if
there had been any such, Nor could they justly be accused of violating that
humane right, which had been quitted long before; nor be blamed rightly for
denying obedience to him from whose Jurisdiction they were exempted by the
Canon of an Ecumenical Council, and who had himself implicitly renounced that
Ecclesiastical right which he held from the Church.

Perhaps some may conceive a defect in the manner of proceeding of the King and
Church of England, that they did not first make a Remonstrance of their
grievances, and seek redress of the Pope himself; So the Council of Towers
thought it fit. Visum est tamen Concilio, ante omnia mittendos Legatos ad D.
Papam Julium, Cone. Tur^^. an. 1510. in sine.
etc. It seems good to the Council, that in the first place messengers be
sent from the French Church to the Pope, who may admonish him with brotherly
love and according to the Evangelical form of correction to desist from his
attempts, and to embrace peace and concord with the Princes; But if he will not
hear the messengers, let him be demanded to convocate a free Council, according
to the decrees of the holy Council of Basile. And this being done, and his
answer received, further provision shall be made according to right.

To this I answer first, That it had been reasonable and just indeed, that we
had made our first address to the Pope, if we acknowledged the Roman Bishop to
be our lawful Patriarch: But the same respect is not due to an usurper.
Secondly, we have seen by frequent experience, how vain and fruitless such
addresses have proved from time to to time. According to the former advise of
the Council of Towers, Extraict des anales d' Aqui-taine.
the King of France sent Ambassadors to Rome, but the Pope refused to hear
them, or to convocate any Council, and before his death Anathematized
Maximilian King of the Romans; the Kings of France and of Navarre, and diverse
other Princes, Cardinals, and Bishops deprived the Kings and Princes of their
respective Realms and Principalities, the Bishops of their dignities and
benefices, and gave their Kingdoms and Principalities to the first that could
take them; from which sentence they appealed to a future Council.

The most ancient arbitrary imposition of the Popes upon the British Churches
was the Pall, an honorable and at first innocent ensign of an Archbishop,
otherwise of no great moment; first introduced in the reigns of the Saxon Kings
after the six hundredth year of Christ; But in process of time it became
vendible, and a great sum was exacted for it, whereof Canutus long since
complained at Rome, and had remedy promised, as he well deserved of that See.
But how well it was observed, the experience of after-ages does manifest, Baron
to. 11.
when both the price was augmented, and withal an oath of allegiance to the
Pope imposed, Electo in Archiepiscopum seeds Apostolica pallium non tradet,
Greg. 9. de Elect. et Elect. potestate.
^isi prius praeste^ fidelitatis et obedientiae juramentum. The Sea Apostolic
will not deliver the Pall to an elect Archbishop, unless he first swear
fidelity and obedience to the Pope: what was become of their old oath of
allegiance to their King?

In the year 1245. the King, the Lords spiritual and temporal, and the whole
Commonwealth of England joined together unanimously in a complaint, and
exhibited their grievances to Rome, that the Pope extorted more then his
Peter Pence out of the Kingdom contrary to law, that the Patrons of Churches
were defrauded of their rights, strangers preferred, souls endangered, their
bullion exported, the Kingdom impoverished, provisions made, pensions exacted.
That the English were drawn out of the Realm by the authority of the Pope,
contrary to the customs of the Kingdom. They complained of the coming among
them of the Popes infamous messenger, Math. Paris. An. 1245.
(non obstante) by which oaths, customs, writings, grants, statutes, rights,
privileges, were not only weakened, but exinanited, They complained of
collections without the Kings leave, that hospitality was not kept, the poor
not sustained, the Word not preached, Churches not adorned, the cure of souls
neglected, divine offices not performed, and Churches ruined by the abuses of
the Papal Court. I cannot omit one clause in the letter of the Lords to the
Pope, Nisi de gravaminibus domino Regi et regno illatis Rex et r^gnum citius
liberentur, oportebit nos ponere murum pro dom^ Domini, et liberate regni.
Quod quidem ob Apostolicae sedis reverentiam, hucusque facere distuli^us.
Unless the King and Kingdom be quickly freed from these grievances, we must
make a wall (of defense or partition,) for the house of the Lord, and the
liberty of the Kingdom, which we have hitherto forborne to do out of our
reverend respect of the Apostolic See. They seem to allude to that wall which
Severus made to save the Kingdom from the incursions of the Scots and Picts.
Surely that was not more necessary then, than that wall of partition which
Henry the eighth made afterward, to save the Realm from the affronts and
extortions and injuries of the Roman Court.

Neither did they make their addresses to the Pope alone, but to the Council of
Lions, by the Procters of the whole Nobility and Commonalty of England, for
redress of the violent oppressions, intolerable grievances, and impudent
exactions which were practiced in England, Idem an. 1245.
by means of that hateful clause, non obstante, too often inserted in the
Popes letters. They represented that there were so many Italians for the most
part ignorant and unlearned, that understood not one English word, nor did ever
tread upon English ground, beneficed among them, that their yearly revenue
exceeded the revenue of the Crown. Neither did they complain only, Ibidem.
but threaten and swear that they would not permit such abuses for the future.
But what ease did the poor English find by complaining to the Pope either in
Council or out of Council? Martine the Popes Commissioner (for he could not
send a Legate without the Kings consent) extorts, excommunicates, interdicts;
the Pope himself is angry, Id. an. 1246.
because like sturdy children they durst cry and whimper when they were beaten,
and persuades the King of France to invade England, and either to depose the
King or subject him to the Court of Rome, which lost the Pope the heart of the
English. The King told them that their King began to kick against him, and play
the Frederick. And they threatened, that if he persisted they should be forced
to do that which would make his heart ache. After this Edward the third made his
addresses likewise to Rome for remedy of grievances, in the year 1343. How did
he speed? No better then his Great grandfather Henry the third, Walsingh. p.
161.
The Pope was offended, and termed his modest expostulation rebellion. But that
wise and magnanimous Prince was not daunted with words; to requite their
invectives, he made the statutes of Provisoes and praemunire, directly against
the encroachments and usurpations of the Court of Rome. Whereby he so abated
their power in England for sundry ages following, that a Dean and Chapter were
able to deal with them, not only to hold them at the swords point, but to
soil them.

Lastly, King Henry the eighth himself had been long a suitor unto Clement the
seventh, to have his Predecessor Julius the seconds dispensation for his
marriage with his Brothers wife, to be declared void. But though the Popes own
Doctors and Universities had declared the dispensation to be unlawful and
invalide, See theopc. of the ^ull in Antisanderus.
and although the Pope himself had once given forth a Bull privately to his
Legate Cardinal Campeius for the revocation thereof, wherein he declared the
marriage to be null, and that the King could not continue in it without sin;
yet the King found so little respect either to the condition of his person, or
to the justice of his cause, that after long delays, to try if he could be
allured to the Popes will, in the conclusion he received a flat denial. This
was no great encouragement to him to make any more addresses to Rome. So what
was threatened and effected in part in the days of Henry the third, and Edward
the third, was perfected in the reign of Henry the eighth, when the
Jurisdiction of the Court of Rome in England was abolished, which makes the
great distance between them and us. Different opinions are often devised or
defended on purpose to maintain faction; if animosities; were extinguished, and
the minds of Christians free from prejudice, other controversies might quickly
be reconciled, and reduced to primitive general truths. The power Paramount of
the Court of Rome has ever been, and still is that insana laurus, which
causes brawling and contention, not only between us and them, but between
them and the East^rn Churches, yea, even between them and those of their own
communion, Memorial de sa. Magest. ad Carol. an. 1633. L^sit ge^itus. p. 43.
as we shall see in the next Chapter. Yea, the original source and true cause
of all the Separations, and reformations made in the Church in these last ages;
As all the Estates of Castile did not forbear to tell the Pope himself not long
since in a printed memorial, and the Kingdom of Portugal likewise. To
conclude this point; These former Kings who reigned in England about the years
1200. and 1300. might properly be called the first Reformers; and their Laws
of Proviso's, and Pr^munire's, or more properly premoneres the beginning of the
Reformation. They laid the Foundation, and Henry the Eighth builded upon it.

Now having seen the authority of our Reformers, The moderation of the English
Reformers.
and the justice of their grounds: in the last place let us observe their due
moderation in the manner of their separation. First they did not; we do not
deny the being of any Church whatsoever, Roman or other, nor possibility of
salvation in them, especially such as hold firmly the Apostles Creed, and the
faith of the four first General Councels; Though their salvation be rendered
much more difficult by humane inventions, and obstructions. And by this very
sign did Saint Cyprian purge himself and the African Bishops from Schism,
Conc. Carth. de baptiz. (...).
Neminem judicantes, aut a jure communionis aliquem, si diversum senserit,
amoventes. Judging no man, removing no man from our communion, for difference
in opinion. We do indeed require subscription to our Articles, but it is only
from them who are our own, not from strangers; nor yet of all our own, but
only of those who seek to be initiated into holy orders, or are to be admitted
to some Ecclesiastical preferment. So it is in every man's election whether he
will put himself upon a necessity of subscription or not; neither are our
Articles penned with Anathema's or curses against all those, even of our own
who do not receive them; but used only as an help or rule of unity among our
selves. Si quis diversum dixerit, If any of our own shall speak, or preach, or
write against them, we question him. But si quis diversum senserit, if any man
shall only think otherwise in his private opinion, and trouble not the peace
of the Church, we question him not. We presume not to censure others to be out
of the pale of the Church, but leave them to stand or fall to their own Master.
We damn none for dissenting from us, we do not separate our selves from other
Churches, unless they chase us away with their censures, but only from their
errors: For clear manifestation whereof, observe the thirtieth Canon of our
Church, It was so far from the purpose of the Church of England to forsake and
reject the Churches of Italy, Can. 30.
France, Spain, Germany, or any such like Churches in all things which they
held and practiced, etc. that it only departed from them in those particular
points wherein they were fallen both from themselves in their a^cient
integrity, and from the Apostolical Churches, which were their first founders.
So moderate are we toward all Christians, whether foreigners or domestics,
whether whole Churches or single persons.

But because the Roman Catholics do lay hold upon this charitable assertion of
ours, as tending mainly to their advantage: Behold (say they) Protestants do
acknowledge a possibility of salvation in the Roman Church; But Roman
Catholics deny all possibility of Salvation in the Protestant Churches;
Therefore the Religion of Roman Catholics is much safer then that of
Protestants. Hence proceeded their Treatise of charity mistaken, and sundry
other discourses of that nature, wherein there are mistakes enough, but little
charity. For answer, If this Objection were true, I should love my Religion
never the worse. Where I find little charity, I look for as little faith: But
it is not true, for when the business is searched to the bottom, they
acknowledge the same possibility of salvation to us, which we do to them, that
is, to such of either Church respectively, as do not err wilfully, but use
their best endeavors to find out the truth. Take two testimonies of the Bishop
of Chalcedon, Protest. plain confession, Chapter 13. p. 151, 152.
If they (that is, the Protestants) grant not salvation to such Papists as they
count vincibly ignorant of Roman errors, but only to such as are invincibly
ignorant of them, they have no more charity then we; for we grant Church,
saving faith, and salvation to such Protestants as are invincibly ignorant of
their errors. And in his book of the distinction of fundamentals, and not
fundamentals, he has these words, Chapter 2. p. 62.
If Protestants allow not saving faith, Church, and salvation to such as
sinfully err in not fundamentals sufficiently pr^posed, they show no more
charity to erring Christians then Catholics d^; for we allow all to have
saving faith, to be in the Church, in way of salvation, (for so much as
belongs to faith,) who hold the fundamental points, and invincibly err in
not fundamentals, because neither are these sufficiently proposed to them, nor
they in fault that they are not so proposed.

Secondly, as our separation is from their errors, not from their Churches: so
we do it with as much inward charity and moderation of our affections, as we
can possibly; willingly indeed in respect of their errors, and especially
their tyrannical exactions and usurpations, but unwillingly and with
reluctation in respect of their persons, and much more in respect of our common
Savior. As if we were to depart from our fathers, or our brothers house, or
rather from some contagious sickness wherewith it was infected. Not forgetting
to pray God daily to restore them to their former purity, that they and we may
once again enjoy the comfort and contentment of one another Christian Society.
We pray for their conversion publicly in our Letany, in general: And
expressly and solemnly upon Good Friday, though we know that they do as
solemnly curse us the day before. If this be to be Schismatics, it were no ill
wish for Christendom that there were many more such Schismatics.

Thirdly, we do not arrogate to our selves either a new Church, or a new
Religion, or new holy orders: for then we must produce new miracles, new
revelations, and new cloven tongues for our justification. Our Religion is the
same it was, our Church the same it was, our holy orders the same they were in
substance, differing only from what they were formerly, as a garden weeded,
from a garden unweeded; or a body purged, from it self before it was purged.
And therefore as we presume not to make new Articles of faith, much less to
obtrude such innovations upon others; so we are not willing to receive them
from others, or to mingle Scholastical opinions with fundamental truths. Which
has given occasion to some to call our Religion a negative religion; Not
considering that our positive articles are those general truths about which
there is no controversy. Our negation is only of humane controverted
additions.

Lastly, we are ready in the preparation of our minds to believe and practice,
whatsoever the Catholic Church (even of this present age) does universally and
unanimously believe and practice. Quod apud multos unum invenitur, Tertull.
non est err^tum, sed traditum. And though it be neither lawful nor possible
for us to hold actual communion with all sorts of Christians in all things,
wherein they vary both from the truth, and one from another, yet even in those
things we hold a communion with them in our desires, longing for their
conversion and reunion with us in truth.

CHAP. VII.
That all Princes and Republiques of the Roman Communion, do in effect the same
thing when they have occasion, or at least do plead for it.
SO we are come to our fifth Conclusion, That whatsoever the King and Church of
England did in the separation of themselves from the Court of Rome, it is no
more then all Sovereign Princes and Churches (none of whatsoever communion
excepted) do practice or pretend as often as they have occasion. And first, for
all Protestant Kings, Princes, and Republics, it admits no denial or dispute.

Secondly, for the Grecian and all other Eastern Churches, it can be no more
doubted of then of the Protestants, since they never acknowledged any obedience
to be due from them to the Bishop of Rome, but only an honorable respect, as
to the prime Patriarch and beginning of unity. Whose farewell or separation is
said to have been as smart as ours, and upon the same grounds in these words,
Gers. part. 4. Ser. de pace et unit. Graec.
We acknowledge thy power, we cannot satisfy thy covetousness, live by your
selves.

But my aim extends higher to verify this of the Roman Catholic Princes and
Republics themselves, as the Emperor, the most Christian and Catholic Kings,
the Republic of Venice and others. To begin with the Emperors: I do not mean
those ancient Christian Primitive Emperors who lived and flourished before the
days of Gregory the Great. Such a Court of Rome as we made our secession from,
was not then in being, nor the College of Parish Priests at Rome turned then
into a Conclave of Cardinals, as Ecclesiastical Princes of the Ecumenical
Church. So long there was no need of any separation from them, or protestation
against them. But I intend the later Emperors since Gregorie's time, after the
Popes sought to usurp an universal Sovereignty over the Catholic Church, and
more particularly the Occidental, that is to say, the French and German
Emperors.

Yet the Reader may be pleased to take notice, The case of England not the same
wi^h Germany;
that the case of our Kings is much different from theirs in two respects.

First, they believed the Roman Bishop to be their lawful Patriarch, (whether
justly or not, is not the subject of this present discourse,) But we do utterly
deny his Patriarchal authority over us; And to demonstrate our exemption, do
produce for matter of right that famous Canon of the General Council of
Ephesus, made in the case of the Cyprian Bishops; and for matter of fact, the
unanimous Votes of two British Synods, and the concurrent testimonies of all
our Historiographers. Some have been formerly cited: We might add to them the
ancient British history, called by the Author thereof Brutus, wherein he
relates this answer of the British to Augustine, Cap. 98.
Se Caerleonensi Archiepiscopo obedire voluisse, Augustino autem Romano Legato
omnin^ noluisse, nec Anglis inimicis and paulo ante Paganis (a quibus suis
sedibus pulsi erant) subesse se, qui semper Christianifuerunt voluisse: That
they would obey the Archbishop of Caerleon, (that was their British Primate, or
Patriarch,) but they would not obey Austine the Bishop of Romes Legate: Neither
would the Britanes who had evermore been Christians from the beginning, be
under the English, who were their enemies, and but newly converted from
Paganis^e, by whom they had been driven out of their ancient habitations. The
same history is related by sundry other very ancient Authors. Graius in scala
Chronica. Gocelinus in hist. majore, etc.


A second difference between our English Kings and the later German Emperors
is this, that our Kings by the fundamental constitutions of the Kingdom are
hereditary Kings, and never die. So there is an uninterrupted succession
without any vacancy. But the Emperors are elective, and consequently not
invested in the actual possession of their Sovereignty without some public
solemnities. Whereof some are essential, as the votes of the Electours; some
others ceremonial, as the last Coronation of the Emperor by the Bishop of
Rome, which was really, and is yet titularly his Imperial City. But the Popes
who had learned to make their own advantage of every thing, sacred or civil,
took occasion from hence to make the world believe that the Imperial Crown was
their gift, and the Emperors their Liegemen. So Adrian the fourth doubted not
to write to Frederick Barbarossa the Emperor, Insigne corona beneficium tibi
contulimus; Goldast. Constit. Imper. Impressae Francofurti, an. 1607. p. 1.
page 62.
which was so offensively taken, that (as the German Bishops in their letter to
the same Pope do affirm) the whole Empire was moved at it, the ea^es of his
Imperial Majesty could not hear it with patience, nor the Princes endure it,
nor they themselves either durst of could approve it. Whereupon the Pope was
forced to expound himself, that by beneficium, he meant nothing but bonum
factum, a good deed; and by contulimus, nothing but i^^posu^mus, that he had
put the Crown upon him. So the Emperor complains in his letter to the
Bishops, A pictura coepit, a pictura ad Scripturam processit; Scriptura in
authoritatem prodire conatur, etc. It began with paiu^ing, from painting it
proceeded to writing, And at last they sought to justify it by authority. We
will not (said he) suffer it, Ibidem.
we will not endure it, we will rather lay down our Imperial Crown, then suffer
the Empire it self to be deposed, with our consent. Let the pictures be
defaced, let the writings be retracted, that perpetual monuments of enmity
between the S^^pter and the Mi^er may continue.

Thus Pope Adrian failed of his design; But his successor John the 22. renewed
the Papal claim against Ludovicus the fourth, in higher terms, as appears by
his own Bull, wherein he affirms, that after the translation of the Roman
Empire from the Grecians to the Germans by his predecessors the Popes, Dat.
Avinionae, an. 1323. apud Gold. p. 1. page 98.
summus ille honor beneficium Pontificis Maximiesse solet: the Empire used to
be the Popes gift. Adding, that the elections of the German Princes were
invalid, unless the Pope (universi orbis Christiani Pater atque Princeps, Dei
Optimi Maximi Legatus suo numine faveat and aspiret,) should approve it. And
finally, commanding the Emperor to quit his Crown and Imperial dignity, and
not to reassume them but by his command, nisi jussu and mandato nostro. But the
Emperor appealed, In (...) Reinensibus^^^^ Francosurtensibus.
the Electours and other Princes protested against the Popes pretended power;
And the Emperor and all the States of the Empire made a solemn constitution
against it.

This was the second repulse, yet the Popes were not so easily shaken off; It
fortuned about the year 1400, Goldast. part. 1. page 142.
that the Electoral College deposed Wenceslaus from the Empire, and chose
Rupert Prince Palatine in his place, communicating the whole business, whilst
it was in agitation, to the Pope, to have his spiritual advice, and the
countenance of the Apostolic See; but yet reserving the power entirely to
themselves. Howsoever Pope Boniface the ninth lays hold of this opportunity,
and declares by his Bull, that the Electours did it by his authority,
authoritate nostra suffulti. And confirms the said deprivation as good and
lawful.

This incertainty of succession, and this Papal pretension made sundry
Emperors more fearful to grapple with the Popes, or to right themselves from
their grievous exactions and usurpations. In the year 1455. after the death of
Nicholas the fifth, the Germans bewailed their condition to Frederick the
third, Plat. in Pio ^0.
and sought to persuade him that he would no longer obey the Roman Bishops,
unless they would at least give way to a pragmatical sanction for the
maintenance of the liberties of the German Nation; like that of the French
Kings for the privileges of the Gallicane Church. They showed thar their
condition was much worse then the French and Italians. whose servants
(especially the Italians) without a change they were deservedly called.
Rogabant, urgebant Proceres, populique Germaniae gravissimis tum rationibus tum
exemplis, Carol. Molinaeus in Commentaeriis.
tum utilitatem tum necessitatem Imperii, etc. The Princes and people of
Germany entreated and pressed both the advantage and necessity of the Empire.
They implored his fidelity, they prayed him for his Oaths sake, and to prevent
the infamy and dishonor of their Nation, that they alone might not want the
fruit of their National decrees, that he had as much power, and was as much
obliged thereunto as other Kings, etc. Nec certe procul abfuit, etc. It wanted
not much, Plat. ibidem. Molin. ibidem.
says Platina. Molinaeus goes further, His rationibus victus and permotus
Imperator, etc. The Emperor being overcome and moved with these reasons, was
about to make as full a Sanction for his Subjects, as the King of France had
done for his. What hindered him? Only the advice of Aeneas Sylvius, who
persuaded him rather to comply with the Pope, then with his people, upon this
ground, that Princes disagreeing might be reconciled, but between a Prince and
his people, the enmity was immortal. Motus hac ratione Imperator, Plat. ibidem.
spreta populorum postulatione, Aeneam Oratorem deligit qui ad Calistum
mitteretur. The Emperor being moved with this reason, despising the request of
his people, sends the same Aeneas as his Ambassador to Calistus. The truth is
this, The Emperor feared the Pope, and durst not trust his own Subjects.
Whence it proceeded, that seven years before his death he not only procured
his son Maximilian to be crowned King of the Romans, but also took him to be
his companion in the Empire, ne post obitum suum (ut factum fuisset)
transfereretur imperium in aliam familiam: Molin.
lest the Empire after his death (as without doubt it had come to pass) should
have been transferred into another family. Yet notwithstanding these bars or
remora's, the uncertainty of succession, and Papal pretensions, the Emperors
have done as much in relation to the Court of Rome, as the Kings of England.

First, Henry the eighth within his own Dominions did exercise a power of
convocating Ecclesiastical Synods, confirming Synods, reforming the Church by
Synods, and suppressing upstart innovations by ancient Canons. The Emperors
have done the same; Emperors convocated and confirmed Synods, and by them
reformed the Church. Apud Goldastum. part. 1. page 3.
Charles the Great called the Council of Franckford, consisting of 300.
Bishops: Witness his own letter to Elipandus. Iussimus Sanctorum Patrum
Synodale ex omnibus undique nostrae ditionis Ecclesits congregari Concilium.
We have commanded a Synodical Council to be congregated out of all the
Churches within Our Dominions. Neither did he only convocate it, but confirm
it also. Ecce ego vestris petitionibus satisfaciens, congregationi Sacerdotum
auditor and arbiter adsedi. Discernimus and Deo donante decrevimus quid esset
de hac inquisitione firmiter tenendum. Behold, I satisfying your requests (that
is, of the Elipandians and Foelicians who made Christ but an adoptive son of
God,) did sit in the Council both as an hearer, and as a Judge. We determine
and by the gift of God have decreed what is to be held in this inquiry. And it
is very observable how he disposed the resolutions of this Council into four
Books; The first book contained the sense of the Roman Bishop and his
Suffragans; Ibidem.
The second of the Archbishop of Millain and the Patriarch of Aquileia, with
the rest of the Italian Bishops; The third, the votes of the German, French,
and British Bishops; The last, his own consent. The Romans had no more part
therein then others, to set down their own faith, and to represent what they
had received from the Apostles.

Neither did they only convocate Councels, Lib. 5. capitul.
and confirm them, but in them and by them reformed innovations, and restored
ancient truths and Orders. So did the same Emperor, By the counsel of our
Bishops and Nobles we have ordained Bishops throughout the Cities, and do
decree to assemble a Synod every year, that in our presence the Canenical
decrees and laws of the Church may be restored. Ludovicus Pius convocated a
Council at Aquisgrane to reform the abuses of the Clergy, and confirmed the
same, and commanded the constitutions thereof to be put in execution, Goldast.
p. 1. page 12.
as appears by his own Epistle to Arno Archbishop of Salzburge. Otho the
first called a Council at Rome, and caused John the 12th. to be deposed, and
Leo the eighth to be chosen in his place. The sentence of the Council was,
Petimus magnitudinem Imperii vestri, Idem. p. 1. page 34.
etc. We beseech your Imperial Majesty, that such a Monster may be thrust out
of the Roman Church. And the Emperor confirmed it with a placet, we are
pleased.

Henry the fourth called a German Synod at Worms, And another of Germans and
Italians at Brixia, wherein sentence of deprivation was given against Gregory
the seventh, and confirmed by the Emperor. Quorum sententiae quod justa and
probabilis coram Deo hominibusque Id. p. 45: and 50.
videbatur, etc. ego^quoque assentiens omne tibi Papatus jus quod habere visus
es abrenuncio, etc. Ego Henricus Rex Dei gratia cum omnibus Episcopis nostris
tibi dicimus, Descend, descend: To whose sentence because it seemed just and
reasonable before God and men, I also assenting, do declare thee to have no
right in the Papacy, as thou seem to have. I Henry by the Grace of God King
of the Romans, with all our Bishops do say unto thee, Descend from thy Seat,
descend.

So Frederick the first called a Council at Papia, to settle the right
succession of the Papacy, wherein Roland the Cardinal was rejected, and Victor
declared lawful Bishop of Rome. And all this was done with due submission to
the Emperor. Goldast. part. 1. page 70.
Christianissimus Imperator, etc. The most Christian Emperor in the last place
after all the Bishops and Clergy, by the advice and upon the petition of the
Council, received and approved the election of Victor.

I will conclude this first part of the parallel with the words of the same
Emperor, in the same Council, Quamvis noverim officio ac dignitate Imperii
penes nos esse potestatem congregandorum Conciliorum, etc. Although I know that
by virtue of our office and Imperial dignity, the power of calling Councels
rests in us, Rodevic. de Gestis Fred. 1. lib. 2. c. 56.
especially in so great dangers of the Church: For both Constantine, and
Theodosius, and Justinian, and of fresher memory Charles the Great and Otho,
Emperors, are recorded to have done this; Yet I do commit the authority of
determining this great and high business to your wisdom and power, that is,
to the Bishops there assembled.

But it may be objected, The English Reformation not Schismatical.
that the Emperors with their Synods never made any such Schismatical
reformation, as that which was made by the Protestants in England. I answer,
First, that the Schism between the Roman Court and the English Church, (other
Schism I know none on our parts) was begun long before that reformation in the
days of Henry the eighth, and the breach sufficiently proclaimed to the world,
both by Romish Bulls and English Statutes. We could not be the first
separatours of our selves from them, who had formerly thrust us out of their
doors. It is not Schismatical to substract obedience from them to whom it is
not due, who had extruded us out of their Society: but it is Schismatical to
give just cause of substraction.

Secondly, I answer, That there was a great necessity of Reformation both in
Germany and England. For proof whereof, I produce two witnesses beyond
exception, the one a Pope, the other a Cardinal. The former is Adrian the
sixth, in his instructions to his Legate, in the year 1522. which the Princes
of the Empire take notice of in their auswer. Goldast. part. 2. page 29. ct. 31.
His words are these, Scimus in hac Sancta sede aliquot jam annis multa
abhominanda fuisse, etc. We know that for some bypast years many things to
be abominated have been in this holy See, abuses in spiritual matters, excesses
in commands; and to conclude, all things out of order, etc. wherein for so much
as concerns us, thou shall promise that we will use all our endeavor, that
first this Court from whence peradventure (sure enough) all the evil did
spring, may be reformed, that as corruption did flow from thence to the
inferior parts (of the Church), so may health and Reformation. To procure
which, we do hold our selves so much more strictly obliged, by how much we do
see the whole world greedily desire such a Reformation. O Adriane, si nunc
viveres.

The other witness is Cardinal Pool, who makes two main ends of the Council of
Trent: The one, the reconciling of the Lutherans; The other, quo pacto ipsius
Ecclesiae praecipua, vel potius omnia fere membra, ad veterem disciplinam and
instituta, a quibus non parum declinarunt, revocentur. To consider how the
principal members of the Church, Regin. Polus de Concilio, page 86.
or rather almost all the members, might be reduced to their ancient discipline
and Ordinances, from which they had swerved much. Yet when himself was sent
afterward by Paul the fourth to reform the Church of England, Reformatio
Angliae, edit, Venet. 1562.
it seems that he had forgotten those great deviations of the principal
members, and those very representations which he himself with eight other
selected Cardinals and Prelates had made upon oath to Paul the third: Then he
saw that this lying flattering principle, that The Pop^ is the Lord of all
benefices, and therefore cannot be a Simoniack, Council. de lect. Cardinal.
edit. Lutet. an. 1612. page 131, etc.
was the fountain, ex quo tanquam ex equo Trojano irrupere in Ecclesiam Dei tot
abusus, et tam gravissimi morbi, etc. from which as from the Trojan horse so
many abuses and so grievous diseases had broken into the Church of God, and
brought it to a desperate condition, to the derision of Christian Religion, and
blaspheming of the Name of Christ: And that the cure must begin there, from
whence the disease did spring, by taking away all abuses in dispensations of
all kinds, and ordinations, and collations, and provisions, and pensions* and
permutations, and reservatitions, and coadjutorships, and expectative graces,
and unions, and non-residence, and exemptions, and absolutions, and all such
pecuniary artifices: because it is not lawful by any means to reap any gain
from the exercise of the power of the Keys. Tollantur (say they) hae maculae,
etc. Let these spots be taken away, to which if any entrance be given in any
Commonwealth or Kingdom whatsoever, it must needs fall headlong instantly or
very shortly to ruin. Page 140.


Thirdly, I answer, that the Emperors and the German Church did not only
desire a reformation, An. 1415.
as appears by the Letter of Sigismond the Emperor to the King of France,
Maximo deside^io jamdudum tenebamur, etc. We have long desired greatly to see
the only Spouse of Christ the Catholic Church happily reformed in our days,
Goldast. part. 1. page 146.
but after we were assumed to the Imperial Government, our desire passed into
command, etc. And the advises of Constance conceived by the Deputies of the
German Nation in that Council, against some special abuses of the Pope and his
Cardinals: And by the advises of Ments made and concluded in that City by the
States of the Empire, Id^m. page 149.
in the time of the Council of Basile, for preserving the authority of General
Councels; for relief from grievances; Id^m. page 155.
for procuring of conditions from the Pope; for preservation of their just
liberties; and for prevention of the abuses, and excesses, and extortions of
the Roman Court: Idem. p. 2* page 36*
And by the hundred Grievances of the German Nation proposed to the Popes
Legate by the Princes and Lords of the Roman Empire, against the injuries,
extortions, and usurpations of the Sea of Rome, and the encroachments and
oppressions of Ecclesiastical Courts, and persons: And lastly, by the gracious
promise of Charles the fifth to hold a Dyett within half a year, wherein it
should be resolved, what way the differences in Religion should be settled and
quieted, Idem p. 2. page 177.
whether by a General, or National Council, or Imperial Dyett.

Neither did the Emperor and the German Nation only endeavor to reform, but
they did in some measure actually reform the excesses of the Roman Court, and
other Ecclesiastical abuses and innovations; as it has already been verified
of Charles the Great, Gold. p. 1. page 207.
and Ludovicus Pius. This appears yet more plainly by the concordates (as
they are styled) of the German Nation with Gregory the 13th: And the agreements
of Frederick the third and the Princes of the Empire with Pope Nicholas the
fifth, whereby the excesses and abuses of the Roman Court are something abated,
and reduced: Id. p. 211.
And by the Ghostly or Ecclesiastical reformation made by Sigismond the
Emperor, Idem. page 170.
in the year 1436, containing 37 Chapters or Articles, for regulating the Pope
and his Court, Cardinals, Archbishops, Bishops, Suffragans, Abbats, Monks,
Friars, Nuns, and all sorts of Ecclesiastical or religious persons.

I cannot here omit a witty answer of this Emperor, as he was deliberating
with some Ecclesiastical persons about a Reformation, and one said it must
begin with the Minimes. Catalog. testium veritatis.
No, said he, non a Minoritis, sed a Majoritis, not with the Minimes, but with
the Maxims, or great ones, that is, the Pope and the Cardinals, and the Court
of Rome.

This appears also by the Interim, or declaration of Religion made by Charles
the fifth, attested with his Imperial seal, and accepted and approved by the
States of the Empire, assembled in a Dyett at Ausburge, May 15. Gold. part. 2.
p. 109.
in the year, 1548, where the whole exercise of Religion is established, until
the definition of a Council. I produce it not to show what it was, but what
power the Emperor did assume in point of Religion; wherein these words are
contained: Quod autem in supradicta declaratione sub rubrica, de caeremoniis
and usu Sacramentorum inter alia dicitur, [in quas tamen si quid irrepsit quod
causam dare possit superstitioni, tollatur.] Reservat sibi soli Caesarea
Majestas, etc. And whereas in the aforesaid declaration, under the rubric of
ceremonies and the use of the Sacraments, among other things it is said, [into
the which nevertheless if any thing have crept that may administer occasion of
superstition, let it be taken away.] His Imperial Majesty does reserve unto
himself alone in this and the like Articles, where and as often as it shall be
needful, now and hereafter, the right to correct, to add, to detract, as it
shall seem just and equal to himself, according to the present exigence of
affairs.

Lastly, Gold. part. 2. p. 197.
this appears by the declaration of Ferdinand the Emperor made in the year
1555, in favor of the Augustane Confession, and the professors thereof.

Secondly, the Kings of England in their great Councels did make themselves the
last Judges of the liberties and grievances and necessities of their people,
even in cases Ecclesiastical, not the Pope. They had reason. In vain is the
Court of Romes determination expected against it self. The Emperors did the
same. Gold. p. 1. p. 103.
So Lodovic the fourth in his Apology against Pope John the 22th. declares,
that the Pope ought not, cannot be a competent Judge in his own cause. The Pope
challenged such a confirmation of the Emperor, without which his election was
invalid. The Emperor determined the contrary in the Diet of Frankford, An.
1338. Declaramus quod Imperialis dignitas est immediate a solo Deo, Idem page
99.
etc. We declare that the Imperial dignity is immediately from God alone; And
that election gives a sufficient title, The Emperors made themselves the last
Judges of their liberties and necessities.
And that the Popes approbation or disapprobation signifies nothing. The Pope
attempted to divide Italy from the German Empire, by his fullness of power. The
Emperor declares the Act to be invalid, and of no moment.

When the Princes and States of the Empire had presented the hundred grievances
of the German Nation to the Popes Legate, they add this conclusion: Goldast.
part. 2. page 58.
Quod si enumerat^ onera atque gravamina, etc. But if the abovesaid burdens
and grievances be not removed within the time limited or sooner from the eyes
of men, and abolished and abrogated, (which the Lay-States of the Empire do not
expect,) then they would not have his Holiness to be ignorant, that they
neither can nor will bear or endure the aforesaid most pressing and intolerable
burdens any longer, but find out other means of ease, and vindicate their
former liberties and immunities. As the sense of their sufferings was their
own, so they would have the remedy to be their own, and not leave the cure to a
tyrannical Court.

To this add the Protestation and the Oath of the Electoral College and the
other Princes of the Empire, mentioned in their letter to Benedict the 12th.
Quod jura, honores, bona, libertates, and consuetudines Imperii, Idem p. 1.
page 100.
etc. That they would maintain, defend and preserve inviolated, with all their
power and might, the rights, honors, goods, liberties, and customs of the
Empire, and their own Electoral right belonging to them by law or custom,
against all men, of what pre-eminence, dignity, or state soever, (that is to
say in plain terms, against the Pope and his Court,) notwithstanding any
perils or mandates, or processes whatsoever, that is, notwithstanding any
citations, or bulls, or excommunications, or interdictions from Rome.

Take but one instance more: Ferdinand the present Emperor out of an
unavoidable necessity, to extinguish the flame of a bloody intestine war, and
to save the Empire from utter ruin, contracts a peace with the King of France,
the Swedes, and their adherents, whereby sundry Bishoprics and other
Ecclesiastical dignities were conferred upon Protestants, lands and other
hereditaments of great value were alienated from the Church in perpetuity, free
exercise of their Religion was granted to those of the Augustan Confession,
Annates, confirmations, and other pretended Papal rights were abolished. The
Popes extraordinary Nuncio protested against it: And Pope Innocent himself by
his Bull bearing date November. 26. in the year 1651, (...)
declared the contract to be void, annulled it, and condemned it as injurious
and prejudicaial to the Orth^dox Religion, to the Sea of Rome, and to the
rights of Holy Church, notwithstanding the municipal Laws and immemorial
customs of the Empire, and notwithstanding any Oaths taken for the
observation thereof. Yet the Emperor and the Princes of Germany stand to their
contracts, assert the municipal laws and customs of the Empire; And assume
unto themselves to be the only Judges of their own privileges and necessities.

Thirdly, Henry the eighth challenged to himself the patronage of Bishoprics,
and investitures of Bishops, within his own Dominions. The Emperors did more:
Adrian the fourth taxed Frederick the first for requiring homage and fealty of
Bishops, Gold. part. 1. page 58.
Et manus eorum sacratas manib^s tuis innectis, Emperors enjoyed investitures.
and that he held their consecrated hands in his hands. The Emperor denied it
not, but justified it, Ab his qui regalia nostra tenent, cur homagium and
regalia Sacramenta non exigamus? why may we not require homage and Oaths of
Allegiance from them who hold their Lands of our Imperial Crown? The
Ecclesiastical Lords in their letter to Innocent the third do acknowledge, that
the fees which they held from the Empire, they had received at the hands of
Otho the fourth, and had done him homage and sworn fealty to him. And this
before his Imperial Coronation at Rome.

Henry the fifth goes yet further, and accuses Pope Paschal, that without any
hearing he sought to take away from the Empire the investitures of Bishops
which the Emperors his predecessors had enjoyed from the time of Charlemain
by the space of 400 years and upwards: Id. p. 53.
A fair prescription. But this is not all; The Emperors did long enjoy the
patronage of the Papacy it self, and the disposition of the Roman Bishopric*
Adrian the first with the whole Clergy and people of Rome quitted all their
claim, right and interest to Charles the Great, Id. p* ^.
as well in the elections of the Popes, as investitures of Bishops. P. 34.
And Leo the eighth did the like to Otho the first, which is a truth in history
so apparent, that no man can deny it with his credit, nor question it with
reason.

Fourthly, the Kings of England suffered no appeals to Rome out of their
Kingdoms, nor Roman Legates to enter into their Dominions, without their
License. No more did the Emperors, though they acknowledge the Roman Bishop to
be their Patriarch, which we do not. Hadrian the fourth complained of Frederick
the first, Id. page 58. and 61.
That he shut both the Churches and the Cities of his Kingdom against the Popes
Legates a latere. Emnperours have excluded Legate^, etc.
And more fully in his letter to the German Bishops, that he had made an edict,
that no man out of his Kingdom should have recourse to the Apostolic See. To
the former part of the charge the Emperor answers, Cardinalibus vestris
clausae sunt Ecclesiae, and non patent civitates, quia non videmus eo^
praedicatores, sed praedatores; non pacis corroboratores, sed pecuniae
raptores; non orbis reparatores, sed auri insatiabiles corrasores: Our Churches
and Cities are shut to your Cardinals, Page 59.
because we do not see them Preachers, but robbers; not confirmers of peace,
but extorting catchers of money; not repairers of the world, but insatiable
scrapers together of gold: Thus much he writ to the Pope himself. To the second
part of the charge he answers, That he had not shut up the entrance into Italy,
or the passage out of Italy by edict, nor would shut it up to travelers, or
such as had necessary occasions, and the testimony of their Bishops for their
voyage to the Sea of Rome, but he intended to remedy those abuses, Ch*. 13.
by which all the Churches of his Kingdom were burdened and impoverished. Chapter
5, 6, 7, 8.
That the whole body of the Empire were of the same mind, it appears by the
Advises of Ments; And by the hundred grievances of the German Nation, which the
Princes and Peers of the Empire protested that they neither could nor would
endure any longer.

Fifthly, And neglected the Popes Bulls, etc.
the Kings of England declared the Popes Bulls to be void: They had good
reason, for they were not under his Jurisdiction, nor within the sphere of his
activity: The Emperors did not so generally, but yet they took upon them to be
Judges whether the Popes key did err or not* Pius the second by his Bull
condemned all appeals from the Pope to a General Council, An. 1459
as erroneous, detestable, void and pestilent, and subjected all those who
should use them after two months to execration, ipso facto, of what condition
soever they were, Emperors, Kings or Bishops. Yet long after this Charles the
fifth appealed from Clement the seventh to a General Council; Anno 1526.
Rescript. Car. 5. ad Criminal. P. Clem. 7.
Ad sacri Generalis Concilii and totius Christianitatis cognitionem et judicium
remittenda censuimus, Illiqque nos et omnia quae cum S. vestra habere possumus,
aut deinceps habituri sumus omnino subjicimus. Wherein he did but insist in the
steps of his predecessors. Lewis the fourth did the same to John the 22th. And
in the Diet of Frankford decreed them all that should assent to the Popes Bull
to be guilty of treason, Gold. p. 1. page 99.
and to have forfeited all their fees which they held of the Empire; because
the sentence of a Pope contrary to God, or to holy Scripture, or to that due
obedience which a Subject owes to his Prince, is of no moment or validity: And
such the Princes and Peers of the Empire did unanimously declare the Popes
Bull to be, contra Deum, and justitiam, and juris ordinem, contrary to God,
contrary to holy Scripture, and contrary to due order of Law. P. 100. (...)


Sixthly, And seized upon Papal pretended rights.
Henry the eighth deprived the Pope of his Annates, tenths, and first fruits in
England, of his pall-money, and other extorted revenues. What did the Emperor
and the Germans less then he? In the advises of Ments it is concluded, that
the Pope shall receive nothing either before or after for confirmations,
elections, admissions, Cap. 10.
collations, provisions, presentations, holy order, palles, benedictions, etc.
upon pain that the transgressour thereof either in exacting, or giving, or
promising, should incur the punishment due to a Simoniacal person. In
Conclusione S^ss. 21.
And though these were but Advises, yet the King of the Romans and Electors did
covenant mutually to assist and defend one another in the maintenance of them
against all men; And yet further procured them to be confirmed and enlarged in
the Council of Basile, by the addition of investitures, bulls, annates, first
fruits, etc. This was too sweet a morsel for the Pope to lose willingly, when
the Archbishop of Ments paid for his pall (worth about six pence) thirty
thousand Florens.

By the Concordates or accord made between the Emperor and Princes of Germany,
and Nicholas the fifth, the Annates are in part remitted or taken away. The
Estates of the Empire assembled at Nurenberge represented to Adrian the sixth,
that Annates were given for maintenance of the war against the Turks, Gold.
p^rt. 2. page 24. (...) 32.
and how comely a thing it were that they should be restored to the same use.
The Princes added further, That they were but granted for a certain term, which
was effluxed. The hundred Grievances rest not here, but say moreover, that they
were but deposited at Rome, to be preserved faithfully for that use. Cap. 19.
Resc. Number. 44.
And lastly, Charles the fifth in his Rescript tells the Pope, That other Kings
do not suffer the spoils of the Churches and Annates to be transported out of
their Kingdoms to Rome, so universally, and so abundantly.

Seventhly, to draw to a conclusion, And have imposed Oaths of allegiance.
Henry the eighth imposed an oath of fidelity or allegiance upon his Subjects,
Ecclesiastical as well as temporal. So did Frederick the first Emperor of that
name: Gold. part. 1. page 64.
I swear that from henceforth I will be faithful to my Liege Lord, Frederick
the Emperor of the Romans against all men (the Pope is included, or rather
intended principally) as by Law I am bound, And I will help him to retain his
Imperial Crown, and all his honor in Italy, etc.

Henry the eighth took away Popish pardons, The Germans against Pardons,
Indulgences, etc.
and indulgences, and dispensations; The German Nation likewise groaned under
the burden of them. Among their hundred grievances, that of dispensations was
the first; And that of Papal Indulgences the third, either for sins past, or to
come, modo tinneat dextra, (it is their own phrase.) They call these artifices
mere impostures, Gravam. 1. and 3.
by which the very marrow of Germa^y was sucked up, their ancient liberty was
enervated, and the merit of Christ's passion became slighted.

Lastly, Henry the eighth abolished the usurped jurisdiction of the Bishop of
Rome, within his Dominions. Emperors have deposed Popes, and appealed from
them, etc.
The Emperors did not so, whether they thought it not fit to leave an old
Patriarch; Or because they did not sufficiently consider the right bounds of
Imperial power, especially being seconded with the authority of an Occidental
Council; or because they did not so clearly distinguish between a beginning of
unity and an universality of Jurisdiction; or because they had other remedies
wherewith to help themselves, I cannot determine. But this we have seen, That
the Emperors have deposed Popes, and have appealed from Popes to General
Councels; And have maintained their Imperial prerogatives against Popes, and
made themselves the last Judges of the liberties and necessities of the whole
body Politic.

Frederick the third in the Diet of Nurenburg sequestered all the moneys that
should be raised in three years from Indulgences and absolutions, Gold. part.
1. page 214. Number. 8.
whether Papal or Conciliary, toward the raising of twenty thousand men for
defense of the Empire against the Turk. The resolution of the Elect Archbishop
of Trevers against Gregory the 7th. was this, Ne plus per hunc Sancta, quae
modo extremum tra^it spiritum, periclit^tur Ecclesia, ex me dic^, quod nullam
ei posthac obedientiam servabo, Page 47.
etc. Lest the holy Church which is now brought to the last gasp incur more
danger by his means, I speak of my self, that hereafter I will perform no
obedience to him, (that is, Pope Hildebrand). Neither was this his resolution
alone. All the German Bishops were of the same mind: Because thy entrance into
the Papacy was begun with so great perjuries; And the Church of God is brought
into such a grievous storm through the abuse of thy innovations, and thy life
and conversation is soiled with so manifold infamy: As we promised thee no
obedience, Et 48.
so we let thee know, that for the future we will perform none unto thee. Et
quia nemo nostrum (ut public declamas) tibi hactenus ^uit Episcopus, ita nulli
nostrum ^ modo eris Apostolicus: And as thou have reputed none of us for
Bishops hitherto; So hereafter none of us will esteem thee for the Successor
of Saint Peter. Which sentence was confirmed by the Emperor: Ego Henricus Rex
cum omnibus Episcopis meis tibi dico, Dese^nde, descend.

The first Council of Pisa did not only substract their obedience from Peter
de Luna, calling himself Benedict the 13th. and Angelus de Gorario calling
himself Gregory the 12th. But they decreed that it was lawful for all
Christians, and accordingly did command them to substract their obedience from
them. Of which Council the Council of Constance was a continuation. S^ss. 8. ^t
9. S^ss. ultima. promot. Conc^l. P^sani page 32. ^t 172.
The second Council of Pisa suspended Julius the second, from the Papacy, and
commanded all Christians to withdraw their obedience from him. The former had
the consent of the Emperor: The later, his assistance and protection; as
appears both by the solemn promise of the Emperors Ambassadors made in
Council, and the acknowledgment of the Council it self.

I will conclude this first part of my parallel concerning the Empire with two
answers of German Bishops. The first of the German and French to Anastasius the
second, wherein they tell him plainly, that they did not understand that new
compassion, which the Italian Physicians used to cure the infirmities of
France. They ^axe them for seeking to restrain the absolution of souls to Rome.
They require that Italian Bishop that is without sin to cast the first stone at
them; They advise them not to use their pretended authority against their
Bishops, lest the blow should recoile upon themselves, for that theirs had not
learned to fear above that which was needful: they tell them that surely they
in Italy, think that the Galls had lost all these three, Verbum, ferrum, and
ingenium, their tongues, their wits, and their weapons.

And so they conclude, Ex schedis Ioannis Av^ntini apud Goldast. in Rationali
p. 48.
Etiamsi inclinata esset arca testamenti nostri, nostrorum Episcoporum esset,
and non illorum, inclinatam relevare. Although the arc of their Covenant was
falling, yet it belonged to their own Bishops, and not to them, to lift it up
again.

The other answer was of the Archbishops of Colone and Triers, with the Synod
of Coloegne to Nicholas the first. Wherein after many bitter expressions they
have these words, His de causis nos cum fratribus nostris and collegis, neque
edictis tuis stamus, neque vocem tuam agnoscimus, nequo tuas bullas tonitruaque
tua timemus. For these reasons we with our brethren and colleagues, do neither
give place to thy edicts, nor acknowledge thy voice, nor fear thy thundering
bulls. Ibid. p. 50.


I expect that some will be ready to object, that these substractions were but
personal, from the present Pope, not from the Sea of Rome, which is true in
part. But the same equity and rule of justice which warrants a separation from
the person of the Pope, for personal faults, does also justify a more durable
separation from the Sea of Rome, that is from him and his Successors, for
faulty rules and principles, either in doctrine or discipline, until they be
reformed.

From Germany our pass is open into France. The French no vassals of the Roman
Court.
where the case is as clear as the Sun, how their Kings, (though acknowledged
by the Popes themselves to be most Christian, the eldest Sons of the Church,
and otherwise the great Patrons and Protectours of the Roman See,) with their
Princes of the blood, their Peers, their Parliaments, their Ambassodours, their
Schools and Universities have all of them, in all ages, affronted and curbed
the Roman Court, and reduced them to a right temper and constitution, as often
as they deviated from the Canons of the Fathers, and incroached upon the
liberties of the Gallicane Church. Whereby the Popes jurisdiction in France
came to be merely discretionary, at the pleasure of the King.

Hincmare had been condemned by three French Synods for a turbulent person, and
deposed. Pope Adrian the second takes Cognizance of the cause at Rome, and
requires Carolus Calvus the King of France to send Hincmare thither with his
accusers, to receive justice. The Kings apologetick answer will show how he
relished it. Valde mirati sumus ubi hoc dictator Epistolae scriptum invenerit,
esse Apostolica authoritate praecipiendum, Goldast. Constitut. Imper. p. 1.
page 24.
ut Rex corrector iniquorum and districtor reorum, atque secundum leges
Ecclesiasticas atque mundanas ultor criminum, reum legaliter ac regulariter pro
excessibus suis damnatum, sua fretum potentia Roman dirigat. We wondered much
where he who dictated the Popes Letter has found it written, as commanded by^
Apostolical authority, that a King who is the Corrector of the unjust, the
punisher of guilty persons, and according to all Laws Ecclesiastical and
Civil the revenger of crimes, should send a guilty person, legally and
regularly condemned for his excesses, to Rome. He tells him, that the Kings of
France were reputed terrarum Domini, not Episcoporum Vice-Domini, or Villici;
Lords paramount within their Dominions, not Licutenants or Bayliffes of
Bishops. Quis igitur hanc inversam legem infernus evomuit? quis tartarus de
suis abditis and tenebrosis cuniculis eructavit? What hell has disgorged this
disorderly law? what bottomless depth has belched it up out of its hidden and
obscure holes?

The Kings of France have convented the Popes before them; So Charles the Great
dealt with Leo the third, and Lotharius with Leo the fourth.

The Kings of France have appealed from Popes to Councels: So Philip the 4th.
with the advice of all the orders of France and the whole Gallicane Church,
appealed from Boniface the eighth, and commanded his appeal to be published in
the great Church at Paris. So Henry the great appealed from Gregory the 14th.
and caused his appeal to be affixed* to the gates of Saint Peter's Church in
Rome. So the School of Sorbone appealed from Boniface the eight, Benedict the
eleventh, Pius the second, and Leo the tenth.

The Kings of France have protested against the Popes decrees and slighted
them, yea, in the very face of the Council of Trent. Witness that protestation
of the Ambassador of France, made in the Council in the name of the King his
Master. We refuse to be subject to the commands and disposition of Pius the
fourth, Goldast. (...) 3. p. 571.
we reject, refuse and contemn all the judgments, censures and decrees of the
said Pius. And although (most holy Fathers) your Religion, Life and Learning
was ever, and ever shall be of great esteem with us; Yet seeing indeed you do
nothing, but all things are done at Rome rather then at Trent: And the things
that are here published, are rather the decrees of Pius the fourth, then of the
Council of Trent, we denounce and protest here before you all, that whatsoever
things are decreed and published in this Assembly by the mere will and pleasure
of Pius neither the most Christian King will ever approve, nor the French
Church ever acknowledge to be decrees of a General Council. Besides this, the
King our Master commands all his Archbishops and Bishops and Abbats, to leave
this Assembly and presently to depart hence, then to return again, when there
shall be hope of better and more orderly proceedings. This was high and smart
for the King and the Gallicane Church, so publicly to reject, refuse and
contemn all Papal decrees, and to challenge such an interest in, and power over
the French Archbishops and Bishops, as not only to license them, but to
command them to depart and leave the Council, whither they were summoned by the
Pope.

The French Kings have made Laws and constitutions from time to time to
repress the insolences and exorbitances of the Papal Court, so often as they
began to prejudice the liberties of the Gallicane Church, with the unanimous
consent of their Princes, Nobles, Clergy, Lawyers, and Commons. An. 1267.
As against their bestowing of Ecclesiastical dignities and benefices in
France, and their gross Simony and extortions in that way, An. 1406.
against the payment of Annates and tenths to Rome, and generally for all the
liberties of the Church of France. Against reservations and Apostolical graces,
and all other exactions of the Court of Rome. An. 1418. An. 1438.
Charl^s the seventh made the pragmatical Sanction, to confirm all the Acts of
the Councels of Constance and Bas^l against the tyranny and usurpation of the
Pope. It is true that Lewis the eleventh, by the flattering persuasion of
Aeneas Sylvius, then Pius the second, did revoke this Sanction. But the Kings
Proctour, and the Rectour of the University of Paris did oppose themselves
formally to the Registring and Authorizing of this revocation. Whereupon the
King desired the advice of his Parliament in writing, which they gave to this
effect, That the revocation of that Sanction tended to the confusion of the
whole Ecclesiastical order, the depopulation of France, the exhausting and
impoverishment of the Kingdom, and the total ruin of the French Church.
Hereupon the King changed his mind, and made diverse declarations and edicts
conformable to, As that of August. 16. an. 1478.
and in pursuance of the pragmatical Sanction. After this the three Estates
assembled at Towers, made it their first and instant request to Charles the
8th. that he would preserve inviolable the pragmatical Sanction, An. 1487. An.
1517.
which they reputed as the Palladium of France. And in the National Council
assembled by Lewis the 12th. in the same City it was again confirmed.

But the Pope stormed, and thundered, and excommunicated, and interdicted Lewis
the 12th. Francis the first, and the whole Realm, and exposed it as a prey to
the first that could take it; And gave plenary Indulgence to every one that
should kill a Frenchman. King Francis fainted under such fulminations, and came
to a composition or accommodation with Leo the tenth, which was called
conventa, or the concordate: On the one side the Popes friends think he wronged
himself and his title to a spiritual Sovereignty very much, by descending to
such an accommodation. And exclude France out of the number of those Countries
which they term pays d' obedience. As if the French were not loyal obedient
Subjects, but Rebels to the Court of Rome. On the other side the Prelates* the
Universities, the Parliaments of France, were as ill contented that the King
should yield one inch, and opposed the accord: Insomuch, as the University of
Paris appealed from it to a future Council, and expedited Letters Patents
sealed with the Universities Seal, Fascicuius rerum expetend* et fugiend.
impressu^ 1535.
containing at large their grievances, and the reasons of the appeal, which
after were published to the world in print.

I cannot here omit the free and just speech of a French Bishop; When Henry the
fourth had in a manner ended the civil Wars of France, by changing from the
Protestant to the Roman Catholic Communion: Yet the Pope who favored the
contrary party, upon pretense of his dissimulation, and great dangers that
might ensue thereupon, for a long time deferred his reconciliation, until the
French Prelates by their own authority did first admit him into the bosom of
the Church. At which time one of them used this discourse, Was France all on
fire, and had they not Rivers enough at home, but they must run as far as Rome,
to Tybur, to fetch water to quench it?

Since that in Cardinal Richlieu's days it is well known what books were
freely printed, and publicly sold upon pont neuf, of the lawfulness of
erecting a new, or rather restoring an old proper Patriarchate in France, as
one of the liberties of the Gallicane Church. It was well for the Roman Court
that they became more propitious to the French affairs.

Take one instance more which happened very lately. The Pope refused to admit
any new Bishops in Portugal, upon the nomination of the present King, because
he would not thereby seem to acknowledge or approve his title to the Crown, in
prejudice of the King of Spain, whereby the Episcopal order in Portugal and the
other Dominions belonging to that Crown, was well near extinguished, and
scarcely so many Bishops were left alive, or could not be drawn together, as to
make a Canonical Ordination. The three Orders of Portugal did represent to the
Pope, Balatus ovium. p. 2. ^ ^^3.
that in the Kingdoms of Portugal and the Algarbians, wherein ought to have
been three Metropolitans and ten Suffragans, there was but one left, and he by
the Popes dispensation non-Residen^. And in all the As^atique Provinces but one
other, and he both sickly and decrepit. And in all the African and American
Provinces and the Islands not one surviving. Lusitania gemitus, p. 20.
But the Pope continued inexorable; whereupon they^ present their request to
their neighbors and friends the French Prelates, beseeching them to mediate
for them with his Holiness. And if he continue still obstinately deaf to their
just petition, to supply his defect themselves, and to Ordain them Bishops in
case of necessity. The French did the Office of Neighbors and Christians. The
Synod of the French Clergy did write to the Pope on their behalf in April,
1651. But that way not succeeding, they sent one of their Bishops, as an
express Envoie to his Holiness, Epist. Cler. Gallicani ad. Innoc. Pap. 10.
to let him know that if he still refused, they cannot nor will be wanting to
themselves, to their neighbors, but would supply his defect; what the issue of
it is since, I have not yet heard.

But to leave matter of fact, and to come to the fundamental Laws and Customs
of France. Every one has heard of the liberties of the French Church, but
every one understands not what those liberties are, as being better known by
their practice at home, Traictes des (...) liberties de l'Egl^se Gallicane.
then by Books abroad. I will only select some of them out of their own
authentic authorities. And when the Reader has considered well of them, let
him judge what authority the Pope has in France, Pro liberate Ecclesiae
Gallic. adversus Roman, aeulam def^nsia Parisiens. Cur^ae.
more then discretionary at the good pleasure of the King, or more then he
might have had in other places, if he could have contented himself with reason.
Protestants are not so undiscreet, or uncharitable, as to violate the peace of
Christendom, for a primacy or headship of order, without superiority of power,
or for the name of his Holiness; Or for a Pall, if the price were not too
high, Or for a few innocent formalities.

1. The Pope cannot command or ordain any thing directly or indirectly
concerning any temporal affairs, within the dominions of the King of France.
The libert^es of the French Church.


2. The spiritual authority and power of the Pope is not absolute in France,
but limited and restrained by the Canons and Rules of the ancient Counc^ls of
the Church, received in that Kingdom. Where observe first, that the Pope can do
nothing in France as a Sovereign Spiritual Prince, with his non obstantes,
either against the Canons or besides the Canons. Secondly, that the Canons are
no Canons in France, except they be received. This ^ame privilege was
anciently radicated in the fundamental Laws of England. This privilege the
Popes endeavored to pluck up by the roots. And the contentions about this
privilege were one principal occasion of the separation.

3. No command whatsoever of the Pope can free the French Clergy from their
obligation to obey the commands of their Sovereign.

4. The most Christian King has had power at all times, according to the
occurrence and exigence of affairs, to assemble or cause to be assembled
Synods, Provincial or National, and therein to treat not only of such things
as concern the conservation of the Civil estate, but also of such things as
concern Ecclesiastical order and discipline in his own dominions. And therein
to make Rules, Chapters, Laws, Ordinances, and pragmatique sanctions in his
own name, and by his own authority. Many of which have been received among the
decrees of the Catholic Church, and some of them approved by general Councels.

5. The Pope cannot send a Legate a latere into France, with power to reform,
judge, collate, dispense, or do such other things accustomed to be specified in
the authoritative Bull of his Legation, except it be upon the desire, or with
the approbation of the most Christian King. Neither can the said Legate execute
his charge until he has promised the King in writing, under his oath upon his
holy orders, not to make use of his Legantine power in the Kings Dominions
longer then it shall please the King. And that so soon as he shall be
admonished of the Kings pleasure to forbid it, he will give it over: And that
whilst he does use it, it shall be exercised conformably to the Kings will,
without attempting any thing to the prejudice of the decrees of General
Councels, or the liberties and privileges of the Gallicane Church, and the
Universities of France.

6. The Commissions and Bulls of the Popes Legates are to be seen, examined,
and approved by the Court of Parliament. And to be registered and published with
such Cautions, and modifications as that Court shall judge expedient for the
good of the Kingdom, and to* be* executed according to the said cautions, and
not otherwise.

7. The Prelates of the French Church, (although commanded by the Pope,) for
what cause soever it be, may not depart out of the Kingdom, without the Kings
Commandment of License.

8. The Pope can neither by himself nor by his Delegates judge of any thing
which concerns the state, pre-eminence, or privileges of the Crown of
France, nor of any thing pertaining to it: Nor can there be any question or
process about the state or pretensions of the King, but in his own Courts.

9. Papal Bulls, Citations, Sentences, Excommunications, and the like, are not
to be executed in France without the Kings Command, or permission: And after
permission, only by authority of the King, and not by authority of the Pope,
to shun confusion and mixture of Jurisdictions.

10. Neither the King nor his Realm, nor his Officers can be excommunicated or
interdicted by the Pope, nor his Subjects absolved from their Oath of
Allegiance.

11. The Pope cannot impose Pensions in France upon any benefices having cure
of souls, nor upon any others, but according to the Canons, according to the
express condition of the resignation, or ad redimendum vexationem.

12 All Bulls and Missives which come from Rome to France are to be seen and
visited, to try if there be nothing in them prejudicial in any manner to the
estate and liberties of the Church of France, or to the Royal authority.

13 It is lawful to appeal from the Pope to a future Council.

14 Ecclesiastical persons may be convented, judged, and sentenced before a
secular Judge for the first grievous or enormious crime, or for lesser offenses
after a relapse, which renders them incorrigible in the eye of the Law.

15. All the Prelates of France are obliged to swear fea^ty to the King, and to
receive from him their investitu^es for their fees and manours.

16. The Courts of Parliament in case of appeals as from abuse have right and
power to declare null, void, and to revoke the Popes Bulls and
Excommunications, and to forbid the execution of them, when they are found
contrary to sacred decrees, the liberties of the French Church, or the
prerogative Royal.

17. General Councels are above the Pope, and may depose him, and put another
in his place, and take cognizance of appeals from the Pope.

18. All Bishops have their power immediately from Christ, not from the Pope,
and are equally successors of Saint Peter and the other Apostles, and Vicars
of Christ.

19. Provisions, reservations, expectative graces, etc. have no place in France.

20. The Pope cannot exempt any Church, Monastery, or Ecclesiastical body from
the Jurisdiction of their Ordinary, nor erect Bishoprics into Archbishopricks,
nor unite them, nor divide them without the Kings License.

21. All those are not heretics, excommunicated, or damned, who differ in some
things from the doctrine of the Pope, who appeal from his decrees, and hinder
the execution of the ordinances of him or his Legates.

These are part of the liberties of the Gallicane Church. The ancient British
Church needed no such particular privileges, since they never knew any
foreign Jurisdiction: The English British Church which succeeded them in time,
in place, and partly in their members and holy orders, ought to have enjoyed
the same freedom and exemption. But in the days of the Saxon, Danish, and
Norman Kings, the Popes did by degrees insinuate themselves into the mesnagery
of Ecclesiastical affairs in England. Yet for many ages the English Church
enjoyed all these Gallicane privileges, without any remarkable interruption
from the Roman Court. As in truth they do of right by the Law of nature belong
to all Sovereign Princes, in their own Dominions. Otherwise Kingdoms should be
destitute of necessary remedies for their own conservation. And in later ages,
when the Popes having thrust in their heads, did strive to draw in their whole
bodies after, the whole Kingdom opposed them, and made Laws against their
several gross intrusions, as we have formerly seen in this discourse: And
never quitted these English (as well as Gallicane) liberties, until the
Reformation.

But perhaps we may find more loyalty and obedience to the Court of Rome in the
Catholic King. The King of Spain asserts the liberties of his own Churches.
Not at all. Whatsoever power King Henry or any of his Successors did ever
assume to themselves in England as the Political Heads of the Church, the same
and much more does the Catholic King not only pretend unto, but exercise and
put in practice in his Kingdom of Sicily, both by himself and by his
Delegates, whom he substitutes with the same authority, to judge and punish all
Ecclesiastical crimes, to excommunicate and absolve all Ecclesiastical persons,
Edict. Car. 5. December. 7. An. 1526.
Laymen, Monks, Clerks, Abbats, Bishops, Archbishops, yea, and even the
Cardinals themselves which inhabit in Sicily. He suffers no appeals to Rome, He
admits no Nuncio's from Rome, ^aron. to. 11. An. 1097. number. 29. edit. Mogunt.
Atque demum resp^ct^ Ecclesiasticae Iurisdictionis neque ipsam Apostolicam
sedem recognoscere and h^b^re superiorem, nisi in casu praeven^ionis. And to
conclude, he acknowledges not any superiority of the S^e of Rome it self, but
only in case of prevention.

What says Baronius to this? He complains bitterly, that praetensa Apostolica
authoritate contra Apostolicam ipsam sedem grande piaculum perpetratur, Ibid.
(...) 28.
etc. Upon pretense of Apostolic authority a grievous offense is committed
against the Apostolic See, the power whereof is weakn^d in the Kingdom of
Sicily, the authority thereof abrogated, the Jurisdiction wronged, the
Ecclesiastical Laws violated, and the rights of the Church dissipated. Ibid.
number. 29.
And a little after he declaimes yet higher, Quid in ad ista dixeris lector?
What will thou say to this Reader? but that under the name of Monarchy besides
that one Monarch which all the faithful have ever ackn^wledged as the only
visible Head in the Church, Another head it risen up, and brought into the
Kingdom of Sicily, for a Monster and a prodigy, etc. But for this liberty
which he took, the King of Spain fairly and quietly without taking any notice
of his Cardinalitian dignity, caused his books to be burned publicly.

It will be objected, That the King of Spain challenges this power in Sicily,
not by his Regal authority as a Sovereign Prince, but by the Bull of Vrbanus
the second, who constituted Roger Earl of Sicily and his heirs his Legates a
latere in that Kingdom, whereby all succeeding Princes do challenge to be
Legati nati, with power to substitute others, and qualify them with the same
authority.

But first, if the Papacy be by Divine right, what power has any particular
Pope to transfer so great a part of his office and authority from his
Successors for ever, unto a Layman and his heirs, by way of inheritance? If
every Pope should do as much for another Kingdom, as Vrbanus did for Sicily,
the Court of Rome would quickly want employment.

Secondly, if the Bull of Vrbanus the second was so available to the succeeding
Kings of Sicily, which yet is disputed whether it be authentic or not, whether
it be full, or defective, and mutilated, why should not the Bull of Nicholas
the second his predecessor, granted to our Edward the Confessor and his
Successors, be as advantageous to the succeeding Kings of England? why not
much rather? seeing that they are thereby constituted or declared, not Legates,
but Governors of the English Church, in the Popes place, or rather in Christ's
place, seeing that without all doubt Sicily was a part of the Popes ancient
Patriarchate, but Britaigne was not; And lastly, seeing the situation of Sicily
so much nearer to Rome, renders the Sicilians more capable of receiving Justice
from thence, then the English.

Thirdly, the King of Spain when he pleases, and when he sees his own time,
does not only pretend unto, but assume in his other Dominions that self-same
power or essential right of Sovereignty, which I plead for in this treatise. It
is not unknown to the world how indulgent a Father Urban the eighth was
sometimes to the King and Kingdom of France, and how passionately he affected
the interest of that Crown. And by consequence that his ears were deaf to the
requests and remonstrances of the King of Spain. The Catholic King resents
this partiality very highly, and threatens the Pope if he persist, to provide a
remedy for the grievances of his Subjects, by his own power. Accordingly to
make good his word, he called a general Assembly of all the Estates of the
Kingdom of Castile, to consider of the exorbitancies of the Court of Rome, in
relation to his Majesty's Subjects, and to consult of the proper remedies
thereof. They did meet and draw up a memorial consisting of ten Articles,
containing the chiefest abuses and innovations, and extortions of the Court of
Rome in the Kingdom of Castile. His Majesty sends it to the Pope by Friar
Domingo Pimentell as his Ambassador; The Pope returned a smart answer by
Senior Maraldo his Secretary. The King replied as sharply. All which was
afterward printed by the special command of his Catholic Majesty.

The sum of their complaint was first concerning the Popes imposing of
pensions upon dignities and other benefices Ecclesiastical, Memorial de sa
magestad Catolica.
even those which had cure of souls, in favor of strangers, in an excessive
proportion, to the third part of the full value. Chap. 1, 2, 3.
That although benefices were decayed in many places of Spain, two third parts
of the true value; Yet the Court of Rome kept up the Pensions at the full
height: That it was contrived so, that the Pensions did begin long before the
beneficiaries entered upon their profits, insomuch as they were indebted
sometimes two years pensions, before they themselves could taste of the fruits
of their benefices; And then the charge of censures and other proceedings in
the Court of Rome fell so heavy upon them, that they could never recover
themselves. And further, that whereas all trade is driven in current silver,
only the Court of Rome which neither toiles nor sweats, nor hazards any thing,
will be paid only in Duckates of Gold, not after the current rates, but
according to the old value. That to seek for a remedy of these abuses at Rome,
was such an insupportable charge, by reason of three instances and three
sentences necessary to be obtained, that it was in vain to attempt any such
thing. This they cried out upon as a most grievous yoke.

They complained likewise of the Popes granting of Coad jutorships with future
succession, Chap. 4.
whereby Ecclesiastical preferments were made hereditary, persons of parts and
worth were excluded from all hopes, and a large gap was opened to most gross
Simony.

They complained of the Popes admitting of resignations with reservation of the
greatest part of the profits of the benefice; Chap. 5.
insomuch, that he left not above an hundred Ducats yearly to the Incumbent
out of a great benefice.

They complained most bitterly of the extortions of the Roman Court, Chap. 6.
in the case of dispensations. That whereas no dispensation ought to be granted
without just cause; now there was no cause at all inquired after in the Court
of Rome, but only the price. That a great price supplied the want of a good
cause. That the gate was shut to no man that brought money. That their
dispensations had no limits but the Popes will. That for a matrimonial
dispensation under the second degree, they took of great persons 8000. or
12000. or 14000* Ducats.

They complained that the Pope being but the Churches Steward and dispenser,
Chap. 7.
did take upon him as Lord and Master, to dispose of all the rights of all
Ecclesiastical persons. That he withheld from Bishops being the true owners,
the sole disposing of all Ecclesiastical preferments, for eight months in the
year. That he ought not to provide for his own profit, and the necessities of
his Court, with so great prejudice to the right of Ordinaries, and Confusion of
the Ecclesiastical order, whilst he suffers not Bishops to enjoy their own
Patronages and Jurisdictions. Lib. 4. de Consid. cap. 7.
They cite St. Bernard, where he tells Pope Eugenius, that the Roman Church
(whereof he was made Governor by God) was the Mother of other Churches, but
not the Lady or Mistress. And that he himself was not the Lord or Master of
other Bishops, but one of them.

They complained that the Pope did challenge and usurp to himself as his own,
Chap. 8.
at their deaths, all Clergymens estates, that were gained or raised out of the
revenue of the Church. That a rich Clergyman could no sooner fall sick, but the
Popes Collectors were gaping about him for his goods, And guards set presently
about his house. That by this means Bishops have been deserted upon their
deathbeds, And famished for want of meat to eat. That they have not had before
they were dead a Cup left to drink in, nor so much as a Candlestick of all
their goods. It is their own expression. That by this means Creditors were
defrauded, processes in Law were multiplied, and great estates wasted to
nothing.

They complained that the Popes did usurp as their own all the revenues of
Bishoprics during their vacancies, Chap. 9.
sometimes for diverse years together, all which time the Churches were
unrepaired, the poor unrelieved, not so much as one alms given; And the wealth
of Spain exported into a foreign Land, which was richer then it self. They
wish the Pope to take it as an argument of their respect to the Sea of Rome,
that they do not go about forthwith to reform these abuses by their own
auth^^ity, in imitation of other Provinces. So it was not the
unwarrantablenesse of the act in it self, but merely their respect that did
withhold them.

They complained of the great inconveniences and abuses in the exercise of the
Nuncio's office. Chap. 10.
That it is reckoned as a curse in holy Scripture to be governed by persons of
a different language. That for ten Crowns a man might purchase any thing of
them: That the fees of their office were so great, that they alone were a
sufficient punishment for a grievous crime: They added, that self-interest was
the root of all these evils. That such abuses as these gave occasion to all the
Reformations and Schisms of the Church. They added, That these things did much
trouble the mind of his Catholic Majesty; And ought to be seriously pondered
by all Sovereign Princes, qui intra Ecclesiam potestatis adeptae Culmina
tenent; ut per eandem potestatem disciplinam Ecclesiasticam muniant. Behold our
Political Supremacy. They proceeded, that often the heavenly Kingdom is
advantaged by the earthly. That Churchmen acting against faith and right
discipline, may be reformed by the rigor of Princes. Let the Princes of this
world know (say they) that they owe an account to God of the Church, which they
have received from him into their protection. For whether peace and right
Ecclesiastical discipline be increased or decayed by Christian Princes, God
will require an account from them, who has trusted his Church unto their
power. They tell his Holiness it was a work worthy of him to turn all such
Courtiers out of his Court, who did much hurt by their persons, and no good by
their examples. Adding this distich; Vivere qui sancte cupitis discedite Roma,
Omnia cum liceant, non licet esse bonum.


And for remedy of these abuses, they proposed, Ibidem Chap. 10.
that the Popes Nuncio's should not meddle with the exercise of Ecclesiastical
Jurisdiction, but be merely in the nature of Ambassadors; That all
Ecclesiastical causes should be determined at home, according to the Canons:
That the Pope should delegate the dispensation of matters of grace to some ^it
Commissioners within the Kingdom. That Ecclesiastical Courts or Rota's should
be ^rected within the Realm, wherein all causes should be finally determined
without recourse to Rome, except in such cases as are allowed by the ancient
Canons of the Church.

Lastly, Ibidem.
they represented that his Majesty was justly pressed by the continual
clamours, and reiterated instances of his Subjects, to whose assistence and
protection he was obliged to contribute whatsoever he was able, as their
Natural Lord and King, to procure their weal with all his might, by all just
means, according to the dictates of natural reason. And to remedy the
grievances which they ^uffered in their persons and in their goods, by occasion
of such like abuses, not practiced in other Kingdoms. Especially this
proposit^on being so conformable to the Apostolical precepts, and to the sacred
Canons of Councels.

They tell the Pope, that their first address is to him, to whom as universal
Pastor the Reformation thereof does most properly belong, that there might be
no need to proceed to other remedies prescribed by the Doctors of the Church.
And in the margent they cite more then twenty several Authors, to show what
the Magistrate might do, in case the Pope should refuse or neglect to reform
these abuses* So you see they confessed plainly, that there were other lawful
remedies. And intimated sufficiently that they must proceed to the use of them,
in case the Pope refused or neglected to do his duty. That was for the
Sovereign Prince with his Bishops and Estates to ease his Subjects, and reform
the abuses of the Roman Court within his own Dominions. And this by direction
of the Law of nature. Upon our former ground, that no Kingdom is destitute of
necessary remedies for its own preservation. But they chose rather to tell the
Pope this unwelcome Message in the names and words of a whole cloud of Roman
Catholic Doctors, then in their own.

In fine, the Pope continued obstinate: And the King proceeded from words to
deeds; And by his Sovereign power stopped all proceedings in the Nuncio's
Court. And for the space of eight weeks did take away all intercourse and
correspondence with Rome, (This was the first act of Henry the eighth, which
Sanders calls the beginning of the Schism,) until the Pope being taught by
the costly experience of his predecessors, fearing justly what the consequents
of these things might be in a little time, was con^ented to bow, and condescend
to the Kings desires.

To show yet further, that the Kings of Spain when they judge it expedient, do
make themselves no strangers to Ecclesiastical affairs, we read that Charles
the fifth renewed an edict of his predecessors at Madril, That Bulls and
Missives sent from Rome should be visited, An. 1543. Pad. Paolo A^olog. page
405.
to see that they contained nothing in them prejudicial to the (...) or Church
of Spain; which was strictly observed within the Spanish Dominions.

I might add upon the credit of the Portugueses, ^usitan^ae gemitus* page 39.
how Alexander Castracan was disgraced and expelled out of Spain, for
publishing the Popes Bulls, and that the Papal censures were declared void. And
how the Popes Delegates or Apostolical Judges have been banished out of that
Kingdom, page 41.
for maintaining the privileges of the Roman Court.

And when the King of Spain objected to the Pope the Pensions which he and his
Court received yearly out of Spain, from Ecclesiastical benefices and
dignities; The Popes Secretary replied, that all the Papal Pensions put
together, did scarcely amount to so much as one only pension imposed by the
King upon the Archbishopric of Siville. Neither did the King deny the thing,
but justify it* as done in favor of an Infant of Castile: (...)
And did further acknowledge that it was not unusual for the Kings of Spain to
impose pensions upon Ecclesiastical preferments, to the fourth part of the
value, except in the Kingdom of Gali^a: This was more then ever any King of
England attempted, either before or after the reformation.

Before we leave the Dominions of this great Prince, let us cast our eyes a
little upon Brabant and Flanders; who has not heard of a Book composed by
Iansenius Bishop of Ypres, called Augustinus; And of those great animosities
and contentions that have risen about it in most Roman Catholic Countries? I
meddle not with the merit of the cause, whether Iansenius followed Saint
Austine, or Saint Austine his Ancients, or whether he be reconciliable to
himself in this question. I do willingly omit all circumstances, but only
those which conduce to my present purpose. So it was that Vrbane the eighth by
his Bull censured the said Book, as maintaining diverse temerarious and
dangerous positions, under the name of St. Austine, forbidding all Catholics
to print it, sell it, or keep it for the future. This Bull was sent to the
Archbishop of Mechline, and the Bishop of Gant to see it published and obeyed
in their Provinces. But they both refused; And for refusing were cited to
appear at Rome: And not appearing by themselves or their Proctours, were
suspended and interdicted by the Pope, and the copy of the sentence affixed to
the door of the great Church in Brussels. Although in truth they durst not
publish the sentence of condemnation without the Kings License; And were
expressly forbidden by the Council of Brabant to appear at Rome under great
penalties, as appears manifestly by the Proclamation or Placa^t of the
Council themselves dated at Brussels, May 1^. 1653.

Wherein they do further declare, that it was Kennelick end no^oix, Imp^ ess.
Iruxellis per Anth. V^lpium typ^graph. Re^gium 1653.
etc. Well know^ and notoriously true that the Subjects of those Provinces, of
what state or condition soever, could not be cited nor convented out of the
land, neither in person nor by their proctour, [selveroock niet voor het hoff
van Roomen] no not by the Court of Rome it self. And further that the
provisions, spiritual censures, excommunications, suspensions, and
interdictions of that Court, might not be published or put in execution without
the Kings approba^io^, after the Councels deliberation. And yet further, they
do ordain that the said defamatory writing (So they call the Copy of the Popes
sentence) should be torn in pieces in the great Hall of the Court at Brussels
by the doorkeeper, condemning and abolishing the memory thereof for ever. Thus
all Christendom do join unanimously in this truth, that not the Court of Rome,
bu^ their own Sovereigns in their Councels are the last Judges of their
National liberties and privileges.

I pass from Spain to Portugal, where the King and Kingdom either are at this
present time or very lately, The King of Portugal does the same.
were very much unsatisfied with the Pope: And all about their ancient customs
and essential rights of the Crown. As the nomination of their own Bishops,
without which condition they tell the Pope plainly, that they neither can nor
ought to receive them. L^sitan^ae Gemitus, page 30. Page 31.
That if others then the Sovereign Prince have the naming of them* then
suspected persons may be intruded, and the Realm can have no security. That it
is the opinion of all good men, and the judgment of most learned men, Page 32.
that herein the Pope does most grievously derogate from the right of the
Crown. That it is done in favor of the King of Castile, lest he should either
revolt from his obedience to the Pope, or make war against him. And that if
provision be made contrary to justice, Page 34.
for the private interests of the Roman Court, Christ's right is betrayed. They
advise the Pope to let the world know that he has care of souls, Page 37.
and leaves temporal things to Princes. That if he persist to change the
custom of the Church to the prejudice of Portugal, Portugal may and ought to
preserve its right; And that if he love Castile more then Portugal, Page 38.
Portugal is not obliged to obey him more then Castile.

There are other differences likewise, as namely about the imprisoning of some
Prelates for Treason, to which they make this plea, Page 40.
that the Law does warrant it. That Ecclesiastical immunities are not opposite
to natural defense. That it is he that hurts his Country, who hurts his own
immunity.

A third difference was about the Kings intermedling in the controversies of
religious persons. To which they answer, that the protection of the Prince is
not a violation, but a defense of the rights of the Church. That it is the duty
of Catholic Princes to see regular discipline be observed. Page 42.
The fourth difference is about taxes imposed upon Ecclesiastical persons, and
the taking up the revenues of Bishoprics in the vacancy, to which they give
this satisfaction, that all orders of men are obliged in justice to contribute
to the common defense of the Kingdom and their own necessary protection; And
that the revenues of the vacant Bishoprics could not be better deposited and
conserved, then when they are employed by the Prince for the public benefit,
cum onere restituendi.

In sum, they wish the Pope over and over again to consider seriously the
danger of these courses, now when Heresy shows it self with such confidence
throughout Europe. P. 23.
That the minds of men are inclined to suspected opinions. That St. Peter's ship
which has often been in danger in a Calm Sea, P. 17.
ought not to be opposed to the violent course of just complainers, who think
themselves forsaken. That the Church of Rome has lost many kingdoms, which
have withdrawn their obedience and reverential respect from it, P. 43.
for much lesser reasons. That they had learned with grief by their last
repulse, that their submissions and iterated supplications had prejudiced their
right. That the Kings Ambassador, the Clergies messenger, the Agent from the
three orders of the Kingdom had found nothing at Rome from two Popes but
neglects, P. 44.
affronts, and repulses. And lastly, for a farewell, that Portugal and all the
Provinces that belong unto it in Europe, Asia, Africa and America, is more then
one single sheep. Which is as much as if they should tell him in plain down
right terms, P. 45.
that if he lose it by his own fault, he loses one of the fairest flowers in
his Garland. What the issue of this will be, God only knows, and time must
discover.

I will conclude this point with the answer of the University of Lisbone to
certain questions or demands, Imprss. Olissiponae, an. 1649.
moved unto them by the States or Orders of Portugal. The first question was,
whether in case there were no recourse to the Pope, the King of Portugal might
permit the consecration of Bishops without the Pope in his Kingdom? To which
their answer was affirmative, that he might do it, because Episcopacy was of
divine right, but the reservation of the Popes approbation was of humane right,
which does not bind in extreme nor in very great necessity.

The second question, whether there was extreme necessity of consecrating new
Bishops in Portugal? Their answer was affirmative, that there was, because
there was but one Bishop left in Portugal, and six and twenty wanting in the
rest of the Kings dominions.

The third question was, whether Portugal had then recourse to the Pope for his
approbation? The answer was Negative, that they had not; first, because the
Castilians had attempted to slay their Ambassadour^ before the eyes of Urban
the 8th. and Innocent the 10th. So there was no safe recourse. And secondly,
because their Ambassador could uot prevail with the Pope in nine years, by all
their solicitations: So there was no hope to obtain.

The fourth question was, whether the permission of this were scandalous? The
answer was Negative, that it was not; first, because it was a greater scandal
to want Bishops. Secondly, because the King had used all due means to obtain
the Popes approbation. Thirdly, because it was done out of extreme necessity.

The fifth and last question was, how Bishops were to be provided? They
answered, that it was to be done according to Law, by the election of the
respective Chapters, and by the presentation of the King, as it was of old in
Spain and Portugal, and was still observed in Germany and elsewhere.

From Spain and Portugal, it is now high time to pass over into Italy: where
we meet with the Republic of Venice, obliged in some sort to the Papacy for
that honor, and grandeur, and profit, and advantage which the Italian Nation
does reap from it. Yet have not they wanted their discontents, and
differences, and disputes with the Court of Rome.

The Republic of Venice had made several Laws; Maii 23. An. 1602. Ian. 10.
An. 1603. Martii. 26. An. 1605.
As first, that no Ecclesiastical person should make any claim or pretense to
any bona Emphyteutica, (as the Lawyers call them) that is, waste lands that had
been planted and improved by the great Charge and industry and good Culture of
the Fee-farmers, ^ulla Pauli quinti. dat Romans Ap. 17. 1606.
which were possessed by the Laity. Secondly, that no person whatsoever within
their dominions should found any Church, Venetian Laws.
Monastery, Hospital, or other religious house, without the special license of
the State, upon pain of imprisonmeut, and banishment, and confiscation of the
soil and buildings. Thirdly, that none of their subjects should alienate any
Lands to the Church, or in favor of any Ecclesiastical persons secular or
Regular, without the special License of the Senate: Upon pain that the Lands so
alienated should be sold, and the money divided between the Commonwealth, the
Magistrate executing the Law, and the party prosecuting the process. Fourthly,
the Duke and the Senate had imprisoned an Abbat and a Canon, for certain crimes
whereof they stood convicted.

Paul the fifth resented these things very highly, and commanded the Duke and
Senate of Venice to abrogate these Laws, Bulla ead^m. The Popes Bull.
so prejudicial to the authority of the Pope, to the rights of holy Church, and
to the privileges of Ecclesiastical persons: And to set their prisoners
forthwith at liberty: Or otherwise in case of disobedience, he excommunicated
the Duke and Senate, and all their partakers; And subjected the City of Venice
and all the Dominions thereunto belonging to an interdict. And moreover,
declared all the Lands and goods which either the City of Venice, or any of the
persons excommunicated did hold of the Church, to be forfeited, And lastly,
commanded all Ecclesiastical persons high and low, upon their obedience, to
publish that Bull, and to forbear to celebrate all divine offices according to
the Interdict, upon pains contained therein, as also of suspension,
sequestration, deprivation, and incapacity to hold any Ecclesiastical
preferments for the future.

But what did the Venetians whilst Paul the fifth thundered against them in
this manner? Slighted by the Venetians.
They maintained their Laws, they detained their prisoners; They protested
publicly before God and the world, against the Popes Bull, Literae Leonardi
Don. Ducis Venet. datae Maii ^. 1606.
as unjust and void, made withont reason, against the Scriptures, and the
doctrine of the holy Fathers, and the Canons of the Church, to the high
prejudice of the secular power, with grievous and universal scandal. They
commanded all the Clergy within their Dominions to celebrate divine offices
duly, notwithstanding the Popes interdict. And at the same time they published
and licensed sundry other writings, tending to the lessening of the Papal
greatness, and Jurisdiction of the Roman Court. Sundry of which books were
condemned by the Inquisition, as containing in them many ^ings temerarious,
Pad. Paol^ Historia partic. l. 4. p. 141.
calumnious, scandalous, seditious, schismatic, heretical, and the reading
and keeping of them was prohibited under pain of excommunication.

During this contestation the Duke of Venice died; And the Pope prohibited the
Venetians to proceed to the election of a new Duke. Idem. l. 1. p. 24.
The Senate, notwithstanding the Popes Injunction or Inhibition, proceed to the
election; The people are unanimous, and resolute to defend their just
liberties. The Clergy celebrate divine Offices duly, notwithstanding the Popes
interdict: Only one order with some few others adhered to the Pope, and for
their labor were banished out of the Venetian City and Territories. The Pope
called home his Legate from Venice: The Venetians revoked their Ambassadors
ordinary and extraordinary from Rome. The Pope incited the King of Spain to
make war against the Republic, to reduce them to the obedience of the Church.
And the Venetians being aided by their Roman Catholic allies, armed themselves
for their own defense.

It is not unworthy of our observation, Venetian doctrines.
what was the doctrine of the Venetian Preachers and Writers in those days, as
it is summed up by an eyewitness, Pad. Paol Hist. part. l. 4. p. 145.
and a great Actour in those affairs; That God had constituted two Governments
in the world, the one spiritual, the other temporal, either of them Sovereign
in their kind, and independent the one upon the other. That the care of the
spiritual was committed to the Apostles and their Successors. Not to Saint
Peter as a single Apostle, and his Successors alone, either at Antioch, or at
Rome, as if all the rest were but Delegates for term of life, wherein they
agreed justly with us, that as each particular Bishop is the respective Head of
his proper Church; So Episcopacy, or Saint Cyprian's unus Episcopatus the
conjoynt body of Bishops is the Ecclesiastical head of the militant Church.
That the care of the temporal Government is committed to Sovereign Princes.
That these two cannot intrude the one into the office of the other. That the
Pope has no power to a^null the Laws of Princes in temporal things, nor to
deprive them of their Estates, nor to free their Subjects from their
allegiance: That the attempt to depose Kings was but 520 years old, contrary to
Scriptures, contrary to the examples of Christ and of the Saints: That to
teach, that in case of controversy between the Pope and a Prince, it is lawful
to persecute him by treachery or force; Or that his rebellious Subjects may
purchase by it remission of sins, is a seditious and sacrilegious doctrine.
That the exemption of Ecclesiastical persons and their goods from the secular
power is not from the Law of God, but from the piety of Princes, sometimes
more, sometimes less, according to the exigence of affair^s. That Papal
exemptions of the Clergy are in some places not received at all, in other
places but received in part; And that they have no efficacy or validity further
then they are received. That notwithstanding any exemption, Sovereigns have
power over their persons and goods, whenever the necessity of the
Commonwealth requires it. That if any exemption whatsoever be abused to the
disturbance of the public tranquillity, the Prince is obliged to provi^e
remedy for it. That the Pope ought not to hold himself infallible, nor promise
himself such divine assistance: That the authority to bind and loose is to be
understood clave non errante. That when the Pope has censured or
excommunicated a Prince, the Doctors may lawfully examine whether his key have
erred or not: And when the Prince is certified that the Censure against him or
his Subjects is invalid, he may and ought for the preservation of public peace
to hinder the execution thereof, preserving his Religion and convenient
reverence to the Church. That the excommunication of a multitude, or a Prince
that commands much people, is pernicious and sacrilegious. That the new name of
blind obedience lately invented was unknown to the ancient Church, and to all
good Theologians, destroys the essence of virtue, which is to work by certain
knowledge and election, exposes to danger of offending God, excuses not the
errors of a spiritual Prince, and was apt to raise sedition, as the experience
of the last forty years had manifested. What conclusion would have followed
from these premises, if they had been thoroughly pursued, it were no difficult
matter to determine.

It may perhaps be objected, That the Venetian State had these privileges
granted to them by the Popes, and Court of Rome. And it is thus far true, That
they had five Bulls, Nicomaco Philal. avertiment v^ri page 22.
Two of Sixtus the fourth, one of Innocent the eighth, one of Alexander the
sixth, and the last of Paul the third. But it is as true, that none of these
Bulls concerned any of the matters in debate, but only the punishment of
delinquent Clergymen. It has been an old subtlety of the Popes, that when the
Emperors or Councels had granted any Ecclesiastical privilege or honor to
any person or Society, which it was not in their power to cross; Yet
straightway their Bulls did fly abroad, either of concession, or confirmation,
or Delegation, to make the world believe that nothing could be done without
them.

But how or by what right did the Venetians claim these privileges? By virtue
of any Papal Bulls? No such thing. But by the Law of nature as an essential
right of Sovereignty, and by a most ancient custom of 1200 years, that is, a
thousand years before the first Bull was dated, Raccolta degli Sc^it^ti, etc.
page 9.
as appears by a letter of the Senate of Venice to the Venetian Commons their
Subjects.

Secondly, it may be urged further, that the Venetians did not make a total and
perpetual separation from Rome. No more did England, if by Rome we understand
the Church of Rome. Can. 30.
First not total, but only in particular points wherein they were fallen both
from themselves in their ancient integrity, and from the Apostolical Churches
which were their first ^ounders. Which are the very words of our Canon.
Secondly, not perpetual, but only temporary, until their errors be amended,
and abuses reformed.

But if by Rome be understood the Roman Court, the case of Ve^ice and England
is much different: They acknowledge themselves to be justly subject to the
Roman Patriarch; we do altogether deny his Jurisdiction over us; The vicinity
of Venice renders them capable of receiving Justice from Rome, which the
distance of England being so far divided by Seas and Mountains does hinder us
of. Their interest invited them to a conjunction with Rome: Ours is against it.
But yet they take care for their own security and indemp^ity, that the Papacy
which they submitted unto should be toothlesse, not able to bite them or injure
them. If that Papacy which they sought to have obtruded upon us, had been such
an one, in probability they had not so quickly been turned out of doors.

Lastly, it may be objected, that the points in difference between Rome and us
be many more, then those which were in difference between Rome and Venice. This
indeed is most true; But not much material. More or less do not vary the kind
or nature of any thing. Whether their liberties or ours be of greater or lesser
extent, is impertinent to our question. If Venice ought to enjoy their ancient
liberties and customs, then so ought England also. If the Venetians ought to
be the last Judges of their own pretensions, what their ancient customs and
liberties were, then so ought we to be likewise. Not the Pope and his conclave
of Cardinals, which if Venice would not endure, we have much l^sse reason to
endure it. What Canons have been received with us, and how far, and where our
shoe did wring us, none knew so well as our selves.

The chiefest difference between our case and that of Venice, seems to me to be
this, That we were put to an a^ter-game, so were not they: They preserved their
rights and privileges then in question entire from the usurpations of the
Roman Court; we were necessitated in part to retrive and vindicate ours. Theirs
was properly a Conservation; Ours a Reformation. They might thank the unanimity
of their Subjects, the loyalty of their Clergy, and their nearer acquaintance
with Rome for their advantage, we might blame the Barons Wars, and the
contentions between the houses of York and Lancaster, and a kind of
superstitious veneration of that See, occasioned by our distance and want of
experimental knowledge, for our disadvantage.

But to come to the Catastrophe of this business. The conclusion of the
Venetian troubles.
Both sides grew weary of the difference. Christian Princes mediated a Peace,
especially the most Christian King. The Venetians were contented to shake hands
and be friends with the Court of Rome; But without any reparation, or
submission, or confession, or so much as a request to be made on their parts.
They refused to abrogate any one of the Laws complained of. They refused
(though the Pope did press it most instantly, and the Cardinal Ioieuse did
assure them that it would be more acceptable to his Holiness then the conquest
of a Kingdom,) to readmit the banished persons into their City. They refused
to take an absolution from Rome; Yea, they were so far from it, that when the
Ambassador entreated that the Duke might receive a benediction from him
publicly in the Church, both the Duke and the Senate did resolutely oppose it,
because it had some appearance of an absolution.

A man would have thought that this might have sufficed to have caught the
Popes more wit, then to have hazarded their reputation again, so near home,
where they are so well known; But it did not. They adventured after this to
make their spiritual weapons subservient to their temporal ends, by
excommunicating and interdicting the Duke of Parma and his Subjects, with
little better success.

I expect that it should be alleged, That all the Projects of France for a new
Patriarchate, and the memorials of Castile, and the bleatings of Portugal, etc.
were but personated shows, to terrify Popes into their duties; And in part I
do believe it to be true. But withal they must yield thus much unto me, that it
is for children to be terrified with grimaces, or painted vizards, which
signify nothing^ To work upon wise men there must be probable and just
grounds, that such things as are pretended may be, and will be effected. We
have said enough to show that all Christian Nations do challenge this right to
themselves, to be the last Judges of their own liberties and privileges.

CHAP. VIII.
That the Pope and the Court of Rome are most guilty of the Schism.
I Am come now to my sixth and last proposition, which brings the Schism home
to their own doors. Wherein I endeavor to demonstrate that the Church of
Rome, The Church but principally the Court of Rome is 4. ways guilty of
schism.
or rather the Pope and the Court of Rome are causally guilty both of this
Schism, and almost all other Schisms in the Church. First, by seeking to
usurp an higher place and power in the body Ecclesiastical, then of right is
due unto them. Secondly, by separating, both by their doctrines and censures,
three parts of the Christian world from their Communion, and as much as in them
lies from the communion of Christ. Thirdly, by rebelling against general
Councels. Lastly, by breaking or taking away all the lines of Apostolical
Succession except their own.

First, they make the Church of Rome to be not only the sister of all other
Patriarchal Churches, and the Mother of many Churches, but to be the Lady and
Mistress of all Churches; To be not only a prime stone in the building, but the
very foundation; to be not only a respective foundation, in relation to this
or that time and place, (as all the Apostles and all Apostolical Churches were,
and all good Pastors and all orthodox Churches are,) but to be an absolute
foundation for all persons, in all places, at all times, which is proper to
Christ alone: Other foundation can no man lay then that which is laid, even
Jesus Christ. They hold it not enough for the Roman Church to be a top-^ranch,
unless it may be the root of Christian Religion, or at least of all that
Jurisdiction which Christ left as a Legacy to his Church. In all which claim
by the Church of Rome, they understand not the essential Church, nor yet the
representative Church, a Roman Synod, but the virtual Church which is invested
with Ecclesiastical power, that is, the Pope with his Cardinals and Ministers.
When any member how eminent soever scorns its proper place in the body, whether
Natural, or Political, or Ecclesiastical, and seeks to usurp the Office of
the head; it must of necessity produce a disorder, and distur^ance, and
confusion, and schism of the respective members. This is one degree of
schismat^cal pravity.

But in the second place, we press the crime of schism more home against the
Court of Rome, then against the Church of Rome. It is the Court of Rome which
partly by obtruding new Creeds, and new Articles of faith, And especially this
doctrine, That it is necessary for every Christian under pain of damnation to
be subject to the Bishop of Rome, as the vicar of Christ, by divine Ordination
upon earth, (that is in effect, to be subject to themselves who are his Council
and Officers,) yea, even those who by reason of their remoteness never heard
of the name of Rome, without which it will profit them nothing to have holden
the Catholic faith entirely. And partly by their tyraninical and uncharitable
censures have separated all the Asia^ick, African, Grecian, Russian, and
Protestant Churches from their communion, not only negatively in the way of
Christian discretion, by withdrawing of themselves for fear of infection; But
privatively and authoritatively by way of Jurisdiction, excluding them (so much
as in them lies) from the Communion of Christ; Though those Churches so chased
away by them contain three times more Christian souls then the Church of Rome
it self, with all its dependents and adherents; many of which do suffer more
pressures for the testimony of Christ, then the Romanists do gain advantages,
and are ready to shed the last drop of their blood for the least known particle
of saving truth. Only because they will not strike topsaile to the Popes
crosse-keys, nor buy indulgences and such like trinkets at Rome. It is not
passion, but action that makes a schismatic, to desert the communion of
Christians voluntarily, not to be thrust away from it unwillingly. For diverse
years in the beginning of Queen Elizabeth's reign, there was no Recusant known
in England; But even they who were most addicted to Roman opinions, yet
frequented our Churches and public assemblies, and did join with us in the use
of the same prayers and divine offices, without any scruple, until they were
prohibited by a Papal Bull; merely for the interest of the Roman Court. This
was the true beginning of the schism between us and them. I never yet heard
any of that party charge our Leiturgy with any error, except of omission, that
it wanted something which they would have inserted; I wish theirs as free from
exception, to try whether we would shun their communion in the public
service of God. Charity would rather choose to want something that was lawful,
then willingly to give occasion of offense.

But to lay the axe to the root of schism in the third place; the Papacy it
self, (qu^ talis,) as it is now maintained by many, with superiority above
general Councels, and a Sovereign power paramount to confirm or reject their
sanctions, is the cause either procreant, or conservant, or both, of all or the
most part of the schisms in Christendom. To rebel against the Catholic
Church and its representative a general Council, which is the last visible
Judge of controversies, and the supreme Ecclesiastical Court, either is gross
schism, or there is no such thing as Schismatical pravity in the world.

I say, the Bishops of Rome have exempted themselves and their Court from the
Jurisdiction of an Ecumenical Council, and made themselves Sovereign
Monarchs, and universal Bishops, Gregor.
in totius Ecclesiae injuriam and discissionem, to the wrong of the Church, and
renting it in pieces, Hist. Con. Trid l. 7. an. 1563.
making themselves to be not only fathers, but Masters of all Christians. It
is the Popes own expression in his letter to his Legate.

Contrary to their former professions of obedience to the Ecclesiastical
constitutions of Sovereign Princes and Synods; C. de Capitulis did. 10.
contrary to their own Laws which allow appeals from them so often as they
transgress the Canons, C. Nos si incompetenter.
and subject them to the judgment of the Church, 2 Qu 7. Gloss. ^. si Papa
did. 4^. and C. N^mo. 9. qu. 3.
not only in case of heresy, which the most of themselves do acknowledge, and
Schism and Simony, which many of them do not deny: But also of Scandal;
contrary to so many appellations from them by Christian Princes, Prelates, and
Universities; contrary to the judgment of almost all the Cisalpine Prelates,
Hist. Conc. Trid. l. 7. 10.
Spanish, French, Dutch, assembled at Trent; contrary to the decrees of so many
Councels both general and provincial, which have limited their Jurisdiction,
set down the true reason of their greatness, rescinded their sentences,
forbidden appeals to them, condemned their pragmatical intrusion of themselves
into the affairs of other Churches, as being contrary to the decrees of the
Fathers which have judged them and condemned them of heresy, schism, Simony,
and other misdemeanors, which have deposed them by two or three at ^ time,
whereof one was undoubtedly the true Pope. These things are so obvious in the
history of the Church, that it were vanity and lost labor to prove them. But
especially contrary to the Council of Constance and Basile, which have decreed
expressly, Conc. Constable. Sess. 4.
that the Pope is subject to a General Council as well in matter of faith, as
of manners; So as he may not only be corrected; but if he be incorrigible, ^e
deposed. This is determined in the Council of Constance, and confirmed in the
Council of Basil, Con. Basil. Sess. 2.
with this addition, that whosoever opposes this truth pertinaciously, is to
be reputed an heretic.

This decree of the Council wounds deep, because it is so evident and clear in
the point, and because the decrees thereof were confirmed by Martine the fifth.
But the Romanists have found out a salve for it, That Pope Martine confirmed
only those decrees which were conciliarly made, that is, with the influence
and concurrence of the Pope; As the condemnation of Wickliff and Hus: But not
those decrees which were not conciliarly made, that is, which wanted the
influence of the Pope; As the decree of the Superiority of the Council above
the Pope. Which ought to be understood (say they) only of dubious Popes.

For clearing of which doubt, I propose several considerations:

First, The Popes confirmation of Councels of no value.
that it is not material whether the decree were confirmed by the Pope or not.
There are two sorts of confirmation, Approbative, and Anthoritative;
Approbative confirmation is by way of testimony, or suffrage, or reception. And
so an inferior may confirm the acts of his Superior. As it is said, that the
Saints shall judge the world, that is, by their doctrine, by their example, and
by their approbative suffrage, Just ar^ thou, O Lord, and right are thy
judgments. Authoritative confirmation implies either a sole Legislative power,
or at least a negative voice: Whereas it is as clear as the light, that the
Popes anciently never had either the one or the other in the Catholic Church.
We meet with no confirmations of General Councels of old, but only by the
Emperors, whereby Ecclesiastical Sanctions became civil Laws, and obliged all
the Subjects of the Empire under a civil pain. Wherefore it is no matter
whether the Pope confirmed the decree or not, whether it was confirmed or
unconfirmed; it lets us see what was the Catholic tradition, and the sense of
the Christian world in those days; And we abide in it.

Secondly, The decree of the Councels superiority above the Pope most
conciliarly made.
I reply, that this decree was most conciliarly made, and consequently
confirmed, made after due examination and discussion, without any underhand
packing or laboring for voices, made in the public Session, not privately
before the Deputies of the Nations. For clearing whereof take this Dilemma.
Either this decree and the subsequent Acts done by virtue and in execution
thereof, were conciliarly made and confirmed, and consequently valid in the
judgment of the Romanists themselves, or unconciliarly made, and consequently
according to their rules not confirmed, but invalid. If they grant, that this
decree was conciliarly made and confirmed, then they grant the question. If
they say it was not conciliarly made nor confirmed, then Martine the fifth was
no true Pope, but an intruder and an usurper, and consequently his confirmation
was of no value; for in pursuance of this very decree, and by virtue of that
doctrine therein delivered, the other Popes were deposed, and he was created
Pope.

But to clear that passage from all ambiguity. There were in the Council of
Constance the Deputies of the Nations as a selected Committee to examine
matters, and prosecute them, and prepare them for the Council. What was done
apart by these Deputies, by this Committee, was not conciliarly done. But what
was done in the public Session of the Council, upon their report, that was
conciliarly done. Now so it was, that one Falkemberch had published a dangerous
and seditious book, which had been complained of to the Deputies of the
Nations, and condemned by them: But the conjoynt body of the Council in their
public Session had not condemned it conciliarly. Yet after the Council was
ended, and after the Cardinal had given the Fathers their Conge, or leave to
depart, and dismissed them with Domini ite in pace, Fathers depart in peace;
And the Fathers had answered, Amen. When there was nothing left to do, but to
hear a Sermon and be gone, The Ambassadors of Polonia and Lituania, very
unseasonably pressed the Pope to condemn that book, alleging, that it had been
condemned by the Deputies of the Nations. To which the Pope answered, That he
confirmed only those Acts of the Council which were conciliarly made. That is
to say, Not the Acts of the Deputies of the Nations apart, but the public Acts
of the whole Session. This is the genuine sense of that passage which bears its
own evidence along with it, to every one that does not wilfully shut his eyes.
This was an accidental emergent, after the Synod was ended, and not the solemn
purposed confirmation.

And concerning that gloss, that the decree is to be understood only of
dubious Popes, or Popes whose title is litigious. As it contradicts the text it
self, which includes all dignitaries whosoever, of whatsoever title peaceable
or litigious, Popes or others; So it is sufficiently confuted by the very
execution of the decree. An inferior may declare the lawful right of his
Superior, and where there are diverse pretenders, establish the possession in
him that has the best title. But to make right to be no right, to turn all
pretenders right or wrong out of possession, only by the last Law of Salus
Populi, etc. for the tranquillity of the people, This is a prerogative of
Sovereign Princes, and a badge of Legislative authority. This was the very case
of the Council of Constance; They turned out all pretenders to the Papacy, the
right Pope and the Antipopes all together. Some of them indeed by persuasion,
but such persuasion as might not be resisted; And one whose title seemed
clearest, which rendered their persuasions as unto him ineffectual, by plain
power. For so the Council with the consent and concurrence of Christian
Princes, did find it expedient for Christendom.

Lastly, though the Popes do not abolish the order of Bishops, or Episcopacy in
the abstract, yet they limit the power of Bishop^ in the concrete at their
pleasure, by exemptions and reservations, holding themselves to be the Bishops
of every particular See in the world, during the vacancy of it; And making all
Episcopal Jurisdiction to flow from them, and to be founded in the Popes Laws;
Because it was but delegated to the rest of the Apostles for term of life; But
resided soly in Saint Peter as an Ordinary, to descend from him to his
Successors Bishops of Rome; And to be imparted by them to other Bishops as
their Vicars or Coadjutours, assumed by them into some part of their charge. By
this account the Pope must be the universal or only Bishop of the world. The
keys must be his gift, not Christ's: And all the Apostles except Saint Peter,
must want their Successors in Episcopal Jurisdiction. What is this but to
trample upon Episcopacy, and to make them equivocal Bishops, to dissolve the
primitive bonds of brotherly unity, to overthrow the discipline instituted by
Christ, and to take away the line of Apostolical Succession?

The name of Ecumenical or universal Bishop is taken in three senses, one
without controversy lawful, one controverted whether lawful or unlawful; And
one undoubtedly unlawful and Schismatical. In the first sense an universal
Bishop signifies no more then an eminent Bishop of the universal Church,
implying an universality of care and vigilance, but not of Jurisdiction. And in
this sense all the five Protopatriarchs used more Emphatically to be caled
universal Bishops. Either by reason of their reputation and influence upon the
universal Church or their presidence in general Councels.

In another sense, an universal Bishop signifies such a Bishop who besides an
universal care, does also challenge an universal Jurisdiction. This was that
title which John Bishop of Constantinople affected, omnibus praeesse, Greg. ^p.
l. 4. ep. 34. ^t 38.
nulli subesse: And again, Cuncta Christi membra sibimet supponere
universalitatis appellatione. This was that title which Gr^gory the Great and
his predecessors refused, (if they did refuse any such title). For it were
evident madness to fancy, that ever any General Council did offer any
particular Bishop the title of the only Bishop of the world. This title in this
sense was that which Gregory himself did condemn, as a vain, profane, wicked,
blasphemous, Antichristian name.

Lastly, the name of Universal Bishop may be taken exclusively, for the only
Bishop of the world. Which sense was far enough from the intention either of
Gregory the Great, or John of Constantinople, who had both of them so many true
Archbishops and Bishops under them. But this sense agrees well enough with the
extravagant ambition of the later Popes, and of the Roman Court, who do
appropriate all original Jurisdiction to themselves. So many ways is the Court
of Rome guilty of Schismatical pravity.

Besides these branches of Schism, there are yet two other novelties
challenged by the Popes, and their Parasitical Courtiers. But neither these nor
the other yet defined by their Church, both destructive to Christian unity,
both apt to breed and nourish, to procreate and conserve Schism. An
infallibility of judgment, and a temporal power over Princes either directly
or indirectly. General and Provincial Councels are the proper remedies of
Schism. But this challenge of infallibility diminishes their authority,
discrediteth their definitions, and makes them to be superfluous things. What
needs so much expense? so many consultations? so much travel of so many poor
old fallible Bishops from all the quarters of the world? when there is an
infallible Judge at Rome, that can determine all questions in his own conclave,
Conc. (...) Plat. in Ma^cellino. Ath^^as. in Epist. ad solit. vitam agentes.
without danger of error. Was Marcellinus such an infallible Judge when he
burned incense to Idols? Or Liberius when he consented to the Arrians, and gave
his suffrage to the condemnation of blessed Athanasius? Or Honorius when he was
condemned and accursed in the sixth General Council for a Monothelite? Hieron.
in Chron. et Catal. Ecclesi. Script. C^nc. Genesis 6. Act. 13. Gerson.
Or John the 22th. when he was condemned by the Theologues of Paris, before the
King, with sound of Trumpets, for teaching that the souls of the just shall
not see God until the general resurrection? Sermon on Easter Day.
were those succeeding Popes, John, and Martine, and Formosus, and Stephen, and
Romanus, and Theodorus, and John, and Benedictus, and Sergius, who clashed one
with another, and abrogated the decrees one of another over and over again,
such infallible Judges? Neither is it mere matter of fact to decree the
Ordinations of a lawful Bishop to be void. To omit many others.

But howsoever they tell us, Conc. Snuess. et Romans
That the first See cannot be judged. I will not trouble my self about the
credit of the authorities, whether they be true or counterfeit; Nor whether the
first See signify Rome alone, or any other of the five Proto-Patriarchates.
Thus much is certain, that by judgment of discretion any private man may judge
the Pope, and withdraw from him in his errors, and resist him if he invade
either the bodies or the souls of men, as Bellarmine confesses. That in the
Court of Conscience every ordinary Pastor may judge him, and bind him, and
loose him, as an ordinary man. And by their leaves in the external Court by
coercive power if he commit civil crimes, the Emperor; if Ecclesiastical, a
Council, or the Emperor with a Council may judge him, and in some cases
declare him to be fallen from his Papal dignity by the sentence of the Law; in
other cases if he be incorrigible, depose him by the sentence of the Judge. But
there is a great difference between the judgment of Subjects, a^ those
Ecclesiastics were, and the judgment of a Sovereign Prince; between the
judgment of a General Council, and the judgment of an assembly of Suffragans
and inferiors. And yet the Roman Clergy are known to have deposed Liberius
their own Bishop, and justly. Or otherwise Foelix their Martyr had been a
Schismatic.

Their other challenge of temporal power, whether directly or indirectly, and
in ordine ad spiritualia, cannot choose but render all Christians, especially
Sovereign Princes, jealous and suspicious of their power, and averse from the
communion of those persons, who maintain so dangerous positions so destructive
to their propriety. The power of the ke^es does not extend it self to any
secular rights, neither can Ecclesiastical censures alter or invalidate the
Laws of God and Nature, or the municipal Laws of a Land. All which do enjoin
the obedience of children to their Parents, and of Subjects to their
Sovereignes. Gregory the seventh began this practice against Henry the fourth.
But what Gregory did bind upon earth, God Almighty did not bind in heaven. His
Papal blessing turned to a curse; And instead of an Imperial Crown, Rodolph
found the just reward of his treason.

The best is, that they who give these exorbitant privileges to Popes, do it
with so many cautions and reservations, that they signify nothing, and may be
taken away with as much ease as they are given.

The Pope (say they) is infallible, not in his Chamber, but in his Chair; not
in the premises, but in the conclusion; not in conclusions of matter of fact,
but in conclusions of matter of faith. Not always in all conclusions of matter
of faith, but only when he uses the right means and due diligence. And who
knows when he does that? So every Christian is infallible, if ^e would and
could keep himself to the infallible rule which God has given him. Take
nothing, and hold it fast.

So likewise for his temporal power over Princes, they say the Pope, not as
Pope, but as a spiritual Prince, has a certain kind of power, temporal, but
not merely temporal; not directly, but indirectly, and in order to spiritual
things. Quo tencam vultus mutantem Protea nodo

CHAP. IX.
An Answer to the Objections brought by the Romanists, to prove the English
Protestants to be Schismatics.
BUt it is not enough to charge the Church of Rome, unless we can discharge
our selves, and acquit our own Church of the guilt of Schism, which they seek
to cast upon us. First, they object, that we have separated our selves
Schismatically from the communion of the Catholic Church. God forbid. Then we
will acknowledge, without any more to do, that we have separated our selves
from Christ, and all his holy Ordinances, and from the benefit of his Passion,
and all hope of salvation.

But the truth is, We have not separated our selves from the Catholic Church.
we have no otherwise separated our selves from the communion of the Catholic
Church, then all the primitive Orthodox Fathers and Doctors and Churches did
long before us, that is, in the opinion of the Donatists, as we do now in the
opinion of the Romanists; because the Romanists limit the Catholic Church now
to Rome in Italy, and those Churches that are subordinate to it, as the
Donatists did then to Cartenna in Africa, and those Churches that adhered to
it. We are so far from separating our selves from the communion of the
Catholic Church, that we make the communion of the Christian Church to be
thrice more Catholic, then the Romanists themselves do make it, and maintain
Communion with thrice so many Christians, as they do. By how much our Church
should make it self, as the case stands, more Roman then it is, by so much it
should thereby become less Catholic then it is.

I have showed before out of the Canons and Constitutions of our Church, that
we have not separated our selves simply and absolutely from the communion of
any particular Church whatsoever, even the Roman it self, so far forth as it is
Catholic, but only from their errors wherein they had first separated
themselves from their predecessors.

To this I add, that it was not we, but the Court of Rome it self that first
separated England from the communion of the Church of Rome, (...). Paul. 3.
apud Sand. de Schism. l. 1. p. 109.
by their unjust censures, excommunications and interdictions, which they
thundered out against the Realm, for denying their spiritual Sovereignty by
Divine right, before the Reformation made by Protestants.

Secondly, we are charged with Schismatical contumacy and disobedience to the
decrees and determinations of the General Council of Trent. The Council of
Trent not general.
But we believe that Convent of Trent to have been no General, nor yet
Patriarchal; no free, no lawful Council. How was that General, where there was
not any one Bishop out of all the other Patriarchates, or any Proctours or
Commissioners from them, either present, or summoned to be present, except
peradventure some tltular Europaean Mock-Prelates without cures, such as Olaus
Magnus entitled Archbishop of Vpsala; Or Sir Robert the Scottish-man entitled
Archbishop of Armagh? How was that General, or so much as Patriarchal, where
so great a part of the West was absent, wherein there were twice so many
Episcopelles out of Italy, (the Popes professed Vassals, and many of them his
hungry Parasitical pensioners,) as there were out of all other Christian
Kingdoms and Nations put together? How was that general wherein there were not
so many Bishops present at the determination of the weightiest controversies,
concerning the rule of faith, and the exposition thereof, as the King of
England could have called together in his own Dominions at any one time upon a
months warning? How was that general, which was not generally received by all
Churches? even some of the Roman Communion not admitting it.

We have seen heretofore how the French Ambassador in the name of the King and
Church of France protested against it. And until this day though they do not
oppose it, but acquiesce, to avoid such disadvantages as must ensue thereupon;
yet they did never admit it. Let no man say that they rejected the
determinations thereof only in point of discipline, not of doctrine; for the
same Canonical obedience is equally due to an acknowledged General Council in
point of discipline, as in point of Doctrine.

And as it was not General, so neither was it free, Not free.
nor lawful. Not free, where the place could afford no security to the one
party, where the accuser was to be the Judge, Sleid. l. 17.
where any one that spoke a free word had his mouth stopped, or was turned out
of the Council, where the few Protestants that adventured to come thither, were
not admitted to dispute, where the Legates gave auricular Votes, where the
Fathers were noted to be guided by the spirit sent from Rome in a male, Hist.
con. Trid.
where diverse not only new Bishops, but new Bishoprics were created, during
the sitting of the Convent, to make the Papalins able to over-vote the
Tramontains.

Nor yet lawful in regard of the place, Nor lawful.
which ought to have been in Germany. Actor debet rei forum sequi. A guilty
person is to be judged in his Province. And the cause to be pleaded where the
crime was committed. And likewise in regard of the Judge. In every Judgment
there ought to be four distinct persons; The accuser, the witness, the guilty
person, and the Judge. But in the Council of Trent the Pope by himself or his
Ministers acted all these parts himself. He was the right guilty person, and
yet withal the accuser of the Protestants, the witness against them, and
their Judge. Lastly, no man can be lawfully condemned before he be heard.
Sleid. l. 23.
But in this Council the Protestants were not allowed to propose their case,
much less to defend it by lawful disputation.

Thirdly, We have not subtracted our obedience from our lawful Patriarch.
it is objected, and here they think they have us sure locked up, that we
cannot deny but that the Bishop of Rome was our Patriarch, and that we have
rebelled against him, and cast off our Canonical obedience in our Reformation.

To this supposed killing argument I give three clear solutions.

First, That the B^itish Islands neither were, nor ought to be subject to the
Jurisdiction of the Roman Patriarch, as has been sufficiently demonstrated in
my third conclusion. For all Patriarchal Jurisdiction being of humane
institution, must proceed either from some Canon or Decree of a General
Council, or of such a Provincial Council as had power to oblige the Britons to
obedience; Or from the grant or concession of some of their Sovereign Princes,
or from the voluntary submission of a free people; Or lastly, from custom and
prescription. If they had any such Canon, or Grant, or submission, they would
quickly produce it; but we know they cannot. If they plead custom and
prescription immemorial, the burden must rest upon them to prove it. But when
they have searched all the Authors over and over who have written of British
affairs in those days, and all their Records and Registers, they shall not be
able to find any one Act, or so much as any one footstep, or the least sign of
any Roman Patriarchal Jurisdiction in Britaigne, or over the Britons for the
first 600 years. And for after-ages the Roman Bishops neither held their old
Patriarchate, nor gained any quiet settled possession of their new Monarchy.

Secondly, I answer, That Patriarchal power is not of Divine right, but humane
institution. And therefore may either be quitted or forfeited, or transferred.
And if ever the Bishops of Rome had any Patriarchal Jurisdiction in Britaigne,
yet they had both quitted it, and forfeited it over and over again, and it was
lawfully transferred. To separate from an Ecclesiastical authority which is
disclaimed and disavowed by the pretenders to it, and forfeited by abuse and
rebellion, and lawfully transferred, is no Schism.

First, The Roman Bishops quitted their Patriarchate.
I say they quitted their pretended Patriarchal right, when they assumed and
usurped to themselves the name and thing of universal Bishops, Spiritual
Sovereigns, and sole Monarchs of the Church, and masters of all Christians. To
be a Patriarch and to be an universal Bishop in that sense are inconsistent,
and imply a contradiction in adjecto; The one professes humane, the other
challenges divine institution. The one has a limited Jurisdiction over a
certain Province, the other pretends to an unlimited Jurisdiction over the
whole World. The one is subject to the Canons of the Fathers, and a mere
executour of them, and can do nothing either against them, or besides them; The
other challenges an absolute Sovereignty above the Canons, besides the Canons,
against the Canons, to make them, to abrogate them, to suspend their influence
by a non-obsta^te, to dispense with them in such cases wherein the Canon gives
no dispensative power, at his own pleasure, when he will, where he will, to
whom he will. Therefore to claim a power paramount and Sovereign Monarchical
Royalty over the Church, is implicitly and in effect to disclaim a
Patriarchal Aristocratical dignity.

So, Non tellus cymbam, tellurem cymba reliquit: It was not we that deserted
our pretended Patriarch, but our pretended Patriarch deserted his Patriarchal
office. So long as the Popes contented themselves with Patriarchal rights, they
soared no higher then to be the executours of the Canons. When Acacius
complained that he was condemned by the sole authority of the Roman Bishop,
without a Synodal sentence, Gelssius the Pope then pleaded for himself, that
Acacius was not the beginner of a new error, G^l. c. 1. 24. qu. 1.
but the follower of an old; And therefore it was not necessary that a new
Synodal sentence should be given against him, but that the old should be
executed. Therefore (says he) I have only put an old sentence in execution,
not promulged a n^w.

And as they had quitted their title, so likewise they had forfeited it, And
foreited it by rebellion.
both by their Rebellion, and by their exorbitant abuses. First, by their
notorious rebellion against General Councels. The authority of an inferior
cease when he renounceth his loyalty to his superior, from whom he derives
his power. A General Council is the Supreme Ecclesiastical power, to which
Patriarchal power was always subordinate and subject: General Councels with
the consent of Sovereign Princes have exempted Cities and Provinces from
Patriarchal Jurisdiction, Cone. Constant. C. 39. Con. Nic^n. C. 7.
with the consent of Sovereign Princes they have erected new Patriarchates, as
at Jerusalem and Constantinople. And made the Patriarch of Constantinople
equal in all privileges to the Patriarch of old Rome. (...). c. 25.


Against this Supreme Ecclesiastical power the Popes have not only rebelled
themselves, but have compelled all Bishops under their Jurisdiction to take an
oath to maintain their rebellious usurpations. When a President of a Province
shall rebel against his Sovereign Prince, and seek to usurp the whole Empire
to himself, and impose new oaths of allegiancc upon his fellow subjects, it is
not Treason, but Loyalty in them to thrust him by the head and shoulders out of
the gates of their City. When a Steward not imposed upon the family by the
Master, but chosen in trust by his fellow servants, during their Masters
absence, shall so far violate his trust, that he will by force make himself the
Master of the family, and usu^pe a dominion, not only over his fellows, but
over his Masters Wife and Children, and oblige his fellow servants to
acknowledge an independent Sovereign power in him; it is not want of duty, but
fidelity to substract their obedience from him.

This is our case with the Roman Bishops. They have sought to usurp a dominion
over the Catholic Church, the spouse of Christ, and all their fellow servants.
Then ought not all good Christians to adhere to the Catholic Church, and
desert a schismatical Patriarch? They have rebelled against the representative
Church, a general Council, should we involve our selves in their rebellion and
perjury, by swearing to maintain and make good their usurpations? I confess,
inferiors are not competent Judges of their Superiors. But in this case of a
subordinate Superior, and in a matter of Heresy or Schism already defined by
the Church, the sentence of the Judge is not necessary, the sentence of the
Law, and the notoreity of the fact are sufficient. It is not we that judge him,
but the Councels of Constance and Basile.

Neither could our Ancestors hope to have a General Council suddenly, whilst
so great a part of Christendom was under the Turk; nor a free Occidental
Council, whilst the usurper had all Ecclesiastical power in his hands. What
remained then, but to reform themselves? According to the sage advice of
Gerson, Gers. 3. part. Ap^l. de Conc. Constan.
I see that the Reformation of the Church will never be effected by a Council,
without the presidence of a well affected, wise and constant guide. Let the
Members therefore provide for themselves th^oughout the Kingdoms and
Provinces, when they shall be able, and know h^w to compass this work.

Moreover, And by ab^se.
as they have forfeited their power by their Rebellion, so they have most
justly also by their rapine, extortions, and terrible and exorbitant abuses,
the most shameful abuses that ever were committed by persons trusted. To pass
by the hundred grievances of Germany, the complaints and protestations, and
pragmatical Sanctions of France, the memorials of Castile, the sobbes of
Portugal, and to confine my discourse to the sufferings of our own Nation,
which have been more particularly related already in this Treatise, when I set
down the grounds of our Reformation.

They robbed the King of his investitures of Bishops, Matthew. Par. an. 1103.
which Henry the first protested to the Pope himself by his Proctour, that he
would not lose for his Kingdom, and added threatenings to his protestations.
Yet to gratify Anselme, who (though otherwise most deserving) was the first
violater of the ancient customs of our Kingdom in that kind, Idem. an. 1107.
he waved his right. But soon after resumed it, made Rodolph Bishop of London
Archbishop of Canterbury, An. 1113.
and invested him by a crosier and a ring. The like he did to many others.

They robbed the King of his patronages, by their collations, Nich. Clem: de
corrupto Ecclesiae statu.
and provisions, and expectative graces. Two or three or ten benefices were not
accounted sufficient for a Roman Courtier in those days, but an hundred, or
two hundred, or more. They robbed him of the last appeals of his Subjects,
Math. Paris. an. 1164.
contrary to the ancient Laws of England. They fomented the rebellion of his
own Subjects at home, sometimes of his Barons, sometimes of his Bishops,
playing fast and loose on both sides for advantage. They dis-inherited him of
his Crown. They gave away his Kingdom for a prey to a foreign Prince. They
incited strangers to make war against him. And they themselves by mere
collusion and tricks had well near thrust him out of his Throne.

They robbed the Clergy in a manner of their whole Jurisdiction by their
exemptions, and reservations, and visitations, and suspensions, and appeals,
and Legantine Courts, and Nunciatures, thrusting their sickles into every man's
harvest. They robbed them of their estates and livelihoods, by their
provisions, and pensions, by their coadjutorships, and first fruits, and
tenths, by the vast charge of their investitures, and palles, and I know not
how many other sorts of exactions, and arbitrary impositions. The most ancient
of these was the pall, Baron. to. 11. An. 1027.
whereof our King Canutus complained long since at Rome, and had remedy
promised.

They robbed the Nobility and Commonalty many ways, as has been formerly
related. If all these were not a sufficient cause of forfeiture, certainly
abuse did never forfeit office.

And though they had sometimes had a just Patriarchal power, Patriarchal power
was lawfully transferred.
and had neither forfeited it by rebellion nor abuse; Yet the King and the
whole body of the Kingdom by their Legislative power substracting their
obedience from them, and erecting a new Patriarchate within their own
Dominions, it is a sufficient warrant for all Englishmen, to suspend their
obedience to the one, and apply themselves to the other, for the welfare and
tranquillity of the whole body politic, as has before been declared.

Thirdly, The power which we rejected was not Patriarchal nor Canonical.
I answer, that obedience to a just Patriarch, is of no larger extent then the
Canons of the Fathers do enjoin it. And since the division of Britaigne from
the Empire, no Canons are, or ever were of force with us, further then they
were received, and by their incorporation became Britannique Laws. Which as
they cannot, no^ ever could be imposed upon the King and Kingdom by a foreign
Patriarch by constraint, so when they are found by experience prejudicial to
the public good, they may as freely by the same King and Kingdom be rejected.

But I shall wind up this string a little higher; Suppose that the whole body
of the Canon Law were in force in England, (which it never was) yet neither the
Papal power which we have cashiered, nor any part of it was ever given to any
Patriarch by the ancient Canons, and by consequence the separation is not
Schismatical, nor any withdrawing of Canonical obedience. What power a
Metropolitan had over the Bishops of his own Province by the Canon Law, the
same and no other had a Patriarch over the Metropolitans and Bishops of sundry
Provinces within his own Patriarchate. But a Metropolitan anciently could do
nothing out of his own Diocese, without the concurrence of the Major part of
the Bishops of his Province. Nor the Patriarch in like manner without the
advice and consent of his Metropolitans and Bishops.

Wherein then consisted Patriarchal authority? In ordaining their
Metropolitans, (for with inferior Bishops they might not meddle,) or
confirming them, or imposing of hands, in giving the Pall, in convocating
Patriarchal Synods, and presiding in them, in pronouncing sentence according to
the plurality of voices. (That was when Metropolitical Synods did not suffice
to determine some emergent difficulties or differences.) And lastly, in some
few honorary privileges, as the acclamation of the Bishops to them at the
latter end of a General Council, and the like, which signify not much. In all
this there is nothing that we dislike or would seek to have abrogated. Never
any Patriarch was guilty of those exactions, extortions, encroachments upon the
civil rights of Princes and their Subjects, or upon the Ecclesiastical rights
of Bishops, or of those provisions, and pensions, and exemptions, and
reservations, and dispensations, and inhibitions, and pardons, and indulgences,
and usurped Sovereignty, which our Reformers banished out of England. And
therefore their separation was not any ways from Patriarchal authority.

I confess, that by reason of the great difficulty and charge of convocating
so many Bishops, and keeping them so long together until all causes were heard
and determined; And by reason of those inconveniences which did fall upon
their Churches in their absence, Provincial Councels were first reduced from
twice to once in the year, and afterward to once in three years. And in
process of time the hearing of appeals and such like causes, and the
execution of the Canons in that behalf, were referred to Metropolitans, until
the Papacy swallowed up all the authority of Patriarchs, and Metropolitans, and
Bishops. Serpens serpentem nisi ederet, non fieret draco.

Peradventure it may be urged in the fourth place, That Gregory the Great, who
by his Ministers was the first converter of the English Nation, about the six
hundredth year of our Lord, did thereby acquire to himself and his Successors a
Patriarchal authority and power over England for the future. We do with all due
thankfulness to God, and honorable respect to his memory, acknowledge, that
that blessed Saint was the chief instrument under God, to hold forth the first
light of saving truth to the English Nation, who did formerly sit in darkness
and in the shadow of death, whereby he did more truly merit the name of Great,
then by possessing the chair of Saint Peter. And therefore whilst the
sometimes flourishing, now poor persecuted Church of England shall have any
being Semper honos nomenque suum laudesque man^bunt.

But whether this benefit did entitle Saint Gregory and his Successors to the
Patriarchate of all or any part of the British Islands, Gregory the Great
acquired no Patriarchal right in England by the conve^sion of it.
deserves a further consideration.

First, consider, that at that time, and until this day, half of Britaigne it
self, and two third parts of the Britannique Islands did remain in the
possession of the Britons, or Scottish and Irish, who still continued
Christians, and had their Bishops and Protarchs, or Patriarchs of their own,
from whom we do derive in part our Christianity, and holy orders, and
privileges. Without all controversy the conversion of the Saxons by Saint
Gregory could not prejudice the just liberties of them or their Successors.

Secondly, consider, that the half of Britaigne which was conquered and
possessed by the Saxons, was not soly and altogether peopled by Saxons. A world
of British Christians did remain and inhabit among the Conquerours. For we do
not find, either that the Saxons did go about to extirpate the British Nation,
or compel them to turn Renegadoes from their Religion, or so much as demolish
their Churches. But contented themselves to chase away persons of eminency, and
parts, and power, whom they had reason to suspect and fear: And made use of
vulgar persons, and spirits, for their own advantage. This is certain, that
Britaigne being an Island, whither there is no access by land, all those who
were transported, or could have been transported by Sea on such a sudden,
could not of themselves alone in probability of reason, have planted or peopled
the sixth part of so much land as was really possessed by the Saxons.

And therefore we need not wonder if Queen Bertha a Gall^ise and a Christian,
did find a Congregation of Christians at Canterbury to join with her in her
Religion, and a Church called Saint Martins builded to her hand; Bed. l. 1. c.
25.
And stood in need of Lethargus a Bishop to order the affairs of Christian
Religion, before ever Saint Austine set foot upon English ground. Neither did
the British want their Churches in other places also, as appears by that
Commission which the King did give to Austine, Bed. l. 1. c. 26.
(among other things) to repair the Churches that were decayed. These poor
subdued persons had as much right to their ancient privileges, as the rest of
the unconquered Britons.

Thirdly, consider, That all that part of Britaigne which was both conquered
and inhabited by the Saxons, was not one entire Monarchy, but divided into
seven distinct Kingdoms, which were not so suddenly converted to the Christian
faith, all at once, but in long tract of time, long after Saint Gregory slept
with his fathers, upon several occasions, by several persons. It was Kent and
some few adjacent Counties that was converted by Austine. It is true, that
Ethelb^rt King of Kent after his own conversion, did endeavor to have planted
the Christian faith both in the Kingdoms of Northumberland and the East
Angles, with fair hopes of good success for a season. But alas, it wanted
root. Within a short time both Kings and Kingdoms apostated from Christ, and
forsook their Religion. The Kingdoms of the West Saxons and of the South Saxons
under Kingils their King, Speed in the Kings of the West Saxons, An. 612.
who did unite the heptarchy into a Monarchy, were converted by the preaching
of Berinus an Italian, by the persuasions of Oswald King of Northumberland.
Osw^ld King of Northumberland was baptized in Scotland, and Religion luckily
planted in that Kingdom by Aidan a Scottish Bishop. Bed. l. 3. c. 4. and 5.
Penda King of Mercia was converted and christened by Finanus Successor of
Aidan by the means of a marriage with a Christian Princess of the Royal Family
of Northumberland. Bed. l. 3. c. 21.
Sigibert King of the East Angles, Speed in the Kings of the East Angles, An.
624.
in whose days, and by whose means Religion took root among the East Saxons,
was converted and christened in France. All these Saxons which were converted by
Britons or Scots, may as justly plead for their old immunities as the Britons
themselves. We acknowledge Saint Gregory to have been the first that did break
the ice. And yet we see how small a proportion of the inhabitants of the
British Islands do owe their conversion to Rome, in probability not a tenth
part.

Fourthly, consider, that the conversion of a Nation to the Christian faith, is
a good ground in equity (all other circumstances concurring,) why they should
rather submit themselves, or a General Council assign them to that See that
converted them, then to any other Patriarchate. As was justly pleaded in the
case between the Bishops of Rome and Constantinople, about the right of
Jurisdiction over the Bulgarians. But the conversion of a Nation is no ground
at all to invest their converter presently with Patriarchal authority over
them, or any Ecclesiastical superiority, especially where too great a distance
of place does render such Jurisdiction useless and burdensome. And most
especially where it cannot be done without prejudice to a former owner, thrust
out of his just right merely by the power of the sword, (as the British
Primates were,) Or to the subjecting of a free Nation to a foreign Prelate,
without or beyond their own consent. In probability of reason the Britons ought
their first conversion to the Eastern Church, as appears by their accord with
them in baptismal rites, and the observation of Easter; Yet never were subject
to any Eastern Patriarch. Sundry of our British and English Bishops have
converted foreign Nations, yet never pretended to any Jurisdiction over them.

Fifthly and lastly, consider, That whatsoever title or right S. Gregory did
acquire, or might have acquired by his piety and deserts toward the English
Nation, it was personal, and could not descend from him to such Successors,
who both forfeited it many ways, and quickly (within four or five years) after
his death quitted their Patriarchate, and set an higher title to a spiritual
Monarchy on foot, whilst the most part of England remained yet Pagan, when
Pope Boniface did obtain of Phoeas the usurper, (an usurping Pope from an
usurping Emperor) to be universal Bishop.

Their Canon-shot is past, that which remains is but a small volly of Muskets.
They add, that we have schismatically separated our selves from the Communion
of our Ancestors, whom we believe to be damned. That we have separated our
selves from our Ecclesiastical predecessors, by breaking in sunder the line of
Apostolical succession, whilst our Presbyters did take upon them to Ordain
Bishops, and to propagate to their Successors more then they received from
their predecessors. That our Presbyters are but equivocall Presbyters, wanting
both the right matter and form of Presbyterial ordination. To extinguish the
order is more schismatical, then to decline their authority. And lastly, that
we derive our Episcopal Jurisdiction from the Crown.

First, for our natural Fathers, the answer is easy. We do not condemn them,
nor separate our selves from them; Charity requires us both to think well and
speak well of them. But prudence commands us likewise to look well to our
selves. We condemn not our Fathers.
We believe our fathers might partake of some errors of the Roman Church, we
do not believe that they were guilty of any heretical pravity, but held always
the truth implicitly in the preparation of their minds, and were always ready
to receive it when God should be pleased to reveal it. Upon these grounds we
are so far from damning them, that we are confident they were saved by a
general repentance. He that searches carefully into his own heart, to find
out his errors, and repents truly of all his known sins, and beggeth pardon
for his unknown errors, proceeding out of invincible or but probable
ignorance, in Gods acceptance repents of all. Otherwise the very best of
Christians were in a miserable condition. For who can tell how often he offends?

The second accusation of Priests consecrating Bishops, Our Bishops not
Ordained by Presbyters.
is grounded upon a senseless fabulous fiction, made by a man of a leaden
heart and a brazen forehead, of I know not what assembly of some of our
Reformers at the sign of the Nags-head in Cheapside, or rather devised by their
malicious enemies at the sign of the Whetstone in Popes-head-Alley. Against
which lying groundless drowsy dream we produce in the very point the
authentic records of our Church, of things not acted in a corner, but
publicly and solemnly, recorded by public Notaries, Mason de Ministerio
Anglicano, etc.
preserved in public Registers, whither every one that desired to see them
might have access: And published to the world in Print whilst there were
thousands of eyewitnesses living, that could have contradicted them if they
had been feigned. There is no more certainty of the Coronation of Henry the
eighth, or Edward the sixth, then there is of that Ordination, which alone they
have been pleased to question, done not by one (as Austine consecrated the
first Saxon Prelates,) but by five consecrated Bishops. Let them name the
person or persons; And if they were Bishops of the Church of England, we will
show them the day* the place, the persons, when and where, and by whom, and
before what public Notaries or sworn Officers they were ordained. And this not
by uncertain rumors, but by the Acts and instruments themselves. Let the
Reader choose whether he will give credit to a sworn Officer, or a professed
adversary; to eyewitnesses, or to malicious reporters upon hearsay; to that
which is done publicly in the face of the Church, or to that which is said to
be done privately in the corner of a Tavern.

These authentic evidences being upon occasion produced out of our
Ecclesiastical Courts, and deliberately perused and viewed by Father Oldcorn
the Jesuit, he both professed himself clearly convinced of that whereof he had
so long doubted, (that was the legitimate succession of Bishops and Priests in
our Church,) and wished heartily toward the reparation of the breach of
Christendom, that all the world were so abundantly satisfied as he himself
was. Blaming us as partly guilty of the gross mistake of many, for not having
publicly and timely made known to the world the notorious falsehood of that
empty but far spread aspersion against our succession. As for our parts, we
believe Episcopacy to be at least in Apostolical institution, approved by
Christ himself in the Revelation, ordained in the infancy of Christianity as a
remedy against Schism; And we bless God that we have a clear succession of it:

Our matter and form in the Ordination of Presbyters is imposition of hands;
Our matter and form in Presbyterial Ordination justified.
And these words, Receive the Holy Ghost, whose sins thou do forgive, they
are forgiven; And whose sins thou do retain, they are retained, Be thou a
faithful dispenser of the Word and Sacraments. The form most agreeable to the
Gospel, practiced throughout the Occidentall Church for a thousand years,
approved by the Fathers, and by the most found and learned Roman Catholics
themselves. The form of Ordination in the Greek Church is no more but this,
Imposition of hands, and these words, The Divine Grace which always cures
that which is infirm, does create [or promote] A. B. a venerable Subdeacon to
be a Deacon, or a venerable Deacon to be a Priest, or a Priest beloved of God
to be a Bishop. And yet no man ever doubted of the validity of their
Ordination, but they did always, and do at this day execute their functions in
the Roman Church; And discharge all duties belonging to their respective
orders, as freely as in the Greek Church it self. We have the same matter that
they have, we have the form more fully then they have, the Romanists themselves
being Judges. Then what madness is it to allow of their Ordination, and
dispute of ours, and upon a pretended defect in matter or form, to drive men to
be re-ordained. Is not this to have the faith of our Lord Jesus Christ in
respect of persons?

These grounds are over-weighty to be counterbalanced by the tradition of the
patine and of the chalice. An upstart custom or innovation, confirmed but the
other day by the decree of Eugenius the 4th. An. 1439.
A time too late in conscience for introducing either a double matter and form,
or a new matter and form of that, which is acknowledged by them, and not denied
by us in a larger sense, to be a Sacrament: All we say is this, That it is not
a Sacrament generally necessary to salvation, as Baptism and the holy
Eucharist are.

Neither do we draw or derive any spiritual Jurisdiction from the Crown: We
derive no Jurisdiction from the Crown.
But either liberty and power to exercise actually and lawfully upon the
Subjects of the Crown that habitual Jurisdiction which we received at our
Ordination; Or the enlargement and dilatation of our Jurisdiction objectively,
by the Princes referring more causes to the cognizance of the Church then
formerly it had: Or lastly, the increase of it subjectively, by their giving to
Ecclesiastical Judges an external coercive power, which formerly they had not.
To go yet one step higher. In cases that are indeed spiritual or merely
Ecclesiastical, such as concern the doctrine of faith, or administration of the
Sacraments, or the ordaining or degrading of Ecclesiastical persons, Sovereign
Princes have (and have only) an Architectonical power, to see that Clergymen
do their duties in their proper places. But this power is always most properly
exercised by the advice and Ministry of Ecclesiastical persons; And sometimes
necessarily, as in the degradation of one in holy Orders by Ecclesiastical
Delegates.

Therefore our Law provides, that nothing shall be judged heresy with us
denovo, but by the high Court of Parliament, wherein our Bishops did always
bear a part, with the assent (that is more then advice) of the Clergy in their
Convocation. In sum, we hold our benefices from the King, but our offices
from Christ. The King does nominate us, but Bishops do ordain us. I touch these
things more briefly now, because I have handled them more at large in a full
answer to all the objections brought by S. N. Doctor of Theology in the
twentieth Chapter of the guide of faith, or the third part of his Antidote
against our holy Orders, our Jurisdiction, and power to expound Scripture.
Which if God send opportunity, may if it be thought convenient perhaps one day
see the light. The confounding of those two distinct acts intimated by me in
this paragraph, that is, nomination or election, with ordination or
consecration has begotten many mistakes in the world on several sides. Among
which the respect I owe to the British Churches will not permit me to pass by
one untouched.

I have read related, Blondel. Apolog. p. 368. etc.
but confusedly, out of venerable Bede, sundry Histories by very learned
authors, of Aidan a Scottish Bishop sent to Oswald King of Northumberland for
the conversion of his people from the Island of Hy, Bishops not subject to nor
ordained by Presbyters of old in Britaigne.
wherein was one of the principal Monasteries of the N^rthern or Ulster Scots,
etc. Sicque eum ordinantes ad praedicandum miserunt, So the College ordaining
him Bishop sent him to preach. As likewise of Columbanus his coming into
Britaigne, P. 370.
where he had assigned unto him the Island Hy or Iona, for the building of a
Monastery. Habere autem solet ipsa insula rectorem semper Abbatem Presbyterum,
cujus juri and omnis Provincia, and ipsi etiam Episcopi ordine inusitato
debeant esse subjecti. That Island used to have a Governor an Abbat a
Presbyter, to whose jurisdiction both the whole Provincee, and the Bishops
themselves by an unusual order ought to be subject. P. 367.
These testimonies they account so clear as to be able to inlighten the dullest
eye. And hence they conclude, not only that Presbyters may ordain Bishops, and
be their spiritual Governors, but that it was communis quodammod^ Anglorum
omnium regula, P. 371.
a common rule of all the English in a manner, that Bishops being Monks should
be subject to their Abbats.

I honor Bid as the light of his age, who justly gained to himself the name
of Venerable throughout the Occidental Church. And I doubt not but he writ what
he heard. But certainly he could not have such clear distinct knowledge of
particular circumstances as they who have been upon the place, and seen the
records thereof.

First, there is a great mistake in the person; Columba and Columbanus lived
both in the same age, but Columbanus was much the younger, who propagated
Christian Religion much, but it was in other parts of the world. It was not
Columbanus but Col^mba that converted the British Scots, and founded both the
Bishopric of Derry by another name, and the Abbey of Derry. And likewise the
Bishopric of the Isles in Scotland, and the Abbey of Iona, he whom the Irish
call to this day Columkill, quia multarum cellarum Pater, (as his own Scholar
gives the reason in the description of his life,) because he was the Father or
founder of many Churches or Celles.

Secondly, they confound the places, the Abbey of Derry or Derrimagh, quod
lingua Scotorum significat campum roborum, (says Bid,) which in Irish (that
was the ancient Scottish) signifies a field or plain of Oaks, which was indeed
situated in the territories of the Northern Vlster Scots, with the Abbey of Iona
situated in Britaigne.

Thirdly, they confound the actions, mission which is no more then nomination
or election, with Ordination or consecration. Who so proper to choose a Bishop
as the Chapter? So was that Convent until the Reformation. Who so proper to
Ordain as the Bishop* For neither Derry nor the Isles, did ever want a Bishop
from their first conversion. So, referendo singula singulis, the words of Bid
are plain, the Chapter named, and the Bishop Ordained.

Fourthly, they mistake the subjection. The Abbat was the Lord of the Manor,
and so the Bishop was subject to the Abbat in temporalibus. But the Abbat was
every where subject to the Bishop in spiritualibus, who did annually visit
both the Abbey and the Abbat, as by the visitation-rolles and records, (if these
intestine wars have not made an end of them) may appear. You see upon what
conjecturall grounds Critics many times build new paradoxes, which one latent
circumstance being known, is able to disperse and dissipate, with all their
probable presumptions. If it had not been thus, It is no new thing for an Abbat
to challenge Episcopal Jurisdiction, or to contend with his Bishop about it.
What is this to mere Presbyters, qua tales?

Lastly, they contradict Venerable Bede. He says it was ordine inusitato, by
an unusual order. They say it was in a manner the common rule of all the
English. And this they say upon pretense of a decree of the Council of
Hereford, that such Bishops as had voluntarily professed Monkery, should
perform their promised obedience. Which is altogether impertinent to their
purpose. Does any man doubt whether Bishops might freely of their own accord
enter into a religious Order? or that they were not as well obliged to perform
their vow as others? Some Emperors have done the same. Yet no man will
conclude from thence, that Emperors are inferior to Abbats.

Such mistakes are all their instances, except they light by chance upon an
unformed Church, Unformed Churches no fit president.
before it were well settled. As if a man should argue thus; There have been no
Bishops in Virginia during the Reigns of King James and King Charles, therefore
the Clergy there were Ordained by Presbyters. We know the contrary, that they
had their Ordination in England. So had the Clergy in unformed Churches,
foreign Ordination.

This is part of that which we have to say for a proper Patriarchate, and for
our exemption from the Jurisdiction of the Roman Court, from which our
separation is much wider then from the Roman Church. Other differences may make
particular breaches, but the Roman Court makes the universal Schism between
them and all the rest of the Christian world, and has been much complained of,
and in part shaken off by some of their own communion. I could wish with all my
heart that they were as ready to quit their pretended prerogatives, which not
we alone, but all the world except themselves, and a great part of themselves
privately, so condemn, as we should be to wave our just privileges, and if
need were to sacrifice them to the common peace of Christendom.

This was a more noble and a more speedy way to a re^union, then a Pharisaical
compassing of Sea and Land to make particular Proselytes, of all those whom
either a natural levity, or want of judgment, or discontent, or despair to see
the Church of England re-established, or extreme poverty, and expectation of
some supply, have prepared for their baits; whom they do not court more until
they have gained them, then they neglect after they think they have them sure,
as daily experience does teach (...).

CHAP. X.
Th Conclusion of this Treatise.
THis is the Treatise of Schism intimated in my answer to Monsi^ur de la
militiere, but not promised by me, who know nothing of the impression, nor
should have judged it proper to give an English answer to a French Author.
Howsoever being published I own it, except the errors of the Press. Among
which I desire the Christian Reader to take notice especially of one, because
it perverts the sense. p. 65. l. 21. for [neither do you] ^ read [moreover you
do]
It is noted in the margent.

They who have composed minds free from distracting cares, and means to
maintain them, and friends to assist them, and their books and notes by them,
do little imagine with what difficulties poor Exiles struggle, whose minds are
more intent on what they should eat to morrow, then what they should write,
being chased as Vagabonds into the merciless world to beg relief of strangers.
An hard condition, that when the meanest creatures are secured from that fear
of wanting necessary sustenance, by the bounty of God and nature: that only
men the best of creatures, should be subjected to it^ by undeserved cruelty.
Peruse all the Histories of the latest wars, among Dutch, French, Swedes,
Danes, Spaniards, Poles, Tartars and Turks, and you shall not meet with the
like hard measure. Did the King of Spain conqner a Town from the Hollanders? He
acquired a new Dominion, but the property of private men continued the same.
Did the Hollanders take in a Town from the Spaniard? they made provision for
the very Cloisterers, during their lives. So did our Henry the eighth also at
the dissolution of the Abbeys. Violent things last not long.

Or if Exiles can subsist without begging, yet they are necessitated to do or
suffer things otherwise not so agreeable to them. Wherein they deserve the pity
of all good men. When Alexander had conquered Darius, and found many Grecians
in his Army, he commanded to detain the Athenians prisoners, Plutarch.
because having means to live at Rome, they chose rather to serve a Bar^arian;
And the Thessalians because they had a fruitful Country of their own to till;
But (said he) suffer the The^ans to go free, for we have left them neither a
City to live in, nor fields to till. This is our condition.

When the free exereise of the Roman Religion was prohibited in E^gland, and
they wanted Seminaries at home for the education of their youth, and means of
Ordination; Yet by the bounty of foreign Princes, and much more by the free
contribution of our own Contrymen of that communion, they had Colleges
founded abroad for their subsistence. So careful were they to propagate and
perpetuate their Religion in their native Country. The last age before these
unhappy tro^bles was as fruitful in works of piety and charity done by
Protestants, as any one preceding age sin^e the conversion of Britaign^. And
although we cannot hope for that foreign assistance which they found, yet
might we have expected a larger supply from home, by as much as our professors
are much more numerous then theirs were. Has the sword devoured up all the
charitable Obadiahs. in our Land? Or is there no man that lays the affliction
of Joseph to heart? Yet God that maintained his people in the Wilderness
without the ordinary supply of food or raiment, will not desert us, until he
turn our captivity as the rivers in the South. Where humane help fails,
Divine begins.

But to draw to a conclusion: We have seen in this short Treatlse how the Court
of Rome has been the cause of all the differences and broiles between the
Emperors with other Christian Princes and States, and the Popes. We have seen
that from the excesses, abuses, innovations and extortions of that Court, have
sprung all the Schisms of the Eastern and Western Church, and of the
Occidentall Church within it self. We have heard the confession of Pope Adrian,
that for some years bypast many things to be abominated had been in that holy
See, abuses in spiritual matters, excesses in commands, and all things out of
order. We have heard his promise to endeavor the Reformation of his own Court,
from whence pe^adventure all the evil did spring, that as corruption did flow
from thence to the inferior parts, so might health and Reformation. To which
he accounted himself so much more obliged, by how much he did see the whole
world greedily desire a Reformation.

We have viewed the representation which nine selected Cardinals and Prelates
did make upon their oaths to Paul the third: That this lying flattering
pri^ciple, that the Pope is the Lord of all benefices, and therefore could not
be Simo^iacall, was the fountain from whence as from the Trojan horse so many
abuses, and so gri^vou: diseases had (...) into the Church, and brought it to a
desperate condition, to the d^rision of Christian Religion, and blasp^eming of
the Name of Christ, and that the cure must begin there, from whenc^ the disease
did sp^ing.

We may remember the memorial of the King of Spain, and the whole Kingdom of
Castile, That the abuses of the Court of Rom^ gave occasion to all the
Reformations and Schisme^ of the Church. And the complaint of the King and
Kingdom of Portugal, That for these reasons many Kingdoms had withdrawn their
obedience and reverential respect from the Church of Rome. These were no
Protestants. The first step to health, is to know the true cause of our disease.

It has been long debated whether the Protestant and Roman Churches be
reconciliable or not. Far be it from me to make my self a Judge of that
Controversy. Thus much I have observed, that they who understand the sewest
controversies make the most, and the greatest. If questions were truly stated
by moderate persons, both the number and the height would be much abated. Many
differences are grounded upon mistakes of one another sense. Many are mere
logomachies or contentions about words. Many are merely Scholastical above the
capacity and apprehension of ordinary brains. And many doubtless are real both
in credendis and agendis, both in doctrine and discipline. But whether the
distance be so great, or how far any of these are necessary to salvation, or do
entrench upon the fundamentals of Religion, requires a serious, judicious, and
impartial consideration. There is great difference between the reconciliation
of the persons, and the reconciliation of the opinions. Men may vary in their
judgments, And yet preserve Christian unity and charity in their affections,
one toward another, so as the errors be not destructive to fundamental
Articles.

I determine nothing, but only crave leave to propose a question to all
moderate Christians, who love the peace of the Church, and long for the
reunion thereof. In the first place, if the Bishop of Rome were reduced from
his universality of Sovereign Jurisdiction, jure Divino, to his principium
unitatis, and his Court regulated by the Canons of the Fathers, which was the
sense of the Councels of Constance and Basile, and is desired by many Roman
Catholics as well as we. Secondly, if the Creed or necessary points of faith
were reduced to what they were in the time of the four first Ecumenical
Councels, according to the decree of the third General Council, Conc. Ephesians,
Part. 2. Act. 6. c. 7. (Who dare say that the faith of the primitive Fathers
was insufficient?) Admitting no additional Articles, bur only necessary
explications; And those to be made by the authority of a General Council, or
one so general as can be convocated: And lastly, supposing, that some things
from whence offenses either given or taken, (which whether right or wrong, do
not weigh half so much as the unity of Christians,) were put out of divine
offices, which would not ^e refused if animosities were taken away, and charity
restored; I say, in case these three things were accorded, which seem very
re^sonable demands, whether Christians might not live in an holy communion, and
join in the same public worship of God, free from all Schismatical separation
of themselves one from another, notwithstanding diversities of opinions, which
prevail even among the members of the same particular Chrches, both with them
and us.

FINIS.

