THE GREAT QUESTION CONCERNING THINGS INDIFFERENT IN Religious Worship,
Briefly stated; And tendered to the Consideration of all Sober and Impartial
men.

The Second Edition.

Chillingworth Praef.. 34. Not Protestants for rejecting, but the Church of
Rome for Imposing upon the Faith of Christians, Doctrines unwritten and
unnecessary, and for disturbing the Churches Peace, and dividing Unity in such
matters, is in an High degree presumptuous and Schismatical.

LONDON, Printed in the Year, 1660.

The Publisher of this Treatise TO THE Christian and Candid READER.
THough Opinions should be weighed, not by the Reputation of the Authors which
deliver, but by the strength of the Arguments which defend them; yet it is too
usual with unobserving Readers, to slight the Argument for the Author's sake;
and to consider, not so much what is said, as, who it is that says it. Which
being the common Fate of most Discourses, such especially as do at all meddle
with that excellent, but too much abused Notion of Christian Religion, do most
expose the Writers to Censure: The most obvious Character that is fastened upon
them being, that they are Men either of Loose, or else of Factious Principles:
and so being discredited, before they are read; their Books, how sober soever,
do not remove, but only settle and fix the Preconceived Prejudice; as in
diseased stomachs, every thing they take turns to nourish and to increase the
Humor.

That this is like to be the Fortune of this small Treatise, I have reason to
expect; and therefore I have suffered it to run abroad in the world without a
Name, like one of those (...), Pliny mentions; as if it were Born of it self,
and begotten without a Parent. That so those few Readers it may meet with, may
only fasten upon the Faults of the Discourse it self, without diverting
themselves unto that Question, which all Times, as well as Saul's, (2 Samuel
10.12.) have malice enough to make a Proverb of, But who is their Father? Yet
Christian Reader, that it may appear only with its own Faults, and have no
aggravating suspicions upon it, from any mistake of the Author's Design or
Humor, I have adventured to give thee this Account of Him.

First, That He is a strict Assertour of the Doctrine of the Church of England,
as it is contained in the 39. Articles; and for that which is the Prime Branch
of Discipline, viz. Episcopacy, or the Subordination between Bishops and
P^esbyters; he does own it to be of Apostolical Institution; that is, as he
understands it, Jure Divino. At least he thinks himself able to speak as much
for the Order of Bishops in the Church, as any can for the Baptizing of
Infants, for the Change of the Sabbath, or for any thing else, which has no
particular Divine Precept, but only Primitive Practice and Example to warrant
it. And therefore in Conformity to this Principle of His, when the Bishops were
sunk lowest, not only for Pomp, but likewise for Reputation; and when no
temptation either of Profit or Convenience, but rather the contrary, could work
upon him; He then chose to be Ordained a Presbyter by one of them: which is a
greater Argument of his Reality and Steadfastness in Judgment, than most of
those, who now signalize themselves by Distinctive Habits, can pretend to;
since such may reasonably be presumed to wear them, either because they are the
Fashion, or else the way to Preferment.

Secondly, This I must say likewise, that none is more satisfied with the
Present Government, or has a more Loyal and Affectionate Esteem for his
Majesty's Person and Prudence, than this Writer: and therefore in stead of
declaiming against, or too rigid reenforcing our Old Rites, fitted only for the
Infancy of the Church (these being as it were its swadling-clouts, and at the
best do but show its Minority) he does heartily wish that all Parties would
agree to refer the whole Cause of Ceremonies to his Majesty's single
Decision: from whose unwearied endeavors in Procuring first, and afterward in
passing so full an Amnesty of all our Civil Discords, we need not doubt but we
may obtain, that these Apples of Ecclesiastical Contention may be removed out
of the way. Which are so very Trifles, that they would vanish of themselves,
but that some men's Pride, others want of Merit, make them so sollicitous to
continue them; least if those little Things were once taken away, they should
want something whereby to make themselves Remarkable.

Lastly, He does profess yet further, that as to himself, he needs not that
Liberty, which here he pleads for: since, though for the Present he does make
use of that Indulgence, which his Majesty ha^h been pleased to allow unto
Tender Consciences, i. To all Rational and Sober Christians: (the continuance
of which, he dares not so much wrong his Majesty's Goodness, as once to
question) yet should his Majesty be prevailed upon for some Reason of State, to
enjoin Outward Conformity; this Writer is resolved, by the help of God, either
to submit with Chearfullness, or else to suffer with silence. For as there is
an Active Disobedience, viz. to Resist, which is a Practice he abhorres; so
there is a Passive Disobedience, and that is to Repine, which he can by no
means approve off. Since whatever He cannot Conscienciously do, he thinks
himself obliged to suffer for, with as much Joy, and with as little Reluctance,
as if any other Act of Obedience was called for from him.

Having said this concerning the Author, I need not speak much concerning the
Argument; but only this, that it was not written out of Vanity or Ostentation
of Wit; but as a Question, in which he is really unsatisfied; and therefore
thought himself bound to impart his Doubts: which having done to many in
Discourse, with little success or fatisfaction; he has now Communicated them
to the World, hoping they may light into such men's hands, who may be prevailed
upon, if not to alter the Judgment, yet at least to moderate the Passion of
some, who would put out our Eyes, because we cannot see with their Spectacles;
and who have placed Ceremonies about Religion, a little too truly as a Fence:
for they serve to keep out all others from their Communion. All therefore which
this Treatise aims at, is briefly to prove this, -- That none is to Hedge up
the Way to Heaven; or by scattering Thorns and Punctilioes in it, to make
Christianity more Cumbersome, Tedious and Difficult, than Christ has left it.
That is in short, That none can Impose, what our Savior in his Infinite
Wisdom did not think Necessary, and therefore left Free.

Farewell.
THE GREAT QUESTION Concerning Things Indifferent in Religious Worship,
Briefly Stated; and tendered to the Consideration of all sober and Impartial
men.
Quest. Whether the Civil Magistrate may lawfully impose and determine the Use
of Indifferent Things, in reference to Religious Worship.

FOr the understanding and right stating of this Question, I will suppose these
two things;

1. That a Christian may be a Magistrate; this I know many do deny, grounding
themselves upon that Discourse of our Savior to his Disciples, Ye know, says
he, Mat. 20.25.
that the Princes of the Gentiles do exercise Dominion over them, and they that
are great, exercise Authority upon them. But it shall not be so much amongst
you: from whence they infer, that all who will be Christ's Disciples, are
thereby forbid any exercise of Temporal Sovereignty. And I remember amongst
many other of the Primitive Writers, who were of the same opinion, Tertullian
in his Apology does expressly say, Nos ad omnem Ambitionis curam frigemus, etc.
We 1. Christians, says he, have not the least Taint of Ambition, being so
far from affecting Honors, that we look not after so much as the Edileship,
which was the lowest Magistracy in Rome; and afterward of Tiberius, Tiberius,
says he, would have become a Christian, if either the world did not need, or
it were lawful for Christians to be Emperors. Many other expressions there
are both in Tertullian, Cyprian and Origin, to the same purpose. But because
the Practice of the Christian world, down from Constantines time, even in the
most Reformed Churches, has carried it in the Affirmative for Christian
Magistracy; and the contrary Doctrine, besides the Gap it opens to all Civil
Confusion, is built only upon some remote Consequences from Scripture, rather
than any direct proof. I will therefore admit that a Christian may lawfully
exercise the Highest place of Magistracy, only, as the Apostle says in another
case, in the Lord, i. not extending his Commission farther than the Word of God
does warrant him.

1. I will suppose that there are some things in their own Nature Indifferent,
I mean, those Outward Circumstances of our Actions; which the Law of God has
left Free and Arbitrary, giving us only general Precepts for the Use of them
either way: Such are, Do all things to the glory of God, And, Do what makes
most for edification, and the like, which Rules whoever observes, may in things
Indifferent, either do or forbear them, as he in his Christian Prudence shall
think Convenient.

Of these Indifferent Things some are Purely so, as the Time and Place of
meeting for Religious Worship; which seem to me, to be so very Indifferent,
that they cannot without great violence, be wrested to any superstitious
Observance; and therefore concerning these I do not dispute.

Other things there are commonly supposed Indifferent in their own Nature, but
by Abuse have become occasions of Superstition: such as are, Bowing at the Name
of Jesus, the Cross in Baptism, Pictures in Churches, Surplices in Preaching,
Kneeling at the Sacrament, set Forms of Prayer, and the like; All which seem
to some Indifferent in their own Nature, and by any, who is persuaded in his
Conscience of the Lawfullness of them, without doubt may lawfully enough be
practiced; yet I hold it utterly unlawful for any Christian Magistrate to
impose the use of them. And that for these Reasons.

First, Because it is directly contrary to the Nature of Christian Religion in
general, which in every part of it is to be Free and Unforced; for since the
Christian Magistrate cannot, as I think now all Protestant Writers do agree,
force his Religion upon any, but is to leave even those poor Creatures the
Jews and Mahumedans, to their unbelief (though they certainly perish in it)
rather than by Fines and Imprisonments to torture them out of it; then much
less may he abridg his Fellow Christian, in things of lesser Moment, and which
concern not the substance of his Religion, from using that Liberty in serving
God, which his conscience prompts him to, and the Nature of his Religion does
warrant him in. For God as he loves a cheerful giver, so likewise a cheerful
Worshipper, accepting of no more, than we willingly perform.

Secondly, And more particularly. This Imposing of Things Indifferent, is
directly contrary to Gospel-Precept. Our Savior does in many places Inveigh
against the Rigid and Imposing Pharisees, Matthew. 23.
for laying yoakes upon othe^s, and therefore invites all to come unto him for
Freedom, Take my yoke upon you, says he, Matthew. 11.
for it is easy, and my burden is light. And, If the Son set you Free, Ioh.
8.36.
then are you Free indeed. Where by Freedom I do not only understand Freedom
from sin, but from all Humane Impositions; since the Apostle Paul does seem to
allude unto this place, in that Command of his to the Galatians, Stand fast in
the Liberty, wherewith Christ has made you free, and, Gal. 5.1.
be not again entangled with the Yoke of Bondage; where, that I may prevent an
Objection, I will grant, that by Yoke of Bondage, he understands Circumcision
and other Jewish Ceremonies; but from thence I will draw an unanswerable
Argument against the urging of any other now upon a Christian Account; since
that the Mosaicall Ceremonies which had so much to plead for themselves, upon
the Account of their Divine Original; and which, even after they were
fullfilled by our Savior, still remained indifferent in their Use, and were so
practiced by Paul; yet when once they were Imposed, and a Necessity pleaded for
their Continuance, the Apostle Writes so sharply against them, exhorting the
Galatians to stand fast in their Liberty, as part of our Saviors purchase. If
this, I say, was the case with those Old Rits, then much less can any now
Impose an invented form of Worship, for which there cannot be pretended the
least warrant that ever God did Authorize it. And it seems altogether
needless, that the Jewish Ceremonies, should, as to their Necessity at least,
expire and be abrogated, if others might succeed in their room, and be as
strictly commanded, as ever the former were. For this only returns us to our
Bondage again, which is so much the more intolerable, Iac. 1.25.
in that our Religion is styled the Perfect Law of Liberty: which Liberty I
understand not wherein it consists, if in things Necessary, we are already
determined by God, and in things Indifferent we may still be tied up to Humane
Ordinances, and Outside Rites, at the pleasure of our Christian Magistrates.

To these Scriptures which directly deny all Imposition, may be added all those
Texts, which consequentially do it, such as are Do to others, as you would have
others do to you: And who is there that would have his Conscience Imposed upon?
And, You that are strong, Romans 14.
bear with the Infirmity of the weak; Whereas this practice will be so far
from easing the Burden of the weak; that if men are at all scrupulous, it only
lays more load upon them. These Scriptures, with many hundreds the like, show
that this kind of Rigor is utterly inconsistent with the Rules of Christian
Forbearance and Charity, which no Christian Magistrate ought to think himself
absolved from: Since though as a Magistrate he has a power in Civil things,
yet as a Christian, he ought to have a care that in things of spiritual
concernement he grieve not the minds of any, who are upon that Relation, not
his Subjects, so much as his Brethren: and therefore since they have left their
Natural, and voluntarily parted with their Civil, they ought not to be
entrenched upon in their Spiritual freedom: especially by such a Magistrate,
who owning the same Principles of Religion with them, is thereby engaged to use
his Power, only to support, and not to ensnare them: to Bound perhaps, but not
to abridg their Liberty; to keep it ind^ed from running into Licentiousness
(which is a Moral Evil) but not to Shackle, Undermine and Fetter it, under
pretense of Docency and Order. Which when once it comes to be an Order of
constraint, and not of consent, it is nothing else but in the Imposer, Tyranny;
in the person Imposed upon, Bondage: 1 Cor. 7.23.
and makes him to be, what in things appertaining to Religion we are forbidden
to be, viz. The servants of men. Ye are bought, says the Apostle, with a
price, and manumitted by Christ, be you not the Servants of men: which
prohibition does not forbid Civil Service, for he said alittle before, Art
thou called while thou art a Servant? Verse 21.
care not for it; but if thou can be free, use it rather, Implying, that
Civil Liberty is to be preferred before servitude, yet not to be much
contended for, but held as a matter Indifferent; but when once our Masters,
shall extend their Rule over the Conscience, then this precept holds valid, be
ye not the Servants of men.

Thirdly, It is contrary to Christian Practice, of which we have many
remarkable Instances:

1. The first shall be that of our Savior Christ, who was of a most sweet and
complying disposition; he says of himself, that he came Eating and Drinking,
i. e. doing the common Actions of other men; and therefore he never disdained
to keep company with any, even the meanest and most despicable sinner; his
retinue consisting for the most part of those the Jews called, (...), i.
sinners in an eminent and notorious manner; whom as a Physician he not only
cured; but as a merciful Priest sought out to save. Yet when his Christian
Liberty came once to be invaded, he laid aside his gentleness, and proved a
stiff and peremptory Assertour of it. To omit many passages, of which his Story
is full, I shall mention but one, Matthew. 25.
and that was his refusing to wash his hands before meat. This was not only a
thing in it self Indifferent, but likewise had some Argument from Decency to
induce, and a constant Tradition from the Elders or Sanhedrim to enforce it,
who at this time were not only their Ecclesiastical, but their Civil Rulers:
Yet all these Motives, in a thing so innocent and small as that was, would not
prevail with our Savior to quit his Liberty of eating with unwashed hands.
And in defense of himself, he calls them superstitious fools, and blind guides,
who were offended at him; and leaves two unanswerable Arguments, which are of
equal validity in things of the like nature. As

1. That this was not a Plant, of his Fathers planting, and therefore it should
be rooted up; whereby our Savior intimates, that as the Pharisees had no
divine warrant to prescribe such a Toy as that was, so God would at last
declare his Indignation against their Supererogatory Worship, by pulling it up
Root and Branch. From whence I gather this Rule, That when once Humane
Inventions become Impositions, and lay a Necessity upon that, which God has
left Free; then may we lawfully reject them, as Plants of man's setting, and not
of Gods owning.

2. The second Argument our Savior uses is, That these things did not defile a
man, i. e. as to his mind and conscience. To eat with unwashed hands was at the
worst, but a point of ill manners, and unhandsome perhaps or indecent, but not
an impious or ungodly thing; and therefore more likely to offend nice stomachs,
than scrupulous consciences. Whose satisfaction in such things as these our
Savior did not at all study. From whence I infer, That in the Worship of God
we are chiefly to look after the Substance of things; and as for Circumstances,
they are either not worth our Notice, or else will be answerable to our Inward
Impressions; according to which our Savior in another place, says, O blind
Pharisee, Matthew. 23.36.
cleanse first the Inside of the Cup, and of the Platter, that so the outside
may be clean; hereby implying, that a Renewed Heart, will be sure to make a
changed and seemly behavior; whereas the most specious outside is consistent
with Inward Filth and Rottenness. So that they who press outward conformity
in Divine Worship, endeavor to serve God the wrong way, and often times do
only force Carnal and Hypocritical men to present God a Sacrifice which he
abhorres; while to others that are more Tender and Scrupulous, they make the
Sacrifice it self unpleasant, because they will not let it be, what God would
have it, a Free-will-offering.

2. My second Instance shall be the Resolution of the Apostles in that Famous
and Important Quaere, concerning the Jewish Ceremonies, whether they were to be
Imposed or not. After a long dispute to find out the Truth ((...), Acts 15.
says the Text) Peter directly opposes those Rites Why, says he, do ye tempt
God, by putting a Yoke upon the Neck of the Disciples? Intimating that to put a
Yoke upon others (and to Impose in Things Indifferent is certainly a great one)
from which, God has either expressly freed us, by commanding the contrary: or
else tacitly freed us, by not commanding them: This is nothing else but to
Tempt God, and to pretend to be more Wise and Holy than he. Again, James
decries those Ceremonies, upon this score, least they should ((...)) be
troublesome to the converted Gentiles; implying, that however men may think it
a small matter, to Impose an Indifferent thing, yet indeed it is an infinite
Trouble and matter of Disquiet to the Party Imposed upon, because he is thereby
disabled from using his Liberty, in that which he knows to be Indifferent.

Upon the hearing of these two, the Result of the whole Council was, that the
Brethren should not be Imposed upon, although the Arguments for conformity were
much stronger then, than now they can be; because the Jews in all probability,
might thereby have been the sooner won over to the Christian Persuasion. The
Decree which that Apostolical, and truly Christian Synod makes is very
observable,

1. From the Style they use, It seems good (say they) to the holy Ghost, and to
us, -- so that whoever exercises the same Imposing Power, had need be sure he
has the same Divine Authority; for fear he only rashly assumes what was
never granted him.

2. From the Things they Impose, It seems good, etc. (say they) to lay upon you
no greater burden than these necessary things; That you abstain from things
offered to Idols, from Blood, from things strangled, and from Fornication.
Whence I observe,

1. That they call their Imposition (...), a weight, or burden; which is not
unnecessarily to be laid on the shoulders of any.

2. They say, they forbid only (...) -- These very Necessary things, to show,
that Necessary things only, and not Indifferent, should be the matter of our
Imposition.

For whereas some gather from hence, that the Church, i. where a State is
Christian, the Christian Magistrate, has a power to obliege men to the doing
of things he commands, though in their own Nature they be indifferent; because
they suppose that the Apostles did so, as for example, in forbidding to eat
Blood, therefore consider.

1. That this is quite contrary to the Apostles scope, whose business was to
Ease and Free, and not to Tie up their Brethren; and therefore they say, they
merely do lay upon them things very necessary.

2. That all those things they forbid, were not Indifferent, but long before
prohibited by God, not only in the Ceremonial, but in his Positive Law, and
therefore obligatory, whereupon the Apostles call them Necessary, i. things
necessary to be forborne, even before they had made any Decree against them. As

1. (...), i. The meat of things offered to Idols: To eat of them was not in
all cases Indifferent; for to do it with conscience of the Idol, i. intending
thereby to worship the Idol, this was a thing against the second Commandment.
But if a man was convinced that the Idol was nothing, and therefore the meat,
though consecrated, was Free to him: Yet if his weaker Bro^her was offended; he
was then to abstain in observance of Christian Charity and Condescension: But
if the Eater himself did doubt, then was he to forbear for his own peace and
quiet's sake, for to eat, while he was unsatisfied whether it was lawful or
not, was nothing else but to condemn himself, as the Apostle says, He that
doubts, is (not damned, as we render it, but (...) --) condemned, i.
Self-condemned if he eat, because he does that which he inwardly does either
not approve, or else at least suspects, that it is not lawful: so that the
Case of eating (...), being so nice, and so apt to be mistaken: the Apostles do
make their Prohibition Universal, as that which was most safe, and least
subject to scruple.

2. (...) and (...), Blood; i. e. Flesh with the blood; or, as some, Raw flesh;
and Things strangled; to eat these was not indifferent, but prohibited long
before by God, in his Law given to Noah. And therefore the Apostles Prohibition
here, is not to be interpreted, as their giving a Temporary Law, with respect
had to the then Constitution and economy of the Jews (as some weakly and
without ground from Scripture, imagine) but rather as a Reviving and
Reenforcing an old Law, which being given by God to Noah, both then was, and
still is Obligatory to all his Posterity, God having no where dispensed with it.

3. Lastly, (...), if you render it Fornication, then it is evidently contrary
to those Precepts of Purity, Holiness and Perfection, which God every where
requires. But if you expound it, as many learned men do, Unlawful Copulations;
then the Prohibition enforces upon us the observance of those Laws concerning
Marriage, which are recorded in Levit. 18. and which is evident, are not in
their own Nature indifferent, since marrying with our Mother, Sister, or
Daughter, the Heathen Plato, and the Grecian Laws condemned even by the light
of Nature. And God, there in that Chapter, calls the contrary Practices,
Abominable Customs; for which he threatens to root even the Heathen out, -- v.
27. ad sin.

From what has been said out of this Instance, I conclude, That since, 1. The
Apostles, though divinely inspired, yet did not impose any Rites upon the
Church, by their own proper Power, but join themselves with the Holy Ghost, as
being Acted and Commissioned by him. Since, 2. They use no Arguments from
Decency to justify their imposition, nor lay any Unnecessary Burden upon any,
by forbidding or enjoining things purely Indifferent, but only prohibit such
things, as they call, and it is clear from what has been said, that they were
Necessary. And lastly, since the Retaining some of the more Innocent and less
Burdensome Ceremonies of the Jews, in point of Order and Convenience only,
would in all probability have been the readiest means to bring that Precise and
Superstitious People unto a Compliance with the Gospel; and without doubt for
that reason would have been enjoined, had the Apostles conceived they had any
power to have meddled with them. Hence I conclude for Persons, 1. Who have no
such Authority. 2. In things much more indifferent. And lastly, Where the
Necessity of conforming is nothing near so pressing and urge^t. For such, I
say, to take upon themselves an Arbitrary and an Imp^sing Power, it is
altogether Unwarrantable, and consequently sinful.

3. My last instance shall be that of the Apostle Paul, who was of an
Universally Complying carriage; he says of himself, That he became all things
to all men, even to Jews as a Jew, 1 Cor. 9.19, 23 Act. 16.
etc. with many more words to the same purpose. And to show his Liberty, he
circumcised Timothy, though a Greek, that he might gain the Jews in those
parts. But when once a Sect of men rose up, who began to preach the Necessity
of Circumcision, he does in many places sharply inveigh against them, calling
them dogs, evil workers, and in derision, (...), or the Concision; and
concludes his Epistle to the Galatians, with bidding them to beware of such, as
labored to boast in their flesh, i. sought to bring them unto a Conformity in
those outward Ordinances. Nay so jealous and precisely careful was that
Apostle of this great Christian Privilege and Charter, viz. Freedom in
Indifferent things; that he could not brook so much as Peter's suspicious
carriage in that particular, but for his Dissimulation, and pretending to be
less Free, than he was; Paul says, That he openly reproved him to his Face.
Gal. 2.
And for other False Brethren, who crept into their Assemblies, merely to spy
out their liberty, and without doubt, used the same Arguments for Conformity,
which many do now; the Apostle says, He resisted them, and yielded not to them
so much as for a moment And that he might for ever preserve his Galatians from
being ensnared, and brought under bondage again, he leaves them the Caveat, I
mentioned before, Stand fast in your liberty, etc. From whence I infer, that
so long as a thing is left Indifferent, though there be some suspicion of
Superstition in it, we may lawfully practice it, as Paul did Circumcision: But
when any shall take upon them to make it Necessary, then the thing so imposed
presently loses not its Liberty only, but likewise its Lawfulness; and we may
not, without Breach of the Apostles Precept, submit unto it: because we thereby
do own, that those whose injunctions we obey, had a power to i^pose; and so, by
assenting, we become abetters and pro^oters of their Usurpation.

4. My last A^gumen^ against Impositions, shall be taken from the
Inconveniences that attend such a practice. For though I lay little stress upon
^uch kind of Arguments (because Truth is to be tried by its Evidence, and not
by its Consequences) yet because, 1. In Principles, on which moral Actions are
grounded, the Inconveniences do use ^o be weighed, and that Doctrine for the
most part seems most True, at least most Plausible, which is attended by fewest
Inconveniences: and because, 2. The Opposers of Liberty, have v^ry little else
to urge for themselves, but by pretending the many inconveniences tha^ flow
from it. Therefore I shall clearly prove that many more Absurd, and more
Destructive and Fatal Consequences attend the Doctrine of Impositions, then the
Doctrine of Christian liberty. As

1. The first Inconvenience is, the Impossibility to fix a point where the
Imposer will stop. For do but once grant, That the Magistrate has power to
impose, and then we lie at his mercy, how far he will go. For the Marriage of
Ministers, holy Unction, Consecrating the Host, etc. are as indifferent in
their own nature, as Using the Cross, or Surplice. And if the Magistrate has
indeed lawful power to Impose, he may as well Command those, as these:
especially if he be convinced that they are either Decent or Convenient; at
which door have entered in all those gross Fooleries, which are in the Popish
worship: any of which, take them singly, and apart from the Circumstances which
determine them, so they are Indifferent, and may, for ought I know, be
conscientiously observed. grossest Idolatry, and the vilest Tyranny that ever
yet was practiced. For we are for the most part mistaken in the Notion of
Popery, if we see a Surplice, or a Cross, or Organs, or Bowing, we presently
cry out. Popery: Popery to forbid these things, as we do, under Penalties, than
to practice them with Freedom. If I understand any thing of Antichrist, his
Nature seems to me to consist in this, That he Acts in a way contrary to
Christ, i. e. in stead of a spiritual, he brings in a Devised Worship; and in
stead of Freedom, lays a Constraint even upon our Devotion. So that, as John
in his Revelation says of him, Rev. 13.
Men shall neither buy, nor sell, who have not his mark; i. who do not serve
God in that outward way, which he commands. So that whoever does own the
Doctrine of Imposition, though in the smallest circumstance of Worship, he
brings in the Essence, though not the Name of Popery; and lays down that for
his Foundation, on which all the Will Worship, which this day reigns in the
world, is bottomed. For what ever opinions we have concerning the Necessity of
Bowing, Kneeling, or the like, while they stand confined to our private
practices, they are at worst but Hay and stubble, 2 Cor. 3.
which will perish at the day of account, though he that does them may very
well be saved. But when once a man goes further, and not content. with his
Persuasions, envies his Brother that Liberty, which he himself desires to
enjoy; and seeks to obtrude his Conce^^s upon others, who perhaps are not so
well satisfied as he is: Whoever does this, becomes Impious to God, by invading
his Sovereignty, and lording it over another man's Conscience; and likewise
injurious to men, by pressing such things, as are only Baits to the Careless,
and Traps for the Conscientious. I know very well, that the Argument is
specious, and often urged -- Why should men be so scrupulous? Most pleading for
Ceremonies, as Lot did for Zoar, Are not they little things? But I answer, 1.
That a little thing unwarrantably done is a great sin. 2. That a little thing
unjustly gained, makes way for a greater: and therefore we should not let the
Serpent get in his Head, how beautiful soever it seems, lest he brings in his
Tail, and with that his sting. -- How curious even almost to Superstition, our
Savior and his Apostles, especially Paul, were, I have already mentioned; by
whose Example we are little profited, if we do not learn, that in Imposi^ions
we are not so much to consider how small and inconsiderable the thing imposed
is, as how lawful it is: Not, what it is in it self, as whether it tends, and
what will be the Consequence of its Admission. For the smaller the thing
imposed is, the more is our Christian Liberty invaded, and cons^quently the
more injurious and sinful is its imposition.

2. The second Inconvenience is, that it quite inverts the Nature of Christian
Religion; not only by taking away its Freedom, but likewise its spirituality,
our Savior says, that God will now be worshipped not in show and Ceremony,
but in spirit, and in truth; whereas this D ctrine of Impositions, places it in
such things, in the obs^rv^nce of which, Superstition will be sure to outdo
Devotion. But true Religion like the spirits of wine or subtle essences, when
ev^r it comes to be Opened and Exposed to view, runs the ^azard of being
presently dispirited, and lost. In the service of God there is a vast
difference, between Purity and Pomp, between spirit and splendor, whereas ^he
Imposer only drives at and improves the ^a er; but on the former is altogether
secure and careless, as is evid^^t in those places, where Uniformity is most
strictly practiced.

3. Thirdly, This Doctrine making no provision at all for such as are
scrupulous and tender, supposes the same measure of Faith in all; whereas
nothing is more clear than, as the Apostle says concerning Things offered to
Idols, so concerning Ceremonies, I may say, that All have not knowledge. But to
this day many there are utterly unsatisfied with the Lawfulness of any, and
most are convinced of the Vselesnesse of them all. Whose Consciences, how
erroneous soever, yet are to be Tenderly and Gently dealt with; least by our
Rigid commanding what they can by no means comply with, we bring them unto that
Dangerous Dilemma, either of breaking their Inward Peace and comfort, by doing
outwardly what they do not inwardly approve of: or else of running themselves
upon the Rocks of Poverty and prejudice, by disobeying what is commanded. For
though we are upon all occasions to suffer gladly, yet let not Reuben smite
Ephraim; let us not receive our wounds in the house of our friends; for then
our sufferings will be sharpened from the consideration of the Unkindnesse; that
our Brethren should put us upon the Trial of our Faith and Patience, especially
in such things, which while the Imposor calls Indifferent, he thereby
acknowledges, that they may very well be spared.

4. The last Inconvenience is, that by Impositions, esp^cially when the Penalty
is severe, we seem to lay as much weight and stress upon these Indifferent
things, as upon any the most material parts of our Religion. This Rigid
Irrespective obtruding of small things, makes no diff^rence at all between
Ceremony and Substance. So that a man who were not a Christian at all, would
find as good, nay perhaps better usage from the Imposer; than he who laboring
and endeavoring to live up to other parts of Christian Faith, shall yet
forbear to practice these Ceremonies: Which is not only Harsh and Cruel, but
very Incongruous dealing, that a Jew or Mahumedan, shall be better regarded,
than a we^k and scrupulous Christian. This is nothing else, but to deal with
Christians, as Jephtha did with the Ephraimites, to kill them for no weightier
crime, than because they cannot pronounce Shibboleth.

To those Inconveniences I might add the certain decay of the growth of
Religion as to its inward Purity, while there is this Disguise and Mask of
needless Ceremonies upon it to keep it under; but those which I have already
urged, are so great, that those which are commonly insisted upon by men of
another Persuasion, are not at all to be put into the Balance with them; as
will appear by this brief Answer to their main Objections.

1. They object that this will be the way to beget all manner of Disorder and
Confusion; that every man will have a several Fashion and Custom by himself;
and for want of Uniformity and Ceremony, the Unity and Essence of Religion will
perish. But I answer,

1. Does any plead for Baal? He that will abuse the Principle of Liberty, to
justify his Licentiousness of life, let him know that the Magistrate bears
not the Sword in vain, but has it to cut off such offenders. If you suffer as
Christians, says the Apostle, r^j^yce at it; 2 Pet. 1.4.
But let none suffer, as a Thief, Murderer, (...). i. a seditious person, or
State-Incendiary, or as a busy Intermedler in other men's m^tters: for he that
does these things suffers justly; nor can he plead any thing from the Gospel,
which is a Rule of strictness to exempt him from Punishment. But

2. This Disorder, which is so vehemently and so Tragically aggravated, and for
the prevention of which, Ceremonies must be invented and forced, is indeed
nothing else but a Malicious and Ill sounding name, put upon an excellent and
most comely thing, i. e. variety. For as God, though he be a God of Order, has
not made all men of one countenance, and in the world has given several and
diverse shapes to many things, which yet are the same for substance; so in the
Assemblies of his people, who all come to Honor him, and agree in the Essence
of his Worship, why should we doubt, but God will be well pleased with their
variety in Circumstances? The exercise of which not only their Consciences do
prompt, but God himself does induce them to, because in his Word he has not
prescribed any one outward Form, that all should necess^rily agree in; but in
such things has left them to the Dictates of their own Spirits, and the
guidance of Christian prudence; which Variety is so far from being a Confusion,
that nothing can be more Comely and Harmonious, as serving to set out the
Indulgence of God, the indifferent Actings of the holy Spirit, and the Liberty
of the Saints, who preserve Unity in mind, without Uniformity in Behavior.

2. The second Objection is, the practice of the Jewish Princes, who as soon as
ever they were installed in their Kingdoms, set upon reforming the House of
God, and imposing upon all a Form of Worship: which since all Scripture is
written by Divine Inspiration, and for our Instruction, Romans 16.
se^ms to be a leading case that Christian Princes should imitate them, and do
so likewise. But I answer.

1. Though Arguments taken from Analogy are of very little weight, when
Positive Precepts are required, yet I will grant, that the Piety of the Jewish,
is, and ought to be exemplary to the Christian Magistrates, -- but withal I
deny the Inference, since the Jewish Princes, when they Reformed Religion, they
therein followed a Divine Law, which did command it from them, and which, in
the minutest circumstances, had provided for uniformity of Worship: from which
Rigor and Restraint all Christians are absolved, and therefore it is very
unconcluding to Argue from the Jews, who had; to the Christian Magistrate, who
wants Divine Authority. To this is also object^d.

3. That since things Necessary to the worship of God, be already determin^d by
God, and over them the Magistrate has no power; if likewise he should have no
Power in Indifferent Things, then it would follow, that in things appertaining
to Religion, the Christian Magistrate had no power at all -- which they think
to be very Absurd -- so the Reverend and Learned Mr Hooker, and Dr Sanderson.
But I answer,

1. That it is no Absurdity at all, that Princes should have no more power in
ordering the things of God, than God himself has allowed them. And if God has
no where given them such an Imposing Power, they must be content to go without
it. But in this case, where will the Christian Magistrate find his Warrant, the
Scriptures being utterly silent, that he is now to take such Authority upon
him, which, because the thing concerns not man, but the Worship of God, had it
been thought necessary and Fit, would certainly not have been omitted.

2. It is so far from being an Argument for Impositions, to urge that the thing
Imposed is Indifferent, that there cannot be a stronger Argument against them:
since it is as requisite to Christian Practice, that Things Indifferent, should
still be kept Indifferent, as Things Necessary, be held Necessary, -- As I have
already proved.

Lastly, It is much more suited to the Nature of the Gospel, that Christian
Princes should reform Religion, rather by the example of their Life, than by
the severity of their Laws; and if they may show their power at all in this
case, it should rather be by Substracting, then by Adding. -- By taking away
all impertinencies, which may hinder the Progress of it, rather than by
obtruding unwarrantable Methods, to tie all men up to such Outward Forms; as
may make Piety suspected only for Policy disguised.

Much more might be said for this from Authority, but I willingly wave it. For
i^ Scripture and Reason will not prevail to hinder Impositions, I have no cause
to expect that any sentences from Antiquity should. -- Only this is certain,
that all the Writings of the Christians for the first three hundred years, are
full of nothing else but such Arguments as evince a Liberty, more Absolute and
Universal than I contend for. And likewise it may be of some weight, that the
Churches Doctrine was then more pure, their Discipline more strict and severe
than now; and yet they had nothing but Mutual Consent, either to Establish or
Protect it, the Magi^trates being all against them. -- But when once
Constantine took upon him to manage the Affairs of the Church, and by Penal
Laws, ratified and confirmed Church-Orders. -- He laid that foundation of
Antichristian Tyranny, which presently after him, his Son Constantius exercised
against the Assertors of the Trinity: and, the Churches worldly power
increasing as fast, as the puri^y of Religion did decrease, the Bishops of Rome
within a few years, gained to themselves, and have ever since practiced
severely against such, whom they call Heretics, i. Deniers of their Factious
Doctrine; and opposers of their most Ungospel-like, but indeed most Politic
and Prudentiall impositions.

Whose furious and bloudy-Tenets have, like subtle Poison, run through the
Veins of almost all Professors; scarce any sort even of Protestants, allowing
to others that Liberty of Religion; which at the beginning of their Sects, they
justly challenged to themselves. Nor is there any Hope, that the world should
be freed from Cruelty, disguised under the name of zeal, till it please God to
inform all Magistrates, how far their Commission reaches, that their proper
Province is only over the Body, to repress and correct those moral vices, to
which our Outward man is subject: But as for Christian Religion, since it is so
Pure and Simple, so free from State and worldly magnificence, so Gentle and
Complying with the meanest Christian, and withal so remote from Harshness,
Rigor, and Severity; there the Magistrate most consults Gods honor and his
own duty, it being strict to himself, he leaves all others in these Outward
Ceremonies, to their Inward Convictions. Which Liberty, is so far from
weakening, that it is indeed the security of a Throne; since besides gaining the
Peoples Love (especially the most Conscientious and sober of them) it does in a
special manner entitle him to Gods Protection: Since in not pretending to be
wiser then God, he gives Religion the free and Undisturbed Passage, which our
Savior seems by his Life and Death to have opened for it.

FINIS.

