THE CONSECRATION AND SUCCESSION, Of Protestant Bishops justified.

The BISHOP of DURESME vindicated.

And That infamous Fable of the ordination at the Nagges head clearly confuted.

By JOHN BRAMHALL, D. D. Bishop of Derry.

Necesse est ut lance^ in libra ponderibus impositis
Deprimi, sic animum perspicuis cedere.
GRAVENHAGH, By JOHN RAMZEY, Anno 1658.

CHAP. I. The occasion of this Treatise.
THe fairest ears of Corn are soonest blasted, so the more conspicuous the
Church of England was among the reformed Churches, (as not being framed
according to the brainsicke dictates of some seditious Orator, or the giddy
humors of a tumultuous multitude, but with mature deliberation, and the free
consent and concurrence of all the Orders of the Kingdom,) the more it was
subjected to the envy and groundless calumnies of our Country men of the Roman
Communion. But of all the slanderous aspersions cast upon our Church, that
liyng fable of the Nagges head Ordination does bear the bell away. Those
monstrous fictions of the Cretian bulls and minotaures, (devised by the
Athenians to revenge themselves upon Minos King of Creete, who had subdued them
in a just war, and compelled them to send their sons to him for hostages,)
were not more malicious, nor that shamelesslie of Kentish long tails more
ridiculous. The first deviser of it does justly deserve the Character of A man
of a brazen forhead and leaden hearie. If the unpartiall reader after he have
perused this treatise, think I do him wrong. I do willingly submit my self
to his censure. This prodigious fable received its deaths wound from Mr.
Masons pen, and has remained ever since for the space of thirty years
buried in deep oblivion. And those assaies which it makes now to get wing
again, by the assistence of two Ignatian Fathers, are but the vain attempts
of a dying Cause. Neither would I have troubled the Reader or my self to bring
Owls to Athens, or to confute a Cause which has been so demonstratively
confuted to my hand, but for two new additions lately spread abroad. The one by
orall tradition which concerns my self. That Father T. and Father B. had so
confuted the Bishop of Derry in the presence of the King, that he said he
perceived his Father had made me a Lord, but not a Bishop, And that afterward,
by my power I had procured those two Jesuits to be prohibited that presence. So
that whereas Father Talbot used to be the Interpreter in the Spanish treaties,
now he was not admitted, and Don John would admit no other.

So the Bishop of Derry is accused not only to have been publicly baffeled,
but also to have been a disturber of public affairs. Yet I know nothing of
all this, which concerns myself. I never heard of any such conference, or any
such words, I never knew that Father Talbot was designed to that imploiment. I
was never guilty of having any such power, muchlesse of any endeavor to turn
out any man. If the Fathers seemed too pragmaticall to those who were
entrusted, or to involue the interest of their Religion into Civil treaties,
what is that to me? If it were true they may thank themselves. If it were
false, they may thank them who did it. Whether true or false I never had an
hand, nor so much as a little finger in it.

All the truth that I know is this. Hearing that these two Fathers, had spoken
largely in the Court of the Succession of our English Bishops, but never in my
presence, I sought out Father B, and had private conference with him about it
in the Jesuits College at Bruges, and afterward some discourse with Father T.
and him together in mine own Chamber. Whatsoever they did say, they put into
writing to which I returned them an answer, showing not only that there was
not, but that it was morally impossible there should be any such Ordination at
the nagges head. From that day to this I never heard any thing of it, that
concerned myself. Now if a man should search for an Author of this fabulous
Relation, he shall be sure to have it fathered upon some very credible persons,
without names, who had it from John an oaks whilst he was living, and he had
it from John a Styles, and he had it from No body, but feined it himself out of
a good intention, according to that case Theology which he had learned of
Machiavell, To advance the credit of Religion by all means possible true or
false.

The other addition concerns the learned and Reverend Bishop of Duresme one
of the ancientest Bishops this day living in the Christian world, being 95
years old at least. That he owned and justified the nagges head Ordination in
public Parliament, in the house of the Peers: It is very well, we can not
desire a better place where to have it spoken, then the house of Parliament.
Nor better witnesses then the Lords spiritual and temporal. We have no man of
the Episcopal Order, whose memory can reach so near those times, or in whose
integrity we do more confide, then the Bishop of Duresme. He might hear many
things either from the persons praetended to have been then consecrated, or
from the Notaries or witnesses who were then present at that imaginary
Consecration. Or at least he might receive the tradition of that age from such
as were eiewitnesses of what passed. Let it be put to his Testimony if they
think fit, (without doubt he is the same man he was then) or to the
Testimony of any other of his age and Reputation, whom they can produce. We
refuse no sort of proof but only vain hear say, which as our English
proverb says is commonly, and in this case most undoubtedly a lier. Nay we
would not refuse the Testimony of Mr. Neale himself, though a professed enemy,
who was the only founder of this silly fable, so he might be examined upon
oath, before equal Judges, but compel him either to shame the devil, and
eat his own words, or to run himself into such palpable absurdities
Contradictions and impossibilities, that no man of reason how partial soever,
could give any credit to him. My first task shall be, before I meddle with the
fable it self to vindicate the Bishop of Duresme, and the truth which is
wounded through his sides, with this intimation to the Reader, that if this
branch of the Legend be proved apparently to be false, which is pretended to
have been publicly acted in a full house of the Peers of the Realm, we can
expect no truth from the voluntary report of one single mean malicious enemy,
to his own party. And with all a confessed Spy, of what was done at the Nagges
head. Break ice in one place, and it will crack in more.

CHAPT. II. The Vindication of the Bishop of Duresme.
TO vindicate the Bishop of Duresme, I shall first set down the relation of
this passage in the words of the Fathers themselves.

Treatise of the nature of Catholic faith and haeresy c. 2. p. 9.
In the beginning of the late Parliament some Presbiterian Lords presented to
the upper house a certain book, proving that the Protestant Bishops had no
succession or consecration, and therefore were no Bishops, and by consequence
had no right to sit in Parliament. Hereupon Doctor Morton pretended Bishop of
Durrham who is yet alive, made a speech against this book in his own and all
the Bishops behalf then present. He endeavored to prove succession from the
last Catholic Bishops, who (said he) by imposition of hands ordained the first
Protestant Bishops at the Nagges head in Cheap side, as was Notorious to all
the world. Therefore the before said book ought to be looked upon as a
groundless libell. This was told to many by one of the ancientest Peers of
England, praesent in Parliament when Morton made his speech. And the same he is
ready to depose upon his oath. Nay he cannot believe that any will be so
impudent as to deny a thing so notorious, whereof there are as many
vvitnesses living, as there are Lords and Bishops that were that day in the
upper house of Parliament.

Here are three passages. One concerning a book presented to the upper house,
against the succession of English Bishops, by some presbiterian Lords. The
second concerning the pretended refutation of this book by the Bishop of
Duresme. The third the proof of both these allegations by the Testimony of an
Ancient Peer of England,

First for the book, It is most true there was a book written about that time
by a single Lord against Episcopacy, and dedicated to the members of both
houses of Parliament. No wonder. How often have the Parliaments in the reigns
of Queen Elisabeth and King James been troubled with such Requests and
Representations. It is no strange thing that a weak eye should be offended
with the light of the sun. We may justly ascribe the reviving of the Aerian
heresy in these later days to the Dispensations of the Court of Rome who
licensed ordinary Priests to ordeine, and confirm, and do the most essential
offices of Bishops So their Schools do teach us, A Priest may be the
ex^raordinary Minister of Priesthood, and inferior orders by the delegation of
the Pope. Again The Pope may confer the power of confirmation upon a simple
Priest. By such exorbitant practices as these they chalked ou^ the way to
^nnovators. And yet they are not able to produce one president of such a
dispensation throughout the primitive times, A good Christian ought to regard
more what the whole Christian world in all ages has practiced, then what a few
conceited persons in this last age have fancied. Among all the Eastern
Southern and Northern Christians, who make innumerable multitudes, there
neither is nor ever was one formed Church that wanted Bishops. Yet these are as
far from submitting to the exorbitant power of the Roman Bishop as we. Among
all the western Churches and their Colonies, there never was one formed Church
for 1500. years, that wanted Bishops. If there be any persons so far
possessed with prejudice, that they choose rather to follow the private dictates
of their own phrensy, then the perpetual and universal practice of the
Catholic Church, enter not into their secrets o my soul.

Thus far we agree, but in all the rest of the circumstances, (though they be
not much material) the Fathers do pitifully mistake themselves, and vary much
from the Testimony of their witness, and much more from the truth. First the
Author of this book was no presbyterian Lord* much less a company or caball
of Presbiterian Lords in the plural, but my Lord Brooks, one that had as
little favor for Presbytery as for Episcopacy.

Secondly the book was not praesented to the upper house. It might be brought
into the house privately, yet not be praesented to the house publicly. If it
had been publicly praesented, the Clerks of the Parliament or some of them
must needs have known of it and made an Act of it, but they know no such
thing. The Lords Spiritual and Temporal could not all have Forgotten it, but
they remember no such thing, as by their respective certificates praesently
shall appear.

Thirdly as the Author is mistaken, and praesentation mistaken. So the subject
likewise is mistaken. Sit liber Iudex, let the book speak for it self* Thus
an able friend certifieth me. I have got my Lord Brooks book which he wrote
against the Bishops with much labor, and perused it with no less Patience. And
there is not in it the least shadow of any Argument, that the Bishops ought not
to sit in Parliament, because they had no succession or consecration. What
did my Lord Brooks regard succession or Consecration or holy orders, who had a
Coachman to be his preacher. The less Canonical the ordination had been, the
more he would have applauded it. Time and place and form and all were
agreeable to that Christian liberty which he dreamed of, it was not want of
consecration, but consecration it self which he excepted against, as all men
knew who knew him. And in this quarrel he lost his life, after a most
remarkable and almost miraculous manner, at the siege of Lichfield Church,
upon St. Ceaddas anniversary day, who was the founder of that Church and Bishop
of it.

I know the Fathers will be troubled much, that this which they have published
to the view of the world, concerning the Bishop of Durrham, as a truth so
evident which no man can have the impudence to deny, should be denied, yea
denied positively and throughout, denied not only by the Bishop of Durrham
himself, but by all the Lords spiritual and Temporal that can be met with,
Denied by some Lords of their own communion, who understand them selves as
well as any among them, though their names are not subscribed, to the
certificate, Denied by the Clerks of the Parliament, whose office it is to
keep a diary of all the speeches made in the house of the Peers For Proof
hereof First I produce the Protestation of the Bishop of Duresme him self,
attested by witnesses in the Praesence of a public Notary. Take it in his own
words.

Whereas I am most injuriously and slanderously traduced, by a nameles
Author, calling himself N. N. in a book said to be printed at Rouen 1657.
entitled [a treatise of the nature of Catholic faith and haeresy], as if upon
the praesenting of a certain book to the upper house in the beginning of the
late Parliament, proving as he says the protestant Bishops had no succession
nor consecration, and therefore were no Bishops, and by consequence ought not
to sit in Parliament, I should make a speech against the said book in my own
and all the Bishops behalfs, endeavoring to prove succession from the last
Catholic Bishops as he there styles them,) who by imposition of hands ordained
the first protestant Bishops, at the nagges head in cheapsyde, as was notorious
to all the world, etc.

I do hereby in the praesence of Almighty God solemnly protest and declare to
all the world, that what this Author there affirms concerning me is a most
notorious untruth and a gross slander. For to the best of my knowledge and
remembrance, no such book as he there mentions was ever presented to the upper
house in that or any other Parliament, that ever I sat in. And if there had, I
could never have made such a speech as is there pretended, seeing I have ever
spoken according to my thoughts, and always believed that fable of the Nagges
head consecration to have proceeded from the father of lies; as the Authentic
Records of the Church still extant, which were so faithfully transcribed, and
published by Mr. Mason, do evidently testify. And whereas the same impudent
Libeller does moreover say, that what he there affirms was told to many, by
one of the ancientest Peers of England, praesent in Parliament, when I made
this praetended speech: and that he is ready to depose the same upon his oath:
And that he can not believe any will be so impudent, to deny a thing so
notorious, whereof there are as many witnesses living, as there are Lords and
Bishops that were that day in the upper house of Parliament etc. I answer, that
I am very unwilling to believe any peer of England should have so little sense
of his Conscience and honor, as either to swear or so much as affirm such a
notorious untruth. And therefore for the justification of my self and
Manifestation of the truth in this Particular, I do freely and willingly
appeal (as he directs me) to those many honorable persons, the Lord
Spiritual and temporal yet alive, who sat in the house of Peers in that
Parliament, or to as many of them as this my Protestation shall come to, for a
true certificate of what they know or believe Concerning this matter. Humbly
desiring them and charging it upon their souls, as they will answer it to
god at the day of Judgment, that they will be pleased to testify the truth,
and nothing but the truth herein, to the best of their knowledge and
remembrance, without any favor or affection to me at all. I cannot reasonably
be suspected by any indif^erent man, of denyng any thing that I know or
believe to be true, seeing I am so shortly in all probability to render an
account to the searcher of hearts of all my words and actions, being now (at
the least) upon the ninetyfifth year of my age. And I acknowledge it a great
mercy and favor of God, that he has reserved me thus long, to clear the
Church of England and my self of this most notorious Slander, before he takes
me to himself. For I can not imagine any reason, why this shameless writer
might not have cast the same upon any of my Reverend Brethren as well as me,
but only that I being the eldest, it was probable I might be in my grave,
before this untruth could be taken notice of in the world. And now I thank god
I can cherefully sing my nunc dimittis, unless it please him to reserve me for
the like service hereafter: for I desire not to live any longer upon earth,
then he shall be pleased to make me his instrument to defend the truth, and
promote his glory. And for the more solemn and full Confirmation of this my
free and voluntary protestation and declaration I have hereunto set my hand and
seal, this seventeenth day of July. Anno Domini 1658.

THOMAS DVRESME.


Signed sealed published and declared, in the presence of Tho: Sanders Sen:,
Tho: Sanders Iun:, John Barwick Clerk, R: Gray, Evan Davies.
I Tobias Holder public Notary, being requested by the Right Reverend Father
in God Thomas Lo. Bishop of Duresme, at the house of Thomas Sanders Esquire, in
the Parish of Flamstead, in the County of Hartford, in the year of our Lord
month and day above specified, was then and there personally present, where
and when the said Reverend Bishop did Sign publish and declare this his
Protestation and declaration above written, to be his Act and deed, and did
cause his Authentic Episcopal Seal, to be there to affixed, in the presence
of the vvitnesses whose names are there to subscribed. And did there and then
likewise sign publish and declare as his Act and deed, another of the same
Tenor written in paper, which he Signed with his Manual Seal, in the
presence of the same vvitnesses. All this I heard, saw, and therefore know to
be done. In Testimony whereof I have subscribed and thereto put my usual and
accustomed Notaries Sign.

TOBIAS HOLDER. Public Notary.


How does this so solemn Protestation agree with the former Relation of the
Fathers, that the Bishop of Durham affirmed publicly in the upper house that
the first Protestant Bishops were Consecrated in the Nagges head, that they
were not Consecrated at Lambeth, that this was notorious to all the world, that
it is not Credible that any will be so impudent as to deny it, that all the
rest of the Bishops approved his assertion by their silence, and were glad to
have such a retiring place against the Presbyterians, that none of the Bishops
did give credit to Mr. Masons new found Registers? Even as light and Darkness,
or truth and falsehood, or two Contradictory Propositions do agree together.
This is the first witness whom any of that party has adventured to cite
publicly and directly for that infamous story whilst he was living. And they
see the success of it. I hope they will be wiser hereafter, then to cite any
more living witnesses.

But it may be that they who do not stick to suppose that our Archbishops make
false certificates, may object this is but the Testimony of the Bishop of
Durham in his own cause. Let us see whether the other Bishops dissent from the
Bishop of Duresme. Take the Testimony of them all, who sat in that Parliament,
which are now lining except the Bishop of Bangor, whose absence in Wales is the
only reason why he is not a subscriber with the rest.

Whereas we the surviving Bishops of the Church of England, who sat in the
Parliament begun at Westminster the third day of November 1640, are required by
our Reverend Brother the Lord Bishop of Duresme, to declare and attest the
truth, concerning an imputation cast upon him in the Pamphlet of that namelesse
Author, mentioned in his Protestation and Declaration here prefixed. And
whereas we are obliged to perform what he requesteth, both for the
justification of the truth, and for the clearing of our selves of another
slanderous aspersion, which the same Author casts upon us, as if we had
heard our said Reverend Brother make such a speech as is there pretended, and
by our silence had approved, what that Libeller falsely affirms was delivered
in it. We do hereby solemnly protest and declare before God and all the
world, that we never knew of any such book presented to the house of Peers,
as he there pretends, nor believe any such was ever presented: And therefore
could never hear any such speech made against it, as he mentions, by our
said Reverend brother or any other, much less approve of it by our silence.
And if any such book had been presented, or any such speech had been made,
there is none among us so ignorant or negligent of his duty in defending the
truth, but would have been both able and ready to have confuted so groundless
a fable, as the pretended consecration of Bishops at the Nagges head, out of
the Authentic and known registers of the Church still extant, mentioned and
faithfully tra^scribed and published by Mr. Mason so long before. For the
confirmation of which truth, and attestation of what our said Reverend Brother
has herewith Protested and declared, we have hereunto set our hands. Dated the
19th. day of July Anno Domini 1658.

LONDON. M. ELI. BR. SARUM. BATH. and WELLS.
JO. ROFFENS.
OXFORD.


If all these proofs seem not satisfactory to the Fathers, they shall have
more. Let them take the Testimony of the Principal Peers now living, who sat
then in Parliament.

We of the Lords temporal whose names are here under written, who sat in the
Parliament begun at Westminster the third day of November 1640, being desired
by the Bishop of Duresme to testify our knowledge concerning an imputation cast
upon him, about a speech pretended to be made by him in that Parliament, more
particularly mentioned and disavowed in his prefixed Protestation, Do hereby
testify and Declare, that to the best of our present knowledge and remembrance,
no such book against Bishops as is there mentioned, was presented to the house
of Peers in that Parliament. And consequently, that no such speech as is there
pretended, was or could be made by him or any other against it. In testimony
whereof we have signed this our attestation with our own hands. Dated the
nineteenth day of July Anno Domini 1658.

DORCHESTER. RVTLAND. LINCOLN. CLEVELAND. DOVER. LINDSEY. SOVTHAMTON.
DEVONSHIRE. MONMOUTH. To this proof nothing remains that can be added, but
only the testimony of the Clerk of the Parliament, who after a diligent
search made in the book of the Lords house, has with his own hand written
this short Certificate, in the margent of one of your books page 9. over
against your relation, Upon search made in the book of the Lords house, I do
not find any such book presented, nor any entery of any such speech made by
Bishop Morton.

HENRY SCOBEL CLERK* Of the Parliament*




And now methinkes I hear the Fathers blaming of their own credulity, and
rashness, and over much confidence. They had forgotten Epictetus his rule,
Remember to distrust. I judge them by my self, Homo sum, humani a me nihil
alienum pu^o. One circumstance being either latent or mistaken, may change the
whole drift and scope of a relation. But though we would be contented to lend a
skirt of our coat, to cover the fault of them who calumniate our Church: yet
this relation can never be excused in any man from a most grievous mistake,
where both the person, and the whole scope of his discourse is altogether
mistaken. This is almost as great a mistake as the Nagges head Ordination it
self, where a confirmation dinner was mistaken for a solemn consecration. But
those who cherish such mistakes for advantage, and deck them up with new
matter, and publish them to the world for undoubted truths, can not be excused
from formal calumny.

The last thing to be considered in this first part of this discourse, being
the vindication of the Reverend Bishop of Duresme, is concerning the witness,
whom as the Fathers do forbear to name, so shall I. Of whom they say four
things, ^ that he is one of the Ancientest* Peers of England, that he was
present in Parliament when Morton made this speech, that he will take his Oath
of the truth of it, and that he can not believe that any will be so impudent to
deny it. We have no dispute concerning the antiquity of Peerage, Let that
pass: but I am confide^t whatsoever his present judgment had been either of
the speaker or of the speech, your witness would have abstained from uncivil
language, as to style the Reverend Bishop of Duresme a pretended Bishop, and
plain Morton, without either welt or guard He would not have forgotten all his
degrees both in the Church and in the Schools. He will not charge all them with
down right Impudence, who tell him that he was doubly mistaken: Nor call that
no^orious to all the world, which he himself acknowledges that he never heard
of before in his life. He is not guilty of those inferences, and eo nomine^
which you have added. I do not believe that he does, or ever did know the
Bishop of Duresme* so well as to swear this is the man: Nor does take himself
to be so exact an Analyser of a discourse, as to be able to take his Oath what
was the true scope of it, pro or contra; especially when some thing is started
that does quite divert his attention, as the sound of the market bell did the
Philosophers Auditors.

This is my Charity. And my ground for it is this. When I had once conference
with him about this relation, he told me the name of the Naggeshead did
surprise him, and he betook himself to inquire of another what it meant. And
when I urged to him, that it was incredible that any Protestant Bishop should
make such a speech, unless he used it only by way of Supposition, as
argumentum ad hominem, a reason fit for my Lord Brooks, that such a
Consecration as that was, agreed well enough with his principles, He told me he
knew not that, the Bishop might answer so for himself.

To conclude, I have heard the Bishop of Lincoln did once mention the Fable of
the Nagges head in a speech in Parliament, but with as much Detestation of it,
as our Ancestors used to name the Devil. Why might not the mistake both of
the person, and of the drift or scope of his speech, be the occasion of this
relation? I had rather out of charity run into two such right handed errors,
then condemn a Noble Gentleman of whose ingenuity I never had any reason to
doubt, of a malicious lie. Take it at the very best, the mistake is great
enough, to mistake both the person of the speaker, and the scope of his speech.
I hope they will all do that which in Conscience they are obliged to do, that
is acquitte the Bishop of Duresme, and crave his pardon for their mistake. If
they do not, the world will acquitte him, and condemn them. But the greatest
mistake of all others was, to publish such a notorious untruth to the world, so
temerariously without better advise.

CHAP. III. Three reasons against the Nagges head Consecration, 1. from the
Contradictions of the Relaters, 2. from the latenesse of the Discovery, 3. from
the Strictness of our laws.
NOw having beaten Down the Pillar about their ears, which they had set up to
underproppe their Nagges head Ordination, it remains next to assault the
maine fable it self, as it is related by these Fathers. Having told, how the
Protestant Doctors who were designed for Bishoprics in the beginning of Queen
Elisabeths Reign, had prevailed with Anthony Kitchen Bishop of Landaffe, to
give them a meeting at the Nagged head in Cheapesyde, in hope ^he would Ordeine
them Bishops there. And how the Bishop of Landaffe through Bishop Bonners
threatenings refused, (all which shall be examined and laid open to the view of
the world in due order, how it is stuffed with untruth and absurdities.) They
add, that being thus deceived of their expectation, and having no other means
to come to their desires (that is, to obtain consecration), they resolved to
use Mr. Scories help, an Apostate religious Priest, who having borne the name
of Bishop in King Edward the sixths time, was thought to have sufficient
power to perform that Office, especially in such a strait necessity as they
pretended. He, having cast of together with his Religious habit all scruple
of conscience, willingly went about the matter, which he performed in this
sort. Having the bible in hand, and they all kneeling before him, he laid it
upon every one of their heads or shoulders, saying, take thou Authority to
preach the world of God sincerely. And so they rose up Bishops of the new
Church of England. This narration of the consecration at the Nagges head (they
say) they have taken out of Holywood, Constable, and Dr. Champneys works. They
might as well have taken it out of Aesops fables, and with as much credit or
expectation of truth on our parts.

So the controversy between them and us is this. They say that Arch Bishop
Parker and the rest of the Protestant Bihops, in the beginning of Queen
Elisabeths reign, or at the least sundry of them were consecrated at the
Nagges head in Cheapesyde together, by Bishop Scory alone, or by him and Bishop
Barlow jointly, without Sermon, without Sacrament, without any solemnity, in
the year 1559. (but they know not what day, nor before what public Notaries,)
by a new fantastic form. And all this they say upon the supposed voluntary
report of Mr. Neale (a single malicious spy,) in private to his own party,
long after the business pretended to be done.

We say Arch Bishop Parker was consecrated alone, at Lambeth, in the Church, by
four Bishops, authorized thereunto by Commission under the great Seal of
England, with Sermon, with Sacrament, with all due solemnities, upon the 17 day
of December Anno 1559. before four of the most eniment public Notaries in
England; and particularly by the same public Notary who was Principal Actuary
both at Cardinal Poles Consecration and Arch Bishop Parkers. And that all the
rest of the Bishops were* Consecrated at other times, some in the same month
but not upon the same day, some in the same year but not the same month, and
some the year following. And to prove the truth of our relation and falsehood
of theirs, we produce the Registet of the Sea of Canterbury, as authentic as
the world has any, the Registers of the other fourteen Sees then vacant, all
as carefully kept by sworn Officers as the Records of the Vatican it self. We
produce all the Commissions under the privy seal and great Seal of England:
We produce the rolls or Records of the Chancery; And if the Records of the
Signet office had not been unfortunately burned in King James his time, it
might have been verified by those also: We produce an Act of Parliament express
in the point, within seven years after the Consecration: We produce all the
controverted Consecrations published to the world in printe Anno 1572* three
years before Arch Bishop Parkers death, whilst all things were fresh in men's
memories. These bright beams had been able to dasell the eyes of Mr. Neale
himself, whilst he was living, and have made him recant his lewd lie, or
confess himself stark blind.

The first reason which I bring against this ridiculous fable, The first reason.
it taken from the palpable Contradictions, and gross absurdities and defects
of those Roman Catholic writers, who have related this silly tale of a tub,
and agree in nothing but in their common malice against the Church of England.
It is no strange matter for such as write upon hearesay, or rely upon the
exact truth of other men's notes or memories, to mistake in some inconsiderable
circumstance: as to set down the name of a place amiss, which may be the
transcribers fault, or the printers, as well as the Authors: Or to say two
Suffragans for one, when there were two named in the Commission, and but one
present at the Consecration. Such immateriall differences which are so remote
from the heart of the Cause, about indifferent Circumstances, may bring the
exactness of the Relation into question, but not the substantial truth of it.
Such petty unsignificant variations, do rather prove that the Relations were
not made upon compact or confederacy. Especially where there are original
Records taken upon the place by sworn Notaries, whose names, and hands, and
Acts are as well known to every man versed in the Records of those times, as a
man knows his own house. To which all Relaters and Relations must submit,
and are ready to submit as to an infallible rule.

But he who should give credit to such a silly senseless fable as this is,
which is wholly composed of absurd, improbable, incoherent, inconsistent,
contradictory fictions, had need to have a very implicit faith. The greatest
show of any accord among them is about the Consecrater, yet even in this they
disagree one from another. The common opinion is that Bishop Scory alone did
consecrate them. But Mr. Constable one of their principal authors supposes,
that Bishop^ Barlow might join with him in the Consecration. And Sanders,
whose pen in other cases uses to run over, one who had as much malice as
any of them, and had reason to know the passages of those times better then all
of them, leaves it doubtful, when, or where, or by whom they were ordained,
quomodocunque facti sunt isti Pseudo-Episcopi; by what means soever they were
ordained.

But they disagree much more among themselves, who they should be that were
ordained. First Mr. Waddesworth (whose ingenuity deserves to be commended)
does not say that any of our Bishops were actually consecrated there, but only
that there was an attempt to consecrate the First of them, that was Archbishop
Parker. But that which destoyeth the credit of this attempt is this, that it is
evident by the Records, that Archbishop Parker was not personally present at
his Confirmation in Bows Church, or at his Confirmation dinner at the Nagges
head, which gave the occasion to this merry Legend: but was confirmed by his
Proctor Nicholas Bullingham Doctor in the Laws, upon the ninth of December
Anno 1559. A man may be confirmed by Proxy, but no man can be ordained by
proxy. It is a ruled case in their own law, Non licet Sacramentum aliquod
praeter matrimonium absenti administrare. So if there was an attempt to
consecrate any man at the Nagges head, it must be Doctor Bullingham, it could
not be Arch Bishop Parker.

Others say there was more then an attempt, that one or more of them were
actually ordained there: but they name none. Others name some, but they accord
not one with another in naming of them. Some say, Jewel, Sands, Horn,
Grindall; where was Arch Bishop Parker? Others say, Parker, Grindall, Horn,
Sands. Lastly others say, they were all ordained there, who were named to
Bishoprics, and number fifteen of them. These fathers speak indefinitely,
Parker and his fellows. But they seem to extend this word fellows as far
as Doctor Champneys fifteen: for they tell us, that they all kneeled down
before him, and he laid the Bible upon every one of their heads or shoulders.
Thus these Cadmean brethren, like those false witnesses which testified against
Christ, destroy one another with their mutual Contradictions.

Thirdly, the time is a principal Circumstance in all Consecrations, and is
evermore most punctually recorded by the Actuaries, or public Notaries. But in
this fabulous Relation the time is concealed. It seems the Forger was no good
Actuary, and either did not know how material that Circumstance was, or had
forgotten it. Only Doctor Champney tells us, that it was before the ninth of
September Anno 1559. But this is not precise enough for an Act: and moreover,
it is most apparently false and impossible. For whereas there are two
Commissions under the great Seal of England, for the Confirmation and
Consecration of Arch Bishop Parker, both recorded in the Rolls; the one which
was not executed, dated the said very ninth day of September; and the other
which was executed, dated the sixth day of December following: if Doctor
Champney said true, Arch Bishop Parker was consecrated before he was confirmed,
yea before there was any Commission out, either for his Consecration or
Confirmation; which is one of the drowsiest dreams that could drop from an
English pen.

Lastly, every Consecration must be performed before one or more public
Notaries. (We shall show them Notaries enough of great eminence, beyond all
exception, for Archbishop Parkers true Consecration.) And indeed what could a
Consecration avail any man, without a public Notary to Record it, to make an
authentic Certificate of it under the seal of the principal Consecrater? Now
who recorded the Nagges head Consecration? who drew it up into Acts? Who
certified it? No body, because the silly forger did not understand what things
were requisite to a Consecration. Only as the Athenians sometimes said of
Metiochus, Metiochus grindes the corn, Metiochus bakes the bread, Metiochus
mendes the highwaies, Metiochus does all, an evil year to Metiochus: So we
may say of Mr. Neale; Mr. Neale was the spy, Mr. Neale was the witness, Mr.
Neale was the public Notary, Mr. Neale was the chief Eugenier or forger, Mr.
Neale was all, what honors are due to Mr. Neale?

Qui tot sustinuit, qui tanta negotia solus.
So they feine a Consecration without a public Notary, or (which is all one)
no man ever knew who that public Notary was; At a time impossible, or else no
man knows at what time; without any certeinty who consecrated, whether Scory
alone, or Scory and Barlow together, or God knows who; and yet with much
less certeinty who were consecrated, whether none at all, but only an attempt
was made, or one, and who that one was; or some indefinitely, without naming
who they were, or how many they were; or four expressly, but dissenting one
from another who those four were. Here is a story composed altogether of
uncerteinties and contradictions, like A man and no man, ^it a bird and no
bird, on a tree and no tree, with a stone and no stone. To make this
uncerteine, groundless, contradictory rumor, to be the touchstone of truth,
and to overballance all the authentic Records of the Kingdom, in a matter of
such public concernment: is just to make the Parish clock go truer then the
Sun, because the Clerk who settes it is our Friend.

My second reason against this senseless fable, Seeond reason.
is the late discovery of it to the world, and the long concealing of it in*
holes and corners before they durst adventure present it to the view of the
world, Can any man who is in his right wits be so stupide as to imagine, that
the Nagges head Ordination happened in the year 1559, and (if these Fathers
say truly) was notoriously known to all the world; and that it should never
once Peep into the light for almost a whole age after it was pretended to have
been done, that is till after the year sixteen hundred? We use to say a
monster is but nine days wonder: but this ugly monster was not taken notice of
in the world until after forty years. The reason is evident; Either it was
then but newly hatched, or it had been kept all that time at dry nurse in a
closet. If it had been so notorious to all the world from the year 1559 as the
fathers feine, all the windows in the Nagges head would have been full of it,
and the room would have been showed to all their guests, where such a
prodigious pageant had been acted.

I dare appeal to the judgments of these Fathers themselves, whether it be
Credible, that this story should be notoriously known to the world in the
beginning of Queen Elisabeths reign, and yet neither Stapleton, nor Harding,
nor Bristow, nor Alan, nor Reynoldes, nor Parsons, nor any one of all their
Roman Catholic writers, should so much as mention it for forty years ensuing;
especially writing so much as they did upon that very subject, the validity or
invalidity of our Ordination. How could their silence have been excused from
betraying of their cause, to lose such an egregious advantage? Was it
peradventure out of affection to us, to conceal the Defects of the
Protestants? No, they had will enough, but they durst not avouch such a
Monstrous untruth in earnest, (if ever they did hear of such a vain rumor,
which I can not easily believe,) so contrary to the knowledge of that age.

Especially let them tell me how it comes to pass, that Nicolas Sanders, who
professes to write the Ecclesiastical history of England, from the one and
twentieth year of Henry the eighth, until the Eight and twentieth year of
Queen Elisabeth then current, in his three books of the Original and
progress of the English Schism, has not one syllable of the Nagges head
Ordination? He was never accused of partiality for the Protestants, (but as
malicious against the Protestants as any man could wish): nor of concealing
truths to their advantage, but of Devising fables to their prejudice.

He having related the form of our English Consecrations, partly true and
partly false, proceedth to this first Ordination of Protestant Bishops, in the
beginning of Queen Elisabeths Reign; alleging that the Catholic Bishops
refused to impose hands upon them, De Schism. Angl. c. 3. p. 400. Edit Romans
And that they had not of themselves two or three Bishops, or so much as one
Metropolitan. What a shameless untruth is this, that there were not two or
three Protestant Bishops, when the Queens Commission under the great Seal of
England, recorded in the Rolls, is directed to seven Protestant Bishops,
expressly by their names and titles?

He adds, that they were very instant with an Irish Arch Bishop to have
presided at their Ordination, but he would not. He mistaketh the matter
altogether, They might have had seven Irish Arch Bishops and Bishops if they
had needed them; where the procedings were not so rigorous, where the old
Bishops complied and held their places, and joined in such Ecclesiastical
Acts, until they had made away to their kindred, all the lands belonging to
their Sees. We found one Bishopric reduced to five marks a year by these
temporisers, another to forty shillings a year, and all of them to very poor
pittances for Prelates. But by this means there wanted no Ordeiners. Never did
any man question the Ordination of the first Protestant Bishops in Ireland
until this day.

Then he tells, how being thus rejected by the Catholic Bishops and the
Irish Arch Bishop, they applied themselves to the lay Magistrate in the ensuing
Parliament for a confirmation, from whence they were called Parliamentary
Bishops. By whom were they called so? By no man but himself and his fellows.
How many Ordinations were passed over, one after another, before that
Parliament? Was there any thing moved in this Parliament, concerning any the
least essential of our Episcopal Ordination? Not at all, but only concerning
the repealing and reviving of an English Statute. English Statutes can not
change the essentialls of Ordination, either to make that Consecration valid
which was invalid, or that invalid which was valid. The validity or invalidity
of Ordination, depends not upon humane law, but upon the institution of
Christ. Neither did we ever since that Parliament change one syllable in our
form of Ordination. Then what was this Confirmation which he speaks of? It
was only a Declaration of the Parliament, that all the Objections which these
men made against our Ordinations, were slanders and calumnies: and that all the
Bishops which had been ordained in the Queens time, had been rightly ordained,
according to the form prescribed by the Church of England, and the Laws of
the Land. These men want no confidence, who are not ashamed to cite this
Statute in this case. But we shall meet with this Parliament again.

In all this impertinent Discourse, where is the fable of the Nagges head
Ordination* It had been a thousand times more material then all this Iargon.
And you may be sure it had not been missing, if there had been the least grain
of truth in it, or is there had but been any suspicion of it when that was
written. It was not then full thirty years after Archbishop Parkers
Consecration, and there were store of eyewitnesses living to have hissed such a
senseless fable out of the world, And therefore Sanders very prudently for
himself, after so many intimations, passes by their Ordination in a deep
silence, which was the only work he took in hand to show. Qualescunque
fuerint aut quo modocunque facti sint isti Pseudo-Episcopi etc. What manner of
persons soever these False-Bishops were, or after what manner soever they were
ordained etc. If Bishop Scory had ordained them all at the Naggeshead, by layng
a Bible upon their heads, and this form of words, Take thou Authority to
preach the word of god Sincerely, M. Sa^ders needed not to have left the case
so doubtful, how they were ordained. And if there had been the least suspicion
of it, he would have blown it abroad upon a silver Trumpet: but God be thanked
there was none. The universal silence of all the Romish writers of that age,
when the Naggeshead Ordination is pretended to have been done, in a case which
concerned them all so nearely, and which was the Chief subject of all their
disputes; is a convincing proof to all men who are not altogether possessed
with prejudice, that either it was devised long after, or was so lewd a lie,
that no man dared to own it, whilst thousands of eyewitnesses of Arch Bishop
Parkers true Consecration at Lambeth were living.

The third Reason.
A third reason, against this ridiculous libell of the Nagges head Consecration,
is taken from the strictness of our laws, which allow no man to consecrate or
be consecrated but in a sacred place, with due matter and form, and all the
Rites and Ceremonies prescribed by the Church of England. No man must be
Consecrated by fewer then four Bishops, or three at least, And that after the
Election of the Deane and Chapter is duly confirmed, And upon the mandate o^
Commission of the King under the great seal of England; under the pain of a
Praemunire, that is, the forfeiture of lands, and goods, 25. H. 8. c. 20.
and livings, and liberty, and protection. They allow not Consecration in a
Tavern, without due matte: and form, without the Ceremonies and solemnity
prescribed by the Church, without Election, without Confirmation, without
letters Patents, by one single Bishop, or two at the most; such as they feine
the Nagges head Ordination to have been. Who can believe, that two Archbishops
and thirteen Bishops, having the reputation of learning and prudence, should
wilfully thrust themselves into an apparent Praemunire, to forfeite not only
their Arch Bishoprics and Bishoprics, but all their estates and all their
hopes, for a fantastic form, and scandalous Consecration: when the Queen
and Kingdom were favorable to them, when the form prescribed by the Church
did please them well enough, when there were protestant Bishops of their own
Communion enough to Consecrate them, when all the Churches in the Kingdom were
open to them; unless it had been Midsummer moon in December* and they were
all stark mad, and then it is no matter where they were consecrated?

In criminal causes, where things are ^retended to be done against penal
laws, ^uch as this is, the proofs ought to be clea^er then the noone day
light. Here is nothing proved, but one single witness named and he a professed
enemy, who never testi^^ed it upon Oath, or before a Judge, or so much as a
public Notary, or to the face of a protestant, but only whispered it in
corners (as it is said by Adversaries) among some of his own party. Such a
testimony is not worth a deaf nut, in any cause between party and party. If
he had been a witness beyond all exception, and had bee^ duly sworn and
legally examined* yet his testimony in the most favorable cause had been but
half (...) proof, though an hundred did testify it from his mouth, it is
still but (...) single testimony: And as it is, it i^ plain prittle prattle.
and ought to be va^lued no more then the shadow of an ass* To admit such a
testimony, or an hundred such testimonies, against the public authentic
Records of the Kingdom were to make our selves guilty of more madness, then
they accuse the Bishops of^ If St. Paul forbid Timothy to recei^^ an accusation
against a single Presbyter under two or three witnesses, he would no^ have us
to condemn fifteen Bishops of such a penal crime, upon a ridiculous rumor
contrary both to the laws and Record^ of the Kingdom. The severity of ou^
laws does destroy the credit of this fable.

CHAP. III. The fourth and fifth reasons against this improbable fiction, from
the no necessity of it, and the less advantage of it.
MY fourth plea is, because there was no need to play this counterfeit pageant.
We use to say Necessity has no law. that is, regards no law. In time of
war the laws are silent, but this was a time of peace. First there could be
no necessity why they should have a clandestine Consecration, without a
Register or public Notary, when they might have had an Army of public
Notaries ready upon their whistle, eve^ under their elbowes at Bows Church,
out of the Courts of the Arches, and the Audience, and Prerogative. Secondly,
there was no necessity why they should anticipate the Queens Letters patents
for their consecration, by whose gracious favor they were elected, and of the
accomplishme^t whereof in due time they could not doubt; unless they would
wilfully destroy their own hopes, by such a mad pranke as this had been, that
is, unless they would themselves hew down the bough where upon they stood.
Thirdly, there was no necessity that they should choose a common Tavern for the
place of their Consecration, when the Keys of all the Churches in the Kingdom
were at their Command, Fourthly, there could be no necessity why they should
deserte the form of Ordination prescribed by the Law, which was agreeable both
to their judgments, and to their desires, and to their duties; and to omit
the essentialls of Ordination, both matter and form, which they knew well
enough, to be consecrated after a new brainsick manner.

Then all the necessity which can be pretended, is want of a competent number
of Ordeiners. Suppose there had been such a necessity 'to be ordained by two
Bishops, or by one Bishop, this very necessity had been a sufficient
Dispensation with the rigor of the Canons, and had instified the Act. as St.
Gregory pleads to Augustine* In the English Church wherein there i^ no other
Bishop but thy self, Resp. Int. 8. August.
thou can^ not ordeine a Bishop otherwise then alone* And after this manner,
our First English Bishops were ordained. And so might these protestant Bishops
have been validely ordained, if they received the essentialls of Ordination.
But what a remedy is this, because they could not have a competent number of
Bishops, according to the canons of the Church, and the laws of England,
therefore to reject the essentialls of Ordination, for a defect which was not
essential, and to cast of obedience to their superiors, both civil and
Ecclesiastical? This had been just like little children which because they ca^
not have some toy which they desire, cast away their garments, and whatsoever
their Parents had provided for them, Want of three Bishops might in some cases
make a consecration illegal or uncanonicall, but it could not have rendered it
invalide, as this silly pretended Ordinatio^ had.

But now I come up close to the ground work of the fable, Rot. 14. Pars 2.
Elisab.
and I deny positively that there was any such want of a competent number of
Bishops, as they pretend. And for proof hereof, I bring no vain rumors or
uncertein conjectures, but the evident and authentic testimony of the great
seal of England, affixed to the Queens Leuers Patents, for authorizing the
Confirmation and Consecration of Archbishop Parker, dated the sixth day of
December, Anno 1559. directed to seven protestant Bishops, namely Anthony
Bishop of Landaffe, William Barlow sometimes Bishop of Bath and Wells, and
then elect Bishop of Chichester, John Scory sometimes Bishop of Chichester,
then Elect Bishop of Hereforde, Miles Coverdale sometimes Bishop of Exceter,
John Suffragan Bishop of Bedford, John Suffragan Bishop of The^ford, and John
Bale Bishop of Ossory in Ireland. Three are a Canonical number, if there were
choice of seven, then there was no want of a competent number to ordeine
canonically. I add, that if it had been needful, they might have had seven
more out of Ireland, Arch Bishops and Bishops, for such a work as a
consecration. Ireland never wanted store of Ordeiners. Nor ever yet did any man
object, want of a Competent number of Consecraters, to an Irish Protestant
Bishop. They who concurred freely in the Consecration of Protestant Bishops at
home, would not have denied their concurrence in England, if they had been
commanded. Which makes me give no credit to that vain report* of an Irish
Arch Bishop prisoner in the tower, who refused to complie with the desires of
the protestant Bishops, for his liberty and a large reward. But the Arch
Bishop wants a name, and the Fabl^ wants a ground; the witnesses and
persuaders are all unkowne. And if there had been a grane of truth in this
relation; yet in this case one man is no man, one man's refusal signifies
nothing.

Against the evident truth of this assertion, two things may be opposed out of
the relation of these Fathers. The First is particular, concerning the Bishop
of Landaffe, that he was no Protestant, but a Roman Catholic until his death.
So they say indeed, that he was the only man of all the Catholic Bishops,
that took the oath of Supremacy. Observe how prejudice and partiality does
blindfold men of learning and parts; They confess he took the oath of
supremacy, and yet esteem him a good Roman Catholic. I see censures go by
favor, and one may Steal an horse, better then another look over the hedge.
I am well contented, that they reckon him for so good a Catholic.

They add, that he knew Parker and the rest which were to be ordered Bishops
to be heretics, and averse from the Doctrine of the Roman Catholic Church,
which he Constantly adhered unto, (the Supremacy only excepted) during his
life. And a little after they tell us, that he desired to be numbered among
Catholics. Now what if the Bishop of Landaff after all this should prove to be
a protestant? Then all the Fathers story is quite spoiled. And so he was. If he
knew Parker and the rest, to be heretics, he knew himself to be one of their
brother heretics. His daily mass was the English Leiturgy, as well as theirs,
He adhered constantly to a Protestant Bishopric during his life, as well as
any of them, And if he did not hold it as long as any of them, it was deaths
fault, and none of his fault.

They say they prevailed with him to give them a meeting at the Nagges head in
Cheapeside, where they hoped he would ordeine them Bishops, despairing that
ever he would do it in a Church, because that would be too great and notorious
a scandal for Catholics. They were too modest. They might easily have
prevailed with him, or have had him commanded to join in their consecration in
a Church, after a legal manner. He who did not stick at renouncing the Pope,
and swearing an oath of Supremacy to his Prince, would not have stuck at a
legal Ordination, upon the just command of his Prince. But to desire him to do
it in a tavern, in a clandestine manner, without the authority of the great
seal, before their election was confirmed, was to desire him out of Curtesy to
run into a Praemunire, that is to forfeit his Bishopric of Landaffe, his
estate, his liberty. Is it become a more notorious scandal to Catholics, to
ordeine in a Church, then in a tavern, in the judgment of these fathers? There
may be scandal taken at the former, but notorious scandal is given by the
later.

Here Bishop Bonner steppeth upon the stage, and had well near prevented the
whole pageant, by sending his Chaplein to the Bishop of Landaffe, to forbid him
under pain of excommunication to exercise any such power of giving Orders in
his diocese, where with the old man being terrified, and other wise moved in
conscience refused to proceed. Bishop Bonner was allwaies very fierce which way
soever he went: If Acworth say true, Acworth cont. monar. Sander. l. 6. p. 195.
he escaped once very narrowly in Rome, either burning or boiling in scalding
lead, for being so violent before the Assembly of Cardinals, against the
Pope, on the behalf of Henry the eight, if he had not secured himself by
flight. Afterward he made such bonefires of protestants, and rendered himself
so odious, that his prison was his only safeguard from being torn in pieces
by the People. But that was, dum stetit Iliam and ingens Gloria Teucrorum,
whilst he had his Prince to be his second. Now he was deprived, and had no
more to do with the Bishopric of London, then with the Bishopric of
Constantinople, he had the habitual power of the Keys, but he had no flock to
exercise it upon. If he had continued Bishop of London still, what has the
Bishop of London to do with the Bishop of Landaffe? Par in parem non habet
potestatem. Thirdly, Bows Church which is near the Naggeshead, wherein the
Ecclesiastical part of this story, so far as it has any truth in it, was
really acted, (that is the Confirmation of Arch Bishop Parkers election) though
it be in the City of London, as many Churches more, is not in the Diocese of
London, but a Peculiar under the Jurisdiction of the Archbishop of Canterbury.

Lastly, the Fathers say that when Parker and the rest see that he had refused,
they reviled the poor old man, calling him doting fool, and some of them
saying, This old fool thinks that we can not be Bishops, unless we be
greased. The contrary is evident by the Records of the confirmation, that Arch
Bishop Parker was not present in person: So this whole narration is composed of
untruthes, and mistakes, and incongruities, and contradictions. But that which
discovers the falsity of it apparently to all the world is this, that the
Bishop of Landaff lived and died a protestant Bishop, in the reign of Queen
Elisabeth, as he had been formerly in the reign of King Edward, for proof
whereof I produce two of their own Authors. Sand. de Schism. l. 2. p. 350
The one is Sanders, But the Bishops, who had been created out of the Church in
those most wicked times, who had now repented from their hearts of their
Schism, being not contented wiih this common dispensation and confirmation,
did each of them particularly crave pardon of their former grievous fault from
the Sea Apostolic, and Confirmation in their Bishoprics, excepting the Bishop
of Landaffe, who omitting it rather out of negligence then malice, did only
relapse into Schism in the reign of Queen Elisabeth, as we interpret it by
the just judgment of god. Confut. Apol. part 6. c. 2.
He acknowledges, that he became a Protestant again, that is in their
language, relapsed into Schism. The other is cited by Doctor Harding, We had
only one fool among us, (we see whose livery the fool was,) who now I know
not by what entisements is become yours, being unworthy the name of a Lord and
a Bishop, whose learning is very little, and his credit by this action much
lost. Thus writes Doctor Harding of the Bishop of Landaffe, about the fifth
year of Queen Elisabeth, at which time he was living, and continued
protestant Bishop of Landaff.

A second objection against the truth of that which has been said of the
competent Number of our Protestant Bishops to make a canonical Ordination, is
an exception against all the seven Bishops named in the letters Patents, that
they were no true Bishops, because all of them were ordained in a time of
Schism, and two of them in King Edwards time, according to a new form of
Ordination, and consequently they could not ordeine. That Ordination which was
instituted by Edward the sixth was judged invalide by the Catholics, Brooks
Novel, Cafes placit. 493.
and so declared by public judgment in Queen Mary's reign, in so much as
leases made by King Edwards Bishops, though confirmed by Deane and Chapter
were not esteemed available, because they were not (says the sentence)
consecrated, nor Bishops.

To the First part of this objection, that our consecraters were ordained
themselves by Schismatics or in a time of Schism, I answer three ways. First
this argument is a mere begging of the quaestion. The case in brief is this.
If those branches of Papal power which we cast out of England by our Laws at
the Reformation, were ^laine usurpations, then our Reformation (...) but a
reinfanchisement of our selves, and ^he Schism lies at their door, then they
may question the validity of their own Ordination upon this ground, not ours:
But we are ready to maintain to all the world that all those branches of
Papal power, which we cast out by our laws at the Re^ormation, were gross
usurpations, first introduced into England above ele^en hundred years after
Christ. So this ^art of the Objection concerns them (...) us.

^econdly these Fathers know well enough, ^^d can not but acknowledge, that
according to the principles of the Catholic Church and their own practice,
the Ordination not only of Schismatics, but o^ heretics, if it have no
essential defect i^^valide, and the persons so Ordained ough^ not to be
reordeined, but only reconciled* Many Orthodox Christians had their holy
orders from heretical Arrians. If Cra^mer, and Latimer, and Barlow, and
Hodgkins, were no true Bishops, because the^ were ordained in a time of Schism
then Gardinar, and Bonner, and Tu^^stall, and Thurleby, etc. were no true
Bi^shops, for they were ordained in a tim^ of Schism likewise; then Cardinal
Pol^ and Bishop Watson, and Christophers* and all rest of their Bishops were no
tru^ Bishops who were ordained by these. (...) to put out one of our eyes (like
the envio^ man in the fable) they would put out (...) their own.

Thirdly I answer, that it was not we (...) made a Discrimination between our
^^^shops and their Bishops, as to the poi^^ of Ordination, but the Marian
Bisho^ themselves, who made a mutual co^^pact, one and all, that none of them
should impose hands upon any new elect^ Bishops; thinking vainly, there could
other Consecraters have been found out, and that by this means they should
both preserve their Bishoprics, and bring the Queen to their bent: but they
found them selves miserably deceived. Many Bishops who had been chased out of
their Bishoprics in Queen Mary's days, did now return from exile, and
supply the place of Consecraters. Then conjurationis eos penituit, The Bishops
repented of their Conspiracy. Ace worth. cont. Sander. l. 2. page 197.
Multi ad judices recurrunt, etc. many of them ran to the Judges, confessed
their obstinacy, and desired leave to take the oath of Supremacy. Thus writes
Acworth an Author of good account in* those days. If this foolish conspiracy
had not been. we had had no Difference about our Consecrations.

To the second part of this objection, that the form of Ordeining used in King
Edwards days, was declared invalide in Queen Mary's Days, I answer, First,
that we have no reason to regard the Judgment of their Judges in Queen Mary's
Days, more then they regard the judgment of our Judges in Queen Elisabeths
days. They who made no scruple to take away their life's, would make no scruple
to take away their holy Orders.

Secondly I answer that which the Father^ call a sentence, was no sentence. The
word is Dicitur, it is said or it is reported, not decretum est, it is decreed.
Neither were Queen Mary's laws proper rules, nor Queen Maryes Judges at
common law the proper Judges, of the validity of an Episcopal consecration, or
what are the essentialls of ordination, according to the institution of Christ.
They have neither rules, no^ grounds for this in the common law.

Thirdly I answer that the question i^ Queen Mary's days was not about the
validity or invalidity of our Orders, bu^ about the legality or illegality of
them, not whether they were conformable to the institution of Christ, but
whether they were conformable to the Laws o^ England.

The Laws of England can neither make a valide ordination to be invalide* nor
an invalide ordination to be valide, because they can not change the
institution of Christ. In sum King Edwards Bishop^ were both validely
ordained according to the institution of Christ, and legally ordained according
to the laws of England. (...) Queen Mary changed the Law, that the form of
ordeining which had bee^ allowed in King Edwards days should not be allowed in
her days. Notwithstanding Queen Mary's law, they continued still true
Bishops, by the institution of Christ, But they were not for that time legal
Bishops in the eye of the Law of England, which is the Judges rule. But when
Queen Elisabeth restored King Edwards law, then they were not only true
valide Bishops, but legal Bishops again.

That corollary which the fathers add, in so much as leases made by King
Edwards Bishops though confirmed by the Deane and Chapter were not esteemed
available, because they were not consecrated or Bishops, that is in ^he eye of
the English law at that time, signi^ieth nothing at all. Leases concern the
be^efice of a Bishop, not the Office of a Bishop. A Bishop who is legally
ordained, though ^e be invalidely ordained, may make a lease which is good in
law. And a Bishop which is validely ordained, if he be ille^ally ordained, may
make a lease which is ^oide in law.

Concerning Bishop Bonners Conscience, that he lost his Bishopric for his
con^ience, and therefore it is not proba^^e that he would make himself guilty
of so much sacrilege, as to declare King Edwards form of ordination to be
invalide for the profit of new Leases, it belongs not to me to judge of other
men's Consciences. But for Bishop Bonners Conscience I refer him to the
Testimony of one of his Friends, Nicolas Sanders, who speaking of Bishop
Gardener, Bishop Bonner, Bishop Tunstall and the Bishops of Worcester and
Chichester, concludes with these words. T^^mide ergo restiterunt pueri Regis
prima^^ spirituali, imo simpliciter subscripseru^, and in omnes caeteras
innovationes, quae ne^ videbantur ipsis continere apertam haer^^sim, ne
Episcopatus and honores perderent ^ vel ul^ro, vel comra conscientiam coa^
consenserunt. Therefore they resisted the sp^^rituall primacy of the King being
but a boy fairly, yea they subscribed to it simply, and they consented to all
the rest of the innovations, De Schismate l. 2. p. 282 Edit. Romans
which did not seem to them to contain manifest heresy either of their own
accord, or compelled again Conscience, least they should lose their Bishoprics
and honors. We see they had no great reason to brag of Bishop Bonners
Conscience, who sometimes had been a great favorite of Cranmer and Crumwell. He
g^^ his Bishopric by opposing the Pope, a^^ lost his Bishopric by opposing
his Prince* But if reordination be such a sacrilege, many Romanists are guilty
of gross sacrilege, who reordeine those Proselites whom they seduce from us,
with the same essentialls, matter and form, imposition of hands, and these
words Receive the holy Ghost; wherewith they had been formerly ordained by us.

Lastly I answer, (and this answer alone is sufficient to determine this
controversy,) that King Edwards form of ordination was judged valide in Queen
Mary's days by all Catholics, and particularly by Cardinal Pole then
Apostolical Legate in England, and by the then Pope Paul the fourth, and by
all the clergy and Parliament of England. The case was this. In the Act for
repealing all statutes made against the sea of Rome, in the first and second
years of Philip and Mary, the Lords Spiritual and Temporal in Parliament
assembled, representing the whole body of the Realm of England, presented
their common request to the King and Queen, that they would be a means to the
Legate to obtain some settlements by authority of the Popes Holiness, for
peace sake, in some Articles where of this is one. That institutio^s of
Benefices and other Promotions Ecclesiastical, and Dispensations made
according to the form of the Act of Parliament might be confirmed.
Institutions could not be confirmed, except Ordinations were confirmed. For the
greatest part of the English Clergy had received both their benefices and their
holy orders, after the casting out of the Popes usurped authority out of
England. And both benefices and holy orders are comprehended under the name of
Ecclesiastical Promotions. This will appear much more clearly by the very
words of the Cardinals Dispensation, Ac omnes ecclesiasticas seculares seu
quorumvis ordinum regulares personas, quae aliquas impetrationes,
dispensationes, concessiones, gratias and indulta, tam ordines quam beneficia
Ecclesiastica, seu alias spirituales materias, pretensa authoritate
supremitatis Ecclesiae Anglicanae, licet nulliter and de facto obtenuerint, and
ad cor reversae Ecclesiae unitati restitutae fuerint, in suis Ordinibus and
beneficiis, per nosipsos seu a nobis ad id deputatos misericorditer recipiemus,
prout jam multae receptae fuerunt, secumque super his opportune in domino
dispensabimus; And we will graciously receive (or interteine) by our selves or
by others deputed by us to that purpose, Cardinal Poles Dispensation.
(as many have already been received) in their Orders and in their Benifices,
all Ecclesiastical Persons as well Secularas Regular of whatsoever Orders,
which have obtained any suites, dispensations, grants, graces, and
indulgences, as well in their Ecclesiastical Orders, as Benefices and other
spiritual matters, by the pretended authority of the Supremacy of the Church
of England, though ineffectually and only de facto, so they be penitent, and
be returned to the unity of the Church. And we will in due season dispense
with them in the Lord for these things.

Here we see evidently, that upon the request of the Lo^ds Spiritual and
Temporal and Commons, being the representative body of the Church and Kingdom
of England, by the intercession of the King and Queen, the Popes Legate did
receive all persons, which had been Ordained or Beneficed, either in the time
of King Henry or King Edward, in their respective Orders and Benefices, which
they were actually possessed of, at the time of the making of this dispensation
or Confirmation, without any exception or Condition, but only this, that they
were returned to the unity of the Catholic Church. Neither was there ever any
one of them who were then returned, either deprived of their Benefices, or
compelled to be reordeined. From whence I argue thus, Either King Henry the
eighths Bishops and Priests, and likewise the Bishops and Priests Ordained in
King Edward the sixths time, had all the Essentialls of Episcopal and Priestly
Ordination, which were required by the institution of Christ; and then they
ought not to be reordeined, Then (in the judgment of these Fathers themselves)
it is grievous sacrilege to reordeine them: Or they wanted some essential of
their respective Ordinations, which was required by the institution of Christ;
and then it was not in the power of all the Popes and Legates that ever were in
the world, to confirm their respective Orders, or dispense with them to
execute their functions in the Church. But the Legate did Dispense with them to
hold their Orders, and exercise their several functions in the Church, and the
Pope did confirm that dispensation. This does clearly destroy all the
pretensions of the Romanists against the validity of our Orders.

It may perhaps be objected, that the dispensative word is recipiemus, we will
receive, not we do receive. I answer, the case is all one; If it were unlawful
to receive them in the present, it was as unlawful to receive the^ in the
future. All that was done after, was to take a particular absolution or
confirmation from the Pope or his Legate, which many of the Principal Clergy
did, but not all; No not all the Bishops, Not the Bishop of Landaff, as Sanders
witnesses, De Schism. l. 2. p. 305.
Yet he injoied his Bishopric, So did all the rest if the Clergy, who never
had any particular confirmation. It is not material at all, whether they were
confirmed by a general or by a special dispensation, so they were confirmed
or dispensed with at all, to hold all their Benefices, and to exercise their
respective Functions in the Church, which no man can deny.

Secondly it may be objected, that it is said in the Dispensation, licet
nulliter and de facto obtenuerint, Although they had obtained their Benefices
and Promotions ineffectually and only in fact without right: which does
intimate that their Orders were void and null, before they had obtained this
dispensation. I answer, that he styled them void and null, not absolutely but
respectively, quoad exercitium, because by the Roman law they might not be
lawfully exercised without a Dispensation: but not quoad Characterem, as to the
Character. If they had wanted any thing necessary to the imprinting of the
Character, or any thing essential by the institution of Christ, the Popes
Dispensation and Confirmation had been but like a seal put to a blanke piece
of paper. And so the Cardinals dispensation in general, and particularly for
Benefices and Ecclesiastical Promotions, Dispensations, and Graces given by
such Order as the laws of the Realm allowed and prescribed, in King Henry's
time and King Edwards time, was then and there ratified by act of Parliament.

Lastly, that this Dispensation was afterward confirmed by the Pope, I prove
by the confession of Sanders himself, though a malicious enemy. He (that is
Cardinal Pole, in a public Instrument set forth in the name and by the
authority of the Pope) Confirmed all Bishop which had been made in the former
Schism, De Schism. l. 2. p. 350.
so they were Catholic in their judgment of Religion, and the six new
Bishoprics which King Henry had erected in the time of the Schism. And this
writing being affixed to the Statute, was published with the rest of the
Decrees of that Parliament, and their minds were pacified. All which things
were established and confirmed afterward, by the Letters of Pope Paul the
fourth.

We have seen, that there were a competent number of Protestant Bishops beyond
'Exception to make a Consecration: And so the necessity, which is their only
Basis or Foundation of the Nagges head Consecration, being quite taken away,
this prodigious fable having nothing else to support the incredibilities and
inconsistencies of it, does melt away of it self like winter ice.

The fifth reason is drawn from that well known principle in Rethorick, A
fifth reason
Cui bono? or what advantage could such a consecration, as the Nagges head
Consecration is pretended to have been, bring to the Consecraters or the
persons consecrated. God and Nature never made any thing in vain. The hair of
the head, the nails upon the fingers ends, do serve both for ornament and
muniment. The leafes defend the blossoms, the blossoms produce the fruit,
which is Natures end. In sensitives, the Spider does not weave her webbes, nor
the silly Be make her celles in vain. But especially intellectual creatures
have always some end of their Actions. Now consider, what good such a mock
Consecration could do the persons so consecrated? Could it help them to the
possession of their Bishoprics by the law of England? Nothing less. There is
such a concatenation of our English Customs and Records, that the
counterfeiting of of any one can do no good, except they could counterfeite
them all, which is impossible.

When any Bishops See becomes void, there issues a Writ out of the
Exchequer to seize the Temporalties into the Kings hand, as being the ancient
and well known Patron of the English Church; leaving the Spiritualties to the
Arch Bishop or to the Deane and Chapter, according to the custom of the
place. Next the King grants his Conge d'Eslire or his License to choose a
Bishop, to the Deane and Chapter; upon the receite of this License, the Deane
and Chapter, within a certain number of days, choose a Bishop, and certify
their Election to the King, under the common seal of the Chapter.

Upon the return of this Certificate, the King grants out a Commission under
the great seal of England to the Arch Bishop, or in the vacancy of the Arch
Bishopric to so many Bishops, to examine the Election: and if they find it
fairly made to confirm it, and after Confirmation to proceed to the
Consecration of the person elected, according to the form prescribed by the
Church of England. This Commission or Mandate must pass both through the
Signet office and Chancery, and be attested by the Clerks of both those
offices, and signed by the Lord Chanceller and Lord privy seal, and be
enrolled. So as it is morally impossible there should be any forgery in it.

Upon the receite of this Mandate, the Bishops who are authorized by the King,
do meet first at Bows Church in London, where with the assistence of the
Chief Ecclesiastical Judges of the Realm, the Deane of the Arches, the
Judges of the Prerogative and Audience, with their Registers to Actuate what is
done, they do solemnly in form of law confirm the election. Which being
done, and it being late before it be done, the Commissioners and Judges were
and are sometimes invited to the Nagges head to a dinner, as being very near
Bows Church, and in those days the only place of note, This meeting led Mr.
Neale (a man altogether unacquainted with such forms,) into this fools
Paradise; first to suspect, and upon suspicion to conclude, that they were
about an Ordination there, and lastly to broach his brainsick conceits in
corners; and finding them to be greedily swallowed by such as wished them true,
to assert his own drowsy suspicion for a real truth. But the mischief is,
that Doctor Parker who was to be consecrated, was not present in person, but by
his Proxy.

After the Confirmation is done, commonly about three or four days, (but as
it happened in Arch Bishop Parkers case nine days,) the Commissioners proceed
to the Consecration; for the most part out of their respect to the Archbishop
in the Chapel at Lambeth, with Sermon, Sacrament, and all solemnity
requisite, according to the form prescribed by the Church of England; in the
presence of public Notaries or sworn Officers, who reduce every thing that is
done with all the circumstances into Acts, and enter them into the Register of
the Sea of Canterbury. Where they are carefully kept by the principal Officer
in a public office, as Records, where every one who desires may view them
from time to time, and have a copy of them if he please. And it is to be noted,
that at any Consecration, especially of an Archbishop, great numbers of
principal Courtiers and Citisens are present: so as it is no more possible to
coun^erfeite such a Consecration, then to walk ^nvisible upon the Exchange at
noone day.

After the Consecration is done, the person Consecrated is not presently
admitted to his Bishopric, First the Arch Bishop makes his certificate of the
Consecration with all the circumstances of it, under his Arch-Episcopall seal:
Thereupon the King takes the new Bishops oath of fealty and commands that he
be put into the Actual possession of his Bishopric: Then he is ^nthroned, and
at his Inthronisation his Or^ination is publicly read: Then he injoieth ^is
Spiritualties: Then issues a Writ out ^f the Exchequer to the Sherif, to
restore ^im to the Temporalties of his Bishopric. This custom is so ancient,
so certain, so general, that no Englishman can speak^ against it.

Here we see evidently how al things (...) pursue one another, and what a
necessary and essential connection there is betwee^ them. So as the stealing of
an Election or the stealing of a Consecration, can ge^ no man a Bishopric, as
Mr. Neale dreamed. He that would advantage himself that way, must falsify all
the Record^ both Ecclesiastical and Civil. He mu^^ falsify the Records of
the Chancery, (...) the Signet office, of the Exchequer, (...) the Registries,
of the Bishop, of the De^^ne and Chapter. He must counterfeit the hands and
seals of the King, of the Arch^ Bishop, of the Lord Chanceller, the Lo^^ Privy
seal, of the Clerks and public^ Notaries, which is not imaginable. (...) Mr.
Neale, who first devised this drow^ dream (or somebody for him) had (...) more
experience of our English laws (...) Customs, he would have feined a mo^^
probable tale, or have held his peace for ever.

Answer me, They who are calumniate to have had their Consecration at the
N^^ges head, did they mean to conceal it (...) have it kept secret? Then what
good could it do them? De non existentibus and non apparentibus eadem est
ratio: If it were concealed, it was all one a^ if it had never been. Or did
they mean to have it published? Such an Ordination had been so far from
helping them to obtain a Bishopric, that it had rendered them incapable of a
Bishopric for ever: And moreover subjected both the Consecraters and the
Consecrated to deprivation, and degradation, and a Praemunire or forfeiture of
their lands goods and liberties, and all that were present at it to
excommunication. Rome is a fit place wherein to publish such Ludibrious
fables as this; where they can persuade the people, that the Protestants are
stupid creatures, who have lost their Re^igion, their reason, and scarcely
retain their human shapes. It is too bold an attempt, to obtrude such
counterfeit ware^ ^n England.

CHAP, IIII. The sixth and seventh reasons, that all the Records of England are
diametrally opposite to their Relation, and do establith our Relation.
HItherto we have been taking in the out works: Now I come directly to
assault this Castle in the air, That which has been said already is
sufficient to persuade any man, who is not brimme full of prejudice and
partiality: The other five reasons which follow next, have power to compel all
men, and command their assen^^*

My sixth reason is taken from the diametrall oppositio^ which is between this
fabulous relation of the Nagges head Ordinatio^* and all the Records of
England, both Ecclesiastical and civil. First for the time. The Romanists
say, that this Ordination was before the ninth of September Ann. 2559: (...) it
is apparent by all the Records of the Chancery, all the distinct Letters
Paten^^ or Commissions for their Respective Confirmations, and Consecrations,
whereupon they were consecrated, did issue out lo^^ after; namely, Arch Bishop
Parkers Lette^^ Patents (which were the first) upon the sixth day of December
following. Next the Commissions for Grindall, Cox and Sands, Then for
Bullingham, Jewel, and Davis. Then for Bentham and Barkley: and in the year
following for Horn, Alley, Scambler, and Pilkinton. He that has a mind to see
the Copies of these Commissions, may find them Recorded Verbatim both in the
Rolls of the Arch Bishops Register, Rot^ pars 1 4.2. El.
and in the Rolls of the Chancery. To what end were all these Letters Patents,
to authorize so many Confirmatio^s and Consecrations, if the Consecrations were
done and past long before? No man's Election can be confirmed in England, but by
virtue of the Kings Letters Patents. Therefore the Letters Patents must precede
the Confirmation and Consecration, not follow after ^t three months, or four
months, or six months, and in some of the^ above a year.

And as by the Records of the Chancery, ^o their relation is proved to be a
notorious fable, by all the Ecclesiastical Records; first of their several
and distinct Confirmations, which pursued their Commissions punctually; Then of
their several and distinct Consecrations which pursued their Confirmations
punctually. He who desires ^o see these, may find Authentic Records of them
all, both Confirmations and Consecrations, in the Register of the Arch Bishop
of Canterbury. It is not the forging of one Record that would serve the turn:
Either all these Records must be forged, o^ the Nagges head Ordination is a
silly senseless fable.

Lastly after the Consecration follows the Installement or Inthronisation,
which is to be found in the Register of the Dea^^ and Chapter: And the
Restitution of the new Bishop to his Temporalties by virt^^ of the Kings Writ,
mentioning the Confirmation and oath of fealty to the King, (...) being
temporal things. Observe ho^ every one of these do pursue another^ Arch Bishop
Parkers Commission issue^ December the sixth, his Confirmation followed
December the ninth, his Consecration December the seventeenth, his
Inthronisation forthwith, and the Restitution (...) his temporalties the first
of March ensu^^ing, that is, at the later end of the ver^ next term: But by
their Relation, the Consecration was long before the Election was confirmed,
which can not be; The Letter Patents to license the Confirmation and
Consecration, come out three moneth^ after the Consecration was done, which
(...) incredible. As for the Confirmation, M^ Neale who was their contriver,
knew not what it was. The installement followed three months after the
Consecration, and the Restitution to the Temporalties six months after; which
have no probability.

Thus for the time, next for the place. Their lying Relation says, the elected
Bishops were consecrated at the Nagges head: All the Ecclesiastical Records
say they were consecrated at Lambeth. The Kings Commission injoineth a legal
Consecration according to the form prescribed by law: Such a legal
Consecration ours at Lambeth was; Such a legal Consecration theirs at the
Nagges head was not, neither for the place, nor for the rites, nor for the
essentialls of Consecration. And without good assurance that the Consecration
was legal, neither the person consecrated could have been inthroned, nor made
his oath of fidelity to the King, nor have been restored to his Temporalties:
but he was inthroned, and did his fealty, and was restored to his temporalties,
that is as much as to say, that his Consecration was legally performed at
Lambeth, not illegally at the Nagges head.

Thirdly for the Consecrater. That fa^ulous Relation feineth that there was but
one Consecrater, or at the most two: the authentic Records of the Church of
England testify, that there were four Consecraters. The Letters Patents
require that there should be four Consecraters, and without an authentic
Certificate that there were four Consecraters, the King^ Writ for restitution
had not issued.

They feine that they imposed hands m^tually, Scory upon them and they upon
Scorie: But the Records witness that Scor^^ was solemnly ordained Bishop in
King Edwards time, Reg. Cran. fol. 334.
the thirteenth day of Augu^^ Anno. 1551, by the Arch Bishop of Canterbury, the
Bishop of London and the Susfragan Bishop of Bedford; and needed no^ to be
reordeined at the Nagges head.

Lastly, for the persons consecrated so^ of them feine that all the elected
Bishops and all of them say that many of them, we^^ consecrated together at one
time wi^^ Arch Bishop Parker: But all the Record^ both Civil and
Ecclesiastical do testifies contrary, that they had several Commissions,
several Confirmations, several Consecrations, upon several days, in severa^
months, in several years, several Co^^secraters; as appears most evidently
(...) only by the Authentic Records of the S^ of Canterbury, but also by the
Record^ of the Chancery, And particularly by the several Commissions directed
expressly to ArchBishop Parker, as a Bishop actually consecrated, for the
Consecration of all the rest, the three first of which Commissions or Letters
Patents bear date the eighteenth of December An: 1559, that is the very next
day after ArchBishop Parkers Consecration; for the Confirmation and
Consecration of Grindall, Coxe, and Sands, three of those elected Bishops. He
that doubts of the truth of these Letters Patents, may find them recorded
verbatim, both in the Archbishops Registry, and in the Rolls. If they were
confirmed and consecrated by Archbishop Parker, then they were not consecrated
together with Archbishop Parker, as in that lyng relation is affirmed. And
with this their subsequent Installements and Restitutions do exactly agree.
Either all the Records of England must be false, or this silly fable of the
Nagges head is a prodigious forgery.

Thus we have seen how the Records of England, The seventh Reason.
civil and Ecclesiastical, do contradict this tale of a tub. My seventh
reareason shows how the same Records do confirm and Establish our relation.
We say first (that the Sea of Canterbury being void by the death of Cardinal
Pole, (who died as some say the very same day with Queen Mary, The seventh
reason.
others say the day following,) the Queen granted her conge d'es^ire to the
Deane and Chapter of Canterbury to choose an Archbishop. This is clearl^
proved by the authentic Copy of the cong^ d'eslire itself in the Rolls. Rot.
pa. 6.1. Elis.
Regina dilect^ sibi in Christo Decano and Capitulo Ecclesiae M^tropoliticae
Cantuariensis saluiem etc.

Examinatur RICHARD BROUGHTON.


Secondly we say, that the Deane and chapter having received this license, did
choose Doctor Matthew Parker for their Archbishop. This is apparent by the
Queens Commission for his Confirmation and Restitution, wherein there is this
clause And the said Deane and Chapter, by vir^^^ of our license, have chosen
our beloved in Christ Matthew Parker Professor of Theology, for Archbishop and
Pastor to them and the aforesaid Church, as by their letters. Patent^ directed
to us thereupon it appears more fully.

Thirdly the Queen accepting this Election, was graciously pleased to issue
out two Commissions for the legal Confirmation of the said Election, and
consecrating of the said Archbishop. The former dated the ninth of September
Anno 1559, Directed to six Bishops, Cuthbert Bishop of Durham, Gilbert Bi^hop
of Bath, David Bishop of Peterburough, Anthony Bishop of Landaff, William
Barlow Bishop, and John Scory Bishop, in these words.

Elisabet^ dei gratia Angliae etc. Reverendis in Christo Patribus Cuthberto
Episcopo Dunelmensi, To: Pars 2.1. Elis.
Gilberto Bathoniensi Episcopo, Davidi Episcopo Burgi Sancti Petri, Anthonio
Landavensi Episcopo. VVillelmo Barlo Episcopo, and Iohanni Scory Episcopo,
Salutem. Cum vacant nuper Sede Archi-Episcopali Cantuariensi per mortem
naturalem Domini Reginaldi Pole Cardinalis, ultimi and immediati Archi-Episcopi
and Pastoris ejusdem, ad humilem petitionem Decani and Capituli Ecclesiae
nostrae Cathedralis and Metropoliticae Christi Cantuariensis, eisdem per
literas nostras patentes licentiam concesserimus alium sibi eligendi in
Archiepiscopum and Pastorem Sedis praedictae. Ac iidem Decanus and Capitulum
vigore and obtentu licentiae nostrae praedictae, dilectum nobis in Christo
Magistrum Matthaeum Parker Sacrae Theologiae Professorem sibi and Ecclesie
praedictae elegerint in Archiepiscopum and Pastorem, prout per literas suas
patentes Sigillo eorum communi sigillatas, nobis inde directas, before liquet
and apparet. Nos electionem illam acceptantes, eidem electioni Regium nostrum
assensum adhibuimus pariter and favorem, and hoc vobis tenore praesentium
significamus. Rogantes, ac in fide and dilectione quibus nobis tenemini
firmiter praecipiendo mandantes, quatenus eunde^ Magistrum Matthaeum Parker in
Archepiscopum and Pastorem Ecclesiae Cathedralis and Metropoliticae, Christi
Cantuariensis praedictae, sic ut praefertur electum, electionemque praedictam
confirmare, and eundem Magistrum Matthaeum in Archiepiscopum and Pastorem
Ecclesiae praedictae consecrare, caeteraque omnia and singula peragere, quae
vestro in hac part incumbant officio Pastorali, juxta formam Statutorum in ea
part editorum and provisorum, velitis cum effectu. In cujus rei testimonium
etc. Test Regina apud Redgrave, nono die Septembris Anno Regni Elisabethae
Angliae etc. primo.

Per breve de privato Sigillo.

Examinatur RI: BROVGHTON.


Now if any man desire a reason why this first Commission was not executed, the
best account I can give him is this, That it was directed to six Bishops,
without an [ aut minus, or at the least four of you]: so as if any one of the
six were sick or absent, or refused, the rest could not proceed to Confirm, or
Consecrate. And that some of them did refuse, I am very apt to believe, because
three of them not long after were deprived. But the Reader may note, First that
there were three Protestant Bishops in that First Commission. They who were
such punctual observers of the law of England, that they would not proceed to
consecrate without a fourth, in the vacancy of both the Archiepiscopall Sees,
certainly would never give way to a private profane Ordination at the Nagges
head, by one single Bishop. And secondly, that for all their pretended
intelligence, our English Romish writers are great strangers to the true
passages of those times, knowing nothing but what they hear at Rome, or
Rhemes, or Doway. If it were otherwise we should have heard of this Commission
sooner.

The second Letters Patents which were executed, were dated the sixth of
December following, directed to Anthony Bishop of Landaff, William Barlow
sometimes Bishop of Bath, now Elect Bishop of Chicester, John Scory sometimes
Bishop of Chichester, now Elect Bishop of Hereford, Miles Coverdale sometimes
Bishop of Exceter, Richard Suffragan Bishop of Bedford, John Suffragan Bishop
of The^ford, and John Bale Bishop of Ossory in Ireland, in these words.

Regina etc. Reverendis in Christo Patribus Anthonio Landavensi Episcopo,
Willelmo Barlow quondam Bathoniensi Episcopo, nunc Cicestrensi Electo, Iohanni
Scory quondam Cicestrensi Episcopo, nunc Electo Herefordiensi, Miloni Coverdale
quondam Exoniensi Episcopo, Richardo Bedfordensi, Iohanni Thedfordensi,
Episcopis Suffraganeis, Iohanni Bale Ossoriensi Episcopo, Salutem. Cum vacant
nuper Sede Archiepiscopali Cantuariensi per mortem naturalem Domini Reginaldi
Pole Cardinalis, ultimi and immediati Archiepiscopi and Pastoris ejusdem, ad
humilem petitionem Decani and Capituli Ecclesiae nostrae Cathedralis and
Metropoliticae Christi Cantuariensis, eisdem per Literas nostras. Patentes
licentiam concesserimus alium sibi Eligendi in Archiepiscopum and Pastorem
Sedis praedictae, Ac iidem Decanus and Capitulum vigore and obtentu Licentiae
nostrae praedictae, dilectum nobis in Christo Magistrum Matthaeum Parker Sacrae
Theologiae Professorem, sibi and Ecclesiae praedictae Elegerunt in
Archi-Episcopum and Pastorem, prout per Literas suas patentes nobis inde
directas before liquet and apparet. Nos electionem illam acceptantes, eidem
electioni Regium nostrum assensum adhibuimus pariter and favorem, and hoc vobis
tenore praesentium significamus. Rogantes ac in fide and dilectione quibus
Nobis tenemini firmiter praecipiendo mandantes, quatenus vos aut minus quatuor
vestrum, eundem Matthaeum Parker in Archi-Episcopum and Pastorem Ecclesiae
Cathedralis and Metropoliticae Christi Cantuariensis praedictae sicut
praefertur Electum, electionemque praedictam Confirmare, and eundem Magistrum
Matthaeum Parker in Archi-Episcopum and Pastorem Ecclesiae praedictae
consecrare, Caeteraque omnia and singula peragere, quae vestro in hac part
incumbant officio Pastorali, juxta formam statutorum in ea part editorum and
provisorum, velitis cum effectu. Supplentes nihilominus suprema Authoritate
nostra Regia, ex mero motu and certa Scientia nostris, si quid aut in his quae
juxta mandatum nostrum praedictum per vos fient, aut in vobis, aut vestrum
aliquo, condition, Statu, facultate vestris, ad praemissa perficienda desit
aut deerit eorum, quae per statuta hujus Regni nostri aut per leges
Ecclesiasticas in hac part requiruntur, aut necessaria sunt, temporis ratione
and rerum necessitate id postulante. In cujus Rei etc. Test Regina apud
VVestmonasteriu^ sexto die Decembris, Anno Regni Reginae Elisabeth Angliae etc.
Secundo.

Examinatur. RI: BROUGHTON.


Before I proceed further, to prevent cavills, I must acquainte the Reader,
that the Suffragan Bishop of Bedford is misnamed Richard in the Rolls; by what
mistake or error, after so long time it is folly to inquire. We may Conjecture
how it might easily, and most probably did come to pass: but to say positively
how it did come to pass, whether it was the error of the transcriber, or the
mistake of him who gave the instructions, or it was no fault at all, (he might
have two names, as many have had, and many have and own them severally,) is
not possible. In the Ecclesiastical Register of the Church, he is always
styled by his right name John, throughout all the Acts of the Confirmation and
Consecration of Arch Bishop Parker. Once his name had been written Richard, but
it was corrected, and my friend assures me, that it is the only word in that
long narration which is expunged or interlined; So exact is that Record. This
is certain, his right name was John, as it is in the Register. To this the
Records of his own Consecration, and twenty other Records do bear witness.

But as to the validity of the Act or Ordination, it is not material whether
his name were John or Richard, or both, or neither. So he was truly ordained
himself, and did truly concur in ordeining, it is no matter how he is Styled
in the Commission, or in the Register. Regal Commissions are no essentialls of
Ordination* Notariall Acts are no essentialls of Ordination. The misnaming of
the Baptise^ in a Parish Register does not make void the Baptism. When Popes
do consecrate themselves, (as they do sometimes), they d^ it by the names of
Paul, or Alexander o^ Vrbanus, or Innocentius: yet these are not the names
which were imposed upon them at their Baptismes, or at their Confirmations, but
such names as themselves have been pleased to assume. But to come to more
serious matter.

There are two differences between these two Commissions. The first is an [
aut minus, Or at the least four of you], which clause is prudently inserted
into all Commissions, where many Commissioners are named, least the sickness,
or absence, or neglect of any one or more, might hinder the work. The question
is, why they are limited to four, when the Canons of the Catholic Church
require but three. The answer is obvious, because the Statutes of England do
require four in case one of the Consecraters be not an Arch Bishop, or deputed
by one. Three had been enough to make a valide Ordination, yea to make a
Canonical Ordination; and the Queen might have dispensed with her own laws:
but she would have the Arch Bishop to be ordained both according to the canons
of the Catholic Church, and the known ^awes of England.

The second difference between the two Commissions is this, that there is a
Supplen^es in the later Commission, which is not in the former. [ Supplyng by
our Sovereign authority all defects either in the Execution, or in ihe
Executers of this Commission, or any of them]. The Court of Rome in such like
instruments have ordinarily such dispensative clauses, for more abundant
caution, whether there be need of them or not, to relaxe all sentences
censures, and penalties inflicted either by the law or by the Judge.

But still the question is, to what end was this clause inserted? I answer, it
is en^ enough, if it serve (as the Court of Rome uses it,) for a certain
salve to help any latent impediment, though there be none* A superfluous
clause does not vitiate (...) writing. Some think it might have reference to
Bishop Coverdales side woollo^ gown, which he used at the Consecration toga
lanea talari utebatur. That was uncanonicall indeed, and needed a dispensation
for him that used it, not for him who was consecrated. But this was so slender
a defe^^ and so far from the heart or essence o^ Ordinatio^; especially where
the three other Co^secraters, (which is the canonical number) where formally
and regularly habite^ that it was not worth an intimation und^^ the great seal
of England. This Miles Coverdale had been both validely and legally ordained
Bishop, and had as much power to ordeine as the Bishop of Rome himself. If he
had been Roman Catholic in his ^udgment, he had been declared by Cardinal
Pole as good a Bishop, as either Bon^er, or Thirleby, or any of the rest.

Others think, this clause might have relation to the present condition of
Bishop Barlow and Bishop Scory, who were not yet inthroned into their new
Bishoprics. It might be so, but if it was, it was a great mistake in the
Lawiers who drew up the Commission. The Office and the Benefice of a Bishop are
two distinct things; Ordination is an act of the Key of Order, and a Bishop
uninthroned may ordeine as well as a Bishop inthroned. The Ordination of
Suffragan Bishops, who had no peculiar Bishoprics, was always admitted and
reputed as good in the Catholic Church, (if the Suffragans had Episcopal
Ordination,) as the Ordination of the greatest Bishops in the wolrd.

But since this clause does extend ir self both to the Consecration and the
Consecraters, I am confident that the only ground of it was that same
exception, o^ rather cavil which Bishop Bonner did afterward make against the
legality of Bishop Horns Consecration; which is all that either Stapleton or
any of our Adversaries ha^ to pretend against the legality of the Ordination of
our first Protestant Bishops* that they were not ordained according to the
praescript of our very Statutes.

I have set down this case formerly in my replication to the Bishop of
Chalcedon* But to avoid wrangling, I will put i^ down in the very words of
the Statute* King Edward the Sixth in his time by authority of Parliament,
caused the book of Common Prayer and Administration of Sacraments and other
Rites and Ceremonies in the Church of England, (...) be made and set forth, not
only for or^ uniforme Order of Service, Common Prayer, and Administration of
Sacrament^ to be used whithin this Realm, but also did add and put to the
said book, a very godly Order manner and form, ho^ Archbishops, Bishops,
Priests, Deacons and Ministers, should from time to time be consecrated, made,
and ordered, within this Realm. Afterward it follows, that in the time of
Queen Mary, the several Acts and statutes made in the second, third, fourth,
fifth and sixth years of King Edward, for the authorizing and allowing of the
said book of Common prayer and other the premises, were repealed. Lastly the
Statute adds, that by an Act made in the first year of Queen Elisabeth,
entitled An act for the uniformity of Common prayer and service in the Church,
and administration of Sacraments, the said book of Common Prayer and
Administration of Sacraments, and other the said Orders Rites and Ceremonies
before mentioned, and all things therein contained, is fully stablished and
authorized to be used in all places within the Realm.

This is the very case related by the Parliament. Now the exception of Bishop
Bonner, and Stapleton, and the rest, was this. The book of Ordination was
expressly established by name by Edward the Sixth, And that Act was expressly
repealed by Queen Mary: But the book of Ordination was not expressly restored
by Queen Elisabeth, but only in general terms under the name and notion of
the Book of Common Prayers and administration of Sacraments, and other orders
rites and Ceremonies. Therefore they who were ordained according to the said
form of Ordination in the beginning of Queen Elisabeths time, were not
legally ordained. And those Bishops which had been ordained according to that
form in King Edwards time, though they were legally ordained then, yet they
were not legal Bishops now, because Quee^^ Mary's statute was still in force,
and was not yet repealed.

Is this all? Take courage Reader, Here is nothing that touches the validity
of our Ordination, but only the legality of it* which is easily satisfied.
First I answe^ that Queen Mary's Statute was repeale^ sufficiently, even as to
the book of Ordination; as appears by the very word of the Statute which
repealed it. A^ that the said book, with the order of Service (...) of the
administration of Sacraments rites (...) Ceremonies, shall be after the feast
of St. (...) Baptist next in full force and effect, any thing (...) Queen
Mary's Statute of repeal to the contrary in any wise not withstanding. That
the book of Ordination was a part of this book, and printed in this book in
King Edwards days, besides the express testimony of the Statute in the eighth
of Queen Elisabeth we have the authority of the Canons of the Church of
England, which call it singularly the book of Common Prayer, and of Ordering
Bishops Priests and Deacons. Can. 36
It is our form of prayer upon that occasion, as much as our form of
baptising, or administering the holy Eucharist, or our form of confirming, or
marryng, or visiting the sick.

Secondly, it is also a part of our form of Administration of the Sacraments.
We deny not Ordination to be a Sacrament, though it be not one of those two
Sacraments, which are generally necessary to salvation.

Thirdly, although it were supposed that Ordination were no Sacrament, nor the
book of Ordination a part of the book of Common prayer: yet no man can deny
that it is a part of our Ecclesiastical rites and ceremonies, and under that
notion sufficiently authorized. Lastly, Ejus est legem imerpretari cujus est
condere.
They who have legislative power to make a law, have legislative power to
expound a law. 8. Elc. cap. 1.
Queen Elisabeth and her Parliament made the law, Queen Elisabeth and her
Parliament expounded the law, by the same authority that made it; declaring
that under the book of Common Prayer, the form of Ordination was comprehended
and ought to be understood. And so ended the grand cavil of Bishop Bonner and
Doctor Sapleton and the rest, of the illegality of our Ordination; showing
nothing but this, how apt a drowning cause is to catch hold of every reed,

That the Supplentes or this dispensative clause had Relation to this cavil,
(which as it did break out afterward into an open controversy, so it was then
whispered in corners,) is very evident by one clause in the Statute: that for
the avoiding of all questions and ambiguities that might he objected against
the lawful Confirmations, investing, and Consecrations of any Archbishops,
Bishops etc. the Queen in her Letters Patents had not only used such words as
had been accustomed to be used by King Henry and King Edward, but also diverse
other general words, whereby her Highness by her Supreme power and authority,
has dispensed with all causes and doubts of any imperfection or disability
that could be objected. The end of this clause and that Statute was the same:
And this was the only question or ambiguity which was moved.

Yet although the case was so evident, and was so judged by the Parliament,
that the form of Consecration was comprehended under the name and notion of
the book of Common prayer etc: yet in the indictment against Bishop Bonner, I
do commend the discretion of our Judges, and much more the moderation of the
Parliament. Criminal laws should be written with a beam of the sun, without
all ambiguity.

Lastly, before I leave this third consideration, I desire the Reader to
observe three things with me. First, that this dispensative neither has, nor
can be construed to have any reference to any Consecration that was already
past, or that was acted by Bishop Scory alone; as that silly Consecration at
the Nagges head is supposed to have been.

Secondly, that this dispensative clause does not extend at all to the
institution of Christ, or any essential of Ordination, nor to the Canons of
the universal Church: but only to the Statutes and Ecclesiastical laws of
England. Si quid desit aut deerit eorum quae per Statuta hujus Regni nostri,
aut per leges Ecclesiasticas requiruntur.

Thirdly, that the Commissioners authorized by these Letters Parents to
confirm and consecrate Arch Bishop Parker, did make use of this Supplentes or
dispensative power in the Confirmation of the Election, which is a political
Act, (as by the words of the Confirmation in the next paragraph shall appear,)
but not in the Consecration, which is a purely spiritual act, and belongs
merely to the Key of Order.

Fourthly we say, that by virtue of these Letters Patents of December the
sixth, four of the Commissioners therein named did meet in Bows Church, upon
the ninth day of the same month: and then and there with the advice of the
chief Ecclesiastical Lawiers of the Kingdom, the Deane of the Arches, the
Judges of the Prerogative and Audience, did solemnly confirm the election.
This is proved by the Record of the Confirmation or definitive sentence it
self, in these words.

In Dei nomine, Amen. Nos Willelmus quondam Bathonienfis and VVellensis
Episcopus nunc Cicestrensis Electus, Johannes Scory quondam Cicestrensis
Episcopus nunc Electus Herefordensis, Milo Coverdale quondam Exoniensis
Episcopus, and Johannes Bedford Episcopus Suffraganeus, Mediantibus literis
Commissionalibus Illustrissimae Reginae fidei Defensatricis etc.
Commissionarij, cum hac clausula videlicet [unae cum Iohanne The^fordensi
Suffraganeo and Iohanne Bale Ossoriensi Episcopo], Et etiam cum hac clausula
[Quatenus vos aut ad minus quatuor vestrum], Nec non and hac adjectione
[Supplentes nihil ominus etc.] specialiter and legitime Deputati, etc. Idcirco
nos Commissionarii Regii antedicti, de and cum assensic Iurisperitorum cum
quibus in hac part communicavimus, praedictam Electione^ Suprema Authoritate
dictae Dominae nostrae Reginae nobis in hac part Commissa Confirmamus*
Supple^tes ex Suprema Authoritate Regia, ex mero principis motu and certa
Scientia nobis delegata, quicquid in hac electione fuerit defectum. Tum in his
quae juxta mandatum nobis creditum a nobis factum and processum est, aut in
nobis aut aliquo nostrum, condition, Statu, facultate ad haec perficienda
deest aut deerit. Tum etiam eorum quae per statuta hujus Regni Angliae, aut per
leges Ecelesiasticas in hac part requisita sunt aut necessaria, prout temporis
ratio and rerum praesentium necessitas id postulant, per hanc nostram
sententiam definitivam, sive hoc nostrum finale decretum etc.


I cite this the more largely, that our Adversaries may see what use was made
of the dispensation, whieh they cavil so much against: But in the Consecration
which is an act of the Key of order, they made no use at all of it. This is
likewise clearly proved by the Queens mandate for the restitution of Arch
Bishop Parker to his Temporalties, wherein there is this clause. [ Cui quidem
electioni and personae sic Electae Regium assensum nostrum adhibuimus and
favorem, Rot. pars 14.2. El.
ipsiusque fidelitatem nobis debitam pro dicto Archi-Episcopatu recepimus.]

Fifthly, we say that eight days after the Confirmation, that is to say the
17. of December Anno 1559, the same Commissioners did proceed to the
Consecration of Arch Bishop Parker, in the Archi-Episcopall Chapel at
Lambeth, according to the form prescribed by the Church of England, with
solemn Prayers and Sermon, and the holy Eucharist; at which great numbers of
grave persons communicated with him at that time, [ frequens gravissimorum
hominum caetus.] This is proved evidently by the authentic Records of the
Consecration, as they are still and always have been to be seen, in the
public Registry of the Archi-Episcopall See of Canterbury.

Registrum Reverendissimi in Christo Pa^ris and Domini, Reg. Park. t. 1. f. 2.
Domini Matthaei Parker etc. Principio Sacellum tapetibus ad Orientem
adornabatur, solum vero panno rubro insternebatur, etc. And so first setting
down both how the Chapel was adorned for the Consecration, and what habit
and garments as well the Consecraters as the person who was to be consecrated
did wear, both at the Prayers and Sermon, as likewise at the holy Sacrament
and Consecration, it proceeds to the Consecration itself.

Finito tandem Evangelio, Herefordens^^ Electus, Bedfordensis Suffraganeus, and
Milo Coverdale. Archiepiscopum coram Cicestrensi Electo apud mensam in Cathedra
sedente his verbis adduxerunt, Reverende in Deo Pater hunc virum pium pariter
atque doctum tibi offerimus atque praesentamus, ut Archiepiscopus consecretur.
Postquam haec dixissent, proferebatur ilico regium Diploma sive Mandatum pro
consecratione ArchiEpiscopi, quo per Dominum Doctorem Yale legum Doctorem
perlecto, Sacramentum de Regio primatu sive suprema ejus authoritate tuenda,
juxta statuta primo anno Regni Serenissimae Reginae nostrae Elizabethae edita
and promulgata, ab eodem Archi-Episcopo exigebatur. Quod cum ille solemniter
tactis corporaliter sacris Evangeliis, conceptis verbis praestitisset,
Cicestrensis Electus populum ad orationem hortatus ad Letanias decantandas
Choro respondence se accinxit. Quibus finitis, post questiones aliquot
Archi-Episcopo per Cicestrensem Electum propositas, and post orationes and
suffragia quaedam juxta formam libri authoritate Parliamenti editi apud deum
habita, Cicestrensis, Herefordensis, Suffraganeus Bedfordensis, and Milo
Coverdallus, manibus Archi-Episcopo impositis, dixerunt, Accipe Spiritum
Sanctum, and excitare memineris gratiam Dei quae in te est per manuum
impositionem. Dedit enim nobis Deus Spiritum non timoris, sed Potestatis,
Charitatis, and Sobrietatis, etc.


This is so evident that our Adversaries have nothing to say, but to cry the
Records are forged. Forgery of Records is a grievous crime, and ought to be
manifestly proved, or the accuser to suffer for his Calumny. Let them tell us
who forged them, and when and where they were forged. But they know nothing of
it. Did any of the succeding Proto-No^aries complain that they were forged? or
so much as an under Clerk of the Office, or any man that had once occasion to
view them, and afterward found some change in them?

No such thing. Examine all the Officer^ and Notaries and Clerks living,
whether ever they observed any change in them during their remembrance; And
they will all answer, No. And so would all their predecessors since Archbishop
Parkers time have answered, if they had bee^ put to their Oaths. Who are they
then that accuse them of Forgery? They are the Adversaries of the Church of
England, who never read one word of them, nor know much what belongs to such
Records: Bu^ they wish if they be not forged, that they were forged. What
would you have (...) do? If they could answer them otherwise they would; But
they can not, and the^^fore they cry them down as forged.

It is possible to forge private Acts (...) in a corner: But to forge a
consecration done publicly at Lambeth, in Queen E^^^sabeths time, And to
forge it so early as th^^ was published to the world, is incredibl^ Surely
these Fathers do not know the C^^stomes of the Church, that all things whi^^
are done at public Consecrations, are p^^^sently drawn into Acts by
principal N^^taries, and kept in public Registries, (...) the custody of them
committed to swo^^ Officers. And this practice was not (...) (...) in England
upon this occasion, but ^^th bee^ observed throughout both Provin^^s for time
immemoriall. I should not (...) one Penfull of ink upon an English ^an, who
either does know or ought to ^^ow what credit the law of England does (...) to
these Records: But for the satis^^^tion of strangers who are misled by (...)
bold calumnies, I will take leave for (...) to prove that, which like the
common ^^^nciples of Arts, ought to be taken for ^^anted, and De quo nefas est
dubitare. (...) us try whether they can say more for (...) Vatican Records,
then we can for (...).

For the present, I produce six grounds (...) convince all those who gainsay
them. (...) first is that value and respect which (...) Laws of the Kingdom
do give them, (...) is to allow them to be authentic ^^ofes; Especially in
cases of this nature, ^^^cerning Spiritual Acts belonging to (...) Key of
Order. If a Clerk have lost (...) Letters of Orders, a certificate out (...)
this Registrie, under the Seal of the ^^ch-Bihop, or the hand of the
Protono^^^, is an authentic proof. Shall (...) or three Adversaries, who are
strangers and know little of our affairs, altogethe^ unacquainted with our
Laws and Records, dare without any ground to defa^^ that for forged, which
the Laws of (...) Kingdom do allow for authentic? Either these Records are
authentic, or Christendom never had an authentic Ecclesiastical Record. The
very Act^ of our Synods or Convocations are (...) more undoubted, then these
are.

My second proof is taken from (...) credit of the Public Notaries, who (...)
testify this individual Consecration, (...) draw it up into Acts. The
Testimony (...) two public Notaries, for matter of (...) makes full proof
over all Europe: but (...) at least four Public Notaries we^^ present at this
Consecration, and testif^^ ^he truth of these Acts; Whereof two (...) them were
the Principal Public Notari^^ in England, that is, Anthony Huse proto^^^tary
of the Sea of Canterbury, and (...) Argall Registerer of the Prerogative (...)
assisted in actuating this Consecration (...) Thomas Willet and John Iucent
Public N^^taries. Who can make doubt of a m^^^ter of fact so attested?

But is it further Observable that these four public Notaries were the same
who did draw Cardinal Poles Consecration into Acts, and attest them. Either
let ^hese Fathers deny that Cardinal Pole was Consecrated, or let them grant
that Archbishop Parker was Consecrated, Aut u^ramque negate, aut u^rumque
conced^^e. There are the same Proofs for the one and for the other. There
needs no more to be done to satisfy any man that has eyes in his head, but
to compare the one Register with the other,

We owe a third ground to the Queens extraordinary care, who was so solicitous
least some Circumstance in the Political part might be defective in some
punctilio of law, by reason of the frequent change of the Statutes in the
reigns of her Father, Brother, Sister, and Her self, that she caused the
Letters Patents to be carefully perused by six of our most eminent Lawiers, who
all with one unanimous consent did certify, that the Commission was good in
law, and that the Consecraters might proceed legally to Consecration upon it;
which Certificate subscribed with their own hands is preserved in the
Records. So if these Records be forged not only the Acts of the Principal
No^^ries of England, but also the hands of the Principal Lawiers of England
(...) be forged for company, which is incredible.

The fourth ground is irrefragable, taken from the testimony and authority
(...) the Parliament of England, in the eight^ year of Queen Elisabeth, that
was about six years after this Consecration wa^ acted; which speaking of the
great car^ was taken in and about the Elections, Confirmations, and
Consecrations of Archbishop Parker, and the rest of those fir^^ Bishops in
Queen Elisabeths time, for proof thereof refers us to these very Records,
[ As the Records of her Majesty's said Fathers and Brothers time, and also her
own time, 8. El. c. 1.
will mo^^ plainly testify and declare]. Does the Parliament refer subjects
to Records which are forged? You see the contrary, that it mentions them as
authentic, undoubted, undeniable proofs of what was really done.

To this unanswerable reason, these Fathers pretend to give two answers: But
they are such as are able to satisfy any man, that no answer is to be
expected. The first answer is in their printed book page 16, that the word
Records is but a general term. As if truth ought not to be regarded in
generals; as well as in particulars. Yet the terms which are added to
Records, that is, [ of her Fathers time, her brothers time, and her time], are
no general but restreining terms.

They add, that it is a word of course, which men do rather suppose then
examine, when they mention things that have been practiced in former times.
What latitude these Fathers may allow their Confitents in case Theology for
words of Course, I do not now examine; but what have words of Course to do in a
printed law? They might as well tell the Parliament in plain terms, that they
lied, or that they spoke they knew not or regarded not what: as tell them that
their words were but words of course. If these words of course were not true,
why did not ^hey confute them then, when all things were fresh in men's
memories? No man can believe that they did forbear out of affection to the
Parliament, but because they could not then oppose so evident truth.

Yet they conclude it to be evident, that there were no such Records of
Parkers consecration. This is more then words of course, to charge the
Parliament directly with an untruth. But how is it evident that there were no
such Records? because they were never produced to those Roman Catholic
Doctors, who desired to see some evidence of Parkers Consecration. This is
wonderful, They were cited in printe, they were alleged by the Parliament in
the Public Laws of the Kingdom, of which no man can plead ignorance; and
yet they tell us they were never produced. But to satisfy their very
pretensions. Their exception^ in those days were of another nature, either
against our English Ordinall, or against the Legality of our Bishops; which
later exception has been answered already, and the former shall be answered i^
due place. The reason why Bishop Jewel, and Bishop Horn, and others did not
ci^^ these Records more expressly, was no dread at all least they should be
found to be counterfeit, but because they had no need to cite them, to answer
any thing that was objected against them. Either the Roman Catholic writers of
those days were false to their own interest, to smother a thing which (if it
had been true) had been so much to their advantage; which no rational man can
imagine: Or the Nagges head Ordination was altogether unknown and unheard of
in those days; which is most certain.

But now the Fathers change their note, could they not be forged as well in
Queen Elisabeths time as in King James his reign? This is to blow hot and
cold with the same breath. Before they demanded, how it was possible they
should be extant then and not produced? Now they tell us, they might be extant
then, and yet forged: Nay, such a dexterity they have in turning all which they
touch into gold, that they make this very supposition that they were extant
then, to be a proof against us that they were forged. Therefore they were not
produced, because in Queen Elisabeths time many were living, who would have
proved them to be forged.

Observe first, what honor and respect our Countrymen do bear to our Princes
and Parliaments united. Before they did as good as gave them the lie, And now
they make them at the least Accessaries to forgery, so far as to avouch and
justify forged Records. Secondly observe, with what confidence and conscience
they say that these Records were never produced: And yet confess that they
were cited in Printe, and alleged in our very Statutes. If Bishop Jewel and
Bishop Horn had cited them, (as they would have cited them if they had had
occasion), they could have done no more then was done. Did any man upon this
publication go about to convince them of forgery? No I warrant you, The case
was too plain to be convinced. The Parliament, and the book of the life's of
the seventy Arch Bishops of Canterbury printed by John Day Anno 1572. have
spoiled the Fathers Arguments, [ They were not produced, therefore they were
forged]* and furnished us with a demonstrative proof of the contrary. They
were produced and cited in printe, and neither convinced, nor so much as
accused of forgery; Therefore they were not forged.

It seems this answer did not satisfy the Fathers themselves: and therefore
the one of them has adds a second answer in the margent, with his pen, in
these words; The Act of Parliament relates only to the Records of the Queens
Letters Patents, and not to the Records of the Bishops Consecration or
Ordination. They say that gloss is accursed which corrupts and Contradicts
the text, as this gloss does egregiously. The Statute speaks expressly, of
the Records of Elections and Confirmations and Consecrations, which are all of
them Ecclesiastical Acts, and none of them Recorded in the Rolls of Chancery,
or any other civil Court of Records, but only in the Ecclesiastical
Registers of the Archbishops, Deanes and Chapiters respectively. This answer
is a groundless evasion.

My fifth ground to prove that these Records were not forged, is taken from
that book of the life's of the seventy succeding Archbishops of Canterbury,
printed in London in the year 1572; wherein the Author, (that was Arch Bishop
Parker himself,) having described the Confirmations and Consecrations of Bishop
Grindall, Bishop Sands, Bishop Jewel, Bishop Horn, and all the rest of those
first Protestant Bishops, he adds in the margent, Hae confirmationes and
consecrationes in Registris apparent: These confirmations and consecrations de
appear in the Registers. Then the Registers were then extant, and not only
extant but publicly printed, whilst all things were fresh in men's memories,
yet no man did or durst except against the truth of them; So free they were not
only from corruption, but from suspicion.

The sixth and last ground to prove that the Records were not forged, is taken
from the agreement and concurrence of our civil Records (which no man ever
doubted of) with our Ecclesiastical Registers. We have seen the Queens
Letters Pate^ts, directed to seven other Bishops, for the confirmation and
consecration of Archbishop Parker, dated the sixth of December anno 1559;
Therefore upon the sixth of December 1559 he was neither Confirmed nor
Consecrated. We have seen the Ecclesiastical Records, how by virtue of those
very Letters Patents, he was confirmed upon the ninth day, and consecrated upon
the seventeenth day of the same Month. We find three other Letters Patents,
directed to Archbishop Parker himself as a Consecrated Bishop, for the
Confirmation and Consecration of other Bishops; namely Richard Coxe, Edmund
Grindall, and Edwin Sands, dated the Eighteenth of December, that is the very
next day after his consecration: Therefore he was then consecrated. And this
agrees exactly with the Ecclesiastical Register.

Elisabeth Dei gratia Angliae etc. Reverendissimo in Christo Patri and Domino,
Matthaeo Archi-Episcopo Cantuariensi, totius Angliae Primati and Metropolitano,
etc, Salutem. Rogantes, ac in fide and dilectione quibus nobis tenemini
firmiter praecipiendo mandantes, quatenus eundem magistrum Edmundum Grindall in
Episcopum and Pastorem Ecclesiae Cathedralis Divi Pauli London praedictae sic
ut praefertur Electum, Electionemque praedictam Confirmare, and eundem
magistrum Edmundum Grindall in Episcopum and Pastorem Ecclesiae praedictae
consecrare, ceteraque omnia and singula peragere, quae vestro in hac part
incumbunt Officio pastorali etc. Test Regina apud west monasterium, decimo
Octavo die Decembris, Anno Reginae Elizabeth Angliae etc. secundo.

Examinatur per RICH: BROUGHTON.


Consimilia Brevia (Eisdem forma and verbis, mutatis solummodo Mutandis)
directa sunt cidem Mattbaeo Archi-Episcopo Cantuariensi, pro confirmatione
Electionis, and consecratione Richardi Cox Sacrae Theologiae Professoris in
Episcopum Eliensem, Et Edwini Sands sacra Theologiae Professoris in Episcopum
VVigornensem, Omnia sub dato praedicto and in Rotulo supradicto.

Examinatur per RICHARDUM BROUGHTON,


There cannot be a clearer proof in the world, to prove that Archbishop
Parker was neither confirmed nor Consecrated upon the sixth of December Anno
1559. and that he was both Confirmed and Consecrated, and commanded to
Consecrate others, upon the eighteenth of the same month. Neither does the
King, or Church, or Laws of England, take notice of any man as a true
Archbishop or Bishop, until hands be imposed upon him, but always with this
addition [ Elect] as in the book of Ordination, Ego I N. Ecclesiae atque sedis
N. Elecius Episcopus profi^eor* And in the letany, Te Rogamus ut huic fratri
nostro Electo Episcopo Benedicionem and gratiam ^uam largiri digneris.

Lastly, by the laws of England, a Bishop can not be admitted to do his homage
or swear fealty for his Bishopric, nor be restored to his Temporalties,
until he be legally Consecrated: But it is Apparent by the Queens Letters
Patents, dated the one and twentieth day of March following, (that was at the
end of Hilary term, as speedily as could be) he had done his homage, and was
then restored to his Temporalties. Which proves clearly, that he was legally
Consecrated, that is to say, according to the Register. Such a perpetual
agreement there is, between our Ecclesiasticall-Recordes and our Civil
Records.

CHAPT. V. The eighth ninth and tenth reasons against that fabulous relation,
from the Authority of our Statute, the book of the life's of the Archbishops
of Canterbury, and all sorts of witnesses.
The eighth reason.
THe eighth reason to prove the Nagges-head Ordinatio^ to be a fable, is taken
from the authority of the Statute in the eighth year of Queen Elisabeth,
which is thus entitled. An Act declaring the manner of making and Consecrating
of the Archbishops and Bishops of this Realm, to be good lawful and perfect.
[An Act declaring] not enacting or making; [the manner of making and
Consecrating the Arch Bishops and Bishops of this Realm,] that is, those in
the beginning of Queen Elisabeths time, as appears by the whole body of the
Act; [ to be good lawful and perfect. The title of the Statute alone is
sufficient to confute this fable: But there is much more in the body of the
Statute; As where it approves the making and consecrating of the same Arch
Bishops and Bishops to be duly and orderly done, according to the laws of
this Realm. If it was done duly and orderly according to the laws of this
Realm, then it was not done at the Nagges head, nor after such a silly
ridiculous manner, as these Fathers do relate it. That form differs from our
form in all things. In the Consecrater, or Minister of the Consecration: We
must have three Bishops at the least, there was but one. In the matter: Our
matter is Imposition of hands, their matter was the laying the Bible upon the
head or shoulders of the person Consecrated. In the form: Our form is receive
the holy Ghost etc, Their form was, Take thou Authority to preach the word of
God sincerely.

The Statute proceeds, that they were elected made and consecrated Arch
Bishops and Bishops, according to such order and form, and with such
Ceremonies in and about their Consecrations, as were allowed and set forth by
the said Acts Statutes and Orders, annexed to the said book of Common prayer
before mentioned. This is plain enough. If the Parliament say truly, then
they were Consecrated in a Church, not in a Tavern; not according to the
Brainsick whi^sies of a self conceited Fool, or rather the ludibrious devise
of an Archenemy, but according to the form prescribed by the Church and
Kingdom. The Parliament had more reason to know the truth then these Fathers,
for there were personally present both the persons who did consecrate, and the
persons who were consecrated, and many Lords and Gentlemen who were eye
witnesses of the consecration. Choose Reader, whether tho^ wilt trust the tale
of a single, obscure, malicious spy, tatling in a corner: or the asseveration
of the Parliament of England, i^ the face of the sun, published to the world in
print.

The Parliament testifies further, that i^ is and may be very evident and
apparent that no cause of scruple ambiguity or doubt (...) or may justly be
objected, against the said Elections Confirmations or Consecrations. Do they
think the Parliament would have give^ such a testimony for the Nagges head
Consecrations. And so they conclude, the all persons which had been or should
be orde^^ or consecrated, after the form and order presc^^bed in the said
English Ordinall, were very deed, and by authority of Parliament were declared
and enacted to be rightly Ordered and Consecrated. The scope of the Parliament
and of this Act, was to confirm the consecration of Arch Bishop Parker and the
rest of the Bishops, and to free them from ca^ills and objections: But they
confirm no Ordination at the Nagges head, neither can their words be extended
any way to such a ridiculous Consecration: Therefore the Ordination of Arch
Bishop Parker and the rest, was no Nagges head Ordinatio^.

My ninth reason to prove that Nagges-head Relation fabulous and counterfeit,
is taken from the Testimony of that book formerly mentioned, of the life's of
the seventy Ar^h Bishops of Canterbury; wherein the Consecrations of Arch
Bishop Parker and all the rest are particulary related. That which was
published to the world in print, above thirty years before the death of Queen
Elisabeth, was not lately forged: But the legal Ordinations of Archbishop
Parker and the rest, according to the Register, was published to the world in
print, above thirty years before the death of Queen Elisabeth. Again, that
which was published to the world in print with the allowance of Arch Bishop
Parker, or rather by Arch Bishops Parker himself, was not intended by Arch
Bishop Parker to be smothered o^ concealed. Men do not use to publish their
forgeries in print; especially so soon, and of such public actions, whilst
there are so many eye witnesses living. That the Relation was not confuted,
That the Author was never called to an account for it, That no man stood up
against the Registers, nor on the behalf of the Nagg^^head Ordination in those
days, That (...) Neale was so tame to endure the lie in prie^ and all his
party so silent, at that tim^ when the truth might so easily have bee^
discovered, as if it had been written with ^ beam of the sun, (as it was
indeed); is (...) evident proof that our Relation is undeniable, and the
Relation which their Fathers make is but a drowsy dream^, which could not
endure the light of the sun.

The tenth reason.
The tenth and last reason to prove on Relation true and theirs fabulous, is
taken from all sorts of witnesses, ours and theirs indifferently. Mr Mason
reckoned up seven of our writers, who had justi^^ed the legality of our
Ordinations, and ^ited our Registers as authentic Recor^es, before himself;
Bishop Jewel, Bishop Hall, Bishop Goodwin, Doctor ^ollings, Mr, Camden, Mr.
Shelden, and one who was then living when this ^uestion was so hotely debated
in King ^unes his time, and had been an eye-wit^esse of Arch Bishop Parkers
Consecra^^ons at Lambeth, that was the Earl of ^ottingham. One that was, well
stored ^ith our English writers in Queen Elisabeths time, might add many
more: ^ut that can not well be expected from me (...) this distance.

We may produce as many of theirs, ^ho have confessed or been convinced of
(...) truth of Arch Bishop Parkers Conse^^ation. First Mr. Clerk, whose Father
^as Register to Cardinal Pole in his Le^^ntine Court, and he himself an
Actu^^y under him, when Theophilus Higgins (...) out of England to St. Omars,
or ^^oway, (I remember not well whether). ^here he met with this Mr. Clerk,
^ho falling into discourse with him ^^ncerning his Reasons why he had forsaken
the Church of England, Mr Higgins told him, that one of them (...) that saying
of St. Hierome, It is no Church which has no Priests; reflecting upon thi^
Nagges head Consecration. Mr. Clerk approved well of his Caution, because
(...) dubiis tutior pars sequenda: but withal (...) wished, that what their
Authors had written concerning that point, could be man good; confessing that
he himself was (...) England at that time, (The witness do^^ not positively
remember whether at t^^ Consecration or not.) But Mr, Cler^^ said that he
himself was present when (...) Advocate of the Arches, whom the Quee^ sent to
peruse the Register after the Consecration, and to give her an account whether
it was performed Canonically, retur^^ her this answer, that he had peruse the
Register, and that no just excepti^^ could be made against the Consecration But
(he said) something might h^^ been better, particularly that Bish^^ Coverdale
was not in his Rochet, (...) he assured her, that could make no ^^^fect in the
Consecration. Here (...) have, if not an eye witness, yet at least (...) ear
witness in an undoubted manner, of^^ legal Consecration* and of the truth of
the Register, and of the judgment of the Advocate of the Arches, concerning
the Canonicalnesse of the Consecration. Thus much Mr. Higgins was ready to make
faith of whilst he was living, and Mr. Barwick a person of very good credit,
from him of at this present.

The second witness is Mr. Higgins himself, who coming afterward into
England had a desire to see the Register, and did see it, and finding those
express words in it [ Milo vero Coverdallus non nisi togalanea talari
^^ebatur,] and remembering withal what Mr. Clerk had told him, whereas the
Canonical garments of the rest of the Bishops are particularly described: he
was so fully satisfied of the truth of the Consecration, and lawful succession
of our English Bishops, that he said he never made doubt of it afterward.

My third witness is Mr. Heart, a stiff Roman Catholic, but a very ingenuous
person, who having seen undoubted copies of Doctor Reynolds his Ordination by
Bishop Freake, and of Bishop Freakes Consecration by Arch Bishop Parker, and
lastly of Arch Bishop Parkers own, Consecration: he was so fully satisfied
with it, that he himself did raze out all that part of the conference between
him and Doctor Reinoldes.

My fourth witness is Father Oldcorne the Jesuit. This testimony was urged by
me in my treatise of Schism in these words. These authentic evidences being
upon occasion produced, out of our Ecclesiastical Courts, and deliberately
perused and viewed by Father Oldcorne the Jesuit, he both confessed himself
clearly convinced of that whereof he had so long doubted, (that was the
legitimate succession of Bishops and Priests in our Church) and wished heartily
toward the reparation of the breach of Christendom, that all the world were
so abundantly satisfied as he himself was; blaming us as partly guilty of the
gross mistake of many, for not having publicly and timely made known to the
world, the notorious falsehood of that empty, but far spread aspersion against
our succession. To this the Bishop of Chalcedon, who was better acquainted with
the passages of those times in England, then any of those persons whom these
Fathers style of undoubted credit, makes this confession. That father Oldcorne
being in hold for the powder treason, and judging others by himself, Survey c.
9. p. 122.
should say, those Registers to be authentic, is no marvel,

A fifth witness is Mr. Wadsworth, who in an Epistle to a friend in England
does testify, that before he left England he read the Consecration of Arch
Bishop Parker in our Registers. This made him so moderate above his fellows,
that whereas some of them tell of five, and the most of them of fifteen, which
were consecrated at the Nagges head, In Ep. ad ami. n. 5.
he says only that the consecration of the first Protestant Bishop was
attempted there, but not accomplished* If it were only attempted not
accomplished, then the Nagges head Ordination is a fable. But it falls out
very unfortunately for Mr Wadsworths attempt, that of all those first
Protestant Bishops, whose elections were all confirmed at Bows Church about
that time, (And it might be all of them, it is very probable ^undry of them had
a confirmation dinner at the Nagges head) not one was confirmed in person, but
all of them by their Proxies: Arch Bishop Parker by Doctor Bullingham, Bishop
Barlow and Bishop Scory by Walier Jones Bachelour of Law, Bishop Grindall by
Thomas Hink Doctor of Law, Bishop Cox by Edward Gascoine, Bishop Sands by
Thomas Bentham, etc; as appears by the authentic Records of their
confirmation. Bishops are ordinarily confirmed by Proxy, but no man was ever
consecrated, no man was ever attempted to be consecrated by Proxy.

The four next witnesses are Mr. Collimo^* Mr. Laithwait, Mr. Faircloth, and
Mr. Leake, two of them of the same order with these Fathers; to whom the
ArchBishop of Canterbury caused these Records to be showed, in the presence of
himself, the Bishops of London, Durham, Ely, Bath and Wells, Lincoln, and
Rochester. They viewed the Register, they turned it over and over, and perused
it as much as they pleased, and in Conclusion gave this sentence of it, that
the book was beyond exception. To say, that afterward they desired to have
the Records into prison, to peruse them more fully, is ridiculous. Such
Records may not go out of the presence of the Keeper. But these Fathers may
see them as much as they list in the Registri^, if they seek for satisfaction,
not altercation.

Lastly Bishop Bonner had a suite with Bishop Horn, and the issue was whether
Bishop Horn were l^gally consecrated Bishop; upon that ^c^uple, or rather
cavil, which I have formerl^ mentioned. If Mr. Neale who they say was Bishop
Bonners Chaplein, and ^ent on purpose to spy what the ^ishops did, could have
proved the ordination of Bishop Horn at the Nagges head, he might not only
have cleared his Master, but have turned Bishop Horn deservedly out of his
Bishopric. But he was loath to forfeit his cares, by avouching such a palpaple
lie. The Nagges head Ordination was not talked of in those days. How should
it, before it was first devised? Mr. Sanders dedicated a book to ArchBishop
Parker, which he called the Rock of the Church: If the Nagges head Ordination
had been a serious truth, how would he have triumphed over the poor
Archbishop?

To conclude, ^f faith ought to be given to concurring Records Ecclesiastical
and civil, of the Church and Kingdom of England, If a full Parliament of the
whole Kingdom deserve any credit, If the testimony of the most eminent public
Notaries in the Kingdom, If witnesses without exception, If the silence, or
contradiction, or confession of known Adversaries, be of any force, If the
strongest presumtions in (...) world may have any place, that men in their
right wits will not ruin themselves wilfully* without necessity, or hope of
advantage, If all these grounds put together do over balance the clandestine
Relation of a single malicious Spy, without either oath, or any other
obligation: then I hope every one who reads these grounds will conclude with
me, that the Register of the Church of England is beyond all exception, and the
malicious Relation of the Nagges head Ordination, a very tale of a tub, and no
better; so full of Ridiculous folly in it self, that I wonder how any prudent
man can relate it without laughter.

Who told this to Bluet? Neale. Who told this to Haberley? Neale. Who told it
to the rest of the Prisoners at Wisbich? Neale. Only Neale. Who suggested it
to Neale? The Father of lies. Neale made the fable, Neale related it in
Corners, long after the time it was pretended to be acted. If his Master
Bishop Bonner had known any thing of it, we had heard of it long before. That
the Archbishop should leave Lambeth to come to London to be consecrated; That
he should leave all those Churches in London, which are immediately under his
own Jurisdiction, to choose a common tavern, as the fittest place for such a
work; That Bishop Bonner being deprived of his Bishopric, and a prisoner in
London, should send Neale from Oxford, and send a command by him to one over
whom he never had any Jurisdiction; That the other Bishop being then a
Protestant should obey him being a Roman Catholic, when there were so many
Churches in the City to perform that work in, where the Bishop of London
never pretended any Jurisdiction; That these things should be treated, and
concluded, and executed all at one meeting; that Bishop Bonner did foresee it
would be so, And command his servant to attend there until he see the end of
that business. That the Bishops being about such a Clandestine work, should
suffer a known enemy to stay all the while in their company, is incredible. If
Neale had feined that he had heard it from one of the Drawers boys, it had
deserved more credit, then this silly, improbable inconsistent Relation; which
looks more like an heap of fictions made by several Authors by starts,
then a continued Relation of one man, Quicquid ostendas mihi sic incredulus odi.


CHAPT. VI. The Nagg^s head Ordination is but a late devise. Of the Earl of
Nottingham, Bishop Bancroft, Doctor Stapleton* the Statute 8. El. 1. And the
Queens disp^nsation.
NOw having laid our grounds, in the next place let us see what the Fathers
have to say further for themselves. This stor^ of the Nagges head was first
cno^radicted b^ Mason in the year 1613: yet so weakly and family that the
a^ten^ive Reader may easily perceive he feared to be caught in a lie. First,
the Fathers seem to argue after this manner; Many Athenian writers did mention
the Cretan Bulls and Minotaurs and Labyrinth, but no Cretan did write against
them, therefore those ridiculous Fables were true. Rather, the Cretans laughed
at their womannish ^evenge, to think to repair themselves for a beating, with
scolding and lying: such ridiculous Fictions ought to be entertained with
scorn and contempt, Spreta exolescunt, si irascaris agnita videmur. Secondly,
it might be (for any thing I know to the contrary) Mr. Mason was the first who
dissected this lie, and laid the falsity of it open to the world: but he was
not the first who avouched and justified the Canonical Consecration, and
personal Succession of our Protestant Bishops, which is the same thing in
effect; the Bishop of Hereford did it before him, and Doctor Reynolds before
the Bishop of Hereford, and he that writ the life of Archbishop Parker before
Doctor Reynolds, and the Parliament before him that writ Arch Bishop Parkers
life, and the public Registers of the Church before the Parliament.

Thirdly, they would make us believe that this Fable was ancient, and published
to the world from the beginning of Queen Elisabeths time in print, and
unanswered by the Protestants until the 13, of King James: but there is no
such thing. For their credit, let them produce one Author that mentions it
in the beginning of Queen Elisabeths time, or if they cannot do that, for
forty years after, that is, before the year 1600: or otherwise the case is
plain that it is an upstart lie, newly coined about the beginning of King James
his time; the Fathers would not have us answer it before it was coined, or
before it was known to us.

Where they say that Mr, Mason did handle this Controversy weakly and faintly,
they know they do him wrong: He has so thrashed their Authors, Fusherbert,
and Fitz-Simon, and Holywood, and Constable, and Kellison, and Champney, that
the cause has wanted a Champion eversince, until these Fathers took up the
Bucklers. But whereas they add, that Mr. Mason was afraid to be convinced by
some aged persons that might then be living, and remember what passed in the
beginning of Queen E^isabeths reign; is so far from truth, that Mr. Mason
names a witness beyond all exception, that was invited to Arch Bishop Parkers
Consecration at Lambeth, as being his Kinsman, and was present there, The Earl
of Notting^am Lord High Admiral of England.

Why did none of their Authors go to him, or employ some of their Friends to
inquire of him? The case is clear, they were more afraid of Conviction, and
to be caught in a lie, then Mr. Mason: who laid not the Foundation of his
Discourse upon loose prittle-prattle, but upon the Firm Foundation of Original
Records.

They say, in the year 1603, none of the Protestant Clergy durst call it a
fable, as some now do. I am the man, I did call it so, I do call it so. Such a
blind relation as this is, of a business pretended to be acted in the year
1559, being of such consequence, as whereupon the succession of the Church of
England did depend, and never published until after the year 1600, as if the
Church of England had neither Friends nor Enemies; deserves to be styled a
Tale of a Tub and no better.

They add, Bancroft Bishop of London being demanded by Mr. William Alabaster,
how Parker and his Colleagues were consecrated Bishops? ^nsvvered, he hoped
that in Case o^ ne^essity a Priest (alluding to Scory, might ordein Bishops.
This answer of his was objected in Print by Holywood, against him and all the
English Clergy in the year 1603* not a word replied, Bancroft himself being
then living. And why might not Holywood be misinformed of the Bishop of London,
a^ well as you yourselves were misinformed of the Bishop of Durham? This is
certain he could not allude to Bishop Scory, wh^ was consecrated a Bishop in
the reign of Edward the sixth, as by the Records of those times appears;
unless you have a mi^^ to accuse all Records of Forgery. If you have any thing
to say against Bishop Sc^ryes Consecration, or of any of them who joined in
Ordeining Arch Bishop Parker, spare it not, we will not seek help of (...) Act
of Parliament to make it good.

In sum, I do not believe a word (...) what is said of Bishop Bancroft, sub
mod^^ it i^ here set down, nor that this Accusation did ever come to the
knowledge of (...) prudent Prelate; if it did, he had great^^ matters to
trouble his head withal, the^ Mr. Holywords bables: but if ever such a a
question was proposed to him, it may be after a clear answer to the matter of
Fact he might urge this as argumentum ad hominem; that though both Bishop Scory
and Bishop Coverdale had been but simple Priests, (as they were complete
Bishops), yet joining with Bishop Barlow and Bishop Hodgskings, two undoubted
Bishops (otherwi^e Gardener and Bonner and Tunstall and Thurleby and the rest
were no Bishops,) the Ordination was as Canonical, as for one Bishop and two
Mitred Abbats to consecrate a Bishop (which you allow in case of Necessity), or
one Bishop and two simple Presbyters to consecrate a Bishop by Papal
Dispensation. So this question will not concern us at all, but them very much,
to reconcile themselves to themselves. They teach that the matter and form of
Ordination are essentialls of Christ's own Institution, They teach that it is
grievous Sacrilege to change the matter of this Sacrament, They teach that the
matter of Episcopal Ordination is Imposition of hands of three Bishops, upon
the person consecrated: and yet with them one Bishop and two Abbats, or one
Bishop and two simple Priests extraordinarily by Papal dispensation, may
ordein Bishops. The essentialls of Sacraments do consist in indivisibili, once
Essential always Essential, whether ordinarily, or extraordinarily whether
with dispensation or without. So this Question whether a Priest in case of
Necessity may ordein Bishops, does concern them much, but us not at all. But
for my part I believe the whole Relation is feined, for so much as concerns
Bishop Bancroft.

They add, or the one of them, I have spoken with both Catholics and
Protestants, that remember near 80. years, and acknovvledge that so long they
have heard the Nagges head story related as an undoubted truth. Where I wonder?
sooner in Rome or Rhemes or Doway, then in England, and sooner in a Corner then
upon the Exchange. You have heard from good Authors of the Swans singing, and
the Pellicans pricking of her Breast with her bill: but you are wiser then to
believe such groundless Fictions. I produce you seven of the ancient Bishops
of England, some of them near an 100. years old, who do testify that it is a
groundless Fable: yet they have more reason to know the right value of our
Ecclesiastical Records, and the truth of our affairs, then any whom you
convers^ withal*

The Authors proceed, This Narration of the Consecration at the Nagges head,
have I taken out of Holywood, Constable, and Doctor Champnies works. They
heard it from many of the ancient Clergy, who were Prisoners for the
Catholic Religion in Wysbich Castle, as Mr. Blewet, Doctor Watson, Bishop of
Lincoln, and others. These had it from the said Mr. Neale and other Catholics
present at Parkers Consecration in the Nagges head, as Mr. Constable affirms
Here is nothing but hearsay, upon hearsay, such Evidence would not pass at a
trial for a lock of Goats wool. Holywood and the rest had it from some of the
Wisbich Prisoners: and the Wisbich Prisoners heard it from Mr. Neale and others.

What others? had they no names? did Bishop Bonner send more of his Chapleins
then one to be Spectators of the Consecration, and they who were to be
consecrated permit them being Adversaries to continue among them, during the
Consecration, supposed to be a Cla^de^^ine Action. It is not credible, without
a Pl^^ between Neale and the Host of the Nagges head, to put him and his
fellows for that day into Drawers habits, least the Bishops should discover
them. Here, is enough said to disgrace this Narration for ever, that the first
Authors that published it to the world, did it after the year 1600; until
then it was kept close in Lavander, Bishop Wa^son lived splendidly with the
Bishops of Ely and Rochester, at the time of Archbishop Parkers Consecration,
and a long time after, before he was removed to Wisbich Castle. If there had
been an^ such thing really acted, and so notoriously known, as they pretend,
Bishop Wa^s^^ and the other Prisoners, must needs ha^^ known it long before
that time, when Mr. Neale is supposed to have brought the^ the first news of
it. The who^e story's composed of Inconsistences. That which quite spoileth
their story, is that Arch Bishop Parker was never present at any (...) these
Consecrations, otherwise calle^ Confirmation Dinners: but it may be (...) merry
Host showed Mr. Neale Docto^ Bullingham for Arch Bishop Parker, and told him
what was done in the withdrawing room, which (to gain more credit to his
Relation) he feigued that he had seen, out of pure zeal.

Howsoever, they say the Story was divulged to the great grief of the newly
Consecrated, yet being so evident a truth they durst not contradict it. We must
suppose that these Fathers have a Privilege to know other men's hearts, but let
that p^sse. Let them tell us how it was divulged by word or writing, when and
where it was divulged whilst they were newly consecrated, who divulged it and
to whom? If they can tell us none of all this, it may pass for a great
presumption, but it cannot pass for a proof,

But they say, that not only the Nullity of the Consecration, but also the
illegality of the same was objected in Print against them not long after, by
that famous writer Doctor Stapleton and others. We look upon Doctor Stapleton,
as one of the most Rational heads that your Church has had since the
separation: but speak to the purpose Fathers, did Doctor Stapleton print one
word of the Nagges head Consecration. You may be sure he would not have balked
it, if there had been any such thing, but he did balke it because there was no
such thing. No, no, Doctr. Stapletons pretended illegality was upon another
ground, because he dreamed that King Edwards Statute was repealed by Queen
Mary, and not restored by Queen Elisabeth, for which we have an express Act of
Parliament against him in the point: and his supposed invalidity was because
they were not consecrated ritu Romano. If you think Doctor Stapleton has said
any thing that is material, to prove the invalidity or nullity of our
Consecration, take your bows and arrows and shoot over his shafts again,
and try if you do not meet with satisfactory answers, both for the Institution
of Christ, and the Canons of the Catholic Church, and the Laws of England.

You say, Parker and the rest of the Protestant Bishops, not being able to
answer the Catholic arguments against the invalidity of their Ordination etc.
Words are but wind. The Church of England wanted nor Orthodox Sons enough to
cope with Stapleton and all the rest of your Emissaries: nor to cry down the
illegal and extravagant manner of it at the Nagges head, How should they cry
down, that which never had been cried up in those days? We condemn, that form
of Ordination which you feign to have bee^ used at the Nagges head, as
illegal, and extravagant, and (which weighs more then both of them) invalid,
as much as yourselves.

They were forced to beg an act of Parliament, whereby they might enjoy the
Temporalities, not withstanding the known defects of their Consecration etc. O
Ingenuity! whither art thou Fled out of the world? Say, where is this Petition
to be found, in the Records of Eutopia? Did the Parliament ever make any such
establishment of their Temporalties, more then of their Spiritualties? Did the
Parliament ever take any notice of any Defects of their Consecration? Nay, did
not the Parliament declare their Consecration to have been free from all
defects? Nay, does not the Parliament quite contrary, brand these Reports for
slanderous speeches, 8. Elis. cap. 1.
and justify their Consecrations to have been duly and orderly done, according
to the Laws of this Realm: and that it is very evident and apparent, that no
cause of scruple ambiguity or doubt, can be justly objected against their
Elections Confirmations or Consecrations.

Yet they give a reason of what they say, for albeit Edward the sixths rite of
Ordination was reestablished by Act of Parliament in the first year of Queen
Elisabeth: yet it was notorious that the Ordination at the Nagges head was very
different from it, and formed extempore by Scoryes Puritanicall Spirit etc. I
take that which you grant out of Sanders, that King Edwards Form of Ordination,
was reestablished by Act of Parliament 1. Elisabethae; wherein you do
unwittingly condemn both Bishop Bonners and Stapletons plea of illegality. The
rest which you say is partly true and partly false. It is very true that there
is great difference between the English Form of Ordeining, and your Nagges head
Ordination, as much as is between the head of a living horse and the sign of
the Nagges head, or between that which has a real entity and an imaginary
Chim^ra ( Mr. Mason was the Bellerephon that destroyed this monster): But that
the Form of the Nagges head Ordination was framed extempore by Scoryes
Puritanicall Spirit, is most false; That Posthumus brat was the Minerva or
Issue of Mr. Neales brain, or some others who fathered this rapping lie upon
him.

Then they repeat the words of a part of the Statute, and thence conclude, By
which Act appears that not only King Edwards rite, but any other used since
the beginning of the Queeens reign, upon her Commission was enacted for good,
and consequently that of the Nagges head might pass. Cujus co^trarium verum
est. The Contrary to what these Fathers infer, does follow necessarily from
these words which the Fathers cite. The words of the Act are these, [ By virtue
of the Queens Letters Patents or Commission]: Every one of the Letters Patents
is extant in the Rolls, not one of them did ever authorize any form but that
which was legally established; that is, the Form of Edward the sixth. First,
the Queens Letters Patents or Commission has an aut minus in it, or at the
least three or four of you: but to justify the Nagges head Ordination, the aut
minus must be altered to at the least one or two of you. Secondly, the Queens
Letters Patents have always this clause in them: Iuxta Formam and effectum
Statutorum in ea part editorum and provisorum; According to the form and
effect of the Statutes in that case made and provided: but the Statutes allow
no less number then four, or at the least three to ordein, At the Nagges head
(you say there was but one Ordeiner. Our Statutes prescribe Imposition of Hands
as the Essential matter of Ordination, and these words, Receive the Holy Ghost
as the form of Ordination: but your Nagges head Ordination is a mere Phantasm,
without matter or Form; our Statutes allow no such fanaticall and
Fantastical Forms, as your Form of the Nagges head. And so your Consequence,
[ Consequently that of the Nagges head might passe], is foundered of all four,
and can neither pass nor repasse, unless you can raze these words [ by virtue
of the Queens Letters Patents] out of the Statute, and insert these [ without
the Queens Letters Patents]: and likewise raze these words out of the
Commission [ according to the Form and effect of the Statutes], and insert
these [ contrary to the Form and effect of the Statutes]. A single
Falsification will do your cause no good. Two poisons may perchance help it at
a dead lift.

It is in vain to tell us, that Mr Mason see this over clear to be denied, who
know better that Mr. Mason did not only deny it over and over again, but
sqeesed the poor Fable to dirt. I have showed you particularly what was the
end of the Queens Dispensations, the same which is the end of Papal
Dispensations, to meet with latent objections or cavills. I have showed you
what that Cavil was; which needed no Dispensation in point of Law, but only
to stop the mouths of Gainsaiers. But where you add, that the Queens
Dispensation was given, not in conditional but in very absolute Terms: You
are absolutely mistaken. The Queens dispensation was both in General Terms,
which determine nothing, (not like the Popes Dispensations, A quibusvis
excommunicationis suspensionis and interdicti sententiis): and also in these
conditional Terms, si quid etc. desit aut deerit eorum quae per Statuta hujus
regni nostri, aut per leges Ecclesiasticas in hac part requiruntur: If any
thing is or shall be wanting, which are required by the Laws Civil or
Ecclesiastical of this Kingdom. You see it is conditional and has reference
only to the Laws of England.

They go on, the truth is, all the world laughed at the Nagges head
Consecration, and held it to be invalid, not so much for being performed in a
Tavern, as for the new form invented by Scory. If all the world did laugh at it
in those days, they laughed in their sleeves, where no body could see them
laugh. It had been too much to laugh at a jest before it was made, nay before
it was devised. The Reader may well wonder, how all the world came to get
notice of it so early as the beginning of Queen Elizabeth's reign, and we only
in England should hear nothing of it for above 40 years after? but as soon as
we did hear of it, we laughed at it as well as they, and held it as invalid as
they could do for their hearts; but they laughed at it as Bishop Scoryes
Invention, and we laughed at it as theirs.

CAP. VII. Of Bishop Bonner, the Reordination of our Clergy, the quality of
their witnesses, Mr. Fitzherberts suspicions, the testimony of their Doctors,
and the Publishing of our Register before Mr. Mason
Their next instance is in Bishop Bonners case, who was indicted by Mr. Horn,
one of the First Protestant Bishops consecrated by Mr. Parker, or together with
him, for refusing to take the Oath of Supremacy. The first error might be
pardoned, as being only a mistake in a word, to say that Bishop Bonner was
indicted by Mr. Horn, where as he was only signified by Bishop Horn: but the
second mistake is fatal, that after all this confidence, and this great
Notoreity of the Nagges head Ordination to all the world, these Fathers
themselves are still uncertain, whether Bishop Horn were consecrated by
Archbishop Parker, or at the same time with him; that is as much as to say,
they know not certainly what was done at the Nagges head, but they wish that if
the Confirmation dinner were not a Consecration, it had been one. It could
never end better, for Mr. Neale to feign an Ordination, without an Actuary to
record what was done. Bishop Wa^son and Mr. Bluet and the rest were much to
blame, that (since he had the fortune to wear Gyges his ring and walk
invisible) they did not cause him to play the public Notary himself, and draw
that which was done there into Acts; then we might have known as certainly as
he could tell us, whether Dr* Parker had been consecrated there by his Proctor
Dr Bullsngham. It may be, some very credulous Reader, who like the old Lamiae,
could take out his eyes and put them in again when he pleased, would have given
more credit to Mr Neales pleasant Fable, then to the public Rolls and
Registers of the Kingdom.

I have handled Bishop Bonners case before: and th^se Fathers themselves have
unwittingly given sentence in it against him; That King Edwards Form of
Ordination, was reestablished by Act of Parliamant in the first year of Queen
Elisabeth. But final sentence there was never any given, until the Parliament
gave a final sentence in it, That Bishop Horn and all the rest were legal
Bishops. To admit a Plea to be tried by a Jury, and the veredict of the Jury,
are two very distinct things.

They tell us, he was a man specially shot at. Rather he was a man graciously
preserved by the Queens mercy, from the rage of the Common people against him.
If they had shot at him, they could have found ways enough to have tendered
the Oath of Supremacy to him, without Bishop Horn. I profess I am no great
Patron of such Oaths, men have more dominion over their actions then over their
judgments: Yet there is less to be said for Bishop Bonner, then for other
men. He who had so great a hand in framing the Oath, He who had taken it
himself, both in King Henryes time, and King Edwards time, and made so many
others to take it, He who had been so great a stickler in Rome for the Kings
Supremacy, who writ that Preface before Bishop Gardiners book de vera
Obedientia: if he had suffered by the Oath of Supremacy, he had but been
scourged with a rod of his own making.

Their next reason to prove the Nullity of our Holy Orders, is taken from the
constant Practice of the Roman Catholics, to Reordein Protestant Ministers,
not conditionally but absolutely, which they call an evident Argument of our
mere Laity. A doughty Argument indeed, drawn from their own Authority. Can any
man doubt, that that they which make no scruple of taking away our life's, will
make conscience of taking away our Orders? This is that which we accuse them
of, and they do fairly beg the Question. If Reordination be Sacrilege (as
they say it is), we are ready to convince them of gross Sacrilege, or
iterating all the Essentialls of Ordination, the same matter and the same Form
that is for Episcopacy, the same Imposition of Hands by three Bishops, and the
same words Receive the Holy Ghost etc. Some were of the same mind with these
Fathers in Queen Mary's time: but Paul the 4. and Cardinal Poole were wiser,
who confirmed all Ordinations in Edward the sixths time indifferently, so the
Persons professed but their Conformity to the Roman Religion. How does this
consist with your pretended Nullity?

They say, Our Records were produced by Mr* Mason in the years 1613, fifty
yeare^ after they ought to have been showed. They forget that they were
published in Print in Arch Bishop Parkers lifetime, that they were justified by
the Parliament 8. Elisabethae, that all of them go hand in hand with our
Civil Records,

He says, it cannot be testified by any lawful witnesses (produced by us)
that they were (...) forged. This is their Method, first to ^ccuse us of
Forgery, and then to put us to prove a Negative; where learnt he this Form of
proceeding? By all Laws of God and man the Accuser is to make good his
Accusation: yet we have given him witnesses beyond exception. They say, there
can not be a more evident mark of Forgery, then the concealment of Registers,
if they (...) useful and necessary to the persons in whose Custody they are.
The proof lies on the other hand. Tell us how they were concealed, which were
published to the world in Print, by a whole Parliament, by private persons, and
were evermore left in a Public Office, where all the world might view them
from time to time, who had either occasion or desire to do it? That our
Adversaries did insult and Triumph over us, is but un empty flourish without
truth or reality, as we shall see presently.

They say, it is not worth refuting which some modern Protestants say, ye have
no witnesses of the story of the Nagges head etc. but Roman Catholics, we
value not their Testimony, because they are known Adversaries. This answer they
term Ridiculous, and parallel it with the answer of an Officer in Ireland. You
will not find this answer so ridiculous, upon more serious consideration.
Protestants know that some Exceptions in Law, do destroy all Credit, and some
other Exceptions do only diminish credit. An Adversaries Testimony may be
admitted in some cases, but it is subject to exception and makes no full
proof, especially in cases favorable in the Law; as the case of persons
spoiled, (which is your Irish case). such witnesses may be admitted, an^e omnia
spoliatus restitui debet: but then they ought to make up in number what they
want in weight.

But you mistake wholly, our answer is not, that you produce no witnesses for
the story of the Nagges head but Roman Catholick^: Our answer is that you
produce no witnesses at all, neither Roman Catholics nor others. For first one
witness is no witness in Law, Let him be beyond exception duly sworn and
examined, yet his Testimony makes but semiplenam probationem, half a proof;
especially in Criminal causes such as this is, it is nothing. Deuteronomy. 19.15.
One witness shall not rise up against a man for any Iniquity or any sin, At
the mouth of two witnesses or at the mouth of three witnesses shall the matter
be stablished. Which law is confirmed by our Savior. Mat. 18.16.
They were never yet able to pretend any eye witness by name, but Mr. Neale,
or some body that had no name, because he had no being in the nature of things:
all the rest had it from Mr. Neales single Testimony, because they cannot
testify what was done, but what Mr. Neale said.

Secondly, Mr. Neale testifies nothing, as a single witness ought to testify.
He was never sworn to speak the truth, he never testified it before a public
Notary, he was never examined before a competent Judge, (...) was never
produced before the face of a Protestant. Is this the manner of the Romans now
a days, to condemn whole Churches upon the ver^all Testimony of a single
witness, before ^e be brought face to face with those whom ^e accuses; and
such a Testimony which (...) clogged with so many improbabilities and
incongruities, and incoherences, (...) no rational impartial man (...) trust
one syllable of it? whereas in such a case as this, against the third Estate of
the Kingdom, against the Records Civil and Ecclesiastical, against the
testimony of a Parliament, an hundred witnesses ought not to be admitted.

We regard not Mr. Fitzherberts suspicions at all. What are the suspicions of a
private stranger, to the well known credit of a public Register? His
suspicions can weigh no more then his reasons, that is just nothing. He says
this exception is no new quarrel, but vehemently urged to the English Clergy
in the beginning of the Queens reign, (...) show how and by whom they were made
Priests Bishops etc: You have said enough to confute yourselves, but you touch
not us. If they had known that they were consecrated at the Nagges head, as
well as you would seem to know it, they needed not to urge it so vehemently to
show how and by whom they were ordained; they would have done that for them
readily enough: unless perhaps you think that they concealed the Nagges head
Ordination out o^ favor to the Protestants. But I see you are mistaken in this
as in all other things* There was an old objection indeed, that ou^
Consecraters were not Roman Catholics and that our Consecration was not Ri^^
Romano, or that we were not Ordained by Papal Authority: but the Nagges head
Ordination is a new question. What might be whispered underhand, in the ears
of credulous persons of your own party in Corners, we do not know: but for all
your contrary intimations, none of all your Writers did dare to put any such
thing in print, for above forty years after Arch Bishop Parkers Consecration.
If silent Witnesses in such circumstances prove more then others, as you
affirm, then all your writers are our witnesses. But none of all your Doctors
did ever urge any such thing, as required that we should cite the Registers in
prudence, as by a clear answer to all your Testimonies shall appear. The
water did not stop there in those days: yet even in Arch Bishop Parkers life
time the Consecration of our Bishops was published to the world in Print;
either show us as much for your Nagges head Ordination, or hold your peace for
ever. Bishop Andrews the learned Bishop of Winchesters absurdities falsities
and lies, are easily talked of, men may talk of black Swans: but he who has
laid your greatest Champions in the dust, requires another manner of Discoverer
then Mr. Fitzherbert.

But these Fathers are resolved to confute themselves, without the help of an
Adversary. They tell us, that no mention was ever made of Registers testifying
Parkers Consecration at Lambeth, until Mr. Mason printed his book. This is
not true, they were mentioned by the Parliament, mentioned in Print, I think
before Mr. Mason was born* What though Lambeth were not mentioned, if the
Legality of his Consecration were mentioned? This is enough to answer your
Objection; this is enough to confute your Romance of the Nagges head. Yet thus
much you yourselves confess, in the same Paragraph, that in a book printed in
the year 1605 (that is eight years before the year 1613, wherein you say
that Mr, Mason printed his book) called Antiquitates Britanniae, there is a
Register of the Protestant Bishops of England: The^ there was a Register of the
Consecration of Protestant Bishops extant, before Mr. Mason did write of that
subject. You say, that Register does not mention any certain place or Form of
their Consecration. It was not needful; the Law prescribes the Form, and the
place was indifferent, so it were a consecrated place, which the Law does
likewise prescribe. But you tell us further, that thi^ Register was forged or
foisted in, and that your learned but namelesse Friend, see the old Manuscript
of that book, wherein there is no mention of any such Register, which you tell
us in your Friends words, that all the world may see how this Register was
forged. Why are all the world bound to believe your Friend? How should we give
credit to a man who tells us three notorious untruths in four lines? First,
that it is pretended that Archbishop Parker was made a Bishop by Barlow Scory
and three others, by virtue of a Commission from Queen Elisabeth: he was made a
Bishop by Barlow Scory and two others. Secondly, that this work was acted on
the 17. day of September, An: 1559, which was acted on the 17. Day of December
1559. pa. 10.
Thirdly, that we had no form then or Order to do such a business; whereas
you yourselves confess, that Edward the sixths rite of Ordination, was
reestablished in the First year of Queen Elisabeth: and Archbishop Parkers
Ordination was in the second of Queen Elisabeth. He who stumbles so thick and
three fold, may err in his viewing the Manuscript as well as the rest. But to
gratify you, suppose it was foisted in, what good will that do you? It must of
necessity be foisted in before it was printed, it could not be foisted in after
it was printed, And it must be foisted in by a Protestant, for no Roman
Catholic would foist it in. So still you see a Register of Protestant Bishops,
was published to the world in print, eight years before Mr. Mason published
his book.

Your Friend says, that this printed Book of Parkers Antiquitates Britanniae,
is the first that mentions any such pretended Consecration of him and the
rest. So it might be well when it was first printed, that was not in the year
1605, but in Archbishop Parkers life time, three years before his death, An.
1570. So much you might have learned from the very Title Page of the Book,
printed at Hannovv; Historia antehac non nisi semel, nimirum Londini in Aedibus
Iohannis Day anno 1572. excusa: That this History was printed formerly at
London in the house of John Day in the year 1572. This does utterly destroy
the Credit of your Friends Relation, that he had viewed the Manuscript of that
Book. There needed no Manuscript, where they had a Printed book for their
Copy, (as the Title Page tells us they had)* and that printed above sixty
years before your Friend writ, it is probable before his Birth. If there be
any thing of foisting in the case, there is rather something foisted out of the
former Edition, then foisted in; namely, Archbishop Parkers Life until that
time, with the particular Consecrations of our first Bishops, which were in the
London Edition, and are omitted in this Edition of Hannow. This is clear
enough by the very Title, An History of 70. Archbishops, and there are in this
Edition but 69. Archbishops, because the Life of Archbishop Parker is wanting;
which nevertheless is promised in the Life of Archbishop Warham page 312. [ ut
in Matthaei Parker Cantuariensis Archiepiscopi vi^a inferius di^emus: As we
shall say hereaf^er in the Life of Matthew Parker Archbishop of Canterbury. You
see how unfortunate you are in accusing others of Forgery.

Your Author proceeds, Any man reading the printed Book, will manifestly
see it is a merely foisted and inserted thing, having no connection
correspondence or affinity, either with that which goes before, or follows
it. Say you so? There was never any thing more fitly inserted. The Author
undertaketh to write the Life's of 70. succeeding Archbishops of Canterbury,
from Austin to Matthew Parker, and having premitted some general Observations
concerning the Antiquity of Christian Religion in Britany, with the names of
some Archbishops of London, and the Original and Changes of Episcopal Sees
in England, and some other Generalities concerning the Privileges of the Sea of
Canterbury, and the Conversion of Kent; Just before he enter upon the Life of
St. Austin the first Archbishop, he presents the Reader with a summary View
of the Archbishopric of Canterbury, at that time when the book was first
printed, in the year 1572, with the names of all the Bishops of the Province
at that time, their Countries, their Arms, both of their Sees and of their
Families, their respective Ages, their Universities, their Degrees in Schools,
with the times of their several Consecrations, if they were ordained Bishops,
or Confirmations, if they were translated from another See. It is hardly
possible for the wit of man to contriue more matter into a lesser Room. Then,
he settes down a like Table for the Province of York: and lastly an
Alphabeticall Catalogue of the Bishops whose Life's were described in this
book, and among the rest, Archbishop Parker, whose Life (if you call it
foisting) is foisted out of this Hannow Edition. If this has no connection or
affinity with that which goes before, and follows after, I know not what
Connection or Affinity is.

Your Friends last Exception against the Authority of that book called
Antiquitates Britanniae, is, that it contains more things done after Matthew
Parker had written that Book. So you confess that Archbishop Parker himself
(about whom all our controversy is,) was the Author of that book; wherein I
agree with you. The conclusion of the Preface, and many other reasons invite me
to do so. Surely this Author meant that there is something contained in this
Register, which is not within the Compass of the following Life's in the Hannow
Edition. (that may well be because Matthew Parkers life is foisted out in this
Edition:) but there is nothing which was not in the London Edition, much more
largely then it is in this Register, especially for the Confirmations and
Consecrations of our Protestant Bishops: there is nothing after the time when
this Register was made, which is prefixed in the Frontispice of it in the
Hannow Edition, with M P for Matthew Parker. Matthew Parker died May the 27,
Anno 1575: he printed his book at London three years before his death,
without the Authors name, in the year 1572. I appeal to the ingenuous
Reader, (let him be of what Communion he will, or never so full of prejudice),
whether it be credible, that Arch Bishop Parkers own book should be printed in
London, by the Queens Printer, in his life time, and have any thing foisted
into it contrary to his sense.

Here then we have a Register of Protestant Bishops, with their Confirmations
and Consecrations, published to the world in Print at London, by Arch Bishop
Parker himself, (who was the principal person and most concerned in that
Controversy,) as if it should dare all the Adversaries of our Church to except
against it, if they could* Registers cannot be concealed, being always kept in
the most public and conspicuous places of great Cities, whither every one has
access to them who will. They need no printing, but this was printed (a work
of supererogation). They who dared not to except against it then, when it was
fresh in all men's memories, ought not to be admitted to make conjecturall
exceptions now.

Now the Fathers come to show, how their Doctors did object to our Protestant
Clergy, the Nullity and Illegality of their Ordination. If their Doctors give a
cause or reason of their knowledge, we are bound to answer that: but if they
object nothing but their own Judgment and authority, we regard it not; their
judgment may weigh some thing with them, but nothing at all with us. This is
not to make themselves Advocates, but Judges over us, which we do not allow. If
I should produce the Testimonies of fourscore Protestant Doctors, who affirm
that we have a good Succession, or that their Succession is not good, what
would they value it?

The first is Doctor Bristow; Consider what Church that is, whose Ministers are
but very Laymen, unsent, uncalled, unconsecrated, holding therefore amongst us
when they repent and return, no other place but of Laymen, in no case admitted,
no nor looking to Minister in any Office, unless they take Orders which before
they had not. Here is Doctor Bristows Determination, but where are his grounds?
He brings none at all, but the practice of the Roman Church, and that not
general. Paul the 4, and Cardinal Poole, and the Court of Rome in those days
were of another Judgment, and so are many others: and so may they themselves
come to be, when they have considered more seriously of the matter, that we
have both the same old Essentialls. That which excuses their Reordination from
formal Sacrilege (for from material it cannot be excused upon their own
grounds,) is this, that they cannot discover the truth of the matter of Fact,
for the hideous Fables raised by our Countrymen. But where is the Nagges head
Ordination in Dr. Bristow? Then had been the time to have objected it, and
printed it, if there had bee^ any reality in it. Either Dr. Bristow had never
heard of this Pageant, or he was ashamed of it. Here we meet with Dr. Fulke
again, and what they say of him shall be a^swered in its proper place

Their next witness is Mr. Reinolds, There is no Heardman in all Turkey, who
does not undertake the Government of his Heard, upon better reason and greater
right Order and authority, then these your magnificent Apostles. etc. And why
an Heardsman in Turkey, but only to allude to his Title of Calvino Turcismus?
An heardsman in Turkey has as much right to order his heard, as an heardman in
Christendom; unless perhaps your Dr. did think, that Dominion was founded in
Grace, not in nature. This is saying, but we expect proving. It is well known
that you pretend more to a magnificent Apostolate, them we. If the authority of
the holy Scripture (which knows no other Essentialls of Ordination; but
imposition of hands and these words Receive the Holy Ghost,) if the perpetual
practice of the universal church, if the Prescription of the ancient Council
of Carthage, and above 200. Orthodox Bishops, with the concurrent approbation
of the Primitive Fathers be sufficient grounds, we want not sufficient grounds
for the exercise of our Sacred Functions. But on the contrary, there is no
Heardman in Turkey who has not more sufficient grounds or assurance of the
lawfulness of his Office, then you have for the discharge of your Holy Orders,
upon your own grounds. The Turkish Heardman receives his Masters Commands
without examining his intention: but according to your grounds, if in ^n
hundred successive Ordinations, there were but one Bishop who had an intention
not to Ordein, or no intention to ordein, or but one Priest who had an
inte^tio^ notto bap^^ise, or no intention to baptize any of these Bishops, then
your whole Succession comes to nothing. But I must ask still where ^s your
Nagges head Ordination in all this? ^r. Reinolds might have made a pleasant
Pa^^lell between the Nagges head Ordination and the Ordination of the Turkish
Mufti, and wanted not a mind mischievous enough against his Mother the Church
of England, if he could have found the least pretext: but there was none. You
seek for water out of a Pumice.

Their third Witness is Dr. Stapleton, in his Counterblast against Bishop
Horn. To say truly, you are no Lord Winchester, nor elsvvhere, but only Mr
Robert Horn. Is (...) not notorious that you and your Colleagues were not
ordained* according to the prescript, I will not say of the Church, but even
of the very Statutes? How then can you challenge to your self the name of the
Lord Bishop of Winchester? You are without an^ Consecration at all of your
Metropolitan, himself pooreman being no Bishop neither. This was a loud blast
indeed^ but if Dr Stapleton could have said any thing of the Nagges head
Ordination, he would have given another manner of blast, tha^ should have made
the whole world Ech^ again with the Sound of it. In vain you see^ any thing of
the Nagges head in your writers, until after the year 1600. For answe^ Dr.
Stapleton raises no Objection from the Institution of Christ, whereupon an^
only whereupon, the Validity or Invalidity of Ordination does depend: but
only from the Laws of England. First for the Canons, we maintein that our
Form of Episcopal Ordination has the same Essentialls with the Roman: but in
other things of an inferior allay it differs from it. The Papal Canons were
never admitted for binding Laws in England, further then they were received by
our selves, and incorporated into our Laws: but our Ordination is conformable
to the Canons of the Catholic Church, which prescribe no new Matter and Form
in Priestly Ordination. And for our Statutes, the Parliament has answered that
Objection sufficiently, showing clearly, that the Ordination of our first
Protestant Bishops was legal, and for the Validity of it, we crave no man's
favor.

Their last witness is Dr. Harding, who had as good a will (if there had been
any reality in it) to have spoken of the Nagges head Ordination as the best,
but he speaks not a Syllable of it more then the rest: and though they keep a
great stir with him, he brings nothing that is worth the weighing. First he
reads us a profound Lecture, that Sacerdos Signifies both a Priest and a
Bishop. Let it signify so, and in St. Hieroms sense, what will he infer from
thence? Next, he asks Bishop Jewel of Bishoply and Priestly vocation and
sending. What new canting language is this? Could he not as well have made use
of the old Ecclesiastical word of Ordination? Thirdly he taxes the Bishop,
that he answers not by what example hands were laid on him, or who sent him.
What does this concern any question between them and us? Hands were laid on him
by the example of Christ, of his Apostles^, of the Primitive and Modern Church:
so Christ sent him, the King sent him, the Church sent him, in several
respects. He tells us, that when he had duly considered his Protestant
Ordination in King Edwards time, he did not take himself for lawful deacon in
all respects. If his Protestant Ordination were a Nullity (as these me^ say),
the^ he was a lawful Deacon in no respect. Pope Paul the 4. and Cardinal
Poole were of another mind. Then follow his two grand excepitons against our
Ordination, wherein you shall find nothing of your Nagges head fable The former
exception is, that King Edwards Bishops who gave Orders, were out of Orders
themselves, The second is, that they ministered not orders according to the Rite
and manner of the Catholic Church. For the former exception, I refer him to
the Council of Carthage in St. Austins time, and for both his excepitons to
Cardinal ^oles Confirmation of King Edwards Bishops and Priests, and Paul the
4. Ratification of his Act. If any man have a mind to inquire further into the
Validity of our Form of Ordination, let him leave these Fables and take his
scope freely.

To all this they say, that Bishop Jewel answers with profound silence, yet
they add, only he says without any proof, that their Bishops are made by
Form and Order, and by the Consecration of the Arch bishop and other three
Bishops, and by admission of the Prince. I expected profound silence, but I
find a profound answer; this is the first time I learned how a man can both
keep profound silence and answer so pertinently all at once. How does Dr.
Harding go about to take away ^his answer: For Bishop Jewel was the
defendent, and the burden of the proof did ^ot rest upon him? First I pray
you how was ^our Archbishop consecrated? If Dr. Harding did not see his
Consecration, he might have ^een it if he would. He asks further, what ^ree
Bishops were there in the Realm to lay hands upon him? Ask the Queens Letters
patents, ^^d they will show you seven. What a ^^eake Socraticall kind of
arguing is this, ^ltogether by questions, without any Infe^ence? If Dr. Harding
could have said it justly, (and he could have said it if it had been so), he
should have confuted him boldly, and told him your Metropolitan was consecrated
in the Nagges head, by one single Bishop, in a fanaticall and fantastical
manner: but he did not, he durst not do it, because he knew it to be otherwise,
and it was publicly known to be otherwise. All his exception is against our
Form, If you had been Consecrated after the Form and Order which has ever
been used, you might have had Bishops out of France or at home in England. It
is the Form established in King Edwards time, and restored in Queen Elisabeths
time which Doctr. Harding impugneth, not tha^ ridiculous Form which they Father
upon Bishop Scory: and their chief objection against that Form, was that vain
Cavil that it was not restored by Act of Parliament, which since has been
answere^ abundantly by an Act of Parliament. Here upon he tells Bishop
Jewel, that his Metropolitan had no lawful Consecration. Thoug^ his
Consecration had not been lawful, y^^ it might have been valid, but it was
bot^ legal and valid. This is all that Docto^ Harding has, which a much mean
Scholar then that learned Prelate might have adventured upon, without fear of
burning his Fingers.

Their next proof against our Records, is taken from the Contradictions of our
Writers, Mr. Masons Registers and Records, disagree with those that Mr. Goodwin
used in his Catalogue of Bishops, sometimes in the Day sometimes in the month,
sometimes in the year. And again, Mr. Mason Sutcliffe and Mr. Butler, all
speaking of Mr. Parkers Consecration, do all differ one from another in naming
his Consecraters; Mr. Mason says it was done by Barlow, Scory, Coverdale* and
Hodgskins. Mr. Sutcliffe says, besides the three first there was two
Suffragans. M Butler says, the Suffragan of Dover was one. who is not named
in the Commission. So as these men seem to have had three Disagreeing
Registers. I answer, first that it is scarcely possible to avoid errors in
transcribing and printing of Books, in the Authors absence, especially in
names and numbers. To keep a balling and a stir about these Errata of the pen
or of the press, is like the barking of little Curres, which trouble the whole
Vicinage about the Mooneshining in the Water. Such were the most of these.

Secondly supposing that some very few of these were the real mistakes of the
Authors, yet innocent mistakes, which have no plot in them or design of
Interest or Advantage, which conduce neither pro nor contra to any Controversy
that is on Foot, they ought not to be exaggerated or pressed severely; It is
the Wisdom of a wise man to pass by an Infirmity. Such are all these petty
Differences. Whether Archbishop Parker was consecrated by three City Bishops
and two Suffragan, or by three City Bishops and one Suffragan Bishop, and
whether this one Suffragan were Suffraga^ of Bedford or Suffragan of Dover,
co^duceth nothing to any Controversy which is on Foot in the Church, and
signifies nothing to the Validity or invalidity, legality or illegality,
canonicalnesse or uncanonicalnesse of his Ordination. All Memories are not so
happy, to remember names and numbers, after a long distance of time, especially
if they entered but by the ^are* and were not Oculis subjecta fidelibus. I^ any
man should put me to depose (wanting my notes and memorialls,) what Priests did
impose hands upon me with Archbishop Mathews at my Priestly Ordination, or what
Bishops did join with my Lord Primate of Ireland at my Episcopal Ordination,
I could not do it exactly. I know there were more then the Canons do require,
at either Ordination; and refer my self to the Register. Whether two
Suffragans or one Suffragan, is an easy mistake. when there were two in the
Commission, and but one at the Consecration: so is the Suffragan of Dover for
the Suffragan of Bedford.

Thirdly, whether these were the faults of the pen or the press or the
Author: yet after retractation it ought not to be objected. It is inhumane to
charge any man with that fault, which he himself had corrected and amended.
Bishop Goodwin corrected all these errors himself, without any Monitor, and
published his Correction of his errors to the world in Print long since, in a
new Edition of his book. Likewise Dr. Sutcliffe acknowledged his mistake and
gave order to Mr. Mason to publish it to the world, as he did.

To ground exceptions upon the errors of the press, or the slips of the
tongue or pen or of the memory, after they have been publicly amended, is like
flies to delight in sores, and neglect the body when it is sound. I have the
same error crept into a book of mine, of [five] for [four], how it came I
know not, for the book was printed in my absence: but I have corrected it in
mine own Copy and in many Copies of my Friends, where I meet with the book.

Lastly, there is no danger in such petty differences, so long as all parties
do submit themselves to the public Registers of the Church, as all these
writers do; although is may be some of them were better acquainted with
Polemick Writers, the^ with Registers, or the practical customs of the Church
of England. The very Reference or submission of themselves to the Register, is
an Implicit retractation of their errors. As in a City the Clocks may differ,
and the peoples Judgments of the time of the day, but both Clocks and Clerks
must submit to the Sun dyall when the sun shines out: so all private
memorialls must be, and are submitted to the public Register of the Church.
Where these Fathers talk of plurality of Registers, they err because they
understand not our Customs. Every Bishop throughout the Kingdom has one
Registry at least, every Dean and Chapter has a Registry. The ordinations of
Priests and Deacons, and the Institution of Clerks to Benefices, are recorded
in the Registries of the Respective Bishops, in whose diocesses they are
ordained and instituted. The elections of Bishops and Inthronisations and
Installations, in the Registry of the respective Deans and Chapiters: and the
Confirmations and Consecrations of Bihops, in the Registry of the Archbishop
where they are consecrated; except the Archbishop be pleased to grant a
Commission to some other Bishops, to Consecrate the elected and confirmed
Bishop in some other place. But the same thing can not be recorded originally
but in one Registry.

CAP. VIII. Dr. Whitaker and Dr. Fulke defended, Bishop Barlowes Consecration
justified, of John Stowes Testimony, and the Earl of Notinghams etc.
HEre the Fathers take upon them the office of Judges or Censors rather then of
Advocates. Mr. Mason ought to have answered as Mr. Whitaker and Mr. Fulke,
(they were both eminent Drs. in the Schools) who had reason to be better
informed of the Records then he. How? Nay nor half so well. They were both
contemplative men, Cloistered up in St. John's College, better acquainted with
Polemick writers, then with Records, They were both ordained Deacons and
Priests legally, Canonically, according to the Form prescribed by the Church of
England: and were no such ill Birds to defile their own nests. If the Records
of their Ordination will ^atisfy you, that they were no Enthusiasts, (as you
imagine,) you may quickly receive satisfaction: But if they had said any thing
contrary to our Laws and Canons, you must not think to wrangle the Church of
England out of a good possession, by private voluntary speculations. Let us see
what these Doctrs say as you allege them, for I have not their books in
present. Mr. Whitaker says, I would not have you think we make such reckoning
of your Orders, as to hold our own Vocation unlawful without them. You see
Doctor Whitaker justifies our Ordination in this very place as lawful, and
much more plainly elsewhere in his writings. That though our Bishops and
Ministers be not Ordained by Papisticall Bishops, yet they are orderly and
lawfully ordained: Again, The Romanists account none lawful Pastors, but such
as are created according to their Form or Order. These are your two main
Objections against our Ordination, that we are not ordained by Bishops of your
Communion. That we are not ordained according to the Roman Form. In both of
these Doctor Whitaker is wholly for us against you, that which he makes no
reckoning of, is your Form of Ordination, as it is contradistinct from ours, as
it is in many things, especially in your double matter and Form in Priestly
Ordination.

You say Mr. Fulke speaks more plainly Let us hear him. You are highly
deceived if you think we esteem your Offices of Bishops Priests and Deacons
better then Laymen: and with all our heart we defy, abhor, detest, and spit
at your stinking, greasy, Antichristian Orders. This is high enough indeed, and
might have been expressed in more moderate terms: but it is to be expounded,
not of the invalidity of your Ordination, as if it wanted any Essential, but
partly in respect of the not using or abusing these sacred Offices, and partly
in respect of the Laws of England. Excesses may make an Ordination unlawful,
although they do not make it invalid. Holy Orders are an excellent Grace
conferred by God for the Conversion of men: but if those who have them, instead
of preaching truth do teach errors to his people, and adulterate the old
Christian Faith by addition of new Articles, they are no longer true Pastors,
but Wolves which destroy the Flock, and so they are not only no better, but
worse then Lay men, Corruption optimi pessima. In this respect they tell you,
that your Priests and Bishops are no true Priests and Bishops, as Marcellus
told his Soldiers that they were no true Romans (who were natural Romans)
because they wanted the old Roman virtue. Lastly you have habitual power to
exercise these Offices, but you want actual power in England, by reason of the
not application, or rather the substraction of the matter by our Laws: so you
are no legal Bishops or Priests there. This I take to have been the sense of
these two Doctors.

Now are we come to their grand exception, against Bishop Barlow, who was one
of the Consecraters of Archbishop Parker, whose Consecration is not found in
the Archbishops Register, and there fore they conclude that he was never
consecrated. If this objection were true, yet it does not render Archbishop
Parkers Consecration either invalid or uncanonicall, because there were three
other Bishops who joined in that Consecration besides Bishop Barlow, which is
the full number required by the Canons. But this objection is most false.
Bishop Barlow was a Consecrated Bishop above 20 years before the Consecration
of Archbishop Parker. They should have done well to have proposed this doubt in
Bishop Barlows lifetime, and then they might have had the Testimony of his
Consecraters under an Archiepiscopall or Episcopal Seal, for their
satisfaction, The Testimony of the Archi-Episcopall Register, is a full proof
of Consecration affirmatively, but it is not a full proof negatively; such a
Bishops Consecration is not recorded in this Register, therefore he was not
Consecrated. For first, the negligence of an Officer or some cross accident
might hinder the recording. Secondly Fire or Thieves or some such Casualty
might destroy or purloin the Record. Thirdly though it be not recorded in this
Register, it may be recorded in another, the Arch Bishop may, and Arch Bishop
Cranmer usually did delegate or give Commission to three other Bishops for
Consecration. And though the work be ordinarily performed at Lambeth, because
of the place, where they may have three Bishops always present without any
further Charge: yet they are not obliged by any Law to Consecrate them there.
And if there be a sufficient number of Bishops near the Cathedral which is to
be filled, or if the person who is to be Consecrated do desire it, they may be
Consecrated either in that, or any of their own Churches. The Bishops of the
Province of York, by reason of the former convenience are usually consecrated
at Lambeth, yet I have known in my time Bishop Sinews of Carlisle consecrated
at York upon his own desire, by the Archbisop of York, and the Bishops of
Durham, Chester, and Man A man might seek long enough for his Consecration in
the Archbishop of Canterburies Register and miss it, but it is to be found in
the Register at York. So the Omission of it in that Register though it be no
full proof, yet it is a probable proof that Bishop Barlow was not Consecrated
there, but it is no proof at all that he was not Consecrated elswere.

And this I take to have been the case both of Bishop Barlow and Bishop
Gardener: and although the effluxion of above an hundred years since, has
rendered it more difficult to find where it was done, yet by the help of those
Records which are in the Court of Faculties, I should not despair of finding
it yet.

But there are so many evident proofs that he was Cousecrated, that no
ingenuous person can have the Face to deny it. The first reason is, his actual
possession of 4. Bishoprics one after another, St. Assaph, St. David's, Bath
and Wells and Chichester, in the Reigns of three Princes. They feign some
pretenses why Archbishop Parker was not consecrated Canonically* because there
wanted a competent number of Bishops, though it were most false: but what can
they feign why Bishop Barlow was not consecrated in Henry the eighths time? was
Henry the eighth a Baby to be jeasted withal? In Archbishop Parkers case, they
suppose all the Bishops to have been stark mad, to cast themselves down
headlong from a Precipice, when they had a fair pair of Stairs to descend by:
but in Bishop Barlowes case they suppose all the world to have been asleep;
except there had been such an Universal sleep it had been impossible for any
man in those days to creep into a Bishopric in England without Consecration.
To say he is actually possessed of a Bishopric therefore he is Consecrated, is
as clear a Demonstration in the English Law, as it is in nature to say the Sun
shines, therefore it is Day.

But it may be objected, that he held all these Bishoprics as a Commendatory,
no^ in Title, as an Vsufructuary not as a true owner. It is impossible,
Vsufructuaries are not elected and confirmed, but Bishop Barlow was both
elected and Confirmed. The Conge d'eslire to the Dean and Chapter, the Letters
Patents for his Confirmation, the Commission for the restitution of his
Temporalties, do all prove that he was no Vsufructuary but a right owner, This
is a second reason.

Thirdly, The same Letters Patents that do authorize Bishop Barlowes
Confirmation, did likewise Command the Archbishop with the assistence of other
Bishops to Consecrate him himself. or to give a Commission to other Bishops to
Consecrate him, which if they did not perform within a prescribed time, or
perform after another manner the^ is prescribed by the Law, it was not only a
loss of their Bishoprics by the Law of England, but a Praemunire or the loss
of all their Estates, their Liberties, and a casting themselves out of the
Kings Protection 25, Hen: 8. c. 20. No me^ in their right wits would r^n such a
hazard, or rather evide^tly ruin themselves and all their hopes without any
need, without any e^d in the whole world. Fourthly, by the same Law no man
could be acknowledged a Bishop in England, but he who was Consecrated legally,
by three Bishops with the consent of the Metropolitan, but Bishop Barlow was
acknowledged to be a true Bishop; The King received his Homage for his
Bishopric; the King commanded him to be restored to his Temporalties, which is
never done until the Consecration be passed. King Henry sent him into Scotland
as his Ambassador with the title of Bishop of St. David's; and in his
restitution to the Temporalties of that See, the King related that the Arch
Bishop had made him Bishop and Pastor of the Church of St. David's. This could
not be if he had not been Consecrated.

Thirdly, he was admitted to sit in Parliament as a Consecrated Bishop: for no
man can sit there as a Bishop before he be Consecrated, but it is plain by the
Records of the house of the Lords that he did sit in Parliament many times in
the 31 of Henry the 8. in his Episcopal habit, as a Consecrated Bishop; and
being neither a Bishop of one of the five Principal Sees, nor a Privy
Counselor, he must sit and did sit according to the time of his Consecration,
between the Bishops of Chichester and St, Assaph. What a strange boldness, is
it to question his Consecration now, whom the whole Parliament, and his
Consecraters among the rest, did admit without scruple then as a Consecrated
Bishop.

Sixthly, There is no act more proper or essential to a Bishop then
Ordination, What does a Bishop that a Priest does not (says St. Hierom) except
Ordination? But it is evident by the Records of his own See, that Bishop Barlow
did Ordein Priests and Deacons from time to time, and by the Arch Bishops
Register that he, joined in Episcopal Ordination, and was one of those three
Bishops who imposed hands upon Bishop Buckley Feb. 19. 1541,

Seventhly, there is nothing that ^^inth a Bishops Title to his Chuch more then
^he Validity and Invalidity of his Leases. If Bishop Barlow had been
unconsecrated, all the Leases which he made in the Sea of St. David's, and Bath
and Wells, had been void, and it had been the easiest thing in the whole world
for his Successor in those days, to prove whether he was consecrated or not,
but they never questioned his Leases; because they could not question his
Consecration.

Lastly, an unconsecrated person has neither Antecessors nor Successors, he
succeeds no man, no man succeeds him. If a grant of any hereditaments be
made to him and his Successors, it is absolutely void^, not worth a deaf Nut;
If he alien any Lands belonging to his See from him and his* Successors, it is
absolutely void: But Bishop Barlow^ received the Priory of Br^cknock from the
Crown, to him and his Successors Bishops of St. David's, and in King Edwards
reign being Bishop of Bath and Wells, he alienated from him and his Successors
to the Crown much Land, and received back again from the Crown to him and his
Successors equivalent Lands. If he had been unconsecrated all these Acts had
been utterly void. In sum, whosoever dreameth now, that all the world were in
a dead sleep then, for twenty years together, whilst all these things were
acting, is much more asleep himself.

To these undeniable proofs I might add as many more out of the Records of
the Chancery, if there needed any to prove him a Consecrated Bishop. As.

A grant to the said William Barlow Bishop of St. David's, to hold in Commendam
with the said Bishopric the Rectory of Carewe in the county of Pembrooke,
Dated October. the 29. Anno 38. Hen. 8.

A commission for Translation of William Barlow Bishop of St. David's to the
Bishopric of Bath and Wels, Dated. 3. Feb. 2. Edv. 6.

A Commission for the Consecration of Robert Farrer to be Bishop of St. David's,
per translationem VVillelmi Barlow etc. Dated 3. Iul. Anno 2. Edv. 6.

A Commission for the Restitution of the Temporalties of the said Bishopric to
the said Robert Farrer, as being void per translationem Willelmi Barlow. Dated
1. Augusti Anno 2. Edv. 6. In all which Records and many more he is always
named as a true Consecrated Bishop.

And lastly, in Bishop Goodwins book de Praesulibus Angliae pa. 663. of the
Latin Edition printed at London Anno 1616. in his Catalogue of the Bishops of
St. Assaph number. 37. he has these words. Gulielmus Barlow Canonicorum
Regularium apud Bisham Prior Consecratus est. Feb. 22. Anno 1535; Aprili deinde
sequente Meneviam translatus est. William Barlow Prior of the Canons Regulars
at Bisham was consecrated the two and twentieth Day of February, in the year
1535, and in April Follovving was translated to St. David's. Which confirms
me in my former conjecture, that he was Consecrated in Wales, which Bishop
Goodwin by reason of his Vicinity, had much more reason to know exactly then we
have.

They say Mr. Mason acknowledges that Mr Barlow was the man who consecrated
Parker, because Hodgskins the Suffragan of Bedford was only an Assistent in
that action: and the Assistents in the Protestant Church do not consecrate. By
the Fathers leave, this is altogether untrue. Neither was Bishop Barlow the
only man who Consecrated Archbishop Parker; Neither was Bishop Hodgskins a
mere Assistent in that action; Thirdly, whosoever do impose hands are joint
consecraters, with us as well as them; Lastly, Mr. Mason says no such thing as
they affirm, but directly the Contrary, that all the four Bishops were equally
Consecraters, all imposed hands, all joined in the words, and this he proves
out of the Register it self, L. 3. c. 9. n. 8. and l: 3. c. 10. n. 9.

They object He might as well be proved to have been a lawful Husband, because
he had a woman* and diverse Children, as to have been a Consecrated Bishop
because he ordained. and Discharged all acts belonging to the Order of a
Bishop. What was Bishop Barlowes Woman pertinent to his cause. Are not
Governants, and Devotesses, besides ordinary maidservants, women?

All which Pastors not only of their own Communion, but of their own Society,
are permitted to have in their houses. Let themselves be ^udges whether a Woman
a wife, or a Woman a Governant or a Devotesse, be more properly to be ranged
under the name or notion of (...), such women as were prohibited to Cohabit
with Clerks by the Council of Nice. But to leave the Hypothesis and come to
the Thesis, as being more pertinent to the present case. If a man have
cohabited long with a Woman as man and wife in the General estimation of the
world, and begot children upon her, and dies as her husband without any doubt
or dispute during his life and long after, though all the Witnesses of their
Marriage were dead, and the Register lost, this their Conjugall cohabitation
and the common reputation of the world during his Life uncontroverted, is in
Law a sufficient proof of the Marriage: but all the world nemine contradicente
esteemed Bishop Barlow as the undoubted Bishop and Spouse of his Church.

They add, Ridley Hooper Farrer were acknowledged and obeyed as Bishops in
King Edwards time, yet were Judged by both the Spiritual and Temporal Court
not to have been consecrated. They mistake, they were not judged not to have
been consecrated, (for their Consecrations are upon Record,) but not to have
been consecrated ritu Romano, after the Roman Form. And who gave this
Judgment? Their open enemies, who made no scruple to take away their Life's,
whose unjust judgment we do not value a rush: but Paul the 4. and Cardinal
Pole; more authentic Judges of their own party, gave a later Judgment to the
Contrary.

They ask, how it is possible that Barlowes Consecration should not be found
recorded (if ever it was), as well as his preferment to the Priory of Bisham,
and Election and Confirmation to the Bishopric of St. Assaph. I answer it is
very easy to conceive. I have showed him sundry ways how it might be, and one
probable way how it was. I desire the Reader to observe the extreme partiality
of these Fathers, they make it impossible for the Acts of one Consecration to
be lost or stolen, and yet accuse us of forging fifteen Consecrations. It is
easier to steal fifteen, then to Forge one Act.

We have often asked a reason of them, why the Protestants should decline their
own Consecrations? They give us one, The truth is, that Barlow as most of the
Clergy in England in those times were Puritans, and inclined to Zuinglianisme,
therefore they contemned and rejected Consecration as a rag of Rome, and were
contented with the extraordinary calling of God and the Spirit, as all other
Churches are, who pretend Reformation. It is well they premised the truth is,
otherwise there had not been one word of truth in what they say. First how do
they know this? It must be either by Relation, but I am confident they can name
no author for it: or by Revelation, but that they may not do: or it is (to
speak sparingly) their own Imagination. It is a great boldness, to take the
liberty to cast aspersions upon the Clergy of a whole Nation. Secondly, how
comes Bishop Barlow, to be taxed of Puritanism? we meet him a Prior and a
Bishop, we find him in his Robes, in his Rochet, in his Cope, Officiating,
Ordaining, Confirming. He who made no scruple to Ordein and Consecrate others
gratis, certainly did not forbear his own Consecration with the apparent
hazard of the loss of his Bishopric, out of scruple of Conscience. Thirdly,
this aspersion is not well accommodated to the times, For first Zuinglianisme
was but short heeled in those Days when Bishop Barlow was Consecrated, who
sat in Parliament as a Consecrated Bishop 31. Henr. 8: and the first Sermon
that ever Zuinglius Preached as a Probationer, was in Zurick in the year 1510.
that was in the 10. or 11. year of Henry the eighth. If there were any one
Zuinglian in those days, upon their grounds, it is most likely to have been
Bishop Gardener, for his Consecration does not appear more then Bishop
Barlowes.

But there is yet a greater mistake in it; it is the Anabaptists who reject
Ordination, and content themselves with the extraordinary calling of the
Spirit, not the Zuinglians. In the writings of Zuinglius we find a Letter of
him and ten other of the principal Helvetian Theologians, to the Bishop of
Constance; beseeching him in all humility and observance, to favor and help
forward their beginnings, as an excellent work and worthy of a Bishop; They
implore his Clemency, Wisdom, learning, that he would be the first fruits of
the German Bishops; They beseech him by the Common Christ, by that fatherly
affection which he owes unto them, to look graciously upon them etc; They
court him to show himself a Father, and grant the request of his obedient
sons, Zuinglius and the Zuinglians liked Bishops well enough, if he could
have had them. But the Bishop of Constance of another Communion was their
Bishop.

Here Meanderlike they make a winding from St. Asaph back again to Cheapside,
from Bishop Barlowes Consecration to Archbishop Parkers. They say, that if
there had been any other Consecration of Archbishop Parker then that of the
Nagges head, John Stow would not conceal it in his Annals; who is so diligent
in setting down all that passed in and about London, and professes personal
respect to him, he having related the Consecration of Cardinal Pole with so
many particulars. They add out of Dr. Champney, that John Stow acknowledged to
many persons that the story of the Nagges head was true. Their store is very
low, when they are forced to produce John Stow, who scarce knew what a
Consecration was. But what says he in his Chronicles? Not a word, either of
the feigned Consecration at the Nagges head, or of the true Consecration at
Lambeth. But he told it to many persons by word of mouth, that the Story of the
Nagges head was very true. If he did, he lied notoriously to many persons, but
we acquit him of that calumny: let it rest upon them, who think it a
meritorious Act, to advance religion by any means true or false, we are too
well acquainted with their hearsay reports. They who dare wrest his printed
works, ought not to be trusted what he spoke by word of mouth, to some body,
whom no body knows. Their Author says to some persons, they say to many
persons, thus this snowball increases. John Stowe is now dead, and dead men do
not bite: yet let us know to whom he said it? Doctor Champney tells us, they
are ^imorous and would not be named. Good reason, for they have no names: so
John Stow is a silent witness, and they are namelesse witnesses.

So much for the man: now for the thing I give three answers; First if John
Stow were a lover of the truth, he should rather have set down the Nagges head
Ordination (if there was any such thing) then the Lambeth Ordination. Men would
suppose the Lambeth Ordination of themselves, where nothing is said to the
contrary, it is presumed for the Law: but the Nagges head Consecration, had
been such a Consecration, as never was before, never will follow after.

Secondly, their Authors wrest John Stow abhominably. He was no professed writer
of Ecclesiastical Annals. It is true he mentions the Consecration of
Cardinal Pole, whether it was his respect to his Eminence, as being a near
Kinsman to the Queen, a Cardinal, the Popes Legate, and his grand Minister for
the reconciliation of England, or because a toy took him in the head: but not
with so many particulars as the Fathers intimate; all he says is this, the 21
of March Dr. Cranmer Archbishop of Canterbury was burnt at Oxford, the same day
Cardinal Pole sang his first Mass at Greenwich in the Friars Church, on
Sunday next he was Consecrated Archbishop of Canterbury (here was speedy
work), and the 25 of March received the Pall with the usual Ceremonies at
Bows Church in Cheap. Here is another Nagges head meeting; where he was
Consecrated, by whom, after what Form, he leaves the Reader to presume: but of
all the other Consecrations performed in Queen Mary's time, this diligent
Author mentions not so much as one; of all the Consecrations in Queen
Elizabeth's time, I think not one; of all the Consecrations in England since the
Conquest, not one, or so rarely that they are not to be taken notice of. If the
Argument of these Fathers were of any value John Stow mentions not his
Consecration at Lambeth, therefore he was not Consecrated there, we never had a
Consecration in England, since the Conquest, but Cardinal ' Poles: for he
mentions none but that which I remember, I am sure if he mention any it is
most rarely. If the Fathers argument were good, Archbishop Parker was never
elected, nor confirmed, because his Election and Confirmation are not recordsd
by John Stow: but all our Records Civil as well as Ecclesiastical do testify
the Contrary.

Lastly, if the Fathers would lay aside their prejudice, there is enough in
John Stowes Annals, to discover the falsehood of their lying Fable of the
Consecration at the Nagges head. By their account the Nagges head Consecration
was September 7. Anno 1559, but after this in relating the solemn Obsequies
kept in St. Paul's Church, for the French King, John Stow calls him, Dr.
Parker Archbishop of Canterbury Elect, therefore the Nagges head Consecration
is a lying Fable; if he was still Elect, he was not then Consecrated. But
afterward speaking of his Death May 17. 1575, which is the next time I find him
mentioned, he styles him the right Reverend Father in God Matthew Parker Dr.
of Divinity Archbishop of Canterbury. Here is no more the word Elect, for after
Confirmation and Consecration, the word Elect cease, here he is complete
Archbishop of Canterbury.

They say, they who make no Conscience to falsify Scripture will forge Records:
And how notoriously the English Clergy have falsified Scripture, is
Demonstrated by Gregory Martin. I hope none of us did ever attempt to purge St.
Paul's Epistles, because there were in them, Quaedam male sonamia, Somethings
that sounded not well, in the point of Justification. We desire good words,
until they be able to prove their allegation. Rather then be accounted
falsifiers of Scripture, we are contented to stand to the vulgar Latin, in any
Controversy between them and us. But who is the man does accuse us of so many
Falsifications? One Gregory Martin, one of their fellows, whose censure we do
not weigh a button. This is a new Inartificiall Kind of arguing, from the
Authority of their own Writers.

But they use it much, so it follows in the next words, it is want of Charity
to think that Stapleton, Harding, Bristow and the rest of the English Catholic
Doctors, who did forsake all at home for Conscience sake, would publish to the
world in print, the Nullity of Parkers Ordination; thereby engaging posterity
to commit so many damnable Sacrileges, in reordeining those who had been
validly ordained already, without due examination of the matter. This plea is
much like that of the old Roman, that his Adversary, did not receive the wound
with his whole body, that he might have killed him fairly. They would have us
rather put up the loss of our Holy Orders, then the skill of their Doctors
should be questioned. If Reordinatio^ be damnable Sacrilege, the Authority of
your own Doctors may be a fit medium to convince yourselves of Sacrilege, not
us of the Invalidity of our Ordination. I hope Stephen the sixth and Sergius
the third, two Popes, were other manner of men then your English Doctors, and
did both pretend to examine the matter as duly, and to be as a verse from
damnable Sacrilege as you, yet they decreed publicly, and most unjustly, (as
you yourselves do now confess) that all the holy Orders received from
Formosus were void, and compelled all those who had been ordained by him, to be
reordeined. Bell. de Romans Pont. l. 4. cap. 12.

Mr. Mason cited the Testimony of a witness beyond all exception, Charles
Howard Earl of Nottingham, Lord High Admiral of England, who acknowledged
Archbishop Parker to be his Kinsman, and that he was an invited Guest at his
Consecration at Lambeth. To this the Fathers reply, If this were true, it
proves only that there was a good Dinner at Lambeth, which might well be to
conceal the shameful Consecration at the Nagges head. It proves there was a
good Consecration, as well as a good Dinner, the words are to honor his
Consecration, and the solemnity thereof with his presence. It had been
something uncivil, to encumber the Tavern with a Consecration, and not stay
dinner there. The Earl was invited to the Consecration, at Lambeth, therefore
it was at Lambeth, The Earl was not at the Nagges head; Mr. Neale himself, who
see more then ever was acted, or so much as thought of, did not see that. Is it
the Custom when one is invited to a Consecration, to come after it is done to
dinner: or to invite a Nobleman to a Consecration in one place, and then be
consecrated in another? This had been so far from concealing the
shamefulnesse of such a brainsick Consecration, that it been a ready means to
divulge it to all the world.

They add, Besides we must take the Earls Friends word for the Earls
Testimony, and Mr. Masons word for his namelesse Friend. That is none of Mr.
Masons fault, but Mr. Holywoods, Mr. Constables, Mr. Sacroboscoes, Dr.
Champneys, Mr. Fitz Herberts, Mr Fitz-Simons, who first broached this odious
Fable. Mr. Mason published this relation to the world in print while the Earl
was yet living, on purpose that they might enquire and satisfy themselves; if
they did not, they can blame no body but themselves; if they did by themselves
or their Friends, (as it is most likely they did) it is evident the answer did
not content them, and so we never heard more of them since. It had been the
greatest folly in the world to allege the Testimony of such a Noble man in his
Life time, contrary to his own knowledge, which might have been disproved from
his own Authority, and so have easily laid Mr. Mason flat upon his back. You
may remember your own case with the Bishop of Durham. But it was too true to be
contradicted then, and too late to be Contradicted now.

They say, they bring more then one witness of the Nagges head Consecration.
Pardon me, You never produced one yet, and which is less then producing, you
never so much as named a witness, whilst he himself was living. In or about
the year 1603. you first named Mr. Neale and innocent John Stow, when they
were both dead; you might as well have named the man in the Moon as John Stow.
Only I confess you named the Bishop of Durham in his life time, and you see
what is the issue of it: and if you had named the others in their life times,
you must have expected a like issue, either the perpetual infamy of your
witness, or the utter confusion of your Cause. You speak much of the
learning, and virtue, and judgment of your hearsay Witnesses, who knew how to
distinguish between an Episcopal Consecration, and a banquet. I hope you do
not mean that the Earl of Nottingham did not know, how to distinguish between
a banquet and a Consecration, if he did not, the High Admiralship of England
was ill committed to him: or that he had not as much regard to his honor and
Conscience, as any of your Priests. We meddle not with their Learning and
virtue, but we are no more obliged to take their Testimonies upon hearsay, then
they would take our Testimonies. They have give^ an account to God, and know
before this time whether they have done well or ill.

They proceed, The Priests and Jesuits, to whom the Records were showed in
King James his time, protested against them as forged and improbable, as
appears by the Testimony of men yet living, whose honesty cannot be called in
question. Father Faircloth, one of the imprisoned Jesuits, testified so much to
many by word of mouth and in writing. Where is the writing? where is the
protestation? why are they not produced? Still here are no proofs but upon
Hearsay. One eye Witness is worth an hundred such, who can swear to no more
but that they heard it, and God knows through how many Hucksters hands. I hope
the Bishop of Durhams case will make them more wary for the future.

But they are angry with some Protestants, who endeavor to make this well
grounded story a mere Fable, and thereby call many persons of much more
learning, virtue, and prudence then themselves Fools or knaves. We are plain
Macedonians, who call a Fable a Fable, without either welt or guard: yea, so
notorious a Fable, that (but that you tell us the Contrary), we could not
believe that any one of you did ever give any credit to it your selves; any
more then the Athenians did believe those monstrous Fables of Bulls and
Minotaures, which themselves had raised, because some of their eminent Citizens
had devised it or related it: But we call no men Fools or Knaves, That
langguage is too unmannerly for civil Writers. What new Topic is this,
because we cannot believe a ^mans relation or his Judgment, do we straightway
call him Fool or Knave? Excuse me, there are credulity, and prejudice, and
mistakes, and pious frauds in the world, and none of these will willingly wear
the Livery of Knaves or Fools. We are not of the same mind with Pope Stephen
and Pope Sergius, for the reordeining of those, who had been ordained by
Formosus, yet we do not call them knaves or Fools. We cannot believe what you
yourselves have related of my Lord of Durham, yet we are not guilty of such
extravagant expressions.

CAP. IX. The Fathers insist too much upon the Authority of their own party,
Why Consecration is not mentioned at Restitution, The exactness of our
Records justified.
IT seems to me, that the Fathers insist too much upon the honesty, and
virtue, and learning of their own party* In dispute with an Adversary, virtue
is like fire, which preserves it self by being covered with ashes: but spread
abroad by ostentation, it is quickly extinguished; especially Comparisons are
odious, and beget altercation. We say, there is not a Hill so high in
Lincolnshire, but there is another within a Mile as high as it: take you the
reputation of learning and prudence, so you leave us the better cause; and we
shall be able to defend it well enough against you. But the maine defect in
this part of your discourse is this, the Bishop of Chalced^^ confesses of Mr.
Oldcorn, one of your Order, that he acknowledged these Records to be
Authentic, and the rest of the imprisoned Priests, who viewed the Records, are
charged publicly in print to have done the same, by Bishop Goodwin, by Mr.
Mason; every thing ought to be unloosed the same way it is bound. They were all
Scholars and could write, if this charge were not true, they ought to have
published a Protestation to the world in print to the contrary, whilst their
Adversaries were living, whilst the Witnesses were living: but now after they
and their Adversaries, and the witnesses are all so long dead, to talk of a
verbal protestation to some of their Friends, upon hearsay, signifies nothing.

Now we must make another winding, and return to Bishop Barlow: but I hold to
the clue, in hope at length to get out of this fictitious Labyrinth. Henry the
8. Letters Patents, whereby Bishop Barlow was installed in (they would say
restored to) the Temporalties of his Bishopric, make mention of his
acceptance and Confirmation, but none of his Consecration. why should this
last be omitted, if he were really consecrated? This objectio^ shows nothing,
but the unskilfulnesse of the Fathers in our English Customs and Forms. Let
them compare all the restitutions of their friends to their Temporalties in
England, as Cardinal Poles, Bishop Gardiners and the rest, and they shall find
the Form the very same with Bishop Barlowes; I hope they will not conclude
thence that none of them were consecrated. The reason of the Form is very
prudent, In a Restitution to Temporalties, they take no notice of any Acts that
are purely Spiritual, as Consecration is: but only of such Acts as are
Temporal, as Acceptance and Confirmation.

But if he was restored to his Temporalties not being Consecrated, he might
also sit in Parliament without Consecration. The Assumtion is understood, but
Bishop Barlow was restored to his Temporalties without Consecration; which is
most false. From the Conversion of the Nation until this Day, they are not
able to produce one instance, of one Bishop, who was duly Elected, duly
confirmed, and duly restored to his Temporalties by the Kings Mandate, without
Consecration, or did sit in Parliament without Consecration. He must sit in
Parliament in his Episcopal habit, but that cannot be before Consecration. It
seems they think that Bishops sit in Parliament, as Temporal Barons: but it
a great mistake, Bishops sat in the Great Counsels of the Kingdom, before
the names of Parliament or Barons were heard of in England.

They bring an Argument from the exactness of our Records, and that connection
that is between Records of one Court and another. The first thing necessary to
obtein a Bishopric in England, is the Kings Conge d'eslire; that appears in
the Rolls. Next, the actual Election; that appears in the Records of the
Dean and Chapter. Thirdly, the Kings Acceptance of the Election, and his
Commission to the Archbishop, or four Bishops in the Vacancy, to Confirm the
Election and Consecrate the person Elected and Confirmed legally; that appears
in the Letters Patents enrolled. Fourthly, the Confirmation of the Election
before the Dean of the Arches, but by the Archbishops appointment, (this is
performed always in Bow Church, except extraordinarily it be performed
elsewhere by Commission); this appears in the Records of the Archbishop.
Fifthly, the Consecration it self by the Archbishop and other Bishops, or other
Bishops without him by virtue of his Commission; this appears in the Records
of the Protonothary of the Sea of Canterbury. Lastly the Restitution of the
Temporalties; which appears in the Rolls, and his Enthronisation in the
Records of the Dean and Chapter. Every one of these takes another by the hand,
and he who will enjoy a Bishopric in England, must have them all. The Chapter
cannot elect without the Kings Conge d'Eslire. The King never grants his
Letters Patents for Confirmation and Consecration, until he have a Certificate
of the Dea^ and Chapiters Election. The Dean of the Arches never confirms,
until he have the Kings Commission. The Archbishop never Consecrates until
the Election be confirmed. And lastly the King never receives Homage for the
Bishopric, or gives the Temporalties, nor the Dea^ and Chapter Enthrone,
until after Consecration. He that has any one of these acts, must of
Necessity have all that go before it in this Method: and he that has the
last, has them all. But this was more then Mr. Neale, or whosoever was
Inventer of that silly Fable, did understa^d, otherwise he would have framed a
more possible relation.

Hence they argue, The Records being so exact, how is it possible that no
Copies of Barlowes Consecration do appear in any Court or Bishopric of
England? They mistake the matter wholly, the Consecration ought not to appear
in any Court but one, that is that Registry where he was Consecrated, which
being not certainly known, at so great a distance of time, is not so easily
found, and I believe was neversought for yet further the^ Lambeth. But all the
other Acts do appear in their proper Courts; The Kings License, the Dean and
Chapiters Election, the Kings Letters Patents, the Confirmation of the Dean of
the Arches, which all go before Consecration: and his doing Homage, and the
Restitution of him to his Temporalties, and his Enthronisation, all which do
follow the Consecration, and are infallible proofs in Law of the Consecration:
as likewise his sitting in Parliament, his Ordeining of Priests, his
Consecrating of Bishops, his letting of Leases, his receiving of Heriditame^ts
to him and his Successors, his exchanging of Lands; all which are as
irrefragable proofs of his Consecration, as any man has to prove that such
persons were his Parents, either Father or Mother. And when the right Register
is sought, which must be by the help of the Court of Faculties, I doubt not but
his Consecration will be found in the proper place, as all the rest are.

Mr. Mason alleged, that Bishop Gardiners Consecration was not to be found in
the Register of Lambeth, any more then Bishop Barlowes: yet no man doubted of
his Ordination. They answer first, that Mr. Mason did not seek so solicito^sly
or diligently for Bishop Gardiners Consecration, as for Bishop Barlowes. Then
why do not they whom it does concern, cause more diligent search to be made?
without finding the Records of Bishop Gardiners Consecration, they cannot
accuse Bishop Barlow of want of Consecration, upon that only reason. Secondly
they answer, that if Gardiners Consecration, were as doubtful as Barlowes and
Parkers, they would take the same advise they give us, to repair with speed to
some other Church of undoubted Clergy. Yes, where will they find a more
undoubted Clergy? They may go further and fare worse. Rome itself has not
more exact Records, nor a more undoubted Succession, then the Church of
England. There is no reason in the world to doubt either of Archbishop Parkers
Consecration, or Bishop Gardiners, or Bishop Barlowes. Neither does his
Consecration concern us so much, at the Fathers imagine: there were three
Consecraters (which is the Canonical number) besides him.

It is high time for the Fathers to wind up, and draw to a Conclusion of this
Argument. That which follows next is too high and can scarcely be tolerated;
to accuse the public Records and Archives of the Kingdom, and to insimulate
the Primates and Metropolitans of England of Forgery, upon no ground but their
own Imagination. I doubt whether they durst offer it to a widow Woman. As to
the impossibility of forging so many Registers, in case there be so many, it is
easily answered, that it is no more then that the Consecraters and other
persons concerned, should have conspired to give in a false Certificate, that
the Consecration was performed with all due Ceremonies and Rites, and thereby
deceive the Courts or make them dissemble. Should any man accuse the General
of their order, or one of their Provincialls, or but the Rector of one of their
Colleges, of Forgery and counterfeiting the public Records of the Order; how
would they storm, and thunder, and mingle heaven and earth together and cry
out. No moderate or prudent persons can suspect that such persons should damn
their souls, that so many pious learned Divines should engage themselves and
their posterity, in damnable Sacrileges, without fear of damnation. If a man
will not believe every ridiculous Fable, which they tell by word of mouth upon
hearsay, they call persons of more virtue learning and prudence then
themselves, Fools and Knaves: But they may insimulate the principal Fathers
of our Church, of certifying most pernicious lies under their hands and seals,
not for a piece of bread, which is a poor temptation, but for nothing, that is
to make them both Fools and Knaves. Is not this blowing hot and cold with the
same breath? or to have the Faith of our Lord Jesus Christ with respect of
persons? Compare the political principles of the Church of England with your
own, and try if you can find any thing so pernicious to mankind and all humane
Society, in ours more then in yours. Compare the Case Theology of the Church of
England, with your own, and try if you can find any thing so destructive to
Morality, to truth, and Justice, and Conscience, as might lead us to perpetrate
such Crimes more then yourselves. We are not afraid of a Parallel. You
profess great endeavors to make Proselites; we do not condemn Zeal, yet
wish you had more light with it: even in prudence, which you yourselves extol,
this is not your right Course, to follow those Birds, with noise and clamor,
which you desire to catch.

In sum, your answer or solution is full of ignorant mistakes. It confounds
Civil Rolls and Ecclesiastical Registers. It supposes that our Records are
but transcriptions, one out of another; whereas every Court records its own
Acts, and keeps itself within its own bounds. It takes notice but of one
Consecrater: where as we have always three at the least, many times five or
six. It quite forgets public Notaries, which must be present at every
Consecration with us, to draw up what is done into Acts; with us every one of
these Notaries when he is admitted to that charge, does take a solemn Oath
upon his knees to discharge his Office faithfully, that is, not to make false
Certificates. Secondly, it is absurd and unseasonable, to enquire how a thing
came to pass that never was: you ought First to have proved, that our Records
were forged, and then it had been more seasonable to have enquired modestly,
how it came to pass. Thirdly, it is incredible, that persons of such prudence
and eminence, should make false Certificates under their hands and seals, to
the utter ruin of themselves and all that had a hand it, and no advantage to
any person breathing. It is incredible that those Records should be
counterfeited in a corner, which were avowed publicly for Authentic by the
whole Parliament of England in the 8 year of Queen Elisabeth; which were
published to the world in print by the person most concerned, as if he dared
all the world to except against them: and yet no man offered to except against
them then. Fourthly, it is impossible to give in a false Certificate of a
Consecration which was never performed in England, (especially at Lambeth)
before less then thousands of eye witnesses: and that at Lambeth, in the Face
of the Court and Westminster Hall. Surely they think we consecrate in Closets,
or holes, or hay mowes. They may even as well say that the public Acts of our
Parliaments are counterfeited, and the public Acts of our Synods are
counterfeited, and all our public monuments counterfeited. It is none of the
honestest Pleas, Negare factum, to deny such public Acts as these. Fifthly,
this answer is pernicious to mankind, it is destructive to all Societies of
men, that Bishops of so great eminence, should conspire with public Notaries,
to give in false Certificates, in a matter of such High Consequence as Holy
Orders are, without any temptation, without any hope of Advantage to them
selves or others. It affords a large Seminary for jealousies and suspicions.
It exterminateth all credit and confidence out of the world, and instructs
all men to trust nothing, but what they see with their eyes. Lastly, it is
contradictory to themselves; They have told us, I know not how often, and tell
us again in this Paragraph, That if the Nagges head Consecration had been
false, they might have convinced it by a thousand witnesses: Here they make it
an easy thing, for the Consecraters and other persons concerned, to conspire
together to give in a false Certificate, that the Consecration was performed
with all due Ceremonies and Rites, and thereby deceive the Courts or make them
dissemble. If the world will be deceived so, it is but right and reason that it
be deceived; to be deceived by a false Certificate, that may be convinced by a
thousand witnesses, is selfdeceit.

But they say, this is more possible and more probable, then that all the
Clergy should conspire not to produce the same Registers, when they were so
hardly pressed by their Adversaries. These are but empty pretenses, there was
no pressing to produce Registers, nor any thing objected that did deserve the
production of a Register. That which was objected against our Orders in those
days was about the Form of Ordination published by Edward the sixth, and the
Legality of our Ordination in the time of Queen Elisabeth; the Nagges head
Consecration was never objected in those days. Besides, Registers are Public
enough themselves, and need no production; and yet our Registers were produced,
produced by the Parliament 8 Elisab. who cited them as authentic Records,
produced and published to the world in Print, that was another production.

They add, Or that so many Catholics should have been so foolish to invent or
maintein the Story of the Nagges head, in such a time when if it had been
false, they might have been convinced by a thousand Witnesses. Fear them not,
they were wiser then to publish such a notorious Fable in those days; they
might perchance whisper it in Corners among themselves, but the boldest of them
durst not maintain it, or object it in print, for fear of shame and disgrace.
It was folly to give any ear to it, but is was knavery to invent it: and to
do it after such a bungling manner, (whosoever was the Inventer) was knavery
and Folly complicated together.

If the Fathers write any more upon this subject, I desire them to bring us no
more hearesay testimonies of their own party; whatsoever esteem they may have
themselves, of their judgment, and prudence, and impartiality. It is not the
manner of Polemick writers to urge the authority of their own Doctors to an
Adversary, or allege the modern practice of their present Church. We have our
own Church and our own Doctors as well as they. If we would pin our faith
to the sleeves of their Writers, and submit to their judgments, and believe all
their reports, and let all things be as they would have it, we needed not to
have any more controversy with them: but we might well raise a worse
controversy in our selves with our own consciences.

CHA. XI. Of our forms of Episcopal and priestly ordination, of
Zuinglianisme, of Arch Bishop Lavvd, of ceremonies. Our assurance of our Orders.
WE have done with the Nagges head for the present. That which follows next
does better become Scholars, as having more show of truth and reality in it.
They object that in all the Catholic Ritualls, not only of the west but of
the East, there is not one form of consecrating Bishops, that has not the
word Bishops in it, or some other words expressing the particular authority and
power of a Bishop distinctly. But in our Consecration, there is not one word to
express the difference and power of Episcopacy. For these words [receive the
holy Ghost] are indifferent to priesthood and Episcopacy, and used in both
Ordinations. I answer, that the form of Episcopal Ordination used at the same
time when hands are imposed, is the same both in their form and ours, [
Receive the holy Ghost], And if these words be considered singly in a divided
sense from the rest of the Office, there is nothing either in our form or
theirs which does distinctly and reciprocally express Episcopal power and
Authority. But if these words be considered coniointly in a compounded sense,
there is enough to express Episcopal power and authority distinctly, and as
much in our form as theirs.

First two Bishops present the Bishop elect to the Archbishop of the Province,
with these words, most Reverend Father in Christ, we present to you this godly
and learned man to be Consecrated Bishop. There is one expression.

Then the Archbishop causes the Kings Letters Patents to be produced and
read, which require the Arch Bishop to consecrate him a Bishop. There is a
second expression.

Thirdly the new Bishop takes his oath of canonical obedience. I A B elected
Bishop of the Church and See of C. do profess and promise all reverence and
due obedience to the Arch Bishop and Metropoliticall Church of D. and his
Successors. So God help me etc. This is a third Expression.

Next the Arch Bishop exhorts the whole Assembly* to solemn prayer for this
person thus elected and presented, before they admit him to that office (that
is the Office of a Bishop,) whereunto they hope he is called by the holy Ghost,
after the example of Christ before he did choose his Apostles, and the church of
Antioch before they laid hands upon Paul and Barnabas. This is a fourth
expression.

Then follows the Litany, wherein there is this express petition for the
person to be ordained Bishop, we beseech thee to give thy blessing and grace to
this our brother elected Bishop, that he may discharge that office whereunto he
is called diligently to the Edification of thy Church. To which all the
congregation answer, Hear us O Lord we beseech thee. Here is a fifth
expression.

Then follows this prayer wherewith the Litany is concluded. Allmighty God,
the giver of all good things, which by thy holy Spirit have constituted diverse
orders of Ministers in thy Church, vouchsafe we beseech the to look graciously
upon this thy servant, now called to the Office of a Bishop. This is a sixth
expression.

Next the Archbishop tells him he must examine him, before he admit him to
that administration whereunto he is called, and makes a solemn prayer for
him, that God who has constituted some Prophets, some Apostles etc. to the
Edification of his Church, would grant to this his servant the grace to use the
authority committed to him, to edification not destruction, to distribute food
in due season to the family of Christ, as becomes a faithful and prudent
Steward. This authority can be no other then Episcopal authority, nor this
Stewardship any other thing then Episcopacy. This is a seve^th expressio^.

Then follows imposition of hands, by the Archbishop and all the Bishops
present, with these words Receive the holy Ghost etc: and lastly the tradition
of the Bible into his hands, exhorting him to behave himself toward the flock
of Christ, as a Pastor, not devouring but feeding the flock. All this implies
Episcopal authority. They may except against Christ's own form of ordeining
his Apostles if they will, and against the form used by their own Church: but
if they be sufficient forms, our form is sufficient. This was the same form
which was used in Edward the sixths time, and we have seen how Cardinal Pole
and Paul the fourth confirmed all without exception, that were ordained
according to this form; so they would reunite themselves to the Roman
Catholic Church.

They bring the very same objection against our Priestly Ordination, The form
or words whereby men are made Priests must express authority and power to
consecrate, or make present Christ's body and blood, (whether with or without
transubstantiation is not the present controversy with Protestants.) Thus far
we accord, to the truth of the presence of Christ's body and blood; So they
leave us this latitude for the manner of his presence. Abate us
Transubstantiation, and those things which are consequents of their
determination of the manner of presence, and we have no difference with them in
this particular. They who are ordained Priests, ought to have power to
consecrate the Sacrament of the body and blood of Christ, that is, to make them
present after such manner as they were present ar the first institution;
whether it be done by enunciation of the words of Christ, as it is observed in
the western Church, or by prayer, as it is practiced in the Eastern Church;
or whether these two be both the same thing in effect, that is, that the forms
of the Sacraments be mystical prayers and implicit invocations. Our Church
for more abundant caution uses both forms, as well in the Consecration of the
Sacrament, as in the ordination of Priests. In the holy Eucharist, our
consecration is a repetition of that which was done by Christ, and now done by
him that consecrateth in the person of Christ: otherwise the Priest could not
say this is my body. And likewise in Episcopal Consecration, Homo imponit
manus, deus largitur gratiam, Sacerdos imponit supplicem dex^eram, Deus
benedicit potente dex^era: Man imposes hands, God conferreth grace, The Bishop
imposes his suppliant right hand, God blesses with his Almighty right hand.
In both consecrations Christ himself is the chief consecrater still, Then if
power of consecration be nothing else but power to do that which Christ did, and
ordained to be done, our Priests want not power to consecrate. They add, in
all forms of Ordeining Priests, that ever were used in the Eastern or
Western Church, is expressly set down the word Priest, or some other words
expressing the proper function and authority of Priesthood etc. The Grecians
using the word Priest or Bishop in their forms, do sufficiently express the
respective power of every Order. But our Reformers did not put into the form
of ordeining Priests, any words expressing authority to make Christ's body
present. I answer, that if by forms of ordeining Priests, they understa^d that
essential form of words, which is used at the same instant of time whilst
hands are imposed, I deny that in all forms of Priestly ordination, the word
Priest is set down either expressly or aequivalently. It is set down expressly
in the Eastern Church, it is not set down expressly in the Western Church.
Both the Eastern and Western forms are lawful, but the Western comes
nearer to the institution of Christ.

But if by forms of Ordeining, they understand Ordinalls or Ritualls, or the
entire form of ordeining: both our Church and their Church have not only
aequivalent expressions of Priestly power, but even the express word Priest it
self, which is sufficient both to direct and to express the intention of the
Consecrater. Under that name the Arch Deacon prese^teth them, Right Reverend
Father in Christ, I present unto you these persons here present, to be admitted
to the Order of Priesthood. Under that name the Bishop admits them, well
beloved brethren, these are they whom we purpose by the grace of God this day
to admit [cooptare] into the holy office of Priesthood. Under this name the
whole assembly prays for them, Almighty God, vouchsafe we beseech thee to
look graciously upon these thy servants, which this day are called to the
office of Priesthood. It were to be wished, that writers of Controversies would
make more use of their own eyes, and trust less other men's citations.

Secondly I answer, that it is not necessary, that the essential forms of
Sacraments should be always so very express and determinate, that the words
are not capable of extension to any other matter: if they be as determinate and
express, as the example and prescription of Christ, it is sufficient. The
form of baptism is, I baptize the in the name of the Father, and of the Son,
and of the Holy Ghost: Not I baptize the to Regeneration, or for Remission of
sins. There are many other kinds of baptismes or washings, besides this
Sacramental baptism: yet this form is as large as the institution of Christ.
And these general words are efficacious both to regeneration and remission of
sins, as well as if regeneration and remission of sins had been expressly
mentioned. In this form of baptism, there is enough antecedent to direct and
regulate both the actions and intentions of the Minister: So there is likewise
in our form of Ordination.

Thirdly I answer, that in our very essential form of Priestly Ordination,
Priestly power and authority is sufficiently expressed; we need not seek for a
needle in a bottle of hay. The words of our Ordinall are clear enough. First
Receive the Holy Ghost, (That is the grace of the holy Ghost) to exercise and
dicharge the Office of Priesthood, to which thou have been now presented, to
which thou have been now accepted, and for which we have prayed to God, that in
it thou may disscharge thy duty faithfully and acceptably.

Secondly, in these words, whose sins thou do remit they are remitted, that
is not only by Priestly absolution: but by preaching, by baptising, by
administering the holy Eucharist, which is a means to apply the alsufficient
sacrifice of Christ, for the remission of Sins. He who authoriseth a man to
accomplish a work, does authorize him to use all means which tend to the
accomplishment thereof,

That which is objected, that Laymen have power to remit sins by Baptism,
but no power to consecrate, signifies nothing as to this point. For first
their own Doctors do acknowledge, that a Lay man can not baptize solemnly,
nor in the presence of a Priest or a Deacon, Bell. de Sac. Bapt. l. 1. c. 7.
nor in their absence, except only in case of necessity. Saint Austin gives
the reason, because no man may invade another man's office. Lay men may, and are
bound to instruct others in case of necessity: yet the office of preaching and
instructing others is Conferred by Ordination. The ordinary office of remitting
sins, both by baptism and by the holy Eucharist, does belong to Bishops and
under the^ to Priests.

Thirdly, this Priestly power to consecrate is contained in these words, Be
thou a faithful dispenser of the word of God, and Sacraments. And afterward,
when the Bishop delivers the holy Bible into the hands of those who are
ordained Priests, Have thou authority to preach the word of God, and Administer
the Sacraments. We do not deny, but Deacons have been admitted to distribute
and Minister the Sacraments, by the Command or permission of Priests, or as
Subservient unto them: but there is as much difference between a subservie^t
distributio^ of the Sacrament, and the Dispensing or Administering of it, as
there is between the Office of a Porter who distributeth the alms at the
gate, and the Office of the Steward who is the proper dispenser of it. Look to
it Gentlemen; If your own Ordination be valide, Ours is as valide, and more
pure.

They make the cause of these defects in our form of Ordination, to be,
because Zuinglianisme and Puritanisme did prevail in the English Church in
those days. They bele^ved not the real presence: therefore they put no word
in their form expressing power to consecrate. They held Episcopacy and
Priesthood to be one and the same thing: Therefore they put not in one word
expressing the Episcopal Function. This is called leaping over the style
before a man comes at it, To devise reasons of that which never was. First
prove our defects, if you can: And then find out a^ many reasons of them as you
list. But to say the truth; the cause and the effect are well coupled together.
The cause, that is the Zuinglianisme of our predecessors, never had any real
existence in the nature of things, but only in these men's imaginations: So the
defects of our Ordinalls are not real but imaginary. Herein the Fathers
adventured to far, to tell us that we have nothing in our forms of
Ordeining, to express either the Priestly or Episcopal function: when every
child that is able to read can tell them, that we have the express words of
Bishops and Priests in our Forms, over and over again, And maintain to all
the the world that the three Orders, In praefa^ione.
of Bishops Priests and Deacons, have been ever from the beginning in the
Church of Christ.

This they say is the true reason, why Parker and his Colleagues were contented
with the Nagges head Consecration, (that is to say, one brainsick whimsey is
the reason of another): and why others recurred to extraordinary vocation in
Queen Elisabeths time. Say what others? name one genuine son of the Church of
England if you can? Doctor Whitakers, and Doctor Fulke, who are the only two
men mentioned by you, are both professedly against you. Doctor Whitakers says
we do not condemn all the Order of Bishops, as he falsely slanders us, De
Eccles. cont. 2. q. 5 c. 3.
but only the false Bishops of the Church of Rome. And Doctor Fulke, for Order
and seemly government among the Clergy, there was allwaies one Principal, to
whom the name of Bishop or Superintendent has been applied, which room Titus
exercised in Crete, Timothy in Ephesus, In Titum c. 1
others in other Places. Adding, that the Ordination, or Consecration, by
imposition of hands, was always principally committed to him.

The Fathers proceed, If Mr. Lawd had found success in his first attempts, it
is very credible, he would in time have reformed the Form of the English
Ordination. That pious and learned Prelate wanted not other degrees in Church
and Schools, which they omit. He was a great lover of peace, but too judicious
to dance after their pipe, too much versed in Antiquity to admit their new
matter and form, or to attempt to correct the Magnificat for satisfaction of
their humors. But whence had they this credible Relation? We are very
confident, they have neither Author nor ground for it, but their own
imagination. And if it be so, what excuse they have for it in their Case
Divinity, they know best: but in ours we could not excuse it from down right
calumny.

They have such an eye at our order and uniformity, that they can not let our
long Cloakes and Surplesses alone. We never had any such animosities among us
about our Cloakes, as some of their Religious Orders have had about their
gowns: both for the color of them, whether they should be black, or white, or
gray, or the natural Color of the sheep; And for the fashion them, whether
they should belong or short etc, in so much as two Popes successively could not
determine it.

If Mr. Mason did commend the wisdom of the English Church, for paring away
superfluous Ceremonies in Ordination, he did well. Ceremonies are advancements
of Order, decency, modesty, and gravity in the service of God, Expressions of
those heavenly desires and dispositions, which we ought to bring along with us
to Gods house, Adjuments of attention and devotion, Furtherances of
Edification, visible instructers, helps of Memory, excercises of faith, the
shell that preserves the Kernel of Religion from contempt, the leaves that
defend the blossoms and the fruit: but if they grow over thick and rank,
they hinder the fruit from coming to maturity, and then the Gardener* pluckes
them of. There is great difference between the hearty expressions of a
faithful Friend, and the mimicall gestures of a fawning flatterer: betwee^ the
unaffected comelenesse of a grave Matrone, and the fantastical paintings, and
patchings, and powderings, of a garish Curtesan.

When Ceremonies become burdensome by excessive superfluity, or unlawful
Ceremonies are obtruded, or the Substance of divine worship is placed in
Circumstances, or the service of God is more respected for humane ornaments
then for the Divine Ordinance; it is high time to pare away excesses, and
reduce things to the ancient mean.

These Fathers are quite out, where they make it lawful at some times to add,
but never to pare away: yet we have pared away nothing, which is either
prescribed or practiced by the true Catholic Church. If our Ancestors have
pared away any such things out of any mistake, (which we do not believe,) let
it be made appear evidently to us, and we are more ready to welcome it again
at the foredore, then our Ancestors were to cast it out at the backdore.
Errare possumus haeretici esse nolumus.

To conclude, as an impetuous wind does not blow down those trees which are
well radicated, but causes them to spread their roots more firmly in the
earth: so these concussions of our Adversaries, do confirm us in the undoubted
assurance of the truth, and validity, and legality of our holy Orders. We have
no more reason to doubt of the truth of our Orders, because of the different
judgment of an handful of our partial countrymen, and some few foreign
Doctors misinformed by them: then they themselves have to doubt of the truth of
their Orders who were ordained by Formosus, because two Popes Stephen and
Sergius one after another, out of passion and prejudice, declared them to be
void and invalide.

But supposing that which we can never grant, without betraying both our selves
and the truth, that there were some remote probabilities, that might occasion
suspicion in some persons prepossessed with prejudice, of the legality of our
Orders: yet for any man upon such pretended uncerteinties, to leave the
communion of that Church wherein he was baptized, which gave him his Christian
being, and to Apostate to them, where he shall meet with much greater grounds
of fear, both of Schism and Idolatry; were to plo^ge himself in a certain
crime, for fear of an uncertein danger.

Here the Fathers make a brief repetition of whatsoever they have said before
in this discourse, (either out of distrust of the Readers memory, or confidence
of their own achievements,) of the Nagges head, and Mr. Neale, and the
Protestant writers, and Bishop Bancroft, and Bishop Morton and the other
Bishops that sat with him the last Parliament, (which being the only thing
alleged by them in the Authors life time, and proved so undeniably to be
false, is enough to condemn all the rest of their Hearesay reports, for
groundless fables) of our Registers, of King Edwards Bishops, of Bishop
Barlow, and of the form of our ordination; Directing him who will clear all
those doubts, what he has to do, as if we were their Iournymen. Let them not
trouble themselves about that, they are cleared to the least grain.

But if they will receive advise for advise, and pursue a prudentiall course
which they prescribe to others; if they regard the present face of the sky,
and look well to their own interest, and the present conjuncture of their
affairs: they have more need and are more engaged in reputation to defend
themselves, then to oppugn others.

So they conclude their discourse with this short Corollary, How unfortunately
was Charles the first late King of England, misinformed in matter of his
Bishops and Clergy? what scruple could he have had, if he had known the truth,
to give way to the Parliament, to pull down Parliament Bishops, who were so
far from being de jure divino, that they were not so much as de jure
Ecclesiastico? We thank you Gentlemen for your good will, The Orthodox Clergy
of England are your fear. And you know what commonly follows after fear,
Hate, Oderunt quos metuunt. What pity it is that you were not of King Charles
his Council, to have advised him better? yet we observe few Princes thrive
worse, then where you pretend to be great ministers. If you had counseled him
upon this Subject, perhaps you might have found him too hard for you; as
another did whose heart he burst with down right reason. If ever that innocent
King had a finger in the blood of any of that party, that was it, to choke a
man with reason: but certainly that wise Prince would not have much regarded
your positive conclusions, upon hearsay premises.

We hold our Benefices by human right, our offices of Priests and Bishops both
by divine right and humane right. But put the case we did hold our Bishoprics
only by humane right, Is it one of your cases of conscience, that a Sovereign
Prince may justly take away from his Subjects any thing which they hold by
humane right? If one man take from another that which he holds justly by the
law of man, he is a thief and a robber by the law of God. Let us alter the case
a little, from our Bishoprics to their Colleges or their treasures: If any
man should attempt to take them from them, upon this ground because they held
them but by humane right, they would quickly cry out with Ploiden, the case is
altered. Be our right divine, or humane, or both, if we be not able to defend
it against any thing the Fathers can bring against it, we deserve to lose it.

FINIS.
ERRATA.
P. 14. l. 9. r. that the. p. 15. l. 22. r. as to. p. 18. l. 9. and p. 19. l.
10. r. Tob^e, p. 20. l. 20. r. requested. p. 23. l. 2. d. present. p. 30. l. 2
r. Chapel. p. 37. l. 23. r. to present. p. 40. Ma^g* lib. 3. p 47. l. 1. r.
chap. 4. and in like manner correct the number of the chapter, till chap. ^1.
p. 63. l. 21. r. temporal, and commons in p. 76. l. 20. r. 1599. p. 77. l. 8.
Rolls r. Acts. p. 82. l. 20. r. Ac i^dem Decanus and Capitulum etc. And p. 86.
ad l. 24. Marg. add. Rot. par. 14.2. E^^zab. p. 101 l. 10 r. Commissaru. l. 19.
assensu. r. Consilio p. 104. l. ^. Marg. add. Regist. Parker. Tom. 1 sol. 10.
l* 12. r. per Thomam Yale l. 25. r. se adju^^it. p. 105 l. 7. r. dix erunt
Anglico. take etc. as in the Preface, p. 108. l. 25. r. John Incent, p. 117. l.
11. r. Metropolitano salutem, etc. p. 127. l. 7. d. of. p. 154. l. 1. d. that.
p. 162. l. 14. r. 1572. p. 168. l. 14 r^. r. merry and for w. r. we. p. 188. l.
7. r. Fif^ly p. 190. l. ult. r. 31. Iul. p. 191. l. 12. r. number. 27. p. 200. l.
19. r. September 9. p. 211. l. 10. p. 212. l. 12. and p. 213. l. 10. for Dean
of the A^ches r. Archbishop or his Comm^ssioner.


