A CORDIAL-MEDIATOR, for ACCORDANCE of BRETHREN, THAT Are of different
Judgments and ways of Administration, in things that concern the Kingdom of
God: For repairing of the breach, and restoring of the paths for many
generations WHEREIN Is proposed the way and means (not to enforce or compel to
an outward dissembling, hypocritical uniformity, which is all that can be
enforced unto by humane authority, but) to induce and engage to a Cordial
uniformity even of soul and spirit amongst all that are truly and really
Christians; and to bring them likewise into the same ways and ministrations in
the things of God.

For this is the Message that ye have heard from the Beginning, that we should
love one another: Not as Cain who was of the Evil one, and slew his Brother;
and wherefore slew he him? because his own works were evil, and his Brothers
righteous, 1 John 3.11, 12.

We are of God: he that knows God, hears us, he that is not of God, hears
not us: hereby know we the spirit of truth, and the spirit of error 1 John 4.6.

If ye love me keep my Commandments, Joh. 14 15, see also verse. 16, 17.

He that is of God, hears Gods words: Ye therefore hear them not, because ye
are not of God, Joh. 8.47.

Written by ELLIS BRADSHAW.

LONDON, Printed and are to be sold by Lodowick Lloyd at the Castle in
Cornhill, also by Henry Crips at the end of Popes-head-Alley, and by Thomas
Brewster at the three Bibles in Pauls-Church-yard, 1658.

To his Highness Richard the now Lord Protector, together with the Parliament
of the Commonwealth of England, Scotland, and Ireland, with the dominions
thereunto belonging. May it please your Highness, together with the Honorable
Parliament, etc.
THere present you in the name of God, and of our Lord and Savior Jesus
Christ, with a short Epitomie of that fiery law, and that everlasting Gospel
(Deuteronomy. 33.2. and Rev. 14.6.) which shall be preached to them that dwell on the
earth, and to every nation, and kindred, and tongue, and people, and that
immediately upon the downfall of Babylon, see verse. 7, 8, 9, 10, 11, 12. as by
reading these 6 verses you may plainly see, for after the Angel flying in the
midst of Heaven, having the everlasting Gospel, etc. The next that followed
proclaimed Babylon is fallen, is fallen, etc. And so the third Angel follows
threatening the Judgment and wrath that should certainly befall them that
worshipped the Beast and his Image, or receive his mark in their foreheads, or
on their hands, see verse. 9, 10, 11, 12. And that all these things are the
success or effects or at lest part thereof upon the 7th Angel sounding of his
Trumpet, see Chap. 11.15. And that time shall be no longer till the mystery of
God be finished, but till the seventh Angel should sound his Trumpet, see the
Oath of the Angel, Chap. 10, 5, 6, 7. And this 14 Chapter being held forth to
us as part of the effects upon the 7th Angels sounding, as that by reading the
Chapters is clear and manifest; I shall not need to make any further proof
that Babylon shall fall upon the holding forth of the everlasting Gospel. I
mean when it is so preached and so received as the everlasting Gospel, for
such is the Gospel of Jesus Christ, it is both a Gospel to wit glad-tidings,
and it is the Gospel, the glad-tidings, to wit the only glad-tidings that are
everlasting; to them that dwell on the earth, and therefore shall be preached
to every nation, kindred, and tongue, and people; Saying (moreover) fear God,
and give glory to him, for the hour of his judgment is come: and worship him
which has made heaven and earth, and the sea, and the fountains of waters,
see Chap. 14.6, 7. And this also is Gospel, for it is glad-tidings when the
hour of his Judgment is come, and his advice is good, to fear God, etc. And in
regard he is said to say it with a loud voice. It is intimated that it should
be more audibly spoken, and more generally heard and received then it had been
formerly, and that by all nations, kinreds, tongues, and peoples. And it may
not be unprofitable to consider, that it is said and sworn by the Angel, that
in the days of the voice of the 7th Angel, when he shall begin to sound the
mystery of God shall be finished, as he has declared to his servants the
Prophets, see Chap. 10.7. Not that all should be finished when he shall begin
to sound; for in that there is a beginning it implies a continuance; And it is
said also that in the days of the voice etc. the mystery of God shall be
finished: Now how many days the voice of this sounding shall continue it is
not easily determined, being only held forth in the plural number without
limitation: But this is certain, that when he shall begin, his sounding shall
continue till the mystery of God be finished.

Now see the first effects or what is fully concluded on, and voted in the
Church, and by the four and twenty Elders when the 7th Angel begun to sound
Chap. 11.15, 16, 17, 18, 19. And it evidently appears, that the Kingdoms of
this world shall certainly become the Kingdoms of our Lord, and of his Christ,
and he shall (thenceforth) reign for ever and ever. For which there is thanks
rendered by the holy Elders, because he had taken to him his great power, and
had reigned, and how, the nations were angry, etc. see and read the verses, for
they do concern us if we be christians indeed, and not in show only, and that
in these days, and for our great comfort and encouragement in the ways of
God, they are held forth to us. For has he not begun, has he not already
taken to himself even his great power, and has reigned amongst us; Has he
not given a bannor to them that fear him, Psalm. 60.4. Has he not begun, and
shall he not make an end, 1 Samuel 3.12. Has he not already whett his glittering
sword, and has not his hand already taken hold of vengeance; And shall he not
fully recompense his adversaries, and repay them that hate him, see Deuter.
32.40, 41, 42, 43. And has he not owned this nation, yea even this of England,
and that as first, yea and also above others, yea even any nation now under
Heaven; And that for his own cause sake, though not for our worthiness, but
for respect to his name, the which through his grace was owned by us against
his adversaries; Yea and that by a strong hand, and a stretched out arm, many
a time giving victory to a few against their double number, and that to weak
and despised ones against the strong and potent, and that beyond our hopes and
expectations, or the fears of our adversaries, and that by sea and land. And
why should we think that he will repent him for his choice of us before any
nation now under heaven. The Apostle tells us his gifts and callings are
without repentance, Romans 11.29. And though he will oblitterate the names of
such out of his book of life (as he said unto Moses) who sin against him (Exodus
32.32, 33.) yet he will be merciful unto his land and to his people. And
therefore he says: Rejoice oh ye nations with his people, for he will avenge
the blood of his servants, and will render vengeance to his adversaries, and
will be merciful to his land and people, see Deuteronomy. 32.43. And of this we may
be confident that he that has begun will certainly make an end, before he
break off from us whom he has owned as a peculiar people in a national way,
and that above any nation under heaven, as once he did to Israel of old. And
will bring us to rest and settlement in spite of all opposers, either foreign
or domestic. And he will give victory on the Lambs side, together with them
who are the called, and chosen and faithful. His heart is toward the
governors of Israel, who have jeoparded their lives (to maintain his cause)
upon the high places of the field; with Zebulon and Napthali, see Judges
5.9.18. for they offered themselves willingly amongst the people, and have not
loved their lives even unto the death, Rev. 12.11. And therefore rejoice ye
heavens (that is to say ye Churches, militant and triumphant) and ye that dwell
in them, but woe to the inhabitants of the earth, and of the Sea; (that is to
the world) for the Devil is come down amongst you, having great wrath,
because he knows that he has but a short time, verse. 12. to wit, till he
must be enclosed in the bottomless pit, that he shall not deceive the nations
any more till a thousand years shall be fulfilled, see Rev. 20.1, 2, 3. Yea woe
unto the world because of offenses, for (though) it must needs be that offenses
shall come, yet woe to that man by whom the offense comes, see Mat. 18.7.
Doubtless it has ever been dangerous to give any offense either to Jew, or
Gentile, or to the Church of God, see 1 Cor. 10.32. but much more now in these
latter days wherein the Lord has begun to avenge his Elect, who cry unto him
day and night, for now he has begun, he will certainly hold on, and avenge
them speedily, as has been proved before, Luke 18.7, 8. And therefore it is
the advice of our blessed Savior, to take heed that we despise not one of
those little ones, yea one of the least of those little ones that believe in
him, and the reason is rendered, because that in heaven there Angels do always
behold the face of their Father which is in Heaven; For they are all ministering
spirits sent forth for the good of them who shall be heirs of salvation; and
will readily accomplish what the will of God shall require them to do. For
they always behold his face to know his will concerning his servants, that
they might accomplish it concerning all his Elect over whom they have Charge,
see Matthew. 18.10. Mark 9.42. Heb. 1.14. Psalm. 103.20.

Now if it be so much danger to offend but one of the least of those little
ones, that believe in Christ, as that it were better for him that a millstone
were hanged about his neck, and that he were cast into the depth of the Sea,
etc. How dangerous is it to offend his Ambassadors that are sent unto us in the
name of the Lord, for the good of our souls; Is it not said, He that receives
you receives me, and he that receives me receives him that sent me; And he
that despises you despises me, and he that despises me, despises him that
sent me; But how few is there in these our days that regard these words, or at
least so regard them as to caution them as they ought in these respects. Are
not the words of men in authority as Magistrates and Officers, and masters much
more regarded then these words of Christ. They that are under command, under
any authority, either civil or millitary, will quickly say we are so
commanded, and we must obey else it will be worse for us, we shall be turned
out of office, or out of our service, or places else, or those our superiors
will be offended with us, and for such like reasons which in such cases are
good and wise, and but our duty, but how few is there that are so wisely
subservient to the commands of God, and of our Lord Jesus Christ, and to take
his counsels and admonitions, and lay them to heart, and own them as a rule
for regulation of all their ways. But if you please to read with seriousness
of spirit, but this little Treatise, you will easily perceive how much we are
short of obedience, and subserviencie to the commands of Christ, yea even the
best of us all, and so what need there is to make it our business to endeavor
a redress, what in us lies, in our places and callings, and to provoke one
another to love and good works which are so much wanting. And for this end I
have directed it to you who are in highest authority, though I therein speak
not to you only, but to all that are or profess themselves to be christians
indeed, and not in show only: that you and all such might encourage and induce
what in them lies to a cordial uniformity of hearts and affections in the
ways of God. For though it is a thing that cannot possibly be compelled to by
humane authority, yet it much conduces and helps forward when the eyes of
authority are bent that ways. The encouragement of authority in well doing, is
a strong inducement to the doing of it. And so is likewise their own example no
less available with ingeneous spirits, see 1 Pet. 2.14. The Lord grant that
you may make it your business when you come to deal in matters of religion.
To accord our differences as much as may be, and to settle peace both in Church
and state, what in you lies; And in so doing the Lord will assist you and
bless your endeavors for the good of these nations to all posterities: which
is the earnest desire of

Your Cordial Subject Ellis Bradshaw.

I Desire the Reader to mend these Erratats following, and to make the residue
sense in the reading, to wit. Page 6. line 4. for on read or. Page 8. line 30.
for state read save. Page 13. line 26, for smite them hand, read smite them
with the hand. Page 31. line 4, for consecrate read consociate, and line 26.
for hear read heavens,

A CORDIAL-MEDIATOR, FOR Accordance of Brethren that are of different
Judgments, and ways of Administration in things that concern the Kingdom of
God: For repairing of the breach and restoring of the paths for many
Generations, as follows, to wit.
BELOVED brethren, the end of this discourse, I shall in few words first
declare with the grounds thereof before I begin, because I love not prolixity
nor would not be mistaken, to wit.

1. That all the elect and beloved of God that know one another and in the
Judgment of charity account one another, such might love one another as
brethren, and that with a pure heart fervently. See my ground for this 1 Pet.
1.22.

2. That all that are in truth, in the light, might so walk in the light, as
to have fellowship one with another. So as the blood of Jesus Christ might
cleanse us from all sin. See my ground for this, 1 John 1.7. And the rather
because that if we say that we have fellowship with God and walk in darkness,
we lie and do not the truth. See verse. 6 And if we walk in the light we have
fellowship one with another; etc. So that we cannot demonstrate that we have
fellowship with God and the Lord Je^us Christ, unless we also have fellowship
one with another. And therefore cannot say with the Apostle, to wit, And truly
our fellowship is with the father, and with his son Jesus Christ. See ver. 3.
Neither can we demonstrate that we are in the light, nor that we love God,
unless we also love the brethren, See Chap. 2 9, 10, 11. and Chap. 4.20. He
that says he is in the light and hates his brother is in darkness, and
walks in darkness, and knows not whither he goes. And if a man say I love
God, and hates his brother he is a liar, for he that loves not his brother
whom he has seen, how can he love God whom he has not seen? From which it
appears that it is for want either of light or love, or rather both, if we
have not fellowship one with another. So that we cannot demonstrate that we are
in the light, nor that we love God, nor that we love our brethren, nor that God
loves us, nor that we keep his commandments unless we so love our brethren
as to have fellowship with them: For this is his command^ment that we love one
another, and that even so, as Christ has loved us, for this is the manner and
measure required; as I shall further make to appear, from the Law and Testimony.

1. From the command of God, Lev. 19.18. thou shall not avenge nor bear any
grudge against the children of thy people, but then shall love thy neighbor as
thy self.

2. It is also the command of our Lord Jesus Christ, Mat. 22.19. and Luke
10.27, 28. where the command is expressed. This do and thou shall live, and
John 15.17. This I command you, that ye love one another.

3. And the measure of this love which is here commanded, is not a sparing or
scant measure: But this is my commandment that ye love one another, as I have
loved you, See ver. 12. And see also John 13 34. A new commandment I give unto
you, that ye love one another, as I have loved you, that ye also love one
another; From which it evidently appears, that though this commandment is
but the same in substance which was from the beginning. Yet in this respect it
is new and held forth to us under that notion, in regard it is backed with such
an example, to wit, the example of Christ, who in his own person has
exemplified it to us and commands us to follow his steps, and to love one
another, as he has loved us, binding us hereby to his example in what we are
able, and to make it all our mark to aim at as the mark of the price, of the
high calling of God in Christ Jesus: So that in respect of the measure of our
love, we ought not to be content with any lesser attainement then to love one
another as Christ has loved us.

4. It is also the message that we have heard from the beginning that we should
love one another, See 1 John 3 11. And this is his commandment that we should
believe on the name of his son Jesus Christ, and love one another as he gave us
commandment.

5. It is like unto that first and great commandment, to wit. Thou shall love
the Lord thy God with all thy heart, with all thy soul, and with all thy mind.
See Mat. 23.37, 38, 39, 40. and Deuteronomy. 6.5, 6, 7, 8, 9, etc. For upon these two
commandments hang all the Law and the Prophets.

6. The end of the commandment is l^ve out of a pure heart, and of a good
conscience and of faith unfeigned, (See. 1 Timothy 1.5) From which some having
swarved, have turned aside unto vain janglings, See ver. 6. yea and that in
these very days of ours.

7. We are exhorted seriously to see that we love one another with a pure heart
fervently. See 1 Pet. 1.22. It must not be in word and in tongue only, but in
deed and in truth. 1 John 5.18.

8. And the Apostle John seriously exhorts us to it, showing us a strong
reason to induce us, to wit, Beloved (says he) let us love one another, for
love is of God, and every one that loves is born of God, and knows God, and
he that loves not, knows not God, for God is love, Chap. 4.7, 8. It is
therefore styled the royal Law, James 2.8. Because it comes both expressly
and essentially from God the Father, and from our Lord Jesus Christ, who is
Lord of Lords, and King of Kings. Now in regard it is both the express command
to love one another; and the essential and efficient work of the Spirit of
God for it both comes of God, and God is love. And in regard that the end of
the commandment is love, etc. And that the whole Law, to wit, that respects
our neighbor is fulfilled in this, to wit. Thou shall love thy neighbor as
thy self, and that this is that second great commandment, and so like the
first; as that he that loves not his brother whom he has seen, cannot love
God whom he has not seen. Nor manifest himself to be his Disciple, nor indeed
a true Christian, See 1 John 4.20. and Chapter 3.14, 15, 16, 17, 18, 19, etc.

Then it necessarily follows that such who are Christians indeed and expect
to be so accepted and accounted of either with God or men, ought to account
themselves most chiefly bound to this duty of love, and that to all the
brotherhood, above all other duties commanded in the Law that concerns our
neighbor. And that in regard that all other duties are inferior, and lesser
matters of the Law, As tithing of Mint, Annisse, and Cumin was to the Jews,
which yet ought to be done, provided that Judgment, mercy, and faith, which
are the greater matters be not thereby neglected nor secluded; for this was in
the Scribes and Pharisees a token of their hypocrisy; and how can we possibly
excuse our selves from the same charge, if by our strivings and contests about
inferior outward circumstantiall matters and things of God, as Sacramental
matters and ways of government and ministration?

We neglect and hinder the growth of love and so of faith likewise which are
the two essencialls and only infallible marks of our Christianity; And on the
contrary part do thereby provoke one another to wrath and enmity, biting and
devouring one another till we be consumed, as is but just with God, because we
cannot agree but fall out by the way, and that about the way like untoward
children who part themselves into various paths till they are be wildred and
loose one another and some themselves and their poor souls. And considering
also that all the ordinances of God, and the ways of government, and all the
ministrations and gifts of God, with all the ministrators whom he has sent,
and set in his Church, yea all the inferior commandments in the morral Law,
with all the Prophets, Apostles, Scriptures both old and new, yea all the
truths and doctrines or examples therein held forth, both concerning Judgments
and mercies with all other ways and means of grace. Are all but given and held
forth to us through the necessary means, for this necessary end, to wit, The
producing of love out of a pure heart, and of a good conscience, and of faith
unfeigned. See 1 Timothy: 1.5. From all which I make bold to conclude, that if we
make not the observance and use thereof, as helps and means conducing to the
acquirement and fulfilling of this end, but in our keeping of the lesser we
obstruct the greater, yea and even the m^ine of all, And that which if attained
would bring the lesser with it; as a natural fruit which is included in it,
and cannot possibly be separated from it; See 1 Cor. 13.

Then without all question or peradventure we quite pervert the end of all the
commandments and means of grace that God has appointed at least so far forth
as we use them so as has been said before; Making his commandments void, and
of none effect in our selves or others, through our own traditions, for we
thereby hinder both our selves and others from acquiring to the end of the holy
commandments that are given unto us. By the keeping whereof we might be made
partakers of the godly nature, love comes of God, for God is l^ve.

Now these things being generally assented too, as so I nothing doubt, but all
that are Christians i^deed, in the sight of God, both do and will assent with
me thus far at least: and that they will agree to endeavor the acquirement
of this blessed end, as in duty they are bound.

I shall further propose those means and ways which as I conceive would
strongly conduce to the acquirement of this end, through the help of God, the
which as I conceive are of absolute necessity, and such as without which there
is little hopes of this Accordant, nor of keeping this commandment, in the
keeping whereof, there is great reward.

1. Then I desire as accounting it our duty, and the natural product of true
brotherly love, that we might pray one with, and for another, and each for all,
that we might be healed, and our breaches repaired, and we united, and made of
one heart, of one mind, and of one judgment, and that the same mind might be
in us that was in Christ Jesus: This I doubt not but all that are godly will
justify, and own, and endeavor to p^actise but that we might do it in faith,
it is required that we go first and be reconciled to our brethren, and then
come and offer our gifts, See Mat. 5.23, 24.

2. Therefore it is desired for this end, that we might have fellowship one
with another, and each with any, both in public and private, and that in all
Gods ordinances, so as love requires: so far as possible, and convenient, as
being all members of the same body; to wit, of Christ, and each of other; for
how else is it ever possible that we should be reconciled, if we meet not
together my if we receive not one another, even as Jesus Christ has received
us to the glory of God the Father; See Romans 15.7. and 3. John 9.10. Mat. 9.3.

3. That instead of disowning or excluding any that is known to be Godly, of
whatever way, or Church they are of, either Ministers or people, from the Lords
Supper, or any other ordinance, they desire to partake of. We might all be
willing to invite each other to any ordinance that Christ has appointed for
mutual comfort and edification, where our selves are admitted and owned as
Godly, in case when any Brother shall have occasion to sojourn or be
occasionally amongst us to hear the word preached on any other business.

4. And not only so as but barely to partake of the outward ordinances; But
that each and all that in the judgment of charity may be accounted brethren,
might be owned as such, and dealt with as such, not in word only but in deed
and in truth, in a p^acticall manner in all these respects or in any other, as
we do with brethren that are of the same judgment and society with us, as
accounting it our duty both to watch over, and to exhort, reproove, admonish,
comfort, restore and releeve; and all such duties as need requires in a
brotherly way for his good and comfort, as we our selves would also be dealt
with in the like case, for our souls health and benefit any ways.

Reas. For this we are comm^nded, Do to all men as ye would they should do
unto you, for this is the Law and the Prophets; But if to all men, much more to
our brethren that in the judgment of charity are of the same body together
with us, under Christ our Head.

Reas. For if they be members though they are but feet, (the body walks
slowly if it wants feet, See 1 Cor. 12.21, 22. nay, If those necessary
members of the body) should either be cut off, or it halteth on them, you know
the charge, and how we are exhorted to make straight paths for our feet, lest
that which halteth be turned out of the way, which should rather be healed: I
wish this text were better understood then I doubt it is by the most part, even
of the Churches of Christ, See Heb. 12 12, 13, 14, 15. Such who halt betwixt
two opinions, should rather be healed, and have straight paths made for their
feet, then turned out of the way to the Kingdom of Christ.

5. That the doors of fellowship and Christian communion might be set as wide
open as can lawfully be allowed, or as can be practiced without breach of duty,
and conscience toward God; by building men up in their evil ways and sowing
pillowes under all arm holes, healing their wounds slightly, and preaching
peace, when there is manifestly no peace, and that for their own destruction.

Reas. For if the doors of Discipline and Christian communion should shut out
any of the elect of God, either from hearing of the word or Church communion
for their souls health; or that they should be offended through the Churches
default, and scattered abroad, yea whither they be weak or strong, See (Ezekiel.
34) they ought not to be thrust with the side or shoulder, nor pusht with
horns, But the diseased should be strengthened, and the sick healed, and that
which is broken, bound up; and that which is driven away, brought home again;
and that which is l^st, should even be sought out, and recovered, and no force
nor violence should be used by any in ruling of them, lest the great shepherd
of the sheep, who is not willing that the least of his little ones should
perish, should require his sheep at the hands of the sheepheards, and so
destroy both the fat and the strong, and also feed them with judgment. See
ver. 16 and read also, Mat. 18.10, 11, 12, 13, 14. And how wisely ought those
to walk, toward them that are without, who are the light of the world, and
the salt of the earth; Mat. 5 13, 14, 15, 16. For if that salt which should
season the world, yea, even them that are without, and so bring them in, shall
make it self naucious and so unsavory in their conceit as that they will not
come near it, but abhor and loath it, wherewith then shall the world be seas
ned, even those yet without; sure they may perish, for such who are made
unsavory in their conceits, if the great shepherd do not search his sheep,
and seek them out; as Ezekiel. 34.11, 12, 13, 14, 15, 16, etc. And to this end it
was least the Apostle Paul should make himself naucious and unsavory unto any
at all; he became all things unto all men, that by all means he might save
some, and made himself servant unto all, that he might win the more; and has
also commanded us to be followers of him, even as he also was of Christ Jesus,
charging us to give non offense neither unto Jew nor Gentile, neither to the
Church of God, even as he pleased all men in all things, not seeking his own
profit, but the profit of others, that they might be saved, etc. And this he
accounted to be walking wisely, toward them that are without, and the wisest
way of all other for the winning of them, and he that wins souls is wise
indeed.

Oh how much might be gathered and spoken from these texts of Scripture, to
spur us on to a tender hearted and pleasing savory, in offensive carriage, not
only toward brethren, but even toward them that are without and at enmity
with us! and how needful it is even in these our days, for engaging brethren
unto such carriage one toward another, how true is that prophecy, that the
love of many shall wax cold, because iniquity shall be increased, yet it is not
said, that the love of all shall wax cold, for some doubtless shall continue
to the end and so be saved. But oh how far are we off in these days from those
commands of Christ! Luke 6.35. to wit, But love ye your enemies, and do good,
and lend, looking for nothing again, and your reward shall be great in heaven,
and ye shall be the children of the highest, for he is kind unto the unkind,
and to the evil; But oh how little kindness is in these days showed even
unto the good. But suppose there be some love and kindness showed to our
friends and brethren of the same society whereof we are: What thanks may we
possibly expect for this, when the very publicans do as much as we? See ver.
32, 33, 34. And how far are we off from obeying those Important commands of
Christ, verse 27, 28, 29, 30, 31. To love our enemies and bless them that
curse us, and pray for them that despightfully use us, and persecute us, etc.
when we cannot love our brethren nor pray for them, so cordially as we ought,
and only because they are led and engaged through difference of Judgment to
vary from us in respect of Church Government and Discipline, and in some
outward ways and administrations, which differences amongst us; can never be
proved to be scandalous sins, for which they should be secluded and suppose
them erroneous, yet they can never be prooved to be therefore heretics,
because their different Judgments are only about inferior matters and
circumstantials, by any party, and therefore ought not to be rejected upon such
accounts, nor separated from, but invited to communion in any ordinance state
only, in case when known to be under some scandalous sin. All such I say, as
are known to be Godly and worshippers of God, and so in the Judgment of
charity, of the mystical body of which Christ is the head. And this I desi e
might be taken notice of, that as no man can deny but that the greatest
lattitude of love, is the most Christian. So is the greatest lattitude of
charity also, for love and charity are the very same inseparable quality,
according to the lattitude and measure of our love, such is the lattitude and
measure of our charity, either in judging of others, or in our carriage toward
them in any respect.

6. and lastly, And that which must necessarily be agreed on before this
admittance, and brotherly fellowship can be made tolerable to all the several
parties; Is, that this admittance and receiving one another as love requires,
might not be accounted as a sin or scandal in them that do it, by any Church,
or Christian society, whereof they are members, nor taken as an offense by any
of their members, but the contrary declared from these precedent grounds and
inducements. In case as has been said, that in the judgment of charity they
be visible members of Christ his mystical body, yea whether they be, or be not
for the present joined with a^y particular body, one more then others, because
some there are who through desire of correspondency with all, or any, so far as
lawful, and so far seeking the love of all, as not being willing to offend
any, of whatever Judgment, or Church, or way they are found to be of, whose
J^dgements or ways are matters of difference amongst the godly: there being
Godly men of various ^udgments in such respects, whose ways and practices are
accordingly; and this being granted and declared accordingly, this end
intended, is half obtained. And this I dare undertak^ that all this is no more
then these commands require, as necessary duties for exemplification of our
true Christianity; and that ought to be performed by all the Saints unto all
their brethren: as much as in them lies, as the providence of God shall give
them abilities and opportunities.

But least any should think me to intend the exalting of some one way, and to
desparage others, as being partially engaged, and so through prejudicat
conceits and apprehensions of me, and of my ends herein, should be offended
with me; As I have therefore plainly declared what my ends are before I began,
and then my grounds from Scripture, from which I nothing doubt, but by the
operation of the Spirit of God it will evidently appear, that these ends are
nothing, but what in bounde^ duty, which we are mainly commanded and ought to
practice, nor do I much doubt but to make it good against al objections that
can be offered on the other part, and to remove the scruples that may arise in
the consciences of any that is a truly rational conscientious brother of what
ever way or form of judgment that he may be of, if he be indeed a brother and
member of Christ.

And further, I declare that though it were to be wished that all that are of
one heart, and of one judgment, in all fundamentalls; were also one in all
other respects, yet it is my opinion, that these divisions are of the hand of
God, who many times works by contrary means; and yet by his wise ordering of
the events of things, the effect and product is the better and sweeter, and the
re-uniting so much the stronger, as I shall instance in some particulars:
First, you know it is the saying of Christ, that a Nation, or Kingdom divided
against it self cannot stand, and therefore as it is also the policy of men
to devide as much as possible where they desire to reign; Even so I say, who
knows but the Lord has purposely divided us, lest we should have stablished
some Arbitrary government according to the will of man, purposely to stop our
settlement, and to weary us out, with our strivings and contests amongst our
selves; both to weaken our power, and conceits of our own wisdom: and to
discover our folly and humble us, that so he himself may have dominion over
us, and be our only Head and Lord, and that in every respect, as King, Priest
and Prophet, and so have all the glory ascribed unto him, and that by all his
people; according to that prophecy, Isa. 2:11, 12. and ver. 17. to wit. The
pride ^f men shall be brought low, and the haughtiness of men shall be abused,
and the Lord only shall be exalted in that day. And as Paul says to Philemon
concerning his servant Onesimus, so we may well hope concerning our selves,
That perhaps we are parted asunder for a season that we might receive one
another for ever, and be the more strongly united, See v. 15. And it may be
also, that it is very much to prove the naturalnesse of our love, See Philip.
2.20. and 2 Con. 8.8. and 24. verses. And that those that are approved such
might be made known, for this is one express end wherefore there must be
divisions amongst us, See 1 Cor. 11.18, 19. And the truth is, it has much
proved already the unnaturalness of our love, but very little of naturalnesse;
For what great proof of our naturalnesse in love can it be, to express our
love to our brethren and friends of the same judgment and society with us,
this is not thanks worthy as has been said, from Luke 6.32. But if we can love
the brotherhood that differ from us, and it may be speak evil of us, and are
so far our enemies as they would persecute and destroy us; this is thanks
worthy and will indeed prove, and demonstrate the naturalnesse of our love, yea
even to the very consciences of our enemies; and be the greatest means to turn
their hearts, and win their affections, and convince them of their sin in being
our enemies and speaking evil of us, and so to reunite us by an inseparable
bond of love and unity, that can never be broken or such whoever upon whom it
takes not this effect, it will heap cole^ of fire upon their heads, and the
Lord shall reward and recompense us, If we for our parts shall perform our
duties, (See also 1 Pet. 2.19, 20, 21, 22, 23, 24, 25.) by owning them as we
ought.

And again, By means of these divisions and contests there is much more light
and knowledge held forth, then could possibly have had occasion to be known,
or so much as discussed amongst us; but we should have gone blindly to work,
in all or most of these things contested about, in comparison of what is now
made manifest, both in respect of the temper of men's spirits which is
discovered by their actings, and the danger we were likely to have fallen into,
through Lordly and ridged arbitrary actings, in imposing upon men's consciences
things not convenient.

And besides, These divisions have manifestly been a means to provoke all
parties unto emulation in one respect or other. See Romans 11.14, 15. Read these
two verses and you will know what I mean; For by these devisions and strivings
many are provoked to a holy emulation, yea to emulate one another in holiness
and righteousness.

And thus as the Apostle says, The foolishness of God is wiser then men, and
the weakness of God is stronger then men. Yea even thus, he catches the wise
in their own craftiness, and makes us fools, and lets us find it by
experience, that we might be wise; he well knows that the spirit which
dwells in us, lusts to envy, and has told us of it, and yet that if we
have envying and strife in our hearts, we should not rejoice, because this
wisdom descends not from above, but is earthly, sensual, and devilish.

Thus he is glad to deal with us as children, (If we may so speak after the
manner of men) yea as with perrish, foolish, weward, wilful and stubborn
children, to devide us that he might unite us, to let us quarrel, and strive,
and fight in a spiritual sense, purposely to unite us the more strongly, and
to prove the naturalnesse of our love and brotherhood, and our wisdom, and
temper, and strength what it is, that we might know it our selves, even our own
weakness and folly, and that we are as yet but children, and unfit for
government, or to Reign as Kings: as the Apostle speaks.

Reas. For it is hereby manifest to us, by the practices of all, of every
division of us, that we would be partia^l to our own cause, and party, and
principles, and that against all others, and not for them though acknowledged
brethren, and Christians in respect of fundamentalls. And so would necessi^ate
and enforce them to a compliance and conformity to our own particular
principles, and practices, or else they must not expect any love, or favor, or
kindness, or help, or encouragement from us. And this I could manifest at
large to be the present temper of the spirits of many, and that of every party,
and how the several parties have some of them at least been guilty of blood
through their zeal and malignity against the others; but it is so obvious, and
so well known that I need not to demonstrate the particulars thereof. But this
I dare say, and justify, that this sort of zeal is not according to
knowledge, nor according to love and Christianity, and so by consequence not
according to Christ Jesus, who was so far off from shedding the blood of his
brethren (though they were enemies in their minds through wicked works) that he
laid down his life, and shed his own blood for them. And even so ought we to
be also ready even to lay down our lives for the brethren; And till this
temper of Spirit be in some good measure found to be in us, we are not fit to
rule or have the least authority committed to us, for we are so much under age,
and but in the minority of Christianity, we cannot be spoken to, nor accounted
( strong men, nor men at age, nor as yet at years of descretion) but as unto
babes in Christ, who must therefore be kept as under tutors and governors till
the time appointed of the Father.

And though it is a promise which we do and ought to expect, and to comfort one
another with, that the Kingdom of Christ shall come with power, and that it is
also justly to be expected to be near at hand, and is in some measure already
present, and some will needs be so forward as to take it by violence, and beat
down all before them that stands in their way, yea will not much care to
destroy their brethren in whom the King of Heaven is already in some measure,
and so cut off them from living to see it, and enjoy it in the power, who
desire it also as much as themselves, but cannot accord to fetch it in by force
of humane authority save only defensive whiles it is increasing and growing
within us by the force and power of the Spirit of God, nor is it lawful to say
that this temper of spirit comes of God; it is not the persuasion of him that
calls us, to go about to enforce conformity to our own principles, and to
impose them by force upon our dear brethren that are contrary minded; but this
is certainly of that spirit of Antichrist, which is long since come into the
world; and yet this very temper of Spirit if power should be put into our
hands, would be found in measure, less or more in any party of us.

Let us therefore judge in our selves, whether we are any of us yet, come to
years of discretion suitable for government, whiles we are so partial in our
own cause and principles; shall he that hates right, govern; says the
Scripture. Nay, if the power and Kingdom be already in the hand of Christ, and
he gives it to whomsoever he pleases, can we expect to have it whiles in such
a temper of spirit. Nay, may we not rather expect that wise servants, shall
have the rule and government over such lewd sons, that can never agree but are
ready to bite and devour one another at every advantage? Oh brethren consider,
and let us lay it to heart, and charge it home upon our consciences betimes!
for there it will fall heavy one day, and if we judge not our selves we shall
certainly be judged and chastened of the Lord, that so we might not be
condemned with the world, But if our master comes and finds us smiting of
our fellow servants: you know the place where we must have our portion. And if
we possibly do not nor dare not, or cannot smite them hand or with the sword,
yet there is a smiting which is as bad, to wit, With the tongue, for it is
compared to a sword, or a sharp rasor; And this kind of smiting is too too
frequent and common amongst us, and shows clearly that if power and
commission were in our hands, the other sword would follow. Oh these things
brethren we had need to repent and to humble our selves, and watch over our
hearts, left he comes and find us in such a posture of spirit! the danger is
great, yea it is so much the greater as it is expected to be near at hand. And
therefore let us be exhorted by the Apostle, Speak not evil one of another
brethren, etc. Nor think not to escape if we neglect so great salvation.

If we know these things, and that they are no other but the truths of God: Oh
take heed that we let them not slip! but keep them applied to our souls and
consciences till they reply to do them. Blessed is that servant whom his
master, when he comes shall find so doing, verily such a servant shall be
Ruler over all his goods. Read but Mat. 24. from 41. to the end, and consider
it seriously for it much concerns us in these latter days.

And take notice of one thing, if we be indeed the people of God, we shall
never ride on prosperously, but in the ways of truth of meekness and of
righteousness, See Psalm. 45 for we must not prosper, but in the same way and
manner that Christ has led us, for this Psalm is a prophecy concerning
Christ and his Kingdom, who will not own us but in the same paths that he has
trod before us; Read it and compare it with our ways and we need no more
conviction.

Oh how many is there in this generation that are pure in their own eyes, that
yet are not cleansed from this filthiness! (Pro. 30.12.14.) that is so far
contrary unto brotherly love, and meekness, and of truth, and righteousness.
Oh how sad will it be with us if the Lord comes and finds us so doing! and
in our envy and strife, and not in that wisdom that comes from above, which
is pure indeed and word, yea peaceable and gentle, full of mercy and of good
fruits, without grudging, and without hypocrisy, seeing the fruit of
righteousness is sown in peace, of them that make peace. James 3.17, 18. see
also Chapter 4.11, 12. and ver. 5, 6, 7, 8, 9, 10. And blessed are the
peacemakers, Mat. 5. See there and consider to what sorts of people those 9
sorts of blessings do properly belong; and whether there be any of them proper
for such kind of postures of spirit, as many of us are found in this our
generation of Christianity.

The Apostle James tells us plainly (Chapter 1.26.) That if any man amongst us
seem to be religious, and refraineth not his tongue, but deceives his own
heart, this man's religion is vain. And the same Apostle also Chap. 4.11. Speak
not evil one of another brethren, he that speaks evil of his brother and
judges his brother, speaks evil of the Law, and judges the Law, etc.

And the reason is manifest because the Law forbids it, and commands love
which is quite contradicted and judged by us, when we speak evil one of
another: And therefore let us lay it seriously to heart, and but consider it,
how apt we have been in these deviding times to speak evil, yea and even the
worst that we can have any pretense for, one of another; how apt have we been
to pick out the worst, taking all in the worser part, in the evil part, and
whispering it out to the desparagement one of another, by reaches, and jeeres,
and reproaches, even running descant upon the faults or failings, and
weaknesses one of another most inharmoniously, and maliciously, making it the
most part of our discourse, and esteeming them best company who could cast
forth the purest jeeres and reaches against our brethren of any contrary way:
And who has not been guilty in these respects? And how sad is it that we have
so little regarded the danger of these things? I mean of despising one of the
least of those little ones that believe in Christ; See Mat. 18.10, 11. Take
heed that ye despise not one of these little ones; for I say unto you, that in
heaven their Angels do always behold the face of my father which is in
heaven. For the son of man is come to save that which was lost. By which it is
evident, that every one of those little ones that believe in Christ has an
Angel of God, (as it were) standing before God, in a continual readiness to
execute his commands in their behalf, so that it were better for a man that a
millstone were hanged about his neck, and that he were drowned in the depth of
the Sea, etc. And therefore woe unto the world because of offenses, etc. See
ver. 6, 7, 8, 9. And it is certain that Christ has an eye upon them, who came
on purpose to save that which was lost, and therefore will certainly save them,
and has his Angels ready, and will avenge them speedily, if they cry unto him,
See Luke. 18.7, 8.

Beloved brethren, I include my self as well as others under this guilt, and
have been rebuked and chastened of the Lord for such things, and therefore dare
not Justifi^ my self and condemn others, nor expect any other, but that whoever
continue in such practices shall smart for it one time or other, be they who
they can, if they do not repent. Will a father suffer his children to wrong,
and bite, and devour one another, nay his little ones especially, and not whip
them for it. And as a father pittieth his children, so the Lord pittieth them
that fear him. Psalm. 103.13.

Object. But it will be objected, that this is so maine a cause of the
differences amongst us, that it will hardly ever be ascented to by any party in
regard that all their principles are quite contradiory to the receiving of any
to communicate with them in the Sacrament of the Lords Supper, unles they be
known to be of their own way: and especially strangers, who ordinarily get
letters of recommendations for this very purpose, or else they are not?
admitted. And if every Minister or member of a Church, might bring in a
stranger, merely upon his own knowledge and acquaintance with him, and that
without satisfying of the rest of the Church, it would soon grow to that, that
there could be no restraint nor discipline at all exercised in the Church, but
all would be admitted that had any friend a member of a Church in the old
promiscuous manner.

Answ. 1. To this I answer, Let it be considered, That the cause of the
differences are not because that any at all that are known to be Godly, are
admitted to the Sacrament, nor the doors of fellowship straightened on purpose,
to keep any of them out from any ordinance but to keep out those who are
scandalous or ignorant, and that chiefly for their own good.

2. I answer, That I do not propose it, that any should be admitted, either
because they are Presbitterians, and so known to be, nor because they are
Independants, or Anabaptists, but because they are known to be Godly: for there
may be such of any party crept in who are not Godly, but turn the grace of God
into wantonness, and laciviousnesse, and denying the only Lord God, and our
Lord Jesus Christ, See Jude 4. I do not move to the receiving of any, but that
are known to be Godly, of what ever form or Church or way.

3. I do not move that every one might have liberty to invite another, but
those that are known and approved to be Godly, and judicious; For the younger
sort of professors cannot be thought able to discern, being but beginners; But
such are not fit to be accounted Ministers, nor bear the office of Elders, or
Deacons, that may not be trusted in such a case.

Object. But it will be objected that the wisest may be deceived, whereas a
whole Church might be more discerning and some or other may know them unfit.

Answ. I answer, if it so falls out it is the fault and will be the
desparadgement of him that brings him in upon his own Judgment, and it is
nothing at all to the rest of the Church: And if he have no ground so to judge
of him, and yet ^dmitteth him let him bear the blame, as may be thought fit,
the Church is guiltless.

Object. But it will be objected that it is a main principle in Church-pollicy,
to admit none that are not polliticially incorporated into some Church or
other, and that are willing to submit and engage to the discipline thereof.

Answ. 1. I answer, It is true, that it is an old and maine principle in Church
policy, but I for my part could never learn from what Scripture ground it
could be proved lawful.

Answ. 2. But am, and always have been against it in my Judgment, since I
first knew it to be their principle and practice, but shall be glad if any will
inform me how it can be lawful considering the precedent grounds of this
discourse, and most especially that command of the Apostle; Receive ye one
another even as Jesus Christ has received you, to the glory of God the Father,
see Romans 15.7.

Now if we do not receive one another to the outward ordinances and Christian
communion, which are all the glory that we can received and admit them too, how
do we follow Christ who has received us to the glory of God the Father? which
is the highest and greatest glory that he himself can have. And this his love
to us has engaged him to, when as yet we were sinners.

And it always looked so like to the practice of Diotrephes, who loved to have
the pre-eminence, and received not the Apostle John, nor the brethren, etc.
Insomuch that these principles in my opinion engaged in a great measure to the
very same practice, for if the Apostle John, yea or Christ himself should come
amongst us as so he does sometimes in his members, he could not be received
till he first conform himself, both in judgment and practice, or profess so
at least, and also engage to submit to the discipline, and so be under those
who are all under him, else he must not communicate.

But this I dare affirm, and have always so accounted it as a dangerous
thing, for any Church, or any part or member of a Church, neither to receive
the brethren, nor suffer them that would, (See 3 John 9, 10, 11.) especially
considering there is no ground that I yet know of in all the Scripture for such
a policy, but is merely invented to engage or enforce men to their own
principles, and practices, whether their judgments be convinced of the
lawfulness thereof, yea or no, the which is not Christian, it is not doing by
our brethren, as we would that they should do unto us in the like case.

Object. But it will be said, if they be not incorporated with us, and engage
to the government of the Church, we have no power to exercise any authoritative
discipline over them, nor do we account our selves engaged to it.

Answ. I answer, The Church has as much power from Christ, and is as much
engaged in duty to exercise it over any that is called a brother, and owned as
a brother, as if they were engaged and incorporated with them in the same
Church, and this ought to be declared amongst all the Churches, See Levit.
19.17. Mat. 18.15, 16, 17. and 1 Cor. 5.11, 12, 13. and 2 Thessa. 3.6.14, 15.

Now it cannot be denied, but we ought to love and not hate our brother in our
heart, but we cannot show that we love him, if we do not rebuke him, but
suffer sin upon him; And therefore it is said, thou shall in any wise rebuke
him, which implies that no excuse must serve our turn, as that he is not of
our Church, or way, etc. or it belongs to the Church he is of to deal with
him this will not serve to show our love to him, but rather that we hate him,
See Lev. 19.17. So that all the injunctions that lie upon us, that engage us to
any duty to our brethren of the same Church, lie as clearly upon us, from this
duty of love to be exercised unto all, or any whomsoever, that we account a
brother so far forth as we have abillity, and opportunity, yea though in some
respects because of differences in judgments, and ways they be really our
enemies.

Object. But it will yet be objected that we have nothing to do with the
members of other Churches in respect of discipline and government, but it
belongs wholly unto them to admonish, rebuke, suspend, and excommunicate as
need shall require, and if they do it not, it is their sin.

Answ. To which I answer, It is their sin if they do it not, when they see
cause for it. But if they do it not, they ought to be admonished of their
duty, and neglect thereof, and if then they neglect any Church where he has
communicated, and so been owned as a brother may do it, as to him and them, as
after admonition if he will not hear to suspend him from any communion with
them, as if be ^ere their own member; and that in the name of the Lord Jesus
Christ, and by his power and authority if there be ground in Scripture for what
they do.

Object. But it will yet be objected that suppose they be not as yet of any
Church, nor will not engage to any party, how then can they be discipline if
need should require.

Answ. If it may be conceived in the judgment of charity that any such is a
brother he ought likewise to be owned as a brother, by any Church where he is
known as such, and be admitted to all the ordinances. And where he is admitted
in any or many Churches he is also subject to the discipline thereof, and
cannot avoid it if he would, for he cannot avoid the Judgment of Christ, where
ever he dwells, or removes, and if he stay amongst them they may and ought
to deal with him according as they do with brethren, and it will be as
authoritative by the power of Christ as if he were a joint member. For Christ
will make good, and approve, and bless any just ministration in his sacred
name (See Mat. 18.18, 19, 20.)

And in my apprehension there it that are Godly, that are not yet joined with
any Church, save only in love, and private communion, and that cannot yet
resolve to be joined to any but the body-misticall. And that because their
judgments are contrary to some or other of each of their principles; and this
principle last named is one of the greatest obstructions to their coming in of
any that I know of, being not grounded on Scripture but on mere humane policy,
and being the most obstructive to love and communion: which God has so
strictly commanded and charged on us above all other duties as has been
proved. And it is well known that many would join themselves to one Church or
other, but for offending the rest, and therefore they look for, and pray, and
expect also through ^^medy of God for a reconcilement, that so they might
join, ^^d give no offense, neither to Jew nor Gentile, nor to the Church of
God; no not to those of their own mind, in this respect of which there is many.
And therefore this principle being unto generally agreed to be laid aside would
open door to ^full A^ot^^^t, and that in a little time, through the blessing of
God in all other differences about these inferior matters.

Reas. For by means of fellowship one with another. The Spirit of God
cooperating amongst us would bring us all to the same judgment, whereas
whilst our judgments are different, it much cools and interposeth and
obstructeth our love and cordial respects one to another, and many times
produces evill-speaking, and reproaches, and disdaining one of another,
through our natural infirmities, which is not a means to provoke unto love
and good works, which we ought to use and continually practice, but the quite
contrary even to wrath, and hatred, and enmity, and displeasure, as it
evidently appears by too much experience, besides what we know from Scripture.

Object. We shall not deny (some will say) to own such for brethren whom we
know to be Godly, but we cannot own all to be brethren who are admitted to the
Sacrament of the Lords-Super, especially where it is promiscuously administered,
and how then can we communicate with them, (...) were that less in us then a
justification of their male administration? which is quite contrary to our
Judgments and Faith, and what ever is not of faith is sin.

Answ. 1. I suppose it cannot properly be said that either the Presbiterians,
Independants, or Anabaptists, do administer it promiscuously, but there is
care taken that is be not administered to the ignorant or scandalous, or to such
as make not some profession or other of the Christian religion, less or more,
either in truth or hypocrisy. And suppose they minister Godly, that is, of
larger principles for admittance then we, and in case we think him too large,
we ought in the judgment of charity to suppose that his judgment leads him to
it, and upon that account we may lawfully communicate with him if we judge him
to be godly and ought to own him, and if occasion serve, communicate with him
and the charge will lie at his own door, if he be in fault, and not at all on
us who do not by so communicating with him, and owning him, own all the rest
of which it may be we know but few, or it may be none at all, but are only
invited by the Godly Minister to partake with him; and it is he that
administreth it, and and communicates it to us, and if we should deny being
invited till we know all the rest; it may be we should never own him as a
Christian whilst we live, but by denying to communicate then, when invited,
deny him to be a Christian and Minister of Christ.

And suppose a Minister at his first coming to a Congregation, where the people
are numerous that have formerly been received to communion by a precedent Godly
Minister, shall such a M^nister be in conscience bound not to administer the
Sacrament, till he be so far acquainted with them as to know them to be free
from scandal, and to have a competency of knowledge to examine themselves, and
to know the danger in case they receive unworthily?

Let any Christian judge whether this were not too heavy a task for a Godly
Minister and in such a case whether it might not serve to admonish them all in
public, to take care how they tempt God in meddling with his ordinances, in
such respects, before they know how to examine themselves, that so they may
come preparedly, and discern the Lords Body, and so not eat and drink to
themselves Judgment. And whether such a Minister is not cleared for his part,
in case he so admonish them, or whether he must call them all into trial and
examination, before he may lawfully administer the Sacrament, let wise men
judge, whether the judgment of charity will engage them to so heavy a task
before they must admit them.

And whether after telling them the danger, and inviting them to come to him,
in case that any make doubt whether he be fit and able to examine himself,
that so he may receive it in faith and have benefit thereby; and he will be
ready and willing to instruct and teach them what in him lies, and advise them
for their good.

But as for him what more can he do in such a case, does not charity bind him
to communicate with them, knowing nothing to the contrary but that they are
suitable and fitly prepared, being owned as such, by his predecessor, think but
of this Scripture, 1 Cor. 16.14. Let all your things be done with charity, and
it will convince, for what can this Imply less then that there must be an
ingredient of charity visible in us in all our actings and administrations,
that we undertake in the name of God for edification, now charity suffers
long, and is kind, it envyeth not, it thinks not evil, it bears all
things, believes all things, hops all things, endures all things; Insomuch
that if a man had all other gifts of the Spirit, and wanted but this one
ingredient of charity, in the exercise thereof, and that also in visibillity as
held forth with them, or as the efficient cause of the exercise and use of all
the rest, he is accounted as nothing by the Apostle Paul, meaning that all the
other gifts are as it were useless, and unprofitable, for edifiing of the
Church, if this be wanting as a chief ingredient for savouring, and relishing,
and seasoning of them, it being as salt for seasoning and relishing all
unsavorie meats which else are naucious and unfit for food for our natural
bodies, See 1 Cor. 13. and Mat. 5.13. and see Coloss. 4.6. Let your speech be
always with grace, seasoned with salt, that ye may know how ye ought to answer
every man, See also Mark 9.49, 50. and Lev. 2.13. By salt can be nothing else
meant but a cordial affection of love or charity, and that held forth in
visibillity for savouring all out actings and ministrations in the name of God.

For if such who are the only salt of the earth do not keep themselves
savoury, but become naucious and unsavourie to those whom they ought to season;
how shall they ever season them, having made themselves unsavory, and
wherewith shall themselves be seasoned, to make them relish better for the
seasoning of others and especially of the world, when they will not hear them.
For how shall they enlighten the world or salt or season them? In case they
will not come near them; because they have made themselves unsavory as to them
at least in their apprehensions, though they be not so in themselves? for by
that means they put themselves out of all possibility of doing them any good,
and therefore the Apostle Paul became all things unto all men that by all means
he might save some, this was his wisdom, and ought to be ours, and wherein we
fail of this and walk by some other rule, we are doubtless so far off from
the ways of God, and the wisdom of his holy Spirit, (See for this, Acts
21.24, 26.) how Paul acted as if the Jewish ceremonies had not been abolished,
and how he circumcised Timotheous because of the Jews, Acts 26.3. And how he
became as without law, to them that were without law, that he might win them
that were without law.

Consider these things seriously, and lay them in the balance of the
Sanctuary, and see if they will not more then counterpoise all that can be
objected, why we should not communicate in the most distinguishing ordinances,
with all whom we know to be Godly, and yet still continue to differ in our
practices as our judgments lead us till our judgments are convinced, and
reconciled, that so our practices also may be the same.

Nor can it be said that we justify, such in their male administrations, by
our communicating with them our practice being publicly known, to be the
contrary in our own societies.

And consider also, whether this is not the likeliest and nearest way to a full
Accordance, and reconcilement in all our differences that are amongst us. And
whether keeping separate and at a distance can in any possibillity produce
Accordance. And whether our duty of love can be performed without this
fellowship one with another, See 1 John 1.7.

Object. But it is a thought which I fear arises in the hearts of many: That
their brethren of other Judgments and ways from them are so stiff spirited,
and so malignant toward us, that if we should invite them to communion, and
show them never so much love and respect, they would not hear us nor accept
our motion, but despise our offer and invitement, and it may be take it as
though we were convinced that our ways are not good, and that we are ready to
forsake them upon that account, and to join with them, and approve of their
ways as better then ours, the which we are unwilling they should think of us,
till it be so indeed.

Answ. To this I answer, We must and ought to do our duty to them whom we
account brethren, what ever they think, or how ever they take it, if our
consciences be clear in the sight of God, we shall have peace with him, though
when we speak of peace to our brethren, they are bent for war.

But if our brethren take it in the evil part, and despise our motion and
invitement, the fault is theirs in the sight of God, and if they be stiff
spirited and malignant against us, let us take care that we give them no cause,
but do our best endeavor to remove all stumbling blocks, and offenses that
are on our parts, and the Lord will bless us and hear our prayers, and reward
our work, and labor of love that we have showed to his name, and for ought we
know he may turn their hearts to be otherwise minded, then we expect, It may
be our stiffenesse has been a cause of theirs, and theirs of ours. And so
likewise may our yielding and holding forth of love and condescension provoke
them to do the like.

And therefore let no excuses re^ard or hinder our speedy endeavors for
mutual Accordance. But let us make i^ our ^usinesse, and that as a matter of
greatest importance, and concernement to us, yea as a matter of life and death,
lest the Lord comes and finds us smiting our fellow servants, etc.

And give me leave a little, to inculcate and beat it home to our very
consciences. Consider it seriously, did not the Lord himself inculcate this
command upon his holy Disciples, and that over and over again, with argument
after argument, and command after command? and shall we think it needless in
this frozen age? Nay, Did he make it his business, when he was ready to leave
them, and to give it forth chiefly as his will and testament, and shall not we
think it worthy to be made as our business, and that of greatest concernement
in this our age, and generation, because the love of many waxes cold already?
However in this treatise I study brevity, expecting that men better able, will
make it their business; And yet if I seem to repeat and fall on again with
the same Scriptures, it is to press them further. Consider therefore thus
says the Lord, A new commandment I give unto you, that ye love one another as
I have loved you, that ye also love one another, John 13.34.

Consider it I say, It is the commandment of Christ to all such as are, and
would be accounted, and known by all men to be his Disciples, which is the
promise annexed, verse. 35. By this shall all men know that ye are my Disciples,
if ye have love one to another.

Now the measure of this love is expressed in the latter part of the 34. ver.
to wit, As I have loved you, that ye also love one another.

And this measure of love is further explained, as to the latitude and extent
thereof, in reference to the same command, to wit, John 15.12, 13. This is my
commandment that ye love one another as I have loved you, And how is that? See
verse. 15. Greater love has no man then this, that a man lay down his life for
his friends.

And that this is the true and proper meaning of Christ without any mystical
dark sense. See how the same Apostle, that loving Disciple, who is therefore
truly called the beloved Disciple, or the Disciple whom Jesus loved, as though
in comparison he had loved none (...) him. And certain^ it is, that though he
love^ them all; yet he loved John with a more peculiar transcendent affection,
then any of the rest, and chiefly because that his doctrine of lov^, and his
commands thereof, took more impression in him then the other Disciples, and the
love of God, and the love of the brethren took more place in his heart, as so
it is manifest in his Epistles, and Gospel, by his treating more and more fully
of love then all the other Disciples.

1 Con. From whence I may gather by the way, That they that love most, are the
most beloved, and the most bent to the pressing and inculcating, and
communication of the doctrine of love, unto their brethren.

2 Con. And that they whomsoever that cannot cordially embrace, and receive
this doctrine, are not cordially embraced and received of Christ, and that in
respect of the measure of our cordiallity.

3 Con. Look how much more cordially we embrace and receive his doctrine of
love, by so much the more cordially we shall be, and are embraced, yea loved
and received of the Lord Jesus Christ. And thus much by the way.

Now for the proper extent of the manner and measure of this duty of love, See
1 John 3.16. to wit. Hereby perceive we the love of God, because he laid down
his life for us, and we ought to lay down our lives for the brethren.

It is not sufficient to love in word, and in t^ngue only, but it must be in
deed, and in truth, (verse. 18.) especially if we would know that we are of the
truth, and that the love of God dwells in us, and would have our hearts
assured before him, (See ver. 17.19.) we must not shut up our bowels of
compassion if we have this worlds good, and see our brother has need, for in
such case, there is no appearance or manifestation that the love of God abides
in us.

No, he that loves not his brother abides in death. And whosoever hates his
brother is a murderer, and we know that no murderer has eternal life
abiding in him See verse. 14.15 Read this Chapter throughout, and Chapter 4. wherein
it is so evident that the Apostle presses this duty of love as the great and
chiefest, duty and command of Christ, and that without which we cannot possibly
be assured that we are yet passed from death unto life, nor that God loves us,
and we him, nor that we keep his commandments, and do those things that
please him, nor that we know God, or dwell in him, and he in us, nor that we
shall have boldness in the day of judgment, neither can our fear that has
torment in it be cast out, nor can we prove our selves to be true men, but
liars, because it is impossible that he who loves not his brother whom he has
seen, should love God whom he has not seen. And this commandment have we
from him, that he who loves God should love his brother also, See Chap. 4. And
this is the message that ye have heard from the beginning, that we should love
one another, Chap. 3.11. See also 1 Timothy 1.5. Now the end of the commandment
is love out of a pure heart, and a good conscience, and faith unfeigned.

And why is this called the end of the commandment? but because that he that
has loved another has fulfilled the Law, for no man can love his brother but
he loves God, nor any man love God, but he will also love his brother, and
upon this hangs the whole Law, and the Prophets, to wit, To love God above
all, and our neighbors as our selves.

And again, Because if this love be in us in perfection as it ought, the
natural product of it will be suitable both in respect of our duties to God,
and to our neighbors, for love works no evil against our neighbors, much
less against God, See 1 Cor. 13.

Now this main duty of love and the measures and necessity of it being
sufficiently proved, and that from such authority as no Christian can for shame
gainsay it, or oppose it in the least. I shall proceed to answer some Queries
that may be made.

1 Query. The first and chief whereof is, And who is our brother that so we may
know whom we ought to love with so vast and boundless an affection, as that
for their sakes if need so require we should be willing even to lay down our
lives for them, and much more our goods and estates? as so the command is
clear, and full, and without exception.

Answ. I answer, I shall first show whom we ought to account as brethren, and
such to whom we owe this measure and manner of love. And secondly, I shall show
whom we ought to account our neighbors, and we ought to love them.

1. All such ought to be owned and accounted our brethren whom we know to be
professors of faith in God, through our Lord Jesus Christ, and to be
worshippers of God, and that they do not live in any scandalous known sin, nor
do not hold and maintain any manifest convicted error after due admonition,
nor are not wilfully schismatic, nor imperiously proud and arrogant, and
this I believe no rational and sober Judicious Christian will deny.

1. Considering that of necessity we must but judge according to the rules of
charity, in regard we have not any rules of certainty, but such as wherein we
may be deceived, and it is far better to be deceived by extending our charity
to the loving of such as do not properly deserve it, then through mere
uncharitableness to deny such love and brotherly respect, as our duty
requires to all the brotherhood, and so to give them Just cause to be
offended with us; for it is dangerous to offend one of the least of those
little ones that believe in him, See Mat. 18.6.

2. Considering the length and breadth of that love, or charity which comes of
God.

Reas. For if the love of God be shed abroad in our hearts really as it ought,
it is so charitable that it thinks no evil, Nay, it bears all things,
believes all things, hops all things, endures all things, (See 1 Cor. 13
5.7.) Nay, it suffers long, and is kind, etc. verse. 4. It takes not all
things in the evil part, it judges nothing before the time, it quenches not
the smoking flax, nor breaks the bruised reed, and such like, many
Scriptures I might produce, but these I hope are sufficient for any that
understand them, and the latitude of their sense.

3. Considering the absurd unsavourinesse of judging or disowning any as
brethren of whom we know so much as has been said before of their profession
and practice, but have nothing to the contrary whereof to accuse them. And they
that are or should be the salt of the earth, should by all means take heed they
loose not their saltness, or become unsavory to whom they should season, for
who then shall season them? that so they might be able, or in a capacity to
season others. See Mat. 5.^3. and Mark. 9.50. Have salt in your selves, and
have peace one with another: says our blessed Savior. And by this salt is
meant the affection of love and charity, for without the exercise of these,
though we had the tongue of men and Angels, and such other gifts reckoned up
by the Apostle, (1 Cor. 15.) yet we should be so unsavourie if together with
those gifts we did not exercise charity, us that we should profit nothing, nor
season any of those with whom we converse, but seem as it were naucious unto
them, all other gifts would do us no good for edifying of the Church, if
Charity be wanting in us, or if we do not exercise them in a way of charity,
and as mixed with charity and powdered with the affection of love; the which (as
salt to our corporal meat) m^keth it savoury and seasoning to the hearts of
others, but if we step aside out of the ways of charity, and cannot hold that
forth, as having it really in us, and acting by it and in it, It is because we
have but little of it in our own hearts, and then who can expect to be seasoned
by us, See 1 Cor. 1^.31. and Chap. 13 1, 2, 3. and compare the sense whether it
be not so as has been said, Covet earnestly the best gifts, and yet show I
unto you a more excellent way. that is to say, get abundance of charity so as
to exercise those gifts in the way, and show a manifestation of charity, or
else they are all worth nothing for edifying of the Church, but like sounding
brass or a tinckling cimbal, in which there is not much for the use of
edifying. No No, knowledge indeed puffs up, but it is love that edifieth, See
1 Cor. 8.1.

But it may yet be demanded how this Scripture is to be understood, how love
edifieth, considering love is an internal grace, as so also is faith, which
cannot be communicated to others from us, but are gifts of God.

I answer, It is love which edifieth, because love is the efficient cause of
all Spiritual ministrations that are effectual for edification. It is the
fountain and spring from whence does flow forth such cordial expressions as
are effectual for edification. It is of the essence of the Spirit of God, he
that dwells in love, dwells in God, and God in him.

So that when love ingageth us, or is the efficient cause of any expressions or
ministrations, it may truly be attributed to the Spirit of God as the chief
cause of such ministrations, and they are certainly efficacious either as the
favor of life unto life, or of death unto death, as the words of God, nay, as
our Savior says, the words that I speak unto you they are spirit and they
are life. See John 6.63.

So words that come from the Spirit are Spiritual words, they are cordial,
fervent, earnest, and powerful words. They are words of life and power for
edifying in the faith, and provoking unto love and good works. And therefore
when men are acted and exercised from a root and principle of love, they are
properly acted and exercised by the Spirit of God; And it is more proper to say
so of them, then that they exercise their gifts, for it is their gifts, to wit,
of the Spirit, and Faith, and Love, which exercise them. They are but the
instruments, God is the Agent. It is God that grants them according to the
riches of his glory, to be strengthened with might by his Spirit in the inner
man, that Christ may dwell in their hearts by faith, that they being rooted and
grounded in love, may be able to comprehend with all Saints what is the
breadth, and length, and depth, and height, and to know the love of Christ
which passes knowledge, that they might be filled with all the fulness of
God, See Ephe. 3.16, 17, 18, 19.

See here what large requests the Apostle puts up, and that in few words for
the Ephesians, and in how complete an order. For though he ascribes the
original of all strength and might in the inner man, to the Spirit of God, as
the prime efficient cause thereof, and the most immediate, as so it is, yet as
next immediate, and as isntrumental causes whereby he work^th immediately, he
joyneth faith and love as co-operative, (and if I may so say) as co-essenciall
causes of all spiritual power and strength, for working us up, and making us
capable and comprehensive to be filled with all the fulness of God; for
unless Christ dwells in our hearts by faith, and that we be rooted and
grounded in love, we cannot be able to comprehend with all Saints, as verse. 18.
Nor can we be filled with all the fulness of God, as ver. 19.

And consider also how no lesser mea^ures of the Spirit, and Faith, and Love,
will serve the turn to fulfill the desires and requests of the Apostle on
their behalf, but that they might be filled with all the fullness of God,
which might teach us not to be content with any poor measures of his holy
Spirit, But to covet earnestly even the best gifts, and the largest measures
that are attainable, and that we are capable of. For he that has bid us covet
them and a^ke them, can easily give them, and make us capable and comprehensive
of them through faith and love which are in Christ Jesus.

Now the spirit works faith, and works by faith, to make us capable of
discerning all spiritual things, for they being invisible, as God himself
cannot be seen with bodily eyes, but only through an eye of faith, And faith
works by love, and also works love, See 1 Thessalonians. 1.3. and Gal. 5.6. For
what we cannot see through faith and apprehend to be lovely, we cannot possibly
love it (I mean it) of spiritualls, and invisibles. And therefore it
follows, that if we have but a little faith, a dim-eyed faith, we have also
but a little love, and a little desire after spiritual things, but are poor,
and content also to remain poor in all such respects, (See Rev. 3.7, 8.) But
God has chosen the poor of this world, rich in faith, to be heirs of his
Kingdom. And David also, his eyes were upon the faithful in the Land; and
upon the excellent that they might dwell with him. Psalm. 101.6. But he was a
man after Gods own heart, where shall a man be found now in this generation
that makes his choice after the same rule, to make them his associates, and
companions, and delight, and his counselors, as David did, See Psalm. 16.3. and
James 2. and 2, 3, 4 5. And why is it? but for want of faith, which works by
love, and works love to the choicest objects that are the most lovely, and
also the most loving, for there is a reciprocacy in this respect, in the sight
of God, as has been showed.

But if it be conceived that many do in a great measure as David did, I say
let us take the Apostles counsel who beseeches in such a case, to increase
more and more, (See 1 Thessalonians. 4, 10.) which shows that he would not have us
rest content with any poor or scant measures, but to be pressing forwards,
toward perfection in such respects wherein we can never go beyond the mark
that is set us, and therefore it is that the Apostle bids, seeing we desire
and are zealous of spiritual gifts, seek that we may excel to the edifying
of the Church, See 1 Cor. 14, 12. From which it is evident that we may and
ought to seek, that we might excel, provided it be not to make our selves
famous in the eyes of men, but that our consciences may bear us witness in the
holy Ghost, that our end is mainly for the edifying of the Church.

Now this end can never sway us to any great zeal, unless our love to the
Church engage us to it, and the love of Christ must as it were constrain us,
as it did the Apostles, yea and even Christ himself, now where love engages
us it will not pervert the end of such ordinances which Christ has left us for
our edification, to make them as stumbling blocks, and as rocks of offense to
obstruct our communion, whereby we have occasion for edifying one another in
faith and love.

But it will rather cast up and prepare the way, and remove the stumbling
blocks out of the way of his people, See Isa. 57.14. That so all the elect and
beloved of God may accord with us, and come in and consecrate with us in all
Christian communion and brotherly fellowship, for it is the nature of love to
unite cordially, for love is in the heart, and therefore it was that in the
primative times, they that believed were of one heart, and of one mind, and the
success was, they had all things common.

Now it is well known that cordial love cannot be enforced, but must be
induced, we cannot cudgel it into the hearts of any; God is the Author and
Fountain thereof, nor can our separation and keeping a part ever induce it,
but it must be induced through loving and kind fellowship, and communion
together, and therefore it is that God has commanded fellowship.

Consider seriously this Text of Scripture, what it clearly imports, I speak
it as to wise men (as the Apostle did) to judge what I say of it, to wit, 1
Cor. 10.14, 15, 16, 17. Wherefore my dearly beloved, fly from idolatry. I
speak as to wise men, judge ye what I say. The Cup of blessing which we bless,
is it not the communion of the blood of Christ. The bread which we break is it
not the communion of the body of Christ. For we being many are one bread, and
one body, for we are all partakers of that one bread. From all which give me
leave to ask you, does not his bidding us fly from idolatry, imply that we may
idolize the bread and wine, as so not only the Papists do, who account it the
real body and blood of Christ, which they hear us do, and must contain till
all things be restored. But when we make account as if the bread and wine after
consecration or blessing of them had any virtue in them to nourish our souls
to eternal life, which were only left us as outward signs to be eat and
drunk in remembrance of him, and that by his body, the Church, so that when
they gave thanks or blessed the bread and wine, they did not pray that the
bread and wine might be blessed to the people for their Spiritual nourishment,
But they prayed that the communion and fellowship of the mystical body might
be blessed, that is to say, that their union and fellowship together might be a
means o^ their edification, and that is faith and love, and so might grow up
together, and hold close to the Head from which all the body being knit
together, by joints and bands having nourishment ministered, might increase with
the increase of God, See Coloss. 2.19. And this is the end for which this
Sacrament was ordained; to wit. for our edification in faith and love, and that
by having communion with Christ who has promised his presence amongst us, in
case we follow his steps and walk in love as he has loved us, and so obey his
commandment and love one another, owning one another, and having fellowship
one with another, and disowning none that are members of his body, but
receiving all his members, even as he also has received us to the glory of God
the Father: Then I say he will doubtless own us and be present with us, and
shed his l^ve abroad in our hearts, and build us up in faith, yea the whole
body together, till we come to be tall, and strong, so as to ask what we will,
(with a joint consent) and it shall be given us, whereas whilst divided, how
can we expect that our prayers should be heard whiles we are not reconciled to
our brethren which he has bid us do first even as Joseph to his brethren, Genesis
43 5. Ye shall not see my face except your brother be with you, even so says
our Savior, Go first and be reconciled to thy brother, and then come and
offer thy gift, and leave thy gift on the Al^ar till then; as if he should have
said, do not expect thy gift shall be accepted, till you be agreed, you are
both my sons, I cannot endure you should live at variance, come not here, do
not expect to see my face till you be agreed, I will not own thee in such a
posture of spirit, thy brother has something against thee that is contrary to
love, go and agree with thy brother, as I have commanded thee, and then thou
art welcome; Ask and ye shall receive, seek and ye shall find, knock and it
shall be opened unto you, and by this all men shall know that ye are my
Disciples, if (you make it appear) that ye love one another: Whereas on the
other part, how can any man think you are my Disciples, or have any love to
me, or I to you, if ye cannot love and own, and have fellowship together one
with another as brethren ought, and as love ingageth where it is cordial, and
not in word, and tongue only, but indeed and in truth. Nay, how easy is it for
any man to prove and that from Scripture, that whoever denies this
Christian-fellowship with his Christian brethren is yet in darkn^ss, and
walks in darkness, and knows not whither he goes? See 1 John 1.6, 7. and
Mat. 5.23, 24 and Mat. 7.7. Ye^, Dililah could say to Sampson, How can thou
say I love thee, when thy heart is not with me? See Judges 16.15.

And this we may justly say to our selves, how shall we say for shame, or how
can we think that we love God, if we have not a care to keep his commandments?
And can we keep his commandments and not love our brethren? or can we say we
love them and cannot agree with them but fall out by the way.

Object. But it will be objected, such and such are our brethren, but they will
not go our ways, we are in ways that we know to be right, and they are in by
ways, and are bewildred, and will not be persuaded, and how can we help it, we
are forced to leave them.

Answ. If they be our brethren, and that we see them out through weakness, and
that we think our selves strong, we ought rather to bear the infirmities of
the weak then to please our selves, lest our father be angry with us, and say,
why did ye leave my little children, and overrun them in the dark night,
whilst they cannot see but be bewildred? and so send us back to fetch them
home, and not suffer us to rest or come within doors, till we bring them with
us, and it may be whip us also for leaving them at all without a guide. It will
not serve to excuse us, to say our brethren were wilful and pettish, and would
go their own ways, or go none at all, they being but children No, a father
will not loose his children, and danger to have them cast away, because they
are weak and pettish, but will rather say, why did ye not rather turn back and
bring them to me that I might have corrected them, and taught them better, but
you must leave them in danger, and in an angry mood, could ye not have spoke
them fair and in a loving way persuaded them as children.

Beloved brethren, Consider it seriously for there is no father can be so
choice and tender hearted toward his little children, as the Lord is choice
and tender hearted toward his little ones as has been showed before, and
though he will not deny us to be his children but own us as such in an
overly-way, yet he will not welcome us, nor lodge us in his bosom with such
sweet embraces and kisses of love, nor entertain us familiarly, so as to know
his counsels, and his mind, and secrets, till at least we have endeavored
what in us lies to persuade our brethren to come along with us, and that in
love and meekness as a nurse uses to do with children. And when we have used
the means and cannot do it, yet let us never cease to pray to our father,
saying, father persuade them thou art able to do it though we cannot. The Lord
persuade Japheth to dwell in the tents of Shem. And then Canaan shall be his
servant. And doubtless it is already upon the hearts of many of the faithful
servants and messengers of God, both to pray, and preach for this Accordance,
though with little hopes of obtaining there desires because they see such
stiffenesse in the hearts of the people, and averseness to it, and in some of
their ministers which is sad and lamentable, that the leaders of the people
should cause them to err, and to remain stiff against the express commands
both of God the Father, and of our Lord Jesus Christ, and of his holy Apostles,
and Prophets, and not to stoop at all, nor submit themselves nor their ways
and judgments, but as ascribing to themselves infalibillity of Spirit as if
they could not err, See 1 Cor. 13.12.

Consider I beseech you whence this stiffeness arises, and whether it be not
manifest that it springs from the root of pride and self love, and conceits
of our own wisdom above others of our brethren, that yet in account with
others are as wise as we, and it may be much wiser; and that also in the sight
of God. But as I said before, when the leaders of the people cause them to
err. The case is lamentable and very dangerous, lest they that are led of them
be d^stroyed, See Isa. 9.13, 14, 15, 16, 17. And let me say to such stiff
spirited leaders of the people: If they will but look in the bottom of their
hearts they shall certainly find there a root of pride, and self-love, to be
the original fountain from whence this stiffenesse springs and grows up.
And they cannot but know who it was that called such like men blind guides for
straining out a gnat, and swallowing a cammel, and for omitting of judgment,
mercy, and faith, and tithing of Mint, Annisse, and Cumin, as has been spoken
to before.

Object. But it will yet be objected, shall not we be going on, and pressing
forwards, but we must stay for them that will not pace with us but make stands
by the way, and are not satisfied that we go the right way, and therefore will
not forward in the best and nearest paths which we know are such, and they
will not be persuaded, and some are not so able, and zealous, as yet to go
forward so fast as we, and shall we stay for them?

Answ. If they be our brethren we may well stay a while to persuade them, and
tell them what way our father directed us to go, and we cannot be sure our
selves that he has so directed us, but we can easily show it them, and make it
manifest. But if it be their weakness and want of zeal, let us take them by
the hand as little children, and help them forward, and go their pace, and not
leave them behind, as amongst the wolves; our Father will be angry if we
overrun them, and whip us for it. For this is not like as a nurse cherishes
her children, as the Apostle dealt with the Thessalonians, 1 These. 2.7, 8. It
is not so gentle, nor so affectionate, for he being ^ffectionately desirous of
them was willing to impart, unto them not only the Gospel, but even his own
soul, because they were dear unto him, and so would also Silvanus, and
Timotheus whom in such respects we ought to follow, and if we will indeed
press forward unto perfection, let this be our mark and then we shall not
overrun our little brethren whiles they are in nonage, no though they be a
little froward and pettish like children, nor though they think themselves wise
and strong, and yet we know them to be weak and foolish; For if we know them to
be such, we know them also to be but children and babes in Christianity in
comparison with others of a riper standing, for because they are weak, or
froward, pettish, or foolish, shall we be so likewise? Do we not show our
selves also to be but children in Christianity as well as they? and are we not
so far short of the Apostles practice, and resolution before named? It were but
a bad nurse that should so carry toward little children. Compare but such
practices with the Apostles, and it will convince. And if we take in also that
undeniable example of the Lord himself, how he dealt with Israel who were a
stiff-necked people, and how long he suffered their manners in the
wilderness, See Deuteronomy. 32.11, 12, 13, 14. How he dealt with them as an Eagle,
and bare them on his wings, and lead them in the way through a desert
wilderness, feeding them with oil, and milk, and butter, and honey so as
they wanted nothing, neither did he leave them nor forsake them, for all their
frowardness, till they first forsook him, and served other gods; though he
said of them, verse. 20 They were a very froward generation, children in whom
was no faith. And sure there cannot be much faith in us, whilst we have so
little love, and regard so little to obey his first and great commandment,
wherein all the whole laws of God, and the ends of them are so clearly
contained, and comprehended, so as in obeying them, we cannot choose but
fulfill them all, as has been proved at large from sacred Scriptures.

And let us consider also another Scripture or two, to wit, Ephesians. 5.29, 30. No
man (says the Apostle) ever yet hated his own flesh, but nourishes and
cherishes it, even as the Lord does the Church, for we are members of his
body, of his flesh, and of his bones. And he gave himself for it, that he
might sanctify and cleanse it with the washing of water by the word, that he
might present it to himself a glorious Church, not having spot or wrinckle, or
any such thing, but that it should be holy and without blemish, See ver. 25,
26, 27. Now if Christ so loved and has owned his Church as members of his own
body, and flesh, and bones, and has given himself for it, and made it his
business to sanctify and cleanse it, etc. And if we ought to be followers of
God as dear children, and to walk in love as Christ also has loved us, As
verse. 1, 2. Then doubtless we ought also to make it our business, and our
maine business of all other, to present all the members of his body, the
Church perfect, we being also members one of another, (See Chap. 4.25.) as a
perfect and glorious Church, without spot or wrinckle, or any such thing. And
to that end we must let all bitterness, and wrath, and anger, and clamor, and
evill-speaking, be put away from us, with all malice. And be kind one to
another, tenderhearted, forgiving one another, even as God for Christ's sake,
has forgiven us, See Chap. 4.31, 32.

The Lord open our understandings to consider, and discern how much these
sacred words of truth and faithfulness, concern us all in these days of
ours, for his great names sake, Amen.

FINIS.

