THE Quakers VVhitest DEVIL UNVAILED, And their sheeps clothing pulled off,
that their Woolvish inside may be easily discerned. In Answer to a Letter
subscribed James Naylor, A Professed Quaker. For even Satan himself is
transformed into an Angel of Light; no marvel then, if his Ministers transform
themselves into the Ministers of righteousness. Written by ELLIS BRADSHAVV.

Printed, Anno Dom. 1654.

The Quakers LETTER, To all the faithless generation of the world, and to all
who desire to know in what faith and hope we live, and what faith and hope we
deny.
THat Faith which we own and witness, John 1. 9. John 8. 12.
is that Faith which stands in Jesus Christ the everlasting Covenant of Light,
who is the Light of the world, and has enlightened every one that comes into
the world, and this Light we believe and follow, and by this Light we are led
out of all the ways, works, and worships of this dark world, and the effects
of this Light we witness by faith, and by this Faith we do deny all who say
this light John 10. 4, 5.
is not sufficient, without the help and teaching of man, to 2 Timothy 4. 5.
lead and guide in all the ways of God, and all such we deny, for these are
they who know not the voice of Christ 2 Cor. 4. 10, 1^
and therefore hear ye stranger and hireling, who heaps up teachers, having
itching ears, who cannot endure sound Doctrine; and in this Christ we believe,
who is our life and salvation; and all them we deny, and their faith, and who
say they have Faith, but their life is not the 1 John 3 8.
Life of Christ, but lives in sin and worldly pleasures, and say, they cannot
be saved from their sins in this world, but Heb. 7. 25.
in part, and this faith we deny, and them, for these are they who deny the end
of Christ's coming in the flesh, who cannot believe that Christ is able to save
to the uttermost 2 Timothy 1. 19.
all that come unto him, and this Faith is reprobate, Romans 1, 4. 16.
and these deny the Lord that bought them, and have made shipwreck of Faith and
a good conscience, and makes the blood of Christ of none effect to them who are
not elected by it; and all them and their faith we deny, who say they believe
and know the will of God, but they have not the power; but that Christ in which
we believe is the great power of God to salvation in all that believe; and who
has this Christ has power, and in him we have power to do the will of God,
but these are they who 2 Timothy 3. 5.
know not Christ nor his power, but run after men into notions and forms, but
denies the power, and from all such we turn away: for such know not him in them
who is greater than he that is in the world, but are willing to serve sin, Romans
5. 17.
and to be led captive at the devils will, not minding the Light and power of
Christ, to be guided by it, and then would seem to cast the fault on God, as
though he Romans 3. 22.
had given a Christ which is not able to set them free till after death, and
these are they which put him to open Romans 10. 3, 4.
shame, whose Faith and Profession we deny: And we deny all these who say they
have Faith in Christ, and yet their righteousness is not perfect, but this
Faith we witness, that receives the righteousness of God, even the free gift
of righteousness by Jesus Christ, and this is Romans 10. 27.
perfect which is the righteousness of Faith, and all who have not this
righteousness, are in the self righteousness which is not perfect, and those
come short of the Righteousness of God, and would establish their own
righteousness, Psalm. 3. 9.
but these are the boasters which justify themselves, and despise others, but
by the righteousness of Faith is boasting excluded, and here is no justifying
of self, but denying self, and self-righteousnesse, and exalting Psalm. 1. 11.
the Righteousness of God, which is perfect, which is in Christ Jesus, who is made
unto us righteousness and sanctification: And by this Faith we deny all who
say they have Christ, and have not this Righteousness, but whose
righteousness is imperfect, and that Christ, and that righteousness we deny
which is not perfect, and witness that Christ in James 2.
which we are made the righteousness of God, and this Christ is our
righteousness and perfection, and this faith Ephesians. 2. 10*
we own and witness, which is not a talk of faith, as the worlds Professors,
who say they have Faith, but are dead in sins and trespasses, and cannot
witness the work of 1 John 5.
God in them, but that Faith we own which is lively, by which the work of God
is witnessed in us, working out sin, and by which we are his workmanship,
created in Gal. 1. 4.
Christ Jesus unto good works, and this Faith we witness which overcomes the
world, and the devil; and all you we deny, who have a profession in the world,
and in 1 John 3. 3
whom the works of the devil are brought forth, and their faith and hope we
deny, who say they hope to be saved, and yet live in sin, making a Profession,
and this is the hope of the hypocrite, which shall perish, and not the Heb. 6.
19.
hope of Christ, for he that has this hope of Christ purifieth himself even as
he is pure, and this faith and hope Romans 10.
we own which purifies the heart, and enters into the place of holiness within
the Vail; but that which is without holiness we deny, which is not in Christ,
but in a vain mind: And we deny all who say they have faith and Heb. 8. 10.
yet their word and light is without them, for the word we witness which is
nigh even in the heart, and this is the Heb. 7. 19.
word of faith which the Apostles preached, and he that has Christ or faith
has this word, which is Christ the Light, not in Letter but in Spirit. And all
them we deny whose Law is without, and morrall, and that Law we witness which
is spiritual within written in the heart, and 1 Cor. 12,
this Law is perfect, and endures for ever, and all the 1 Cor. 14.
changeable Laws we deny, and all those Laws without, we see to be in the old
Covenant of works, which made nothing perfect, and the felf righteousness which
is filthy rags, and by the Light of Christ are we convinced of that
righteousness; not to be of Faith: therefore whose John 4. 23.
faith and works stand here, them we deny, and see them all worshipping without
the new Covenant, in the oldness of the Letter, whose Law is without, and their
Light without, their word without, their Church without, their Baptism,
praises, and singing without, their Christ without, their righteousness
without, and so their Faith without, all which we witness to be, within, and
within we worship in newness of Spirit, and we see all that are without God,
and his Righteousness to be in the world, and strangers to the Covenant of
Grace, and that faith and worship we deny, which God denies, who seeks such as
worship him in Spirit and Truth, and this Faith and worship we own, not known
to the world, and therefore hated.

JAMES NAYLOR

THE ANSWER To IT. To all the faithful Generation, as so they profess
themselves) of the people called Quakers, who desire to know in what faith and
hope we now live that are called Christians: In direct opposition by way of
counterpoyse, to a Leetter subscribed James Naylor, one of the professed
Quakers, whom they call the Messenger of the living God.
THat Faith which we own and witness too, is that which works by love, and is
in Christ Jesus our dear Lord and alone Savior, who is that true light who
lighteneth every one that comes into the world; and in this Light we believe
and desire to follow, that we might be led out of all the ways, yea works and
worships of the darkness of this world; and all the effects and fruits of this
Light we own and witness too, in the sight of God, by believing and
acknowledging both by word and deed in love and meekness, and by means also of
this Faith and love, which this essential light has wrought in us by his Word
and Spirit. We are seriously engaged utterly to deny their ways and doctrines;
who go about to exclude and disparage all helps and means and teachings of men;
and of such especially whom the Lord of the harvest has thrust forth as
faithful laborers into his harvest, for the leading into, and for the guiding
in all the ways of God, and of Christ our Savior, whose voice we know and
resolve to follow, and not such strange doctrines and devices of men, whom as
Christ has promised we can know by their fruits, that though they come unto
us; and would only appear all in sheeps clothing; yet inwardly they are
ravening wolves, and speak lies through hypocrisy, having their consciences
seared as with an hot iron; pretending to believe in Christ as their life and
salvations and to deny all them and their Faith and ways who say they have
faith, but their life is not the life of Christ, but they live in sin and
worldly pleasures, and say they cannot be saved from their sins in this world,
but in part, implying, that they, for their parts, live the life of Christ in
fullness of perfection here in this life, when it is evident to the contrary,
and easily demonstrable, that they are led away with a spirit of defusion to
believe lies.

1. For first, the Spirit of God teaches us to honor all men: But their
Spirit of delusion teaches and leads them not to honor or reverence any man
at all, though in never so high or honorable a place or condition of life.

2. The Spirit of God teaches us to be courteous and tender hearted toward
all men; but their Spirit teaches and leads to be courteous and tender
hearted toward no man, but teaches them mere incivility, like the bruit
beasts that are led with sensuality as utterly void of rationality.

3. The Spirit of God teaches us to judge nothing before the time; yea, even
Christ himself bids us, Judge not that we be not judged; but their Spirit
teaches them both to judge and condemn, and with a most austere countenance
call men damned, and carnal, and hirelings, and deceivers, and proud, when
they can demonstrate no such thing, but in the judgment of charity might judge
the contrary, if they had that spirit and faith which works by love.

4. The Spirit of God teaches us to let other men praise us, and not our own
mouth, strangers, and not our own lips, and to let our works praise us in the
gates, like the verteons woman: But their fruits teaches them to praise
themselves, as if they were perfect already, even as Christ himself,
intimating, as if Christ already had empowered them to do the will of God.

5. The Spirit of God teaches us to speak the truth in love and meekness, and
not to trust in our selves that we are righteous, and despise others, like the
proud Pharisee, but their spirit teaches them both to falsify and belie our
doctrine and Profession, intimating to the people by their false suggestions,
that we should teach such doctrine as are quite contradictious to the word of
God; to wit, That Christ is not able to save to the uttermost those that come
unto God by him; or that we should not account him the great power of God to
salvation of them that believe; All which we utterly deny to be our doctrine or
faith.

6. But we have learned from that Spirit which teaches us not to exalt our
selves, but to think soberly, and to speak modestly of our selves in respect of
our present seize, as not accounting our selves already perfect, nor to
speak of our selves, above that which may be seen in us, or heard of us: though
yet for ought they know, we utterly forget that which is behind, and press
forward to that which is before, even the mark and the price of the high
calling of God in Christ Jesus: If possible that we might attain to the
Resurrection of the dead: A mark which they know not as yet what it means,
though they prefesse themselves perfect, and to have Christ within them, and
that so many as have Christ have this power, and what have they not (by their
own Profession, if we can believe them) already within them; But I hope we may
know the tree by its fruits: better than their own testimony.

7. The Spirit of God teacherh us not to own any perfection that is in Christ
as properly ours, but acknowledge it his, though we have Christ in us: For
though the life we now live is by Faith in the Son of God, who has loved us
and has given himself for us: yet it is not we that live, but Christ that
lives in us.

But their Spirit teaches them to own every perfection that is in Christ as
properly theirs; affirming that they that have Christ have power; and they that
believe have power to do the will of God, and they deny all those that say they
have Faith in Christ, and yet their righteousness is not perfect, because the
righteousness of Christ is perfect, which yet is not properly theirs, but
only through faith, and that by imputation, and they also deny all those, and
their Faith and hope, who say they hope to be saved, and yet live in sin,
making a profession; for, say they, he that has this hope in him, purifieth
himself even as he is pure: so that if he be not purified in perfection like
Christ, they say, it is but the hope of the hypocrite, which shall perish: And
they also deny all who say they have Faith and Christ, and yet their word and
light is without them; for he that has Christ or faith, has this Word and
Light which is Christ; as if a man could not have Christ by Faith, but he must
of necessity have the fullness of Christ, the essential Word and Light wholely
within them, whom the heavens of heavens are not able to contain, conceived as
God, nor are all creatures able to comprehend. Again they affirm, that he that
has that Word of faith which the Apostles preached, has this Word not in the
Letter, but in the Spirit, as if the Apostle had only spoke of Christ the
essential word, and not inclusively of the spiritual ministration of the Word
of God, in his sacred Name: And so again they deny all them whose law is
without and moral, for they own that Law which is spiritual within wr^tten in
the heart, for that Law, say they, is perfect, and endures for ever, and
therefore they deny all those Laws without, and see them to be in the old
Covenent of works, which made nothing perfect; as if we ought not to own the
Law without us in Tables or Books, as well as that within us, and the rather as
a Rule to try that within us by, whether our Spirits be of God; a subtle
delusive doctrine of Satan this must needs be, to disparage the Word and Law of
God: that men might only listen to his lying spirit, or to their own corrupt
and deluded hearts.

8. The Spirit of Truth teaches us, That Christ our righteousness was
sacrificed for us, and that his righteousness only may be called perfect, and
depended on for our justification, and not our own inherent righteousness; yet
we also endeavor to purify our selves even as he is pure, and do press
onwards toward perfection, though with no intent to establish our own
righteousness, as their lying spirit would hint to the world.

9. The Spirit of God teaches us also to own that Faith which purifieth the
heart, and produces holiness both within and without, and to own that word and
light within, and that Word and light without also, for Christ is within us,
and without also, so is the Law without us and within us also; yea, we also
worship the Father in Spirit and in truth, and utterly disclaim all false
righteousness: But we have also a word without, and a Church without, and a
Baptism without, praises and singing without, and a Christ without, and
righteousness without as well as within, and so we ought.

But whether their spirit teach them to hold forth the profession of their hope
and faith in these respects, as well externally as they profess to do it
internally; whether they will show forth out of a good conversation their works
in meekness and wisdom, and whether they will show forth the vertu^s of him
whom, they say, has called them out of darkness into light, and whether they
w^ll show their faith by their works, that we may believe them, and judge the
tree good because the fruit is good; and whether their faith will ever appear
to be such, a faith as works by love, that so all their things may be done in
love and in the spirit of meekness, as if they had learned of himself to be
meek and lowly of heart, is more than some of those know, to whom those people
write: And again whether it be not utterly in vain to write these things in
answer unto them, considering we have cause to doubt that some of them are
perverted, and son, being damned of their own consciences; and whether they be
of those to whom God has sent strong delusions, that they might believe a lie,
because they have not received the truth in love, but have pleasure in
unrighteousness; and so being already rejected, and delivered up of God, and
under the power of Satan, whether they dare resist him that he might fly from
them, or whether they can resist him steadfastly in the faith, or they are now
already led captive by him, as servants a^^ vassals to do his will, is not
easy to determine, nor will we absolutely determine, nor judge of them as they
do of others: But this we say, They profess to know God, but in their works
they deny him; and they profess to have the Word and the Law of God written in
their hearts, but as for fruits of love we cannot discern any that proceeds
from them: Now the end of the commandment is love out of a pure heart, and
good conscience, and faith unfaigned, and love or charity suffers long, and
is kind it envye^h not, it vaunteth not it self, is not puffed up, does not
behave it self unseemly, seeks not her own, is not easily provoked, think th
no evil, rejoiceth not in iniquity, but rejoiceth in the truth, it bears all
things, believes all things, hops all things, endures all things: It never
fails; But if there be this Charity in the heart, it will act accordingly,
upon all occasions: Out of the abundance of the heart the mouth will speak and
all the body will act; But if it be not, then they have not the Law written in
their hearts as they pretend: They may therefore compare their ways with these
rules of Charity, if they so please, and so may know themselves whether Christ
be in them, by his blessed Spirit, or they are led by a Spirit which is not of
God; For if Christ be in them, he has shed this love abroad in their hearts:
And if the contrary, if this love be not there, it is another spirit than the
Spirit of Christ and another Law than the Law of Christ that acts them: And
if their spirit within will not suffer them to parallel their case aright, if
they please to write to us, they shall have some further help; And in the mean
time we leave them to their proper Steersmen in these respects, and spare our
labor: So resolves he, who without any more complements subscribeth his Name.

ELLIS BRADSHAW.


