SAINTSHIP No ground of SOVEREIGNTY: OR A TREATISE Tending to prove, That the
SAINTS, barely considered as such, ought not to GOVERN.

By Edw: Bagshaw, Student of Ch: Ch:

printer's device: the arms of the University of Oxford (McKerrow 427) ACADEMIA
OXONIESIS
SAPIENTIA ET FELICITATIS

Oxford, Printed by H: Hall, Printer to the University, for T. Robinson. 1660.

To the Honorable JOHN DORMER Esquire; A Member of PARLIAMENT.
Worthy Sir,
THough the manner of my Life and nature of my Studies does lead me to affect a
more then ordinary Retiredness and Privacy, yet I neither am, nor ought to be
so great a stranger to the passages of Providence amongst us, as not to take
notice what great things it has pleased God of late to do for this Nation; if
not by completing our hopes, yet at least by preventing our fears, and
bringing us within some nearer view of Settlement: Whilst others therefore are
taken up with celebrating the Authors, and magnifying the means of our
deliverance: I have a little made it my business to search into the cause of
our Danger; which if once rightly stated, will be a direction for our present
Senators, to secure themselves against that Rock, on which the Ship of the
COMMONWEALTH has almost been ruined. And herein there was no need of any long
study; for who does not see, that the too free venting of all sorts of
Opinions, and that by all sorts of men, how ignorant and unconcerned soever,
will, if not restrained, for ever keep us a Divided, and consequently, make us
an Unsettled People? Amongst those many Principles, which are now let loose upon
us, (to exercise the Faith and Patience of this last Age) there is none that I
know of, which does either more immediately conduce to the ruin of all Civil
Government, or had a greater influence, in the pretenses at least, of the
Actors, upon our late unwarrantable Disturbances, then this which I have here
endeavored to confute. For let this once be granted, that our Savior is a
Temporal Prince, and that only those have a right to Govern who have by Faith
an Interest in him, presently a door is opened to all manner of Rebellion and
Treason; nay, there can be no such Crimes in the World, if Religion, and a
design to advance our Saviors Kingdom, be once made the pretense to authorize
them. Indeed the consequents are so fatal and horrid, and the remembrance of
Munster Affairs (which were acted by the same spirit) so fresh, Sleid. lib. 10.
and recent, that it might almost seem needless to endeavor any other
confutation, then a bare relating of that Story.

But Sir, that I may take here that liberty, which you have hitherto always
indulged me, of speaking my thoughts: I never yet looked upon that way of
confuting an Error, which the Arminian Writers do usually tread in, to be
either Rational or Convincing; I mean, by urging the Inconveniences and ill
Consequences of the Doctrine we dispute against: For it is one Question, What
is true? and another, What is convenient? and after all those Tragical
Inferences, wherewith men seek to affright unwary and unobserving Readers, yet
this will be an eternal Axiom, That truth is truth, let the consequences be
what they will; and the more harsh and repugnant any Doctrine, if plainly
revealed, seems unto Natural Reason, the greater is our Faith, and the more
signal our Obedience, if we notwithstanding do submit unto and embrace it. In
prosecution therefore of this Design (which I have laid down to my self, as the
only satisfactory way of deciding all Controversies in Divinity) I have not
inquired so much how dangerous, or how destructive and ruinous the contrary
Doctrine is, as how it is written; and so have proceeded by direct proof, to
show that their Opinion who would have Sovereignty founded upon that bottom, is
utterly unscriptural; for that it is unreasonable, I think none makes any
question. And therefore I hope this Treatise may be useful for those who err,
not knowing the Scriptures, and following the sound of words, have not leisure,
nor perhaps ability, to look into the sense of them. Had I consulted my own
credit, I might have made this Discourse more plausible, by filling up my Pages
with the Authority of ancient Writers; but I purposely forbore, both because
those, for whose sakes I mainly publish it, are not acquainted with any thing
of Christianity, more then their English Bibles do instruct them in; and
likewise because I thought it needless, having so much of Divine Authority for
my Text, to crowd humane Testimonies into the Margin; since such mixtures do
usually make a good Cause suspected.

Sir, Whatever it is, I humbly present it to you, and doubt not, how rude and
inartificial soever it seems, but it will find entertainment among those who
love seasonable Truths, if you please first to honor it with your Acceptance:
Whose Piety, Prudence, Integrity, and Zeal for your Countries Liberty and
Welfare, have as much advanced you in the Esteem and Judgment of all sober and
unprejudiced men, as your many personal Favors in the Heart and Affections, of,

Worthy Sir, Your most obliged, and most humbly devoted Servant, Edw: Bagshaw.
Ch: Ch: Jan. 26. 1659.
SAINTSHIP No ground of SOVEREIGNTY.
INtending to prove out of Scripture that the Saints ought not to govern the
earth, in that sense which is now by some contended for, I shall take for the
ground of my discourse those words of our Savior to Pilate, Joh. 18.36
when he said, My kingdom is not of this world, which words are very
considerable, whether we regard the Person who, the Time when, or the Manner
how they were spoken.

1. For the Person who spoke them, it was no less then our Savior Christ,
each of whose speeches, how occasional soever, ought to be unto us so many
Precepts and Obligations to Duty.

2. For the Time when they were spoken, it was just then when he was taking his
leave of Earth, 1 Timothy 6.13.
that he witnessed before Pilate a good confession, of which, this Assertion is
the greatest Part: so that if the words of dying men do use to make the
greatest impressions, then ought these of our Savior, even upon that account,
to quicken our Attention.

Lastly, for the Manner how they were spoken, it was not only after a Resolved
and seemingly Obstinate silence, Marc. 15.5.
in so much as the Governor marveiled, but in direct Answer to Pilate's
Question, who was very desirous to know, whether our Savior was King or not;
so that our Savior's Purposed and Positive disavowing any Temporal or Earthly
Kingdom; his redoubling this Assertion in the following part of the verse, My
Kingdom is not from hence; his repeating and insisting upon it again in the
next verse, as a bearing witness to the Truth, ought to convince us that our
Savior was in earnest, and therefore the matter is very Considerable.

If therefore we put all this together, viz. the Authority of the Person, the
Exigence of the time, joined with those Vehement and Reiterated Circumstances,
wherewith these words are Accompanied, we may from thence conclude, that they
contain in them a lesson, of more then ordinary concernment to us.

For the more Full and clear understanding of them, Joh. 11.47
we must have recourse to one of the foregoing Chapters, where we find that the
chief Priests and Pharisees, being informed of our Saviors Miracles, and of
that great Resort of Followers unto him, (which were enough at any time, if
micheivously inclined to raise a Commotion in the State,) upon this they
presently called a Council, Sandrion.
or, according to the Greeks, a Sanhedrim, which was the Supreme and Highest
Court of Judicature among them, (...). lib. 4.
and unto which, if Josephus does rightly inform us, even their Kings were
Accountable. Here being convened they fall to debate about the best Expedient,
how to cut our Savior off, for fear their tolerating one, who was Publicly
voiced for King, Mat. 21.5. and Job. 18.
and so styled likewise by himself, (though in a far other sense then they
interpreted it) might be construed by the Romans (to whom the Jews were at
that time Tributaries) as a design to shake off their Yoke, and thereby
provoke them to an utter extirpation of the Jewish Policy, which until then,
notwithstanding their Conquest, they had in great measure preserved Entire.
Thus therefore we find them Argue, If we let him alone, all men will believe on
him, v. 48.
and the Romans will come, and take away our Place and Nation.

To this Insinuation, which seemed to conclude their Necessity of our Savior's
Death, Caiphas adds something, by which he endeavors to prove that Unjust
Attempt to be not only Necessary, but very Plausible too; v. 50.
and therefore he pleads Salus Populi, the Public Good is urged to palliate
this execrable Murder: You, says he, know nothing at all, neither consider
that it is expedient one man should dye for the People, that the Nation perish
not: -- as if he had said, You are very Weak and Unskilful Politicians to
boggle at such a Case as this, and to debate thus long upon a matter of so
easy solution; for Right or Wrong the Public Safety must be provided for; and
it is a great Folly and want of Foresight to prefer one man's life, how
Innocent soever, before a Nations Welfare. In which wicked speech, though
Caiphas did by God's appointment Prophetically foretell that great good which
would redound to the World by our Savior's Death, v. 52.
yet as to his own Intention, he meant no more then a Justifying of that
Accursed, and, Romans 3.8.
in the Apostle Paul's sense, accounted Damnable Maxim, viz. That we may do
Evil, that Good may come thereof, which Tenet, wherever it is assented to,
will be the Mother of those Mischiefs which men have either Felt or Feared: I
am sure it so far prevailed with that Juncto of Senators, that the Text says
From that Time they took Counsel, how to put him, v. 53.
i. e. our Savior, to Death.

Our Savior's Death being thus agreed on by the Pharisees, and in their deep
Policy resolved to be Necessary in respect of the Romans, and very
Advantageous too in reference to the Jews; the Contrivers make no long Delay,
but what they had before so unjustly concluded on, we find them presently after
as cruelly execute. For having by their own Authority apprehended our Savior,
and being it seems debarred to judge of Capital Causes within themselves, ( it
is not, say they to Pilate, v. 32.
lawful for us to put any Man to Death) they hale him before Pilate the Roman
Prefect, and there with Loud Clamorous Outcries demand Justice against him.
But lest their Noise should not prevail with a Roman, and therein, so far as
related to the Jewish Affairs, an Unconcerned and Dispassionate Judge, with a
Formal story in their Mouths, disguising the Malice of their Hearts, they
Article against him as a Malefactor, i. e. kakopoi.
according to the Importance of the Greek word, a seditious Person, a Disturber
of the State, a Subverter of Government, an Enemy of Caesar, an Ambitious
Affecter to be in Fact, as well as in Title, King of the Jews; which False and
scandalous Charge we have insinuated by John, but is at large expressed by
Luke, chapter 23.2.
we found, say they, this fellow perverting the Nation, and forbidding to give
Tribute unto Caesar, saying, that he himself is Christ a King.

Pilate hearing this Accusation, which, if True, struck so immediatelyat
Cesar's power; and the Gravity and seeming Sanctity of our Saviors Accusers,
would not let him suspect it to be False, he therefore, waving all other
suggestions, hastily asks our Savior, whether he was King or not, v. 33.
Art thou, says he, the King of the Jews? To which Question our Savior
returns an Answer in the words I have already alleged, wherein he intimates
that he was indeed a King, and that he had a Kingdom; but that his Kingdom
was of such a Nature, as Pilate need not be Jealous of, nor apprehend any
danger from it; as if it were intended to enterfere or Justle with Cesar's
Sovereignty; for, says he, my Kingdom is not of this Word. As if he had said,
I am indeed a King, and I have a Kingdom, but you need not fear any
Disturbance to your Secular Interests, by setting up of my Kingdom amongst
you, for though it be in the World, it is not of the world; nor has any
Commerce or Society, either with the Power or Policy thereof.

This being the Plain and Direct meaning of our Savior's words, I shall
briefly explain what Kingdom it is that our Savior means, when he says, my
Kingdom, etc.

I find in Scripture that our Savior is called a King upon a fourfold account,

1. By Power. Thus he is King of the World, Heb. 1.1, 2.
and has a sover aignty Paramount, being one God with the Father, and the
same. Power, by which he made the World, he daily exerts for the continuing and
preserving of it.

2. By Birth: thus he was King of the Jews, being Heir apparent to the Crown,
and lineally descended from David, in whom the Kingdom was vested with a
promise of its perpetuity; from him, according to the flesh, our Savior came,
and therefore had a Star to adorn and declare his Nativity; God herein seeming
to comply with the Opinions of those, who think the Heavens are more then
ordinarily concerned in the Affairs of Princes, and therefore strange
Appearances, and unusual Comets do attend both their birth and death, For
nothing else, for ought we know, but the Prodigy of that Blazing Star (without
any more immediate Instinct) did excite the curiosity of the Eastern Magi, to
go and see that Person, whose Nativity was in so wonderful a manner celebrated:
Where is, say they, he that is born King of the Jews? for we have seen his Star
in the East: i. We have descryed a Star of an unusual Aspect, but yet such an
one, as, according to the rules of our Art, discovers that a Prince is born in
Judea, and we are come (...), i. e. To bow to him, and pay him homage. Orig:
contr: Cells: lib. 1. p. 45. Attributes their coming to a response of the
Devils, upon their doing their Rates of Conjuration: but I conceive the
opinion, I mention, is more probable.


3. By designation and appointment of his Father: Thus our Savior Christ is
King of all the Heathen, according to that Prophecy of Jacob, When Shiloh
comes, unto him shall (...) the obedience or gathering of the Gentiles be: And
many Predictions there are of the same importance, which if they are to be
meant of every Individual Heathen (and not rather signify that the Heathen
shall not be excluded from being reckoned amongst our Saviors subjects, now in
times of Christianity) we have no ground from Scripture to expect that they
shall be actually accomplished until our Saviors second coming, at which time
the Saints shall reign with him: Which is the meaning of that promise of our
Saviors, He that overcomes, i. all difficulties, and keeps my words unto the
end, i. perseveres in the Christian Faith, I will give him power over the
Heathen, etc. even as I have received of my Father, i. Hereafter, he shall
reign with me, not in this life, but when he has exchanged this for a better.

Lastly, By Pact or Covenant: thus our Savior is King of Believers only; as a
Prince he gives us Laws, invites us with Rewards, deters us by Punishments, and
has left nothing unassayed, which may either persuade or enforce obedience;
governing of his People by his Word and Spirit, unto a compliance with his
commands; and this Dominion he will always exercise to the Worlds end. Of which
inward, invisible Kingdom it is, that our Savior is to be understood, when he
says, My kingdom is not of this world, i. not a Political, visible, and
earthly one.

From all that has been said, I infer this Conclusion, That if Christ's kingdom
be not of this world, there is none can, Thesis.
upon the account of their interest in Christ, plead any Right or Title unto
earthly Sovereignty: or more briefly thus, That inward Saintship is not a
ground of outward Empire.

This collection which I make is very easy and natural, for if our Savior did
disclaim all earthly Jurisdiction in himself, then sure none can, upon pretense
of their interest in him, put in their Plea for it: If our Savior, as he lived
an humble, self-denying life, so dyed in an utter abhorrence of temporal
Sovereignty; and spent those few last words he vouchsafed to utter, in a direct
denial of worldly greatness: then certainly his example weighs little with us,
and his latest breath was spent in vain, if we, upon a Christian account, still
affect Empire, or make our Religion the way to outward preferment. It is our
Saviors own reasoning, and bottomed upon the inalterable nature of things,
that the servant is not greater then his master: If therefore our Master would
not be called Lord, certainly the servants ought not to desire it; if Christ
refused Empire, with what face can Christians ambition it? or how can they call
themselves Saints, and yet seek to be advanced in power above their Savior?

Now though the bare authority of our Savior might alone serve to convince
those that are Christians indeed (for so far as they are such, they are to be
imitators of Christ) yet because the matter is of so much weight, and has of
late been too unhappily disputed, I shall therefore endeavor more at large to
demonstrate it, from these two Heads of Arguments.

1. From the nature of Civil Government in general.

2. From the nature of Christian Religion in particular.

First, That Saintship is not the ground of Sovereignty, appears from the
nature of Civil Government in general: for this belongs to men, as they are
Christians, but as they are men; and is a consequent, not of our spiritual, but
of our natural Birth.

To clear up this, I shall not unravel the whole Mystery of Policy, as some too
unwarily, (if not designedly) do, who lay down such Principles of Politics, as
give just occasion to make their Religion suspected: I shall therefore insist
only upon those Grounds which the Scripture affords, only those being
sufficient to convince a gainsaying, or to satisfy a scrupling conscience. And
to begin with the first Original of man, we find, when God made man, it is
said, Genesis 1.28.
that in the Image of God created he him, and thereupon blessed him, and gave
him dominion over the Creatures. Now there is a twofold Image of God,
Supernatural, and Natural: Supernatural, I call those impressions of Sanctity
and Holiness, which are now lost: Natural, is that resemblance which the soul
of man has to the nature of God, as to its being and operation: viz. As God is
a Spirit Immortal, Invisible, etc. so the soul of man is of a Spiritual,
Immortal, Invisible nature; which Image yet remains entire in the worst of
men: Of this Image it is that God speaks, when he forbids Murder, Genesis 9.6.
Who so sheddeth man's blood, s;aith he, by him shall man's blood be shed,
because in the image of Gad created he man; i. e. he put a Spirit of life and
understanding into him, the consideration of which invaluable Jewel within,
ought to make us preserve the Casket without, i. e. the Body, sacred and
inviolable.

Which of these two Images it is that external Dominion over the Creature
belongs to, is clear out of the same Chapter, where God renews his grant to all
the Sons of Noah: The fear of you, (...), 2.
says he, and the dread of you, fall upon every beast of the earth, etc. into
your hand, i. e. power to dispose of as you please, are they delivered: In
which general grant, there are none of the sons of men excluded, because it is
a Birth-priviledge; and profane Cham had upon that score as large a share in,
and as true a title to the free use of all outward things, as any of his more
Religious Brethren.

This is that Civil Right which Abraham acknowledged in the King of Sodom, (and
what kind of abominable sinners the Sodomites were, I need not mention) when
he refused to be enriched by him; I will not, says he, Genesis 14.23
take any thing of thine; by which word Thine, he owns that the King of Sodom
had a True, Legal Propriety, even in those goods, which Abraham might have
challenged as the Fruits of his Victory: This Right afterward Abraham
confessed to be in Abimelech, Genesis 21.23
when he made a League with him not to hurt or injure him, i. not to deprive
him of any thing which was his. But most of all this appears in the bargain and
sale which Abraham Genesis 23.
made with the Sons of Heth; when Abraham, though by Gods absolute grant, the
undoubted heir of all the Land of Canaan, yet the time for the accomplishment
of that promise not being yet come, he refused to receive the Cave of Macpelah,
to make use of it for a burying place, until he had paid a valuable
consideration in money for it.

Obj. If any shall here object that Abraham at that time wanted power to make
good his claim, and therefore was content to buy, what otherwise he might have
forced.

Ans. The vanity and falsehood (I will add too, the impiety) of this Plea
appears from hence, in that we find David afterward using the very same terms
of observance and respect unto Araunah a Jebusite, 2 Samuel 21.
one neither of the same Nation nor Religion with himself: Which instance
serves very much to clear the question in hand, for David was not only a Saint
by privilege (if that signified any thing to give a right) but a King by
power, and might have forced it: nay, he was commanded by God, to make use of
that very place to sacrifice in, and therefore might have pretended an
inspiration to justify his violent seizure; and besides, to make the matter a
little more fair and plausible, he, whom David dealt with, was an Heathen, and
for ought we know, an Idolater: Yet all these advantages did not make David
swerve from the Rules of common Justice, but up he went with all his Retinue to
Araunah, in a suppliant posture, that he might buy his threshing floor: And
when Araunah frankly offered to give it him, the Spirit of God has recorded
it, not as an act of Justice in him, but of Royal Bounty: Araunah, ver. 23.
as a king, gave unto the King.

Obj. It uses to be urged against this, that the Israelites, which were Gods
People, did destroy the Canaanites, and inherit their Land.

Answ. But the Answer is easy, That as God did not choose them to be his
people, because they were more holy then others, but merely because he had set
his heart upon them. So neither did he give them the Land of Canaan, upon the
account of their Saintship, but only to make good his promise unto Abraham,
and by their hands to avenge himself of the Canaanites, whose iniquitys were
then full and ripe for vengeance.

This reason is expressly given by Moses himself, Deuteronomy. 9.5.
Not for thy righteousness, says he, or for the uprightness of thy heart,
do thou go to possess their Land; but for the wickedness of these nations,
the Lord thy God does drive them out from before thee, and that he may perform
the word which the Lord swear unto thy Fathers. God indeed is the great
Proprietor of all things, but yet he has given the Earth, without distinction,
to all the Sons of Men; only reserving to himself this Right, That when they
do ingratefully abuse his gift, he does always dispossess them, and give their
inheritance unto others: but though this be the method of Gods Judgments, yet
it does not excuse any people from a transcendent Crime, who take upon them to
be the executors of Gods Decrees against the wicked. Joshuah therefore, whilst
he was in the hottest pursuit of that promised Possession, never pleaded any
thing to justify his actings, but the particular command of God, who bad him
go and destroy those Nations: this alone made it a pious War, which otherwise
would have been nothing else but a public Robbery: We find also, that when
God, as the supreme Disposer, gave to the Israelites the Land of Canaan, he, at
the same time, expressly forbids them to meddle with the Land of the children of
Ammon; but had relation to God given them any right, that Land would have
equally belonged to them with the other: Deuteronomy. 11.17.
When thou come, says he, nigh unto the children of Ammon, distress them
not, nor meddle with them; for I will not give thee of the Land of the children
of Ammon any possession, because I have given it unto the children of Lot for a
possession. Where we see the children of Lot, though Idolatrous, yet were not
to be disturbed in their possession, because the same God who said to the
children of Israel, Go, Possess Canaan, said to the Children of Lot, Go,
Possess the Land of Ammon. Whereby, as to their civil Claims, and temporal
Rights, God makes no distinction betwixt the one, though his own peculiar, and
the other, though a profane and Idolatrous people.

But if Heathen unregenerate men have, upon the account of their being men, a
Title to other things, then certainly to Dominion much more; which serves only
to secure our other Privileges, and is, if rightly stated, nothing else but a
consequent of Propriety.

I shall therefore conclude this first Argument, which I think abundantly
convincing, with that remarkable Controversy between God and the Jews,
concerning their obedience to Nebuchadnezzar. The Jews, though undoubted
possessors of Canaan, yet after they were by Nebuchadnezzar conquered, and, to
preserve some little remains of Liberty and Livelihood, had taken an Oath of
Fealty and Allegiance to him; we find, upon some reason of State, they were
presently induced to break it, and God as speedily threatens to avenge it
severely upon them. Ezekiel. 17.
The sad condition of that Oath, how it was a Covenant only to enslave
themselves and their Posterity for ever, God himself does declare, thereby to
prevent their Objection: v 13 14.
The King of Babylon, says he, has taken of the Kings seed, i. Zedekiah, and
made a Covenant with him, and taken an oath of him, that the Kingdom might be
base, that it might not lift it self up, i. e. that it might for ever quit the
pretense of being a Free People, and truckle under the Dominion of the
Chaldeans: This Yoke, then which nothing can be more insupportable, and to
which the Jews had been so long unaccustomed, they presently shook off; for it
follows in the next Verse, But he, i. Zedekiah, rebelled, with what success, we
have too much reason in this Nation to read and tremble (...). Armies Plea,
etc. v. 18, 19.
: Seeing he despised the oath, by breaking the Covenant, when lo, he had given
his hand (i. with hands lifted up, had solemnly ratified it) he shall not
escape: Therefore, as I live, says the Lord, my Covenant which he has broken,
and my Oath which he has despised, will I recompense upon his own head: From
which sad place, others perhaps will draw other inferences, but I shall collect
only these three things.

1. That in every Oath God is a Party, and will be sure to punish the violater
of it; though men may break their Oaths, with as much ease as Samson did his
Withs, yet God will be sure to keep his, and he has sworn to Punish.

2. When once a man has sworn, he cannot resume again that natural Liberty,
which he was before possessed of, because by his own voluntary Act he has
divested himself of it, and thereby bound himself over to Divine vengeance,
if he do not perform the Condition of his Covenant.

Lastly, if the Jews, who had so much to plead for themselves, both upon a
Civil and Religious Account, as being not only a Free, but likewise a Godly
People, might yet pass away their whole Liberty unto an Heathen Prince, and by
virtue of their Oath be debarred for ever from forceable seeking a
Re-envestiture; but were obliged, not only to submit unto him as their
Conqueror, but after Faith given, to obey him as their Sovereign; if I say,
the Case stood thus with them, then certainly no Pretense of Sanctity can
absolve us now from such Ties of Obedience, in the Times of the Gospel; which
does as far transcend the Jewish Polity in Peaceablenesse of Disposition, as
in Purity of Doctrine, therefore,



First, This appears from Gospel Precepts: for there is nothing more
frequently or vehemently enjoined by our Savior, then self denial. The
command does not run, Take a Kingdom, Mat: 16.24
but, Take up your Cross and follow me. Learn of me, says our Savior, he
does not add, For this is the way to Honor, for I can point you out a Path to
Preferment, but Learn of me, Mat: 11.26
for I am mecke and Lowly. i. I have equalled my self to the meanest of the
sons of men, I have not where to lay my head, and am so little desirous of
worldly Greatness, that I have voluntarily divested my self of a greater
Royalty, then the world can comprehend; and all this I have done, to show you a
Pattern of Humility. Therefore when the Disciple, (who before our Saviors
Resurrection, did as much mistake the meaning of his Kingdom, as some amongst
us now do) did contend amongst themselves who should be greatest, how sharply
does our Savior reprehend this Ambitious strife? Mat: 18.3.
(...) If you be not turned, i. quite changed, as it were, into another Nature,
and become as little Children, as careless and secure of greatness, as little
swelled and leavened with Ambition, you shall in no wise enter into the
Kingdom of Heaven: whereby the Kingdom of Heaven: whether we understand Grace
or Glory, whether it means Initiall or Complete Happiness, it is all one to
the Question in hand, for it clearly proves, that to affect Temporal
Greatness and Promotion, is utterly inconsistent either with holiness here,
or with our hopes hereafter. I need not multiply more Texts, for the whole
design of the Gospel is aimed at nothing else, but to level, and lower our
Thoughts unto the size of our Saviors meekness, to beat down the tumor and
swelling, and agitation of our Spirits in reference to worldly things, to empty
and divest our souls of all that wind of Ambition, wherewith poor miserable
men, who have no better Hopes, are constantly tossed and perplexed. And the
reason for this is unanswerable, for, if, as our Savior has stated it, None
can serve God and Mammon, then none can serve God and Honor, we cannot serve
God, and gain a Kingdom; much less are we to make one, prepare the way for
the other: for this would be to invert the Intent of the Gospel, and make it a
setter up of what it was principally discovered to beat down; whereby it would
become nothing else, but a Ladder for Ambition to climb by.

Secondly, This appears likewise from Gospel Promises; for these as they are
constantly annexed to the Poor, the Humble, the Mortified, the self denying
Christian, so they are always about such things, as are most remote and
distant from Temporal Enjoyments Blessed, says our Savior, are the poor in
spirit, he does not add, Muth. 5.
for theirs shall be the Kingdom of Earth, but, Theirs is the Kingdom of
Heaven. According to the Analogy of which Promises, must that Text be
understood, which while they fix only upon the Literal meaning, has deluded
so many, Blessed are the Meek, for they shall Inherit the Earth. i. (...) illam
Terram, That Earth, which was promised in a Type, and is Figuratively Heaven,
as the Author to the Hebrews has elegantly proved. For that neither that
place, Heb: 11.13 16.
nor any other in the N. T. can be understood absolutely of any outward and
Earthly Happiness, is clear, because all that we Christians can certainly
expect in this world, by virtue of a Promise, Joh: 16.33
is only Afflictions. In the World, says our Savior to his Disciples, and
therein to all who will be like them, you shall have Tribulation: this was the
last Legacy he left them, 2 Timothy: 3.12
and therefore, says he, ye shall have it, rest ye as certain of it, as of
your Inheritance or Patrimony. And the Apostle, who very well understood our
Savior's meaning, lays it down as a Fundamental in Religion, All that will
live Godly in Christ, must suffer Persecution; they must suffer, there is no
avoiding it. For this Fatal attendance of Persecution upon Piety it is, that
our Savior has provided us so many Cordialls and Comfortable Receipts in
Scripture, as when he bids us to rejoice, Mat: 5. etc. Heb. 12.
and be exceeding glad: nay (...), to skip and dance for Joy, when such
Afflictions do most beset us; for they are evidences of our Sonship, and
assured signs that God has a Care of us: all which Expressions would have
been very vain and useless, if ever Religion should be abused to those Ends,
that the suffering might become the Afflicting Party; if a Christian could not
only exempt himself from Injuries, but return them upon others, and challenge
Authority here, as a Reward of his Piety. For this would not only deprive us of
the Privilege (so the Apostles counted it) of Martyrdom, but would have none
fit to be Persecuted, but only the Wicked; and this is an Honor, which I hope
no true Christian but envies them. (...), To you, says the Apostle, it is
given of grace, Phil: 1.15
not only to believe on Christ, but likewise to suffer for his Name. We are
mistaken, whilst we so much dread Affliction: for it is not a Judgment, no nor
an Evil neither to suffer, but (...), a Gift, a peculiar Boon, a choice
Indulgence of God unto his Favorites. So the Apostle Peter bids those he
writes to not be discouraged, or count it strange, if the Fiery Trial had its
effect upon them, 1 Pet. 11.21. (...).
as well as upon others; for, faith he, unto this were ye called: as if he had
said, be sure you look, nay long for it; for if you miss of this, you have
some reason to doubt the Truth of your Calling. All which places, with many
more to the same purpose, how any can reconcile to an Affecting of Temporal
Greatness, let them resolve who love a Secure, an Easy, a Specious, a
Prosperous Religion, such an one as Christ never came to teach, nor any of his
Followers died to establish.

Obj. It is very true, what some, with a little too much gust and relish of
worldly-mindedness, allege, That every true Christian is heir of a Kingdom,
and ought to live in expectation of such Glory and Greatness, as whatever the
world has, can but imperfectly shadow out: With this our Savior does buoy up,
and revive the sinking spirits of his Disciples: Be of good comfort, says he,
for it is your Fathers good pleasure to give you a Kingdom: It is this we pray
for, this we are to be in a readiness for daily.

Answ. But yet it is as true too, that, so long as we live here, this is a
Kingdom in expectation only; Flesh nor Blood, neither shall nor can inherit
it. As we must first put off Mortality, before we can put on Eternal Life; so
we must put off earth and earthly-mindedness, before we can expect any share in
that blessed Inheritance.

There are, amongst many other, two very remarkable places to clear this: The
one is our Saviors answer to Peter, upon his Discourse with the young man: For
our Savior having pronounced so severe, and yet so peremptory a doom against
rich men, as that a rich man could scarcely be saved; (...).
he repeats it again, and makes it to be altogether as great a Moral
Impossibility, for a man that is clogged with Wealth, and loaded with worldly
Cares, to enter into the Kingdom of Heaven, (that (...), the narrowed, pressed,
and straightened way) as it would be a natural impossibility for a Camel to go
through the eye of a needle. Upon this we find the Disciples were exceedingly
amazed, not only as missing of their hopes, but likewise as being conscious to
themselves, that though they were not, yet they did all desire to be rich;
whereupon Peter, in the name of the rest, replies, Behold, we have left all and
followed thee, what shall we have therefore? As if he had said, Shall we
venture to loose all, and yet be so great losers by the bargain, as to be
altogether unprovided of a recompense? our Savior therefore to quit them, and
to take them off from such sensual desires, which he saw possessed them:
Verily, says he, ye that have followed me, in the regeneration, when the Son
of man sits upon his Throne of Glory, shall sit upon twelve Thrones, judging
the twelve Tribes of Israel: In which words our Savior does promise them a
great and a glorious reward, viz. to be Kings and Judges with himself, but yet
defers the fruition of it, until the (...), i. The restoration of all things,
when neither Mortality nor Misery shall be any more, but every thing shall be
restored unto that Primitive Integrity and Luster, wherein they were at first
created.

The other place which manifests the nature of Christ's Kingdom, Matthew. 20.20,
etc.
is that Answer which our Savior returned to the Mother of Zebedees Children,
who, it seems, mistaking the true notion of it, and fixing her thoughts upon an
earthly Empire, petitioned our Savior for her two sons, That the one might sit
at his right hand, and the other at his left, when he came into his Kingdom, i.
when he had taken possession of the Throne, and was invested with the Realm of
Judea, she humbly begged, that then he would be pleased to look favorably upon
her two sons, to make them the Grandees and Minions of his Court; that they,
under him, might enjoy the greatest Power and Privileges: But our Savior, to
take them off from such haughty Aims, presently puts them in mind of
Suffering, v. 23.
as a thing much more suited to a Christians complexion; and lest the other
Disciples should be infected with the same desires, he does for ever strive to
suppress them, as passions much more fit for Heathen, then Christian tempers:
Ye know, says he, that the Princes of the Gentiles do exercise dominion over
them, and those that are great, do exercise authority upon them: But it shall
not be so amongst you: As if he had said, The Heathen indeed, who have no other
hope, do place all their Heaven upon Earth; they make Fame their Immortality,
and Power their Paradise; and therefore never rest satisfied, until they can
exercise an absolute and an Arbitrary Dominion over their enslaved Subjects.
But you, who are my Disciples, and called by my Name, who have a certainty of
future Enjoyments, unto whom a Kingdom of a clean different nature is reserved;
you ought not to be like them, but rather strive in humility to excel each
other: Wherein our Savior clearly intimates, that it does so little become a
Saint to rule, that he is certainly not a Saint who does ambition it: For how
can he rationally expect a Kingdom hereafter, who has outed himself of his
Plea, by putting in for a Kingdom here? which is nothing else, but to antedate
the effect of Gods promise; or rather with Dives, to receive our good things in
this life, and to take up with Temporal Joys, when we should patiently have
waited for Eternal.

Thirdly, This appears farther, from the manner how Christian Religion was
propagated in the World, which, as it is a Religion that does most precisely
forbid compulsion and violence, so it was not planted by it. Our Savior
himself that taught it, was as a Lamb that opened not his mouth, but turned his
cheek to the smiter, and his back to the rod of the wicked: The Apostles, his
followers, were accounted the scum and offscouring of the world, i. the vilest
of men, and thereupon were disgraced, persecuted, tormented: And all this they
suffered without the return, so much as of contumelious Language; how much less
do we find them telling the world, that they ought to bear Dominion over them:
Yet by these Arts alone, they did at first Preach, and afterward promote the
Gospel to the conversion of thousands. And this, by the way, without any
further Argument, will serve to evidence the Divine Original of Christianity,
in that notwithstanding all these disadvantages, the least of which, in all
humane probality, was enough to have stifled and suppressed it in the Womb;
yet, in spite of all, it took root and prospered; which could not possibly have
come to pass, without the conduct and assistance of an Almighty Power.

But had our Savior sent a Religion into the World, which would have excited
men's ambition, and fired our Zeal to the ruin and extirpation of it is
Opposers: Quid hoc eximium? What excellence should there have been in Christian
Religion, more then in other Religions? for do not even the Publicans the same?
Is not this the common method of all Political Combinations, rather then
Religions in the World, to rise by the ruin of such as oppose them? But our
Savior took not this course: If, John 18.27.
says he, my kingdom were of this world, then would my servants fight?
intimating, that to make way for Religion by force, to lay down a Principle,
which must needs imbroil the World in Blood and Confusion, is not Religion, but
Rapine; a Sacrilegious design, to make Christianity, and the strict Professors
of it, odious: For who will not suspect the truth of that Religion, which
despairing of its own Excellence, and hopeless of a better reward, eggs on its
followers to take up with Worldly Honor? and under the notion of Sanctity,
leaves the Throne exposed to the Invasion of every Hypocritical Pretender: At
in initio non fuit sic? Our Savior taught us no such Doctrine, nor did his
Apostles leave us such a pattern. Therefore,

Lastly, That Saintship gives no right to Civil Empires appears from the
practice of the Apostles, and other Professors of Christianity in the Purest
and most Primitive Times. Presently after our Saviors Ascension, when by
Peter's Ministry so many thousands were converted; we do not find him
Preaching them into a Tumult, or raising a Party among the People, upon the
score of our Saviors being a Temporal Prince, to whom all men were to pay
their Civil Allegiance, but he only bids them, Act. 111.29.
Repent and be converted, that their sins might be blotted out: And such
Doctrine as this might be Preached, without any impeachment to Caesar's Power.

Again, when the chief Priests and Rulers did forbid the Apostles to Preach in
the Name of Christ; as being madded with envy, that one whom they had lately so
ignominiously Crucified, should yet find so much reputation among his
Followers: The Apostles, upon this, do not combine to strengthen themselves,
and, under pretense of setting up Christ's Kingdom, make a commotion in the
State, but they presently fell to their Prayers, Act. 11.29.
Now Lord, say they, behold their threatenings, and grant unto thy servants,
that with all boldness they may speak thy Word. They only beg courage to
speak, and patience to suffer, and as for promoting Christ's Throne in any other
sense, they seem altogether secure and careless.

As the Apostles, so did their Proselytes behave themselves, so far from
aiming at greatness, or from seeking to improve their Conversion to the
oppression of others; so far from depriving others of their Possessions,
because they were ungodly, that they sold their own, and therein literally
fulfilled that command of our Savior, of Sell all and follow me; which the
Professors of our Times, are so far from practicing, that they are rather apt
to do the clean contrary.

We read indeed, that when the Christians increased, there was an Accusation
forged against them, Acts 17.6.
as if they were Men, who turned the World upside down, who acted contrary to
the Decrees of Caesar, saying, There is another King, one Jesus. And Paul is by
Tertullus expressly called (...), a very Pest, i. Act 24.
a Turbulent, Unquiet Spirited man, and a Raiser of Sedition; which Calumny,
how false and ungrounded it was, Paul shows at large in his Apology, by
averring to their faces, that they could not prove the things which they had
alleged against him. ver. 13.
And afterward, he is fully acquitted by Festus the Roman Deputy: They, says
he to Agrippa, brought against him no Accusation of such things as I supposed,
i. of Treason, Act. 25.8.
of Sedition or Rebellion, of Preaching Disobedience, or non-payment of Tribute
to Caesar; for such crimes as these, were properly under the Governors
Cognizance; and none of these, it seems, were so much as imputed unto Paul:
whereas had he so Preached up Christ, as to affirm that Jesus was not only a
King, but that whoever did not submit to him, ought immediately to be put out
of Office; whereby there would never be such a Crime as Treason, if Religion
were once made the pretense to justify it. Had this, I say, been Paul's
Doctrine, I suppose Festus neither would, nor durst have been so favorable in
his Censure.

And to put the matter out of question on that Apostles part, though none was
more zealous then he, for the advancing of Christ's Kingdom in the right-sense;
yet none was more strict and severe in the enjoining of Obedience unto all
Powers over us, of what Religion soever; unless we think men can be worse then
Nero and Caligula were, who Reigned about his time. And the Apostle gives a
reason for it, which will hold true in all Ages, Romans 13.
viz. because, Authority is from God. Power, by what Arts soever it is gained,
and by what persons soever it is exercised, yet when it is once acknowledged
and sworn too, it is to be looked upon by us, as nothing else but a Ray of Gods
Sovereignty, and therefore to be accounted Sacred. Nor can any pretense of
zeal, or mask of Religion, justify Rebellion more now then heretofore: but the
more piety appears to disguise it, the more monstrous it is: Since in effect it
only sets up Christ against himself, and makes his Kingdom what he would not
have it to be, a kingdom of this World.

The very same command, and to the same purpose is enforced by Peter, 1 Pet.
11.12.
That they might by their obebedience and meekness, put to silence the
ignorance of foolish men, who censured them as evil doers: The Word in the
Original is (...), the very same which was charged upon our Savior, and it
signifies in the Hellenistical Phrase, State-Incendiaries, Incompatible with
Civil Government, and the like; which would have proved a very true and
upright censure, in case the Christians of those Times, had so owned Christ for
their King, as, upon his account, to withdraw their obedience from their Civil
Sovereigns. The more apt therefore profane men were to mis-interpret the
Kingdom of Christ, the more careful that Apostle would have Professors to be,
not to give any such occasion of offense.

Suitable to the Doctrine of these two great Apostles, was the practice of the
Primitive Christians, down from our Saviors, till long after Constantines
time, as I could easily prove out of the most Ancient Records, Tertul. Apulog:
Orig: contra Cells. etc.
but that we live in an Age, when such kind of Learning is, by those who least
understand it, accounted little less then madness; and that we may know which
way the World is going, Ignorance begins once more to be the Mother of Devotion.

I shall therefore draw to a close, for such as Scripture will not satisfy, I
do not intend to confute by humane Testimony, which is not only fallible, but
for the most part false: And I wish all that are at leisure to peruse this
short Treatise, would make this use of it, as to look after the Spirit, rather
then the Splendour of Christianity: For it is evident to all, that know any
thing of Church Story, that so much as our Religion has got in Pomp, it always
lost in Purity.

Those who are still doting upon Christ's temporal Reign, in which they hope to
have their share; methinks the very ambition of such desires, should convince
them that they are not Christian; but if they are so far gone in their Error,
as to think nothing unlawful, so they may in their sense set up Christ; I
heartily wish them to consider, whilst they go about such enterprises, 1.
Whose business they do not. 2. Whose business they do.

1. First, Let them consider whose business they do not; for, let them
pretend what they will, they do not the business of Christ, since he has
absolutely forbid it; and he will not thank us for exalting his Honor the wrong
way: Quis requisivit haec? was Gods expostulation with the Jews, when they
brought him Sacrifices, which he himself had commanded, because they offered
them not in a right manner. How much more will our Savior by these words,
reprove all those, who for his sake, venture upon actions which he at his death
disclaimed? The question at the last day will not be, how many wicked we have
killed, but how many we have converted? Not, how many we have destroyed for
their unbelief, but how many we have turned from it: We shall not be asked,
what Honors and Preferments we have got by the Gospel, but what we have left to
follow it: And don't let any think, as some argue, that God has allowed a
dispensation for these last times; for times, and men, may alter, but the
nature of things can never alter: Since the world is as enticing, and the
Doctrine of the Gospel as severe as selfdenying, now as ever: so that to
reconcile these two together, viz. the pride of Life, with the Purity of Faith,
I think no man can, I am sure no Christian ought to do.

Secondly, As they who are otherwise minded, do not the business of Christ, so
let them consider whose business they do. To understand which, we must take
notice there are in Scripture recorded, two great Pretenders unto temporal
Sovereignty, Satan and Antichrist.

First, Satan: we find him directly claiming the glory of the world as his
own: Behold, says he to our Savior all this power will I give thee, Luke 4.6.
and the glory of them; for that is delivered unto me, and to whomsoever I
will, I give it: Which confident speech of his, as our Savior does not
confute, so, by calling him after, John 16.
the God and Prince of this world, he seems to own it for a truth. And indeed,
if we consider the manner, how; the Arts, by which the Kingdoms of the world
are got and governed, we shall not much doubt of Satan's veracity: Since Fraud
and force, are those two Pillars, upon which almost all Empire is founded; and
the great Maxim in State Policy, is that thing which God most abhors, viz.
Hypocrisy and Dissimulation. So that we need not much question, but as the
wisdom or policy, Ja: 11.15.
so likewise the power of the world, is not only earthly and sensual, but
likewise (...), Devilish; and so much the more Devilish, the more Religion is
pretended to procure it; for Satan never more acts his part, then when he
becoms an angel of light.

Secondly, Another pretense to worldly power discovered unto us in Scripture,
is Antichrist; of whom there are so many Marks and Characters given us, that it
is no hard matter to know where his spirit works: Of him the Apostle John
speaks, when having discoursed, that whatever is in the world, whether the lust
of the flesh, 1 John 2.16.
i. Pleasure; or the lust of the eyes, i. Profit; or the pride of life, i.
Honor, it was not of the Father, but of the world; he presently tells them that
Antichrist was then beginning, intimating, that when ever he came to appear
more manifestly, he would be very notorious and remarkable for the setting up
those three, which are, as one calls them, The worlds Trinity: And this he
would do, not in so open and barefaced a manner as Satan before him, but under
the disguise and mask of Piety; for thus it is said in the description of him,
which all sides agree to be meant of Antichrist, Rev. 13.11
that he had horns like a lamb, but he spoke as a dragon, i. he pretended
meekness, but practiced cruelty; as appears afterward, in that he is said to
force his Religion upon others, and to make all men receive his mark, ver. 16,
17.
or quit their means of living. And there are two Notes of Antichrist, which
will never fail, viz. Pride in himself, and Persecution in reference to others.

Another description we have of him, in that style he assumes to himself, viz.
That he exalts himself above all that is called God, or worshipped: The
meaning is, that he challenges authority and pre-eminence above all Kings and
Emperors: For Kings, in Scripture, are called Gods; and Sbasmo (which we
render, that is worshipped) is that name in Greek, which signifies Majesty in
English, and is the title by which they did express the Grandeur of the Roman
Emperors, whom they called Augusti, and the Greeks Sbaso. According to this
aspiring disposition and nature in him, so has he his name of Antichrist
given him; for Antichrio may either be rendered Anti pro, or vice Christi, that
is, one who places himself in Christ's stead, and behaves himself as his Vicar
and Deputy: Or else Anti may signify contra Christum, one that opposes and
sets himself against Christ, i. not against his Person (for that he would get
nothing by) but against the principal parts of Christ's Doctrine and Worship;
one that puts Christianity upon a new bottom, that inverts the design of it,
and makes it, instead of being a self-denying, the most selfseeking Religion in
the World.

How near this Doctrine of making Christ's Kingdom an Earthly Monarchy, comes to
the nature of Antichrist; nay, is indeed that very ladder by which that man of
sin either already has, or hereafter will ascend the Throne, is too apparent:
For if Antichrist be come, as who can now doubt of it? (since the Apostle Paul
tells us, that in the latter time he needs must come; and the Apostle John
informs us, that the latter time began in his age) then we have no Character
left to descry him by, if this be not it, viz. his mixing the Christian with
the secular Interest; his making Piety a Pandar to Policy; his advancing Christ
in show, that thereby indeed he may advance himself; his centring godliness and
greatness in the same Persons; and ruling over the world as the Deputy of
Christ: Which kind of Doctrine whoever attempts to vent, let his zeal be never
so fierce, and his pretenses never so pious, he does nothing but prepare the
way for Antichrist, whose coming will not be like our Saviors, lowly and meck,
but with pomp and triumph. He does not level the ways and suppress ambition,
but swell it higher, until he sinks down Religion under the weight of worldly
Honor.

Before therefore I do conclude this Discourse, I shall take leave,

1. To bewail many of my deluded Brethren, who have a zeal, but so little,
according to knowledge, that even then when they most fiercely oppose
Antichrist, they only do his work; and while they proceed upon false
Principles, just draw a Circle, in which, the more they labor to go from the
point they fixed on at first, the nearer they draw unto it.

2. I must lament the great stupor and insensibility of the Preachers of the
Gospel in our days, who can be so careless in times of so eminent danger: And
though others may perhaps plead something in their own excuse, yet how can they
answer it, who scrupled at Ceremonies (which were declared, and every one knows
to be, in their own nature, indifferent) and yet are silent under a Principle
which will certainly bring them back, in a far other manner then they were at
first imposed? shall those who were affrighted at the shadow of a Lion, not
tremble to hear him roaring? what folly is it to flee from the tail of the
Dragon, and yet not be afraid when we perceive his sting? Let us not be
mistaken, it is not the garb or dress of Ceremonies, it is not this or that
form of Worship, which presently makes it Antichristian, but it is the
challenging a power to impose them upon others. So that without fixing the name
of Antichrist upon any party of men, which makes the Controversy conjectural
only, and most commonly uncharitable; this I shall be bold to affirm, that to
impose by force any form of Worship, and thereby deny others that liberty of
choice, which, whilst we impose, we assume to our selves: To determine the
indifferency of things, and, in reference to Religious ends, to make that
necessary, which by nature was made, and God has left free: And above all, to
make Christ a temporal Prince, and under the notion of advancing him, to exalt
our selves, and Lord it over others; this is nothing else but the spirit of
Antichrist, since such Doctrine as this, is no way contained in our Saviors
Gospel.

I shall speak out and end; I earnestly pray, that that excellent Principle, I
mean, Liberty of conscience, which first led us out of Popery, do not by our
too wanton abuse of it, lead us back again into it. This I am sure of, that for
men first to call themselves, The Godly, (a style which Paul, after all his
Revelations, did not so boldly assume) and then upon that score, to make
themselves our Governors, is without any streining the road thither; for we
know who it is, that by such Arts, has got no small Dominion in the world: and
where ever such Tenets prevail, they are only forerunners of Antichrists
Temporal regin, and so far as he can suppress it, of Christianities ruin.

FINIS.

