THE NECESSITY and USE OF HERESIES, Or The Third and Last Part OF THE Great
Question About INDIFFERENT THINGS IN Religious Worship, CONTAINING An Answer
to the Objection against Liberty of Conscience, from the Growth and Spreading
of Heresies. By Edward Bagshaw, Student of Chapter Church.

LONDON, Printed for S. M. at the Star in St. Paul's Churchyard, 1662.

To the Honorable Sr JOHN VAUGHAN Knight of the Bath, Second Son to the Right
Honorable, the Earl of Carberry.
Noble and Learned Sir,
HAd I had no other knowledge of your eminent Worth and Quality, but what was
transmitted to me by common fame (which places you, and that deservedly in the
first Rank of our most knowing and Religious Gentry) that alone would have
sufficiently warranted me in this Address, since those who shine like you, in
so vigorous and active a Sphere of constant and unblemished Piety, may easily
excuse the careful Beholder, if he turn his body with some kind of particular
Respect and Observance toward them. But when to this general Account, which
claims a Reverence from all, there is superadded an Intention you long have
had, to show me some personal kindness (which you have lately performed, with
very many Noble and Obliging Circumstances) I could no longer be just, either
to my own Resentments of Gratitude, or to the Expectation of others, should I
not have taken the very first Opportunity of manifesting to the world, how much
I think you are to be honored; and how fit to be proposed as a Public
Pattern. For others of mean Endowments, and narrow Fortunes, to be well
principled in virtue, or to take a little compass of Learning in their way to
Preferment; this carries with it no singular commendation, for in such,
necessity may seem to make their choice for them; but for one in the greatest
outward affluence, and in the midst of the most charming Temptations, both from
Honor and Pleasure, to preserve an unspotted integrity, and to keep himself
free and dis-interessed; for the pursuit only of what is truly Great and Noble;
this is a degree of Excellence, which God vouchsafes to very few: And, Sir, you
are one of those, in whose manner of Life and Studies, we may read, that such
kind of rare examples are not wholly discontinued; but God shows he has a Care
of this Age also, how corrupt soever, in that he has given you, as Salt, to
season it.

But while others are taken up with admiring, what you set the lowest value
upon, your accurate Learning, and through Insight into the profoundest depths
of Philosophy, together with a Masculine and Clean Expression, give me leave to
take notice of that, which I have often in private Wondered at, your strict and
impartial search into the mysteries of Christian Religion, which, while others
pass lazily over, or take the belief of them upon trust, you have made it your
business severely to examine; and thence have arrived to such an height of
Assurance, that you can look down upon those Objections and Difficulties, where
with puzling Disputers do trouble both themselves and others, with a fixed and
steady eye; and only pity those poor mistaken Rationalists, who seek for
satisfaction, where it is not to be had; like Saul, who consulted with a Witch,
when none but the Lord could truly answer him.

I cannot therefore wish an higher Elogy, to this small Treatise, then that it
were as fit for your view, as you are able to judge of it; For you, Sir, are
experimentally acquainted with the Truth it contains; and can demonstrate from
the most undoubted Testimony, that God has a little number in the world, whom
in spite of Hell or Heresies, he is resolved to save; and therefore by
state-Arts and Politic Contrivances, to labor the Prevention of Heresies, it
is as to the Elect, a needless, as to Reprobates an unprofitable care, and
unwarrantable to both, since, when the Scripture tells us, there must be
Heresies; they only take the way to perpetuate them, who endeavor their
suppression, by ways which that Word has not warranted. As winds, till they
are pent up and restrained from their motion, do seldom any hurt; so nor
Heresies neither, till they are imposed and forced, they make no public
disturbance. The world would never have been Arian heretofore, nor
Antichristian now, did not Princes lend their Power to the Beast, to make it
kill, whom it cannot confute. That all men's Eyes may be opened to see that
Christian Religion, which is the Power of God, needs not any Assistance from
the undue Power of man, and that you, whose eyes are already opened, may be
long Preserved for the Information and Example of others, is, and shall be the
constant Prayer of

Drury Lane, Jan. 10, 1661. NOBLE SIR, Your truly Affectionate and most Obliged
Servant, Edward Bagshaw.

THE PREFACE.
AMong all the Arguments, which are made use of in defense of a rigorous and
stated Uniformity, against the pretensions and Plea of Christian Liberty, there
is none, that is either urged with greater vigor, or that, amongst unwary and
superficial Hearers, carries with it a better appearance of probability, then
this, that the Imposing of some few things, supposed to be Indifferent, is the
only way to prevent the entrance, and to suppress the growth of Heresies. For
as unruly Cattle are kept from straying, by being put into a Pound, or into
some straight Enclosure, so, where there is a certain Form, and fixed Garb of
Worship, unto which all are compelled to agree; there will in all probability,
be no room left, for those secret underminings, and clardestine Insinuations,
by which, Error, like undiscovered fire, is blown up and kindled, and spreads
it self, to the ruin sometimes both of Church and State. And therefore as they
tell us, that Conjurers, to keep their evil Spirits from doing mischief, do
draw a Circle about them, and confine them to it; so, Magistrates, who are the
State-Exorcists, have no better way to prevent the Designs of Factious and
light spirited men, (who oftentimes cry up Religion, when they mean Rebellion)
then to confine all, even Religious Meetings, unto such a Circle and Order, out
of which, they may not be suffered to move, lest Conscience, which seems at
first to start and scruple at small things, becomes at length, for want of due
Bounds, a Patronage and Plea for the greatest and most irregular Exorbitancies.

That I may take nothing from the strength of this Argument (which may be yet
farther improved by consideration of the great Scandal given in our own time) I
will confess, that were a State, which professes to embrace Christian
Religion, not solely to be guided according to the Rules of that, but left at
random, to be governed by those Prudential Motives, and Political Maxims,
which the Wisdom of this World (...) that the Apostle calls earthly, sensual and
devilish is most ready to invent and to fasten upon; there seems nothing, at
first Blush, to be so contrary to Reason of State, as a Toleration of two or
more Religions, or the least variation in the Mode and Form of Public Worship;
since this Diversity, may easily be presumed to beget Dissentions and Quarrels,
which arising at first in private Families, like wind that lies concealed in
secret Caverns, at last breaks out into an Earthquake, and, like a mighty
Tempest, overturnes and bears down all before it.

It is, I believe, upon some such fallacious and ill weighed Inducement, as
this I mention, that there has been a kind of Conspiracy, amongst all worldly
wise and superpolitical men, against the sincere, spiritual and unmixed
Profession of Christianity, ever since the death and murder of him, from whom
it received both its Name and Doctrine. For we read that Christ suffered as a
Disturber of that state, which he came to save; and as a Blasphemous Heretic,
in that Church, which he came to teach. Paul, and the rest of the Apostles met
with the very same entertainment, both for Language and Usage; and afterward,
for 300 years together, all kind of violence was practiced against the
Christians, as State-Incendiaries, and men that were obstinate only in Impious
and Seditious Errors. But our Religion lost mose by Peace, then by that bloody
and outrageous Warfare; all the while the Ship of the True Church rode out at
Sea, the Storms it met with, did only toss but could not overwhelm it; In a
Calm, it began to sink, and never was near perishing, till it came to Harbor.
In short, the Professed Favorers of Christianity, did, by their wellmeant, but
ill managed kindness, more destroy the Church, then all its open and most
furious Enemies. For when Constantine and his Successors, mistaking quite the
Nature of our Religion, did labor to accommodate and attemper it unto their
Civil Inter^^^^ straight the old Heathenish Spirit of Idolatry and Persecution,
did revive, under new Names; and Heretics, i.e. Dissenters from the
established Forms then, were as severely handled, as Christians themselves
before. Which course was so long continued, until Policy and Pomp had quite
devoured and eaten out the Purity and Plamness of Religion, and made it nothing
else but a Property, for ambitious Churchmen (who in all Ages, have been the
greatest Cryers up of, because the only Gainers by, a Specious Uniformity, of
which they are the sole Managers) to make Attempts upon the Civil Power; which
at last, they wrested out of the Emperors hands, and in token of their entire
Conquest, they deposed not Princes only, but Scripture and Reason, and the
Spirit of God himself too from their Authority; and set up a Political Head of
their own, unto whose pretended infallible Dictates they enforced all to yield
an absolute, because blind and ignorant Obedience. Thus, under color of
suppressing Heresies, the world consented to enslave themselves unto the most
damnable, destructive and fatal Heresy, that ever the Sun saw; I mean, to
Popery; which, by a strange kind of Figure, would pass for the only Christian
Religion, when as it has in it just nothing of the Spirit, Purity, Knowledge,
or Liberty that Christ established. In which sad condition the greatest part of
the Christian world yet lies, and groans, for the speedy Coming of its Redeemer.

This having been the success and issue of Uniformity, and this being its
natural Tendency, I wish all serious and dispassionate Christians would
consider, that, though Heresies are to be bewailed, and so far as we lawfully
can, suppressed too, yet we must do Bonum been. We must not remedy an
Inconvenience, with bringing in a Mischief; nor devise expedients of a strict
and violent Uniformity, which as God in his Word has no where warranted, so,
we may find by the success of it among the Papists and others, that he has not
blessed. Since by this means, quite contrary to Gods Command, many Millions of
Souls are forced to sit down under a wretched and irreparable Ignorance; their
overcareful Guides, for fear it seems, lest they should lose their way to
Heaven, having with a great deal of Caution, taken their Candle from them.

How unfit I am to be, so much as instrumental, in pulling off the Veil from
before men's eyes, I desire to be always sensible: yet having already ventured
upon this Controversy, I have here once more tried to rectisie men's mistakes;
and labored to take away the strength of that Objection against due Christian
Liberty, from the many Heresies, which thereby are occasioned. In this short
Treatise therefore, I have endeavored to manifest, that, in the Church of
Christ, there must be Heresies. And while we observe that diligence and care in
our selves, together with that equity and moderation toward others, which our
Religion does require from us, it is as impossible to avoid Diversity of
Opinions (which among angry men, will certainly enough be nicknamed Heresies)
as it would be to place our selves in the midst of Sunshine, and not see
Variety of Colors. Men's Judgments, especially if they give themselves any
Latitude of Enquiry, are as various as their Complexions; so that to prescribe
one certain Form to all, and thereby to force men to act outwardly, what
inwardly they do not assent to, is like Painting the Face with an infectious
and Venomous Juice, or giving a Nauseous Potion unto a Nice and Dainty Palate,
whereby we shall offend God, as much as men; who at the last day, will not
thank any, for other men's constrained, involuntary, and therefore false and
hypocritical Devotion.

Having said thus much, I now take my leave of this controversy; not as if I
thought, that more could not be written, but because I am no longer in a free
capacity to do it: Since I cannot write now in so unconcerned a manner as I did
before. For having lately been deprived of my just Right, in a Freehold I had
at Chapter Church, for no reason at all, that I know of, unless for the impartial
and unbyassed Discovery of my Judgment about Indifferent, or rather Doubtful
Things in Religious Worship: It will but wrong the cause; should I prosecute it
any further; since it may be interpreted now, that I write like a Party; and
that, not Conscience, but Discontent does excite me to it. Unless therefore I
am called out to defend what I have already written, I shall for the future
forbear; and manifest by my carriage, that though for the present, I cannot
submit, yet, I thank God, I can suffer in silence.

Drury Lane. Jan. 10. 1661. EDWARD BAGSHAW.

THE NECESSITY and USE OF HERESIES.
1 Cor. 11.19. For there must also be Heresies among you, etc.
THese are the Words of the Apostle Paul, and urged by him as a Reason, why he
did believe the Report he had heard concerning their Schisms and Contentions;
For as we find, Chap. 1. He tells them, Verse 11.
that he was informed by some who were related to the Family of Chloe (who seems
to have been a Woman of Quality and Repute in that Church of Corinth) that
there were Contentions among them: Each Party endeavoring to cry up those
Teachers by whom they were first converted, or most profited, to the Prejudice
and Disgrace of the rest: Whereupon, one said, Verse 12.
he was of Paul; i. e. a Disciple of Paul; another was for Peter; a third sort
for Apollos; whereby they did not so much bandy against one another, as oppose
the Honor of the Lord Christ; who, by these Ministers, as his Instruments, did
work their Salvation. And therefore for them, to have such fierce and vehement
Contentions, about those who were merely subordinate, and could do nothing but
as the Power of Christ did cooperate with them, argued these Corinthians,
notwithstanding their Gifts, to be very raw, V. 4, 7.
childish, and carnal Christians: As the Apostle concludes, Chap. 3. For-while
one says, I am of Paul, and another, I am of Apollos, are not ye carnal? i. e.
Are ye not led by very weak and childish Inclinations, to make such a Note of
Difference among your selves, because of your Teachers?) For who is Paul? and
who is Apollos, but Ministers, by whom (i. e. by whose Ministry, and Preaching)
ye believed, even as the Lord gave to every man? (i. e. according to that
ability which God was pleased to distribute to each of his Ministers) to him
therefore the sole Honor is due, and not to be factiously ascribed to any of
his Servants; as the Apostle further argues, I have planted, i. e. laid amongst
you the Foundation of Christian Faith; Apollos has wateved i.e. by his
Eloquence (for we read that he was (...), Acts 18.25.
i. e. a well spoken man) Apollos has added a Verdure and Freshness to my
Doctrine, and made it spring up amongst you: But, says he, God gave the
increase, i. e. made it fruitful and effectual. From whence it follows, that
neither he that planteth is any thing, i. e. to be esteemed, and solely gloried
in; nor he that waters, but God who gives the increase.

Having thus convinced them of their Folly, as well as sin, in making Schisms
upon such ill-grounded pretenses; he proceeds in this Chapter, to take notice
of a great Disorder, which they committed even at the time of the Sacrament;
for there, when they should have acted in the highest Love and Coudescention
toward each other, yet then they brought their Contentions and Animosities
along with them, and made the Public Assembly, (for so I understand the Word
(...), since the Christians as yet had no public Places of Resort, but met, as
they could, in Private Houses) witnesses of their unchristian Discord. When ye
come together in the Church, says he, i. e. as Iunderstand it, in the Rublick
Assembly, I hear that there be Divisions among you: and though it might seem a
thing almost impossible, at that time, when you come to receive the Lords
Supper, and in that Place, when all the Faithful are met together, there should
be any so bold Defyers of Christian Charity and Order, as then and there, to
vent their Discontents, and manifest an ambitious Strife; yet, says he, I
partly believe it; For there must also be Heresies amongst you, etc. And
therefore I do not much wonder if you begin so early in Schism and Separation.

The words contain Two Parts. 1. A Prediction. There must be Heresies. 2. One
Reason or Ground of it. That (...), i. e. those that are approved and sincere,
may be made manifest.

in the Church of Christ, there is an unavoidable necessity of heresies. Luke
17.1.
As our Savior says of Offenses, (...), i. e. It is unchanceable, or, it
cannot happen but they must come. So say I of Heresies, (...), It is impossible
to avoid it, but they will come.

To clear up this, I shall explain these two things. 1. What is meant by
Heresies. 2. What are the Grounds or Reasons, why in the Church of Christ, they
are so fatally necessary.

For the First, viz. What is Heresy? Some hold it is impossible to be defined,
amongst whom was Austin. Others define it to be Sententia humano sensu electa,
Scripturae Sacrae contraria, palam edocta, and pertinaciter defensa, i. e. Mat.
Paris. p. 874.
An Opinion chosen by a man's own Understanding, contrary to the holy
Scriptures, openly taught, and obstinately defended. Which is the Desinition of
Grosthead, the Learned Bishop of Lincoln, who for his singular Zeal in
opposing the Popes Usurpations in England, was styled, Romanorum Malleus and
Contemptor. With this Desinition, because of the Learning and Virtue of its
Author, I should acquiesce, but that all who have got long possession of any
Tenet, charge Dissenters with the name of Heretics; and every one, who
maintains any singular Opinion, does endeavor to back it with Authority of
Scripture. And therefore without attending to Conclusions of others, the best
way to understand aright the nature and meaning of Heresy, will be to have
recourse our selves unto the Scripture, from whence alone we had the first
Notice of such a thing; I mean, as it is a thing criminal and damnable.

In the Scripture I find the word (...) to be vox mediae significationis, and
to signify any Opinion indifferently, whether good or bad. Acts 15.17.
Thus we read of the heresy of the Sadduces; and the heresy of the Pharisees.
And Paul mentions it of himself, by way of honor: Acts 15.5. Acts 26.5.
according to the most exact or accurate heresy or Opinion of our Religion, I
lived a Pharisee. But for the most part, the word (...) is taken in an ill
sense, to signify, an Opinion repugnant to the sense of Scripture, and
likewise destructive of the Civil Peace. Thus when Tertullus would blast the
Repute of Christian Religion before Felix, the Roman Deputy, he calls it an
heresy: We have, says he, Acts 24 5.
speaking in behalf of the Jews against Paul, found this man (...), a very
Pest, and one that moves (...), Sedition, or uproar amongst the Jews,
throughout the world; and a chief Leader of the Sect or Heresy of the
Nazarenes: So does he in contempt call the Christians, as being the followers
of Jesus of Nazareth, which was a Name of Disgrace and Obloquy among them. As
Paul testifies of himself, whilst he was yet an Unbeliever; (...), I thought
with my self, Acts 26.9.
that I ought to do many things against the Name of Jesus of Nazareth. In this
sense is the word Heresies to be understood, Gal. 5.20, 21.
when by the Apostle they are reckoned among Works of the Flesh, and they are
joined with Strife, Seditions, Wrath, Envyings, which are the usual Attendants
of Heresy. Now because Works of the flesh are of two sorts, either such as
flow from the fleshly Understanding (as the Apostle calls corrupt Reason, (...),
the Understanding of the Flesh) or such as flow from the fleshly Will; Col.
2.18.
accordingly there are two sorts of heresies mentioned and spoken against in
Scripture. 1. Such as upon Presumptions of natural Reason, do contradict
express and clear Revelation of Scripture. 2 Pet. 2.1.
Thus the Apostle Peter calls the denying our Lord Christ, i. e. either his
Nature, as the Socinians of our times; or his Offices, as all the Papists do, a
damnable Heresy. There shall, says he, be false Teachers among you, who
(...), shall covertly, (or over and above, or contrary to the Truth) bring in
destructive heresies, even denying the Lord that bought them. So the Opinion of
those, who under pretense of Humility, brought in the Worship of Angels, into
the Church of Colosse, was a Formal heresy, since the Authors of it, had no
warrant of Scripture to add such kind of Party Mediators to Christ, Col. 2.18.
but as the Apostle speaks, were rashly puffed up by their fleshly mind. Thus
the denying of the Resurrection of the Body, by some in the Church of Corinth,
was a great Heresy, as overthrowing the Foundation of a Christians hope, 1
Cor. 15.12.
and opening a door to all manner of Impiety and Villainy; For if the dead rise
not, the Consequence is very natural and reasonable, let us eat and drink, for
to morrow we shall die 2. Verse 32.
There are another sort of Heresies spoken against in Scripture, which flow from
the fleshly will, and have an immediate tendency to patronize and encourage
dissoluteness of Lise, such was the Heresy of the Nicolaitans, who held, that
it was lawful to eat things offered to Idols, i. e. to commit I olatry, in
times of Persecution; and to commit Fornication, Apoc. 3, 14, 15.
which our Savior speaks sharply against in the Revelations, calling it the
Doctrine of Balaam, and expresses his utter dislike of such Tenets, in these
words, which I hate. 2 Pot. 2.
So the Apostle Peter speaks against some vicious Heretics (as some think, the
Gnostics) who, under pretense of advancing Christian Liberty, Verse 19.
gave themselves up to all manner of Impurity; promising, says he, Liberty,
they themselves are the Servants of Corruption. Jude v 8.
Jude carries on the same men's heresy further, and says, they did not only,
defile the flesh, but by stretching the Notion of Liberty, beyond its due
Bounds, did set at naught Government, and revile Dignities, i. e. undervalue,
disesteem, and disobey their Civil Governors. Which kind of Heresies, as they
are more dangerous, so they are more damnable then others; because there can be
no pretense of Conscience to justify them. From what I have said concerning
Heresies, as I find them recorded in Scripture, I draw this general Definition
of them all. An Heresy is such an Opinion, as either has no Foundation in
Scripture, (as the Worship of Angels, among the Colossians) or, expressly
contradicts it (as the denial of the Resursurrection, among the Corinthians)
or, Mistakes and misse-interprets it, to countenance dissoluteness of Life, and
disobedience unto the Civil Magistrate.

The necessity that there should be such heresies in the Church of Christ, will
appear, from the consideration, 1. Of the Causes. 2. Of the Occasions, which
concur to the producing of them.

1. The Necessity of Heresies will appear from the consideration of their
Causes, and they are these three, 1. God permitting. 2. Satan exciting. 3. Man
begetting and ingendring of them.

Heresies, which makes the being of them necessary, is, Gods permission of
them. Where, by Permission, I do not mean, an idle, unconcerned, ineffectual
letting them pass only, and barely suffering them to be; but Gods wise,
powerful, and mighty ordering of them, as he did the hardness of Pharaohs
heart, for very gracious and holy ends, especially these two.

1. For the Trial of the Godly: As the Apostle has it, that the (...), the
sincere and single-hearted Christians, might, by this means, appear the more
eminent and conspicuous. As it did show the Power of God, to preserve the Bush
(by which his people of Israel was represented) in the midst of the Fire; so
does his Power equally appear, when his Truth is born witness to, in the midst
of the Triumph and Efficacy of Error. Were there but one Opinion which passed
for current among Christians, there would not appear any thing extraordinary in
the owning of it; but when there are so many Parties, each crying up their own
way, as the Ephesians did their Diana, there to keep touch with the things of
God, and, in spite of all contradiction, openly to avow and countenance them,
this shows a well-principled Integrity; a temper that God is singularly
delighted with. In the world, God lets his Heaven be oftentimes wrapped up in
clouds, that the stars which he has appointed for the Government of the Night,
Vid. Deuteronomy. 13.1, 3.
may appear more bright and useful: So in the Church, which is Gods Heaven on
Earth, the most visible Mansion of the Divine Nature, he lets Darkness break
forth, and thick Vapors; that those Saints of his, whom he calls Lights of the
world, may shine with the greater Luster, and redouble their Beams, from the
greatness of the Opposition made against them. We must not think that God has
either given us Faith or Knowledge, which are his choicest Largesses, but he
intends to try the constancy of the one, and the seriousness of the other: And
since the greater Difficulties we encounter, still the more Honor redounds to
God, who is our General; therefore he will seem to hazard his Truth, by letting
it, to outward appearance, be lost as it were, in the midst of a swarm of
Heresies, that by raising up some Heroic Champions, he may recover it again
with greater advantage. Thus in the first ages of the Church, Peter rescued
Freedom of Communion with the Gentiles; Paul asserts Freedom from the Yoke of
needless and insignificant Ceremonies; and John defended the Eternal Divinity
of our Savior, against the Narrow-spirited, Tyrannical, and Hellish Impostures
of the Heretics in their Times: And in all ages, many there are recorded to us
of great esteem and credit in the Church of Christ, whose Memories, in all
probability, had not survived their Bodies, had not they signalized themselves
by their zealous asserting of Truth, when it was almost swallowed up by the
Deluge, or outfaced by the authority of Error. And such Examples God will ever
continue; for which Reason, he lets Heresy, like Pharaoh and his Egyptians,
captivate his Truth, that he may send some Moses and Aarons for the Redemption
and Deliverance of it.

2. The Second, and no less principal end, Ezekiel. 3.20.
as to the Design of God, why he permits Heresies, is, that Reprobates may have
occasions presented them of stumbling and taking Offense. When a wicked man
turns from that Righteousness he once pretended to, God says, I lay a
stumbling block before him; and upon the wicked, the Psalmist says, God raines
Snares, i. e. Psalm. 11.6.
scatters Traps and Snares in their way, that they may be taken. There are some
men, who in Scripture are styled, the People of Gods curse, the Vessels of his
wrath, Isa. 34.5. Romans 9.21. Jude v. 4.
and by Jude, Forewritten unto condemnation: To whom Gods greatest methods of
Goodness prove only means of hardening them, to sin more desperately; thus did
Gods Word prove to the Israelites: It was, says the Prophet, Line upon Line,
Isa. 2.8, 13.
and Precept upon Precept, that they might go, and fall backward, and be
broken, and snared, and taken. And Christ, to the unbelieving Jews, became a
Sione of stumbling, and a Rock of Offense, unto which, 1 Pet. 2.8.
says the Apostle Peter, they were appointed. So the Gospel, (...), to lost,
and perishing Wretches, is a Savor of death. But what these things do only by
accident, that Heresies do in their own proper nature, 2 Cor. 2.15.
i. e. they harden Unbelievers, and make them more resolute in their opposing
of the Truth. As when God did intend Ahab should go down to battle, and perish
there, 1 Kings 22.22.
he let a Lying Spirit of Prophecy be in the mouth of all his Prophets; For,
says he, thou shall persuade him, and prevail also. So when God sees a company
of lazy, vicious men, who are weary of the Powerful plainness of Truth, then he
lets some corrupt Doctrines be scattered abroad, which may fit those
Inclinations, they are already principled with: and likewise, when others have
curious itching Ears, and sound Doctrine will not relish with them, then God
suffers some lofty airy speculations to be broached, by study of which, they
may grow drunk with Pride and Prejudice against more wholesome Tenets. 2 These.
2.10, 12.
It was this just Judgment of God upon men's willingness to be deceived, that
God gave them up to Antichristian, i.e. to Papal Delusions. As the Apostle has
it, Because they received not the Love of the Truth, that they might be saved.
For this cause God shall send them (...), the active power and efficacy of
Error, Mat. 18.
that they should believe a lie, i.e. a false and feigned doctrine. That they
all may be damned who have not believed the Truth, but had pleasure in
unrighteousness, i.e. in false and unrighteous Tenets. And therefore as our
Savior says, Woe to the world, because of Offenses; so, Woe to the world,
because of Heresies; because as we set traps to catch Vermin, so God appoints
these to ensnare arrogant and self-presuming, or vicious and self-defiling men.

Heresies, is Satan exciting. That evil Spirit, whom our Savior calls, the
Prince of the world, and the Apostle, the ruler of the Darkness of the world;
out of that innate hatred he has to Truth, by which his Kingdom is overthrown,
scatters the seeds of Error and ignorance, every where up and down the world:
and as he set upon our Savior with miss quoted Scripture, in which he
appeared so dexterous and ready, as if he intended to puzzle and nonplus his
eternal wisdom: So the most deadly and poisonous heresies, have by him, by a
strange kind of Chemistry, been extracted out of the same holy Scriptures. Thus
he brought in the practice of needless rigor and austerity of Life, Col. 2.
under pretense of Christian strictness and severity, in those Precepts, Touch
not, taste not, 1 Timothy 4.
handle not. Thus brought he in the Doctrine of forbidding marriages, under
pretense of Christian Chastity and Abstinence, 2 Cor. 11.3.
which the Apostle in express words, calls the Doctrine of Devils. Thus he
brought in Superstition, Will Worship, and idle Ceremonies, under pretense of
Christian Decency and Order; thereby, as the Apostle complains, the Serpent
beguiling many through his Subtilty, Rev. 13.
so that their minds were corrupted from the simplicity which was in Christ.
Thus lastly, brought he in the cruel and incompassionate killing of men that
would not worship the Image of the Beast, and in some outward and visible
manner acknowledge their. conformity, under pretense of Christian zeal and care
of Truth. In short, as the greatest Cordials, if not rightly prepared, do prove
the most deadly and killing Poisons; so the most dangerous and destructive
heresies, have been compounded by Satan's malice, out of the most Sovereign
Drugs of Sacred Truth; but by him purposely ill mixed and tempered. And here I
desire to observe, that though the Devil likewise does stir up Persecution, as
our Savior felt in himself, when he said of his own Sufferings, that then was
the Power of darkness, i.e. Hell was then broke loose, Luke 22.53.
and wicked men in crucifying Christ, acted the Devils businesses; so he
foretells to the Church of Smyrna, Fear none of those things thou art to suffer;
behold the Devil shall cast some of you into prison, Rev. 3.10.
that you may be tried. Yet this is but Satan's After-game; for his great design
is, to eclipse the beauty of Truth, by the Mist of Error: And if he finds,
that his Heretical Tares will not take root, then under pretense of Faction;
Sedition, and the like old charges, which were laid both against our Savior,
and his Apostles, he destroys those careful Husbandmen; which would sow better
Seed, and leave no room for the Devils Cockle. The Art and Policy of Hell, lies
in the quiet spreading of Heresy, for this gains him souls, whereas violence
never got him any thing, but the bodies of men; that is, it made them
obsequious Slaves, but not real Converts. WE find therefore in the Revelation,
Rev. 12.
that when the Woman, under which the True Church is emblemed, had brought
forth, the Devil stood by, ready to devour her Child as soon as it was born;
and for some time, endeavored to maintain his footing in Heaven, and till he
was cast down from thence, did not think of making war with her Seed. The Moral
of which Representation, I take to be this, That when Christian Truth begins to
break forth, then the Devil for a time endeavors to destroy it, by disputing
the case, and venturing his cause upon Argument; but when he finds himself
mastered at that weapon, then he changes the Subtilty of the Serpent, into the
Roaring of the Lion; and with open mouth devours his Opposers. But this way the
Devil does not ordinarily try, till his False Doctrines have been baffled and
foiled, and he has no (...), no Wile, no craft left, to countenance the
grosseness of his Impostures.

heresies in the Church, is, Man himself, begetting and ingendring of them. For
as the most fruitful and pregnant Seed, if it be not cast into a warm and
prepared Soil, soseth all its Virtue, so those Seeds of Error the Devil sowes,
if the heart of man was not a fit soil for them, would never rise up again in
so large an harvest of absurd and impious Heresies. Were the winds never so
fierce, yet if the water of the Sea were not of an unstable and moveable
nature, there would never be any Tempest. So, how impetuous and violent soever
the Gusts, and Breath of Satan's Temptations be, yet if our nature were not of
it self ductile, and pliant, the world had never been so prodigiously tossed up
and down, nay, often overturned by erroneous Maxims. Now there are Two
Principles in man, which are always susceptible of any false and Heretical
Impression; the one is, his Ignorance in spiritual matters, the other is, his
Pride inNatural Knowledge. By his Ignorance, he is apt to mistake Error for
truth, and by his Pride he is apt to propagate it; that like Simon Magus (the
first noted Heretic in the Church of Christ) he may appear some body in the
eyes of a few partial Followers; Acts 8.
and this is it, which makes his Error Heresy. So that till we can find some
Art to change the Nature of man, to make his Understanding more refined,
sublime and spiritual; till we can purge the Will from prejudice, design and
partiality; till we can alter the course of his Affections; and set them afloat
another way, to love God, in stead of himself, and to prefer Truth before
applause; till we can do this, we have as little hope to see the Church free
from Heresies, as to have our Gardens clear from infectious Mists and Vapors,
which have the Sun to exhale, the wind to convey, and a Bog hard by, to
engender them.

But besides these Causes, which do absolutely necessitate the Being of
Heresies. There are two other Occasions, which do mightily conduce, if I may so
speak, to the well-being of them, i. e. to their easier growth and spreading.
And they are, 1. Scripturedifficulty. 2. Christian Liberty.

Difficulty of Scripture is a very great occasion for the increase of Heresies,
because of that variety of Interpretation, which many places, especially in the
Apostle Paul's Epistles, are capable of: Whose Writings, even in the Apostle
Peter's time, were liable to much misse-construction. For to omit, that the
things themselves recorded by him, 2 Pet. 3.
are (...), soarcely intelligible, being full of mysterious and fathomless
depths, they are written by that excellent Apostle, in a style so dissonant
from all Rules of ordinary Grammar, that it requires great pains, merely to
find out his Literal Meaning. Which Industry, very few, who read him with
prepossession and prejudice, have leisure for; and therefore hastily expound
their own sense, without attending to his: So that, as Tertullian observes, De
Praescript. Haeretic.
God seems to have ordered the Text of Scripture on purpose, that it might
afford opportunity to Heretical Glosses. For as in the works of Providence,
though the whole Frame and Systeme of the world be admirably well-composed,
composed, yet, if we consider them in patcels, we shall meet with many things,
which will startle us into jealous, and missebelieving Thoughts. So is it in
that complete body of Divine Truth contained in Scripture, the whole Connection
and Series, as it relates to the Messiah, foretold in the Old, and fulfilled in
the New Testament, together with those ravishing heights of Heavenly Directions
for life, is most ineffably curious, and excellent: But if we take those things
asunder, and consider them distinctly, by Chapter and Verse, we shall meet with
Mistakes in Chronology, Variations in Names, Diversity of Readings, and some
lesser seeming contradictions, which to a snarling and quarrelsom wit, are so
many Bones, for him to spend his mouth upon, without minding more wholesome and
digestible Food. And yet this makes very much for the plausible entrance of an
Heresy, that it has the Letter of Scripture to countenance it: The Papist
will urge for his Implicit Faith, Hear the Church, Mat. 18.
without ever considering, that by the Church there, is not meant, what he
fancies, a Pope, or Cardinals, or Councils, or Fathers, but a Select Number of
Christians; which is the only sense wherein that word Church is taken
throughout the whole New Testament, when it is used by our Savior and his
Apostles. So the Socinian shelters his impious denying of our Saviors Divine
Nature, under that, which he finds our Savior speaking, The Father is greater
then I: not considering in what capacity our Savior spoke these words, viz.
John 16.
according to the Person he then took; or how many other places there are,
wherein his equality with the Father is asserted. The Arminian wants not the
same Plausibilities for his Free will: and in short, no Heresy that ever yet
was in the Christian world, but pleaded Scripture for its defense and
Patronage; which such strange Variety of Opinions could never have done, were
not the Scripture exceeding difficult and hard to be understood, and thereby an
occasion given for the Rise and Conceiving of them.

Christian Liberty: Which in no Religion is allowed, nay commanded, in that
Latitude, as in ours. For we are enjoined to try all things, 1 These. 5.21. 1
John 4.1. Call. 1.8.
and then, to hold fast that which is good: We are bid, to try the Spirits, and
though an Angel should come form Heaven, and preach to us, we are not to
believe him, if he teach any thing contrary to this Gospel. We are commanded to
see with our own eyes, and to choose for our selves; without depending any
further upon the Authority of Fathers and Doctors, Isa. 8.20.
then as they speak according to this word, which under the severest penalties,
we are obliged to study and peruse. For as God, in the old Testament, Mal. 1.
would not have the blind for sacrifice, so neither will he in the New; and
they had as good not worship him at all, who like the Samaritans, John 4.
worship him they know not why. And as in point of Judgment, we are to be thus
free; so likewise in point of Practice, 1 Cor. 7. Mat. 15. Gal. 5.1.
as to Religious Rites and Orders, we are commanded, not to be the servants of
men; not to worship God by the Precepts of men; not to be entangled with any
yoke of Bondage, but to stand fast in the liberty wherewith Christ has made us
free; James 1.1, 2.
Whereupon, our Gospel is called the Royal Law of Liberty; and we are, so to
speak, and so to do, as those that shall be judged by that Law. Yea, further,
as we are to be thus free in our selves, so we are to be exceeding charitable
and tender toward others, bearing with our weak brethren; and if they do but
hold the Foundation of Faith and good works, to tolerate the Hay and Stubble,
which they may build upon it. And the reason of this is, because our Religion,
as it sprang from Heaven, so is it maintained from thence; as the Spirit of God
did first discover, so does it still reveal it; and by a new and almighty
Birth, of dead and sinful men, make us Living and sincere Christians: 2 Cor.
3.16.
Now where the Spirit of God is, says the Apostle, there is Liberty, i. e. not
only Freedom from Error and Ignorance, of which he there speaks, but from
those wretched and inhumane Acts of Force and Fraud, whereby other Political
Inventions, rather then Religions, are continued and upheld in the world: For
whereas all others hate the Light, and will not endure to have their Principles
questioned, as is clear in that devilish Cheat and Mystery of Iniquity, the
Papacy: Our Religion desires nothing more, then to be sifted to the bottom,
that so it may be chosen, for its own native Truth and Excellency, and not for
any outward Advantages, or to serve a State-turn, which Christian Religion will
never stoop to do. And whoever have not after the most serious study and
impartial Examination, arrived to an embracing of this Faith, must needs lose
the Comfort, Satisfaction and Sweetness of it, because till a man has met
with, and in his own mind resolved all Objections that make against him, he
cannot be certain that he is in the right, but must upon the rising of every
doubt, be full of anxious fear and perplexity. This which I have said
concerning the necessity of Christian Liberty, does by accident prove a great
means for the propagating of Heresies; for as where the Soil is good, and the
Air free and warm, Weeds will spring up as well as good Corn: So is it in the
Church of Christ, since there is Liberty allowed for variety of Judgments,
Error must needs thrive and spread, as well as truth. Mat. 13.
Especially since we may not pull up the Tares, or by the hand of violence,
stop the Progress of the most deceitful Error; but if sound Persuasion, if
Demonstration of the Spirit and Scripture, if Rejecting of the Heretic, and
forbearing of Communion with him, will not prevail, to make him renounce his
Error, I am not yet convinced, that in Opinions concerning Matters merely
spiritual, our Religion does allow any other more offensive weapons. So that
since to that Liberty, which is given to the sowing of Heresies, there is added
Impunity unto their growth and progress, it must needs follow, that the Causes
I mentioned, do not more necessitate the Being of Heresies, then these
Occasions will necessitate their Thriving and Continuance.

Occasions of Heresy, for the Causes of it. Among those who are exact and
critical Writers of History, as Polybius, Tacitus, and others, we find, they
distinguish carefully between the (...), and the (...), the Beginning, and the
causes of a War. The Beginning of a War may arise from something apparent and
visible; whereas the cause of it may be more deeply laid, even concealed from
the view of the Actors. So in this case, the Occasions indeed of Heresy, which
do midwife it into the world, are Scripture-difficulty, and christian Liberty:
Whereas the true causes are those I have mentioned; especially Man himself,
whose Heart is the Womb, in which that evil Birth is formed. And therefore let
us take heed that through have and prejudice, we accuse not either the
Scriptures, or due Christian Freedom, of those Errors, which merely our own
Ignorance, Presumption and Partiality do produce. To accuse the Scripture for
our Heresies, is all one as if, because we meet with ill sents, we should blame
the Sun, and not the Dunghill. So likewise, as to Liberty of Conscience, to
charge that with the production of Errors, is all one, as if the Air without,
rather then ill humors within us, should be thought the cause of our Diseases.
Let wicked and light-spirited men then bear the blame of whatever Follies they
hold; and not either the Reading of Scripture be disgraced, without which,
there can be no Knowledge of Truth: nor Liberty of Conscience be debarred;
without which, there can be no openness of Profession; both which are as
necessary to Christian Faith, as the Sun and Air are to Natural Life, we cannot
see without the one, nor breath without the other. Take away Scripture, and we
are in this world as Mariners upon the Sea, without a Compass; who have nothing
but the violence of waves, and the uncertain motion of the wind, to drive them.
Deny Liberty, I mean, in things Lawful, then Christian Prudence, Charity,
condescension, and wise doing, or forbearing of things indifferent, as we see
occasion, lie all useless by us, and we labor to become more knowing then
others, to no purpose.

heresies, then let us not take offense, or think ever a whit the worse of our
Religion, for that great Variety of Heresies which have sprung up in our days.
When the Apostle Paul was himself in trouble, he writes to the Church of
Thessalonica, That no man should be moved by these afflictions; for, says he,
your selves know, that we were appointed thereunto, for verily when we were
with you, 1 These. 3, 3, 4.
we told you before, that we should suffer Tribulation, even as it came to
pass. If they were to be comforted under their Afflictions, because he foretold
them, we have the same reason to be comforted under our Heresies, since he
foretold them too; and from thence has afforded us an excellent Argument, to
assert our Saviors Truth and Veracity, and in that, the Truth of our Religion,
against all Opposers. This use the Primitive Writers made of them, when Celsus
and others did object to the Christians, the great variety of Opinions, and
diversity of Judgments amongst them, so that, say they, Were we willing to turn
Christians, we know not of what Party to be, since notwithstanding your Feuds
and Quarrels, you all equally pretend to Christ. To this, Tertullian, Origin,
and the rest reply, Haereses non dolemus venisse, quiae novimus esse
praedictas. WE are not at all sorry, that Heresies are come, for we knew it was
foretold they should come. So that the very Argument, which the Heathens used
to disgrace Christianity, was by those wise and Learned men improved for the
Illustration and confirming of it: And, indeed, since, as I have already
demonstrated, Demonstration that Jesus is the Christ.
there cannot be a more rational Proof of the Divine Mission of any, then the
fulfilling of his Prophesies, it is very admirable to consider, how our Savior
has left such Predictions behind him; which were beyond any Humane Foresight,
and yet every Age has been fulfilling some or other of them, ever since his
time. That a Religion so harmless, and inoffensive, should be persecuted: that
notwithstanding persecution, it should take root, and be preached throughout
the world: That presently after it was propagated, there should be Sects and
Heresies formed out of it; and this to be the constant, un-erring Fate of our
Religion, was a thing beyond all Rational and merely humane Conjecture; and
therefore the fulfilling of this great Prediction concerning Heresies, should
make us with thankfulness look up to Christ, who has already armed us against
any Prejudice we may receive from them, since they are only discoveries of his
Truth, and Trials of ours.

Heresies are necessary, that therefore any shall be excused, who is the Author
of them; Heresies are no otherwise necessary, then Scandals and Sins are, of
which, our Savior says, (...), they must be; but yet, says he, Woe be to that
man by whom they come. Mat. 18. Romans 16.17.
Mark them, says the Apostle Paul, which cause Divisions and Offenses,
contrary to the Doctrine which ye have received, and avoid them. And in another
place, (...), The Sect-making man, after the first and second Admonition,
reject; Tit. 3. (...).
knowing that such a one is quite perverted, and sins, being self-condemned.
All which Places, with many other, making so directly against new-fangledness
of Opinion, I cannot but wonder at the boldness of those men, who are not
content only to start up new and needless Opinions, but to the dishonor of our
Religion, and their own Eternal Ruin, if they repent not, make those Opinions
the Grounds of Separation from all Church Assemblies, but their own. Whoever
does thus set up for himself, must be able to demonstrate these Three things.
1. That the Opinion he dissents from, is apparently false and damnable. 2. That
the Opinion he himself holds, is certainly and infallibly true. 3. That it is
absolutely unlawful for him to join in communion with another, who in that
particular (as for instance, in Infant Baptism) differs in Judgment from him.
The two first of which Assertions, very sew of our Separate Churches will be
able to maintain, and I am sure, the last, none can. For if the Error of
another be not imposed upon my Practice, I ought not to withdraw my self from
the Communion of any, who hold the Foundation of Christian Faith, namely,
Belief in Jesus being the Christ; as is clear in the practice of these
Corinthians, among whom, some denied the Resurrection, and yet were all present
at the same Sacrament. This Doctrine, because it strikes at the Root of all
Separation, which cannot be justified, but in case of indispensable necessity,
viz. when such things are imposed upon us, as Conditions of Communion, which we
cannot in Conscience submit to; for there if we depart, we do not go, but are
driven out. But this deserves to be more largely handled; which I shall reserve
for a particular Treatise.

FINIS.

