An Historical TREATISE OF CITIES, AND Burghs or Boroughs.

SHOWING, Their Original, and Whence, and from Whom they Received their
Liberties, Privileges and Immunities; What they were, and what Made and
Constituted a Free Burgh, and Free Burgesses.

AS ALSO, SHOWING When they first sent their Representatives to PARLIAMENT.

WITH A Concurrent Discourse Of most Matters, and Things incident, or Relating
thereto.

By ROB. BRADY, Dr. in Physic.

LONDON: Prin^ed for Samuel Lowndes over against Exeter-Exchange in the Strand.
MDCXC.

THE PREFACE TO THE READER.
WHEN for my own priv^^^ Satisfaction I first began to inquire into the
Original Constitution of Burghs, in this and Foreign Nations, what they were,
and whence their great Liberties, and Privileges. In our Ordinary Writers,
whosoever they were, that discoursed of them as they came in their way, I found
little else but Prescription, and pretended Usage and Possession time out of
Mind, vouched for the great Independent Rights they have claimed, and do
challenge.

And truly by the Notion these Writers have, and their Readers cannot but have,
of them, according to their Informations, they seem to have been Aeternal, or
at least Coaeval with the Creation, and so many ready Wrought, and Framed,
small Commonwealths, lifted out of the Chaos, and fixed upon the surface of the
Earth, with their VValls, Gates, Town or Gild-Halls, Courts, Liberties,
Customs, Privileges, Freedoms, Jurisdictions, Magistrates and Officers, in
their Formalities, and all Extravagant, Uncontrollable, and Absolute Powers,
and Absurd Rights, they have of late Years pretended to.

But, whoever will seriously peruse this Treatise, shall find the Dates of
their Originals, and Gradual Augmentations, and must confess they have nothing
of the Greatness and Authority they boast of, but from the Bounty of our
Ancient Kings, and their Successors, notwithstanding any other Confirmations,
or acquired Right, they may allege, and acknowledge that See Appendix N. 1. b.
fol. 6. B. C. D. E. F. and fol. 7. A. B. C. D. E.
Prescription, and pretended Immemorial Customs or Usages avail not, when there
are Charters or other Records which show, that in this case (of what weight
soever they may be in other,) they are mere Conjectures, Words of Course, and
the Popular Assertions of such Men, as either knew not how, or would, or for
their more gainful Imploym^nts could, not look into those great Monuments of
Antiquity, and discoverers of Truth.

And therefore I have opposed matter of Fact, through the whole discourse, to
these fond Imaginations, and easy Notions, and for the clearer Demonstration
of what I intended to Evince, have produced all the Instances of Cities,
Burghs, and Towns in both the Books called Domesday-Books, from whence I could
receive any Satisfaction of the Condition and Import of Burghs and Burgesses in
the Saxon Times, without any particular Deductions from these Instances, or
Remarks upon them.

It Is easy for any Man that will but note them to observe, that according to
the Modern way of Speaking, they then made but a small Figure in the Nation; to
be sure the Burghs were not distinct Commonwealths, or Governments, nor the
Burgesses Statesmen, or People of much Interest, whatsoever some Popular and
Factious Writers, who Scrible by Rote, and according to their own Fancies, have
delivered to the contrary.

Many other places not Named in this Treatise, are either called Burghs in the
Conquerors Survey, or there are Burgesses mentioned in the Description of them;
several of which are not now esteemed Burghs, nor is there any Light or
Information to be had from them, what Burghs or Burgesses then were, as
Torchsey, Louth, and Stanford in Lincolnshire, Stainings in Sussex, Sceptesbury
or Shaftsbury in Dorsetshire, Domnitone or Dountone, Theodulveside, Saresberie,
Wilton, Malmesbury, Chrichlade, and Caun in Wilts. Lideford and Totnesse in
Devon, Colcester and Maldon in Essex, Winchelcumb in Glocestershire Hereford,
Snottingham, or Nottingham, these have the bare Names only of Burghs, or some
Burgesses are said to have lived in them, without any thing relating to their
Quality, or Condition.

London and Winchester are not described in this Survey, in Worcester, Derby,
and Lincoln, the Name of Burgess not mentioned. Bristol not to be found in the
Survey, it was made a City and County 47 Ed. 3. though a Burgh long before,
Bridgewater not to be found there, nor Minehead, Lin or Len in Norffolk only
mentioned, but not as a Burgh, or Town of note.

It Is only said of Glocestre. Tempore Regis Edwardi Domesd. f. 126. Col. 1.
Reddebat Civitas de Glowcestre XXVI Lib. numeratas and XII Sextaria Mellis ad
mensuram ejusdem Burgi, in the time of King Edward, the City of Gloucester paid
Thirty Six Pounds by Tale, and Twelve Sextaries or Gallons of Honey, according
to the measure of the same Burgh, nothing further of this Burgh or any
Burgesses therein.

And of Leicester thus. Civitas de Ibid. f. 230. a. Col. 1.
Ledecester Tempore Regis Edwardi reddebat per annum Regi XXX Lib. ad numerum
and XV Sextaria Mellis. Quando Rex ibat in Exercitu per Terram de ipso Burgo
XII Burgenses ibant cum eo. Si vero per Mare in hostem ibat, mittebant ei
quatuor Equos, dc eodem Burgo usque Londoniam ad Comportanda Arma, and alia
quae opus Essent. That is, The City of Leicester in the time of King Edward
paid yearly to the King Thirty Pounds by Tale, and Fifteen Sextaries of Honey,
when the King marched with his Army by Land, there went with him Twelve
Burgesses of this Burgh, when he went by Sea against an Enemy, he had Four
Horses sent from the same Burgh to London to carry Arms, or other Necessaries;
nothing more of this Burgh, or its Burgesses in the Survey.

We may note from both these last Towns, there was not then much difference
between a City and Burgh, both Appellations being given to one and the same
Town; Leicester never had Sir Edward Coke, says, all Bishops Sees are Cities,
etc.
Bishops, and at this time Gloucester had none, the great distinction grew,
after Cities were made Counties by Charter.

Nor was the Condition of London (unless Men would think otherwise from the
largeness of the place only,) much better, or the Liberties, and Privileges of
it, more, or much greater than those of other Cities, and great Burghs.
Notwithstanding the Prodigious Flatteries, and Elevating Haran^ues, it has
been puffed up with by the Author of Londinum A Book composed of Fables, and
the Perverted History of some good Authors.
Triumphans, Printed and Dedicated to the Men in Authority, in the Year 1682.
And by the Writings of many others, Ancient and Modern, who either on purpose,
or occasionally, wrote what they found concerning this City, without
Examination, and so were Deluded by such as went before them, or by their own
Imaginations, or Apprehensions. Judging of its former State and Condition, (or
at least what in their Opinion it ought to be,) according to the present
Splendour, and Appearance of it.

And to Demonstrate what I have here said, I caused the Charters made to the
City of London, by Henry the First, Henry the Second, Richard the First, and
King John, to be Printed in the Appendix, N. 17. and 18. And likewise the
Charters of Winchester, Lincoln, York and Norwich Granted in the same Times, by
comparing of which one with another, there will be found but little difference
in their Compositions, or in the Immunities, Liberties, and Privileges Granted
by them. Except that, the Citisens of London by the Kings Grant, had Power, and
Liberty to Distrein the Goods of any other Citisens, or Burgesses, or of any
See the Charter of Dunwich N. 3. b. f. 11. A.
Inhabitants of the Counties, where such Foreign Citisens or Burgesses lived,
that were indebted to them, if found in London, as is to be seen in the Charter
of King Henry the First, N. 17. f. 27. A. and the Confirmation of it in General
Words, in all the Subsequent Charters, before noted, whereas the Citisens and
Burgesses of other Cities, and Burghs, by their Charters, had not Power to
Distrein the Goods of a Countryman, or Inhabitant of the County for their
Debts, if they were not See Dunwich Charter as above. The like in many other
Ancient Charters of Burghs.
Debtors to them, or See Dunwich Charter as above. The like in many other
Ancient Charters of Burghs.
Sureties for others.

The Cities of Norwich, and Lincoln, had all the Liberties and Free-Customs, of
the City and Citisens of London, in such manner as when they did best, and most
freely enjoy them. See Appendix N. 20. and 22. Yet never pretended to, then,
such unthought of Liberties.

And after these times, whoever will take the pains to read all the Charters of
London, (Translated into English by S. G. Gent. (though not so exactly as he
pretends,) and Dedicated to Sir Robert Clayton, when Lord Mayor,) which were
Granted by King Henry the First, and our Successive Kings, will find, that all
the Great Privileges and Liberties, that City lately enjoyed or pretended to,
were the Grants of the Kings Progenitors; and also find them Successively, and
particularly Granted, as the Citisens Petitioned, Bargained, or Compounded for
them. And therefore no Reason for them to plead Immemorial Custom, or
Prescription for all, or most things, that might have been found Granted by
Charter, if those employed had had Time, or Will, to have Industriously perused
them.

THE PREFACE TO THE READER.
WHen for my own private Satisfaction I first began to inquire into the
Original Constitution of Burghs, in this and Foreign Nations, What they were,
and Whence their great Liberties and Privileges, I could not find any thing in
all our Writers, or Books, whosoever, or whatsoever they were, to, and in which
a Rational Inquirer might give his Assent, and, in some measure, rest satisfied.

And therefore I had Recourse unto Records, and looked into those Great
Monuments of Antiquity, and Discoverers of Truth, that I might bring to light
Things themselves, and Matter of Fact concerning them. And for the clearer
Demonstration of what I intended to evince, have produced all the Instances of
Cities, Burghs and Towns, in Both the Books called Domesday-Books, from whence
I could receive any Satisfaction about the Condition and Import of Burghs in
the Saxon times.

Many other Places not Noted in this Treatise, are either only called Burghs in
the Conqueror's Survey, or there are Burgesses only mentioned in the
Description of them; several of which are not now esteemed Burghs, nor is there
any Light or Information to be had from them what Burghs or Burgesses then
were; as Torchsey, Louth, and Stanford in Lincolnshire, Stainings in Sussex;
yet it is said in the Description of this Town, That there were in the Burgh
(which was a distinct part of it) CXXIII. Masurae.
Houses, that paid a C. Shillings and a C. Pence, that they were built upon a
Plough-Land and half, and the Inhabitants in the time of King Edward did
Servile Works, at the Lords Court as Villains used to do, Domesday, fol. 17. a.
Col. 2.
Ad Curiam Operabant, sicut Villani, Tempore Regis Edwardi; Sceptesbury or
Shaftsbury in Dorsetshire, Domnitone or Dountone, Theodulveside, Saresberie,
Wilton, Malmsbury, Chrichlade, and Caun in Wilts; Lideford and Totness in
Devon, Colchester and Maldon in Essex, Winchelcumb in Glocestershire, Hereford,
Snottingham or Nottingham. These have the Bare Names only of Burghs, or some
Burgesses are said to have lived in them, without any thing relating to their
Quality and Condition.

London and Winchester are not Described in this Survey; in Worcester, Derby
and Lincoln, the Name of Burgess not mentioned. Bristol not to be found in the
Survey, it was made a City and County 47 Edw. 3. though a Burgh long before;
Bridgewater not to be found there, nor Minhead, Lin or Len in Norfolk, only
mentioned, but not as a Burgh, or Town of Note.

It Is only said of Gloucester, Tempore Regis Edwardi Domesd. fol. 126. Col. 1.
Reddebat Civitas de Gloucester XXXVI. Lib. numeratas and XII. Sextaria Mellis
ad Mensuram ejusdem Burgi. In the time of King Edward, the City of Gloucester
paid Thirty Six Pounds by Tale, and Twelve-Sextaries or Gallons of Honey,
according to the Measure of the same Burgh. Nothing further of this Burgh, or
any Burgesses therein.

And of Leicester thus, Ibid. f. 230. a. Col. 1.
Civitas de Ledecester Tempore Regis Edwardi Reddebat per Annum Regi XXX. Lib.
ad numerum, and XV. Sextaria Mellis, Quando Rex ibat in Exercitu per Terram de
ipso Burgo XII. Burgenses ibant cum eo: Si vero per Mare in Hostem ibat,
Mittebant ei Quatuor Equos, de eodem Burgo usque Lundoniam ad Comportanda Arma
and alia quae opus essent. That is, the City of Leycester, in the time of King
Edward, paid Yearly to the King Thirty Pounds by Tale, and Fifteen Sectaries of
Honey; when the King marched with his Army by Land, there went with him Twelve
Burgesses of this Burgh; when he went by Sea against an Enemy, he had four
Horses sent from the same Burgh to London to carry Arms, or other Necessaries;
nothing more of this Burgh or its Burgesses in the Survey.

We may note from both these last Towns, there was not then much difference
between a City and Burgh, both Appellations being given to one and the same
Town; Leicester never had Sir Edward Coke says, all Bishops Sees are Cities,
etc.
Bishops, and at this time Gloucester had none, the great Distinction grew,
after Cities were made Counties by Charter.

Nor was the Condition of London much better than other Cities and great
Burghs, or the Liberties and Privileges much greater, unless Men would think
otherwise from the largeness of the place only, judging of its former State and
Condition (or at least what in their Opinion it ought to be) according to the
present splendour, and appearance of it.

And to demonstrate what I have here said concerning London, I have caused the
Charters made to that City by Henry the First; Henry the Second, Richard the
First, and King John, to be Printed in the Appendix, N. 17 and 18. And likewise
the Charters of Winchester, Lincoln, York and Norwich, Granted in the same
Times; by comparing of which one with another, there will be found but little
difference, in their Compositions, or in the Immunities, Liberties and
Privileges Granted by them.

The Cities of Norwich and Lincoln had all the Liberties, and Free Customs of
the City and Citizens of London, Granted to them, in such manner as when they
did best, and most freely enjoy them. See Append. N. 20 and 22. yet never
pretended to, then, such great Liberties.

And after these Times, whoever will take the pains to read all the Charters of
London, Translated into English by S. G. Gent. (though not so exactly as he
pretends) which were Granted by King Henry the First and our Successive Kings,
will find that all the Great Privileges and Liberties that Huge City does now
enjoy, or pretend to, were the Grants of the Kings Progenitors; And also find
them successively, and particularly Granted, as the Citizens Petitioned,
Bargained or Compounded for them. And therefore there is no Reason for pleading
of Immemorial Custom or Prescription for all or most things, that might have
been found Granted by Charter, with small Skill and Trouble.

A TREATISE OF English Burghs, OR BOUROUGHS.
ISAAC CAVSABON in his Comment upon Strabo, and others will have the Greek
(...), and the Latin Burgus to be the same, and the later to be derived from
the former, and so to signify a Tower, a Castle, or City. He adds, That the
Thracians and Macedonians pronounced the word (...) in stead of (...).

Cluverius in his F. 89, 90.
Germania Antiqua, contradicts Causabon, and asserts Burg to be a pure German
word, and that it signifies, Burg a German word.
The Placing or Situation of many Houses together, which was called a Vicus or
Street, or Rows of Houses close to one another. Not that every Vicus, Street,
or Congregation of Houses was a Burg, but such only as were the Head or Chief
of some Country or Nation; as Batenburg was the chief Town of the Batavi, etc.
And further notes, That the word in its most ancient signification denotes an
Enclosure or Hedge, which was otherwise called Tuun or Tuyn, Tuun, Ton, Tu^,
Town, Tune, what they were.
in the same sense as we anciently used Ton, or Tun, and now do Town, and the
Scots Tune: Which by the French are rendered Bourg or Bourgade. To this purpose
Ibidem.
Luitprandus (who lived about the year 940.) speaking of the Burgundians, says,
Ipsi Domorum Congregationem quae Muro non Clauditur Burgum v^cant, They called
a Congregation of Houses which were not enclosed with a Wall, a Burg. That is,
it was a great Town, not Walled about.

Burgs why so called.
Du Fresn in his Glossary agrees with Cluverius, and says, The Latins, French
and Germans at first called Numbers of Houses joined together Burgs, from
whence their great Towns had the same Name, and that afterward many Towers and
Castles were built for the Security of those Towns against the Attempts of
Enemies, which were also called Burgs, which is proved by the Termination of
many German Towns in Burg; and therefore asserts the word to be rather French,
or German, than Greek.

Bergh or Berg what it signifies.
Wendelin in his Salic Glossary of Atuatic Words informs us, That Bergh or Berg
sometimes signified Receptaculum, a place of Receipt, as in Mallo-bergum, a word
derived from Mallus or Mallum, a Convention for the Determining of Law-Cases,
and Berg the House or Place where it was kept. So in the Laws of the Lib. 2.
Tit. 45. c. 27.
Lombards, Volumus utique, ut Domus a Comite, in loco ubi Mallum tenere debeat,
constituatur, ut propter Calorem Solis, and pluviam publica utilitas non
remaneat. We will, That a House be built by the Earl where the Mall or Assizes
ought to be holden, lest the Public Benefit be hindered or put off, by the heat
of the Sun, or Rain. Also in the Lib. 3. Tit. 57.
Capitulars, Vt in loco ubi Mallos publicos habere solent, Tectum tale
Constituatur, Quod in hiberno and Estate Observatum esse possit. We will, That
in the place where Public Malls or Law-Conventions ought to be kept, there may
be such a Roof or Covering provided, as they may be holden in Winter and
Summer; in this sense Hierberg is now an Inn, or House of Common Receipt: which
was at first a place of Receipt for Soldiers, (from Here an Army, and Berg as
before) and set upon the Public Roman ways. Whence the same Author explaining
the word Berg, says, That in the Composition of Malberg. etc. Non significat
Montem aut Tumulum, sed Receptaculum and Tutamen adversus Tempestatum injurias,
etc. It does not signify an Hill, or Hillock, Barrow, Tomb or Grave, but a
place of Receipt and Security against the Injury of Weather. Vnde Burgen and
Bergen est Tegere ac Tueri, etc. from whence Burgen and Bergen signify to
Cover and Defend: And from thence Halsberg in Dutch, is an Iron Gorget or
Collar to Defend the Neck. Heutherg. and Haut or Hauberg an Iron Helmet to
Defend the Head, and Bainberg Iron Boots to Defend the Legs.

Burg signifies a City, Borough or Town Corporate.
Somner in his Saxon Dictionary tells us, That Burg signifies a City, Fort,
Fortress, Tower, Castle, a Bourough, Free-Bourough or Town Corporate, and Cites
Otfrid for its Derivation from the Saxon Beorgan in Tutum recipere, servare, to
preserve and keep to safety.

The Author of the P. 708. 709.
Court-Law of Norwey gives the same sense of the word Burch, Burgh, Borgh.
Burgum, Munimentum, locus Editus, and Munitus, ad salutem hominum. A Berghen in
Tutum recipere, servare.

And whether Burgh was taken for a place of Strength, or a place of Trade, as
it was Guarded with the Liberties and Privileges granted by Princes, then (and
perhaps now) altogether necessary to the advantage of Buying, Selling, and
Trading, by which Tradesmen quietly and without disturbance enjoy the Benefit
of it, Burghs might truly be called Places of Safety, Protection and Privilege.
But enough of the Notation of the word. I shall proceed to show what Cities and
Burghs were, in reference to Trade and other Matters, and of what Value and
Reputation the Inhabitants or Burgesses were in the Saxon Times, and
afterward; when they became Parlement-Burghs.

Norfulc Little Domesday, fol. 118.
Rex. Est Hund. de Flec.
Gernemwa tenuit Rex Edwardus i. e. as well in the time of King Edward, as at
the time of making the Survey.
semper LXX Burgenses, King Edward held Yarmouth, Yarmouth.
there were always 70 Burgesses. And there is in the Survey it self nothing
further said of these Burgesses, what they or their Condition was. But in a
Controversy Append. N. 1.
that happened between the Burgesses of Yarmouth and the Tenants of the Manner
of Luthinglond in Gorlston and little Yarmouth, in the 12th of Henry the Third,
about Lading and Vnlading of Goods, it appears they were Merchants and Traders
at Sea, and upon the Water. That the Kings of England kept this Burg in their
own Hands, and received by their Officers the Profits of the Port, until the
time of King John, who in the 9th year of his Reign Append. N. 2.
Granted the Burg in Fee-Farm to the Burgesses for ever, at the Rent of Fifty
Five Pounds by the Year to be paid by the Provost or Bailiff of Yarmouth, and
Granted they should yearly choose a Bailiff amongst themselves, fit both to
serve him, and themselves.

Domesday ut supra.
Norfulc. Hundred de Tetford Terrae Regis in Tetford, etc. After an Estimate
made of the Lands and Mills belonging to the King and Earl or Sheriff, it
follows.
In Burgo autem erant DCCCCXLIIII Burgenses Tempore Regis Edwardi, de his Rex
omnem consuetudinem habet. Thetford.
De istis hominibus erant XXXVI ita Dominici Regis Edwardi, ut non possent esse
homines Cujuslibet, sine licentia Regis; Alii omnes poterant esse homines
Cujuslibet, sed semper tamen Consuetudo Regis remanebat praeter Herigete. Modo
sunt DCCXX Burgenses and CCXXIIII Mansurae vacuae. De istis Burgensibus XXI
habent VI Carucatas and LX acr. quas tenent de Rege, etc. That is, In the Burg
there were 944 Burgesses in the Time of King Edward, and the King had all the
Custom they paid, or had of them all sorts of Custom, of those Men there were
36 so much under the Power of King Edward, or so much his Vassals, as they
could not be the Vassals of, or have any other Man to be their Patron, without
his License, all the other might put themselves under the Patronage or
Protection of any other Lord. But so as their Custom always remained to the
King, except only the Hereot. Now there are 720 Burgesses, and 224 Houses or
Dwellings void. Of these Burgesses 21 have six Plough-Lands and 60 Acres, which
they held of the King, etc.

Terrae Ibid. f. 304. and f. 311. b.
Roberti Malet in Sudfulc.
Dunwich.
Dunewit Ibid. f. 304. and f. 311. b.
Tenuit Edricus de Lesefelde T. R. E. pro uno Manerio, and modo Robertus Malet
Tunc II Caruc. Terra, modo I, Mare abstulit aliam, and semper I Car. in Dominio
Tunc XII Bordar. Modo II and XXIIII Franci homines de XL acr. Terrae, and omnem
consuetudinem reddunt huic Manerio, and Tunc C and XX Burgenses, and modo
CCXXXVI.

Edric de Lesefelde held Dunewit in the time of King Edward for one Manner, and
now Robert Malet holds it. Then there were two Plough-Lands, now one, the Sea
has washed away the other, and there was always one Plough-Land in Demeasn,
then twelve Bordars, now two, and 24 French, or Freemen, each 40 Acres, who
pay all Custom to this Manner, and then 120 Burgesses, and now 236, etc.

For the Quality of this Burg and the Condition of the Burgesses, see the Grant
and Confirmation of their Liberties, 1 Johannis in the Append. N. 3.
Appendix, N. 3.

Domesday ut supra, f. 118. a.
Norfulc.
Norwich.
Franci de Norwic. In Novo Burgo XXXVI Burgenses and VI Anglici, and ex Annua
consuetudine reddebat unusquisque 5 d. prater Forisfacturas, de hoc toto
habebat Rex Duas parts, and Comes Tertiam. Modo XLI Burgenses Franci in
Dominio Regis and Comitis, and Rogerus Bigot habet L, and Radulfus de Bellofago
XIIII, and Hermerus VIII, and Robertus Arbalistarius V. and Fulcherus homo
Abbatis I and Isac. I and Rad. Viso Lupi I and in Pristrino Comitis III. And
then it follows, Tota Terra Burgensium erat in Dominio Comitis, and Ralph de
Guader that Rebelled against the Conqueror, etc.
Rad. Concessit Regi in Commune ad faciendum Burgum inter se and Regem ut
Testat^r Vicecomes, and omnes Terrae ista tam Militum, quam Burgensium reddunt
Regi suam Consuetudinem.

There were 36 French Burgesses in Norwich, in the New Burg, and six English,
and every one paid an Annual Custom of 5 d. besides their Mulcts or
Forfeitures. The King had two parts of the whole, and the Earl the third part.
Now there are 41 French Burgesses Vassals to the King, and Earl; and Roger
Big^t has 50. and R^lph de Bellefago has 14, and Hermer 8, and Robert a
Manager of Battering Engines 5, Fulcher Vassal to the Abbat 1, and Isaac ^, and
Ralph Wolfs-face 1, and three in the Earls Duke, or Grinding-House. All the
Land of the Burgesses (in the New Burg) was the Demeasa of Earl Ralph, who
Granted it to the King in Com^^^n^ with himself, to This was the Castle, or the
Land about the Castle; which was within its outmost Ditch, or within its more
immediate Jurisdiction.
make a Burg, to be (that is the Profits of it) between him and the King; and
all those Lands which were the Knights or Burgesses paid their Rent to the King.

Norfulc. In the old City, or Burg.
In Domes. ut supra, f. 116.
Norwico de MCCXXXVIII Burgensibus Rex and Comes habent Socam, Sacam, and
consuetudinem, de L Stigandus habuit Socam, Sacam and Commendationem, de XXII
Heroldus habuit Socam, Sacam and Commendationem, and ^nus eorum ita Dominicus
esset ut non potait decedere vel homagium facere sine ejus Licentia.

In Norwich the King, and Earl have the Jurisdiction and Custom of 1238
Burgesses, Stigand had the Jurisdiction and Protection, or Money for the
Protection of 50, and Heroid of 22; whereof one was so much his Vassal, as he
could not depart or do Homage to any other, without his License.

Great Domesd. Book f. 100. a. Col. 1.
Devenescire.
In Civitate Exonia habet Rex CCC Domus XV. Excester.
minus reddentes Consuetudinem, in hac Civitate sunt vastat^ XLVIII Domus post,
quam Rex venit in Angliam. Burgenses Exoniae urbis habent Extra Civitatem
Terram XII Carucat. Qua nullam Consuetudinem reddunt nisi ad ipsam Civitatem.

In the City of Excester the King has 315 Houses more or less paying Rent in
this City, 48 lying wast, since the King came into England. The Burgesses of
the City of Excester have 12 Plough-Lands without the City which pay no Custom,
or Rent, unless to the City it self.

This is all that is to be found in the Description of Excestre, concerning the
Inhabitants or Burgesses of that place.

Terra Ibid. Col. 2.
Regis.
Rex habet Burgum Barnestaple, Barnestaple.
Rex Edwardus habuit in Dominio ibi sunt intra Burgum XL Burgenses and IX sunt
Extra Burgum, inter omnes reddant Regi XL Sol. ad pensum, He was probably their
Protector, or Patron.
Episcopo Constantiensi XX Sol. ad numenum. This is all of this Burg, and its
Burgesses.

The King has the Burg of Barnestaple, King Edward had it in Demeasn, there
are within the Burg 40 Burgesses and time without, amongst them all they pay
the King 40 s. by weight, and the Bishop of Constance 20 s. by Tale.

Rex habet Ibid.
Burgum Lideford, Lideford.
Rex Edwardus Tenuit in Dominio, ibi sunt XXVIII Burgenses intra Burgum and XL.
Exita, inter omnes reddant Regi LX Sol. ad pensum, and habent If Carac. Terrae
Extra Burgum.

The King has the Burg of Lideford, King Edward held it in Demeasn, there are
within the Burg 28 Burgesses, and 41 without, amongst them all, they pay the
King 60 s. by Weight, and they have two Plough-Lands without the Burg, this is
all of this Burg, and its Burgesses.

Domesd. ut supra, f. 56. a Col. 2.
Berroche Scire.
In Burgo de Walingford Walingford.
habuit Rex Edwardus VIII Virgatas Terrae, and in his erant CCLXXVI From the
Saxon Haegh a House, which was commonly Ditched, or Hedged about, whence our
word Hay, or Hey.
Hagae reddentes XI Lib. de Gablo, etc. In the Burg of Walingford King Edward
had eight Virgates of Land, upon which were 276 Hages or Houses, paying eleven
Pound Rent. The rest of the Description of this Burg is a long and rude
Catalogue of all the Hages or Houses belonging to this Town, and their Owners
being either in Barkshire or Oxfordshire sides. With their Rents or Customs,
many whereof belonged to Foreign Manners, not one word of any Burgesses in the
Survey. But by the Charter of King Append. N. 4.
Henry the Second, there were many and large Liberties and Privileges granted
them by the Name of Burgesses of Walingford.

Little Domesd. f. 290. a.
Sudfolc. De Dimid. Hund. de Gepeswit.
Ipswich.
In Burgo erant Tempore Regis Edwardi DXXXVIII Burgenses reddentes
consuetudinem Regi, and habebant XL acr. Terrae. Modo vero sunt CX Burgenses,
qui consuetudinem reddunt, and C pauperes Burgenses, qui non possunt reddere ad
Geltum Regis nisi unum Denarium de suis Capitibus and CCCXXVIII. Vastatae sunt,
etc. In the Burg of Gipswic, or Ipswich, there were in the time of King Edward
538 Burgesses which paid Custom to the King, and had 40 Acres of Land, now
there are only 110 Burgesses which pay Custom, and 100 poor Burgesses, which
can only pay one Penny a Head, and 328 Mansions lie waste; nothing more of this
Town as a Burg, or of its Burgesses.

Sudfulc. Terra Domesd. ut supra, f. 319. b.
Roberti Malet. Hund. de Hertesmera.
Eye.
Ejam Tenuit Edricus XII Car. Terrae T. R. E. Modo Tenet R. in Dominio, etc. Et
modo [1] mercatum, and [1] Parcus, and in Mercato Manent XXV Burgenses. Huic
Manerio pertinent XLVIII socmani CXXI acr. Terrae. Ex his socmannis sunt XXXVII
in Dominio, etc.

The Land of Robert Malet, in the Hundred of Hartesmer.

Edric held Eye, there were 12 Plough-Lands in the time of King Edward, now
Robert holds it in Demeasn, etc. And now there is a Market, and a Pound for
Cattle, or rather a Park for Deer. And to the Market belong 25 Burgesses. To
this Manner there belonged 48 Socmen, who had 121 Acres of Land, of these Socmen
there were 37 in Demeasn, or the Lords Vassals. This is all concerning the
Burgesses of this Town.

Great Domesd. Book, f. 143. Col. 1.
Bochingham Scire.
Bochingham Buckingham.
Great Domesd. Book, f. 143. Col. 1.
cum Bortone pro una Hida se defendebat T: R. E. and modo similiter facit.
Terra est VIII Caruc. in Dominio sunt II and Villani habent III Car. and Dimid.
and adhuc Due and Dimid. possunt fieri. Ibi sunt XXVII Burgenses and XI Bordar.
and II Servi, Ibi. 1. Molin. de XIIII Sol. Pratum VIII Car. pastura ad Pecuniam
Ville. In totis valentiis T. R. E. reddebat X Lib. ad Numerum, Modo reddit XVI
Lib. de albo argento.

Ecclesiam hujus Burgi Tenet Remigius Episcopus and Terram IIII Caruc. Quae ad
eam pertinet ibi sunt IIII Carucae and III Villani and III Bordar. and X Cotar.
Et I Molin. X Solidor. Pratum II Car. Nemus ad sepes, valet and valuit VI Lib.
T. R. E. VII Lib. hanc Ecclesiam Tenuit Willielmus Episcopus de Rege E.

In hoc Burgo Episcopus Constantiensis habet III Burgenses quos tenuit Wluvard
filius Eddeve hi reddunt VI Sol. and VI Denar. per annum and Q. Whether this
not Geltum Regis; which is frequently said to be paid by Burgesses in General.
Regi reddunt XI Denar.

Hugo Comes habet I Burgensem qui fuit homo Burcardi de Senelay hic reddit XXVI
Denar. per annum, and Regi V Denar.

Robertus de Olgi habet I Burgensem qui fuit homo Azor f. Toti, hic reddit XVI
Denar. per annum, and Regi V Denar.

Rogerius de Juri habet IIII Burgenses qui fuerunt homines ejusdem Azor hi
reddunt VII Sol. and VI Denar. and Regi XIII Denar.

Hugo de Bolebec habet IIII Burgenses qui. fuerunt homines Alrici. Hi reddunt
XXVIII Denar. and Regi XII Denar.

Manno Brito habet IIII Burgenses qui fuerunt homines Eddeve femine Syre^ hi
reddunt XXIX Denar. Regi nil Debent.

Hascojus Musart Musart.
habet I Burgensem qui fuit homo Azor. f. Toti, hic reddit XVI Denar. and Regi
II Denar.

Ernulfus de Hesding habet I Burgensem qui fuit Wilaf hic reddit per annum II
Sol. and Regi III Denar.

Willielmus de Castellon de Feudo Episcopi Baiocensis habet II Burgenses, qui
fuerunt homines Leuvini Comitis hi reddunt XVI Denar. and Regi modo Nichil. Sed
T. R. E. reddebat III Denar.

De Feudo Alberici Comitis I Burgens reddit Regi II Denar.

Lenumus de Neuucham habet V Burgenses and T. R. E. habuit, Hi reddunt ei IIII
Sol. per annum and Regi XII Denar.

Bochingham with Borton was Taxed for one Hide in the Time of King Edward, and
now likewise, the Arable is eight Plough-Lands. There are two in Demeasn, and
the Villans have three Plough-Lands and half, and yet there may be two more and
half. There are 27 Burgesses, and eleven Bordars, and two Servants, there is
one Mill of 14 s. Rent, Meadow sufficient for the eight Plough-Lands. Pasture
for the Cattle of the Town, for all Dues it paid in the Time of King Edward Ten
Pounds by Tale, now it pays Sixteen Pounds of White Money.

Bishop A Norman and Bishop of Lincoln.
Remigius holds the Church of this Burg, and four Plough-Lands which belong to
it. There are four Ploughs, and three Villans, and three Bordars, and ten
Cotars and one Mill of 10 s. Rent. Meadow sufficient for two Ploughs, and Wood
sufficient for Hedges, it is and was worth Six Pounds by the Year, in the Time
of King Edward it was worth Seven Pounds, Bishop Wluui held this Church of King
Edward.

In this Burg the Bishop of In Normandy. The Burgesses of Buckingham paid a
yearly Rent to their Patrons, or Protectors.
Constance has three Burgesses, which Wlward the Son of Eddeve held; these pay
Six Shillings and Six Pence to him by the Year, and to the King Eleven Pence.

Earl Hugh has one Burgess who was the Comendatus, or under Protection of
Burcard of Senelay, he paid Twenty Six Pence by the Year, and to the King Five
Pence.

Robert D'oyly has one Burgess who was the Man, or under the Protection of
Azor the Son of Tot, he paid Sixteen Pence, and to the King Five Pence.

Roger de Juri has four Burgesses which were under the Patronage of the same
Azor, these paid Seven Shillings and Six Pence, and to the King Thirteen Pence.

Hugh de Bolebec has four Burgesses who were the Men, or under the Patronage
of Alric, these paid Twenty eight Pence, and to the King Twelve Pence.

Manno a Britain has four Burgesses, which were the Men, or under the
Protection of Eddeve the Wife of Syred, these pay Twenty nine Pence, they owe
nothing to the King.

Hascoy Musart has one Burgess who was under the Protection of Azor Son of
Tot. He paid Sixteen Pence, and to the King Two Pence.

Ernulf of Hesding has one Burgess who was Wilaf's, he pays Two Shillings, and
to the King Three Pence.

William de Castellon Feudal Tenent to the Bishop of In Normandy.
Bajeux has two Burgesses, who were under the Protection, or the Men of Earl
Leuuin, these paid Sixteen Pence, and nothing now to the King, but in the Time
of King Edward they paid Three Pence.

One Burgess was of the Fee of Earl Alberic, and paid to the King Two Pence.

Leuuin of Nenueham has Five Burgesses, and had them in the Time of King
Edward. These pay to him 4 s. by the year, and to the King 12 Pence.

Here are all the 27 Burgesses of this Burg Obnoxious to, and under the
Protection of Foreign Lords, and Patrons.

Northantscire.
Tempore Domesd. ut supra, f. 219. a. Col. 1.
Regis Edwardi fuere in Northantone Northampton.
in Dominio Regis LX Burgenses habentes Totidem Mansiones, ex his sunt modo XIV
Vaste. Residue sunt XLVI. praeter hos sunt Modo in Novo Burgo XL Burgenses in
Dominio Regis Willielmi.

In the Time of King Edward there were in Northamton 60 Demeasn-Burgesses of
the King, or 60 Burgesses Vassals to him; that had so many Mansions, of which
14 are now waste. The Residue are 46. Besides these, there are now in the The
New Burg was either the Castle, or situate within the Precinct of it.
New Burg 40 Demeasn-Burgesses of King William. This is all I find either
concerning this as a Burg, or its Burgesses; only a little further it is said,
Burgenses de Hantone reddunt Vicecomiti per Annum XXX Lib. and X Sol. hoc
pertinet ad firmam ipsius. The Burgesses of Hamton pay to the Sheriff 30 Lib.
and 10 s. by the year, and it belongs to his Farm, (that is, his Farm of the
whole Shire.)

Hertfordscire.
Burgum Domesd. ut supra, f. 132. a. Col. 1.
Hertford, Hertford.
pro X hidis se Defendebat T. R. E. and modo non facit, ibi erant CXLVI
Burgenses in Soca Regis Edwardi.

Alios XVIII Burgenses habet Rex Willielmus, qui fuere homines Comitis Heraldi,
and Comitis Leuuini, omnes Consuetudines reddunt.

The Burg of Hertford in the time of King Edward was Taxed as much as Ten
Hides, now not so much: There were 146 Burgesses under the Liberty or Privilege
of King Edward.

King William has 18 others, that were the Men, or under the Protection of
Earl Herald, and Earl Leuuin. They paid all Customs.

Nothing more relating to Burg or Burgesses in this place.

Eurnicscire.
In Eboraco Domesd. ut supra, f. 298. a. Col. 1. York.
Civitate Tempore Regis Edwardi praeter Scyram Archiepiscopi fuere VI Scyrae,
una ex his est Vastata in Castellis. In Quinque Scyris fuere Mill and
Quadringente and Octodecim Mansiones Such as were let for an annual Rent, and
the Inhabitants bound to reside in them.
hospitate, etc.

De supradictis omnibus Mansionibus sunt modo hospitate in manu Regis reddentes
Consuetudinem quadringente IX Minus inter Magnas and Parvas. Et CCCC Mansiones
non Hospitate, que reddunt Melior I Denar. and alie Minus, and Quingente and XL
Mansiones ita vacue quod nil omnino reddunt. Et CXLV Mansiones tenent
Francigene.

In York City in the Time of King Edward, besides the Archbishop's Ward or
Division, there were six Wards or Divisions, one of these was destroyed when
the Castles were built; in five there were 1418 Mansions inhabited, etc.

Of all these Mansions there are in the King's Possession inhabited, and paying
Custom 409 great and small, and 400 Mansions not Non hospitatae; i. e. they had
no constant Inhabitants tied to Residence, but such as went and came as they
pleased.
inhabited, the best of which pays one Penny, and others less; and 540 Mansions
so uninhabited as they yield nothing at all. The French hold 145. The rest of
the Description of this City is taken up, in setting down many particular
Proprietors of Mansions, and some particular Customs and Privileges belonging
to some of them. No mention of Burgesses, but as it were after the following
manner: Sanctus Cutbertus habet I Domum quam semper habuit, ut plures dicunt,
quietam ab omni Consuetudine. Sed Burgenses dicunt non eam fuisse quietam T. R.
E. nisi sicut una Burgensium, nisi tantum quod propter eam habebat Theloneum
suum, etc. Saint Cuthert, or the Church of Duresm, has one House which it
always had, as many say, free from all Custom; but the Burgesses say it was not
free in the Time of King Edward, otherwise than one of the Burgesses Houses was
free, except by reason thereof he paid no For things bought and sold in the
Market; especially Victuals.
Toll.

Chenth.
In Civitate Domesd. ut supra, f. 2. a. Col. 1. Canturbury.
Cantuaria habuit Rex Edwardus L and I Burgenses reddentes Gablum, and alios CC
and XII super quos habebat Socam and Sacam, etc. Modo Burgenses Gablum
reddentes sunt XIX. de aliis qui fuerant XXXII obierunt, and adhuc sunt CC and
XII Burgenses super quos habet Rex Sacam and Money paid for their Liberty and
Privilege.
Socam, etc.

Burgenses habuere XLV Mansuras extra Civitatem, de quibus ipsi habebant Gablum
and Probably Forfeitures and Toll in this place.
Consuetudinem, Rex autem Sacam and Socam, ipsi quoque Burgenses habebant de
Rege XXXIII Acr. prati in Gildam suam, has Domus and hanc Terram Tenet
Ranulphus de Columbels, habet etiam quater XX Acras Terrae super haec. Quas
Tenebant Burgenses in Alodia de Rege, de his omnibus revocat isdem Rannulfus ad
Protectorem Episcopum Bajocensem.

In the City of Canturbury King Edward had Fifty one Burgesses paying Rent, and
other 212 under his Privilege and Jurisdiction, etc. Now the Burgesses paying
Rent are 19, the others which were 32 are dead, and yet there are 212 under the
King's Privilege and Jurisdiction.

The Burgesses had Forty Five Houses without the City, of which they had the
Rent and Custom, but the King had the Jurisdiction and Soke. The Burgesses also
had of the King Thirty Three Acres of Meadow which was toward the maintenance
of their Guild, or belonging to their Society, besides these, which the
Burgesses held freely of the King. For all these the same Ranulf voucheth the
Bishop of Baieux for his He held them of him, and he was his Warrant for the
Possession.
Protector. Nothing more here concerning the Burgesses.

Chenth. Terra Archiepiscopi Cantuariensis.
Archiepiscopus Domesd. ut supra, f. 4. a Col. 1.
Tenet Aldingtone in Dominio, etc.

In Romeney Domesd. ut supra, f. 4. a Col. 1.
sunt quater XX and V Burgenses qui Pertinentes, servi qui ad aliquem
pertinent, subditi, tenentes, etc. du Fresn, in verbo.
pertinent ad Aldintone Manner. Archiepiscopi, and valuerunt and modo valent
Domino VI Lib.

The Archbishop holds Aldingtone in Demeasn, etc.

In Romeney Romeney.
there are Eighty Five Burgesses, which belong to Aldinton the Manner of the
Archbishop, and they were worth, and now are worth to the Lord Six Pounds,
(that is, so much by the Year.)

Domesd. ut supra, f. 203. a Col. 1.
Huntedune Scire.
In Burgo Huntedone sunt IIII Ferlingus, or, Quarentena Terrae tunc continebat
32 acras Terrae. Huntingdon.
Ferlingi. In duobus Ferlingis T. R. E. fuerunt and sunt modo CXVI Burgenses
Consuetudines omnes and Geldum Regis reddentes, and sub eis sunt C Bordarii qui
adjuvant eos ad persolutionem Geldi. De his Burgensibus habuit Sanctus
Benedictus de Ramesyg. X cum Saca and Soca, and omni Consuetudine: Tantummodo
Geldabant T. R. E. Hos abstulit Eustachius per vim de Abbatia, and sunt modo
cum ceteris in Manu Regis.

Vlf Fenisc habebat XVIII Burgenses, modo habet Gislebertus de Gand cum Saca
and Soca praeter Geldum Regis.

In the Burg of Huntington there were Four Furlongs. In two of them there are
now and were in the Time of King Edward 116 Burgesses, paying all Customs, and
the Kings Tax, and under them are 100 Bordars which help them to pay the Tax.
Of these Burgesses the Abbey of Ramesy had Ten with Jurisdiction, and
Soke-Money, and all Custom. They were only Taxed in the time of King Edward.
These Eustachius (the Earl) took by force from the Abbey, and they are now with
the rest in the Kings Hand.

Vlf Fenisc had Eighteen Burgesses, now Gilbert de Gand has them, with
Jurisdiction and Protection-Money, except the Kings Tax.

The further Description of these Two Furlongs is in noting, who had been
Proprietors, and what Houses had been destroyed for a place to build the Castle
in.

In aliis duobus Ibidem.
Ferlingis fuere and sunt CXL Burgenses ad omnes Consuetudines and ad Geldum
Regis, and isti habebant quater XX Hagas pro quibus dabant and dant omnes
Consuetudines, de his habebat Sanctus Benedictus de Ramesy XXII. T.R.E. Duo ex
his fuere quieti ab omnibus Consuetudinibus, and XXX reddidere quisque X Denar.
per Annum.

In the other two Ferlings there were, and are 140 Burgesses which pay all
Customs, and the Kings Tax, and they had Eighty Hages or Houses, for which they
did give, and do give all Customs, of which the Abbey of Ramsey had Twenty two
in the Time of King Edward; Two of these were free from all Customs, and Twenty
paid every one Ten pence by the Year, the Residue of the Survey of these two
Furlongs is as the other, nothing more of the Burgesses.

Stadford Scire.
In Burgo de Domesd. f. 246. a Col. 1.
Stadford habet Rex in suo Dominio XVIII Burgenses, the King has in Demeasn
Eighteen Burgesses in the Burg of Stafford, Stafford.
nothing further particularly about the Burg or Burgesses.

Terra Henrici de Ferrariis, vel Ferieres.
Henricus de Ibid. f. 248. b Col. 1. Tutberie Castle.
Ferreres habet Castellum de Toteberie, in Burgo circa Castellum sunt XLII
homines de Mercato suo tantum viventes, and reddunt cum foro IIII Lib. and X.
Sol.

Henry de Ferrers has the Castle of Tutbury, in the Burg about the Castle are
XLII i. e. Burgesses.
Men, which only Live upon his Market, and they with the Market yield Four
Pounds and Ten Shillings.

Sumersete.
Rex tenet Domesd. f. 87. a Col. 2. Bath.
Bade T. R. E. Geldabat pro XX Hid. Quando Scira Geldabat. Ibi habet Rex LXIIII
Burgenses reddentes IIII Lib. and quater Viginti and X Burgenses aliorum
hominum reddunt ibi LX Solid.

The King holds Bath, in the Time of King Edward it was Taxed at the rate of
Twenty Hides, when the Shire was Taxed. There the King has Sixty four
Burgesses, paying him four Pound by the Year, and there are Ninety under the
Protection of other Men which pay Sixty Shillings yearly, nothing more of this
Town or its Burgesses.

In Ibib. b Col. 1. Taunton.
Tanton there is only mention of Sixty Four Burgesses which paid Thirty Two
Shillings, but there are many Privileges noted to belong to that Town then.

Hantescire.
In Burgo de Domesd. f. 52. a Col. 1. Southampton.
Hantune habet Rex in Dominio quater XX homines IIII minus, qui reddunt VII
Lib. de Gablo Terrae, and tot idem reddiderunt T. R. E. In the Burg of Hamton
the King has in Demeasn, or his immediate subjection, Eighty Four Men or
Tenants at least, which pay Seven Pound Rent for their Land, and so much they
paid in the time of King Edward, not one word of any Burgesses in the Survey of
this Town, unless these Eighty four Men were such, as there can be no doubt but
they were.

Sudsexe. Terra Willielmi de Waren.
Burgum de Ibid. f. 26. a Col. 1.
Jews T. R. E. reddebat VI Lib. and IIII Solid. and III obolos de Gablo and de
Theloneo ibi Rex Edwardus habebat CXXVII Burgenses in Dominio. The Burg of
Jews Jews.
in the Time of King Edward did yield 6 l. 4 s. 1 d. ob. for Rent and Toll.
There King Edward had 127 Burgesses in Demeasn, or in immediate Subjection to
him, or that were his Vassals.

Sudsex. Terra Comitis Meritoniensis.
In Burgo f. 20. b Col. 1. Pevensey.
Pevensel T. R. E. fuere XXIIII Burgenses in Dominio Regis and reddebant de
Gablo XIIII Sol. and VI Denar. de Theloneo XX Sol. De portu XXV Sol. De pastura
VII Sol. and III Denar.

Episcopus de Cicestre habebat V Burgenses. Edmer Presbyter XV, Ormer Presbyter
V, Doda Presbyter III.

Quando Comes de Moritonio recepit, nisi XXVII Burgenses, modo habet ipse in
Dominio LX Burgenses reddentes XXXIX Sol. de Gablo. Theloneum IIII Lib. Moneta
XX Sol.

Monachi de Moritonio VIII Burgenses de LXVI Denar. Gislebertus Vicecomes I
Burgensem de XX Denar. Willielmus de Cahainges II Burgenses de II Sol.
Ausfridus IIII de II Sol. Giroldus II de VI Sol. And so others that had
Burgesses in this Burg to the Number of Forty one Burgesses under several
Patrons.

In the Burg of Pevensey in the Time of King Edward there were Twenty four
Burgesses in Demeasn of, or Vassals to the King, who paid Fourteen Shillings
and Six pence Rent. Tol. Twenty Shillings, Port Custom, or for use of the Port
Twenty five Shillings, for Pasture Seven Shillings and Three pence.

The Bishop of Chichester had Five Burgesses, Edmer a Priest Fifteen, Ormer a
Priest Five, Doda a Priest Three.

When the Earl of Moreton received this Burg, he had but Twenty seven
Burgesses, now he has in Demeasn Sixty Burgesses, paying Thirty nine Shillings
Rent, Tol. Four Pound, Money Twenty Shillings.

The Monks of In Normandy.
Moreton had Eight Burgesses which paid them Sixty six pence, Gilbert the
Sherif one Burgess which paid Twenty pence. William de Cahainges Two Burgesses
that paid him Two Shillings. Ausfrid Four that paid Two Shillings. Girold Two
that paid Six Shillings, etc. These were Annual Payments.

In the City of Domesd. f. 23. a Col. 1.
Chichester, Chichester.
no mention of any Burgesses, only of Hages, Houses and Dwellings, and that it
paid Ten Pound yearly to the King, and Five Pound to the Earl in King Edwards
time. That it was then worth but Twenty five Pound, yet it paid Thirty five
Pound.

Castrum Ibidem.
Harundel inter Burgum and Portum Aquae, and Consuetudinem Navium reddit XII
Lib. and tamen valent XIII.

The Burg and Port, of the Castle of Arundel, Arundel.
with the Custom of Ships, yielded Twelve Pounds, and were worth Thirteen
Pounds.

Morinus habet ibi Consuetudinem de II Burgensibus XII Denar. Ernaldus I
Burgensem de XII Denar. Sanctus Martinus I Burgensem de XII Denar.

Morin had there the Custom of Two Burgesses Twelve pence. Ernald of One
Burgess Twelve pence, the Church of St Martin one Burgess Twelve pence.

Warwic Scire.
In Burgo de Domesd. f. 238. a Col. 1.
Warwic Warwick.
habet Rex in Dominio suo CXIII Domus, and Barons Regis habent CXII de quibus
omnibus Rex habet Geltum suum.

In the Burg of Warwic the King has in his Demeasn 113 Houses, and the Kings
Barons have 112, of all which the King has his Tax. And then the Survey notes
all the Bishops, Abbats, Earls and Barons, that were possessed of those Houses.
Nothing further of the Burgesses and Burg to any purpose, except these Words.
In ipso Burgo XIX Burgenses qui habent XIX Mansuras cum Saca and Soca and
omnibus Consuetudinibus and ita habebant T. R. E. In this Burg there are
Nineteen Burgesses who had Nineteen Houses, with Jurisdiction, Protection-Money
and all Customs, or Forfeitures incurred in them, and so it was in King
Edward's time.

Terra Regis.
Rex tenet Ibid. Col. 1. Coleshelle and Tameworth.
Coleshelle, etc. Et in Tameworde X Burgenses huic Manerio pertinentes. The
King holds Coleshull and Ten Burgesses in Tamworth belonging to this Manner.
That is, paid their Customs to the Lords of it.

Wiltescire. Terra Regis.
Rex Ibid. f. 64. b. versus finem.
habet de tertio Denario de Chrichelade V Lib.

The King has Five Pounds of the Third Penny of Cricklade.

Rex Ibid. fol. 65. a Col. 1. C 7. fol. 15.
Tenet Albeborn, Ghida tenuit T. R. E. Geldabat pro XL Hidis, etc. Huic manerio
pertinebant VI Burgenses de Chrichelade reddentes LXIIII Denarios.

The King holds Albeborn, Ghida held it in the Time of King Edward, to this
Manner there were Six Burgesses of Chrichelade Servants, or base Tenants, who
paid yearly Sixty four pence.

Episcopus Ibid. f. 66. a Col. 1.
Sarisberiensis tenet Ramesberie, etc. In Chrichelade huic Manerio pertinentes
V Burgenses, reddunt V Sol.

The Bishop of Salisberie holds Ramesberie, etc. In Chrichelade there are Five
Burgesses, Servants, or Base Tenants to this Manner, who paid Five Shillings
yearly.

Ecclesia Ibid. f. 66. b Col. 1.
Glastinberiensis tenet Badberie, etc. In Chrichelade I Burgensis reddit V
Denarios.

The Church of Glastonbury holds Badberie, etc. In Chrichelade, one Burgess
paying Five pence by the Year.

Ecclesia Ibid. f. 67. a.
Sancti Petri Westmonasteriensis tenet Ecclesiam de Chrichelade, and habet ibi
plures Burgenses, and Tertium Denarium ejusdem Villae. Totum simul Reddit IX
Lib. Quod habet Sanctus Petrus Westmonasteriensis.

The Church of St Peter at Westminster, holds the Church of Chrichelade, and
has there many Burgesses, and the Third Penny of the same Town; all together
yield to that Church, Nine Pounds.

Ecclesia Ibid. f. 67. b Col. 2.
Sceptheriensis tenet Ledington, etc. In Chrichelade I Burgensis reddit VI
Denarios.

The Church of Shaftsbury holds Ledington, etc. In Chrichelade One Burgess
(that is, One Burgess belonging to that Manner) who paid Six Pence by the Year.

In Wallia.
In ipso Manerio Ibid. f. 269. a Col. 2. Roelent.
Roelend est factum noviter Castellum similiter Roelent appellatum, ibi est
Novum Burgum and in eo XVIII Burgenses inter Comitem and Robertum.

In ipso Anno hujus Descriptionis datum est ad firmam hujus Burgi Theloneum pro
III Solid.

In the Manner of Roelent there was lately erected a Castle called also Roelent:
There is a New Burg, and in it Eighteen Burgesses between the Earl, (that is,
Hugh Earl of Cheshire,) and Robert (that is, Robert de Roelent.

In the year of this That is, in the year when the Description of Cheshire and
this Country was made.
Description, the Toll of this Burg was let to Farm for Three Shillings.

By these Instances (which are all can be found in both Domesday Books, that do
give any light to the understanding what Burgs and Burgesses were in the Saxon
times, and in the Reign of Edward the Confessor, as likewise afterward in the
Reign of William the Conqueror) we find the Burgesses or Tradesmen in great
Towns, Tradesmen in the Saxon times, and in the time of the Conqueror had their
Patrons, under whose Protection they Traded.
had in those times their Patrons under whose Protection they Traded, and paid
an acknowledgement therefore; or else were in a more Servile Condition, as
being in Dominio Regis vel aliorum, altogether under the Power of the King, or
other Lords, and it seems to me that then they Traded not, as being in any
Merchant-Gild, Society and Community, but merely under the Liberty and
Protection given them by their Lords and Patrons, who probably might have Power
from the King to License such a number in this or that Port, or Trading Town.

And any Man would think the Charter of the Conqueror, obtained by William
Bishop of London, looked this way, and that it was a mere Instrument of
Protection rather than a Charter. The Saxon Words are these, as they are found
in Vol. 3. f. 15. n. 20.
Holinshead.

See these words in more plain Saxon, pat. 2. Ed. 4. part. 5. m. 23. per
inspeximus.
Williem King grets Williem Bisceop and Godfred Port-Refan, and ealle ya
Burghwarn binnen London Frencise and Englise Frendlice, and ic Kiden eoy, yeet
ic will git ben ealra weera Lagay-Weord, ye get Weeran on Eadwerds Daege
Kings. And ic Will yeet aelc Child by his Fader yrfnume after his Fader Daege.
And ic nelle ge Wollian yeet adnig Man eoy aenis Wrang beode. God eoy heald.
That is,

William the King Greets William the Bishop, and Godfrey the Port-Reve, from
Port an Haven or Harbor, and Reve, an Officer, Minister, or Bailiff, that does
business for other Men, and the Port-Reve was the Kings Bailiff, that looked
after his Customs and Tolls in the Port of London, before they were let to
Fee-Farm. The Interpretation of the Conquerors Charter, or protection to the
City of London.
Port-Reve, and all the Burgesses, or rather Inhabitants of the Burg, within
London French and English Friendly. And I declare to you, that I will that you
be all Law-Worthy as ye were in King Edward's Days, and I will that each Child
be his Fathers Heir, after his Fathers Days. And I will not that any Man
command any Wrong to be done to you. God you hold, or Keep.

There are two things remarkable in this Charter, (as it is called.) First, the
Burgesses were declared, all to be Law-Worthy. Secondly, That their Children
should be their Heirs. Now there were two ways of being Law-Worthy, or having
the benefit of the Law. By the State and Condition of Men's Persons, so almost
all Freemen had the free benefit of the Law, but Men of Servile Condition had
not, especially such as were in Dominio, in Demeasn, for they received Justice
from their Lords, were Judged by them in most Cases, and had not the true
benefit of the Law; so neither as to the second observable in this Charter,
could their Children be their Heirs, for they held their Lands and Goods at the
Will of the Lord, and were not sure to enjoy them longer than they pleased him.
The Second way of being Law-Worthy was, when Men had not committed any Crimes,
or done any thing for which they forfeited the Law and deserved to be
Outlawed, then they were said to be Legales homines, recti in Curia, or
Law-Worthy, but not so properly as in the first Sense of the Word.

From hence we may make a very probable Conjecture at the true meaning of this
Protection or Charter. It is not to be doubted, but that the Burgesses of
London had obtained of the Saxon Kings several Liberties and Immunities,
amongst which this was one, to be so far Free, as not to be in Dominio, or so
Obnoxious to any Lord, but that by reason of their State and Condition, they
might be Law-Worthy, that is, have the free benefit of the Law, and had
likewise further obtained, (if it was not then a consequent of their Personal
State and Condition) that their Children should be Heirs of their Lands and
Goods, and in both these were Free from the Injuries, and unreasonable Demands,
and Power of any Severe Lord; So that all the application made by their He had
also been Bishop of London Sixteen years, in King Edwards time.
Bishop William, and not unlikely by Godfrey the Port-Reve, to the Conqueror
for them, was, that their State and Condition might be the same it was in King
Edward's Days, that their Children might be their Heirs, and that they might in
both be Protected from the Injury and Violence of Imperious Lords, which by the
Prevalency of their Bishop were granted; considering therefore that by the
foregoing Instances it is clear, that many or most Burgesses of other Burghs,
were in Dominio either of the King, or some other Lords or Patrons, in the time
of King Edward, and that the Londoners might fear the Conqueror would break in
upon their Privileges, and reduce them to the same Condition; this Explication
seems to discover the Genuine meaning, and very Import of this Protection, or,
as it is commonly called, Charter.

How long in most Burghs, A Conjecture when the Free condition of Burghs began.
very many Burgesses remained in this Servile State, or others in a Middle or
Neutral State of between Servitude and Freedom; I cannot say certainly, but do
suppose, until our Ancient Norman Kings granted by their Charters, there should
be Merchant or Trading-Gilds, Communities and Societies, in Burghs, and gave
them See Append. N. 1. a and b. and N. 2. concerning great Yarmouth.
Free Liberty of Trade, without paying Toll or Custom any where, other than
their Fee-Farm-Rent in Lieu of them, where that was Reserved; or to raise and
Multiply such Payments by Encouragement of Trade, which by the Grants of such
Liberties did mightily Increase, where the Kings Bailiffs collected them.

In France and Countries adjoining, the Chief and Ruling Inhabitants of Cities,
Burghs and Towns, that enjoyed these Privileges were called Communities, which
in Latin were variously expressed, by the Words Du Fresn, in verbo. The
Communities of Cities and Burghs, here and in Foreign parts erected or
confirmed by Kings.
Commune, Communia, Communio, Communitas: Du Fresn in his Glossary and
Explication of these Words, says, The Kings of France erected these Communities
to cheque the Insolences of their great Vassals, and to protect them from
their overgrown Dominion and Extravagant Power over them, that they reputed
such Cities and Towns their own, where there were such Communities; and truly,
for that the Inhabitants were in a manner Freed from the Dominion of their
Lords thereby, and became immediately Subject to their Kings, who by reason of
such Establishments had Power to call them forth into their Armies, many such
Communities were erected in France by Dukes, Earls and other great Vassals of
that King, which were confirmed by his Assent, and Supreme Right, and where he
pleased did institute, and take away such Communities without consulting their
Lords, if the Inhabitants offended. The same Author says, that inter Communiae
Jura praecipua recensentur, The Rights of, or what makes a Community of a City,
or Burg.
Scabinatus, Collegium, Majoratus, Sigillum, Campana, Berfredus and Iurisduio.
That is, the chief things which constituted a Community, were, a Major,
Eschevins or Aldermen, a Body, Society, Fraternity or Common Counsel, out of
which they were to be chosen, a Bell-Fry and B^ll, to call them together to
public Meetings, a Common Seal and Jurisdiction. He gives an account of Ninety
seven in France, and parts adjoining, which were Erected by Charters of the
Ancient Kings thereof, and their great Vassals. The most Ancient, I find
amongst them, Communities, when they first began to he frequent in France, etc.
is the Charter granted by Lewis the Sixth called the Gross, to the Town of St.
Riquier in Pontieu, A. D. 1126. He began his Reign, July 26. A. D. 1108, and
was Contemporary to our Henry the First, they were much increased and
multiplied by his Successor Lewis the Seventh, who was Contemporary to our King
Stephen, and Henry the Second.

The Burgh-Laws when first published in Scotland.
About the same time the Laws and Customs of the Burghs of Scotland were
published by David the first King of that Nation, who began his Reign A. D.
1124. and was Contemporary to our Henry the First and King Stephen.

It wants not Probability, though it manifestly appears not, that William
Rufus, Henry the First and King Stephen, being all Usurpers, granted large
Immunities to Burghs; to secure them to their Party; and by the time that
Glanvil wrote, which was in the Reign of Henry the Second, Burghs had so great
Privileges, as that if a Bondman or Servant Glanvil. lib. c.
remained in a Burgh as a Burgess or Member of it, a Year and Day, he was by
that very Residence made Free, and so it was in Scotland, he was always free
and enjoyed the Liberty of the Burgh, if he were able to buy a Burgage, and his
Lord claimed him not within a Year and a Day. Si Leg. Burg. Scot. c. 17.
homo Comitis vel Baronis seu cujuscunque Servus fuerit, venerit in Burgo; Et
emerit sibi Burgagium, and manserit in eodem Burgagio per unum Annum and unum
Diem, sine Calumnia Domini sui vel ejus Rallivi: Semper erit Liber, and
Liberate Burgi gaudebit sicut Burgensis, nisi sit servus Domini Regis. And in
or before the Sixth year of this King, he granted, by Charter before cited, to
the Burgesses of Wallingford, many large Privileges for the Service they did
him against King Stephen, in recovering his Hereditary Right. Theobald,
Archbishop of Canturbury was a Witness to this Charter, who died A. D. 1160. in
the Sixth of Henry the Second; Winchester also and Oxford had Charters in the
Reign of Henry the Second, as appears by the Append. n. 5.
Charter of Portsmouth in the Fifth of Richard the First, and that of Ibid. n.
6.
Andever in the Sixth of King John.

Why these were called Free-Burghs, and why the Tradesmen in them were called
Free Burgesses, the Charters themselves will inform us, in the Charter of
Append. n. 3.
Dunwich, Johannis 29 Junii. Sciatis, nos concessisse quod Burgum de Dunewiz.
Sit Liberum Burgum. So in the Charter of Bridgwater, granted to William Briwer.
Append. n. 7 Why Burghs and Burgesses were called Free-Burghs and
Free-Burgesses.
Quod Bruge Walteri, 2 Johannis 26 Junii, sit Liberum Burgum, and quod ibi sit
Liberum Mercatum, and that the Burgesses of the same Burg should be Free
Burgesses and quiet of Toll, Passage, Pontage, Lastage and Stallage, and should
have all Liberties and Free Customs, Quittances, which belonged to the Crown,
through all his Territories, and all Ports, except the City of London. Likewise
in the Charter of Helleston in Cornwall, 2 Johan. Vt sit Append. n. 8.
Burgus noster de Helleston Liber Burgus, etc. After the same manner King John
granted to the Burgesses of the Town of Append. n. 2.
Yarmouth in Norff. Quod Burgenses nostri de Gernemua habeant Burgum de
Gernemua ad feodi Firmam in perpetuum; and quod Burgus ille sit Liber Burgus in
perpetuum. In the Fifth of the same King, Noveritis ut Villa de Lenna sit
Append. n. 9.
Liber Burgus in perpetuum. And in the Charter to Hertlepoole in the Bishopric
of Durham Append. n. 10.
Sciatis nos concessisse and hac praesenti Charta nostra confirmasse hominibus
de Hertlepoole, quod sint liberi Burgenses. Which Liberty granted to the Burgs
and Burgesses (for all Inhabitants of Burgs were not such) was a Freedom to Buy
and Sell freely without disturbance, a Liberty from paying Toll, What the
Freedom of Burgs and Burgesses was, and in what it consisted.
Pontage, Passage-Money, Lestage, Stallage, etc. In the Mercates and Fairs in
these Burgs, and in coming to, and going from them, and for these things, the
Burgs were called free Burgs, and the Burgesses Free Burgesses, and for nothing
else, as is most evident from the Charters themselves.

From the Burg and other Laws of Scotland, What the Freedom of Burgs and
Burgesses was, by the Burg-Laws of Scotland.
the same thing is evinced; in the Burg-Laws, Tit. de Vigiliis, C. 86, by which
every House was bound to find one to Watch and Knock at their Doors with a
Staff. Exceptis Viduis, quae tamen si Communicaverint cum Vicinis suis, in
Emendo and Vendendo, Vigilare debent, and alia onera supportare; except Widows,
who notwithstanding, if they Bought and Sold as their Neighbors did, ought to
Watch and bear other Burdens. Again Cap. 108. Nullus Burgensis qui manet extra
Burgum potest aliquid Emere nec Vendere, nec Liber esse in aliquo Burgo nisi in
illo Burgo in quo est Burgensis. And in Chap. 139. Statuit Rex David, quod
omnes Burgenses sui sint liberi per totum Regnum suum, tam per aquam quam per
Terram, ad Emendum and Vendendum, and ad commodum suum faciendum absque
perturbatione, super plenam suam forisfacturam.

King David made a Law, that all his Burgesses should be free to Buy and Sell
in his whole Kingdom, as well by Water as by Land, and to make their advantage
without disturbance, upon pain of full forfeiture to such as disturbed them. In
the Statutes of King William Chap. 35. Item statuit, quod Mercatores Regni
habeant Gildam suam Mercatoriam, and ita gaudeant in pace, cum liberate Emendi
and Vendendi, ubique infra limits Libertatum Burgorum, ita quod quilibet sit
contentus sua Liberate, and nullus occupet Libertatem alterius, etc. Also he
decreed, that the Merchants of the Kingdom should have their Merchant-Gild, and
so peaceably with the Liberty of Buying and Selling every where within the
Liberties of their Burgs, so that every one be Content with his Liberty, and
none should That is, use his Trade.
Vsurp the Liberty of another, etc. By understanding wherein their Liberty
consisted, we come to know what Men, the Burgesses were, to wit, Buyers and
Sellers, Ordinary and Common Tradesmen, (then called Merchants) such as are
commonly found in ordinary Inland Burgs, and Mercate Towns, such as frequented
Fairs and Markets. So in a Plea Riley's Placita Parlementar. f. 292, 293, 294,
295.
between the Abbat of Westminster, and the Tradesmen that resorted to his Fair
there in 30th of Edward the First, they are often called Mercatores Merchants;
likewise in the 34th of the same King in the Parliament holden at Inter Communia
de Termino Trinitat. Ann. R. R. Ed. 1. 34. cum Remem. These. in Scaccario.
Westminster on the morrow after Trinity Sunday, the Citisens, Burgesses, and
others of the Kings Demeasn Subjects, granted unto him the 20th part of their
Goods, etc. Mat. Westminster, speaking of this very Gift; says, f. 455. lin. 6.
Mercatores Vicesimum Denarium concesserunt, and in all Old Authors, English
and French, Ordinary Tradesmen are termed Merchants. In the Agreement between
Richard the First King of England, and Philip King of France at Messina.
Statutum est a praedictis Regibus, quod Mercator, de quacunque Mercatione sit
Mercator, non potest emere in exercitu panem ad Vendendum, ne farinam, nisi
aliquis Alienigena illam adduxerit, and de illa panem fecerit, nec Bladum nisi
de illo similiter panem fecerit. Hoved. f. 384. b. n. 30. Here Bakers and
Sutlers were accounted Merchants. Alii Mercatores, de quacunque Mercatione
fuerint, in December Denarios tenentur Lucrari unum, Ibid. Here other ordinary
Tradesmen, that brought Goods into the Army to sell, were termed Merchants.
Aldermannus Gildae Mercatorum Oxoniae, Judex Gilda Oxoniensis. Qui Mercatorum
lites dijudicabat. Monast. Angl. Tom. 2. f. 141. Here the ordinary Tradesmen of
Oxford, were called Merchants, and that they were so Denominated, the very
words, Gilda Mercatoria, do sufficiently prove it, as it was granted to most
ordinary Inland Burgs.

For the Gild or Community there did always consist of a Select Number of
Ordinary Tradesmen, yet of the most Discreet and Wealthy of the Burg, and by
whom the Bulk of the meaner sort of Burgesses (or, as they are now called,
Freemen) were Superintended and Governed. In the Iter or Circuit of the Kings
Chamberlain, who had the Superintendency of all Burgs in Scotland, and went
from Burg to Burg, and punished all Faults and Crimes committed there, and also
the Chief Officers, if negligent in their Duties, in the Third Chapter of the
Iter, entitled, Modus Tenendi Iter, has this Article; Item, petantur in
Scriptis omnia Nomina Burgensium infra habitantium, and extra, videlicet,
Nomina fratrum Gildae per se, and Nomina aliorum per se. Also, that all the
Names of the Burgesses be demanded in Writing, as well of those that dwell
within the Burg as without; that is to say, the Names of the Brethren of the
Gild by themselves, and the Names of others by themselves; from hence it is
clear, the Gilds or Communities of all the Burgs in Scotland were a Select
Number, and so they were in France, Germany, and all other places where they
had Burgs, or Municipal Towns, and in England the same.

In the Hoved. f. 399. b. n. 20. 30. 40.
Year 1191. which was the Second of Richard the First, John Earl of Moreton,
the Archbishop of Roven, and all the Bishops, Earls and Barons, with the
Citisens of London, met in St Paul's Churchyard on the 11th of October, deposed
the Chancellor, William Longchamp Bishop of Ely, the King then in the Holy
Land, and made Walter, Archbishop of Roven, Chancellor in his stead, and the
same Day the said Earl and Archbishop, and other the Kings Justices, Granted to
the Citisens of London, to have their Community. Et eodem Die Comes Moretonii,
A Grant to the Citisens of London, that they should have a Community.
and Archiepiscopus Rothomagensis, and alii Regis Justitiarii concesserunt
Civibus Londoniarum habere Communiam suam. And the same Year the Earl of
Moreton and the Archbishop, and almost all the Bishops, and Earls and Barons of
the Kingdom, did Swear firmly and steadfastly to Defend and Preserve that
Community, so long as it pleased the King. Et eodem Anno Comes Moretonii, and
Archiepiscopus Rothomagensis, and fere omnes Episcopi and Comites and Barons
Regni juraverunt Communiam illam firmiter, and inconcusse Servaturos; quamdiu
Domino Regi placuerit.

This Community, which was thus granted to the Citisens, was a Select Number,
for the better management of the Affairs of the City, for no doubt but the
Citisens met promiscuously in St Paul's Churchyard, and to avoid confusion for
the future, it was desired by themselves, and thought requisite by Earl
Moreton, the Chancellor and Kings Justices, that they should have such an
Establishment, the better to assist them in their Seditious Practices, and for
the more advantage of the Citisens; otherwise, why should the Citisens desire
it, and the Nobility be Importuned to Swear the Defense of it? The Citisens
that were of this Constitution Swear Fealty to the King, and also to his
Brother Ibid. n. 40.
John Earl of Moreton, against all Men if he should Dye without Heirs, and some
Obligation there was upon them without doubt to assist in Edward the Second
demanded of the Citisens of London, Aid against his Queen, in the 19th of his
Reign: when she and other Rebels landed with Foreign Force, upon Deliberation,
Exire Civitate sua se nolle fatebantur ad pugnam, nisi possent (juxta
libertatem eis Concessam) ipso eodem Die reverti ante solis occasum, Walsing.
f. 123. n. 40.
War, as well as there was upon the Communities in other Nations, if Earl John,
and the Bishops and Barons of his Faction, could have had an opportunity to
have used them. In Rigord, and other Ancient French Historians, we read often
of the King of France calling out his Communities to War, and Hoveden aforesaid
tells us f. 444. b. lin. 28.
that A. D. 1197. On the Eve of St Michael, Philippus Rex Franciae Magno
congregato Exercitu Militum, and Communiarum Suarum, Exiens de Mant. upon the
River Scyn in the Isle of France.
Mantua profectus est versus Curceles. Here it seems as if he had as much Power
to call his See du Fresn in the word Hostis, where it evidently appears, that
the Communities of Cities and Burghs in France, were to send out their Horse
and Foot upon Summons into the Host or Army.
Communities out to War, as he had to call his Knights, and this may be the
reason why London in the time of Edward the Third, and some other Cities and
Burghs in England had Charters of Privilege, and Grants from our Ancient Kings,
that they should not be called out to War, or forced to march out of the Limits
of their own Jurisdiction.

Whether this Community mentioned by Hoveden was the first that was granted to
London, or whether they had One before, and it was Dissolved by King Henry the
Second, for their constant Rebellion against his Mother Maud the Empress and
Himself, and never restored until this time, I know not. They had not a Mayor
until the First of Richard the First, the Year before this, and perhaps might
not have a Community until the Second of his Reign. However it was then, it
appears, by the City Lib. A. B. C. throughout.
Books, that in the time of Edward the first, and the succeeding Kings, it had
Communia's, and the first mentioned in these Books consisted of Two in every
Ward, in all Forty, who were Elected by the Probi homines of the Ward, which
Probi Homines are explained by these Words, Discretiores, Sapientiores, and
Meliores de Warda; the most Discreet, Knowing, and Best Men of the Ward. Such
were the Electors, and of such was the Community to consist, sometimes the
Number of the Communia (which word is more frequently used in their Books, than
Communitas) was made up of 2, 4, 6, 8. out of every Ward, or out of some Wards
more, others fewer, according to the Quantity of the Ward, and the Summons, at
least Direction, of the Major, or of him and the Sheriffs.

There is a notable Writ or Record much to this purpose in the time of King
Append. n. 11.
Henry the Sixth, concerning the Election of the Mayor and Aldermen of London;
setting forth, that his Progenitors Kings of England, had by their Charters
granted to his Citisens of the City aforesaid Liberty to choose a Mayor and
Aldermen among themselves, whom they pleased, and to present them to the Lord
Treasurer and Barons of the Exchequer, the King not being there, that according
to Custom they might be Admitted. And that though according to Custom in former
times, they were wont to be chosen by the Aldermen, and more discreet Persons
of the said City, specially summoned and Warned for that purpose, ('it is not
said, how many out of every Ward) yet some that had not, nor ought to have, any
Interest in such Elections, came, and with their Noise and Clamors disturbed
them. He therefore Commanded the Mayor and Sheriffs to make Proclamation and
Prohibit all from coming, that had no right to be there, and that the Elections
should be made by the Aldermen and Others, more Discreet and Able Citisens of
the said City, specially Summoned for that purpose, according to Custom,
letting them know, that if any one was Chosen any other way and presented to
Him, or the Treasurer or Barons of the Exchequer, he should not be Admitted,
and also directing them to Arrest, and Commit to Prison, all such as they
should find doing contrary to the Proclamation and Inhibition.

In the 29th of Edward the First, John Blund was chosen Mayor Lib. c. fol. 62.
b. How the Mayor and Aldermen of London were chosen.
per Commune Consilium Elye Russel tunc Majoris, and the Aldermen there named;
and the Sheriffs, per assensum Duodecim proborum hominum Singularum Wardarum,
by Assent of Twelve Good Men of every Ward. In the 31 of the same King, also in
the 32 and 33. John Lincoln Ibid. f. 111, 112, 113.
and John Blund the third and fourth time chosen by Twelve bonos and legales
homines de qualibet Warda Summonitos; Twelve Good and Lawful Men Summoned out
of every Ward. In that 31 Year, William de Coumb-Martin, and John de Burford
were Lib. c. f. 111. b.
elected Sherifs by the Mayor and Aldermen, in praesentia XII de Singulis
Wardis Summonitorum ad Eligendum and recipiendum Vicecomites suos, in the
presence of Twelve of every Ward, Summoned to choose and receive their Sheriffs.

In the Sixth of Edward the Second, Lib. d. f. 3. a.
William Wellesford and another were chosen Sheriffs by the Mayor, Aldermen,
and Twelve Summoned out of every Ward. Wellesford Dies, and Adam Ludkin was
Chosen, per Sex and amplius de Singulis Wardis Summonitos, by Six and more
Summoned out of every Ward.

In the Seventh of Edward the Second, Nicholas Ibid. b.
Farendon was chosen Mayor by the Mayor, Aldermen, Sheriffs, and per
Communitatem, by the Community assembled. The Ibid.
Sheriffs chosen the same Year by the Mayor, Aldermen, and per Communitatem
Summonitam, etc. by the Community Summoned, etc.

In the Eight of Edward the Second, the Mayor and Sheriffs were chosen as
before, and Ibid. f. 4. a.
per probiores homines Communitatis de qualibet Warda, by the better Men of the
Community of every Ward.

In the 20th of Edward the Third, it was London Liberties, etc. f. 2. and f. 11.
Agreed, That from thenceforth there should come the Mayor, Aldermen, and also
out of every Ward of the City of London, Twelve, Eight, or Six, according as
the Ward shall be great or small of the Richest and Wisest of every Ward; and
such Twelve, Eight or Six, with the Mayor and Aldermen, shall intermeddle, and
choose a Mayor and Sheriffs for the year following. In all these Elections, and
all others in the Times of Edw. 1, 2.3. Rich. 2. Hen. 4, 5, and 6. no mention
is made of the Common Council, but there can be no doubt made but that the
Common Council-Men in every Ward were all summoned, and the others that were
summoned besides them, were sent to by the Mayor's Direction, and happily, not
without the Advice of the Aldermen and Sheriffs; There being not the least
notice of their being chosen by the Ward:

These Elections are recorded by various Expressions, and probably were not
made always according to the same exact Form, until the Fifteenth of Edward the
Fourth; when the Ibid. f. 2.
Masters, Wardens, and Liveries of the several Companies were taken in. So that
since that time, the Elections of the Mayor and Sheriffs, etc. are made by the
Mayor, Aldermen, Common Council, and Them, according to the Act of Common
Council then made.

In the year 1650 there was a great Controversy, Whether the Right of Electing
Lord Mayors, Sheriffs, etc. rested in the Lord Mayor, Aldermen, and the Freemen
in general by their Representatives to be chosen in every Ward: Or in the
Mayor, Aldermen, Common Council, Masters, Wardens, and Liveries of the several
Companies; managed by Judge Hales, and Mr. Sergeant Maynard of Council for the
Livery-Men, and Major John Wildman, and one Mr. Price Agents and Speakers for
the Freemen, before the Lord Mayor, Court of Aldermen, and Common Council. The
Community of the City of London a Select Number.
Now in which soever the Right of Election remained, the Arguments, on both
sides, and the Records then produced, and insisted upon by them, do manifestly
prove, That the Community of the City, or as it is called the Commonalty, did
consist of a Select Number of the more discreet, able, wise, and rich Citizens,
and was not the Body of Freemen in General: And that such a Select Number in
Cities and Burgs was most frequently expressed, meant and understood, by the
Latin Words, Communa, Communia, or Communitas. And is, or ought to be so, at
this Day.

See the Sea Petition, etc. Jan. 13. 1680. in Print.
Title of the Common Council holden in the Chamber of the Guildhal of the City
of London, before the Mayor, Aldermen, Sheriffs, and the greater part of the
Commoners in Common Council assembled. Of what Persons the Community of London
consists.
All these together being a Select Number in Common Council assembled, are the
Commonalty or Community of the City of London, according to the Ancient Import,
and true Signification of those Latin Words in all Nations.

In the Scriptor, Norman. Veteres, by Du Chesn. f. 10. 6.
Establishment or Charter of Roven, and Falaise in Normandy, the Government of
the City and Town was by a Mayor, Twenty Four Jurats, (so called, because
sworn, etc. when they were chosen and admitted) and an Hundred Pares or Peers.
The Twenty Four Jurats were annually chosen, out of the 100 Peers, by the 100
Peers; What the Community of Roven in Normandy was.
whereof Twelve were Eschevins, that is, Aldermen, and the other Twelve,
Consultores, Counselors, and all these together were called the Communia, or
Community of that City, and Town with the Castle.

Yet further to make it clear beyond all Exception, what the Community or
Commonalty of a Burgh or City was, I will add a Clause in a Private Act of
Parliament, made for the Establishment of certain Rents, and other Matters
between the Burgh of Plymouth, and the Prior and Convent of Plimpton, in the
Time of King Edw. the Fourth, in these English words, as it is to be found upon
the Parliament Roll, 4 Edw. 4. M. At the end of the 38 Membrane and beginning of
the 39th.
38.39. And if the said yearly Rent of xxix l. vi s. viii d. be behind in part,
or in all, not paid to the same Priour of Plympton, and Covent, and to their
Successors in the same Priorye by xv Days next after Any of the said Fests of
Payment, That then it be Lefull unto the same Priour and Covent and their
Successors, and to their Officers and Ministers to Distreyne in the said
Borough, and in Name of Distress to take all the Goods and Catalles of the
said Maire and Comonalte, and of all other Burgeis of the same Borough, and of
all other Persons resident and Dwelling in the same Borough and Precinct of
the same, Mayor and Commonalty distinct from all other Burgesses, etc.
and in every Parcel thereof. Here we find the Mayor and Commonalty of Plymouth
a Select Number, and distinct from all other Burgesses of that Burgh, and all
other Persons Resident and Dwelling within the same. And what the Mayor and
Commonalty of this Burgh were, other than the Mayor, Aldermen, and Common
Council, or the Mayor and Chief Burgesses, which were the Governing part of the
Town, let any one, that can, tell me.

The Seals of Communities.
These Communities had their Seals, by which they Ratified their Grants and
Charters, and made Authentic all their Matters of Moment, almost as Ancient as
their Being. The Learned De Re Diplomat. f. 148. F. 149. B. C.
Mabillon, after he has mentioned the Seals of the Communities of some Towns
and Burghs, says, Idem censendum est de aliis Communiarum Sigillis, When they
began to be in use.
quae a Seculo duodecimo Originem habuerunt. We are to think the same, of the
Seals of other Communities which began to be in use about the Twelfth Century:
He might have added, and some time before.

From Treating of the Constitution of Burghs, and showing what they, and the
Burgesses anciently were, and of what Value and Estimation in the Nation, I
shall proceed to show, what the Parlement-Burghs were, and when, and for what
cause at first they sent Representatives to Parliament.

In the Reigns of King John, and Henry the Third, we do not find any Citisens
or Burgesses in Great Councils or Parlements, unless they were in that of the
49th of Henry the Third; at which time, the Citisens of York and Lincoln, and
other Burghs of England were written unto, To send two Citisens, and two
Burgesses according to the form of the Writ directed to the Bishop of Durham.
See my Answer to Mr. Petyt, f. 137. A. f. 140. B.

The main cause of the Cities and Burgesses being first Summoned to Parliament.
The main cause of their being, first Summoned to Parliament, was, to give their
Consent to Taxes propounded to, or imposed upon them; before that time in the
Reigns of those two Kings, they were Talliated or paid Tallage according to the
Imposition upon them, or Acceptance of what they offered by the Kings Officers,
or Justices, as also in the time of Edward the First, until after the 34th
year of his Reign, as is manifestly proved in my Animadversions upon a Book,
called, Jani facies Nova, Fol. 178, 179. 130. and further appears in Ryley's
Placita Parlementaria, in the 33d of this King, Fol. 259. 264. 265. 275, 276.
Although several years before, Citisens and Burgesses were Summoned to
Parliament, and there gave their Consent to the Raising and Paying of Taxes. In
the 32d Year of his Reign he caused a See the Commissions, Pat. 32 Ed. 1. in
C^luia.
Tallage, without Common Consent, to be Assessed by Commissioners in all his
Cities, Burghs and D^measns, in every County of England, either by Heads,
(Capitatim) or in Common, and gave particular direction that the Tallage of
Norwich should be Assessed at four Hundred Pounds.

The first time we find any Citisens or Burgesses Summoned to Parliament, was,
in the 23d Year of Edward the First, Citisens and Burgesses first Summoned to
Parliament.
according to the Tenor of this Writ.

Rex Claus. 23. Ed. 1. m. 4. Dors. De Parliamento Tenendo.
Vicecomiti Northampton Salutem, quia cum Comitibus, Baronibus, and caeteris
Proceribus Regni nostri super remediis contra pericula quae eidem Regno his
diebus imminent providendis, Colloquium habere Volumus and Tractatum per quod
eis mandavimus, quod sint ad Nos Die Dominica proxima post festum Sancti
Martini in Hyeme proxime futurum apud Westmonasterium ad Tractandum,
Ordinandum, and faciendum qualiter sit hujusmodi periculis obviandum, tibi
Praecipimus firmiter injungentes, quod de Comitatu praedicto Duos Milites, and
de qualiber Civitate ejusdem Comitatus Duos Cives, and de quolibet Burgo, Duos
Burgenses de discretioribus, and ad laborandum potentioribus sine Dilatione
eligi, and eos ad Nos, ad praedictos Diem and Locum venire facias. Ita quod
dicti Milites plenam and sufficientem potestatem pro se, and Communitate
Comitatus praedicti, and dicti Cives and Burgenses pro se and Communitate
Civitatum and Burgorum prae dictorum Divisim ab ipsis tunc ibidem habeant. Ad
faciendum tunc quod de Communi Consilio ordinabitur in praemissis. Ita quod pro
defectu hujusmodi potestatis negotium praedictum infectum non remaneat, quoquo
modo; Et habeas ibi nomina Militum, Civium and Burgensium and hoc Breve. Test
Rege apud Cantuariam tertio Die Octobris.

The King to the Sheriff of Northamptonshire, Greeting. Because we desire to
have a Conference and Treaty with the Earls, Barons, and other Great Men of our
Kingdom, to provide Remedies against the Dangers the same Kingdom is in at this
time, therefore we have Commanded them, that they be with us at Westminster on
the next Sunday after the Feast of St Martin in Winter next coming, to Treat,
Ordain and Do, so as those Dangers may be prevented. We Command and Firmly
enjoin thee, that without delay thou do cause to be Chosen, and to come to
us, at the time and place aforesaid, two Knights of the County aforesaid, and
of every City, two Citisens, and of every Burgh, two Burgesses, of the most
discreet and fit for business. So as the said Knights may have sufficient Power
for themselves, and the Community of the County aforesaid, and the said
Citisens and Burgesses, may have the same power, separately from them, for
themselves, and the Communities of Cities and Burghs, then to Do in the
Premises what shall be ordained by Common, or the Common Council. So that for
defect of such Power the business aforesaid may not remain undone; And have
there the Names of the Knights, Citisens, and Burgesses, and this Writ. Witness
the King at Canturbury the third of October.

The Parliament Prorogued before it met.
This Parliament did not meet on the Sunday after St Martin, but was Prorogued
before meeting, to the Sunday next before St Andrew the Apostle, which is the
30th. of November. Test. Claus. 23. Ed. 1. n. 2. Dors. De Parliamento
Proregando.
Rege apud Odmer 2 Die Novembris. And all the Treating, Ordaining and Doing in
this Parliament was only to Grant, and Consent to Raise such Supplies as the
King Demanded, as will afterward appear.

The not finding any Citisens or Burgesses, Summoned by former Writs directed
to Sheriffs, nor particular Writs directed to the Mayors, Bailiffs, or Chief
Officers of Cities and Burghs, before this, (except that in the 49th of Henry
the Third) might be a sufficient proof, that these were the first Summons of
Citisens or Burgesses to Parliament. But to clear this point, beyond all doubt
and cavil, we must look back to the 18th of this King, and see what the Style
of Parlements was, between that time, and this.

In this Bundle of Summons to Parliament, 18 Ed. 1.
Year, there is a Bundle of Writs directed to the Sheriffs of several, or most,
of the Counties of England, and they are the Ancientest extant, or perhaps that
ever were, (except as above) by which two or three Knights were directed to be
chosen for each County; but no Citisens or Burgesses. And accordingly Retorn.
Parl. 18. E. 1. Three Knights returned for some Counties, 18. Ed. 1. and two
for others
Norfolk, Suffolk; Cambridge and Huntingdon-Shires, and Cumberland returned
each of them three Knights with Manucaptors for their appearance, all other
Counties but two each, etc.

This Parliament gave the King a Fifteenth part of all their Moveable Goods, as
appears by the In officio Pipae apud Westmonast. The Account Roll hereafter
mentioned.
account upon the Great Roll in the 23d year of this King, in the two last
Rolls of that Great Roll. The Title of Account, wherein also we have the Style
of that Parliment, which runs thus.

Compotus Quintae-Decimae Regi Anno Decimo Octavo per Archiepiscopos,
Episcopos, Abbates, Priores, Comites, Barons, and omnes alios de Regno, de
omnibus bonis suis mobilibus concessae; and per Diversos Collectores, in
Diversis Comitatibus, Eodem Anno Decimo Octavo Assessae, Collectae, and Levatae.

The Account of the Fifteenth, Granted to the King in his Eighteenth Year, by
the Archbishops, Bishops, Abbats, Priors, Earls, Barons, and all others of the
Kingdom, Assessed, Collected, and Levied by Diverse Collectors in several
Counties, in the same Eighteenth Year. This is the very same Style which was
used in the Reigns of King John and Henry the Third, before the Commons or
Community of Counties were Represented by Knights, chosen by them. And it is
here further to be noted, that the two or three Knights, chosen for the
Community of the County did Represent them, and Ad consulendum and
consentiendum pro se and Communitate illa His quae Comites, Barons, and
Proceres praedicti tunc duxerint concordanda.
according to the form of the Writ, Consulted and Consented to a Fifteenth for
them, which are here called the Omnes alii de Regno; and were Military Tenants
in Capite of the Ordinary Rank, but of the same Order with the Knights.

In the Chequer In the Custody of the Kings Remembrancer. Inter Communia de
Termino, St. Mich. Rot. or n. 5.
Roll of the 19th of Edward the First. There is the Form of a Writ, to appoint
Taxors and Collectors of this Fifteenth, in these Words. Edwardus Dei Gratia,
etc. Militibus, liberis hominibus, and toti Communitati Comitatuum, etc.
Salutem. Cum Archiepiscopi, Episcopi, Abbates, Priores, Comites, Barons and
omnes alii de Regno nostro, nunc sicut alias nobis and progenitoribus nostris
liberaliter concesserunt Quintam-Decimam de omnibus bonis suis Mobilibus, etc.
Test meipso apud Kings-Clipton 22 Die Septembris Anno Regni nostri decimo
octavo. Edward by the Grace of God, etc. To the Knights, See my Glossary what
these Freemen were.
Freemen, and the whole Community of Counties, (none named) etc. Greeting,
Whereas the Archbishops, Bishops, Abbats, Priors, Earls, Barons, and all others
of our Kingdom, now as at other times, to us and our Progenitors have freely
Granted a Fifteenth part of all their Moveable Goods, etc. Witness our-self at
Kings-Clipton the 22d of September in the Eighteenth Year of our Reign. Here we
find the same persons only Granted this Fifteenth, which were wont to Grant the
same manner of Taxes in the times of his Progenitors, which illustrates what
was said before.

The Cities and Burghs, or at least the City of London, this Year also had a
Fifteenth Taxed, and Levied upon them, Citisens and Burgesses compliance with
the Kings demands, called a Grant.
which notwithstanding it was demanded by the King, without their being
Summoned to Parliament, by Citisens and Burgesses their Representatives, yet
their compliance with the Kings demands, was called a Grant.

Georgius de Rokesly, Walterus de Rokesly Executor Testamenti ejusdem Georgii
pro eo, In the same Account-Roll of the same great Roll, as above.
Henricus de Waleys, Robertus de Basings, Willielmus de Hereford, and idem
Robertus de Basings Executor Testamenti ejusdem Willielmi pro eo, una cum
Magistro Willielmo de Wimondham Clerico, Assessores and Collectores
Quintae-Decimae in Civitate London, and infra totum praecinctum ejusdem
Civitatis Regi concessae. Anno Regni sui decimo octavo reddunt compotum de 2860
l. 13 s. 8 d. de eadem Quinta-Decima sicut continetur in Rotulo de particulis,
quem iidem Assessores and Collectores liberaverunt in Thesaurario, etc. That is,

George de Rokesly, Walter de Rokesly Executor of the Testament of the same
George for him, Henry de Waley's, Robert de Basings, William de Hereford, and
the same Robert de Basings Executor of the Testament of the same William for
him; together with Mr. William de Wimondham Clerc, Assessors, and Collectors of
the Fifteenth By the City upon the Kings demand, and sending to them.
Granted to the King in the City of London, and within the whole Precinct of
the same City in the Eighteenth year of his Reign, do give account of This was
the Sum of the whole Fifteenth in London, 18 Ed. 1. A. D. 1290.
2860 l. 13 s. 8 d. of the same Fifteenth as it is contained in a Roll of
Particulars delivered into the Treasury, etc.

Many Compounded, or (as the Phrase was then) fined for this Fifteenth, as for
Example. Ibid. Many admitted to a Composition for their Taxes.
Abbas de Sancto Edmundo reddit Compotum de 666 l. 13 s. 4 d. De fine pro
habenda acquietancia Quinta-Decimae omnium Bonorum Suorum Temporalium and
Bonorum Conventus sui and Villanorum suorum, and hominum totius Villae Sancti
Edmundi, Salua Regis Quinta-Decima Bonorum omnium aliorum libere Tenentium
ipsius Abbatis and Conventus praedictorum, sicut continetur in Rotulo de
finibus Dibersorum pro Quinta-Decima in Thesaurario liberavit per quatuor
Taleas and Quietus est. That is,

The Abbat of St St. Edmunds-Bury.
Edmund makes his Account of 666 l. 13 s. 4 d. for a Fine (or Composition) to
have his Discharge of the Fifteenth of all his Temporal Goods, and the Goods of
his Convent, and his Villans, and the Men of the whole Town of St Edmund,
saving the Kings Fifteenth of the Goods of all other free Tenants of the Abbat,
and Convent aforesaid, as it is contained in the Fine-Roll of diverse persons for
this Fifteenth; he paid this Sum in Money by four Tallies, and is discharged.

It will not be Foreign to this matter, to take notice of the Collectors
Accounts in an Instance or two, nor unpleasant to the Reader.

Cambr. Ibid.
Compotus Henrici de Lascy, and Willielmi de Mortuo Mari Collectorum
Quintae-Decimae Regi Concessae, Anno Decimo Octavo in Comitatu Cantabridgiae.

Iidem reddunt Compotum de 3482 l. 16 s. 2. qr. De Quinta-Decima Bonorum
Mobilium Episcoporum, Comitum, Baronum, and omnium aliorum in Comitatu
praedicto, sicut continetur in Rotulo de particulis quem liberaverunt in
Thesaurario. Exceptis Bonis mobilibus Prioris and Fratrum Sancti Johannis
Jerusalem and Villanorum suorum, etc.

The Account of Henry de Lascy, and William de Mortemer, Collectors of the
Fifteenth, in the County of Cambridge, Granted to the King in the 18th Year of
his Reign. The Sum of a Fifteenth in Cambrige-Shire, 18 Ed. 1. A. D. 1290.
The same make their Account of 3482 l. 16 s. 2 d. farthing, of the Fifteenth of
the moveable Goods of the Bishops, Earls, Barons, and all others in the said
County, as it is contained in a Roll of particulars which they delivered into
the Treasury. Except the moveable Goods of the Prior and Brethren of Saint John
of Jerusalem, and many others who had fined, or compounded for them, as above,
etc.

Norff. Ibib. in Dorso.
Compotus Johannis de Breton and Willielmi de Kerdeston Collectorum
Quintae-Decimae Regi Concessae Anno Decimo Octavo in Comitatu Norff. The
Account of John Breton and William de Kerdeston, Collectors of the Fifteenth in
the County of Norff. Granted to the King in the Eighteenth Year of his Reign.
The Sum of a Fifteenth in Norff. 18 Ed. 1. A. D. 1290.
Idem reddunt compotum de 9782 l. 14 s. 6 d. de Quinta-Decima Bonorum mobilium,
etc. The same Collectors give in their Account of 9782 l. 14 s. 4 d. of the
moveable Goods, etc. as in Cambridge-Shire. Exceptis, the Goods of such as had
Compounded and were Discharged, etc.

In the Twenty Second Year of this King there issued this Summons or Writ.
Rex Cl. 22. E. 1. m. 6. Dors. De Militibus eligendis, and mittendis ad
consilium.

Vicecomiti Northumbr. Salutem,
Quia cum Comitibus, Baronibus, and Caeteris Magnatibus de Regno nostro super
quibusdam Negotiis arduis, nos and idem Regnum nostrum Contingentibus, in
Crastino Sancti Martini proxime futuro apud Westmonasterium Colloquium habere
Volumus and Tractatum, tibi praecipimus, quod eligi facias Duos Milites, de
Discretioribus and ad Laborandum potentioribus de Comitatu praedicto and eos ad
nos usque Westmonasterium venire facias: Ita quod sint ibi in Crastino
praedicto, cum plena potestate pro se and tota Communitate Comitatus praedicti,
ad Consulendum and Consentiendum pro se and Communitate illa, his quae Comites,
Barons and Proceres praedicti concorditer Ordinaverint in Praemissis: Et Ita
quod pro defectu potestatis hujusmodi idem negotium infectum non remaneat, and
habeas ibi hoc Breve.

Test Rege apud Westmonasterium 8 Die Octobris.
Consimiles Literae Diriguntur Singulis Vicecomitibus Angliae, T. ut supra.

The King
to the Sheriff of Northumberland, Greeting. In the 22d of Edward the First, no
Citisens or Burgesses Summoned to Parliament.

Because we desire to Confer and Treat with the Earls, Barons, and the other
Great Men of our Kingdom, upon certain difficult Business, that concerns Us,
and the same our Kingdom, at Westminster, on the Morrow of St Martin, or 12th
of November, we Command thee, That thou do cause to be chosen out of the
County aforesaid, and to come to Us to Westminster, two discreet Knights, and
most fit for Business, so as they be there on the Morrow aforesaid, with full
Power for themselves and the whole Community of the County aforesaid, to
Consult and Consent for themselves, and that whole Community, to those things,
the Earls, Barons and Great or Noble Men aforesaid, shall have Unanimously
Ordained in the Premises. And so that for the defect of such Power, the same
Business may not remain undone; Have there this Writ.

Witness the King at Westminster the Eight Day of October.
The like Letters or Writs were directed to every Sheriff in England. Witness,
as above.

On the Ibidem.
next day following, (that is,) on the Ninth of October. The King directed
other Writs (reciting in them much of this above) to every Sheriff to cause to
be Elected two Knights more, to be added to the former, to come to him at the
same time and place. Ad audiendum, and faciendum, quod eis tunc ibidem before
injungemus. To hear and do, what he should there more fully enjoin them. Test
Rege apud Westmonasterium nono Die Octobris. The same day the Parliament met,
they Grant the King a Tenth.
Here was no Citisens or Burgesses Summoned by these Writs, and none but
Knights, in Number Four, who with the Earls, Barons and Great Men, on the very
Day of their Meeting, gave the King a Tenth of all their Goods, and the Writs
or Commissions, whereby Taxors and Collectors of the same Tenth were assigned
in every County, were dated the same Day, as is most evident from the Records
following.

Decima Rot. 23. E. 1. n. 72. in that Roll, penes remem. Regis.
Bonorum Temporalium, Regi Concessa in Anglia in Crastino Sancti Martini, Anno
Regni Regis Edw. 1. Vicesimo Secundo finiente, incipiente Vicesimo Tertio. A
Tenth of Temporal Goods, Granted to the King in England, on the Morrow of St
Martin, ending the Twenty Second Year of King Edward the First, beginning the
Twenty Third, he begun his Reign November the Sixteenth, 1272. Taxatores and
Collectores ejusdem Decimae Ibid.
assignantur in Singulis Comitatibus Angliae in hac forma. The Taxors and
Collectors of the same Tenth are assigned in every County in this Form. Rex
Ibid. and Pat. 22 Ed. 1. m. 2. in Cedula.
Militibus, Libere Tenentibus and toti Communitati Comitatus Cumbriae, Salutem,
cum Comites, Barons, Milites, and omnes alii de Regno nostro in Subsidium
Guerrae nobis nunc sicut alias Progenitoribus nostris Regibus Angliae
liberaliter fecerunt Decimam de omnibus Bonis suis Mobilibus, Exceptu i. e.
their Armor, Plate of ordinary use, Jewels and wearing Apparel.
quae in Quinta-Decima ultimo nobis Concessa in eodem Regno Excipiebantur nobis
curialiter concesserint and gratanter. Nos ut Decima illa ad minus Dampnum and
Gravamen Populi, etc. Assignavimus Dilectos and Fideles nostros Thomam de
Newton and Robertum de Whiterigge vel alterum ipsorum una cum quodam Clerico ad
Dictam Decimam assidendam, Taxandam, Levandandam, and Colligendam, and ad
Scaccarium nostrum Deferendam, and Solvendam: Vnam medietatem citra festum
Purificationis proxime futurae, and alteram citra Festum Pentecostes, etc.
Test Rege apud Westminster 12 Die Novembr. Anno Regni sui 22. The King to the
Knights, Free-Tenents, and the whole Community of the County of Cumberland,
Greeting. Whereas the Earls, Barons, Knights, and all others of our Kingdom,
have liberally done to us now toward the War, as heretofore to our Progenitors
Kings of England. And have Courteously and Willingly or Gratefully Granted a
Tenth of all their Moveable Goods, except those things which were excepted, in
the last Fifteenth which was Granted unto us. We, that the Tenth may be paid
with the least Damage and Grievance to the People, have assigned our Faithful
and well-beloved Thomas de Newton, and Robert de Whiterigge or one of them,
together with a certain Clerc, to Assess, Tax, Levy and Collect the said Tenth,
and to bring it to, and pay it at our Exchequer, one Half before the Feast of
the Purification, and the other Half before the Feast of Pentecost. Witness the
King at Westminster, the 12th of November in the Twenty Second of this Reign.
In this very Twenty Second Year of King Edward the First, Philip King of France
having then surprised and seized Gascony, after the Feast of Pentecost a Mat.
West. Anno Dom. 1294. fol. 421. n. 20.
Parliament was assembled, to advise how to regain that Country, in which it was
agreed to Recover it by Force and Arms. Toward which War the Clergy had Granted
a Moiety, or Half part of the Value of their Benefices, and Goods for that
Year, as may appear by the Kings Writ or Commission to the Abbat of Feversham
in Kent, by which he was appointed Collector for the same in the Province of
Canturbury.

Assignatio Collector. Medietatis, Regi a Clero Concessae.
Edwardus Dei Gratia, etc.
Dilecto sibi in Christo Inter Recorda de Termino Trinitat. 22 Ed. 1. Rot. vel.
n. 68. De Subsidio Regi a Clero Concesso.
Abbati de Feversham, Salutem.
Cum Praelati and Totus Clerus de Regno nostro This Grant was made on the Eve
of St. Matthew, September. 21. C^adunatis Clero and Populo. Mat. Westminst. f.
422. n. 30. 40.
Medietatem Beneficiorum and Bonorum Suorum nobis in Subsidium nostrum de Anno
praesenti Liberaliter Concesserunt, and gratanter. Ita quod prima Tertia pars
ejusdem medietatis in festo omnium Sanctorum proxime futuro, Secunda in
Quindena Paschae, Tertia in Quindena Nativitat. Sancti Johanis Baptistae
proxime futur. nobis persolvantur, etc. Nos de vestra Fidelitate and Diligentia
confidentes, assignavimus vos, ad Dictam Medietatem, etc. In Diocesi
Cantuariensi Colligendam, etc.

Test meipso apud Westmonasterium 30 September. Anno Regni nostri 22.
Here we have a Moiety given this Year of their Benefices, and Goods by the
Clergy, and a Tenth by the Earls, Barons and Knights, for all others of the
Kingdom; That is, all Free-Tenents, such as held in Military Service, and
others in Soccage, which then were very few. Let us now see, how and what the
Cities, Burghs, and Kings Tenants of his Demeasus gave, or paid by themselves,
not being then reckoned, inter omnes alios de Regno, which granted a Tenthpart
only.

These then were neither Summoned, or came to a Common Council, or Parliament,
Citisens and Burgesses, when not Summoned to Parliament.

How they were Taxed.


but were required and induced by the Kings Commissioners; or Taxors to pay a
certain Sum charged upon or demanded of them. Which at this time was a Sixth
part of all their Moveable Goods, toward the War. The City of London was first
sent to, and that made an Example to all other Cities, Burghs and Towns of the
Kings Demeasus, and their Compliance with the Kings Demands passed as, and
under the Name of a Grant.

Rex Dilectis and Fidelibus suis Inter Recorda de Anno 23 Ed. 1. n. vel Rot. 73
pe^ies Remem. Regis.

De Sexta part Regi Concessa in London.


Custodi, Vicecomitibus Aldermannis and Toti Communitati Civitatis suae London,
Salutem. Cum vos in forma qua Nuper Nobis Quintam-Decimam Concesseratis, Sextam
partem Bonorum and Mobilium Vestrorum in Subsidium Guerrae nostrae nobis
Concesseritis liberaliter and libenter; nos ut illa Sexta pars ad minus Dampnum
and Gravamen Vestri and Singulorum Civitatis ejusdem Levetur and Colligatur
providere Volentes, assignavimus, Johanem de Banquelle, Thomam de Romeyn,
Hamonem Box, Willielm^m de Betonia, and Gilbertum de Marchia una cum Dilecto
Clerico nostro Magistro Willielmo de Wymundham, etc. And after the Example of
London the King sent his Commissioners to Tax or Demand of his other Demeasn
Cities, and Towns, a Sixth part through England.

Rex Dilecto and Fideli suo Roberto de Ratford, Salutem, Ibid. Eodem Anno and
numero.

De Diversis assignatis ad petendum Consimilem Sextam in Dominicis Villis
Regiis in Diversis Comitatibus.


Cum Cives and probi homines nostri London, Sextam partem Bonorum suorum
Mobilium nobis in Subsidium Guerrae nostrae Gratanter Concesserint, ut aliis
qui sunt de nostris Villis Dominicis exemplum praebeant ad Consimile Subsidium
faciendum; Assignavimus vos ad petendam hujusmodi Sextam partem in Singulis
Dominicis Civitatibus and aliis Villis nostris in Comitatibus Kanciae, Sussex,
Surry, and Suthamton Secundum Taxationem Decimae jam nobis in Regno nostro
Concessae, and Ideo vobis Mandamus, quod assumptis vobiscum Vicecomitibus
Locorum, ad Singulas Dominicas Civitates, and alias Villas nostras personaliter
accedatis, and homines earundarum Civitatum, and Villarum ad Concedendam and
Preestandam nobis Praedictam Sextam partem juxta Taxationem praedictam,
diligenter Ex part nostra requiratis, and efficaciter indutatis, modis quibus
videbitis expedire. Et quod inde feceritis, nobis aut Thesaurario and Baronibus
nostris de Scaccario sine Dilatione constare faciatis. In cujus Rei Testimonium
has literas nostras fecimus Patentes. Test William Bishop of Bath and Wells
then Lord Treasurer.

London an example to all Cities and Burghs to Grant a Sixth part of their
Goods, etc.


Venerabili Patre, etc, 21 Die Novembr. Anno 23. That is.

The King to his well Beloved and Faithful Robert de Ratford, Greeting. Whereas
our Citisens and Good Men of London, have willingly Granted to us, toward
maintaining our War a Sixth part of their Moveable Goods, that they might show
an Example to others of our Demeasn Towns, to make the like Aid. We have
assigned you to Demand a like Sixth part in every of our Demeasn Cities, and
other Towns in the Counties of Kent, Sussex, Surry and Southampton, according
to the Taxation of the Tenth now Granted to us in our Kingdom; and therefore we
Command you, that taking with you the Sheriffs of Places, ye personally go to
every of our Demeasn Cities, and other Towns, and diligently on our behalf
require, and effectually induce the Men of the same Cities and Towns, by such
means as you think expedient, to give and Grant to us the said Sixth part
according to the Taxation aforesaid, and what you shall do herein, you shall
signify to us, or our Treasurer and Barons of the Exchequer, without delay. In
Witness of which thing we have made these our Letters Patents. Witness the
Venerable Father, etc. The 21st of November, the 23d Year.

Per Ibid. Eodem Anno. Number. sive Rot. 73.
Consimiles Literas assignantur infra Scripti ad petendam hujusmodi Sextam
partem in Singulis Dominitis Civitatibus, and aliis Villis Regiis, in
Comitatibus Subscriptis, viz.

Willielmus de Ormesby in Comitatibus Norff. Suff. Cantabr. and Huntingdon.

Magister Petrus de Lek in Comitatibus Northampton, Leycester, Warwick,
Roteland, Lincoln.

Johannes de Litegremes in Comitatibus Ebor. Northumberland, Cumbria,
Westmerland, Lancastria.

Magister Johannes Lovel in Comitatibus Wilts, Somerset, Dorset, Devon. and
Cornubi^.

Johannes de Bosco in Comitatibus Nottingham, Derby, Salop. Stafford, Wigorn.

Radulfus de Broghton in Comitatibus Oxen, Berks, Bedf. Bucks. Gloucester,
Hereford. T. ut supra.

No Citisens and Burgesses Summoned to Parliament before the 23 of Edward the
first.
By all these Records it is most clear, there were no Citisens, Burgesses or
Tenants of the Kings Demeasns, Summoned to great Councils or Parlements until
the 23d of Edward the First, and also how they were Taxed before that time.

The first Writ of their Summons, and the Prorogation of that Parliament from
the Sunday next after St Martin, (which was the first Day appointed for
meeting,) to the Sunday next before St Andrew the Apostle, we have noted
before. And I shall further observe, that the Writ directs they should have a
Power to Act separately from the Knights of the Counties, and do what by Common
Councils should be ordained. Et dicti Cives and Burgenses Plenam and
Sufficientem potestatem pro se, and Communitate Civitatum, and Burgorum,
Divisim ab ipsis (i. e. Militibus) tunc ibidem habeant, ad faciendum tunc quod
de Communi Concilio Ordinabitur in praemissis, and accordingly they made a
different Grant, the Earls, Barons and Knights, who then sat, Treated, and
Consulted altogether, about Granting Taxes, Gave an Eleventh part of all their
Moveable Goods; and the Good Men of his Demeasn Cities and Burghs Granted a
Seventh part of all their Moveable Goods.

And according to the Addition made in the Writ of Summons, when the Citisens
and Burgesses came first to Parliament, there was also an alteration made
answerable to it, in the Writ or Commission for appointing Taxors and
Collectors, for the Levying and Collecting of this Eleventh and Seventh part,
in the several Counties, which is not to be found in these Writs or Commissions
before this time. The Words of the Writ or Commission are these. Pat. 24. Ed.
1. p. 1. m. 22. De undecima and septima Regi Concess. Levand. and Colligend.
Rex Militibus, Libere Tenentibus, and Toti Communitati Comitatus Roteland,
Salutem, Cum Comites, Barons, Milites, and alii de Regno nostro in Subsidium
Guerrae nostrae nunc sicut alias, nobis and progenitoribus nostris Regibus
Angliae liberaliter fecerunt Vndecimam de omnibus Bonis suis Mobilibus. Et
These words were not in former Commissions, for appointing Taxors and
Collectors.
Cives, and Burgenses, and alii probi homines de Dominicis nostris Civitatibus
and Burgis ejusdem Regis Septimam de omnibus Bonis suis Mobilibus, exceptis his
quae in Decima ultimo nobis concessa excipiebantur, nobis Curialiter
Concesserint and Gratanter, nos ut Vndecima, and Septima praedictae, ad minus
Dampnum and Gravamen, etc. Assignavimus Dilectos and Fideles nostros Rob. de
Flixthorp and Johannem de Wakerley, etc. Ad Dictas Vndecimam and Septimam in
Comitatu praedicto Assidendas, Taxandas, Levandas, and Colligendas, etc. Test
Rege apud Westmonasterium This Parliament met by Prorogation, about the 30th of
November.
Quarto Die Decembris.

According to the Tenor of the Writ of Summons, Citisens and Burgesses,
different persons from the Alii de Regno, etc.
we find by this Commission, that the Citisens and Burgesses were in this
Parliament, and that they were different Persons from the Alii de Regno,
mentioned after the Earls, Barons and Knights, for they gave the Eleventh part,
and these the Seventh, somewhat more than a Third beyond what they gave; And it
became a settled Rule afterward for the Citisens, They gave a 3d part more than
the Earls, etc.
Burgesses and Tenants in ancient Demeasns to give a Third part more, or
thereabouts of their Personal Estates, than the Earls, Barons and Knights did
Grant.

The Summons to this Parliament directed to the Archbishop of Canturbury is very
observable, and may furnish us with the Reason why the King Summoned the
Citisens and Burgesses to it.

Rex Venerabili in Christo Cl. 23. Ed. 1. m. 3. Dors. De Parliamento Tenendo
apud Westmonasterium.
Patri R. Eadem Gratia Cantuariensi Archiepiscopo, totius Angliae Primati,
Salutem, Sicut Lex justissima provida circumspectione Sacrorum Principum
stabilita hortatur and statuit, ut quod omnes tangit, ab omnibus approbetur,
sic and innuit evidenter ut Communibus periculis per remedia provisa Communiter
obvietur. Sane satis nostis, and jam est ut credimus per universa mundi Climata
Divulgatum, qualiter Rex Franciae de Terra nostra Vasconiae nos fraudulenter
and cautelose decepit eam nobis nequiter Detinendo. Nunc vero praedictis fraud
and nequitia non contentus, ad Expugnationem Regni nostri Class maxima, and
Bellatorum copiosa multitudine congregatis, cum quibus Regnum nostrum, and
Regni ejusdem incolas hostiliter jam invasit, Linguam Anglicanam si conceptae
iniquitatis proposito detestabili potestas correspondeat (quod Deus avertat)
omnino de Terra delere proponit. Quia igitur praevisa jacula minus laedunt, and
res vestra Maxim sicut Caeterorum Regni ejusdem concivium agitur in hac part.
Vobis mandamus in Fide and Dilectione quibus nobis tenemini, firmiter
injungentes quod Die Dominica proxime post festum Sancti Martini in hyeme
proxime futurum apud Westminster personaliter intersitis. Praemunientes Priorem
and Capitulum Ecclesiae vestrae, Archidiaconum totumque Clerum vestrae
Diocaeseos. Facientes quod iidem Prior and Archidiaconus in propriis personis
suis, and Dictum Capitulum per unum, idemque Clerus per duos Procuratores
idoneos, plenam and sufficientem potestatem ab ipsis Capitulo and Clero
habentes, una vobiscum intersint modis omnibus. Tunc ibidem ad Tractandum,
Ordinandum and Faciendum, nobiscum, and cum caeteris Praelatis and Proceribus
and aliis incolis Regni nostri, qualiter hujusmodi periculis and excogitatis
malitiis obviandum. Test Rege apud Wengeham Tricesimo Die Septembris.

The King to the Venerable Father in Christ, R. by the same Grace, Archbishop
of Canturbury, etc. Greeting, As the most just Law established by Princes does
appoint, Why the Citisens and Burgesses first Summoned to Parliament.
That which concerns all should be approved by all. So it evidently shows, that
dangers, common to all, should be obviated by Remedies provided by all. You
understand sufficiently, and as we believe it is now Divulged through the whole
World, how the King of France fraudulently surprised Gascony, and yet detains
it from us. But now not content with that, he has provided a great Navy and
Army, with which he has About the 8th of September this year, the French
landed at Dover, burnt a great part of the Town, and killed an old Monk.
Walsingh. fol. 64. n. 10.
Invaded our Kingdom, and the Inhabitants thereof, and intends to destroy the
English Nation and Language, if his Power were answerable to his detestable
purpose, (which God avert.) Because therefore, foreseen attempts do less hurt
us; and not only you chiefly, but the rest of the Inhabitants of the Kingdom
are also concerned in this matter, we Command, firmly enjoining you in the
Faith and Love by which you are bound to us, that on the Sunday next after the
Feast of St Martin, next coming, you be at Westminster, and that you warn the
Prior and Chapter of your Church, the Archdeacon and whole Clergy of your
Diocese, and cause the Prior and Archdeacon in their own persons, and the
Chapter by one, and the Clergy by two, fit These are now called Cleres of the
Convocation.
Procurators or Proxies, having sufficient Power from the said Chapter and
Clergy to be present with you, then and there to Treat, Ordain, and appoint
with us, and the rest of the Prelates, Great Men, and other Inhabitants of the
Kingdom, how to prevent these Dangers, and designed Mischiefs. Witness the King
at Wengeham, the 30th of September.

The first Summons of the Commons Clergy to Parliament.
This is the first Summons I find directed to the Archbishop, by which he was
ordered to cause the Body of the Clergy of his Diocese, and the Chapter to come
to Parliament with him, by their Procurators or Representatives, and the same
Reason given in this Writ, that brought them thither, brought also the Citisens
and Burgesses, as may appear by the Writ before recited, directed to every
Sheriff of England for the first choice of them, and dated the third Day of
October, next following after the date of this to the Archbishop.

The Treating, Ordaining, and Appointing Remedies to prevent the imminent
Dangers to the Kingdom, was only to raise Money, to prosecute the War, and
defend the Nation against the King of France; and toward that, the Clergy gave
a Tenth; the Earls, Barons and Knights, gave an Eleventh; and the Demeasn
Cities, Burghs and Kings Tenants of his Demeasns, gave a Seventh part of all
their Moveable Goods. There were no Laws made, or other Matters dispatched in
this Parliament, as was hinted before.

Having thus Proved, the Time when, and the Cause why, Citisens, Burgesses, and
the Tenants of the Kings Demeasns, were at first Summoned to Parliament, we
shall proceed to discover what Cities and Burghs sent their Representatives, or
Citisens and Burgesses, upon such Summons. The Answer to this is very short,
What Cities and Burghs sent Citisens and Burgesses to Parliament.
that they were only the Dominici Civitates, and Burgi Regis, the Kings Demeasn
Cities and Burghs, such as had Charters from the King, and paid a Fee-Farm Rent
in Lieu of the Customs, and other Advantages and Royalties that belonged to the
Crown, Customs in Cities and Burghs, originally gathered by the Kings Bailiffs,
etc.
and were originally taken and gathered by the Kings Collectors and Officers,
whether Bailiffs, Port-Reves, Senescals, or Stewards, or by what other Names
they were called. But afterward Collected and Received by Officers, chosen by
the Cities and Burghs, according to License, Granted by the Kings Charter, to
the use of such Cities and Burghs, or perhaps, sometimes by Permission only.

This does abundantly appear by the Account given of great Yarmouth, in the N.
1. A.
Appendix, where after the Description of that and Gorleston, taken out of
Domesday Book, it is said thus. Et Sciendum, quod Progenitores Domini Regis
tenuerunt praedictum Burgum in manibus suis propriis, percipiendo omnia
proficua exeuntia de portu praedicto, usque ad Tempus Regis Johannis, qui
Append. N. 2.
concessit Villam praedictam Burgensibus Villae praedictae ad feodi firmam,
Reddendo sibi and haeredibus suis Quinquaginta and Quinque libras per Annum, ad
quod Solvendum, nihil aliud habent nisi consuetudinem and alia proficua
provenientia de portu praedicto, nec capiant aliquas consuetudines de rebus
Venditis vel Emptis in Mercato super terram, nullo Tempore Anni. That is, And
it is to be understood, that the Progenitors of the Lord the King held the
foresaid Burgh (that is, Yarmouth) in their own hands, until the time of King
John, who Granted it in Fee-Farm to the Burgesses, paying to him and his Heirs
Fifty Five Pounds by the Year, for the Payment whereof, they had nothing but
the Customs, and other Profits of the Port, neither might they at any time of
the Year take any Customs of things Bought and Sold in the Mercate upon the
Land.

Not long after King John had Granted his Charter, there happened a
Controversy, between Gorleston and South-Yarmouth in Luthinglond, both on the
other side of the River, and Great Yarmouth, Append. N. 1. a.
about certain Customs and Privileges in the 12th of Henry the Third, and Ibid.
again, in the 34th of Edward the First, which was d^termined in the Exchequer
by the Lord Treasurer, the Chancellor of England, the J^stices of both Benches,
and others of the King's Counsel. By which Append. N. 1. B. Yarmouth holden of
the King in Fee-farm. Why called a Free Burgh.
Record it is evident, That Great Yarmouth was holden of the King in Fee-farm,
was styled, Villa Regis, the King's Town, and Liber Burgus, a Free Burgh, and
enjoyed such Liberties as belonged to a Free Burgh, only by, and in respect of
the Charter.

It was, and is the General Opinion of Commons Journal, 1 Maii 1628. A great
mistake, That Towns that paid Tenths, and sent Representatives to Parliament,
were Burghs.
Lawyers, That such Towns as sent Burgesses to Parliament, though but very
seldom, and paid Tenths when they were granted in Parliament, were Burghs,
Notwithstanding they had not, nor perhaps now have any Charter, Fair, Market,
Franchise, or other Liberties which should Constitute, and make them Burghs.
But this is a mighty Mistake: For there were anciently, and are yet many Towns
that sent their Representatives to Parliament, which were not Burghs, but only
Towns of Ancient Demeasns, Towns in Ancient Demeasns that were no Burghs sent
Representatives.
and these (in the Granting of Taxes especially) consulted, and gave their
consent with the Citizens and Burgesses, who in All Taxes upon Goods and
Personal Estates did usually give and pay about one Third or Fourth more than
the other Towns which were neither Cities or Burghs, or Ancient Demeasns,
before the Tenths and Fifteenths were constantly and regularly settled.

This will be fully Evinced by the following Records. Edward the First
intending to Knight his Son, Cl. 34. Ed. 1. M. 15. Dors. in Cedula. Append. n.
13.
summoned the Archbishops, Bishops, Abbats, Priors, Earls, Barons, and other
Great Men to be before him and his Council, on the Morrow after Holy Trinity,
to Treat of, and Grant an Aid which was due upon that occasion. He also sent to
all the Sheriffs of England, to Append. n. 12. 13.
cause to come before him and his Council on the same day, two Knights of every
County, and of every City two Citizens, and of every Burgh two or one
Burgesses, as the Burgh was greater or lesser, to Treat, Ordain, and Consent,
etc.

All which Orders of Men being Append. n. 13.
Assembled before the King's Council, and it having been showed unto them by
the same Council, on behalf of the King, That there was an Aid due to him in
the foresaid case, (that is, for making his Son Knight:) And also, That there
were manifold Expenses, and many other Burdens incumbent on the King in
restraining the Rebellion and Malice of Robert de Brus, his Traitor, and his
Adherents in Scotland, who had presumed to make War against him.

The same Ibid.
Prelates, Earls and Barons, and other Great Men, and also the Knights of
Shires, Treating deliberately upon this Matter, and considering there was an
Aid due as aforesaid, and that many Burdens were incumbent upon the King by
reason of the War aforesaid, at length unanimously Granted to the King for
themselves and Note, The Citizens, Burgesses, and Tenants in Ancient Demeasns,
were no part of the Community of the Kingdom, for they gave a 20th part for,
and by themselves, and Treated apart.
whole Community of the Kingdom, a Thirtieth Part of all their Temporal
Moveable Goods, which they should be possessed of at the Feast of St. Michael
next coming, for a Competent Aid toward the Knighthood of his Son, and also for
an Aid toward his Expenses which he was to be at in the War aforesaid. But so,
as this Grant should not The reason of this Clause at this time was, for that
the Aid for making the Prince Knight, was to have been laid upon Land; i. e. so
much upon every Knights Fee; and here it was Taxed upon Goods, whereas it was
due upon Knights Fees.
prejudice themselves, nor their Successors, and Heirs in future Times, nor be
made an Example in the like case. And that in Taxing the Goods aforesaid, all
things were to be Excepted, as in the Taxation of the Fifteenth granted to the
King by the Communi^y of the Kingdom, in the Eighteenth Year of his Reign, for
the Banishment of the Jews.

Also Ibid.
the Citisens and Burgesses of Cities and Burghs, and others of the King's
Demeasns Assembling together, and Treating about the Premises, considering the
Burdens incumbent upon the King, as was before mentioned, unanimously Granted
unto him for the Causes abovesaid, a Twentieth Part of their Moveable Goods,
and to have them as aforesaid.

Who, and what the Coeteri, the Residue, or Others of the King's Demeasns were,
is plainly discovered in another Record about the same Matter.

It is to be Ibid.
remembered, That on the Morrow of Holy Trinity last past, the Prelates, and the
other Great Men of the Kingdom, for themselves and the whole Community of the
Kingdom, Granted to the Lord the King, for themselves and the whole Community
of the same Kingdom, a Thirtieth Part of all their Temporal Goods, without
Cities, Burghs, and the King's Demeasns. And the Citizens, Burgesses, and
Tenants of the foresaid Demeasns, Granted a Twentieth Part of their Goods, as
well towara the Knighthood of Edward the King's Son, as toward the Defense of
Scotland against Robert Brus, and his Accomplices, the King's Enemies, and the
Form of the foresaid Grant is more fully noted in the Memorials of Trinity-Term
last past.

By this Record it is very plain, That the Prelates, Earls, Barons, The
Prelates, Earls, Barons and Knights Treated together. The Citizens, Burgesses,
and Tenants in Ancient Demeasns consulted together, and apart from them.
and Knights of Shires Consulted together and Treated about this 30th Part
which they granted for themselves and the whole Community of the Kingdom; as
also that the Citizens, Burgesses, and Tenants of the Kings Demeasns Treated
and Consulted by themselves apart, and Granted a 20th Part of their Goods,
which was a Third Part more than the Lords and Knights gave. And that Tenants
of the King's Demeasns were Members of Parliament.

The King's Commission, and Assignment of Commissioners to Levy, and Collect
the 20th, and 15th Granted in the First of Edward the Second, proves the same
thing. Rex Pat. 1 E. 2. p. 1. M. 7.
Militibus, Liberis Hominibus and Toti Communitati Comitatus Middlesex tam
infra Libertates quam extra, Salutem. Cum Comites, Barons, Milites, Liberi
Homines, ac Communitates Comitatuum Regni nostri, Vicesimam omnium Bonorum
suorum Mobilium; Civesque and Burgenses, ac Communitates omnium Civitatem and
Burgorum ejusdem Regni, nocnon Tenentes de Antiquis Dominicis Coronae nostrae
Quintam-Decimam Bo^oru^ suorum Mobilium Curialiter concesserint and Gratanter,
nos, ut Vicesimo, etc. That is, the King to the Knights, Freemen, and whole
Community of the County of Middlesex, as well within Liberties as without
Greeting. Whereas the Earls, Barons, Knights and Freemen, and the Communities
of Counties of our Kingdom Courtly, or courteously and gratefully Granted us a
20th Part of their Moveable Goods, and the Citizens, Burgesses and Communities
of Cities and Burghs of the same Kingdom, and also the Tenants of the Ancient
Demeasn of our Crown a 15th Part of their Moveable Goods, We, that the said
20th Part, etc.

Tenants in ancient Demeasn sometime omitted in Commissions.
Some time afterward, the Tenants in ancient Demeasns were left out of the
Preambles of the Commissions, and not mentioned as Grantors of Taxes, with the
Citisens and Burgesses in the 12th of Edward the Second, in some Commissions
they were retained, in others omitted. Edwardus Dei Gratia Rex Angliae, etc.
Inter Recorda de Term. Sanct. Trin. Anno 12. Ed. 2. penes Remem. Regis. in
Scaccario. Commissio ad Levand. and Colligend. 12am.
Fidelibus suis Ballivis and Communitatibus Civitatum and Burgorum in Comitatu
Lincoln, Salutem. Cum Cives and Burgenses Civitatum and Burgorum Comitatnum
Regni nostri in Parlamento nostro apud Eborum a Die Paschae proximo praeterito
in unum mensem convocato pro expeditione Guerrae nostrae Scotiae Duodecimam
omnium Bonorum suorum Mobiltum nobis Concesserunt, etc. Nos, ut, etc. Test
meipso, apud Eborum 30 Die Maii Anno Regni nostri 12. Per ipsum Regem.

The Tenants of the Kings ancient Demeasns were not mentioned as Grantors in
this Commission.

Yet in this following Commission about Levying the same Tax, they are
mentioned as Grantors of it, with the Citisens and Burgesses.

Inter Commissiones and Literas Patentes de Termino Sanctae Trinitatis Anno 12
R. Rs. Edwardi Secundi penes Remem. Regis in Scaccario.
Oxon. Berks, Bed. Bucks de Levatione 12 and 18 super vidend. and festinand.
Rex omnibus ad quos praesentes literae pervenerint, Salutem. Cum per Literas
nostras Patentes Assignaverimus quosdam Dilectos and Fideles nostros ad Decimam
Octavam nobis per Note the Earls and Barons and Knights of the Shire, granted
this 18th, and therefore the Earls and Barons were part of the Community of the
County, which was the Tenants in Capite.

At what time the Tenants in ancient Demeasns are no longer mentioned as
Grantors of Taxes in the Taxors Commissions. The ancient manner of Levying
Taxes.


Communitates Comitatuum Regni nostri in Parlamento nostro apud Ebor. a Die
Paschae proxime praeterito in unum mensem Convocato. Et Duodecimam nobis per
Cives, Burgenses, and Tenentes de Dominicis nostris in eodem Parlemento
concessas, etc.

But afterward they were frequently omitted, and after the Eighth of Edward
the Third, when the Establishment of Taxes upon Personal Estates became
certain, and the way and manner of Levying them was changed, the Tenants in
ancient Demeasns are no longer mentioned in the Commissions of the Taxors and
Collectors, as Grantors of those Taxes.

Before this time there were two chief Taxors appointed by the King in every
County, who appointed Twelve in every Hundred, to raise every Man's Personal
Estate according to the true value, and then to Levy a Thirtieth, or an
Eighteenth part of it, as it was Granted by the Earls, Barons and Knights of
Shires in Parliament. They also appointed such and as many as they thought fit
in every City, Burgh and Town of the Kings Demeasns, to inquire into every Man's
Personal Estate in those places, and find out the true value of it, and then to
Levy a Twentieth, or Twelfth part of it, as it had been Granted by the
Citisens, Burgesses and Tenants of the Kings ancient Demeasns in Parliament. And
that they might Tax and Value every Man's Estate truly and really, the Taxors
were Sworn not to do otherwise for Love, Hatred, Favor, Gift or Promise. See
the Inter Recorda de Term. Trinit. 34 Ed. 1. penes Remem. Regis.
Form of Taxing and Levying the 30th and 20th part Granted to King Edward the
First, made by him and his Council in the 34th year of his Reign, as it was
delivered to the Chief Taxors of every County with the Oath. See the like Inter
Recorda. de Term. Trinit. 12 Ed. 2. penes Remem. Regis.
Form in the 12th of Edward the Second, for Taxing and Levying an 18th Granted
by the Earls, Barons, etc. and a 12th by the Citizens, Burgesses, and Tenants
of Ancient Demeasns.

In the Eighth of Edward the Third, upon Pat. 8 E. 3. p. 2. M. 16. The occasion
and manner of the first settling of Fifteenths and Tenths.
Complaint of the Barons, Knights, Citizen^ and Burgesses to the King in
Parliament, That the Taxors and Collectors for Bribes spared some Men, and by
Color of their Office extorted from others more than they ought to pay, and
applied it to their own use; with Request to him, That they might pay toward
the 15th and 10th then Granted, as they had done to the last 10th and 15th.
There were sent Commissioners into every County in England, to Agree and
Compound with the Inhabitants of every Town that was to pay a Fifteenth; And
also with the Communities of Cities and Burghs, and Men of the Towns of Ancient
Demeasns, which paid a Tenth; Ad Tractandum and Concordandum cum Communitatibus
Civitatum and Burgorum, ad Hominibus Villarum, and Dominicorum antiquorum, qui
hujusmodi Decimam and Quintam-Decimam solvere tenentur, for the Sums they were
to pay; which Sum was fixed upon the particular Towns, Cities and Burghs for
the future, and Collected, and Rated most commonly by the Inhabitants (I
suppose) amongst themselves; the chief Collectors and Taxors in every County
were reserved to be Taxed by the Treasurer and Barons of the Exchequer as
before.

I could never find the Roll, or any Book of this Establishment of this Eighth
year of King Edward the Third. But in a With the Kings Remembrancer in the
Exchequer.
Book of Fifteenths and Tenths in the Third year of King Henry the Fifth, where
the particular Sums of every ordinary Town, and of every City, Burgh, and Every
Town there that paid a Tenth, and was neither City nor Burgh, was Ancient
Demeasn.
Town of Ancient Demeasns in all Counties in England are noted, there is often
Reference to the Particulars of such a Roll in that Eighth year. After which
time, when Tenths and Fifteenths were reduced to a certainty, the Parliament for
the most part Granted Taxes of those Denominations, half a Tenth, and
Fifteenth, a whole Tenth, and Fifteenth, Two Tenths, and Two Fifteenths, etc.
according to the Exigency of the King's Affairs.

There has been often mention made of the King's Demeasn Cities and Burghs, as
well as of his Tenants of Ancient Demeasn, What the Kings Demeasn Cities and
Burghs were.
in this Treatise. And it will much tend to the understanding of it, and of
ancient Records and History where they are mentioned, to know what they were.
And if they be duly considered, they are not much unlike one another, having
their Names from the same thing, that is, from holding of the King by Fee-farm.

For those Town and Lands which are found in Domesday-Books under the Title of
Terra Regis, The Original of Fee-Farms.
were then and afterward kept in his Hands, and managed by Praepositi, or
Bailiffs, (as were most of the Towns and Lands of Bishops, Abbats, Priors,
Earls, Barons, and other Great Men) and called his, and their Demeasns; which
in process of time were let to Farm to Tenants for a considerable part of their
true value, an half part, third or fourth at least, and this Rent was called a
Fee-Farm-Rent, the Tenants esteeming what these Estates were above the Rent, or
in respect of the Tenure, to be to them, ut, or tanquam de feodo, as if they
were holden in Fee, paying their Rent, and Tallages.

Of the same condition were Cities and Burghs; at first they were kept in the
Kings Hands, and the Customs and Profits, that arose from Trade, gathered by
his Bailiffs and Officers, which afterward were let out in Fee-Farm, to the
Communities of Cities and Burghs, which commonly were made such, by the same
Charters by which the Customs in kind, or the true value of them, as then
Collected, were changed into Fee-Farm Rents, and the Kings Officers, or others
in Lieu of them, were made Officers as well to the Cities and Burghs, as to
himself. This is clearly apparent from the Narrative of great Yarmouth, in the
Appendix N. 1. A. N. 1. B. and from the Charter N. 2, as also from the Second
Charter of Donewic, N. 3. B. and from others. And may further be confirmed by
the following Record.

Amerciamenta Adventus Vicecom. Anno 5 Ed. 3. finiente, incipiente 6. in
Crastino Sancti Mich. apud Remem. Thesaura. in Scaccario.
Hominum and Burgensium Firmariorum Diversarum Villatarum ad Feodi Firmam de
Rege tenentium qui non venerunt ad Scaccarium ad faciendum Proffrum de firmis
suis in Crastino Sancti Michaelis Anno Regni Regis Edwardi Tertii post
Conquestum VI incipiente, V finiente.

Northumberland. De hominibus Villae de Bamburgh quia non venerunt ad
Scaccarium ad faciendum Proffrum suum ad Diem praedictum. V Merc. Bedeford. De
Hominibus Villae Bedeford pro eodem V Merc. Essex. De Hominibus Villae de
Colchestre pro eodem V Merc. Dorset. De Hominibus Villae de Brudport pro eodem
V Merc.

Et Memorandum quod hujusmodi Firmarii, and alii Vicecomites and Ballivi
consimili modo amerciati sunt pro non Adventu suo ad Proffrum suum Tempore
Regis Edwardi filii Regis Henrici, sicut continetur in Memorandis Anni XVIII
ejusdem inter Communia de Termino Sancti Michaelis.

The Amerciaments of the Men and Burgesses, Farmers of diverse Towns, holden of
the King in Fee-Farm, who came not to the Exchequer or Scaccar, to make the
proffer, (i. e. the At this time they began their Accounts for that half Year,
and paid a small Sum in part of their Rent, which was called their proffer.
beginning of their Accounts) on the morrow of St Michael in the Year of the
Reign of King Edward the Third, after the Conquest beginning the Sixth, ending
the Fifth.

Northumberland. Of the Men of the Town of Bamburgh, because they came not to
the Scaccar to make their proffer at the Day aforesaid. Five Marks. Bedford. Of
the Men of the Town of Bedford for the same. Five Marks. Essex. Of the Men of
the Town of Colchester for the same. Five Marks. Dorset. Of the Men of the Town
of Brudport for the same. Five Marks.

It cannot be denied, that many Towns which are now Parliament Burghs were the
ancient Demeasns of the Crown, and that the Lands belonging to them were holden
in Fee-Farm. But then it must be considered, that the Towns and Lands so
holden, were holden by particular Men, by Grant from the Crown, and as Tenants
to the Manner, where the Lands lay, or to some other Manner, at some distance
from them, and therefore for this reason, they could not be called, Civitates
and Burgi Dominici Regis. Cities and Burghs why called Demeasn Cities and
Burghs.
The Kings Demeasn Cities and Burghs, but must be so called, by reason of the
Fee-Farm they paid as Cities and Burghs, as Communities, Corporations and
Bodies Politic, constituted by the Kings Charters, with Liberty of free
Trading, from which Trade, or from Tolls and Customs thereby happening, the
Fee-Farms of such Communities arose, and from hence the Burgesses of such
places, as Burgesses were called the Kings Farmers, or Tenants in Fee-Farm.

Having seen, what the Civitates and Burgi Dominici Regis, the Kings Demeasn
Cities and Burghs were, we shall next show what, and how many of the present
Parliament Burghs were ancient Demeasns. And in doing this, I will follow the
direction of an ancient Old Register, fol. 181. B. f. 182. A.
Writ, to the Treasurer and Barons of the Exchequer, in 48th of Edward the
Third, when the Men of the Town of Lindon in the County of Roteland, complained
to the King, that notwithstanding it was neither Burgh nor ancient Demeasn of
the Crown, yet it was Taxed a Tenth, whereas they should have been Taxed only a
Fifteenth, in this case the King Commands the Treasurer and Barons of the
Exchequer, that if it did appear by his Book called Domesday, or by other Rolls
and Memorials of the Exchequer, or any other competent way, that it was neither
Burgh nor ancient Demeasn, they should accept a Fifteenth and discharge them of
the Tenth, etc. Vobis mandamus quod si per Librum nostrum qui vocatur Domesday,
vel per alios Rotulos and Memoranda Scaccarii sive alio modo competenti dictam
Villam Burgum vel de Antiquo Dominico Coronae nostrae non esse invenire
contigerit, etc.

From this Book therefore of Domesday, and other Records it will manifestly
appear, which of the present Burghs were ancient Demeasns.

In Berk-Shire New-Windsor, and Reding in Buckingham-Shire, How many of the
present Burghs, were only Towns in ancient Demeasn.
Wicomb, Wendover, Alisbury then no Burghs. In Devon-Shire, Barn-stable,
Plimpton, Tavistoke, Ash-Burton, Tiverton, the four last then no Burghs.
Dorset-shire, Melcomb then no Burgh. Essex, Maldon. Gloucestershire,
Tewkesbury, Cirencester, the last then no Burgh. Hereford-Shire, Lemster then
no Burgh. Huntington-Shire, Huntington 3 Henry Quinti. Lincolnshire, Grantham,
Grimesby, then the last no Burgh. Norfolk, City of Norwich, Great Yarmouth,
Thetford. Oxfordshire, Woodstooke, but then no Burgh. Sommerset-Shire,
Ilchester, Milborne. Ham-Shire, Andover. Staffordshire, Tam-worth. Suffolk,
Ipswich. Surrey, Guildford. Wilt-Shire, Wilton, Westbury, and Chepeham, now
Chippenham, Cricklade, Bedwin, then the last Westbury and Chepeham no Burghs.
Yorkshire, Knaresburg, Malton, Threshe, Alvertune, then no Burghs. All these
Towns are to be found under the Title of Terra Regis, the Kings Land in
Domesday Books, in the several Counties, except Wicomb, which is to be found in
Buckingham-Shire, under the Title of Terra Episcopi Wintoniensis, and was
allotted to the Monks of Winchester for their Diet, both before and after the
Conquest. Hoc Domesd. f. 143. B. Col. 2.
Manerium (i. e. Wicomb.) fuit and est ad victum Monacorum Wintoniensium. But
how I cannot say, this Town afterward came into the Kings Hands, and was the
Demeasn of the Crown. For in the Cart. 5. Johan. n. 210.
Fifth of his Reign King John Granted it in Fee-Farm, at the Rent of 20 l. per
Annum, and the Service of one Knights Fee, to Alan Basset, and King Henry the
Third, in the 33d year of his Reign, when he Taxed his Demeasns at the request
of Philip Basset his Son, directed his Writ to the Sheriff of Buckingham-Shire
to impose a reasonable Tallage upon the Tenants of Philip in Wicomb, as having
been once the Demeasn of his Progenitors as appears by the Writ it self. Claus.
33. Henry the 3d m. 14.
Quia Rex Talliari facit Dominica sua Mandatum est Vicecomiti Bucks, quod
habere faciat Philippo Basset Rationabile Tallagium de Hominibus suis de eo
Tenentibus in Manerio de Wycumb, quod aliquando fuit Dominicum Praedecessorum
Regis, Regum Angliae. Test Rege apud Westminster Vicesimo Octavo Die December.

In Cornwall at the The time of the making of Domesday Book which see in Cornwall.
time of the Survey, none of the now Burghs were placed under the Title of
Terra Regis, unless that which was then called Henlistone, and described as an
ordinary Town, be now Helston, nor had any of them at the time aforesaid, the
Title of Burghs, Domesd. in Cornwall, sub Tit. Terrae Episcop. Excestren.
Ecclesia Sancti Germani, that Manner or Parish consisted of Twenty four Hides,
whereof the Bishop of Excester had Twelve, and the Canons of the place had
Twelve, what belonged to the Bishop was valued at VIII l. by the Year, what
belonged to the Canons was valued at an C. Shillings. In hoc Manerio est
Mercatum in Die Dominico sed ad nichilum redigitur pro Mercato Comitis
Moritonii quod ibi est proximum, in this Manner is a Mercate on the Lords Day,
but it is reduced to nothing by reason of the Mercate of the Earl of Moreton,
that is very near.

The Earl of Moreton Ibid. Sub. Tit. Terrae Commit. Moriton. f. 121. B. Col. 1.
holds Liscarret, there described as an ordinary Town, the same holds
Fawintone, there described as an ordinary Town, Parish or Village, the same
holds Dunhevet (now Lanceston) ibi Castrum Comitis, there is the Earls Castle,
or the Head of the County.

The Ibid. f. 120. B. Col. 2.
Church of St. Petroc holds Bodmine, there St. Petroc has 68 Houses, and a
Mercate, the whole is valued at XXXV Shillings by the Year.

No other Names of the present Burghs in Cornwall to be found in Domesday Book,
or other things of these.

In Devonshire, besides what were mentioned before under the Title of Terra
Regis. There is Excester Burgus described by it self, Honetone under the Title
of Terra Comitis Moretonensis but no Burgh. Totnais Burgus, under the Title of
Terra Judhael de Totnais, and Ochementone (I suppose now Okehampton) Burgus,
under the Title of Baldwin the Sheriff. Baldwinus Vicecomes Ibid. f. 105. B.
Col. 2.
Tenet Ochementone de Rege, ibi sedet Castellum, ibi quatuor Burgenses, and
Mercatum valet IIII Solidos.

No other Names of the present Burghs to be found in this County, in
Domesday-Book, unless, as has been noted before, those which are placed under
the Title of Terra-Regis.

In Wiltshire, besides what were reckoned before under the Title of
Terra-Regis, there is Ibid. fol. 64. B. Col. 1.
Malmesbery described by it self; Merleberg is described as an ordinary Town,
no Burgh. Dantone is placed under the Title of Terra Episcopi Wintoniensis, no
Burgh, but described as an ordinary Town. Salisbery is under the Title of Ibid.
fol. 66. A. Col. 1.
Terra Episcopi Salisberiensis, no Burgh, but described as a very great Manner,
and as other Country Towns, only thus in part of the Description. In Wiltune
vii. Burgenses pertinentes huic Manerio, reddunt lxv. Denarios. [9] Etesbery (I
suppose now Hey^sbury) under the Title of Terra Aluredi de Ispania, and is thus
described; Aluredus Ibid. fol. 73. A. Col. 1.
de Ispanta Tenet de Rege Etesberie, Alwi Tenuit Tempore Regis Edwardi, valuit
iii l. modo iiii l.

No other Names of the present Burghs to be found in the Description of
Wiltshire, but such as were Ancient Demeasns.

And so it is in other Shires and Counties, such especially as have now many
Burghs in them, as Somersetshire, Hamshire, Sussex, Lancashire and Yorkshire,
in every of these there are now several real or reputed Burghs, whose Names are
not to be found in the Conquerors Survey.

And therefore we are next to show, The Original of our present Burghs.
or at least make a probable conjecture, what the Original of many (if not all)
our present Burghs was; which to me seems to have been only from Charters. We
will begin with those of Cornwall, which are most obscure, and then instance in
some others.

For the Burgh of Helleston Helleston.
see Appendix, Numb. 8.

Truro, Truro.
Truru, or Triuereu, was sometime the Possession of Richard de Lucy, a Person of
great Note in the Reigns of King Stephen, and Henry the Second; in the Eighth
of whose Reign he was made Justice of England. From him it came to Reginald
Fitz-Roy, who was one of the Illegitimate Sons of King Henry the First, and was
Dugd. Baron. f. 610. Col. 1.2.
Created Earl of Cornwall by King Stephen in the Fifth of his Reign, and died in
the 21st of Henry the Second. He, by his Charter, Granted to his Free Burgesses
of Triuereu, That they should have all their Free Customs, and such as were
used in Cities, and the same in all things which they had in the time of
Richard de Lucy* (That is to say) Sac, Soc, Tol, Them, and Infangenethuf; and
Granted them, That they should not Plead or be Prosecuted in Hundred or
County-Courts, nor for any Summons should go any where to any Law-Business
without the Town of Triuereu; and that they should be Quit from paying Toll
through all Cornwall, in Fayrs and Mercats, and wheresoever they bought and
sold. And that for the Goods they Trusted, when they were not paid, they might
Distreyn their Debtors, when they found them in their Town. The Charter it self
runs thus:

Reginaldus Regis Filius Comes Cart. per Inspeximus 13. Ed. 1. N. 61.
Cornubiae. Omnibus Baronibus Cornubiae and omnibus Militibus, and omnibus
Libere-Tenentibus, and omnibus Tam Anglicis quam Cornubiensibus, salutem.
Sciatis, quod concessi Liberis Burgensibus meis de Triuereu habere omnes
Liberas Consuetudines and Vrbanas, The Charter of Truro.
and easdem in omnibus quas habuerunt in Tempore Ricardi de Lucy, fcilicet
Sacham, and Socham, and Toll, and Them, and Hinfangenethuf and Concessi eis
quod non placitent in Hundredis, nec Comitatibus, nec pro aliqua summonitione
eant ad placitandum alicubi extra villam de Triuereu, and quod quieti sint de
Tholneo dando per totam Cornubiam in feriis, and in foris, and ubicunque
emerint and vendiderint, and quod de pecunia eorum accredita, and non reddita
Namum capiant, in Villa sua de Debitoribus suis. His Testibus, etc. without
Date.

In the same Record it follows thus: Inspeximus etiam Chartam quam Henricus
proavus Noster (Henry the Second, who was Great Grandfather to Edward the
First) fecit eisdem Burgensibus in hac Verba. Henricus Dei Gratia Rex Angliae,
and Dux Normanniae, and Aquitaniae and Comes Andegaviae, Archiepiscopis,
Episcopis, Abbatibus, Comitibus, Baronibus, Justiciiariis, Vicecomitibus,
Ministris and omnibus fidelibus suis Francis, and Anglis, totius Angliae, and
Cornubiae, Salutem. Sciatis me Conceffisse and Praesenti Carta Confirmasse
Burgensibus Richardi de Lucy de Triuereu omnes Libertates and Liberas
Consuetudines, quas Comas Reginaldus Abunculus meus, (base Son to Henry the
First, and so Brother to Maud the Empress) rationabiliter dedit eis and
concessit sicut Carta ipsius Comitis Testatur, quare volo, etc. Testibus R.
Episcopo Winton. etc. without date, both which Charters Edward the First
Confirmed by his Charter, dated on the 12th of June, in the A. D. 1284.
13th of his Reign, Edmund then Earl of Cornwall being a Witness to it.

Richard, Brother to King Henry the Third, was created Earl of Cornwall in the
Cart. 15. Hen. 3. M. 4.
Fifteenth year of his Reign, who by his Pat. 2. Hen. 5. part. 3. M. 28 per
inspeximus.
Charter, without date made Dunheved or Lanceston Dunheved or Lanceston.
a free Burgh, and amongst other Liberties, Granted to the Burgesses to choose
their own Bailiffs, who were to answer the Farm of the Burgh, which was to
himself an Hundred Shillings, to the Priory of St Stephen in Lanceston, Sixty
Five Shillings and Ten Pence, and to the Lepers of St Leonard of Lanceston an
Hundred Shillings of his Alms. He granted them also Vnam Placeam, where they
should think it most Decent and Honorable, to erect a Gild-Hall in the same
Burgh, to hold of him and his heirs, by a Pound of Pepper to be paid yearly at
Michael-mass for all Service and Demand whatever, he Granted also they should
not be Taxed when the County was, nor Talliated, by him or his Heirs, when the
King Talliated all his Burghs in England. Et Ibid.
quod non Talliantur per nos vel Haredes nostros ad Tempus quando Dominus Rex
omnes Burgos suos per Angliam Talliaverit. There were Burgesses inhabiting in,
or belonging to the Castle of this Town in the time of King Henry the Second,
who had certain Liberties and Privileges, as appears by the Charter of
Helleston in the Appendix, N. 8.

The same Earl Richard made Liskereth or Liskard Leskard.
a free Burgh, and Granted to the Burgesses Pat. 2. E. 3. Part. 2. M. 14. per
inspeximus.
all those Liberties and Free Customs, which by his Charter he had Granted to
his Burgesses of Lanceston and Helleston. This Charter is dated 5 Junii, in the
24th of his Brother Henry the Third. A. D. 1240.

Edmund Earl of Cornwall his Son in the Ibid.
Third of Edward the First, Granted this whole Burgh, with the Rent of the
same, and his Mills of Bodgara, and Lonvil, with the Hill of Bodgara and the
Meadows belonging to the Mills, with the Toll of the Market and Fairs, and also
all Fines, Mulcts and Perquisites of the same Burgh, belonging to him and his
Heirs in Fee-Farm, at the Rent of Eighteen Pounds Sterling, to be paid to him
or his Heirs by the hands of his Seneschal of Cornwall, by equal portions at
Easter and Michaelmass, Ibid.
except to himself and Heirs, that they might Talliate the said Burgh, as often
and when the King of England did Talliate his Cities and Burghs. Salvo nobis
and Haeredibus nostris quod praedictum Burgum Talliare possumus, quotiescunque
Dominus Rex Angliae Civitates and Burgos suos Talliauerit.

The same Earl Richard, Cart. 13. Ed. 1. n. 9. by Inspeximus.
Granted to the Prior and Canons of Bodmin, Bodmin.
a free Merchand-Gild, (Gildam Mercatoriam) in that Town, and that their
Burgesses should be free and quit of all Customs and Exactions through all
Cornwall, for the yearly Rent of 43 s. and 4 d. without date, etc.

The same Earl when he was King of the Romans, Cart. 19. Ed. 2. n. 24. by
Inspeximus.
in the 12th year of his Reign A.D. 1269. Hen. 3.53.
made Lostwithiel Lostwithiel.
and Penknek one free Burgh, and that his Burgesses there should have a
Merchant-Gild, and then proceeds and Grants them further Liberties in the same
words with those of Truro.

John of Eltham Second Son to Edward the Second, was Earl of Cornwall, who Pat.
1. R. 2. part. 6. m. 7. by Inspeximus.
gave and Granted to his Burgesses of Grauntpount, Grauntpount.
or Great-Bridge in Cornwall, the whole Town, and several other Lands abuttalled
and bounded in his Charter, and made it a free Burgh, which they were to hold
of him and his Heirs for ever in Fee-Farm, paying at the Feasts of Easter and
Michaelmass, Twelve Pounds Eleven Shillings and four Pence. This Charter Vid.
Cart. 6. Ed. 3. n. 7. To which this John Earl of Cornwall, so named there, was a
Witness.
bears date the Sixth of October in the Seventh year of his dearest Brother
King Edward.

Reginald de Valle Torta, or Vautort, who Dugd. Baron f. 22. Col. 1.2.
lived in the time of King John, and died in the 30th of Henry the Third, was
Lord of the Honor and Castle of Trematon, which was head of it, to it Rot.
Eschaet. 28. Ed. 1. n. 44.
belonged Fifty nine Fees of the yearly Value of 259 l. 6 s. 8 d. As the Earls
of Cornwall exercised their Jura Regalia in erecting of Burghs in the County, so
this Reginald and his Antecessors, exercised theirs in erecting the Burgh of
Essa, or Saltash, Essa, or Saltash.
within their Honor of Trematon.

Pat. 5. Ric. 2. part. 1. m. 10. by Inspeximus.
Sciant praesentes and futuri, Quod ego Reginaldus de Valle Torta Dedi and
Concessi and hac praesenti Carta mea Confirmavi Liberis Burgensibus meis de
Essa omnes Libertates and Liberas Consuetudines suas hic subscriptas, quas
habuerunt tempore Antecessorum meorum, etc. which were many, and amongst them
these, That they should choose their own Bailiff or Mayor; That they should
have the whole Toll of Bread, Totum Panis Theloneum; and, That none of his
Burgesses should be taken and carried to his Castle, if they were able to find
sufficient Sureties of their Peers, for their Transgressions. This Charter was
Confirmed by Richard the Second, ut supra.

This Burgh of Essa is now called Carew's Survey of Cor^wal, p. 111 b. and p.
112. b. prin^ed A. D. 1602.
Saltash, which lies in the same Parish of St Stephens, whe^ein the Castle of
Tremeton, the head of that Honor now does, or then did stand. These instances
are sufficient for Cornwall, some few do follow in other Counties.

Baldwin de Redverys, Cart. 13. Ed. 1. n. 64. by Inspeximus.
Earl of Devon and Lord of the Isle (that is, Wight) in the 26th of Henry the
Third, Granted to his Burgesses of Plympton, Plympton.
his whole Burgh of Plympton, with the Market and Fairs, and all appurtenances
to the said Burgh belonging, to have and to hold to them and their Heirs of him
and his Heirs for ever, so freely and quietly, with all Liberties and free
Customs, eo modo sicut Cives Exoniae melius and libertus habent vel habere
debent in Civitate sua Exoniae, quam de Rege tenent; in the same manner as the
Citisens of Excester, best or most freely have; or ought to have in their City,
which they held of the King; this Charter was confirmed by Edward the First, as
above.

Preston Preston.
in Lancashire, Cart. 2 Ed. 3. n. 6. by Inspeximus.
made a Burgh by King Henry the Second, had new Liberties granted by King John,
when the Earl of Moreton and Lancaster confirmed by King Henry the Third, and
Edward the Third.

The same John Earl of Moreton and Lancaster, Cart. 11. Ed. 3. m. 22. n. 39. by
Inspeximus.
Lancaster.
Granted and Confirmed to his Burgesses of that Town, in the fourth of Richard
the First, all the Liberties which he had Granted to the Burgesses of Bristol,
and furthermore, released to them the Suit they ought to his Mill, and
acquitted them from Ploughing his Lands, and performing other Servile Customs.
Johannes Comes Moreton omnibus hominibus and amicis suis Francis and Anglicis
praesentibus and futuris, Salutem. Sciatis, me concessisse and hac Carta mea
confirmasse B^rgensibus meis Lancastriae omnes Libertates quas Burgensibus
Bristol concessi. Praeterea clamavi eosdem Burgenses quietos de Secta
Molendini, and de Arura, and de aliis Servilibus Consuetudinibus quas facere
solebant, etc. This Charter was confirmed by this John, when King, and by
Edward the Third, in the Eleventh of his Reign, as in the Margin.

John the eldest Son of the Duke of Britain, and Lord of Richemund, Richemund.
by his Charter without date for him and his Heirs, Pat. 2. Ed. 3 Part. 1. m.
11. by Inspexmus.
Granted to the Burgesses of Richemund, the Burgh of Richemund, with the
Mercate and Fairs, and the Tolls, with all Rents of Assize, Attachments, and
Pleas, or Mulcts of the said Burgh, and his whole Demeasn, called the Land of
Fonteney, etc. At the Rent of Forty Pound per Annum, etc. Which Charter was
confirmed by Edward the Third, in the Second of his Reign, as in the Margin.

King John in the Second of his Reign, Granted to Cart. 9. Ed. 3. n. 53. by
Inspeximus.
Baldwin Earl of Albemarle and Hawis or Avis his Countess the free Burgage in
Heddun, now Hedon, Hedon.
Heydon, or Hodon in Yorkshire, to them and their Heirs in Fee and Inheritance,
so that their Burgesses of Heddun might hold freely and quietly in free
Burgage, as his Burgesses of York and Lincoln, best, most freely and quietly
did hold, with such Customs and Liberties as King Henry his Father, (that is,
Henry the Second) Granted to William Earl of Albemarle, by his reasonable
Charter.

Johannes Dei Gratia Rex Angliae, etc. Sciatis nos Concessisse Ibid.
Baldewino Comiti Albemarliae and Hawisiae Comitissae Vxori suae liberum
Burgagium in Hedduna eis and Haeredibus suis in feudo and haereditate, ita quod
Burgenses eorum Heddunae, libere and quiet in libero Burgagio teneant sicut
B^rgenses nostri de Eboraco vel Nichol melius, and liberius, and quietius
tenent, illis Consuetudinibus and Libertatibus, sicut Rex Henricus Pater noster
Willielmo Comiti Albemarliae per Cartam suam rationabilem concessit. Testibus,
etc. Dat. apud Caneford 13 Die December. Anno Regni nostri 2. This Charter was
confirmed by Edward the Third, as in the Margin. Very many more Instances might
be given of Charters of very obscure Burghs, and might also be published in the
Appendix, if it were not for making this Treatise too Bulky.

From these Instances we may make a more than probable Conjecture, that all
Free-Burghs, though now never so obscure had their beginning from Charter,
which was Granted as well for the Advantage of the King, Earl, or other great
Man, Lord of the Burgh, as for the profit of the Burgesses themselves. For a
Free Burgh in the true sense of the word, was only a Town of free Trading, What
a Free Burgh is.
with a Merchant Gild, or Community, without paying Toll, Pontage, Passage,
Stallage, etc. And being free from certain Fines or Mulcts, from Suit to
Hundred, and County-Courts, or being prosecuted, or answering there, or any
where else, but within their own Burgh, except in Pleas of the Crown. With
other Privileges, Liberties and Customs according to the Tenor of particular
Grants and Charters. And a free Burgess was no other, than a Man that exercised
free Trade, according to the Liberties and Privileges of his Burgh, whether he
resided in it, or whether he had Liberty to live and Trade other where.

Upon Account of these Liberties, the Prince or Lord of the Burgh received Toll
and Customs, for the Goods bought and sold, or in process of time a Fee-Farm
Rent, or Annual Composition in a stated Sum, always less than the true value,
in Lieu of them. And a reasonable Tallage or Aid, when for his necessity he had
reason to impose it. Tallage why paid and imposed by our ancient Kings.
And that Tallage was due and paid by Citisens and Burgesses, to our ancient
Kings, only in Consideration of their Liberty of Buying, Selling and Trading,
and the Liberties they had Granted them to that purpose and so to do, will be
clearly evinced by what follows.

In the Riley's Placit. Parlamentar. f. 271. The Case of Salisbury about
Tallage.
Eleventh of Henry the Third, New Sarum was made a City by the Kings Letters
Patents, and given to the then Bishop his Successors and Canons there, and
their Successors as their proper Demeasns, (tanquam proprium Dominicum) and
further Granted to the same Bishop and his Successors, that for the necessity
of himself or his Church, he might take a reasonable Tallage or Aid of his
Citisens, when the King or his Heirs made a reasonable Tallage in his Demeasns.
(Concedimus insuper eidem Episcopo, and Successoribus suis, quod pro
necessitatibus suis, and Ecclesiae suae, Tallagium vel rationabile auxilium
capiant de praedictis Civibus suis, quando nos vel haeredes nostri Tallagium
faciemus in Dominicis nostris.)

In the 33d year of Edward the First, the Bishop of Salisbury Ibid. f. 273.
required an Aid or Tallage of the Citisens of New Sarum, according to the
Grant of Henry the Third, the Citisens refuse payment, upon application of the
Bishop to the King, he granted his precept to the Sheriff of Wiltshire, to
Summon, by two legal Men, the Mayor and Community (not all the Burgesses, but
the governing part) of New Sarum, to appear before him and his Council at
Westminster, to show cause why they ought not to be Talliated according to the
Charter and Grant aforesaid.

They appeared by their Attorneys, Ibid.
and Pleaded, that Richard, the Predecessor of the then Bishop with the
Concurrence and Assent of the Dean and Chapter, by their Charter, had confirmed
to their Free Citisens of New Sarum Ibid. f. 274.
that every one of them should hold his free Tenement, (suum Liberum
Tenementum) in the City aforesaid, and their Heirs likewise, honorably,
freely, quietly and peaceably, rendering to the Bishop and his Successors, (pro
plena placea) that is, a full Tenement or Burgage, twelve pence by the year,
and he that held more or less should pay according to the same quantity more or
less for all Services and Demands, and upon this they produce the Charter of
Bishop Richard, and demand Judgment, if as they were Free Men and Free Tenants,
(Desicut sunt liberi and libere Tenentes) as it was contained in the Charter
aforesaid, and never were as they said Talliated, whether they ought then to be
Talliated.

The Bishop, notwithstanding the Grant of his Predecessor, Ibid. f. 275.
affirmed, they ought to be Talliated, and pleads the Charter of King Henry
III. Tallage paid by Burgesses in respect of their Trading and the use of Burgh
Liberties.
and that the Citisens at their own charge had procued a Confirmation of it,
from King Edward. And the matter having been fully debated before the King and
Council in Parliament, it was said, that King Henry in the Grant of their
Liberties (which were no other than those of the City of Winton, and many other
Cities and Burghs) imposed upon the said Citisens, the Burden of the said
Tallage and reasonable Aid, for the necessities of the said Church, when the
King or his Heirs made a Tallage in his Demeasns, and from the time the said
Citisens used their Liberties and quietances (that is from Toll, Pontage,
Passage, etc.) to their profit, by the said Charter, they ought to bear the
Burden imposed upon them by the same, when it is consonant to Reason, that
those who have the profit should bear the Burden.

The King therefore did Will and Command, Ibid.
that the Citisens should be for that time Talliated, for the profit they had
received by their Liberties from the time of the first Grant of their Charter
until then. And afterward choose whether they would use their Liberties, and be
Talliated according to their Charter for the future, or renounce them, and not
be Talliated. The Citisens did choose to renounce their Liberties, and a few
days after Surrendered them to the King by the hands of their Mayor.

When by reason of this Renunciation, the Citisens could not use their
Liberties, or any one of them, within less than the space of a year, they, with
the Bishop, Petition the King to have their Liberties Regranted, and do submit
to pay Tallage, as it follows in the Charter of this King, after the Repetition
of King Henry's Charter, and the precedent Judgment. Cart. 34. Ed. 1. n. 27.
Et idem Episcopus and Praedicti Cives jam nobis attente supplicaverunt, ut de
Gratia nostra concedere velimus, libertatibus superius expressis, (in the
Charter of King Henry) and dictos Cives contingentibus, and per ipsos ut
praedictum est Renunciatis, de caetero uti possint and gaudere, Nos licet dicti
Cives Libertatibus praedictis Renunciaverint sicut praedictum est,
considerantes tamen pium propositum quod dictus Pater noster habuit ad
Ecclesiam praedictum, etc. Necnon and per finem quem praedicti Cives fecerunt
nobiscum coram Consilio nostro Volumes and Concedimus pro Nobis and Haeredibus
nostris, quod dicta Civitas de Nova Sarum sit Libera Civitas ipsius Episcopi,
and Successorum suorum, ac Ecclesiae suae praedictae in perpetuum. Et quod
Cives ejusdem Civitatis ibidem manentes sint Cives ipsius Episcopi and
Successorum suorum, and quod per totam Terram nostram de Theolonio, Pontagio,
Passagio, Paiagio, Lestagio, Stallagio, Cariagio, and omni alia Consuetudine de
omnibus rebus suis sint quieti. Et quod habeant in perpetuum omnes alias
Libertates and Quietancias per totam Terram nostram quas habent Cives nostri
Wynton and quod omnibus and singulis Libertatibus supra Scriptis quatenus eos
contingunt de Caetero utantur and gaudeant adeo plene and integre sicut in
dicta Carta praedicti Patris nostri necnon and in Carta nostrae de
Confirmatione praedicta before continentur. Quodque idem Episcopus and
Successores sui, Tallagium vel rationabile auxilium capiant de praedictis
Civibus suis, Haeredibus vel Successoribus suis ratione Libertatum ipsis
Civibus per nos sic concessarum quando nos vel Haeredes nostri Tallagium in
nostris Dominicis de caetero faciemus. Quare volumus, etc. In English thus.

And the same Bishop and the foresaid Citisens now most earnestly have
beseeched us. That of our especial Grace we would Grant them the Liberties
above expressed touching the said Citisens, and which were renounced by them,
and that they might use and enjoy them; We though the said Citisens have
renounced the Liberties aforesaid, considering the Pious purpose our Father had
to the Church aforesaid, etc. And also for the Composition or Fine the Citisens
made with us before our Council, we Will and Grant for Us, and our Heirs, that
the said City of New Sarum be the Bishops and his Successors Free City,
forever, and that the Citisens of the same City there dwelling, be the Bishops
and his Successors Citisens, and that they be quit of Toll, Pontage, Passage,
Paiage, Lestage, Stallage, Carriage, and all other Custom of all their Goods
through our whole Land, and that they have for ever all other Liberties, and
Quietances through our whole Land, which our Citisens of Winchester have, and
that for the future they use and enjoy all and Singular the above Written
Liberties, fully and wholly, as they are contained in our Fathers Charter, and
our own of Confirmation. Why Tallage paid by Burghs and Cities.
And that the same Bishop and his Successors may take a reasonable Tallage or
Aid of his Citisens aforesaid their Heirs or Successors, by Reason of the
Liberties by us so Granted, when we or our Heirs shall hereafter Talliate our
Demeasns. Wherefore we will, etc. Dated the 28th of May at Westminster.

The Emolument and Profit mentioned in this Judgment and Charter, did arise
from Buying, Selling and Trading, and the Liberties (by reason whereof the
Citisens were Talliated,) there spoken of, were Granted for the Furtherance and
Encouragement of them, which all Free Citisens and Free Burgesses enjoyed, as
Members of a Free City or Burgh. And it is evident they were called Free Cities,
Free Burghs, Free Cities, why so called.
(or more frequently) Free Burghs, and the Members thereof Free Citisens, and
Free Burgesses, (almost in all Charters) from these Liberties, and Free Trading
only, notwithstanding they were liable to reasonable Tallage imposed by the
King, when his necessity required it; and from their paying a Fee-Farm Rent,
and being obnoxious to the Kings Tallage, either expressed, or implied in the
Charters, by the profit received, most of the Cities or Burghs in England, were
called Civitates and Burgi Dominici Regis, as his Demeasn Lands were called
Terrae Regis Dominicae, and the Tenants of them, Tenentes Regis Dominici, for
the same reason, and for others as before has been said.

To this we will add another Record for the proof of the assertion, that
Tallage in Cities and Burghs was paid, upon the account of Buying, Selling,
Trading or Merchandising, and use of their Liberties Granted by the King, being
a Petition in Parliament in the 33d of Edward the First.

Ad petitionem Riley's Placita Parlementar. f. 259.
Majoris and Burgensium Bristol petentium quod Homines qui Tenent Terras, and
Redditus Magistri, and fratrum Templi, in Villa Bristol Tallientur and
Contributionem faciant ad Tallagium Regis ejusdem Villae cum Burgensibus
ejusdem, de sicut ipsi Mercantur, and omnibus aliis Libertatibus and
Aisiamentis usi sunt quae ad dictam Villam pertinent, etc.

Ita Responsum est. Distringantur pro Contributionibus, and Tallagiis
faciendis, and fiat Justitia Conquerentibus, and super hoc habeatur Breve de
Cancellaria Majori and Ballivis Bristol. That is.

To the Petition of the Mayor and Burgesses of Bristol, that the Tenants of the
Master and Brethren of the Temple, in the Town of Bristol, might be Talliated,
and make Contribution to the Tallage of the same Town paid to the King, with
the Burgesses of the same, for that they Traded or Merchandised, and used all
Note Trading, a Liberty.
other Liberties and Easements, which belong to the said Town.

It was Answered. Let them be Distreined for Contributions, and Tallages, and
let Justice be done to the Complainants, and upon, or for this, let a Writ go
out of Chancery directed to the Mayor and Bailiffs of Bristol.

By what has been here Written upon that Head, it is mightily probable, that
our present free Burghs had their Origin, and received the Liberties they have
of long time used, from Charters only, (especially since the Conquest) and if
any Man can show any Burghs, or Ancient Trading Towns, which use the Common
Liberties of Burghs, without Charter, or that never had one, undoubtedly (if
any such there be) they were Towns holden of the King in Ancient Demeasn; and
the Inhabitants upon presumption of being his Tenants, did at first begin to
Buy, Sell and Trade, and by Connivence continued so to do, as the Tenants or
Men of the Templers did in Bristol, presuming upon their Masters great
Privileges.

The Instances used concerning the Original of Burghs, were of such, as have
been Erected by, or Granted to Earls. Those Erected by the Charters of Earls,
were notwithstanding constituted such, by an Implicit Derivative Power from
the King, who had Created them Earls, and the Chief Fundamental Dominion of
those Burghs remained in the King or Crown: The Fundamental Dominion of Burghs
remained in the King.
For the Earls could not Talliate them at their own Pleasure, but only when the
Kings Demeasns were Talliated, and then by his Grant, or Precept, as is
manifest from these two Records.

Rex Vicecomiti Lincoln, Salutem. Cl. 6. Johan. m. 4.
Scias quod Commisimus Dilecto nostro Willielmo Comiti de Warenna Grantham and
Stanford cum pertinentiis habendum quousque Terram suam recuperaverit in
Normannia, vel quousque ei alibi fecerimus Competens Excambium. Ita tamen quod
non possit Talliare Homines de Stanford nisi per praeceptum nostrum. Et ideo
tibi praecipimus quod ei inde sine dilatione Sesinam habere facias. Test Rege
apud Westminster. 19. Die Aprilis.

By this Record it seems probable, that by the Original Grant, William de
Warenna might have Power and License to Talliate Grantham, but he could not
impose Tallage upon Stanford, but by the Kings Precept. The other Record is
this.

Rex Vicecomiti Cornubiae, Salutem. Cl. 11. Hen. 3. part. 1. m. 19. De Tallag.
in Comitatu Cornub.
Scias quod de Consilio nostro provisum est, quod enxilium Efficax assideri
faciamus in omnibus Burgis and Dominicis nostris per totam Terram nostram
Angliae, and Volumus quod Consimile auxilium assideatur per Totam Ballivam tuam
in Dominicis and Burgis nostris, ad opus dilecti fratris nostri R. Comitis
Pictaviae, and ideo tibi praecipimus quod una cum Simone de Brackel, Ballivo
pradicti Comitis ad auxilium assidendum in Burgis and Dominicis nostris de
Comitatu tuo diligenter intendas, Test Rege apud Westminster. 16 Die Februarii.

Sir William Dugdale in his Baronage, Fol. 762. Col. 1. Says, Richard Earl of
Poicton Brother to King Henry the Third, was Created Earl of Cornwall in the
Eleventh of his Reign, if so, the King might Grant this Precept after he was
Earl, and call them his Demeasn and Burghs, by reason of his Supreme Original
Dominion, and Prerogative; or if not made Earl of Cornwall until the Fifteenth
of that King, as has been noted before, he might then have the Earldom of
Cornwall in his Hands by Eschaet, or Forfeiture, and so call the Revenues of the
Earldom, and Burghs in that County, his Demeasns. Which way soever it was, his
Brother Richard could not impose a Tallage without his Precept. Which was a
certain Argument that the Supreme Dominion of those Cornish Burghs was in the
King.

I shall conclude this Treatise with the Answers to these two Questions.

First, Who named them, and by whose Direction and Appointment it was, that
such, or such Burghs chose, and sent Burgesses or Members to Parliament, and not
others?

Secondly, Who then were, or ought to be the Electors, in Real or Reputed
Burghs?

The Sheriffs at first directed, what Towns or Burghs should send Burgesses to
Parliament.
To the First. It was left to the Sheriff of each County to Name and Direct
which were Burghs, and which were not, by those Indefinite and General Words in
the Writ. De qualibet Civitate Duos Cives, and de quolibet Burgo Duos
Burgenses, etc. eligi facias, etc. To cause to be chosen two Citisens of every
City, and two Burgesses of every Burgh.

The Retorn. Brev. Parl. 26. Ed. 1. in Turri Land.
first Returns Extant of Knights, Citisens and Burgesses are in the Twenty
Sixth of Edward the First, and in that of Wiltshire Wiltshire.
for that year Annexed to the Writ, there were returned two Knights for the
County; two Citisens for New Sarum, two Burgesses for Dounton, two Burgesses
for the Devises, two for the Burgh of Chippenham, and two for Malmsbury, with
their Manucaptors, and the Writ was sent to the Constable of Merleberge, (that
is, the Constable of the Castle there,) and Ballivis Libertatis Caln, and
Worth, qui nullum inde dederunt Responsum. And to the Bailiffs of the Liberty
of Caln and Worth, who returned no Answer. To the City of New Sarum, and these
Six other Burghs, the Sheriff of this year, made his Precepts, and for them
only made his Returns.

In the Retorn. Brev. Parl. 12. Ed. 3.
Returns of Knights, Citisens and Burgesses to serve for this County in the
Twelfth of Edward the Third, in a Parliament holden at York three weeks after
Michaelmass, Wilts.
the Execution of the Writ was in a Schedule fewed to it, Executio istius
Brevis patet in Cedula huic Brevi consuta. After the Return of the Knights, the
Sheriff for that year, Return only two Citisens for Sarum, two Burgesses for
Wilton and two for Dounton, with Manucaptors; and then for two Burgesses for
Merleberg; Breve retornatum fuit Constabulario Castri Merleberg, eo quod nulla
inde fieri potuit Executio in Balliva mea infra Libertatem praedictam. Et idem
Constabularius qui habet Returnum omnium Brevium and Executiones eorundem,
nullum mihi inde dedit Responsum. The Writ was returned to the Constable of the
Castle of Marleburgh, because it could not be Executed by me in that Liberty,
and the Constable, that has the Return of all Writs and the Execution of them
gave me no Answer. The Sheriff of this year made his Precept to two Burghs
only, and for them, and no other made his Return, and one of them was not
returned in the Twenty Sixth of Edward the First, and then immediately after
his Answer concerning Marleburgh, closes the Return thus. Non sunt plures
Civitates, neque Burgi infra Ballivam meam, that there were no more Cities, nor
Burghs within his Bailywick: That is, within the County, norwithstanding
Bedwin, Caln, Chippenham, Creklade, Devises, Lutgershal, Malmsbury and
Marleburgh had frequently Burgesses returned to Parliament, especially the two
later, before this time, as appears by the Returns in Edward the First, Second
and Third until this year.

In the Retorn. Brev. Parl. 36. Ed. 3.
Return of the Thirty Sixth of this King, after the Return of Knights for the
same County, and Citisens for New Sarum, there were by this Sheriff two
Burgesses returned for Wilton, Wilts.
two for the Burgh of Old Sarum, two for the Burgh of Dounton, two for the
Burgh of Chippenham, two for the Burgh of Caln, in the Return. Nomina
Burgensium Burgi de Caln, two for the Burgh of Marleburg, two for the Burgh of
Devises, two for the Burgh of Malmsbury, two for the Burgh of Creklade, Nomina
Burgensium Burgi de Creklade, so in the Return, and two for Bed^inde. Then
after the Names of the Burgesses for those ten Burghs, with their Manucaptors,
the Sheriff closes his Return with these Words, and non sunt plures Civitates
nec Burgi in Comitatu praedicto, Ideo inde ulterius nichil actum est, and there
are no more Cities nor Burghs, within the said County, and therefore there is
nothing further done in this matter.

The Return of these Burgesses in the Dors of the Writ, is much to our purpose,
and runs thus: Ibid. in Dorso Brevis.
Ego Henricus Sturmy Vicecomes praetextu istius Brevis de Comitatu infra
Scripto, Duos Milites, and de qualibet Civitate ejusdem Comitatus Duos Cives,
and de quolibet Burgo dicti Comitatus Duos Burgenses de melioribus,
validioribus, and discretioribus, Militibus, Civibus and Burgensibus,
Comitatus, Civitatum and Burgorum praedictorum eligi feci juxta tenorem istius
Brevis, and nomina dictorum Militum Civium and Burgensium patent in quadam
cedula huic Brevi Consuta. That is,

I Henry Sturmy Sheriff, by Virtue or Pretext of this Writ, have caused to be
chosen, in the County Underwritten two Knights, and of every City of the same
County two Citisens, and of every Burgh of the said County two Burgesses, of
the best, most able, and discreet, Knights, Citisens and Burgesses of the
County, Cities and Burghs aforesaid, according to the Tenor of the Writ; and
the Names of the Knights, Citisens and Burgesses, are Written in a Schedule
sewed to this Writ.

WILTS.
In this Return notwithstanding the Sheriff returned that there were no more
Cities nor Burghs in his County, yet he left out Lutgershall, which had sent
Burgesses to Parliament, 7th of Ed. 2. twice in the 8th of Ed. 2. the 4th of Ed.
3. the 14th of Ed. 3. and 33d of Ed. 3. before this time, as appears by the
Returns of those years.

In the 43d of Edward the Third. The Retorn. Brev. Parl. 43. Ed. 3.
Return is thus upon the Dors of the Writ. Ego Walterus Haywood, Vicecom. Vobis
sic Respondeo Mandatum Vestrum Reverenter sum Executus prout patet in Cedula
huit Brevi Consuta. I Walter Haywood Sheriff, Wilts.
make you this Answer, that I have Reverently, or rather (according to the
meaning of the Man) Truly, Executed your Command, as is to be seen in the
Schedule sewed to this Writ. And then Returns only the Names of the Knights,
Citisens for New Sarum, Burgesses for Wilton, Old Sarum, Marleburgh, the
Devises, Malmsbury, Creklade and no more, making no Return for Caln,
Chippenham, Bedwin, or Lutgershal, nor Excuse why he did not.

In the 26th of Retorn. Brev. Parl. 26. Ed. 1.
Edward the 1st, The Sheriff of Buckingham-Shire made this Return in the Dors
of the Writ. Nulli sunt Cives, nec Burgenses in Comitatu praedicto, nor
Civitas, Bucks and Bedford.
nec Burgus propter quod Cives, nec Burgenses coram vobis venire facere non
possum. There are no Citisens nor Burgesses in the County aforesaid, nor City,
nor Burgh, for which cause I cannot make Citisens or Burgesses to come before
you.

In the 28th of that King, the Retorn. Brev. Parl. 28. Ed. 1.
Sheriff returned for Agmundesham, Wicomb and Wendover, two Burgesses for each,
which were Elected by those Towns or Burghs. B^cks, etc.


In the 30th of the same King, there were only Ibid. 30. Ed. 1.
two Burgess^s returned for Wycomb, Bucks, etc.
and none for Agmundesham or Wendover.

In the First and Second of Edward the Second, the then Sheriffs Ibid. 12. Ed.
2.
returned two Burgesses for Wycomb, Bucks, etc.
two for Wendover, two for Agmondesham, and two for Great Marlow.

In the 6th of Edward the Second, Parliament at Ibid. 6. Ed. 2.
Woodstock July 20th, the Sheriff made this Return, Nullae sunt Civitates in
Comitatu Bucks, Bucks, etc nec etiam Burgi praeter in Villa de Wycomb. There
are no Cities or Burghs in the County of Buckingham, except in the Town of
Wycomb.

In the 12th of this King, Ibid. 12. Ed. 6.
Wycomb is only returned as a Burgh, and Burgesses for it in Buckingham-Shire,
and in the close of the Return, Bucks, etc.
Nulla est Civitas nec plures Burgi, in Balliva mea. There is no City or more
Burghs in my Bailywick; and so no other Burghs were returned in this County,
until after the Reign of Edward the Fourth, or the Parliament in 1641. And there
are many omissions of very many other inconsiderable Burghs, for 100, 150, 200,
250, 300. or more years, grounded upon the like Returns, some of which sent
Burgesses, but once or twice, before the Years, 1640 and 1641.

In the 21st and 22d of Edward the Third, after the Ibid. 21. 22. Ed. 3.
Return for Knights of the Shire, for Gloucestershire, Gloucestershire.
and Burgesses, for Gloucester and Bristol, the Sheriff Returns, Non sunt plures
Burgi seu Civitates in Balliva mea, that there were no more Cities nor Burghs
in his County.

In the 11th, 17th, 22d of Edward the Third, after Knights for the County, and
only Citisens for Worcester, the Ibid. 11.17.22. Ed. 3.
Returns were the same as in Gloucestershire. Worcestershire.


And so it was in See Returns of these several Counties.
Yorkshire, Lincolnshire, Cornwall, Dorset, Devon, Somerset, Southampton,
Surry, Sussex, and most if not all Counties in England, where there were, at
the time of the Returns, any Small, Poor, Inconsiderable Burghs, and where the
Sheriffs were more or less kind to them, they returned or omitted them at
Pleasure, and for all what ever I could find, notwithstanding all my Endeavor,
without the direction of the King or his Council.

In the 5th of Richard the Second, there was a Law made, Stat. at large, 5.
Rich. 2. cap. 4 p. 169.
that if any Sheriff of the Realm should be from thenceforth negligent in
making his Returns of Writs of the Parliament, or that he should leave out of
the said Returns any Cities or Bouroughs, which be bound and of old time were
wont to come to the Parliament, he shall be punished in the manner as was
accustomed to be done in the said Case in the said time past. But
notwithstanding this Law, the Practice of the Sheriffs remained the same it was
before, as will be proved by what shall in part next be said concerning the
meaning and reason of these Returns.

When the Sheriffs made their Returns, that there was not any, or more Cities
and Burghs in such or such Counties, than for which they had Returned
Burgesses, no Man can believe they were so Ignorant, as not to know there were
other Burghs, or more than they had Returned Burgesses for, and therefore some
other than the very Literal meaning of those Words must be found out.

And to my Apprehension, The reasons of the Returns of non sunt plures Burgi,
etc.
the reasons (which also show the meaning) of these Returns, in these Words,
Non est aliqua Civitas, vel aliquis Burgus, or non sunt plures Civitates, vel
Burgi (than what were returned) in Balliva mea, was for that many times, there
was no able, fit, Persons for that Service to be found in the other Burghs of
the County, at the time of the Return. (The choice being always made in those
days out of their own Body, and not of Foreigners or Country Gentlemen.) And
Secondly, for that the Burghs were so Poor as they were not able to pay the
Burgesses their Wages or Expenses.

This assertion seems to be manifestly evinced, by some other Returns made in
different Words, though of the same Sense and Import, Retorn. Brev. Parl. 21.
Ed. 3.
in the 21 Ed. 3. after the Burgesses Returned for Exon, Barnstable, Plympton,
Tavystock, Toryton and Totnes. The Sheriff of Devon Shire closes his Return
with these Words, Devon.
Non sunt plures Civitates vel Burgi in Balliva mea quae r^^onari possant.
There are not any more Cities or Burghs in my Bailywick, which can be Returned,
omitting all other Burghs in that County, by these Words it should seem, that
either there were no Burgesses fit or qualified for the Service of Parliament in
the other Burghs, or that they were so Poor as they could not bear the Expenses
of such as should serve for them, for the Sheriff denies not that there were
more Burghs in his County, but affirms they were such as could not be Returned,
and if not for these, it is hard to imagine, for what other Reasons they were
such.

In the Ibid. in those years.
Returns for Worcestershire in 8 and 12 of Ed. 2. and 12, 14 Ed. 3. the
Sheriff ends them thus, after the Returns of Knights for the County, and
Citisens for Worcester, Wigorn.
Non est aliquis Burgus in Balliva mea, unde aliqui sunt Burgenses qui ad
dictum Parlementum venire possunt, there is not any Burgh in my Bailywick,
whence any Burgesses can come to Parliament. For the reasons without doubt
abovementioned. Though Wyche (now Droitwich) had sent Burgesses to Parliament,
26. 28. 29. 30. of Ed. 1. and in 2. and 4. Ed. 2. and in 28. and 29. Ed. 1.
they received their Expenses, as appears by the Writs, de Expensis Militum,
Civium and Burgensium, then directed to the Bailiffs of that Town, and are to
be found in the close Rolls in those years.

In the 27. 28. 29. 33. of Hen. 6. the Sheriffs of Ibid. in those years.
Yorkshire, after the Return York was then a City and County, and so the Writs
for Citisens were directed to, and returned by the Sheriffs of that City, and
Hull was then also a Town and County, and the Writs were directed to, and
returned by the Sheriffs of the Town.
only of the Burgesses for Scardeburgh conclude thus. Et non sunt Aliquae
Civitates, vel aliqua Civitas, nec plures Burgi in Comitatu Eborum, unde
aliquis Civis, ceu plures Burgenses ad Parliamentum praedictum ad praesens
venire facere possum. And there are not any Cities, or City, or more Burghs in
the County of York, from whence I can make any Citisens, or more Burgesses at
present come to the foresaid Parliament. I see not what could be a Temporary
reason why at that present the Sheriff of Yorkshire, could not cause more
Burgesses to come to those Parlements, from other Burghs than Scardeburgh,
except one, or both of those abovementioned.

In the 29 Hen. 6. only Citisens Ibid. 29. Hen. 6.
for Norwich, Burgesses for Lin and Yarmouth Returned for Norffolk, and only
for Ipswick and Donewick for Suffolk. Norff. and Suff.


In Ibid. 28. Hen. 6.
Cornwall, Cornwall.
28th of the same King, Burgesses returned only for Launceston, Leskard,
Bodmin, Lostwithiel, Truro, Helleston, and then follows, Nullae sunt Civitates
infra Ballivam meam, nec sunt plures Burgi infra Ballivam meam.

In Ibid. 28. Hen. 6.
Devon, Devon.
the same year Burgesses Returned only for Exon, Dartmouth, Totnes, Plymouth,
Plimpton, Tavestock, Barnstable.

In the 26th of Ed. 1. after the Knights of the Shire Ibid. 26. Ed. 1.
Ralph Fitz-Thomas and William le Chantour were Returned for the Town of
Lancaster, Lanca-Shire.
and Adam Fitz-Ralph, and Adam de Biri for Preston.

In the 8th of Ed. 2. only Ibid. 2. Ed. 2.
Knights of the Shire Returned, no Burgesses for any Burghs. Lanca-Shire.


In the 19th of Ed. 2. for Ibid. 19. Ed. 2.
Lancaster, William Laurence, John Brokeholes, no Return then for Preston, and
the Words of the Sheriffs Return are, Lanca-Shire.
Non sunt aliquae Civitates in dicto Comitatu nec Burgi praeter Lancaster in
Balliva mea, there are no Cities in the said County, nor Burghs, beside
Lancaster in my Bailywick.

In the 1. Retorn. Brev. Parl. 1. Ed. 3.
of Ed. 3. at the Parliament at Lincoln, that year John le Ken, and Laurence de
Bulk were returned for Lancaster, and John Starkey and Henry Banaster for
Preston, and no Returns for other Burghs. Lanca-Shire.


He began his Reign January 25th A. D. 1326.
In the Ibid. Eodem Anno.
same year at the Parliament at York, Nich. de Lancaster and Henry Burgeis were
Returned for Lancaster, but none for Preston, or any other Burgh.

In the Ibid. 2. Ed. 3.
Second of the same King, in the Parliament at Northampton three Weeks after
Easter. Lanca-Shire.
The Writ of Summons dated 5. Martii. John de Burghton Sheriff. Adam
Fitz-Simon, John le Ken, were Returned for Lancaster, and then the Return was
thus closed. Non sunt aliquae Civitates vel Burgi in Balliva mea praeter Burgum
Lancaster. There are no Cities and Burghs in my Bailywick, except the Burgh of
Lancaster. No Return for Preston this Parliament.

In the Ibid. Eodem Anno.
same year of the same King, in the Parliament at New Sarum on Sunday next after
Fifteen days after Michaelmass, the Writ of Summons dated 26 Augusti, and the
same John de Burghton Sheriff, John le Ken, and Robert de Bolroun were Returned
for Lancaster; and for Preston, William Fitz-Paulin, and Nich. de Preston, and
then the Return ends thus, Non sunt aliquae Civitates in Balliva mea. There are
no Cities in my Bailywick.

In the Ibid. 4. Ed. 3.
4th of Edward the Third, in the Parliament at Winchester on the Sunday next
before St Gregory, Lanca-Shire.
the Writ of Summons dated 25 Januarii, John de Denom Sheriff, William de
Bolleroun, John de Bulk Returned for Lancaster, but no Burgesses Returned for
Preston, nor does the Return end with, Non sunt alii Burgi, etc.

In the Ibid. the same year.
same year of the same King, in the Parliament at Westminster on the Monday
before the Feast of St Katherine, (i. e. November 25th.) the Writ of Summons
dated 23 Octobris. The same John de Denom Sheriff, Robert de Bolleroun and John
de Ken were Returned for Lancaster; and William Fitz-Paulin and Henry Haydoke
for Preston, and then the Return is thus concluded, Non sunt alii Burgi in
Balliva mea.

In the Ibid. 34. Ed. 3.
34th of Edward the Third, the Writ of Summons dated the 20th of November,
Lanca-Shire.
for a Parliament to be holden at Westminster on the Sunday before the
Conversion of St Paul was directed to Henry Duke of Lancaster, or his Deputy,
who made this Return. Henricus Dux Lancastriae sic respondet. Nomina Militum ad
respondendum, faciendum, and consentiendum in praesenti Parliamento prout idem
Breve requirit pro Communitate dicti Ducatus, Willielmus de Radecliffe,
Ricardus de Tounkay. In eodem Ducatu non est aliqua Civitas, nec Burgus qui
ante haec Tempora, in aliquo Parliamento respondit per Burgenses. Henry Duke of
Lancaster answers thus. The Names of the Knights who are to answer, do and
consent in the present Parliament, for the Community of the said Dukedom, as the
same Writ requires, William de Radcliffe, Richard de Tounkay. There is not any
City in the same Dukedom, nor Burgh, which before this time answered in any
Parliament by Burgesses. It wants not probability, that from the 4th of Edward
the Third, to this 34th of the same, there might be Thirty years intermission
and omission of Burgesses for these Burghs, (in all that time there being no
Return of Burgesses for this County,) which might be the reason of this Return.

In the 38th of this King, the Ibid. 38. Ed. 3.
Sheriff of Lanca-Shire after the Return of the Knights, gives the reason why
Citisens and Burgesses ought not, nor were wont to come, in these Words. Et non
sunt aliqui Civitates seu Burgi infra Comitatum de quibus aliqui Cives seu
Burgenses ad dictum Parliamentum venire debent seu solent, propter eorum
debilitatem seu paupertatem. That there were not any Cities, or Burghs within
that County, from which any Citisens or Burgesses ought, or were wont to come
to the said Parliament, for, or by reason of their Inability or Poverty.

In the 39th of Edward the Third, the Return is Ibid. 39. Ed. 3.
, Non est aliqua Civitas seu aliquod Burgum de quibus aliqui Cives seu
Burgenses venire possunt seu solent secundum tenorem Brevis propter eorum
debilitatem and paupertatem. There is not any City or any Burgh from which any
Citisens or Burgesses, can or were wont to come, by reason of their Low
Condition or Poverty. The same Words are in the 50th of Edward the Third. And
the Returns of this County are closed after this manner with some small
variation, in the Reigns of Edward the Third, Richard the Second, Henry the
Fourth, Fifth and Sixth, and Edward the Fourth, and no Burgesses Returned for
any Town or Towns in all that time from the 33d of Edward the Third, which was
124 years, and how much longer it cannot well be known.

In the 10th of Henry the Fourth, there was this Return made after the Knights,
etc. Ibid. 10. Hen. 4.
Et non sunt aliqui Cives aut Burgenses infra dictum Comitatum Lancastriae qui
ad dictum Parliamentum venire possunt propter eorum paupertatem and
debilitatem. The same Return is Word for Word in the 2d of Henry the Fifth.

In the 7th, 25th, 28th, 33d of Henry the Sixth. The Returns were with this
small Variation. Ibid. 7. 25. 28. 33. H. 6.
Et non est aliqua Civitas infra Comitatum praedictum nec Burgus qui ad aliquod
Parliamentum Temporibus retroactis aliquos Cives aut Burgenses Mittere solebant
propter eorum paupertatem and debilitatem, ideo de Civibus and Burgensibus
nulla fit mentio. And there is not any City within the County aforesaid, or
Burgh, which used to send any Burgesses or Citisens, to any Parliament in former
times, by reason of their Poverty and Inability. Therefore no mention is made
of Citisens or Burgesses.

In the 27th of Henry the Sixth. The Return after the Knights Names, is
somewhat different from others. Ibid. 27. Hen. 6.
Et non est aliqua Civitas infra Comitatum praedictum nec Burgus qui ad aliquod
Parliamentum temporibus retroactis aliquos Cives aut Burgenses solebant
invenire propter eorum debilitatem and paupertatem, Lanca-Shire.
ideo, etc. And there is not any City within the County aforesaid, or Burgh,
which in former times were wont to find Citisens or Burgesses in any Parliament
by reason, etc.

In the 17th of Edward the Fourth, on the Dors of the Writ of Summons for
Election of two Knights for the County, two Citisens for every City, and two
Burgesses for every Burgh, in the Return after the Indorsment of the Knights
for the County and their Manucaptors, it follows. Et quia non est aliqua
Civitas infra Comitatum praedictum, aut Burgus qui ad aliquod Parliamentum
temporibus retroactis aliquos Cives aut Burgenses Mittere solebant propter
eorum paupertatem and debilitatem, coram Domino Rege and Consilio suo, ideo de
Civibus and Burgensibus non est mentio. And because there is not any City
within the said County or Burgh which in former times sent any Citisens or
Burgesses to Parliament before the King and his Council by reason of their
Poverty and Inability, therefore no mention is made of Citisens and Burgesses.
The same Words are in the Sheriffs Indenture of Return of Knights of the County
annexed to the Sheriffs Precept, and the same Returns were in the 7th and 12th
years of this King.

In the Seventh of Edward the Fourth, (who began his Reign March 4th A. D.
1461.) in the Parliament at Westminster on the Third of June, the Retorn. Brev.
Parl. 7. Ed. 4.
Writ of Summons dated February 28. in the sixth of his Reign, Henry Barle
Sheriff of Essex and Hertfordshire, after the Returns of Knights for each
County, and Burgesses only for Colchester and Maldon, adds this Clause; Et in
praedicto Comitatu Hertford non est Aliqua Civitas, nec aliquis Burgus, unde
Aliqui Cives sive Burgenses, nec aliqua Civitas, neque plures Burgi in Dicto
Comitatu Essex, unde plures Burgenses neque aliqui Cives Eligi possunt. That is,

And in the foresaid County of Hertford, there is not any City, or any Burgh
from whence any Citisens or Burgesses may be chosen. Nor is there any City, or
more Burghs in the said County of Essex, from whence any Citisens, or more
Burgesses may be chosen.

By these few Returns and Instances, of very many more which might have been
produced, if needful, it is abundantly proved, That from the 23d of Edw. 1. when
the First Writs were sent forth for the choice of Citisens and Burgesses, The
first Writs sent for the Choice of Citisens and Burgesses.
and also during the Reigns of Edw. 2. and 3. Rich. 2. Hen. 4.5. and 6. and
Edw. 4. it was left to the Discretion and Judgment of the Sheriffs, which
Burghs were fit and able to send Burgesses, and which not. Sheriffs Judges of
what Burghs were fit and able to send Burgesses, and what not.
And that if ancient able Burghs became poor and indigent, and unable to pay
the Expenses of their Burgesses, or had none fit to choose, it was a just Ground
for the Sheriff to excuse them from the trouble and charge of Electing and
sending Burgesses, notwithstanding the Statutes 5 Rich. 2. c. 4. 1 Hen. 5. c.
1. 8 Hen. 6. c. 7. 23 Hen. 6. c. 15. And also, That the plain Negative Returns,
The reason and meaning of Sheriffs Negative Returns.
of Non sunt aliqui Civitates vel Burgi in Balliva mea, or Non sunt plures
Civitates vel Burgi in Comitatu praedicto, etc. are to be explained by those
other Returns of Non sunt aliquae Civitates, vel aliqua Civitas, nec plures
Burgi, (in this, or that County) unde Cives vel Burgenses venire facere possum,
or unde Cives and Burgenses venire possunt, vel venire debent, vel venire
solebant, and other different Expressions before mentioned. Propter debilitatem
eorum and paupertatem. Those Absolute Negatives in Terms only, being equivalent
in signification to the other, and import no more, than, that those Burghs the
Sheriffs did not return, at such times, were poor and inconsiderable, and that
either they had not fit Persons to send, or for their poverty could not pay
their Wages, or bear the Expenses by Law due to them. And all this was done by
Virtue of the General Clause in the Writs, De qualibet Civitate duos Cives,
and de quolibet Burgo duos Burgenses, etc. For in the Charters of Ancient
Burghs, there was no Clause or Grant for the choice or sending of Burgesses to
Parliament, nor have I ever seen or heard of any particular Directions from the
King and Council, or others, to the Sheriffs, for the sending their Precepts to
this or that Burgh only, and not to others.

I shall finish the Answer to the first Question with this Remarque; No
Complaint made by the Burghs of Sheriffs for not sending Precepts to Elect
Burgesses, etc.
That the Burghs during the time of all these Kings Reigns, never complained of
the Sheriffs for not Returning them Burghs, or not sending Precepts to them, or
taking away their Birthrights. Nor did they clamor against hard usage, or
injustice. Nor did the King, Lords, or Commons in Parliament, ever blame,
complain of, or question the Sheriffs for sending, or not sending Precepts to
this, or that Burgh; to all, or any of them, and making Returns accordingly.
Nor was it accounted an Advantage, Honor, or Privilege, to be bound to send
Burgesses to Parliament, but rather on the contrary, it was reputed a Burden
and a grievance for Poor and Small Burghs to send them, as in the Case of Pat.
42. Ed. 3. part. 1. m. 8. Torriton in Devon-Shire discharged from sending
Burgesses.
Toriton in Devon-Shire, that Petitioned the King in Parliament to be discharged
of sending Burgesses to Parliament, suggesting it was great Trouble and Charge,
and to their manifest Damage and Depression, and their Petition was Granted,
and the Town or Burgh Exonerated and Excused for ever after, notwithstanding it
had sent Burgesses Thirty two times before.

The Second Question, who were or ought to be the Electors in real or pretended
Burghs, has much exercised the House of Commons, (since they have taken upon
them to determine those Cases) and perhaps there has scarcely been given a
direct and true Solution of it to this day. In the 22d of King Commons Journal,
die veneris 21 Maii 22 Jacobi. A. D. 1624.
James in a contest between Sir William Masters, and Sir Maurice Berkley, upon
an Election made at Cirencester in Gloucestershire, upon the Question, it was
Resolved, that no consent of Parties, Competitors, can alter the Legal course
of Elections. Where no Charter or Custom, how Elections to be made?
That where no Charter or Custom to the contrary, the Election to be made by
all the Houshoulders; that Sir William Masters duly Elected, that he had the
greater Number of Inhabitants and Freeholders; and that where i. e. in truth
where there is not, nor can be a Burgh.
neither Charter nor Custom, nor free Burgesses in any Borough, there the
Election to be made by Hous-holders, and not only Freeholders.

In the 4th of King Commons Journal. veneris 28 Martii 4. Car. 1. A. D. 1628.
Charles the First, Report made from the Committee of Privileges, (now the
Committee of Elections) by Mr. Hackwill.

Colchester, one only Return made by the Bailiffs, in which Sir Thomas Cheek,
and Mr. Alford returned. That the Bailiffs, Aldermen and Common Council, Two
Elections, one by the Mayor Aldermen and Common Council, the other by the
common sort of Burgesses. An insufficient prescription.
consisting of Forty two in an upper Room, read the Writ and there Elected Sir
Thomas Cheek, and Mr. Alford. In a lower Room the Common sort of Burgesses in
General, Elected Sir Thomas Cheek, and Sir William Masham.

That the Bailiffs, etc. made their Prescription, by Election, as they now made
it. Against this alleged, that till Richard the First, no Bailiffs, nor then,
no Common Council, till Edward the Fourth, then Sixteen appointed by a new
Charter, which by Constitutions sithence they have increased to --

Upon this the Prescription holden Insufficient, that the Committee is also of
Opinion, that the Election of Sir William Masham is Good, and his Name to be
put in by the Bailiff instead of Mr. Alford.

Upon Question Sir William Masham duly Elected, and his Name by one of the
Bailiffs was Inserted at the Board, in stead of Mr. Alfords.

Mr. Hackwill Commons Journ. Sabbat. 12 April. 4. Car. 1. 1628. Whether the
Commons or chief Burgesses, Electors.
Reports from the Committee of Privileges the Case of the Burgh of Bridport.
The Question whether the Commons, or the two Bailiffs and Thirteen Capital
Burgesses are Electors. There the last claiming by Prescription the sole Power,
this proved by two Witnesses for Forty Six years, primo Jacobi claimed it, but
were denied.

A Certificate of Disclaimer under the Hands of 80 Commoners offering to
justify it upon Oath, and affirmed they could have proved it by Forty
Commoners more.

On the other part Records produced the 6th of Edw. 6. These the very words of
the Journal.
Indenture returned the Election to be per Ballivos per assensum Communitatis,
2. and 3. Philip. and Mariae Election accords, 1 Eliz. accords, 1 Jacobi
accords. This also proved by two Witnesses, above 40 Commoners gave Voices
primo Jacobi. Another that above 60 years ago the Commoners had Voice, and that
he himself, then a Commoner, gave Voice.

Replied to this, That the Addition of the Commonalty, And these.
because that the Name of the Corporation, that so they make their Leases, yet
the Commoners never meddle.

Exception to one of the Witnesses, That he, a Commoner, And these, and so to
the end of this Case.
and very aged Man, scarce could hear, or be heard; That the other have been
Disfranchised, and therefore spoke out of spleen.

Alleged for them, That primo Jacobi the Commons called, because they were to
Contribute toward Wages.

Agreed by the Major part of the Committee, That the Commoners had Voice in
Election.

Resolved also here no good Election, because the Commons having right of
Voice, had no Warning as they ought to have had.

Resolved upon the Question, The Commonalty in General ought to have Voices in
the Elections of the Burgesses for Parliament.

Upon the Question, The Election void in respect of the want of Warning to the
Commonalty.

A new Writ for a new Election.

Mr. Hackwill Commons Journal, Jovis 8 Maii, 4 Car. 1. 1626.
reports from the Committee of Privileges the Case of Boston in Lincolnshire,
Mr. Bellingham the Recorder, and Mr. Okeley chosen.

The Question, Whether a Select Number, or the Commonalty were to choose. Sir He
of my own Knowledge a Friend to the Cause.
Anthony Irby chosen by Majority of Voices of the Commonalty, and 14 of the
Select Number.

Agreed by the Committee, That the Election of Burgesses in all Buroughs did
of Common Right belong to the Commoners, Voted to whom the right of Election
belongs in all Burghs.
and that nothing could take it from them, but a Prescription and a constant
usage beyond all memory.

1. Upon the Question, the right of Election for Burgesses to serve in
Parliament for Boston, rests in the Commonalty, and not in the Mayor,
Aldermen, and Common Council.

2. Upon the Question, Mr. Okely not duly Elected or Returned.

3. That Sir Anthony Irby duly Elected, and ought to have been Returned.

4. That the Mayor of Boston shall be sent for, to put out Mr. Okely's Name,
and put in Sir Anthony Irby's.

Mr. Hackwill Commons Journ. Sabbat. ultimo Maii, 4 Car. 1. 1628.
reports from the Committee of Privileges the Case of Warwick. Question,
Whether the Election to be made by the Mayor and Common Council, or by the
Commons in general? That a Petition produced whereby above 200 Commoners
Disclaim to have any Right of Election. The Case of Warwick.
But that refused to be accepted by the Committee, because if but one Commoner
appear to sue for his Right, they will hear him.

1. Upon the Question, The Right of Election for the Town of Warwick belongs to
the Commonalty.

2. That Mr. Robert Grevill and Mr. Francis Lucy unduly Elected.

3. A new Writ to issue for a new Choice in their Rooms.

By these Five Instances it appears how perplexed and conjectural the Opinions
of the Committee, and Resolves of the House of Commons were, concerning the
Right of Electing of Burgesses to serve in Parliament, and the Persons in whom
it was Lodged. They judged, the Communities or Commonalties of Cities and
Burghs to be only the ordinary and lower sort of Citisens, Burgesses, or
Freemen in General. And that the Right of Election of Burgesses in all Burghs
did of common Right belong to the Commoners, (meaning) the ordinary sort of
Burgesses or Freemen, and not to the Mayor, Aldermen, and Common Council, as in
the Cases of Boston, Colchester, and Warwick, nor in the Bailiffs and Capital
Burgesses, being a Select Number, as in the Case of Bridport.

The Ground of this popular Error was, That this Commit (notwithstanding the
two great Antiquaries Ibid. Jovis 20 Martii, 3 Car. 1. 1627.
Sir Robert Cotton, and Mr. Seldom, and the Oracle of Law (so called) Sir
Edward Coke, were Members of it) did not truly understand the meaning of the
words Communitates Civitatum, and Burgorum, the Commonalty of Cities and
Burghs; which always signified the Mayor, Aldermen, and Common Council, The
Communities or Commonalties of Cities and Burghs are the Governing part of them.
where they were to be found, or the Steward or Bailiff, and Capital Burgesses,
or in short the Governing part of Cities and Towns, by what Persons soever they
were Governed, or Names and Titles they were called and known, which has been
sufficiently evinced by what has been said before in this Treatise, upon that
Subject. So that, if the Communities of Cities and Burghs had been truly
understood, the Committee ought to have Determined, and the House Resolved,
That the Right of Election in very many, if not in most, or all Cities and
Burghs, ought to have rested in the Governing part of them, which is always a
Select Number. And therefore I shall produce many Instances from the Returns of
Parliament Writs upon Record, to Confirm this Opinion.

In the 26th of Edward the First, in most Counties, Cities and Burghs, the
Knights, Citisens and Burgess^s are only named with their Manucaptors, or
Sureties, in the Dors of the Writ, as for Example. Retorn. Brev. Parl. 26. Ed.
1. The first Returns Extant.
Nomina Duorum Militum Comitatus Hereford, with each of them four Manucaptors,
there named. Nomina Duorum Civium Civitatis Hereford, with each two Manucaptors
or Sureties there named. Nomina Duorum Burgensium de Burgo Leominster, with
each two Manucaptors, there named. But not said by whom Elected, and so in many
others, with some, not very material, Variation.

Yet in some, the Elections are said to be made by the Bailiffs, with the
assent of the Community, or for the Community of the Burghs. So the choice was
made for the Town of Derby. Et Breve Ibid.
istud returnatum fuit Willielmo Oyler, Ballivo Libertatis Villae Derby, qui
plenum Returnum Brevis habet pro duobus Burgensibus ejusdem Villae, and mihi
Respondit, quod elegit assensu Communitatis Totius Villae praedictae Magistrum
Willielmum Broun de Derby, and Nicholaum Latimer de eadem. And that Writ was
Returned to William le Oyler Bailiff of Derby, who has full Return of the Writ
for two Burgesses of the same Town. And he Answers me, he has chosen by the
assent of the Community of the whole Town aforesaid, Master William Broun of
Derby, and Nicholas le Latimer of the same, who have two Manucaptors for each
Returned. In like manner for the Town of Nottingham. Et Breve istud Ibid.
Retornatum fuit Ballivis, etc. Qui michi Responderunt quod elegerunt assensu
Communitatis Villae praedictae Johan. le Fleminge de Nottingham, Adam le
Fleminge de eadem, and that Writ was Returned to the Bailiffs of the Liberty of
Nottingham, etc. Who Answer me, that they have chosen by the assent of the
Commonalty of the Town aforesaid, John the Fleming of Nottingham aforesaid, and
Adam the Fleming of the same, who found each two Sureties for their Appearance
in Parliament. So two Burgesses chosen, Ibid.
pro Communitate Burgi Colecester, for the Community of the Burgh of
Colechester, with four Manucaptors or Sureties each, likewise, Ibid.
Johannes de Westreet de Hertford Simon Wall de eadem, electi sunt duo
Burgenses per Communitatem Burgensium Hertford, etc. And gave Security for
their Appearance by four Manucaptors each.

Accordingly two Burgesses were Elected for the Community of the Burgh of
Newcastle upon Tine, with their Names, and Manucaptors Names in a Schedule.
Nomina Ibid.
Burgensium pro Communitate Burgi Novi Castri super Tinam, sunt in Cedula huic
Brevi Annexa.

In the 27th of Edward the Third, that King directed his Writ to the Bailiffs
of the Town of Boston Boston.
in Lincolnshire. Edwardus Retorn. Brev. Parl. 27 Ed. 3.
Dei Gratia, etc. Ballivis Villae de Sancto Botolpho, etc. And then after the
Introduction to, and Causes of the Precept itself, which follows in these
Words, Vobis praecipimus firmiter injungentes quod duos Burgenses de
provectioribus, and discretioribus, and magis expertis Burgensibus Villae
praedictae, de assensu ejusdem Villae sine dilatione eligi, and eos ad Diem and
Locum praedictos venire faciatis, ita quod iidem Burgenses pro se and
Communitate Villae praedictae sufficientem potestatem habent, ad Tractandum,
Consulendum, and Consentiendum his quae tunc Divina favente Clementia de
Communi Consilio contigerit Ordinari, etc. We command, firmly injoyning you,
that without delay you cause to be chosen two Burgesses, of the more Grave,
Discreet and Experienced Burgesses of the Town aforesaid, by the assent of the
same Town. So that the same Burgesses may have sufficient Power for themselves
and the Community of the Town aforesaid to Treat, Consult of and Consent to
those things, which, Divine Clemency favoring, shall happen to be ordained by
common advice, etc.

The Return in the Dors of the Writ was answerable to the Words of the Precept
of this Writ. Respons. Ibid.
Johannis de Morys, and Ricardi de Read Ballivorum Villae de Sancto Botolpho.

Manucaptores Johannis de Skirbek de Sancto Botolpho unius Burgensium Villae de
Sancto Botolpho, de assensu ejusdem Villae electi ad Tractandum, Consulendum,
and Consentiendum secundum Tenorem hujus Brevis.

Thomas de Tumby de Sancto Botolpho. Johannes de Gosberkirk de eadem.


Manucaptors or Sureties of John de Skirbek of Boston, one of the Burgesses of
Boston, chosen by assent of the same Town, to Treat, Consult and Consent
according to the Tenor of this Writ.

Thomas de Tumby of Boston, John de Gosberkirk of the same.


The same Return, and in the same Words, is for William Bayard, the other
Burgess with two Manucaptors. This Town of Boston never Elected, or Returned
any Burgesses during the Residue of this Kings Reign, nor in the Reigns of
Richard the Second, Henry the Fourth, Fifth, Sixth, and Edward the Fourth.

In the Writ directed to the Mayor and Bailiffs of Bristol Bristol.
to choose Burgesses for the same Great Council, the Precept is the same. Ibid.
Vobis praecipimus firmiter injungentes, quod duos Burgenses de provectioribus,
and discretioribus and magis expertis Burgensibus Villae praedictae de assensu
ejusdem Villae sine dilatione eligi, and eos ad diem and locum praedictos
venire faciatis. Ita quod iidem Burgenses pro se and Communitate Villae
praedictae sufficientem potestatem habent, etc. As in the former Writ for
Boston.

To the Precept of this Writ, the following Return was made. Ibid. in Cedula.
Virtute Brevis Domini Regis praesentibus annexi, nos Major and Ballivi Villae
Bristol, de assensu Communitatis Villae praedictae eligi fecimus Thomam
Babbecary, and Willielmum Coumbe de essendo ad diem and locum infra Breve
contentos ad faciendum quod ex part Domini Regis eis tunc ibidem injungetur.
That is,

By Virtue of the Kings Writ annexed to these Presents, we the Mayor and
Bailiffs of the Town of Bristol, by assent of the Community of the Town
aforesaid, have caused Thomas Babbecary and William Coumbe to be chosen, to be
at the time and place contained in the Writ, to do what on the behalf of the
Lord the King, shall then, and there be enjoined them.

It appears by this Writ and Return, that the words Assensus Villae, and
Assensus Communitatis Villae, signified the same thing; and that as the
Community of the Town, so the Town itself, Government of the Town, and Body
Politic were, and did consist of a select Number.

The words of the Writ directed to the Mayor and Bailiffs of Excester Excester.
for the choice of Burgesses for this Great Council, are the same with those of
Boston and Bristol, Ibid.
Vobis praecipimus firmiter injungentes quod Duos Burgenses de Provectioribus,
Discretioribus, and magis Expertis Burgensibus Civitatis praedictae, de affensu
ejusdem Civitatis sine Dilatione Eligi, etc. Ita quod iidem Burgenses pro se
and Communitate Civitatis, etc. sufficientem potestatem habent, etc. The Return
was, as hereunder written.

Roberti de Brideport Ibid. in Dorso Brevis.
Manucaptores Johannes Spicer. Willielmus Wike.


Roberti de Hugheton Manucaptores Willielmus Sleght. Richard Oliver.


Responsio Ibid.
Roberti de Brideport Majoris Civitatis Exon. and Ricardi Oliver and Thomae
Spicer Ballivorum ejusdem Civitatis, ac Communitatis Civitatis praedictae,
talis est. Quod ipsi eligerunt praedictos Robertum de Brideport, and Robertum
de Hugheton Burgenses dictae Civitatis, ad faciendum secundum Tenorem istius
Brevis. In English thus:

The Answer of Robert de Brideport Mayor of the City of Exon, and Richard
Oliver and Thomas Spicer Bailiffs of the same City, and the Community of the
City aforesaid, is such; That they have chosen the foresaid Robert de
Brideport, and Robert de Hugheton Burgesses of the said City, to do according
to the Tenor of the Writ.

The words of this Return do illustrate the words of the former, and make it
most evident, That the Assent of the Mayor, Bailiffs, and Community of the City
of Exon, which was the Government of it, was the Assent of the City itself.

The form and words of the Writ for the choice of Citisens for the same Great
Council, directed to the Mayor and Sheriffs of the City of London, London.
are the same. Ibid.
Vobis praecipimus, etc. Quod duos Cives, etc. de assensu ejusdem Civitatis
sine Dilatione eligi, etc. The Return was as follows.

Eligi Ibid. in Dorso Brevis.
fecimus Thomam Leggy and Thomam Dolseley duos Cives Civitatis London de
assensu ejusdem Civitatis ad interessendum coram vobis in instanti Consilio
sufficientem potestatem pro se and Communitate Civitatis praedictae habentes ad
Tractandum, Consulendum, and Consentidum his, quae, Divina favente Clementia,
de Communi Consilio tunc contigerit Ordinari.

Et praedictus Thomas Leggy attachiatus est per Radulphum de Cauntebrigge, and
Johannem Herewardstoke. Et praedictus Thomas Dolseley attachiatus est per
Thomam Wilchir, and Rogerum de Reygate.

Responsio Adae Franceys Majoris, and Johannis de Stodeye, and Johannis Pecche
Vicecomitum.
The Return is thus made English:

We have caused to be chosen Thomas Leggy and Thomas Dolseley, two Citisens of
the City of London, by Assent of the same City, to appear before you in the
Council next to be holden, having sufficient Power for themselves, and the
Community of the foresaid City, to Treat, Consult, and Consent to those Things
which by Divine Clemency shall happen to be Ordained by Common Advice.

The foresaid Thomas Leggy has given Security for his being in Parliament by
John de Cauntebrigge, and John Herewardstoke. And the foresaid Thomas Dolseley
has done the same, by Thomas Wilchir, and Roger de Reygate.

The Answer of Adam Franceys Mayor, and John de Stodeye, and John Pecche
Sheriffs.
What is here meant, by the Assent of the City, and the Power they had to Treat
for themselves, and Community of it, and what the Community itself was, has
been cleared by what has been observed upon the Returns of Bristol and Exon;
and is confirmed by the following Record beyond all Contradiction.

Retorn. Parl. 12 Ed. 2.
Excellentissimo Principi and Domino suo carissimo Domino Edwardo Dei Gratia
Illustrissimo Regi Anglie Domino Hibernie and Duci Aquitanie Johannes de
Wengrave Major Civitatis London. London.
Aldermanni, Vicecomites, and tota Communitas ejusdem Civitatis, se and sua.
Noverint Excellentia vestra nos assignasse dilectos Concives nostros Johannem
de Cherleton, Willielmum de Flete and Rogerum le Palmere vel duos eorum, ac
eisdem vel duobus eorum plenam and sufficientem potestatem dedisse per
presents ad faciendum in hoc instanti Parliamento vestro a die Sancti
Michaelis ultimo preterito in tres septimanas apud Ebor. quod de Communi
Consilio ordinabitur in Parliamento praedicto juxta formam Brevis vestri nuper
nobis inde directi. In cujus rei testimonium has literas nostras eisdem fieri
fecimus Patentes. Sigillo Communitatis nostre predicte signatas. Dat. London.
Sextodecimo die Octobris, Anno Regni vestri duodecimo.

To the most Excellent Prince, and their most Dear Lord, the Lord Edward by the
Grace of God the most Illustrious King of England, Lord of Ireland, and Duke of
Aquitain, John de Wengrave Mayor of the City of London, the Aldermen, Sheriffs,
and the whole Community of the same City, Themselves and Theirs. Your
Excellency may know we have assigned our beloved Fellow-Citisens John de
Cherleton, William de Flete, and Roger le Palmere, or two of them, and have
given to them, or two of them, full and sufficient Power by these Presents, to
do in this your instant Parliament, to be holden at York three weeks after
Michaelmas, what shall be Ordained in the foresaid Parliament by Common Advice,
according to the form of your Writ lately to us directed. In witness whereof we
have made these our Letters Patents, to be sealed with the Seal of our
Community or Commonalty aforesaid. Dated at London the 16th day of October, in
the 12th year of your Reign.

There can be no doubt, but what was called the City in the preceding Record,
was the same with the Mayor, Aldermen, Sheriffs, and whole Community or
Commonalty in this Record.

The Writ upon which this Return was made, was dated at Nottingham, August
25th, and directed only to the Sheriffs of London, not to the Mayor, Aldermen,
Sheriffs and Community, as the Return insinuates, and the Precept was only to
choose two Citisens, though there are three Returned as chosen.

Edwardus Dei Gratia Rex Angliae, etc.
Vicecomitibus London, Retorn. Brev. Parl. 12 Ed. 2.
Salutem.
Quia pro diversis and arduis negotiis nos and statum Regni nostri specialiter
tangentibus Parliamentum nostrum apud Eborum a Die Sancti Michaelis proximo
futuro in tres septimanas tenere ac cum praelatis, etc. Vobis praecipimus
firmiter injungentes quod de Civitate nostra praedicta duos Cives de
discretioribus, etc.

Test meipso apud Nottingham 25 Die Augusti. Anno Regni nostri duodecimo.
Per ipsum Regem and Consilium.
In the Second of King Henry the Fifth, the Mayor of York York.
and thirteen more Concives, Fellow-Citisens named in the Return, See the
Returns of Parliament Writs for these years.
Plenam potestatem de tota Communitate Civitatis habentes, eligerunt duos Cives
jdoneos, etc. Having full power from the whole Community of the City, chose two
fit Citisens, etc. In Witness whereof they put their particular Seals to the
Indenture of Return.

In the Indenture of Return for the Town of Derby Derby.
in the Twelfth of Henry the Fourth, after Six of the Electors Names, Pryn's
Brevia Parl. Rediviva. p. 267.
which were of the Community, it follows, and per Multos alios de Communitate
praedicti Burgi Derby, qui in Curia Burgi interfuerunt Electi sunt duo
Burgenses, and by many others of the Community of the Burgh of Derby, which
were present in the Court of the Burgh, two Burgesses were Elected, etc.

In the Second of Edward the Third, for the Parliament at York, Bailiffs and
Communaltie de la Ville de Geppewic de nostre Commun assent avons Eluz. nous
Comburgois Geffrei Stacy and Christophre Del Bois de Estre pur nostre dit Ville
al Parliament avaundite, etc. Not to be found amongst the Returns of this year.
The Bailiffs and Communalty of Ipswich, Ipswich.
by our Common assent have chosen of our Fellow Burgesses, Geofry Stacy and
Christopher Del Bois, to be for our said Town at the Parliament aforesaid.

In the Second of Henry the Fifth, the Mayor, Aldermen, Bailiffs and whole
Community of the Burgesses of the Town of Oxford, Oxford.
chose Burgesses for the Parliament at Westminster. Omnibus ad quos praesentes
literae pervenerint, Major, Aldermani Ballivi and Tota Communitas Burgensium
Villae Oxon. Salutem, etc. Sciatis nos unanimi assensu and consensu nostris,
etc. Elegisse dilectos Comburgenses nostros Johannem Merston, and Thomam
Coventry essendum ad Parlementum, etc. In cujus rei Testimonium praesentibus
Sigillum nostrum Commune apposuimus Dat. in Gihala Villae praedictae, etc. 2
Regis Hen. quinti.

Oxford.
In the Twenty fifth of Henry the Sixth, for a Parliament to be holden at
Cambridge, Johannes North Major Villae Oxon. and Johannes Barton, and Thomas
Wymond Ballivi ac tota Communitas dictae Villae eligerunt Thomam Dagfield and
Robertum Watford Comburgenses suos, personas jdoneos and discretos ad
comparendum, etc. John North Mayor of the Town of Oxford, and John Barton and
Thomas Wymond, and the whole Community of the said Town chose Thomas Dagfield
and Robert Watford their Fellow-Burgesses, fit and discreet Persons to appear,
etc. In cujus rei Testimonium hiis Indenturis tam Sigillum Dictorum Majoris
Ballivorum and dictae Communitatis, quam Sigillum Officii Vicecomitis Oxon. est
appensum.

The later Return explains the former, and shows that the Communitas Burgensium
Villae, and Communitas Villae, was the same.

Oxford.
In the Seventh of Edward the Fourth, the Return was thus, Praesens Billa
indentata facta, etc. Testatur quod Richardus Bustrad and Thomas Halman Ballivi
Burgi Oxon, and Comburgenses Burgi praedicti ex unanimi assensu and consensu
eligerunt Willielmum Bedston and Willielmum Dayvile Burgenses essendi ad
Parlementum, etc. The present Bill indented made, etc. Witnesses that Richard
Burstrad and Thomas Halman Bailiffs of the Burgh of Oxford, and their
Fellow-Burgesses of the said Burgh, by one assent and consent chose William
Bedston and William Dayvile Burgesses to be at the Parliament, etc. In cujus rei
Testimonium Commune Sigillum apposuerunt, etc. In Witness whereof they put to
the Common Seal, etc.

Bailiffs and Fellow-Burgesses the same with Bailiffs, and Community or
Commonalty.
It is not to be otherwise thought, but the Bailiffs and Fellow-Burgesses were
the same persons in this Return, with the Bailiffs and Community of the Town of
Oxford in the others, and that the Election was now made as formerly,
notwithstanding the different expressions, and Clerkship of the Return; and
that these Comburgenses, Fellow Burgesses, were of the same Rank and Order;
with the Mayor, Bailiffs and Aldermen, before they had been chosen and promoted
by, and out of their Fellow Burgesses, and were not of the most ordinary and
poor sort of Burgesses or Freemen, who never were ordinarily or regularly of
the Community or Common Council of any Town or Burgh.

To confirm what has been last said, I shall produce the Returns of
Wallingford in the Eleventh of Henry the Fourth, and Fifth of Henry the Fifth.

Retorn. Brev. Parl. 11 Hen. 4. In Pryn's Brev. Parlementar. Rediviva, p. 288.
Viso Breve Domini Regis nos Johannes Derby Major Burgi Wallingford, and omnes
ejusdem Burgi Comburgenses, Scrutinio veritatis eligimus, and ordinavimus
Johannem Cotterel, and Willielmum Cotterel, nostros Burgenses in peritia
abiles, and honestos procuratores ad Westmonasterium ad Parlementum Domini
Regis, ipsis conferentes nostram plenariam potestatem ad Omnia and Singula
ibidem legalia facienda, Wallingford.
and in Testimonium Ordinationis and Electionis praefatarum, nos ante dicti
Major, and praefati Burgi Comburgenses huic Indenturae secundum dicti Brevis
exigentiam Sigilla nostra apposuimus. Sicut patet in Scriptura inferius
nominatim.

Johannes Derby, Willielmus Arnegat, Thomas Swallwyke, Rogerus Baker,
Willielmus Morgan, Johannes Culham, Willielmus Essex, Johannes Payable,
Robertus Colsill, Galfridus Littell, Johannes Breewood, Robertus Dessont,
Johannes Heart. The English of which runs thus:

Having seen the Kings Writ, we John Derby, Mayor of the Burgh of Wallingford,
and all the Fellow-Burgesses of the same Burgh, have by true scrutiny chosen
and appointed John Cotterell and William Cotterell, our skilful Burgesses, and
honest Procurators in the Parliament of the Lord the King at Westminster,
conferring upon them our full Power, to do there all and singular Legal Things;
And in witness of the Appointment and Ordination aforesaid, we the foresaid
Mayor and Fellow-Burgesses of the foresaid Burgh, according to the Exigency or
Command of the said Writ, have put to our Seals to this Indenture, as it does
appear here underwritten Name by Name.

John Derby, William Arnegat, Thomas Swallwyke, Roger Baker, William Morgan,
John Culham, William Essex, John Payable, Robert Colsill, Geofrey Little, John
Breewood, Robert Dessont, John Heart. We see here the Omnes Comburgenses ejusdem
Burgi, all the Fellow-Burgesses of the Burgh of Wallingford were then but
Twelve, and it may easily be believed, That no Man can think, but that these
Twelve, with the Mayor, were the Community, or Governing part of the Town, or
at least the more part of it.

The other Return in the 5th of Hen. the 5th, runs thus: Wallingford, ibid.
Viso Breve Domini Regis nos Johannes Derby, Willielmus Arnyat, Johannes
Chalmer, Galfridus Little, Thomas Swalewit, Ricardus Algate, Johannes Denby,
cum assensu and consensu omnium Comburgensium nostrorum, Elegimus and
Ordinavimus Johannem Cotterel, and Johannem Derby, nostros Comburgenses
perrecturos ad Parlementum Domini Regis ad certum diem and locum in Breve
contentos. Ad quam Ordinationem and Electionem, illi qui ejusmodi Electioni
interfuerunt sigilla sua apposuerunt.

Having seen the Writ of our Lord the King, we John Derby, William Arnegat,
John Chalym, Geofrey Little, Thomas Swalewit, Richard Algate, John Benby, with
the consent and assent, of all our Fellow- Burgesses, have chosen and appointed
John Cotterel and John Derby, our Fellow-Burgesses, to go to the Parliament of
our Lord the King, at the day and place contained in the Writ. To which
Election and Appointment, those which were present at the Election put to their
Seals.

By this second Election it is manifest, That the Fellow-Burgesses, or the
absent our Fellow-Burgesses, were equal in their ordinary Quality to John
Derby, who was, or had been then Mayor of the Town, and to William Arnegat, and
others, who doubtless were Aldermen or chief Burgesses of the same, and not
Burgesses of the lower Rank.

In the Return of the Writ for Wallingford Wallingford.
in the 7th of Edward the Fourth, it is thus: Haec Billa Indentata, etc,
Testatur quod Henricus Glasyer, and Johan. Medowys Ballivi Burgi de Wallingford
and Comburgenses Burgi praedicti ex unanimi assensu and consensu eligerunt
Johannem Colynggrugge and Robertum Hoptoik Burgenses essendi ad Parlementum
Domini Regis, etc. In cujus Rei Testimonium Sigillum Commune apposuerunt.

Here in this indented Bill of Return it is said the Bailiffs of the Burgh of
Wallingford and the Fellow-Burgesses made the Election, in witness whereof they
put the Common Seal of the Burgh to this Bill; whereas in the former every one
set his particular Seal to the Returns. Now who they were that had the
disposal, ordering, and directing of the use of the Common Seal of any Burgh,
see hereafter in the Observations upon the Return for Windsor, in the same 7th
year of this King.

In the Return of Helston Helston.
in Cornwall, in the 7th of Edward the Fourth, the words are these: Haec
Indentura facta apud Helston-Burgh, etc. inter Johannem Colshill Militem
Vicecomitem, etc. ex part una, and Ricardum Lanargh Majorem Burgi praedicti,
Johannem Emmont, and Johannem Harry Ricchowe, Ballivos ejusdem Burgi and
Henricum Gellyot, and omnes alios Comburgenses suos Burgi praedicti ex part
altera Testatur. Quod iidem Ricardus, Johannes Emmont, Ricardus Harry Ricchove,
Henricus, and omnes alii Comburgenses sui unanimi assensu and consensu, etc.
Eligerunt Edwardum Gower and Willielmum Stavely, etc.

This Indenture made at Helston-Burgh, etc. between John Colshill Knight,
Sheriff, etc. on the one part, and Richard Lanargh, Mayor of the Burgh
aforesaid, John Emmont, and John Harry Ricchowe, Bailiffs of the same Burgh,
and Henry Gellyot, and all other their Fellow-Burgesses of the Burgh aforesaid,
on the other part, witnesses, That the same Richard, John Emmont, Richard
Harry Ricchowe, Henry, and all other their Fellow-Burgesses, by their unanimous
assent and consent, etc. chose Edward Gower and William Stavely, etc.

Here the Comburgenses, or Fellow-Burgesses of this Town, were in their
ordinary value and esteem, Equals to the Mayor and Bailiffs, as being their
Fellow-Burgesses; so that it is not hard to believe they were the Community, or
Governing part of the Burgh.

In the 25th of Henry the Sixth, the Return for Windsor Windsor.
was thus: Haec Indentura facta, etc. Testatur quod Major and Communitas
Burgensium Burgi de Nova Windsore eligimus and nominavimus de Communi Consilio
nostro Rogerum Fasnam, and Rogerum Scherman dicti Burgi Burgenses ad
comparendum, etc. In quorum Testimonium Sigillum Commune omnium and singulorum
Burgensium, and Communitatis praedictae In the Record it is habemus Electionem.
habentium Electionem interessentium praesentibus est appensum. Dat. apud
Windsore, etc. praesentibus Johanne Avelyn Majore Burgi praedicti, Willielmo
Scherman, Willielmo Trow, Rogero Weyte, Johanne Notewey Ballivis, Johanne
Bethewood, Thoma Swan, Johanne Ruwelond, Thoma Pers, Ricardo Bernard,
Constabulariis and aliis.

Here we find the Parliament Burgesses of New Windsor chosen by the Mayor and
Community of the Burgesses of that Burgh. In witness whereof, the Common Seal
of all and singular Burgesses, and of the Community aforesaid, which had Voices
in the Election, was affixed to the Indenture. Dated, etc. in the presence of
John Avelin Mayor, William Scherman, William Trow, Roger Weyte, and John
Notewaye Bailiffs, John Bethewood, Thomas Swan, John Ruwelond, Thomas Pers,
Richard Bernard Constables, and others.

But in the Seventh of Edward the Fourth, about Twenty four years afterward,
the Return is much different, Praesens Billa indentata facta, etc. Testatur
quod Johannes Scot, and Willielmus Kemsale Ballivi Burgi de Windsore, Windsore.
and Comburgenses Burgi praedicti eligerunt Willielmum Evinton and Henricum
Franceys Burgenses essendi ad Parlementum, etc. In cujus rei Testimonium
Sigillum Commune apposuerunt, id est, Ballivi, and Comburgenses, Sigillum
apposuerunt.

The Communitas Burgensium, in the former Return, and the Comburgenses in the
later were the same Body of Men; that is, those with the chief Officers made
the governing part of the Burgh, who in most, if not all, Corporations have the
Common Seal at their disposing, and by their only consent, it is to be affixed
to any Writing. See the Returns for Oxford, in the Second of Henry the Fifth,
and 25th of Henry the Sixth, here before mentioned, for the clearing of this
matter.

In the same 25th of Henry the Sixth, the Return was the same for Reding.
Reding.
Haec Indentura, etc. Testatur, quod nos Major and Communitas Burgi de R^dynge
ordinavimus eligimus, and nominavimus de Communi Consilio nostro Simon Kent and
David Gower dicti Burgi Burgenses ad comparendum, etc. In quorum Testimonium
Sigillum Commune omnium and singulorum Burgensium and Communitatis praedictae
In the Record it is, Habemus Electionem.
habentium Electionem interessentium praesentibus est appensum. Dat. apud
Reding, etc. Praesentibus Johanne Sawyer Majore Burgi praedicti, Roberto Morys,
Willielmo Stapper, Willielmo Stapper, Edwardo Linacre, Johanne West, Thoma
Goldoure Constabulariis Ricardo Farle, Bartholom. At More Ballivis, and aliis.

So in the same 7th year of Edward the 4th, Reding.
the words of the Return were the same, except the Names. Praesens Billa
indentata, etc. Testatur quod Willielmus Bluet and Johannes Broad Ballivi Burgi
de Reddinge and Comburgenses Burgi praedicti ex unanimi assensu and consensu
eligerunt Johannem Bukke and Johannem Vpston Burgenses essendi ad Parlementum
Domini Regis, etc. In cujus Rei Testimonium sigillum commune praesentibus
apposuerunt. There needs no other Observation here, than what was made upon the
foregoing Returns for Windsor in the same years.

The Return for Len Len.
in Norff. Seventh of Edward the Fourth was, Major and Communitas eligerunt
Henricum Bermingham and Willielmum Pilton Burgenses Villae sive Burgi Len, etc.
In the Twelfth of Edward the Fourth, it was the same, in the 17th, it was Major
and Burgenses pro se, and Communitate eligerunt, etc.

So for Great Yarmouth Yarmouth.
in that County, for the same year. Ballivi and Communitas Villae Magnae
Jenemuthe eligerunt Johan. Russ, and Johan. Tymperley ad Essend. ad
Parlementum, etc. In the 12th of this King it was, Ballivi de Communi assensu
Villae eligerunt, etc. In the 17th of the same King it was, Ballivi and
Communitas unanimi assensu eligerunt, etc. The meaning and intent of the
Returns was the same.

In the 12th of Edward the Fourth, Wells.
Major and Communitas unanimi assensu and consensu eligerunt Johannem Beynton
and Willielmum Abury Cives Civitatis Wellensis ad interessend. in proximo
Parlemento apud Westminst. etc. As by the Return for Wells in Sommerset-Shire,
for that year appears and the like Return changing the Names is in the 17th
year of that King.

In the Return for Brideport Bridport.
17th of Edward the Fourth. Ballivi and Burgenses de Brideport per assensum and
consensum totius Burgi Communitatis eligerunt Thomam Neburgh and Robertum Hill
duos Burgenses, etc.

Colchester.
In the Seventh of Edward the Fourth, only five Burgesses of Colchester, named
in the Return, choose two Burgesses, William Forde and John Boteler in the
County Court holden at Chelmsford for the Parliament mentioned in the Writ, etc.

In the 12th and 17th of that King, the Returns were thus, Ballivi Burgi
Colchester, etc. Eligi fecerunt per majorem partem Burgensium magis
sufficientium Johan. Wright and Johan. Boteler. Essend. pro Burgo illo ad
Parlementum, etc.

In the Seventh of that King John Herthull Esquire John Fisher of Warwick, Warwick.
and only Ten more Named in the Indenture of Return, did in the County Court
holden at Warwick, on the Monday next before Whitsunday, choose Edward Durant
and Benedict Lee, Burgesses pro Burgo Villae Warwick, to which Indenture the
Sheriff on one part and all the twelve Electors on the other part put to their
Seals.

It Is not said in the Return of what quality any of these Electors were,
whether Mayor, Bailiffs or what others, yet it cannot be doubted, but they were
of the best and most substantial Burgesses, and were at least part of, if not
the whole Community, or Government of the Town.

In the 12th and 17th years of that King, the Burgesses were also chosen in the
County Court, but not said how, or by whom, for their Names are only Indorsed
on the Writ, with their Manucaptors, and likewise only mentioned in the
Indenture of Return for the County. Yet, by a parallel Return, we may make a
more than probable Conjecture, they were chosen by the chief Magistrate, or
Magistrates, and the Community of the Town.

For in the 15th of Edward the Second, after the Knights of the Shire Indorsed
on the Kings Writ of Summons, the Citisens of Lincoln Lincoln.
follow in the same method with their Manucaptors, and in the same Form here
underwritten.

Manucaptores Henrici de Hakethorn, unius Civium Civitatis Lincoln.

Johannes Fowler de Lincoln.

Adam del Marrays de eadem.

Manucaptores Thomae Gamel, alterius Civium Civitatis de Lincoln.

Philippus Millays de Lincoln.

Rogerus Ingloys de eadem.

The like Returns are in the Dors of the Writ for Grimsby and Stanford, Grimsby
and Stanford.
and then it follows, Et non plures Civitates seu Burgi in Comitatu Lincoln,
Boston and Grantham being omitted.

Here is only a bare Return of the Names of the Citisens of the City of
Lincoln, with their Sureties, who were to be at the Parliament to be holden at
York, three Weeks after Easter, without any mention, how, or by whom chosen.
Yet, by the Petition, Certificate, or Return following, which is now sewed to
the Kings Writ, directed to the Sheriff of Lincolnshire, it appears they were
Elected by the Mayor and Communalty of the City of Lincoln.

A tres Noble Home and Sage Sire William de Eyrminne Meire and la Comminalty de
Nicole, quant quit devent and poent, D'onors and Reverences, pur ceo Sire, qui
nous avons Estutz, Henry de Hakethorn, and Thomas Gamel nos Conciteyns, de
venir au Parliament nostre Seigneur le Roi, par la city de Nicole selonc le
purport le Brief le dyt nostre Seigneur le Roi, and ore le dyt Thomas ne se
Deggne venir pur riens que nous savoms fair, pur quoy Sire nous avoms Eslutz
Alayn de Hodelston en le leiu le dyt Thomas, a fair and assentir pur la Dite
City solonc le tenure le dyt Brief, and vous Prioms Cher Sire, Sil vous plest,
que le dit Hen. Et Alayn voilets Resceivire pur la City avaunt Dite. En
Tesmoygnance de quelque chose a cestrez praesents avoms Mis le Seal de nostre
Meiretee. Don a Nicole le Second jour de May lan du Reign nostre Seigneur le
Roi Edward que orest qui Dieu Guard. Quinszime.

Besides, that it is manifest from this Certificate and Return, that the Mayor
and Commonalty of the City of Lincoln, Elected these two Citisens to represent
them in Parliament; there are several other things may be observed from it: As
First, that Thomas Gamel one of the Citisens, though he had two Manucaptors
Returned with him on the Dors of the Writ, yet would not go to the Parliament,
for any thing the Mayor and Commonalty of the City knew what to do. Secondly,
that they without any other, or new Writ, after his Name was Returned to the
Sheriff, and by him Indorsed on the Writ, and Returned with two Manucaptors for
his Appearance at the Day and place appointed for the Parliament, Elected
another Citisen, Alayn de Hodelston in his place, and desired Sir William
Eyrminne, (then Master of the Rolls, and Keeper of the Seal, in the absence or
time of indisposition of John Bishop of Norwich, then Lord Chancellor,) that he
being thus Elected by them, according to the Form of the First Writ of the
King, might be received with the other Citisen Henry de Hakethorn, first
Elected with Gamel, as Citisen for this Parliament, upon the Mayors Seal of
Office affixed to this Certificate. Thirdly, if Hodelston Sat, as in all
probability he did, there could not then be such fine Niceties and Punctilioes
in the Return of Parliament Writs, as at this present.

How Cirencester in Gloucester-Shire came to send Burgesses, 22 Jacobi, I know
not, it sent None before that time that I can find.

In the Return for the City of Rochester, Rochester.
in the 17th of Edward the Fourth, the Words were very General, and these
following. Haec Indentura facta apud Rochester, etc. Testatur quod Willielmus
Mungeham Major Civitatis Roffen una cum omnibus, and Singulis Civibus, and
Communiariis ejusdem Civitatis eligerunt and nominaverint Johan: Kyrton and
W^ll^elmum Revers ad Essend. Cives pro Civitat, etc.

The meaning whereof is, that the Mayor together with all and Singular
Citisens, and Communers, that is, with all and every Citisen who was a
Communer, and of the Community of the City, which was as much as to say, the
whole Community of the City chose them for the Communiarii, or Comminiarii of
the City of London, are the Common Council Men thereof, and a Select Number of
the most Worthy, and able Citisens, as appears by the Style of the Common
Council in the City Books. Commune Concilium tent. in Camera Guildhall
Civitatis London, etc. Coram Tali, Majore Civitatis, etc. Then after the Names
of the Aldermen present, and Sheriffs, it follows, Nec non Majore part
Comminariorum dictae Civitatis in Communi Concilio tunc and ibidem assemblat,
and it cannot be doubted but the Commoners of the City of Rochester were
Persons of the same Condition.

Bath and Bridgewater.
In the 12th and 17th years of Edward the Fourth. The Returns of Bath and
Bridgewater in Sommerset-Shire, are thus Penned. Haec Indentura, etc. Testatur
quod Cives Civitatis Bathon. Ex vnanimi assensu eligerunt, etc. Willielmum
Haynes and Robertum Baten, etc. Ad Essend. ad Parliamentum, etc. So for the
Burgh. Haec Indentura, etc. Testatur quod Burgenses Burgi de Briggewater
unanimi assensu elegerunt Thomam Tremayle, and Johannem Kendale, pro
Burgensibus dicti Burgi ad essendum ad Parliamentum, etc.

How the Elections have been made in the Burgh of Bridgewater, since the date
of these Writs, and of late times, I cannot say. But in the City of Bath, they
have always been made Pryn's Brev. Parl. Rediviva. p. 317.
only by the Mayor, Aldermen and Common Council, consisting of Thirty one
Persons and no more, notwithstanding these General Words, Cives or Burgenses,
or at least, Major, Aldermanni, and Cives elegerunt, have been in most of their
Returns.

In the 13th year of King Charles the Second, 1661. Alexander Popham, and
William Pryn Esquires, were chosen Citisens for the City of Bath, by the Mayor,
Aldermen, and Citisens as in the Ibid. p. 313.
Return, of which the whole Number that Elected them were but Twenty one
Persons of the Thirty one above mentioned. There happened a Controversy about
this Election, there being two Competitors Ibid. p. 317, 318.
chosen by one Aldermen, Five Common Council Men, and Thirty two Freemen, the
question before the Committee of Privileges, and the Parliament was, Ibid. p.
318.
whether all the Freemen and Citisens of Bath had, and ought to have Voices in
the Election of Citisens to serve in Parliament, or only the Mayor, Aldermen,
and Common Council of the City. That the choice had been always made by the
later was clearly proved.

The principal matter then Ibid. p. 320.
insisted upon by the Competitors Counsel, was, that the Elections were made in
the Name of the Mayor, Aldermen, and Citisens of Bath, which Word Citisens,
must necessarily, and of Common Right be intended of all the Citisens, and
Freemen of the City, who are Citisens, and not of the Citisens only, that are
Common C^uncil Men.

To this it was, or might have been answered, That Knights of the Shire are
said to be chosen by the County, or the whole Community of the County, and yet
those Words do not extend to all the Inhabitants of the County, though never so
Rich, for Tradesmen, and others whose Estates are in Money or Goods, nor
Copyholders, or Leaseholders have any Voice in such Elections. And the Commons
assembled in Parliament, are usually styled the Commonalty of the Realm, nay,
all the Commons of the Realm, as in the Stat. of Provisors, 25 Edward the
Third, and others; yet are a Select Number of Persons, Elected, Entrusted, and
Authorized not by half the Inhabitants of England. So that though the Words
Cives and Burgenses may in some Cases, and in their full Latitude, extend to
all Citisens, Burgesses, or Freemen, and Inhabitants also of Cities and Burghs,
yet in many others, and most frequently in this particular case of Electors,
they are restrained to some Select Number of Citisens and Burgesses, or to the
Chief Magistrates, and Common Council. Whoever desires further satisfaction in
this point, may peruse Mr. Pryn's Brevia Parliamentaria Rediviva, from page 320
to page 328.

In several Counties the Citisens and Burgesses were chosen in the County
Courts Citisens and Burgesses chosen in County Courts.
with the Knights, on the day of the Knights Election in the same Court, and
jointly Returned in one Indenture especially before the Stat. of the 23 of
Henry the Sixth, and in some after that; there were commonly sent four or five
Citisens or Burgesses from the Respective Cities, or Burghs, whereof the Mayor,
or Chief Magistrate was usually one, to the County Court. Qui de assensu totius
Communitatis, Civitatis vel Burgi eligerunt, etc. Who by assent of the whole
Community of the City or Burgh, from which they were sent, did choose Citisens
and Burgesses, who gave them full and sufficient Power for themselves, and the
Community of the Cities and Burghs, to do and consent to such things, as by
Common Council should be ordained. One Example of these Returns may be seen in
the N. 14.
Appendix which was made for Sommerset-Shire, in the Second of Henry the Fifth,
and the like is upon Record for Dorset-Shire, in the same year; there is also
in that year one for Wilt-Shire, though not in the very same Form, for which
see the N. 15.
Appendix for Devon-Shire in the 27th of Henry the Sixth, for Cambridge and
Huntington, Warwick, and Kent and other Counties and Shires, in other years.

To all these Instances for the greater proof, that the Communities of Cities
and Burghs did and ought to choose, may be added, that the Citisens and
Burgesses constantly had from their particular Cities, and Burghs, Power to
Treat, Do and Consent for themselves, and the said Communities, according to
the Tenor of all Writs, in all times, and those, for whom they were to Treat,
Do and Consent, did, or most certainly ought to send them: For the Citisens and
Burgesses Represented the Cities and Burghs, and were Trustees for them in
Parliament, as the Community, or Mayor, Aldermen, and Common Council, or the
Chief Magistrate, and Capital Burgesses Represented them at home, in the
Cities, and Burghs themselves, and were Trustees for them there. For before
Bribery, Meat, and Drink, with Insinuation, and Artifice, prompted to the Mean,
and Ordinary poor sorts of Burgesses, a right which anciently they never Dreamt
of, there were no contests between them and the Communities, or Commonalties,
or the Governing part of Cities and Burgesses about the Election of Citisens
and Burgesses to Represent them in Parliament, seeing when they Received Wages,
it was a Burden to those that chose and sent them. And it is not easily to be
imagined, Poor Ordinary Men would contend for a Burden, or seek a Trouble.

Returns of Writs as to Form uncertain.
Besides, the Returns are very uncertain, and different in Form, sometimes the
Names of the Knights, Citisens, and Burgesses only with their Sureties are
Returned. Sometimes they are made according to the Tenor of the Writ, but mostly
according to the Form, Fancy, and Invention of the Clerk that drew them up,
without any strictness of Words or design to inform posterity, Who were, or
ought to be Electors. The Writs were commonly in the nature of a venire facias,
and the Cities and Burghs took care only to send their Citisens and Burgesses
according to the Precept, which was the Business of the Government of the
places, to which the Writs were directed, and that was the best Judge Who was
fittest to serve them; there was then no striving for Votes, or making Parties
or Factions to be Elected.

Hitherto of the great probability, if not certainty, Who anciently were, and
now ought to be the Electors in all Cities and Burghs, which have Charters, and
Free Burgesses. But the difficulty is, Who ought to be Electors in such Towns
or Burghs, that have neither Charter, Custom, or Free Burgesses, as in the case
of Fol. 60. A.B.
Cirencester abovementioned.

To this I say, First, that where there is neither Charter, Custom, or
Burgesses, there can be no Burgh.

Secondly, as to this particular Case, I am apt to believe Cirencester was
anciently no Burgh, for amongst all the Returns in the Tower, from the 26th of
Edward the First, to the 17th of Edward the Fourth, there is not one for that
Town.

Thirdly, I say, that because several Towns have sent Burgesses or Members to
Parliament, therefore to assert according to the Vulgar Opinion, they must be
Burghs, or, as they call them, Burghs by Prescription, as not having Charter or
Burgesses, is an error occasioned by want of due Observation and Perusal of
Ancient Records.

For, no Man that I know of has taken notice of Tenants in Ancient Demeasns,
having been sent to, and having sat in Parliament. And several of those Towns
that sent them, were such as might have no Charters constituting them Free
Burghs, and consequently had no Free Burgesses, for, as it has been said and
proved before, these were made such by Here f. 47. 49, 50. and and Append. n.
1. b.
Charters only, and the Grant of Royal Liberties, by which Cities and Burghs
were constituted.

But it will be said, that never was any Writ or Summons directed to the
Sheriffs, to send to any Town of the Kings Ancient Demeasns, to choose and send
two Tenants to Parliament, as there was for Cities, and Burghs, to send
Citisens, and Burgesses.

To this I reply, and do confess, I never did see such Writs or Summons
directed to any Sheriffs, or Tenants in Ancient Demeasns, to send any of their
own Number to Parliament, nor was there any need of it, Tenants in Ancient
Demeasns, how and by whom Represented.
for the Representatives of such Towns as were Burghs by Charter, and also the
Kings Ancient Demeasns, Represented both the Burgesses and Tenants too, and in
some places might therefore be chosen by them both.

Secondly, when it was left to the Sheriff as has been Here f. 52, 53, 54. etc.
shown before, to direct his Precepts to what Burghs, Towns, or Places he
pleased, he might send them to such large Towns of the Kings Ancient Demeasns
as had a Market only by Connivence and Permission, or Charter, without the
constitutive clause of a Burgh, or Free Burgesses, for it was a hard matter to
distinguish such Market Towns from Burghs, which by outward appearence, in many
things could not be distinguished, seeing they always paid the same Tallages,
and Taxes, that Burghs did, they were free from Register of Writs, f. 261. b.
Toll all over the Kingdom, free from Append. n. 16.
contributing to the Wages of Knights of the Shire, and free from Suit to
Hundred, and County Courts, as Burghs were. They only wanted Burgh Liberties
and Royalties, Free Burgesses, a Merchant-Gild, or Community and peculiar
Officers, which were the Characteristicks of a Burgh, and were Created and
passed by Charter, which the Sheriff might not take notice of.

Lastly, when some Sheriffs might call for the Charters, and enquire after the
Free Burgesses of some Towns, they might not find any; or be informed there was
none, which sometimes might be the cause of some Negative Returns, that there
were no more Burghs in such or such a County, than what they then Returned.

When therefore there does arise a dispute about Elections, by whom they ought
to be made, in such Towns as have neither Charter, nor Burgesses. The Answer is
ready, that they ought to be made by the Freeholders, such as are possessed of
the Ancient Demeasn Lands, or those which anciently by one way or other had
been in the Crown.

From the 17th of Edward the Fourth, which are the last Returns of Parliament
Writs in the Tower, now known, Most of the Writs and Returns lost, since the
Reign of Edw. the 4th.
to the First of Edward the Sixth, the Returns are all lost; there are two
Bundles in the Chapel of the Rolls in the time of Henry the Eighth, but not
Legible. Two other Bundles in the Reign of Edward the Sixth, 1st and 6th. Five
Bundles in Reign of Queen Mary. Seven in the Reign of Queen Elizabeth. Three in
the Reign of King James the First, and Five in the Reign of King Charles the
First, and no others either in the Petty-Bag, Crown-Office, or in any other
known place, until the Reign of King Charles the Second.

And these Returns here are not much unlike those in the Tower, Returns since
King Henry the Eighth.
as may appear in these few instances, being also different in most places,
according to the Clerkship of those that made them.

Cheping-Wicomb Wicomb.
in Buckingham-Shire. Retorn. Brev. Parl. 1 Ed. VI. In Capella Rotulor.
H^c Indentura testatur, etc. Quod Major and Burgenses unanimi assensu and
consensu elegerunt, etc. In cujus rei Testimonium Major and Burgenses Sigillum
suum apposuerunt.

For the same Town, H^c Ibid. 6 Ed. 6.
Indentura testatur, etc. Quod Major, Ball^vi, and Burgenses unanimi assensu
elegerunt, etc. In cujus rei Testimonium Major Ballivi and Burgenses Sigillum
suum apposuerunt, The same Return in 1 Mariae. And the Elections of Mayor,
Burgesses, and Town Officers, were then made by a Select Number, under the Name
of Mayor, Bailiffs and Burgesses, ever since, except for a few years last past,
as also the Parliament Members Exclusive of the Ordinary Freemen.

Reding Reding.
in Bark-Shire. Hec Ibid. 1 Mariae.
Indentura Testatur, etc. Quod Major, Burgenses and Communitas Burgi,
Ordinavimus, Elegimus, and nominavimus, etc. In cujus Rei Testimonium Major and
Burgenses Sigillum suum Commune, etc.

New Windsor, New Windsor.
nos Major Burgenses and Communitas Ibid. 1. Mariae.
Novae Windsor ex unanimi assensu and consensu nostris elegimus, etc.

Thetford Thetford.
in Norff. Hec Ibid. 1. Mariae.
Indentura Testatur, etc. Quod Major, Burgenses and alii homines de Communi
Concilio, and congregatione dicti Burgi, una voce elegimus, confecimus,
ordinavimus and in loco nostro posuimus, etc. In cujus Rei Testimonium nos
Major and Burgenses Sigillum nostrum Commune apponi fecimus. The same Return is
in the First of Elizabeth, the Burgesses Names only excepted. Here the Mayor,
Burgesses, and other Men of the Common Council, and such as used to come to
Town or Burgh-Meetings, were the Electors, which agrees with the Practice at
this Day.

In the Case between Sir Joseph Williamson, and Mr. Heveningham, The Case
between Sir Joseph Williamson and Mr. Heveningham at Thetford.
the first chosen by the Mayor, Burgesses, and Commonalty of Thetford, the
other chosen by some of the forementioned Electors, and also by the Major part
of the Freemen of the Town.

The Report of the Commons Journal. Mercur. 17 Jun. 1 Jacob 2. 1685. f. 193.
Committee of Elections to the House concerning the Election at ^hetford.

Resolved, that it is the opinion of this Committee, that the Right of Election
is in the Mayor, Burgesses, (which are Ten,) and in the Commonalty, or Common
Council (which are Twenty,) amounting in the whole to Thirty-one.

Resolved, Ibid.
that this House does agree with the Committee, that the Right of Election is
in the Mayor, Burgesses, (which are Ten,) and in the Commonalty, or Common
Council, (which are Twenty,) amounting in the whole to Thirty one.

By all these Ancient, and later Returns, but more especially if compared one
with another, it is manifest, that in very many Controversies about Elections,
the House of Commons have been frequently mistaken in the meaning of these
indefinite expressions, The House of Commons mistaken in the meaning of some
indefinite expressions in the Returns of Writs.
Major and Cives, Major and Burgenses, Major and Communitas, or Major,
Burgenses, and Communitas elegerunt, understanding thereby all Citisens,
Burgesses, or Freemen in General of such Cities and Burghs, when as they were
only a Select Number, which managed the Affairs and Government of those places.

Nay, when or where it is said in some few Returns Major, and omnes Burgenses,
and Comminarii elegerunt, those Words are most commonly, if not always to be
understood in a Limited and Restrained Sense, which was, that the Mayor, and
all the Chief Burgesses, or the Mayor and all such Burgesses (which were the
same with Aldermen, though they wanted the Title,) and Commoners such as were
of the Common Council, or ought to be at City or Burgh Congregations or
Meetings did choose, etc. Who always were a Select Number, Exclusive of the
Bulk of Common, Ordinary, Poor Freemen, Citisens, or Burgesses of the lowest
Rank. And the omnes Burgenses Comminarii, and alii homines Burgi, did mostly
signify no other Persons than all the Burgesses, Men, and Commoners, who were
or ought to be at public Meetings of the Burgh or City, and did transact the
usual business of the place.

Add to this, what has been said before, concerning the great error about the
meaning and signification of the Word Communitas, and that there were very few
ancient Writs and Returns made upon them, to be seen in the Record-Office in
the Tower, before Mr. Pryn, in the years 1660, and 1661. found so many lying
confusedly amongst other Records in the White Tower, as made Ninety Seven
Bundels, which he mentions in his Brevia Parliamentaria Rediviva; by which Men
might have been better informed. And it will seem no great wonder to find Men
guided only by the Sounds of Words, and Biased by Popularity, to run into
Opinions both pleasing to themselves, and the Vulgar, and of late years, to
have determined Controversies about Elections accordingly, contrary to the most
common and frequent ancient usage, in Electing Citisens and Burgesses, and
Tenor of the Returns of Parliament Writs in those times.

FINIS.
THE APPENDIX.
De Burgo Magnae Jernemu.
MEmorandum quod Villa Magnae Jernemu non modico tempore ante conquestum
extitit Situata per progenitores Regis Angliae super portum Magnae Jernemu, In
Bibliotheca Cotton. Claudius, E. 8. f. 5. A. Col. 1.
occasion proficui provenientis de eodem portu, N. 1. a.
ad meliorationem ejus Villae percipiendi, and factus fuit Burgus Regis. Unde
in libro qui vocatur Domesday reperiuntur verba quae sequuntur.

Gernemu tenuit Rex Edwardus semper septuaginta Burgenses tunc valuit cum
duabus partibus Soche de tribus Hundredis 18 l. ad numerum and pars Comitis 9
l. ad numerum, Nordfulc.
Ibid. Little Domesday Book, f. 118. a.
modo duae parts Regis 17 l. 16 s. and quatuor Denarios blancas, pars Comitis
10 l. blancas, and Vicecomes habet quatuor libras and unum ancipitem Terrae de
Gersuma, has quatuor libras dant Burgenses gratis and amicitia. In eadem habuit
tempore Regis Edwardi Ailmarus Episcopus quandam Ecclesiam Sancti Benedicti,
eandem modo habet W. (...) Episcopus de Episcopatu and Valet 20 s. totum reddit
12 d. de gelto.

Dimidium Hundredi de Luthinglond Gorleston tenuit Guertus tempore Regis
Edwardi quinque carucas Terrae pro uno Manerio, Sudfulc.
Ibid. f. 283. a.
tunc viginti Villani modo duodecim, semper quinque Bordmanni, tunc quinque
Servi, modo quatuor, tunc in Dominico duae carucae modo una, tunc boves V.
caruc. modo III. Silvae quinque porcorum december acrae prati, tres Salinae tunc
II. Runcini, modo duo, semper trecentae oves, in Gernemu viginti quatuor
piscatores pertinent huic Manerio.

ET Sciendum quod Progenitores Domini Regis tenuerunt praedictum Burgum in
manibus suis propriis percipiendo omnia proficua exeuntia de portu praedicto,
usque ad tempus Regis Johannis Here
qui concessit Villam praedictam Burgensib^^ Villae praedictae ad feodi firmam
reddendo sibi and haeredibus suis quinquaginta and quinque libras per annum, N.
2.
ad quod solvendum nihil aliud habent nisi consuetudinem, and alia proficua
provenientia de portu praedicto, nec capiant aliquas consuetudines de rebus
venditis vel emptis in mercato super terram, nullo tempore anni.

Et postmodum tempore Regis Viz. Tertii.
Henrici Anno Regni sui duodecimo ortis aliquibus contentionibus inter homines
de Jernemu, and Rogerum filium Osberti custodem Manerii de Luthinglond de
consuetudinibus quas idem Rogerus cepit in portu praedicto contra libertates
ipsorum hominum de Jernemu^, idem Dominus Rex Anno Regni sui praedicto volens
certiorari quae consuetudines pertinuissent praedictis hominibus de Jernemu,
and quae Manerio suo de Luthinglond, assignavit Martinum de Pateshull ad
inquirendum super praemissis. Et facta fuit inquisitio apud Magnam Jernemu Anno
Regis Henrici duodecimo, Sacramento viginti quatuor de Comitatu Norfolciae, and
viginti quatuor de Comitatu Suffolciae tam Militum quam aliorum, per quam
quidem inquisitionem fuit compertum, quod omnia magna mercimonia vendi deberent
and discarcari apud Magnam Jernemu, and quod tota aqua spectabat ad Homines de
Jernemu, sed quod minuta mercimonia and victualia discarcari poterant versus
parts de Luthinglond, vel versus Jernemu pro voluntate eadem adducentium,
prout in Recordo habito coram praefato Martino, and Sociis suis before
apparet, Unde patet quod Praescriptio omnium rerum venalium, quam Johannes de
Britannia, Comes Richmond Homines and Tenentes sui Villarum Parvae Jernemu and
Gorleston penitus est interrupta.

Postea vero praedicti Burgenses percipientes quod per praedictam inquisitionem
fuerunt damnificati in hoc quod naves cum victualibus poterant discarcare
versus parts de Luthinglond, praecipue cum seisona piscationis fuit potissimum
eorum proficuum; accesserunt ad praedictum Dominum Regem Henricum and
obtinuerunt ab ipso quod idem Rex Henricus Anno Regni sui quadragesimo
praedicto Manerio de Luthinglond in manu sua existente per Cartam suam
concessit iisdem quod omnia mercandisae and mercimonia tam de piscibus quam de
aliis rebus, ad portum de Jernemu in navibus vel extra inventa per manus
hujusmodi Mercandorum deferentur apud magnam Jernemu, vendantur, etc. Quibus
quidem libertatibus praedicti Burgenses and Antecessores sui usi fuerunt
pacifice.

Declaratio Cartae Regis Henrici tertii super libertatibus portus Magnae
Jernemu.
SED postea quia videbatur praefatis Burgensibus quod verba contenta in Carta
Domini Regis Henrici praedicta nimis extiterant obscura, accesserunt ad nobilem
Regem Dominum Edwardum Avum Domini Regis nunc, and petierunt sibi declarationem
fieri de verbis antedictis, qui quidem Rex Edwardus Avus, etc. per avisamentum
magni Concilii sui, prout patet in See this Record hereafter following, by the
latter clause whereof it evidently appears what, a free Burgh was.
memorandis de Scaccario suo anno Regni sui tricesimo quarto, de Termino
Sanctae Trinitatis, non obstante reclamatione Adae Bacoun Clerici, Johannis
Kybel, and Johannis de Belton missorum ibidem per homines de parva Jernemu and
Gorliston praedicto Manerio de Luthinglond in manu ipsius Regis Avi existente,
concessit etiam Burgensibus and Successoribus suis quod omnia mercandisae and
mercimonia quaecunque fuerint sive de piscibus, seu de aliis rebus
quibuscunque, quae infra dictum Portum dictae Villae nostrae magnae Jernemu in
Navibus aut batellis seu alio modo adduci seu deferri contingeret, ut ibidem
negotiaretur de eisdem apud eandem Villam de magna Jernemu and non alibi infra
portum praedictum discarcarentur, and Causam exprimit in eadem Carta, Note this
reason.
pro eo quod praedicta Villa sua de magna Jernemu fuit Note this reason.
liber Burgus suus, and per progenitores suos situata extitit super portum suum
praedictum, occasion proficui de eodem portu suo provenientis, ad
meliorationem Villae suae percipiendi, quibus quidem libertatibus iidem
Burgenses post confectionem ejusdem Cartae usi fuerunt and gavisi, eo quod
omnia mercandisae and mercimonia infra portum praedictum adducta tam in Navibus
Hominum, and Tenentium ipsius Comitis Villarum parvae Jernemu and Gorleston,
quam in Navibus aliorum quorumcunque exposita fuerunt venditioni, vendita and
discarcata apud magnam Jernemu virtute Cartae praedictae, and juxta tenorem
ejusdem quod omnibus est publicum and notorium in partibus eidem Villae magnae
Jernemu circumjacentibus.

Et Sci^ndum est, quod omnes libertates praefatis Burgensibus concessae per
Cartas Regis superius ^nnotatas sunt confirmatae per Dominum Edwardum Patrem
Regis nunc, and per Dominum Regem nunc; Et in confirmatione Patris Regis nunc,
continetur, quod licet Burgenses praedicti, vel eorum Successores, aliqua vel
aliquibus libertatum praedictarum hactenus usi non fuerunt, eisdem tamen
gaudeant and utantur.

Carta Regis Edwardi tertii de libertatibus Portus Magnae Jernemu.
EDwardus Dei Gratia Rex Angliae, Dominus Hyberniae, and Dux Aquitaniae,
omnibus ad quos praesentes literae pervenerint, Salutem.
Sciatis quod cum celebris memoriae Dominus Edwardus nuper Rex Avus noster per
Cartam suam quam Dominus Edwardus nuper Rex Angliae Pater noster per Cartam
suam, and nos similiter per Cartam nostram confirmavimus, concessisse
Burgensibus nostris Villae nostrae magnae Jernemu, quod omnia mercandisae and
mercimonia quaecunque sint, sive de piscibus sive de aliis rebus quibuscunque
quae infra portum nostrum dictae Villae nostrae magnae Jernemu in Navibus aut
batellis seu alio modo adduci seu deferri contigerit; ut ibidem negotietur de
eisdem licite and aperte, apud eandem Villam de magna Jernemu and non alibi, in
portum praedictum discarcentur, and per manus mercandisas and mercimonia illa
ducentium seu deferentium, and ea ibidem vendere volentium, seu per manus
servientium suorum venditioni exponantur, and ibidem quibus voluerint libere
vendantur, and emantur, absque aliquo forstallamento, vel abrocamento, seu alio
quovis impedimento. Ita quod nullus forstallarius, abrocator, vel alius
quicunque obviam eat. Mercatoribus cum piscibus, aut aliis mercandisis, and
rebus venalibus versus praedictam Villam nostram venientibus, ad aliqua inde
emenda, seu forstallamenta, vel abrocamenta in dicta Villa vel extra inde
facienda sub forisfactura rei emptae, per quod dicti Burgenses, seu aliqui
mercatores hujusmodi mercandisas and mercimonia ibidem ducentes super
emptionibus and venditionibus suis apud eandem Villam nostram de magna Jernemu
faciendis, ad detrimentum ejusdem Villae aliqualiter impediantur, prout in
Carta nostra before continetur. Ac inter Johannem de Britannis Comitem
Richemond and Homines and Tenentes suos Villarum parvae Jernemu and Gorleston
ex part una, and communitatem dictae Villae Magnae Jernemu ex altera,
occasion quorundam impedimentorum factorum per praefatos Burgenses color
dictae Cartae dicti Avi nostri (ut dicebatur) eisdem Hominibus and Tenentibus
Villarum parvae Jernemu and Gorleston de proficuis capiendis de carcatione and
discarcatione navium venire volentium ad easdem Villas parvae Jernemu and
Gorleston, and de emptione and venditione rerum venalium, Idem placitum in
diversis Curiis nostris tam Parliamentis quam aliis habitum fuisset, quod in
placito illo inter easdem parts per nos and Concilium nostrum consideratum
fuit quod idem Comes, and Haeredes sui, nec non Homines and Tenentes dictarum
Villarum parvae Jernemu and Gorleston Haeredes and Successores sui proprias
naves suas cum rebus and mercandisis in eisdem Navibus carcatis, seu de allece,
seu de aliis piscibus, rebus, and mercandisis quibuscunque ad easdem Villas
parvae Jernemu and Gorleston carcare and discarcare, and res and mercandisas
suas ibidem venditioni exponere, and alias commodum suum inde facere valiant,
pro eorum libito voluntatis, solvendo inde ibidem illis quos nos vel haeredes
nostri ad hoc deputabimus custumas debitas and consuetas quadam sub missione
quorundam hominum, and tenentium, dictarum Villarum parvae Jernemu and
Gorleston, and etiam quorundam Burgensium dictae Villae magnae Jernemu, ad
quosdam de consilio nostro ad See the next Record. N. 1. b.
dictum negotium inter parts praedictas finaliter terminandum, nec non quadam
ordinatione per ipsos de eodem Consilio inter easdem parts inde facta, seu
praedicta Carta ipsius Avi nostri non obstante. Ita videlicet, quod eorum naves
Laniis Coriis and pellibus lanutis suis, de quibus magnae custumae dari debent,
in eodem portu in loco ubi Our Beam, and the Seal called Cocquet.
Thronus noster and Our Beam, and the Seal called Cocquet.
Sigillum nostrum quod dicitur Coket existunt, and non alibi carcen^ur. Et quod
voluntas nostra and intentio nostra and ipsius Consilii nostri fuit, quod dicta
Carta ipsius Avi nostri praedictis Burgensibus Villae magnae Jernemu, ut
praemittitur, facta per istam considerationem, quoad alios in nullo sit
restricta, sed quod locum suum habeant and effectum in omnibus, and gentes
omnes, tam indigenas, quam alienigenas, praeterquam eosdem Comitem, Homines,
and Tenentes dictarum Villarum parvae Jernemu and Gorleston, Haeredes and
Successores suos in forma supradicta, Salvo jure Civium Civitatum London,
Norwici, Baronum de quinque portubus, and aliorum quorumcunque si quod habeant
per Cartas de antiquiori data cartae ipsius Avi nostri vel alio modo in hac
part. Et quod dictum fuit and inhibitum per nos and dictum Consilium nostrum
praesatis Comiti, Hominibus and Tenentibus dictarum Villarum parvae Jernemu and
Gorleston, ne sub gravi forisfactura nostra ad easdem Villas parvae Jernemu and
Gorleston naves aliorum attraherent quo vis modo, nec mercandisas aliquas in
Aquam portus praedicti cum aliquibus per praedictam Cartam dicti Avi nostri
restrictis exerceant, nec impedimentum aliquod faciant quo minus iidem
Burgenses dicta Carta ipsius Avi nostri gentes alias sicut praedictum est in
omnibus suis articulis juxta vim and efficaciam ejusdem uti valiant and
exercere. Et quod dictum fuit and inhibitum tam praefatae Communitati quam
praefatis Hominibus and Tenentibus parvae Jernemu and Gorleston, ne quicquam
contra considerationem dictam and inhibitionem praedictas attemptare praesumant
sub forisfactura supra dicta prout in Recordo and processu inhibitis, and in
Cancellaria nostra residentibus before continetur. Nos ne praemissa quae pro
tranquillitate and quiet partium praedictarum and justitia manutenenda per nos
and praefatum Consilium nostrum sic considerata fuerunt, futuris temporibus in
dubium revocentur, ea tenore praesentium duximus testificanda. In cujus rei
testimonium has literas nostras fieri fecimus patentes.

Test me ipso apud Wodestok, decimo die Julii Anno Regni nostri Sexto.
Inter Recorda de Termino Sanctae Trinitatis Anno tricesimo quarto Edwardi
primi Rot. vel. N. 43.
MEmorandum quod congregatis in Scaccario Regis apud Westmonasterium modo die
Jovis in Vigilia Natalis Sancti Johannis Baptistae venerabili Patre W. (...)
Coventrensi and Lichfieldensi Episcopo, Domino Regis Thesaurario, North. Suff.
de hominibus de Jernemuth, and Luthinglond. N. 1. b.
Willielmo de Hamelton Cancellario Angliae R. (...) le Brabazon Justiciario ad
placita coram Rege placitanda deputato, Baronibus de Scaccario, praedictis
Justiciariis de Banco, and quibusdam aliis de Consilio Regis praedicti super
quibusdam negotiis Regis tranctantibus, venerunt coram eis Henricus Rose, and
Willielmus Fastolft Burgenses Villae Regis magnae Jernemuthae, and supplicarunt
pro se and aliis Burgensibus Villae praedictae, quod cum per Cartam Domini
Regis Henrici quondam Regis Angliae progenitoris Regis nunc, quam ipse Rex nunc
confirmavit inter caetera contenta in Carta praedicta concessum fuit
Burgensibus de Villa de magna Jernemutha, quod omnia mercandisae and mercimonia
tam de piscibus quam de aliis rebus ad portum de Jernemutha venientia in
Navibus vel extra, libere and aperte per manus hujusmodi mercimonia deferentium
absque alicujus impedimento vendantur and emantur, ita tamen quod non sint
abrocatores in praedicta Villa de Jernemutha, per quos venditores vel emptores
de venditionibus vel emptionibus suis libere faciendis impediantur ad
detrimentum Villae memoratae, quod ad majorem notificationem and expressionem
praemissorum concedatur eis inde declaratio sub hac forma (videlicet) quod
mercandisae and mercimonia quaecunque, sive sint de piscibus sive de rebus
aliis quibuscunque, quae infra portum Villae praedictae vel ad eandem Villam
per terram vel per mare causa negotiandi ibidem, de eisdem adduci seu deferri
contigerit libere and aperte apud eandem Villam de magna Jernemutha per manus
mercandisas and mercimonia illa ducentium, and ea ibidem vendere volentium, seu
servientium suorum venditioni exponantur, and ibidem vendantur and emantur
absque aliquo forstallamento vel abrocamento seu alio quovis impedimento, ita
quod nullus forstallarius, abrocator vel alius quicunque obviam eat
mercatoribus cum piscibus vel aliis mercandisis aut aliis rebus venalibus per
terram vel per aquam versus dictam Villam venientibus ad aliquae inde emenda,
vel forstallamenta seu abrocamenta inde facienda sub forisfactura rei emptae,
per quod dicti Burgenses seu aliqui mercatores hujusmodi mercandisas and
mercimonia ibidem ducentes super emptionibus and venditionibus ad detrimentum
Villae praedictae aliqualiter impediantur.

Et super hoc obtulerunt se coram Concilio praedicto Adam Bacon Clericus,
Johannes Kybel de Gorleston, and Johannes de Belton de Suth Jernemutha quae
sunt in Ludinglond, dicentes and proponentes quod dicta declaratio si concessa
fuerit, multum cederet in praejudicium and perpetuam deteriorationem hominum
Villarum earundem, quae quidem Villae sitae sunt prope portum praedictum:
dicunt enim, quod semper retroactis temporibus naves ingredientes portum illum
in seisona piscationis allecis discarcari solebant pro voluntate Magistrorum
navium illarum, tam ad illas Villas quam ad magnam Jernemutham, (videlicet) ad
quem locorum praedictorum illi quorum intersit vendere mercimonia in hujusmodi
Navibus carcata vellent exponere ea venditioni and ibidem vendi and emi absque
allo impedimento; and per praedictam declarationem si concessa esset, in forma
praedicta, attraherent Burgensibus Magna Jernemuthae toto tempore anni
omnimodas naves cum quibuscunque mercimoniis applicantes in portu praedicto ad
eandem Villam, and non permitterent hujusmodi naves alibi discarcare nec aliqua
mercimonia in eisdem navibus adducta alibi venditioni exponere, etc. Unde
petierunt pro Statu hominum Villarum praedictarum in Ludinglond quod nulla
concessio fiat in hac part in laesionem vel derogationem consuetudinum suarum
pacifice hactenus obtentarum super emptionibus and venditionibus faciendis ad
easdem Villas, ut praedictum est, etc.

Et praedicti Henricus and Willielmus dicunt, magna Jernemutha est Note here
what Liber Burgus a free Burgh was. To wit, a Town that had special Liberties
granted by the Kings Charter.
Liber Burgus Regis, and tenetur de ipso Rege ad feodi firmam quinquaginta
quinque librarum per annum, eo quod non est aliquod i. e. no Lands or certain
Rents.
certum in Villa praedicta spectans ad firmam illam, unde aliqua pars inde
exeat vel emergat, sed quod ipsi Villae ejusdem ratione proficui quem habent
and habere clamant, de rebus venalibus adductis ad portum praedictum vendendis
ad eandem Villam, and pro aliis libertatibus quae ad liberum Burgum pertinent
and quas Rex Scilicet King John.
Avus Regis nunc, and Rex Henricus Pater Regis nunc, per cartas suas eis
concesserunt, and ipse Rex nunc per cartam suam confirmavit, solverunt annuatim
firmam supradictam, etc. Et ostendunt Cartam Regis nunc de confirmatione
cartarum praedictarum Avi sui and Patris sui quae testatur magnam Jernemutham
esse liberum Burgum, and Et de Rege teneri ad feodi firmam, etc. Et plures and
diversas libertates hominibus ejusdem Villae and eorum Haeredibus and
Successoribus esse concessas, inter quas ad plenum continetur quod superius in
principio hujus processus de concessione Patris Regis nunc exprimitur, etc. Et
petunt quod explanatio sive declaratio quam petunt super concessione illa
concedatur, non obstante reclamatione dictorum Adae, Johannis and Johannis pro
hominibus praedictis de Ludinglond, praesertim cum ipsi non ostendant, nec
ostendere poterunt quod Villae de Suth-Jernemutha and de Gorleston sint Burgi,
vel aliquam libertatem ad Note here the same.
Liberum Burgum pertinentem habeant per Cartam Regis, etc. Adjicientes, quod
nisi inhabitants Villas illas, qui ex concedione Regia nullas habent
libertates, etc. compellantur subtrahere and delere usurpationes and
foristallamenta quae faciunt and indies facere nituntur contra libertates
magnae Jernemuthae, etc. Attrahentes eis mercandisas and mercimonia
quorumcunque adducta ad praedictum portum, and non permittentes mercimonia
hujusmodi transduci seu transferri ad Villam magnae Jernemuthae ibidem
venditioni exponenda and vendenda, ad quam Villam and non aliam spectat portus
praedictus eadem in proximo penitus adnullabitur, unde pro Rege and Statu
Villae suae opportunum remedium petent eis adhiberi in hac part; and habito
inde tractatu per Concilium Regis praedictum, visaque and examinata Carta Regis
praedicta, etc. Et quesito etiam a praefatis Ada, Johanne, and Johanne, si
aliquam Cariam Regis habeant de aliquibus libertatibus concessis hominibus
Villa parvae Jernemuthae, and Gorleston, and obtento quod non, visum est
concilio praedicto quod per verba expressa in praedictis Cartis Regum Johannis
and Henrici confirmatis per Regem nunc, etc. Et per hoc quod praedicta Villa de
magna Jernemutha est Note again what Liber Burgus was.
Liber Burgus, etc. quod omnia mercimonia adducta ad portum praedictum tum de
piscibus quum de aliis rebus vendenda, etc. Exponi debent venditioni and vendi
ad Villam magna Jernemuthae, etc. and non ad praedictas Villas in Ludinglond,
quae non sunt Burgi, etc. Unde dictum est per dictum Concilium ex part Domini
Regis firmiter injunctum praefatis Adae, Johanni and Johanni de Belton, quod
ipsi scire faciant hominibus praedictarum Villarum in Ludinglond pro quibus
sequuntur quod nullus eorum praesumat attrahere ad suas parts aliquas naves
^pplicantes in portu praedicto cum aliquibus mercandisis seu mercimoniis
vendendis, nec de hujusmodi mercandisis seu mercimoniis venditiones seu
emptiones ibidem facere quoquo modo, quo minus mercandisae and mercimonia illa
libere and aperte absque impedimento seu aliquo foristallamento transduci
possint ad praedictum Burgum Regis Jernemutham, and ibidem prius exponi
venditioni and vendi per manus illorum quorum mercandisae and mercimonia illa
fuerint vel Attornatorum eorundem prout justum fuerit, and prout per libertates
hominibus Burgi pradicti a Domino Rege and Progenitoribus suis concessas fieri
debet, etc.

By this Plea and Controversy in the Exchequer, between the Burgh of Great
Yarmouth, Prescription not allowed, against the Liberties of free Burghs, etc.
and the Men of Little Yarmouth and Gorleston in Lovinglond, it appears, That
Prescription, seeing they were no Burghs, prevailed not to assert and make good
a liberty of unlading Goods, and exposing them to Sale in those Towns, though
it had been always done in foregoing times. By the same it is also evident,
that Liberties belonging to free Burghs were only to be had and obtained by the
Kings Charter, and that where they were used without it, they were esteemed and
judged Usurpations. Especially if practiced, and continued to the prejudice and
damage of a free Burgh.

Cart. 9. Johannis, N. 20. Carta Burgensium de Gernemuth. N. 2.
JOhahnes Dei Gratia, etc. Sciatis non concessisse and praesenti Carta nostra
confirmasse Burgensibus nostris de Gernemua quod habeant Burgum de Gernemua ad
feodi firmam in perpetuum, and quod Burgus ille sit liber Burgus imperpetuum,
and habeant Soca, Soca.
Socna, the place, Territory, or Precinct, wherein Saca or Liberty of Court was
exercised, the Circuit of the place of the Franchise, or the Liberty,
Privilege, or Franchise itself.
Socam and Saca, Saca.
Sacca, Saka, Sacna, signifies a Liberty or Power granted by the King to try
and judge causes, and of receiving the forfeitures arising from them, within
the Limit, Dominion, or Jurisdiction of the Court. See more of these words in
the Preface to my History, Fol. 61.
Sacam, Tol, Tol.
a word commonly known, being an imposition or payment for things bought and
sold in Mercates.
Tol and Theme, Theme.
a Privilege to take and keep Bondmen, Villans, Servants and Slaves, with their
Generations one after another, and Posterities, which in Latin are sometimes
called Sect^^ sometimes Sequela, and to dispose of, and sell their Children, or
moveable, or immovable goods at pleasure.
Theme, and Infangthef.
A Liberty granted to try and judge a Thief taken within the Jurisdiction of the
Burgh.
Infangenethef and Utfangthef.
Vt or Outfangenetheof, a Liberty to take a Thief that fled, and bring him back
to the Court, or Place, within which the fact was committed, and there to try
and judge him.
Utfangenethef, and quod ipsi Burgenses per totam terram nostram, and per omnes
portus maris sint quieti de Theoloneum, Theloneum.
the same with Toll.
Theoloneo, Lestagium, Lestagium.
a Liberty for Men to carry their Goods up and down in Fairs and Mercates,
where they please.
Lestagio, Passagium, Passagium.
Money paid by Passengers at Bridges, Gates, etc. which may be called
Gate-Toll, Bridge-Toll, etc.
Passagio, Paagium Paagium.
any Tribute or Payment from the French Word paier, and ours to pay, or perhaps
the same word with Passagium the double S being left out, yet the word retained
by the ignorance of the Scribe.
Paagio, Pontagium, Pontagium.
Toll paid for Passage over Bridges, with Horses, Carriages, etc. and under
them, with Boats, Ships, etc.
Pontagio, Stallagium.
A payment for a Stall, or a Right to have one in Fairs or Mercates.
Stallagio, and de Leve, Leve.
pro Leva, Tribute, Levies, Exaction, Collection, a Levare, Exigere, Tributum
imponere.
Leve, and de Danegeld, Danegeld.
this was a Tax or Money paid, and imposed, and levied for defense of the
Nation against the Danes, or rather an annual Tribute paid to them, that they
might abstain from Rapine, Burning and Slaughter, See my History, Fol. 123. E.
F.
Denegeld, and omni alia consuetudine, salva liberate Civitatis London, and
quod nullam sectam Comitatuum vel Hundredorum faciant de tenuris infra Burgum
de Gernemua. Concessimus etiam eisdem Burgensibus, and hac Carta nostra
confirmavimus quod nullus eorum placitet extra Burgum de Gernemua de nullo
placito praeter placita de tenuris exterioribus. Concessimus etiam eis
quietanciam murdri infra Burgum de Gernemua, and quod nullus eorum faciat
Duellum, etc.
De Duello inter forinsecum and Burgensem. Leg. Burgor. Scot. c. 14. Si quis
forinsecus Burgensem de re aliqua appellaverit, non potest super Burgensem
pugnare, sed Burgensis per legem Burgi se defendet.
Duellum, and quod de placitis ad Coronam pertinentibus se possint dirationare
secundum legem and consuetudinem Oxon, and quod infra Burgum praedictum nemo
capiat hospitium per vim, vel per liberationem Mareschallorum, and quod in
Burgo illo in nullo placito sit Meskenninga, and quod Husting semel tantum in
ebdomada teneatur. Concessimus etiam eis Gildam Mercatoriam, and quod terras,
and tenuras, vadia sua, and debita sua, omnia just habeant quicunque eis
debeat, and de terris suis and tenuris quae infra Burgum praedictum sunt rectum
eis teneatur, secundum legem and consuetudinem Burgi Oxon, and de omnibus
debitis suis quae accommodata fuerint apud Gernemuam, and de vadiis ibidem
factis placita apud Gernemuam teneantur. Et si quis in tota Anglia Theolonia
vel consuetudines a Burgensibus de Gernemua ceperit, excepto, ut superius,
dicta Civitate London, postquam ipse a recto defecerit, Praepositus de Gernemna
Namium apud Gernemuam capiat. Insuper ad emendationem praedicti Burgi de
Gernemua concessimus quod quinque Mercatores petierint Burgum de Gernemua cum
Mercato suo de quocunque loco fuerint sive extranei, sive alii qui de pace
nostra fuerint vel de licentia nostra in terram nostram venerint, veniant,
morentur, and recedant, salva pace nostra reddendo rectas consuetudines illius
Burgi. Prohibemus etiam ne quis praedictis Burgensibus injuriam vel dampnum vel
molestiam inferat super forisfacturam december librarum. Quare volumus and
firmiter praecipimus quod praedicti Burgenses de Gernemua, and eorum haeredes
habeant and teneant imperpetuum omnia praedicta haereditarie, been and in pace,
libere, quiet, integre, plenarie and honorifice reddendo inde annuatim
quinquaginta and quinque libras numero, per manum Praepositi de Gernemua ad
Scacarium nostrum ad Terminum Sancti Michaelis: and Burgenses de Gernemua
facient Praepositos de se per annum qui sint idonei nobis and eis. Testibus
Domino H. (...) Wintoniensi, Domino J. (...) Norwicensi, S. (...) Sarisberiensi
Episcopis, G. (...) Filio Petri, W. (...) Marescallo, Comite Pembroke, W. (...)
fratre nostro, Comite Sarum, W. (...) Comite de Ferrariis, Petro filio
Herberti, W. (...) Briwer, H. (...) de Nevill, Adamo de Portu, Garino filio
Geroldi, Willielmo de Cantilupo, Johanne de Bassing, Galfrido Lutterell, Thoma
filio Adae. Datum per manum H. (...) de Well Archidiacono Wellensi apud
Merleberg decimo octavo die Martii, Anno Regni nostri nono.

1 Johannis, N. 164. Carta Burgensium de Dunewic. N. 3. a.
JOhannes Dei Gratia Rex Angliae, Dominus Yberniae, Dux Normanniae, Aquitaniae,
Comes Andegaviae, Archiepiscopis, Episcopis, Abbatibus, Comitibus, Baronibus,
Justiciariis, Vice-Comitibus, Praepositis and omnibus Ballivis and fidelibus
suis, Salutem. Sciatis nos concessisse and praesenti Carta confirmasse
Burgensibus nostris Dunewici quod Burgum de Dunewic sit liberum Burgum nostrum,
and habeat Socam, and Sacam, and Toll, and Theme, Infangenetheof, and quod ipsi
per totam terram nostram sint quieti de Theloneo, and Lestagio, and Passagio,
and Pontagio, and Stallagio, and de Leve, and de Danegeld, and de Ewagium, I
know not what it means, unless it be here used for Aquagium, an Aquae-Duct, or
Water-Passage.
Ewagio, and de Wrec, Goods thrown overboard, when the Ship is over-laden, or
cast away at Sea. These belonged to the Crown in all places, and could not be
enjoyed but by special Grant or Privilege.
Wrec, and Lagan, from the old word Liggen or Leggen, Goods lying and found
under Water, or in the bottom of the Sea.
Lagan, and de omnibus aliis consuetudinibus, Salva liberate Civitatis London,
and quod ipsi rectam and Solitam firmam suam per manum suam reddant ad
Scaccarium nostrum, and quod nullam Sectam faciant Comitatuum vel Hundredorum
nisi coram Justiciariis nostris; Et cum summoniti fuerint esse coram
Justiciariis mittant pro se duodecim legales homines de Burgo suo, qui sint pro
eis omnibus. Et si forte amerciari debuerint, per sex probos homines de Burgo
suo, and per sex. probos homines extra Burgum, amercientur. Concessimus etiam
eis quod Note; before they had the Kings License, the Burgesses could not Marry
their Sons and Daughters to whom, and where they pleased, nor could Widows
Marry themselves, nor could the Burgesses give or sell the Lands they
purchased, without License, or before their Charter. And most probable it is,
these were of the same state and condition with the Burgenses Dominici, in the
Saxon times before the Conquest, who had the King or some other Lords, or great
Men for their Patrons, and Protectors.
filios and filias suas possint libere ubi voluerint in terra nostra maritare,
and viduas similiter per consilium amicorum suorum, and Note; before they had
the Kings License, the Burgesses could not Marry their Sons and Daughters to
whom, and where they pleased, nor could Widows Marry themselves, nor could the
Burgesses give or sell the Lands they purchased, without License, or before
their Charter. And most probable it is, these were of the same state and
condition with the Burgenses Dominici, in the Saxon times before the Conquest,
who had the King or some other Lords, or great Men for their Patrons, and
Protectors.
perquisitiones suas de terris and aedificiis in Villa sua possint dare aut
vendere, aut facere inde quod voluerint, and quando voluerint. Concessimus
etiam eis Hansa, from the German word Hanse, which signifies a Society.
hansam, and Gilda Mercatoria, a Trading Society, a Company of Buyers and
Sellers. The other words are all interpreted in the Charter of Yarmouth.
Gildam Mercatoriam, sicut habere consueverint. Quare volumus and firmiter
praecipimus, quod praedicti Burgenses nostri praenominatas libertates and
liberas consuetunines habeant, and teneant libere, pacifice, and integre sine
omni impedimento. Testibus Eustachio Elyensi Episcopo, Willielmo Mareschallo,
Comite de Pembroke, Johanne de Pratell, Ga. (...) Data per manum Huberti
Cantuariensis Archiepiscopi, Cancellarii nostri apud Rupem Aurmall Vicesimo
nono Die Junii, Anno Regni nostri primo.

JOhannes Dei Gratia, etc. Cart. 7 Johan. m. 6. n. 45.
Sciatis quod remisimus and perdonavimus Burgensibus nostris de Dunwico
quadraginta libras in perpetuum de firma sua quam nobis reddere solebant pro
Villa de Dunwico, scilicet, N. 3. b.
de Note, the great Fee-Farm Rent of this now poor Town, it was almost twice as
much as any, and more than twice as much as most Coast-Towns in Norff. and
Suff. then paid.
sexties viginti libris and viginti quatuor mill allecum and una Marca. Ita
quod reddent nobis and haeredibus nostris de caetero singulis annis quater
viginti libras and viginti quatuor mill allecum and unam Marcam pro praedicta
Villa de Dunwico tenenda in perpetuum ad feodi firmam. Quare, etc. quod
praedicti Burgenses nostri and haeredes sui quieti sint in perpetuum a nobis
and haeredibus nostris de praedictis quadraginta libris de praedicta firma,
sicut praedictum est. Concessimus etiam eis and hac Carta nostra confirmavimus
quod non Should not be distreined.
namientur pro aliquo debito unde non fuerint vel plegii vel capitales
debitores nisi ipsi super hoc quieti in Justicia exhibenda defecerint, and nisi
in locis quibus libertatem and potestatem hujusmodi namia capiendi concessimus.
Testibus W. (...) Comite Sarum, W. (...) Comite Arundell, Willielmo Briwer,
Hugone de Neville, Warino filio Geroldi, Thoma Basset. Data per manum Hugonis
de Well (...) Archidiaconi Wellensis apud Freitmantell quinto die Novembris
anno, etc. Septimo.

Dunwich paid to the King Three Hundred Marks for to have their Liberties
granted to them, in their Charter in the First of King John besides Ten
Falcons, and Five Girfalcons.

Dunewic Rot. oblat. 1 Johan. M. 19.
dat Domino Regi trecentas Marcas pro habendis Libertatibus suis secundum
tenorem Cartarum suarum quas habebunt. Item dant pro eodem decern Osterios, and
quinque Girfalcones.

The Burgesses or Men of Dunewic further gave the King an Hundred Marks of
Silver, that they might have and enjoy their Charter of Liberties which was
then detained, as may be supposed by what follows.

Homines Ibid. M. 9.
de Dunewic dant Domino Regi centum Marcas Argenti ut Carta Domini Regis de
libertatibus suis teneantur. Scilicet quinquaginta Marcas ad Pascha, and
quinquaginta Marcas ad Festum Sancti Michaelis.

The Burgesses of Dunewich gave more to the King 200 Marks and 500 Eeles, for
having Wrec and Lagan inserted into, or Granted by their Charter, and the
Charter was delivered to Geofry Fitz-Peter, until provision was made for the
Security of 300 Marks first promised, and 100 Marks promised the second time.

Burgenses Ibid. M. 1.
de Dunewic dant Domino Regi ducentas Marcas and quinque mill Anguillarum pro
habenda Wrec and Lagan in Carta sua (...) Cartam G (...) Fill. Petri ut
provideatur de securitate de trecentis Marcis primo promissis, and de centum
Marcis secundo promissis.

Cart. 51 H. 3. M. 10. N. B. by Inspeximus. Note, there are in this Roll two M.
10.
HEnricus Dei gratia Rex Angliae, etc.
Archiepiscopis, Episcopis, etc. Salutem.
Inspeximus Cartam quam bonae memoriae Henricus quondam Rex Angliae Avus noster
fecit Burgensibus Wallingfordiae in haec verba.

N. 4.
Henricus Dei gratia Rex Angliae, and Dux Normanniae and Aquitaniae and Comes
Andegaviae
Archiepiscopis, etc. and fidelibus totius Angliae and Normanniae, Franciae and
Aquitaniae, Salutem.
Normanniae ubicunque sint; and sciatis me dedisse and concessisse eis
imperpetuum libertates and leges suas omnes and consuetudines been and
honorifice sicut melius and honorabilius eas habuerunt Modo sunt in ipso Burgo
Consuetudines omnes ut ante fuerunt, This follows in a distinct Line by itself,
immediately after what is written out of Domesday Book further on. The word
Consuetudines here seems to signify Rents, and the whole to sound no more,
than that the Rents of Houses were not raised in that Burgh after the Conquest;
or they might have the same other Customs, though they paid more for them, for
the Farm of the Town was raised from 30 to 60 l. per Annum, Domesd. f. 56. b.
Col 1.
tempore Edwardi Regis and tempore Atavi mei Regis Willielmi, and ejus filii
alterius Regis Willielmi and tempore Henrici Regis Avi mei, scilicet, Gildam
Mercatoriam cum omnibus consuetudinibus and legibus suis libere habeant, ne
Officer or Sheriff.
Praepositus meus vel aliqua Justicia mea de Gilda eorum se intromittat nisi
proprie Aldermannus and Minister eorum. Et si Ministri mei vel aliqua Justicia
aliquo placito vel occasion calumpniaverit illos, vel in causam ducere
voluerit, prohibeo and praecipio ne ullo modo respondeant nisi illorum proprio
portimoto. Et si ipse Praepositus eos aliqua occasion sine calumpniatore
implacitaverit non respondeant. Et si aliquo forisfacto vel recto judicio
aliquis eorum forisfactus fuerit per rectam considerationem Burgensium erga
Praepositum illud emendet. Prohibeo etiam and praecipio ne aliquod Mercatum sit
in Craumersa is a Village or small place over against Wallingford Castle or the
Town, where there was an Anti-Castle or Fortress built, to restrain and keep in
the Garrison in that Castle in the time of King Stephen; this appears by the
great Ditches and Trenches to be seen before the place where the great
Castle-Gate was.
Craumersa, nec Mercator aliquis nisi sit At this time it was thought a great
Privilege at least, if not a Livelihood to be a Member of a Trading or
Merchant-Gild; and wherever a Burgess dwelt, if he lived upon, or used the
Mercate of Wallingford, he was to perform all Duties to the Gild, and be judged
according to the Rules and Laws of it, whether he lived within a Burgh, or
without. Et si quis exierit de Burgo Wallingford, and vivat de Mercato ipsius
Wallingford, praecipio ut rectum Gildae Mercatoriae faciat ipsis Burgensibus,
ubicunque sit, infra Burgum, vel extra.
Gilda Mercatoria, and si aliquis exierit de Burgo Wallingford, and vivat de
Mercato ipsius Wallingford, praecipio ut rectum Gildae Mercatoriae faciat ipsis
Burgensibus ubicunque sit infra Burgum vel extra. Sciatis praeterea me dedisse
and concessisse imperpetuum omnibus hominibus Wallingford plenam quietanciam de
annuo In Burgo de Wallingford habuit Rex Edwardus octo virgatas. Terrae, and in
his erant 276 Hage reddentes undecem libras de Gablo, and qui ibi manebant
faciebant Servitium Regis, cum Equis, vel per Aquam usque ad Blidberiam,
Reddinges, Sudtone, and Bensentone ( all Towns in Berkshire) and hoc
facientibus dabat Praepositus (Burgi) Conredium (their Diet) non de censu Regis
sed de suo, Domesd. f. 56. a. Col. 2. Blubery, Reding, Sutton-Courtney and
Besington all in Berkshire, upon or near the Thames, above and below
Wallingford, and the service here meant was Water and Land Carriage.
Gablio meo quod solebant reddere de Burgo Wallingford, de eo, scilicet, quod
ad me pertinet in Burgo has leges and consuetudines, and libertates and
quietancias omnes dono eis, and concedo imperpetuum, and alias omnes quas
poterunt ostendere antecessores suos habuisse libere, quiet, and honorifice
sicut Cives mei Winton melius unquam habuerunt, and hoc pro Servitio and labor
magno quem pro me sustinuerunt in acquisitione haereditarii juris mei in
Anglia. Concedo etiam eis quod ubicunque ierint in Mercationibus suis per totam
terram meam Angliae and Normanniae, Aquitaniae and Andegaviae, by Gater and by
Stronde, by Wode and by Land, quieti sint de Tolneto and Passagio and omnibus
Consuetudinibus and Exactionibus, ne super hoc ab aliquo inquietentur super
forisfacturam december librarum. Prohibeo etiam and praecipio super eandem
forisfacturam ne Praepositus Wallingford Scotale, what it was. Scotale from
Scot, a gathering or shot, and Ale in the known signification, Scotales were
abuses put upon the Kings People by his Officers, who invited them to drink
Ale, and then made a Collection, to the end they should not vex or inform
against them, for the Crimes they had committed or should commit.


Scotaliam faciat, and ne Geresumma, or Jeresumma. Geresumma, or sometime
Jeresumma, is properly an Income or Fine paid for the entrance upon some Place,
Estate or Office. Here it signifies plainly a Bribe, or Money given to the
Kings Officer to connive at, and not to prosecute those that gave it in
Criminal Cases.


Geresumam ab aliquo quaerat, and quod nullam consuetudinem in Wallingfordia
statuat quae noceat Burgensibus Villae hujus Donationis and Concessionis.
Testes sunt Thebaldus Archiepiscopus Cantuariensis and alii. Data apud
Oxeneford primo Idus Januarii. Nos autem praedictas donationem and concessionem
ratas habentes and gratas eas pro nobis and haeredibus nostris, praedictis
Burgensibus and eorum Successoribus concedimus and confirmavimus prout Carta
praedicta rationabiliter testatur. Volumus etiam and concedimus pro nobis and
haeredibus nostris quod licet Burgenses praedicti a principio turbationis dudum
post Parliamentum habitum apud Oxon in Regno nostro suscitatae, aliquo
articulorum libertatum praedictarum minus plene hactenus usi fuerint ipsi tamen
and eorum Successores nichilominus de caetero libere and sine impedimento
aliquo utantur libertatibus ante dictis sicut praedictum est. His testibus
Roberto Walraund, Roberto Aguyloun, Nicholao de Leukenore, Willielmo de Aete,
Johanne de La Lynde, Petro de Neville, Radulpho de Bakepuz, Willielmo Belet,
Bartholomaeo Bigod, and aliis.

Data per manum nostram apud VVestmonasterium duodecimo die Januarii, Anno
Regni nostri quinquagesimo primo.
This was a large Charter, and was granted unto the Burgesses of Wallingford
for the good service they did King Henry the Second, and his Mother Maud the
Empress, against King Stephen.

Cart. 5 Ricardi 1.
RIcardus Dei Gratia Rex Angliae, etc.
Archiepiscopis, Episcopis, etc. Salutem.
Sciatis nos retinuisse in manum nostram Burgum nostrum de Portesmue, N. 5.
cum omnibus ad eum pertinentibus, and in eo stabilisse and dedisse and
concessisse N^ndinas duraturas semel in anno per quindecem dies ad vincula
Sancti Petri, scilicet. Concessimus etiam quod omnes homines Angliae,
Normanniae, Pictaviae, Walliae, Scotiae and omnium terrarum nostrarum, and
aliarum veniant ad praedictas Nundinas, and eant and redeant been and in pace,
and habeant omnes quietancias and libertates quas habent ad Nundinas Winton,
vel Hoiland, vel alibi in terram nostram. Concessimus etiam quod Burgenses
nostri in eodem Burgo habeant singulis Ebdomadis anni una die septimanae,
scilicet die Jovis, Mercatum cum omnibus libertatibus and liberis
consuetudinibus quas cives nostri Wintoniae, vel Oxoniae vel alii terrarum
nostrarum habent vel habere debeant. Concessimus etiam quod praedicta Villa de
Portesmue, and omnes Burgenses nostri in ea, and de ea tenentes sint quieti and
liberi de Thelonio, and Pontagio, and Passagio, and Pedagium and Paagium are
the same.
Pedagio, and Paagio, and Stallagio and Tallagio, and de Schiris, and
Hundredis, and de Sectis Schirarum and Hundredorum and de summis, and auxiliis
Vicecomitum and Servientium and de placitis and querelis omnibus, and de
Blodewyta, a Mulct or Amerciament for drawing Blood.
Blodwyta, and de Sichwyte, I know not what it is.
Sichwyta, and de Leirwyte, Lairwyte, Legerwyte, a Mulct upon him that
corrupted a Bondwoman, or upon a Bondsman for the Fornication of his Daughter.
Leirewyta, and de Free from Suit and Service to the Wapentake Court, as before
from Suit and Service to the County or Shire Court, and Hundred Courts.
Wapentake, and de placito Forestae, and Guardo, and Regard, etc. There were in
the Kings Forests certain Officers called Regardatores, now called Rangers, who
often viewed and went about the Forests, to see if any Wood was cut, Venison
stolen, and other Trespasses committed therein; which view or inspection was
called a Regard; as likewise was the punishment for such Offenses and
Trespasses.
Reguardo Forestae, and de omnibus aliis secularibus exactionibus tam per mare
quam per terram ubicunque venerint in totam terram nostram. Quare volumus and
firmiter praecipimus, quod praedicta Villa de Portesmue, and Burgenses nostri
in ea tenentes Mansiones suas and possessiones habeant and teneant, cum Thol,
and Theme, and Infangenetheof, and Vtfangenetheof, and cum omnibus libertatibus
and liberis consuetudinibus ita been and in pace, libere and quiet sicut Cives
nostri Wintoniae, vel Oxoniae, vel alii de terra nostra melius habent and
tenent. Et prohibemus ne ponantur in placitum de aliquo tenemento ejusdem
Villae, nisi coram nobis. Et prohibemus ne quis eos disturbet in aliquo super
forisfacturam i. e. 10 Lib.
nostram.

His testibus, etc. Data per manum Willielmi de Longo Campo Elyensis Episcopi
Cancellarii nostri apud Portesmue. Secundo die Maii, Anno Regni nostri quinto.
JOhannes Dei gratia, etc. Cart. 6 Johan. n. 15.


Sciatis nos concessisse hominibus de Andever quod habeant Gildam Mercatoriam
in Andever and quod sint quieti de Theloneo and Passagio and consuetudine per
totam terram nostram sicut Burgenses Wintoniae qui sunt de Gilda Mercatorum
sunt quieti, N. 6.
and super hoc nullus eos injuste disturbet pro consuetudine super december
librarum forisfactura, sicut Cartae Henrici Patris nostri, and Ricardi Fratris
nostri quas inde habent rationabiliter testantur.

Testibus R. (...) Comite Cestriae, Warino filio Geroldi, W. (...) de Braosa,
Petro filio Herberti, Henrico Bisset, Hugh de Lascy, Petro de Stok.
Data per manum J. (...) de Well apud Radinge primo die Maii Anno Regni nostri
sexto.
JOhannes Dei gratia, etc. Cart. 2 Johan. p. 2. n. 132.


Sciatis nos dedisse and concessisse and hac praesenti Carta nostra confirmasse
dilecto and fideli nostro Willielmo Briwer quod Bruge Walteri sit liberum
Burgum and quod ibi sit liberum Mercatum, N. 7.
and una feria singulis annis per octo dies duratura, scilicet, a die
Nativitatis Beati Johannis in octo dies cum Theloneo, Paagio, Pontagio,
Passagio, Lestagio, Stallagio and cum omnibus aliis libertatibus and liberis
consuetudinibus ad liberum Burgum and ad Mercatum and Feriam pertinentibus.
Concessimus etiam praedicto Willielmo quod praedicti Burgenses sui de praedicto
Burgo sint liberi Burgenses, and sint quieti de Theloneo, Paagio, Pontagio,
Passagio, Lestagio and Stallagio, and habeant omnes libertates, and liberas
consuetudines and quietancias quae ad nos pertinent per totam terram nostram,
and per omnes portus terrae nostrae, excepta Civitate London. Quare volumus and
firmiter praecipimus quod praedictus Willielmus and haeredes sui post ipsum
habeant and teneant omnia praedicta been, and in pace, libere and quiet,
integre, plenarie, and honorifice cum omnibus libertatibus and liberis
consuetudinibus suis sicut praedictum est.

Testibus W. (...) Marescallo Comite de Penbroc, R. (...) Comite Cestriae,
Willielmo Comite Sarum, Willielmo de Rupibus Seneschallo Andegaviae, etc.
Data per manus S. (...) Wellens Archidiaconi Gloucestriae apud Turon vicesimo
sexto die Junii, Anno Regni nostri secundo.
JOhannes Dei gratia, etc. Cart. 2 Johan. n. 47.


Sciatis nos concessisse and praesenti Carta nostra confirmasse, quod Burgus
noster de Helleston sit liber Burgus and quod Burgenses nostri de eadem Villa
habeant Gildam Mercatoriam and quietanciam per totam terram nostram de
Theloneo, N. 8.
Pontagio, Passagio, Stallagio, Lestagio and I know not the meaning of
Sollagium, unless it be in stead of Seldagium, a Payment for standing in a Shed.
Sollagio salvis in omnibus libertatibus Civitatis London. Concedimus etiam eis
quod non placitent nisi infra Burgum suum de rebus vel tenuris pertinentibus ad
villam suam praeterquam de placitis ad Coronam nostram pertinentibus and
placitis de terris forinsecis. Volumus etiam quod habeant omnes alias
libertates and liberas consuetudines quas habuerunt Burgenses nostri de
Castello de Lanceston tempore Regis Henrici Patris nostri. Ita quod nullus
Burgensium praedictorum Note here, if the Burgesses were not resident in the
Burgh, they were not to enjoy the Liberties of it.
nisi residens fuerit in praedicta Villa de Helleston has habebit libertates.

His testibus W. (...) Comite Sarum, W. Briwer, Roberto de Turnham, Roberto de
Tresgos, Sim. (...) de Pateshul, Radulpho de Stok, Eustachio de Faruberge.
Data per manum S. (...) Wellensis Archidiaconi apud Craneburn decimo quinto
die Aprilis, Anno Regni nostri secundo.
Rot. Cart. 5 Johan. n. 112.
JOhannes Dei Gratia, etc.

Noveritis nos ad instantiam and petitionem venerabilis Patris nostri Johannis
Norwicensis Episcopi Secundi, concessisse and hac praesenti Carta nostra
confirmasse quod Villa de Lenna sit liber Burgus in perpetuum, N. 9.
and habeat omnes libertates and liberas consuetudines quas Note, from hence it
appears there were a certain number of Liberties, which made a free Burgh, and
they were no other than what were usually granted by Charter to free Burghs,
and such as are ordinarily mentioned in their Chart^^.
liberi Burgi habent, omnibus salvis ipsi Episcopo and Successoribus suis, and
Willielmo Comiti Arundell, and haeredibus suis libertatibus and consuetudinibus
quas ipsi in praedicta Villa antiquitus habuerunt. Quare volumus and firmiter
praecipimus quod praedicta Villa de Lenna sit liber Burgus in perpetuum and
habeat omnes libertates and consuetudines liberas quas liberi Burgi nostri
habent in omnibus been and in pace, libere and quiet, and integre, plenarie
and honorifice sicut praedictum est.

Testibus Domino Cantuariensi Archiepiscopo, W. (...) London Episcopo, G. (...)
filio Petri Comite Essex, R. (...) Comite Cestriae, Gaufrido de Say, etc.
Data per manum Summi Praepositi de Beverl, etc. apud Lamb Vicesimo Septimo
Die Januarii Anno Regni nostri quinto.
Cart. 2 Johan. n. 19.
JOhannes Dei Gratia, etc.

Sciatis non concessisse and hac praesenti Carta nostra confirmasse hominibus
de Hertlepole quod sint liberi Burgenses, N. 10.
and quod habeant easdem libertates and leges in Villa sua de Hertlepole quos
Burgenses nostri de Novo Castello super Tinam habent in Villa sua de Novo
Castello. Quare volumus and firmiter praecipimus quod praedicti Burgenses
habeant and teneant praedictas libertates and leges been, and in pace, libere,
and quiet, and integre sicut praedictum est.

His Testibus Willielmo de Stutevill, Hugone Bard, Petro de Patell, Willielmo
Briwer, Hugone de Neville, Roberto de Ros, Eustachio de Vescy, Petro de Bruis,
etc.
Data per manum S. (...) Wellensis Archidiaconi apud Duneim. Octavo Die
Februarii, Regni nostri Anno Secundo.
REX
Majori and Vicecomitibus London, Salutem. Claus. 22. H. 6. m. 25. Dors. De
Proclamatione facienda.

Cum per Cartas Progenitorum nostrorum quondam Regum Angliae quas
confirmavimus, concessum sit Civibus nostris Civitatis praedictae quod Majorem
and Aldermanos de se ipsis quos voluerint eligant and ipsos, nobis apud
Westmonasterium non existentibus, N. 11.
Thesaurario and Baronibus nostris de Scaccario praesentent, ut ibidem prout
moris est admittantur; Ac jam intellexerimus quod quamquam hujusmodi electiones
per Majorem and Aldermannos nec non discretiores dictae Civitatis ad hoc
specialiter summonitos and praemunitos temporibus retroactis fieri
consueverint, nonnulli tamen qui aliquod interesse in electionibus hujusmodi
non habent nec habere debent electionibus illis ausu temerario se ingerunt,
immiscent, and multociens electiones, quae rite and pacifice fierent, suis
validis clamoribus and importunis multipliciter impediunt and perturbant, ad
intentionem quod tales eligerentur qui suis malefactis and erroribus postmodum
favere possent, and ea sub dissimulatione dimittere impunita; quod si fieri
permitteretur, in nostri ac Coronae and dignitatis nostrae laesionem, neenon
status Civitatis praedictae subversionem civiumque nostrorum ibidem
perturbationem and commotionem cederet manifest. Nos igitur quieti and
tranquillitati popoli nobis subjecti providere and congruum remedium in hac
part volentes adhibere, ut tenemur, vobis praecipimus firmiter injungentes,
quod ante tempus electionis Majoris Civitatis praedictae proximo faciendae per
totam Civitatem illam and libertatem ejusdem ex part nostra public proclamari
and firmiter inhiberi faciatis, ne quis hujusmodi electioni nisi qui de jure
and secundum consuetudinem Civitatis praedictae interesse, debeat, illi
intersit, quovis modo nec se de electione illa quoquo quaesito color
intromittat, neque eam impediat, vel perturbet, sed quod electio illa per
Aldermannos and alios Cives discretiores and potentiores Civiratis praedictae
ad hoc specialiter praemunitos and summonitos fiat and habeatur, prout secundum
consuetudinem supradictam fuerit facienda. Scientes pro certo, quod siquem alio
modo quam ut praemittitur electum nobis vel Thesaurario and Baronibus de
Scaccario praesentaveritis, illum nullatenus admittemus, and omnes illos quos
contrarium proclamationis and inhibitionis praedictarum inveneritis facientes
arestetis, and eos prisonae nostrae committatus ibidem moraturos, quousque pro
eorum deliberatione duxerimus demandandum.

Test Rege apud Westmonasterium Septimo die Octobris. Per Consilium.

EDwardus Dei Gratia Rex Angliae, Retorn. Brev. Parl 34 Ed. 1. and Claus. 34
Ed. 1. m. 15. in Cedula.
Dominus Hiberniae and Dux Aquitaniae
Vicecomiti Bedford and Buckingham, Salutem.
Quia ordinavimus quod Edwardus filius noster primogenitus in festo Pentecostes
proximo futuro, Deo propitio, cingulo Militiae decoretur, per quod de jure
Coronae nostrae in hujusmodi casu auxilium fieri nobis debet, N. 12.
tibi praecipimus quod de utroque Comitatu tuo duos Milites and de qualibet
Civitate in Balliva tua duos Cives and de quolibet Burgo duos Burgenses vel
unum secundum quod Burgus fuerit major vel minor venire facias coram nobis and
consilio nostro apud Westmonasterium in Crastino Sanctae Trinitatis proximo
futurae ad tractandum and ordinandum de auxilio nobis in casu praedicto
faciendo, and ad consentiendum hiis quae ordinabuntur in hac part. Scire etiam
facias Archiepiscopis, Episcopis, Abbatibus, Prioribus, and aliis viris
religiosis per totam Ballivam tuam quod per se vel sufficientes procuratores
vel attornatos suos tunc sint ibidem ad tractandum and ordinandum similiter de
praemissis ac ad consentiendum eisdem prout superius est expressum, and habeas
ibi nomina Militum, Civium and Burgensium praedictorum, and hoc Breve.

Test Meipso apud Wynton quinto die Aprilis, Anno Regni nostri tricesimo
quarto.
Inter Communia Brevia de Terminis Sanctae Trinitatis, Anno Regni Regis Ed. 1.
34 Rot. vel N. 40. penes Remem. Regis in Scaccario.
Anglic. de auxilio Concesso ad Militiam Regis.
MEmorandum quod cum nuper D^rdi^us Rexilordinasset quod Edwardus filius suus
primogenitus in festo Pentecostes, Anno Regni sui tricesimo quarto Cingulo
Militiae decoraretur, Et Mandatum esset Archiepiscopis, Episcopis, Abbatibus,
Prioribus, Comitibus, N. 13.
Baronibus, and aliis Magnatibus Regni quod essent coram ipso Domino Rege and
Concilio suo apud Westmonasterium in Crastino Sanctae Trinitatis proximo
sequenti ad tractandum and ordinandum de auxilio Regis faciendo ad Militiam
praedictam and ad consentiendum hiis quae ulterius ordinarentur in hac part,
vel quod procuratores aut attornatos suos sufficienter instructos ad praemissa
loco eorum facienda mitterent tunc ibidem.

Ac etiam praeceptum fuisset singulis Vicecomitibus Angliae, quod eorum
quilibet venire faceret de Comitatu suo ad praefatos diem and locum duos
Milites and de qualibet Civitate Ballivae suae duos Cives, and de quolibet
Burgo ejusdem Ballivae suae duos Burgenses, vel unum, etc. ad tractandum,
ordinandum and consentiendum sicut praedictum est.

Venerunt personaliter coram Rege and Concilio suo apud Westmonasterium, ad
diem illum Antonius Bek Patriarcha Jerosolomitanus Episcopus Dunelmensis, W.
(...) de Langeton Coventrensis and Lichfieldensis, Radulfus de Baldok London,
Episcopi, H. (...) de Lacy Comes Lincolniae, J. (...) de Warenna Comes Surriae,
R. (...) de Monte Hermerii Comes Gloucestriae and Hertfordiae, H. (...) de Boun
Comes Herefordiae, G. (...) de Bello Campo Comes War^wici, Robertus filius
Walteri, Hugo le Dispenser, Johannes de Hastinges, Hugo de Veer, Willielmus
Martyn, Henricus le Tyeys, Johannes Lovel, Rogerus de Mortuomari, Johannes de
Mohun, Alanus la Zouche, Willielmus de Leyburn, and Robertus de Burghersh,
Custos Quinque Portuum cum quibusdam Baronibus Portuum eorundem.

Ac etiam per Procuratores and Attornatos Robertus Cantuariensis and Willielmus
Eborum Archiepiscopi, Thomas Exoniensis, Richardus Herefordensis, Johannes
Wintoniensis, Johannes Cicestrensis, Thomas Roffensis, Robertus Elyensis,
Johannes Norwicensis, Johannes Lincolniensis, Simon Sarum, Willielmus
Wigorniensis, Walterus Bathoniensis and Wellensis, and Johannes Karliolensis
Episcopi; Abbates Westmonasterii, Sancti Edmundi, Sancti Augustini Cantuariae,
Sancti Albani, Glastoniae, Burgi Sancti Petri, Rammeseye, Thorneye, Seleby, and
Malmesbury, Sancti Petri Gloucestriae; Rogerus Comes Norfolciae and Marescallus
Angliae, Thomas Comes Lancastrensis, Edmundus Comes Arundel, and quam plures
alii Praelati, Magnates, and Proceres Regni, nec non de quolibet Comitatu Regni
ejusdem duo Milites, and de qualibet Civitate duo Cives and de quolibet Burgo
duo Burgenses electi per C^mmunitates Comitatuum, Civitatum, and Burgorum
eorundem ad praemissa, loco Communitatum eorundem, tractanda, ordinanda and
consentienda similiter venerunt.

Quibus praedictis omnibus congregatis coram Concilio Regis praedicto ipsisque
ostenso per idem Concilium ex part Regis quod de jure Coronae Regiae auxilium
Domino Regi fieri debuit in casu praedicto; Ac etiam quod expensae multiplices
and alia quam plura onera eidem Domino Regi incumbent ad rebellionem and
malitiam Roberti de Brus proditoris ipsius Domini Regis and sibi in partibus
Scotiae adhaerentium, qui adversus ipsum Regem jam in illis partibus guerram
movere praesumpserunt, reprimendas.

Iidem Praelati, Comites, Barons, and alii Magnates, nec non Milites
Comitatuum Tractatum super hoc cum deliberatione habentes considerantesque
auxilium deberi ut praedictum est, and quam plura onera Regi incumbere propter
guerram praedictam, tandem unanimiter Domino Regi concesserunt pro se and tota
Communitate Regni tricesimam partem omnium bonorum suorum temporalium mobilium,
quae ipsos habere continget in Festo Sancti Michaelis proximo futuro, habendam
pro auxilio eidem Domino Regi competente ad Militiam filii sui praedicti, ac
etiam in Auxilium Misarum quas ipse est facturus circa guerram praedictam; ita
tamen quod ista concessio ipsis vel eorum Successoribus aut haeredibus futuris
temporibus nullatenus cedat in praeiudicium, nec in casu hujusmodi trahatur in
exemplum, and quod in taxando bona praedicta excipiantur omnia quae in
taxatione Quintae-Decimae a Communitate Regni Domino Regi anno Regni sui decimo
octavo concessae propter exilium Judaeorum fuerunt excepta.

Cives quidem and Burgenses Civitatum ac Burgorum ac caeteri de Dominicis Regis
congregati and super praemissis tractatum habentes considerantesque onera
Domino Regi incumbentia ut praemittitur, eidem Domino Regi unanimiter
concesserunt ob causas supradictas vicesimam partem bonorum suorum mobilium
habendam ut praedictum est. Inter Communia Brevia de Term. Sancti Mich. Anno 34
Ed. 1. penes Remem. Thesaurar. in Scaccario.


Memorandum quod ad crastinum Sanctae Trinitatis proximo praeteritum Praelati
and caeteri Magnates Regni pro se and tota Communitate ejusdem Regni
concesserunt Domino Regi Tricesimam bonorum suorum omnium temporalium extra
Civitates, Burgos, and Dominica Domini Regis; and Cives, and Burgenses, and
tenentes Dominicorum praedictorum, vicesimam bonorum suorum tam ad Militiam
Edwardi filii Regis praedicti, quam ad subsidium defensionis terrae Scotiae
contra Robertum de Brus, and ipsius Accomplices inimicos Regis, etc.

Retorn. Parl. 2 Hen. 5.
HAec Indentura facta apud Ivelcestre Die Lunae 12 Die Novembris, Anno Regni
Regis Henrici Quinti post Conquestum secundo inter Walterum Hungerford Militem
Vicecom. Somerset in pleno Comitatu eodem Die ibidem tento ex part una, N. 14.
and Radulphum Hunt Majorem Civitatis Bathon. Johannem Skittish, Johannem
Savage, and Johannem Haygoby Cives Civitatis praedictae, qui de assensu totius
Communitatis Civitatis praedictae, Eligerunt Ricardum Wydecombe, and Willielmum
Radestoke Duos Cives pro Communitate Civitatis praedictae, Essend. apud
Westminster ad Parliamentum Domini Regis tenendum Die Lunae proximo post
Octavas Sancti Martini proximo futuras, secundum formam Brevis Domini Regis
quod est huic annex. eidem Vicecomiti inde Direct. and Johannem Herewode,
Johannem Russel, Walterum Dyere, and Lucam Wilton Burgenses Burgi de Wells, qui
in forma praedicta Eligerunt Thomam Dynt, and Johannem Hindon duos Burgenses
Burgi praedicti Essend. tunc ibidem pro Communitate Burgi praedicti secundum
formam praedicti Brevis. Et Johannem Ward, Willielmum Goffe, Ricardum Ward, and
Thomam Cave, Burgenses Burgi de Bruggewater, qui in forma praedicta Eligerunt
Willielmum Gascoigne, and Johannem Redwelly duos Burgenses Burgi praedicti
secundum formam dicti Brevis. Et Thomam Wiger, Walterum Portman, Edmundum
Tailleur, and Johannem Northmore, Burgenses Burgi de Taunton, qui in forma
praedicta Eligerunt Johannem Merchant and Edmundum Dyere duos Burgenses Burgi
praedicti, Essend. tunc ibidem pro Communitate Burgi praedicti secundum formam
praedicti Brevis, Dantes and Concedentes Civibus and Burgensibus praedictis
plenam and sufficientem potestatem, pro se and Communitate Civitatis and
Burgorum praedictorum ad faciendum and consentiendum iis quae tunc ibidem de
Communi Consilio ordinari contigerit super negotiis inibi Tractandis. In cujus
Rei Testimonium, etc.

Here were Returned to this Parliament Citisens only for the City of Bath, and
three Burghs, Wells, Bridgwater and Taunton in the County of Somerset. Three of
the present Burghs being omitted, Minehead, Milborn-Port and Ilchester,
notwithstanding the County Court was holden there, in which the Election was
made. The words of the Indenture or Return for Dorsetshire for this Parliament
are the same with the words of this, (mutatis mutandis) there being then the
same Sheriff for both Counties. Pool and Corf-Castle, two only of the present
Burghs, were omitted.

HEnricus Dei gratia Rex Angliae and Franciae, Breve and Retorn. Parl. 2 Hen. 5.
and Dominus Hiberniae
Vicecomiti Wilts, Salutem:
Quia de avisamento consilii nostri, pro quibusdam arduis and urgentibus
negotiis nos, statum and defensionem regni nostri Angliae ac Ecclesiae
Anglicanae contingentibus, quoddam Parliamentum nostrum apud Westmonast.
Wiltshire.
die Lunae proximo post Octavas Sancti Martini proximo futuras teneri
ordinavimus, and ibidem cum Praelatis, N. 15.
Magnatibus and Proceribus dicti regni nostri colloquium habere and tractatum:
Tibi praecipimus firmiter injungentes, quod facta proclamatione in proximo
Comitatu tuo post receptionem hujus Brevis, tenend. de die and loco praedictis,
duos Milites gladiis cinctos, magis idoneos and discretos de Comitatu
praedicto; and de qualibet Civitate Comitatus illius duos Cives; and de
quolibet Burgo duos Burgenses de discretioribus and magis sufficientibus libere
and indifferenter per illos qui Proclamationi hujusmodi interfuerint, juxta
formam statuti inde editi and provisi, eligi ac nomina eorundem Militum Civium
and Burgensium sic eligendorum in quibusdam Indenturis inter te and illos, qui
hujusmodi electioni interfuerint, inde conficiendis, licet hujusmodi eligendi
praesentes vel absentes fuerint, inseri eosque ad dictos diem and locum venire
facias. Ita quod iidem Milites plenam and sufficientem potestatem pro se and
Communitate Comitatus praedicti and dicti Cives and Burgenses pro se and
Communitatibus Civitatum and Burgorum praedictorum divisim ab ipsis habeant ad
faciend. and consentiend hiis, quae tunc ibidem de communi consilio dicti regni
nostri, favente domino, ordinari contigerit super negociis antedictis. Ita quod
pro defectu potestatis hujusmodi seu propter improvidam electionem Militum,
Civium aut Burgensium praedictorum dicta negocia infecta non remaneant quovis
modo. Nolumus autem, quod tu seu aliquis alius Vicecomes regni nostri praedicti
aliqualiter sit electus and electionem tuam in pleno Comitatu tuo factam
distinct and aperte sub sigillo tuo and sigillis eorum, qui electioni illi
interfuerint, nobis in Cancellaria nostra ad dictos diem and locum certifices
indilate, Remittens nobis alteram partem Indenturarum praedictarum praesentibus
consutam, una cum hoc Brevi.

Test meipso apud Westmonast. Vicesimo sexto die Septembris, Anno Regni nostri
secundo. WROTEHAM.
Dorso. Ego Elias de la Mare, Vicecomes, vobis significo, quod Breve istud in
omnibus executus sum secundum tenorem and effectum ejusdem, prout in altera
part Indenturarum inde confectarum and in quadam cedula huic Brevi consuta
before continetur.



Haec Indentura facta apud Wilton in pleno Comitatu Wilts, tento die Martis
proximo ante festum Omnium Sanctorum, Anno Regni Regis Henrici quinti post
Conquestum secundo inter Eliam de la Mare Vicecomitem Comitatus praedicti ex
part una, and Willielmum Danngens, Johannem at Borwe, Willielmum Besiles,
Robertum Earl, Nicholaum Lie, Robertum Asshelegh, Thomam Martyn, Johannem
Wichford, Laur. Gowayn, Thomam Godefray, Johannem Brid, Johannem Benger,
Johannem Byngham, Johannem Niweton, Henr. Stauley, Johannem Perham, Rogerum
Alewyne, Johannem Hardy, Thomam Hat, Thomam Vellard, Johannem Billyndon,
Rogerum Wodman, Johannem Coof, Thomam Shawe, Thomam Stabbere, Ricardum Hoke,
Jacobum Hemyngby, Galfridum Cowebrigge, Willielmum Depeden, and Johannem Warham
ex part altera, testatur quod praedictus Willielmus Danngens and omnes alii
superius nominati ad diem and locum supradictos existentes, and per praedictum
Vicecomitem Virtute Brevis Domini Regis eidem Vicecomiti directi and huic
Indenturae consuti singulariter examinati elegerunt Willielmum Esturmy
Chivaler, and Thomam Bonham Milites pro Communitate Comitatus praedicti, and
similiter elegerunt Walterum Shirle and Johannem Becket Cives pro Communitate
Civitatis Novae Sarum, Johannem Harleston and Johannem Whithorn Burgenses pro
Communitate Burgi de Wilton, Willielmum Covyntre and Thomam Covyntre Burgenses
pro Communitate Burgi de Devyses, Thomam Hiwey and Johannem Goore Burgenses pro
Communitate Burgi de Malmesbury, Johannem Brid and Thomam Hatheway Burgenses
pro Communitate Burgi de Marleborgh, Robertum Salman and Robertum Roude
Burgenses pro Communitate Burgi de Calne in Comitatu praedicto, ad omnia and
singula juxta tenorem praedicti Brevis in Parliamento dicto Domini Regis apud
Westmonast. die Lunae proximo post Octavas Sancti Martini proximo futuras,
assign. and ordinat. cum aliis communicand. tractand. faciend. similiter and
terminand. prout dictum Breve exigit and requirit. In cujus rei testimonium,
uni parti istius Indenturae penes praedictum Vicecomitem remanenti praedictus
Willielmus and omnes alii superius nominati sigilla sua apposuerunt; Alteri
vero parti ejusdem Indenturae penes praedictum Willielmum and omnes alios
superius nominatos residenti, praedictus Vicecomes sigillum suum apposuit.

Dat. die, loco and anno supradictis.
Nomina Militum, Civium and Burgensium Comitatus Wilts, Electorum ad
Parliamentum Domini Regis apud Westmonast. die Lunae proximo post Octavas
Sancti Martini, Anno Regni Regis Henrici quinti post Conquestum secundo.
Wilts. MAnucaptores Willielmi Esturmy Chivaler, unius Militum electi pro se
and Communitate Comitatus praedicti ad Parliamentum praedictum. Petrus Braknal.
Willielmus Reymond. Manucaptores Thomae Bonham alterius Militum electi ad
Parliamentum praedictum. Johannes Denyas. Johannes Cory. Civitas Novae Sarum.
Manucaptores Walteri Shirle unius Civium Civitatis praedictae electi ad
Parliamentum praedictum. Johan. Durneford. Johan. Coscombe. Manucaptores
Johannis Beckot alterius Civium ejusdem Civitatis electi ad Parliamentum
praedictum. Willielm. Donyng. Willielmus Slegge. Wilton. Manucaptores Johannis
Harleston unius Burgens. ejusdem Burgi electi ad Parliamentum praedictum.
Johannes Pershore. Johannes Richman. Manucaptores Johannis Whithorn alterius
Burgens. ejusdem Burgi electi ad Parliamentum praedictum. Ricardus Lamprey.
Johannes Digon. Devyses. Manucaptores Willielmi Covyntre unius Burgensium
ejusdem Burgi electi ad Parliamentum praedictum. Johannes Pshore. Johannes
Richman. Manucaptores Thomae Covyntre alterius Burgensium ejusdem Burgi electi
ad Parliamentum praedictum. Willielmus Neek. Henricus Lamkyn. Malmsbury.
Manucaptores Thomae Hiwey unius Burgens. ejusdem Burgi electi ad Parliamentum
praedictum. Nicholaus Penpas. Willielmus Palmer. Manucaptores Johannis Goore
alteterius Burgens. ejusdem Burgi electi ad Parliamentum praedictum. Ricardus
Felice. Willielm. Robardes. Marleborgh. Manucaptores Johannis Brid unius
Burgens. ejusdem Burgi electi ad Parliamentum praedictum. Ricardus Hesham.
Johannes Bide. Manucaptores Thomae Hathewey alterius Burgens. ejusdem Burgi
electi ad Parliamentum praedictum. Johann. Shirwode. Willielmus Warner. Calne.
Manucaptores Roberti Salman unius Burgens. ejusdem Burgi electi ad Parliamentum
praedictum. Robertus Grene. Robertus Lary. Manucaptores Roberti Roude alterius
Burgens. ejusdem Burgi electi ad Parliamentum praedictum. Willielmus Stokke.
Johannes Domel.

The Sheriff, notwithstanding he says in that part of the Return before the
Indenture, That he had in all things executed the Writ according to the Tenor
and Effect thereof, yet returned only two Citisens for New Sarum, and Burgesses
for only five Burghs; having omitted nine of the present Burghs, viz. Downton,
Hindon, Westbury, Heitsbury, Chippenham, Crickelade, Bedwin, Lutgershal, Old
Sarum, and Wootton-Basset; And the Citisens and Burgesses sent to this
Parliament were chosen by the same Persons, that chose the Knights of the Shire.

Retorn. Parl. 2 Hen. 5.
The Return for Devonshire for the same Parliament was without Indenture, only
the Names of the Knights, Citisens and Burgesses, with their Manucaptors or
Sureties, were returned. And that two Citisens only for Exon, and Burgesses for
five Burghs, Plympton, Tottones, Tavystok, Barnstaple, and Dertmouth; And then
the Return is closed with these words, Et non sunt plures Civitates, seu Burgi
infra Comitatum praedictum. The Sheriff having omitted six of the present
Burghs, viz. Plymouth, Okehampton, Honiton, Ashburton, Beralston, and Tiverton.

REx
universis and singulis Vicecomitibus, Majoribus, Ballivis, Pat. 3 II. 4. p. 2.
M. 23.
Constabulariis, Ministris and aliis fidelibus suis tam infra libertates quam
extra ad quos, etc. Salutem.
Sciatis, N. 16.
quod cum secundum consuetudinem in regno nostro Angliae hactenus obtentam and
approbatam, homines de antiquo dominico Coronae Angliae quieti sint and esse
debeant a praestatione Theolonei per totum regnum Angliae. Vobis mandamus, quod
homines de Manerio de Aisbertone, quod de antiquo Dominico Coronae Angliae
existit, sicut per quandam Certificationem per Thesaurarium and Camerarios
Domini Ricardi nuper Regis Angliae secundi post conquestum in Cancellariam suam
de Mandaro ipsius nuper Regis missam, and in filaciis Cancellariae ejusdem
nuper Regis residentem plene liquet, de hujusmodi praestatione Theolonei vobis
praestanda quietos esse permittatis, juxta consuetudinem supradictam. In cujus,
etc.

Test Rege apud Westmonast. vicesimo sexto die Aprilis.
Note this then a Town in Ancient Demeasn, and no Burgh, yet in 26 E. 1. and 8
Hen. 5. it sent Members to Parliament.

London. by Inspeximus, Tempore Hen. 1. Hen. 2. Ric. 1.
REx
omnibus ad quos, etc. salutem. Pat. 2 E. 4. p. 5. M. 23.

Inspeximus tenorem Cartae Domini Hen. 1.
Henrici quondam Regis Angliae Progenitoris nostri factam in haec verba.

Henricus Dei gratia Rex Angliae
Archiepiscopo Cantuariensi, and Episcopis, and Abbatibus, and Comitibus, N. 17.
and Baronibus, and Justiciariis, and Vicecomitibus and omnibus fidelibus suis
Francis and Anglicis totius Angliae, Salutem.
Sciatis me concessisse Civibus meis Londoniae Tenendum Middlesexiam ad firmam
pro trecentis libris ad computum ipsis and haeredibus suis de me and haeredibus
meis. Ita quod ipsi Cives ponent Vicecomitem qualem voluerint de seipsis and
Justiciarium quemcunque vel qualem voluerint de seipsis ad custodienda placita
Coronae meae, and ad eadem placitanda, and nullus alius erit Justiciarius super
ipsos homines Londoniae, and Cives non placitabunt extra muros Civitatis pro
ullo placito, and sint quieti de Scot and Lot what? Scot and Lot, Public
Impositions or Contribution.


Schot, and de Scot and Lot what? Scot and Lot, Public Impositions or
Contribution.


Loath, and de Danegeld what? Danegeld. See Notes upon the Charter of Yarmouth.


Danegeld, and de Murder what? Murdrum, signifies not only the Crime, but the
Mulct or Pecuniary Punishment for that Crime. So that to be free from Murder,
was, that the place where the Murder was committed, and the Murderer fled,
should not be Fined or Amercied for not producing of him. See Leg. Ed. Conf. c.
15. Gul. 1. c. 26. 46 Hen. 1. c. 91.


Murdro and nullus eorum faciat bellum, and siquis Civium de placitis Coronae
implacitatus fuerit per Shall purge himself by Oath.
Sacramentum quod judicatum fuerit in Civitate se disrationet homo London, and
infra muros Civitatis nullus No Stranger to be lodged in the City of London,
etc. No Stranger in these times was lodged, or had his abode in the City,
unless placed by the Kings Marshal, or by the Guardian, or Alderman of the Ward
or Liberty, and for his being so lodged or placed, he gave to him or his
Servant Custom, i. e. Money, as below.


hospitetur, neque de mea familia neque de alia vi alicui hospitium liberatur.
Et omnes homines Londoniae sint quieti and liberi, and omnes eorum res per
totam Angliam and per portus maris de Theoloneo and Passagio and Lestagio and
omnibus aliis consuetudinibus, and Ecclesiae and Barons Barons of London.
Barons! The Citisens or Men of London, who for the Dignity of the City, and
Ancient Liberties of the Citisens, were wont to be called Barons. Quos propter
Civitatis Dignitatem, and Civium antiquam Libertatem Barons consuevimus
appellare, Paris in A.D. 1253. The same Author in A. D. 1258. Londinum
destinati convocaverunt totius Civitatis Cives, quos Barons vocant, being sent
to London they called together the Citisens of the whole City, which they call
Barons.

Paris mistaken in his Reason, why Londoners were called Barons. But for the
latter part of the Reason which the Monk gives, why they were called Barons, it
was only his Fancy: For Baron was a Norman or French word, and came in use here
after the Conquest; so that the Citisens could not have that Appellation for
any ancient Liberties they enjoyed, for it was then but 187 years since the
Conquest, which was not time enough to make them Ancient, according to the
meaning of the word in such Cases.

The Citisens and Inhabitants of York, Chester and Warwick were called Barons.
And further, the Citisens of York and Chester, the Burgesses of Warwick, and of
other famous Cities and Towns that were Endowed with large and Royal
Privileges, were called Barons, yet the Citisens or Burgesses, or Inhabitants
of any of these, or other places, were not so termed in Domesday-Book, nor had
they then any extraordinary Liberties: Therefore since the making of that Book
they must have that Title, and that for the great Privileges and Immunities
granted by the King, and not otherwise; perhaps for some signal Service done
him, as Sir Henry Spolman In verbo. What the Barons of London were.
truly informs us. But the word Barons in this Charter seems to mean the
better sort of Citisens, that is, the Guardians or Aldermen of the Wards; for
the words are, Et Barons, and Cives, which put a Distinction between the
greater and ordinary Citisens.

The Citisens of Orleans and Bourges in France were called Barons. Nor was this
Appellation used here in England only, for the Citisens of Orleans, and Bourges
in France, are so called.


and Cives habeant and teneant been and in pace Their Liberties or Wards, with
all Customs or Payments.
Socas suas cum omnibus consuetudinibus. Ita quod hospites qui in Sokis
hospitabuntur nulli dent consuetudines, nisi illi cujus Except to the Guardian,
or as now, the Alderman of the Ward, or his Servant.
Soka fuerit vel ministro suo quem ibi posuerit, and Homo Londoniae non
judicetur in misericordia pecuniae nisi ad sa The price of a Citisens Life. A
Citisen of London shall not be Amercied beyond his Were, that is, the price of
his Head, or Life, which was 100 Shillings.


Were, scilicet ad centum Solidos, dico de placito quod ad pecuniam pertineat,
and amplius non sit Miskenninge what? Meskenninge from the Saxon Cenninge or
Cennan, citare, vocare, ad mis, or in French mes, male. So Miskenninge was,
when one Man falsely or unduly prosecuted another, or as Col. 957. n. 10.
Brompton has it, Myskenning, i. e. Variatio loquelae in Curia, a Variation of
the Plea in Court; that is, when a Man changes and leaves his first Plea, and
takes up another.


Meskenninge in Hustengs what? Hustengus or Hustengum, either from Hus a House,
and Ting, or Thing Causa, a House where Causes were tried. Or from the Saxon
word Hyhst, or Hyhsta, Supremum, Highest, and Thing, Judicium, a Court or
Judgment according to Mr. Somner; so that Husting signifies in this sense the
Supreme Court of the City of London, as in truth it is.

Hustengs not appropriated to London. But the Name was not appropriated to the
Chief Court in London only, for Winchester, Lincoln, York, the Five-Ports, and
the Isle of Shipwey have their Hustings.


Hustengo neque in Folkmot what? Folkesmot, from Fol^, People, or as they are
often called Folk, and Mote, a Meeting or Convention. A Convention and Court
of the People, which in Shires and Counties was, and now is, the Sheriffs Turn,
and in Cities and Burghs may be called the Burgh-Mote, or Sheriffs Court.


Folkesmot, neque in aliis placitis infra Civitatem, and Hustengum sedeat semel
in Ebdomada, videlicet, die Lunae, and terras and Pawns.
vadimonia and debita Civibus meis habere faciam infra Civitatem and extra, and
de terris de quibus ad me clamaverint rectum eis tenebo lege Civitatis. Et
siquis theoloneum vel consuetudinem a Civibus meis Londoniae ceperit, Cives
Londoniae capiant de Burgo vel de Villa ubi theoloneum vel consuetudo capta
fuerint quantum homo Londoniae pro theoloneo dedit, and proinde de dampno
receperit, and omnes debitores qui Civibus London debita debent eis reddant in
Londonia vel in Londonia se disrationent quod non debent, quod si reddere
noluerint, neque quod non debent ad disrationandum venire, tunc Cives Londoniae
quibus debita sua debentur capiant namia sua in Civitate London de Burgo vel
Villa vel de Comitatu in quo manet qui debitum debet. Et Cives Londoniae
habeant Their Huntings.
fugationes suas ad fugandum sicut melius and before habuerunt Antecessores
eorum, scilicet, in Chiltre and Middlesexe and Surreie.

Testibus Episcopo Wintoniensi, and Roberto filio Richier and Hugone Bigot and
Alnero de Toteneis and Willielmo de alba Spina and Huberto Regis Camerario and
Willielmo de Mountfichet and Haugulfo de Taney and Johanne Bellet and Roberto
filio Siwardi
apud Westmonasterium.
There is the same Charter by Inspeximus in 1 Hen. 4. 25 Mali.
INspeximus insuper cartam Domini Henrici Secundi quondam Regis Angliae
Progenitoris nostri factam in haec verba. Hen. 2.


Henricus Rex Angliae, and Dux Normanniae and Aquitaniae and Comes Andegaviae
Archiepiscopis, Episcopis, Abbatibus, Comitibus, Baronibus, Justiciariis,
Vicecomitibus, Ministris and omnibus fidelibus suis Francis and Anglis totius
Angliae, Salutem.
Sciatis me concessisse Civibus meis Londoniae quod nullus eorum placitet extra
muros Civitatis Lundoniae de ullo placito praeter placita de tenuris
exterioribus (exceptis Which were reserved to his own Court.
Monetariis and Ministris meis.) Concessi etiam eis quietanciam Murdri infra
urbem and in See Notes on this Charter.
Portsoka, what? Portsoka, the extent of their Jurisdiction or Liberty from the
Gates of the City.


Portsoka, and quod nullus eorum faciat duellum, and quod de placitis ad
Coronam pertinentibus se possint Vide Cart. Hen. 1.
disrationare secundum antiquam consuetudinem Civitatis praedictae, and quod
infra muros Civitatis nemo capiat hospitium per vim vel per liberationem
Marescalli. Hoc etiam eis concessi, quod omnes Cives Lundoniae sint quieti de
Theoloneo and Lestagio per totam Angliam and per portus maris, and quod nullus
de Vide Cart. Hen. 1.
misericordia pecuniae judicetur nisi secundum legem Civitatis quam habuerunt
tempore Regis Henrici Avi mei, and quod in Civitate in nullo placito sit
Meskenninga, and quod Hustingum semel tantum in ebdomada teneatur, and quod
terras suas and tenuras and vadimonia and omnia debita just habeant quicunque
eis debeat. Et de terris suis and tenuris quae infra urbem sunt rectum eis
teneatur secundum consuetudinem Civitatis, and de omnibus debitis suis quae
accommodata fuerint apud Londoniam, and de vadimoniis ibidem factis placita
apud Lundoniam teneantur. Et si quis in tota Anglia Theoloneum vel
consuetudinem ab hominibus Lundoniae ceperit, postquam ipse a recto defecerit,
Vicecomes Lundoniae Namium inde apud Lundoniam capiat. Concedo etiam eis, quod
habeant fugationes suas ubicunque eas habuerunt tempore Regis Henrici Avi mei.
Insuper etiam ad emendationem Civitatis eis concessi quod omnes sint quieti de
Bridtol. Bridtol, that is, Bridge-Toll, Money paid for passing over a Bridge.


Bridtol, and de Childwite and Leirwite what? The same with Leirwite, Money
paid, or a punishment for corrupting a Bond-Maid.


Childwite, and de Jeresgieue or Geresgieue what? Jeresgieue, or Geresgieue,
the same that Geresuma, a Bribe or Reward given to the Kings or other Officers,
for Connivence, and being favorable in their Office.


Jeresgieue, and de Scotale what? Scotale, See the notes upon Walingford
Charter, Letter [a].


Scotale, ita quod Vicecomes noster Lundoniae vel aliquis alius Ballivus
Scotale non faciat. Has praedictas consuetudines eis concedo, and omnes alias
libertates and liberas consuetudines quas habuerunt tempore Regis Henrici Avi
mei quando meliores vel liberiores habuerunt. Quare volo and firmiter
praecipio, quod ipsi and haeredes eorum haec omnia praedicta haereditarie
habeant and teneant de me and de meis haeredibus.

Testibus T (...) Archiepiscopo Cantuariensi R (...) Episcopo Londinensi Ph
(...) Episcopo Baiocensi, Ern (...) Episcopo Lexoviensi, T (...) Cancellario, R
(...) de novo Burgo R (...) de Sancto Walrico R (...) de Warenna Walth (...)
Maminot Ricardo de Lucy Guar (...) filio Geroldi Ma (...) Biset Loc (...) de
Ballolio,
apud Westmonasterium.
INspeximus etiam Cartam Domini Ricardi primi quondam Regis Ric. 1.
Angliae Progenitoris nostri factam in haec verba.

Ricardus Dei Gratia Rex Angliae, Dux Normanniae, Aquitaniae, Comes Andegaviae,
Archiepiscopis, Episcopis, Abbatibus, Comitibus, Baronibus, Justiciariis,
Vicecomitibus, Ministris, and omnibus fidelibus suis Francis and Anglis totius
Angliae, Salutem.
Sciatis nos concessisse Civibus nostris Londoniae, quod nullus eorum placitet
extra muros Civitatis Londoniae de ullo placito praeter placita de tenuris
exterioribus (exceptis Monetariis and Ministris nostris.) Concessimus etiam eis
quietanciam Murdri infra urbem and in Portsoka, and quod nullus eorum faciat
duellum, and quod de placitis ad Coronam pertinentibus se possint Vid. Chartam.
Hen. 1.
disrationare secundum antiquam consuetudinem Civitatis, and quod infra muros
Civitatis nemo capiat hospitium per vim vel per liberationem Marescalli. Hoc
etiam eis concessimus quod omnes Cives Londoniae sint quieti de Theloneo and
Lestagio per totam Angliam and per portus maris, and quod nullus de
misericordia pecuniae judicetur nisi secundum legem Civitatis quam habuerunt
tempore Regis Henrici Avi Henrici Patris nostri. Et quod in Civitate in nullo
placito sit Meskenninga, and Hustingum semel tantum in ebdomada teneatur, and
quod terras suas and tenuras, and vadimonia and debita omnia just habeant
quicunque eis debeat, and de terris suis and tenuris quae infra urbem sunt
rectum eis teneatur secundum consuetudinem Civitatis, and de omnibus debitis
suis quae accommodata fuerint apud Londoniam teneantur. Et siquis in tota
Anglia Theoloneum vel consuetudinem ab hominibus Londoniae ceperit postquam
ipse a recto defecerit, Vicecomes Londoniae namium inde apud Londoniam capiat.
Concedimus etiam eis quod habeant fugationes suas ubicunque eas habuerunt
tempore Regis Henrici Avi Henrici Patris nostri. Insuper etiam ad emendationem
Civitatis eis concessimus, quod omnes sint quieti de Bridtol, and de Childwite,
and de Jeresgieue, and de Scotale, ita quod Vicecomes noster Londoniae vel
aliquis alius Ballivus Scothale non faciat. Has praedictas consuetudines eis
concedimus and omnes alias libertates and liberas consuetudines quas habuerunt
tempore Regis Henrici Avi Henrici Patris nostri quando meliores vel liberiores
habuerunt. Quare volumus and firmiter praecipimus, quod ipsi and haeredes eorum
haec omnia praedicta haereditarie habeant and teneant de nobis and haeredibus
nostris. Testibus Huberto Cantuariensi Archiepiscopo, Ricardo Londinensi,
Hugone Dunelmensi, Gileberto Roffensi, Hugone Lincolniensi Episcopis, Ran (...)
Comite Cestriae, Ricardo Comite de Clare, Willielmo Marescallo, Rogero Bigot,
Gaufrido filio Petri, Hugone Bardolfe, Willielmo Briewer, Willielmo de Warenna.

Data per manum Willielmi Eliensis Episcopi Cancellarii nostri apud Wintoniam
Vicesimo secundo die Aprilis, Anno Regni nostri quinto.
INspeximus insuper quandam aliam cartam ejusdem Domini Regis Progenitoris
nostri factam in haec verba. Ric. 1. Chart. 2.


Ricardus Dei Gratia Rex Angliae, Dux Normanniae, Aquitanniae, and Comes
Andegaviae,
Archiepiscopis, Episcopis, Abbatibus, Comitibus, Baronibus, Justiciariis,
Vicecomitibus, Senescallis, Castellanis, Constabulariis, Ballivis, Ministris
and omnibus fidelibus suis, Salutem.
Noverit Vniversitas vestra nos pro Salute animae nostrae and pro Salute animae
Henrici Regis Patris nostri, and animarum antecessorum nostrorum, necnon and
pro communi utilitate Civitatis nostrae Londoniae, and totius Regni nostri
concessisse, and firmiter praecepisse, ut omnes Kidelli qui sunt in Thamisia
amoveantur ubicunque fuerint in Tamisia; and ne de caetero Kidelli alicubi
ponantur in Tamisia. Quietum etiam clamavimus omne id quod Custodes Turris
nostrae Londoniae annuatim percipere solebant de praedictis Kidellis. Quare
volumus and firmiter praecipimus, ne aliquis Custos praefatae Turris aliquo
tempore post hoc aliquid exigat ab aliquo, nec aliquam demandam aut gravamen
sive molestiam alicui inferat occasion praedictorum Kidellorum. Satis enim
nobis constat, and per venerabilem Patrem nostrum Hubertum Cantuariensem
Archiepiscopum and per alios fideles nostros nobis sufficienter datum est
intelligi, quod maximum detrimentum and incommodum praedictae Civitati nostrae
Londoniae, nec non and toti regno nostro occasion Kidellorum illorum
proveniebat, quod ut firmum and stabile perseveret imperpetuum praesentis
paginae inscriptione and sigilli nostri appositione communivimus. Note this.
His Testibus Huberto Cantuariensi Archiepiscopo, Johanne Comite Moritoniae,
Ran (...) Comite Cestriae, Roberto Comite Leicestriae, Willielmo Comite
Arundel, Comite Willielmo Marescallo, Willielmo de Sanctae Mariae Ecclesia,
Petro filio Hereberti, Matthaeo fratre suo, Sym (...) de Kyma, Seherio de
Quinceo.

Data per manum Magistri Eustachii Sarum Decani Vices Cancellarii tunc agentis
apud Insulam Isle of Andely in Normandy.
Andeliacam decimo quarto die Julii, Regni nostri Anno octavo.
London. 1 Johannis. Cart. Antiq. C. n. 26.

JOhannes Dei Gratia, etc.
Archiepiscopis, etc.
Sciatis. Nos concessisse Civibus nostris Londoniae, quod nullus eorum placitet
extra muros Civitatis Londoniae de nullo placito praeter placita de tenuris
exterioribus, N. 18.
exceptis Monetariis and Ministris nostris. Concessimus etiam eis quietanciam
murdri infra urbem and in Portsocha, and quod nullus eorum faciat duellum, and
quod de placitis ad coronam pertinentibus se possint disrationare secundum
antiquam consuetudinem Civitatis, and quod infra muros Civitatis neque in
Portsocha nemo capiat hospitium per vim vel per liberationem Marescalli. Hoc
etiam concessimus quod omnes Cives Londoniae sint quieti de Theloneo and
Lestagio and omni alia consuetudine per omnes terras nostras citra mare and
ultra and quod nullus de misericordia pecuniae judicetur nisi secundum legem
Civitatis quam habuerunt tempore Regis Henrici Avi Henrici Patris nostri. Et
quod in Civitate in nullo placito sit Meskenninga, and quod Hustinga semel
tantum in ebdomada teneatur and quod terras suas and tenuras and vadimonia and
debita omnia just habeant quicunque eis debeant. Et de terris suis and tenuris
quae infra urbem sunt eis rectum teneatur secundum consuetudinem Civitatis, and
de omnibus debitis suis quae accommodata fuerunt apud Londoniam and de
vadimoniis ibidem factis placita apud Londoniam teneantur. Et siquis in aliquam
terrarum nostrarum citra mare vel ultra sive in portubus maris citra vel ultra
Theloneum vel aliquam aliam consuetudinem ab hominibus London ceperit postquam
ipse a recto defecerit Vicecomites London Namium inde apud London capiant.
Concessimus etiam eis quod habeant fugationes suas ubicunque eas habuerunt
tempore Regis Henrici Avi Henrici Patris nostri. Insuper etiam ad emendationem
Civitatis eis concessimus quod omnes sint quieti de Bridtol and de Childwite
and The same with Geresuma, see Wallingford Chart.
Jeresleue and de Scotale, ita quod Vicecomes noster Londoniae nec aliquis
alius Ballivus Scotale non faciat. Has praedictas consuetudines eis concessimus
and omnes alias libertates and liberas consuetudines quas habuerunt tempore
Henrici Regis Avi Patris nostri quando meliores and liberiores habuerunt. Quare
volumus and firmiter praecipimus quod ipsi and haeredes eorum haec omnia
praedicta haereditarie and integre habent and teneant de nobis and haeredibus
nostris. Testibus Huberto Cantuariensi Archiepiscopo Cancellario nostro, W.
(...) Londoniae Episcopo, etc.

Data per manum praedicti Huberti Cantuariensis Archiepiscopi Cancellarii
nostri apud Sorham decimo Septimo die Junii, Anno Regni nostri primo.
The Citisens of London gave 3000 Marks for the Confirmation of their Liberties
by this Charter, as appears by the 1 Johannis, M. 20.
Oblata Roll of this year, and it was left in the Hands of Geofry Fitz-Peter
until they paid the Money.

Cives London dant Domino Regi tria Millia Marcarum pro habenda confirmatione
Domini Regis de Libertatibus suis in Carta, and liberabitur Galfrido filio
Petri per sic, Quod si illa tria millia Marcarum volunt dare suam Cartam
habebunt, sin autem non, Cartam non habebunt.

Winton. 1 Ric. 1. Cart. Antiq. R. n. 30.

RIcardus Dei Gratia Rex Angliae, Dux Normanniae, etc.
Archiepiscopis, Episcopis, Abbatibus, Comitibus, Baronibus, Justiciariis,
Vicecomitibus, N. 19.
Ministris and omnibus Ballivis and fidelibus suis totius terrae suae, Salutem.
Sciatis nos concessisse Civibus nostris Wintoniae de Gilda Mercatoria, quod
nullus eorum placitet extra muros Civitatis Wintoniae de ullo placito praeter
placita de tenuris exterioribus, exceptis Monetariis and Ministris nostris.
Concessimus etiam eis quod nullus eorum faciat duellum, and quod de placitis ad
Coronam nostram pertinentibus se possint disrationare secundum antiquam
consuetudinem Civitatis. Haec etiam eis concessimus quod omnes Cives Wintoniae
de Gilda Mercatoria sint quieti de Theloneo and Lestagio and Pontagio in feria
and extra and per portus maris omnium terrarum nostrarum citra mare and ultra,
and quod nullus de Misericordia pecuniae judicetur nisi secundum antiquam legem
Civitatis quam habuerunt tempore antecessorum nostrorum, and quod terras and
tenuras suas and vadimonia and debita omnia just habeant quicunque eis debeat,
and de terris suis and tenuris quae infra urbem sunt rectum eis teneatur
secundum consuetudinem Civitatis, and de omnibus debitis suis quae accommodata
fuerint apud Wintoniam and de vadimoniis ibidem factis placita apud Wintoniam
teneantur, and si quis in tota terra nostra Theloneum vel consuetudinem ab
hominibus Wintoniae de Gilda Mercatoria ceperit, postquam ipse a recto
defecerit Vicecomes de Southamton vel Praepositus Wintoniae Namium inde apud
Wintoniam capiat. Insuper etiam ad emendandam Civitatem eis concessimus quod
omnes sint quieti and de The same with Geresuma, see Walingford Charter.
Jeresgiene and de Scotteshale ita quod si Vicecomes noster vel aliquis alius
Ballivus Sotthale faciat. Has praedictas consuetudines eis concedimus and omnes
alias libertates and liberas consuetudines quas habuerunt temporibus
Antecessorum nostrorum quando meliores vel liberiores habuerunt; and si aliquae
consuetudines injuste levatae fuerunt in guerra cassatae sint, and quicunque
petierint Civitatem Wintoniae cum mercatu suo de quocunque loco sint, sive
extranei sive alii, veniant, morentur and recedant in Salva pace nostra
reddendo rectas consuetudines, and nemo eos disturbet super hanc Cartam
nostram. Quare volumus and firmiter praecipimus quod ipsi and haeredes eorum
haec omnia praedicta haereditarie habeant and teneant de nobis and haeredibus
nostris. Testibus Waltero Rothomagensi Archiepiscopo, R. (...) Bathoniensi, H.
(...) Coventrensi Episcopis, Bertram (...) de Verdun, Johanne Marescallo, W.
(...) Marescallo.

Data per manum Johannis de Alencon Archidiaconi Lexoviae Vicecancellarii
nostri apud In Normandy.
Nunancurt decimo quarto die Martii, Anno primo Regni nostri.
Lincoln. 1 vel 2 Ric. 1. Cart. Antiq. F. n. 16.

RIcardus Dei Gratia Rex Angliae, Dux Normanniae, Aquitania, Comes Andegaviae
Archiepiscopis, Episcopi^, Abbatibus, Comitibus, N. 20.
Baronibus, Justiciariis, Vicecomitibus, Ministris and omnibus fidelibus suis
tam Francis quam Anglis, Salutem.
Sciatis nos concessisse Civibus nostris Lincolniae quod nullus eorum placitet
extra Civitatem Lincolniae de aliquo placito praeter placita de tenuris
exterioribus, exceptis Monetariis and ministris nostris. Concessimus etiam
quietanciam murdri infra Civitatem and in Portsocha and quod nullus eorum
faciat duellum, and quod de placitis ad coronam pertinentibus se possint
disrationare secundum consuetudinem Civium Civitatis Lincolniae, and quod infra
Civitatem illam nemo capiat hospitium per vim vel per liberationem Marescalli.
Hoc etiam eis concessimus quod omnes Cives Lincolniae sint quieti de Theloneo
and Lestagio per totam Angliam and per portus Maris, and quod nullus de
Misericordia pecuniae judicetur nisi secundum legem quam habent Cives nostri
Lundoniae, and quod in Civitate illa in nullo placito sit Meskenninga, and quod
The Burgh or Folkmot, or Court of the Inhabitants of the Burgh or City.
Burwaremot semel tantum in ebdomada teneatur; and quod terras and tenuras and
vadia sua and debita sua omnia just habeant quicunque eis debeat, and de
terris suis and tenuris quae infra Civitatem sunt rectum eis teneatur secundum
consuetudinem Civitatis, and de omnibus debitis suis quae accommodata fuerint
apud Lincolniam and de vadiis ibidem factis placita apud Lincolniam teneantur.
Et siquis in tota Anglia Theloneum vel consuetudinem ab hominibus Lincolniae
ceperit postquam ipse a recto defecerit, Praepositus Lincolniae Namium apud
Lincolniam capiat. Insuper etiam ad emendationem illius Civitatis illis
concessimus quod sint quieti de Bridtol, and de Childwite and de Geresgiene and
de Scothale, ita quod Praepositus nec alius Ballivus Scothalam faciat. Has
praedictas consuetudines eis concessimus and omnes alias libertates and liberas
consuetudines quas habuerunt vel habent Cives nostri Lundoniae quando meliores
vel liberiores habuerunt secundum libertates Lundoniae and leges Civitatis
Lincolniae. Quare volumus and firmiter praecipimus, quod ipsi and haeredes
eorum haec omnia praedicta habeant and teneant haereditarie de nobis and
haeredibus nostris reddendo per annum novies viginti libras numero de Lincolnia
cum omnibus pertinentiis ad Scaccarium nostrum duobus terminis, ad Pascham,
Scilicet, and ad Festum Sancti Michaelis per manum Praepositi Lincolniae. Et
Cives Lincolniae faciant Praepositum quem voluerint de se per annum qui sit
idoneus Nobis and eis. Testibus his Huberto Cantuariensi Archiepiscopo,
Willielmo Marescallo, Gaufrido filio Petri, Hugone Bam (...)

Data per manum Willielmi Eliensis Episcopi Cancellarii nostri apud Winton.
William Longchamp, Bishop of Ely, was Chancellor of England before he was
Consecrated Bishop of that place. Anno Domini 1189. 1 Richard 1. and was
deposed from his Chancellor-Ship A. D. 1191. So that this Charter was dated by
him, either in the First, or Second year of King Richard the First.

York. 1 Johannis. Cart. 1 Johan. p. 1. n. 75.

JOhannes Dei Gratia, etc.

Sciatis nos concessisse Civibus nostris de Eboraco omnes libertates and leges
and consuetudines suas and nominatim Gildam suam Mercatoriam and Hansas suas in
Anglia, N. 21.
and Normannia, and Lestagia sua per totam Costam maris quieta sicut ea unquam
melius and liberius habuerunt tempore Regis Henrici Avi patris nostri. Et
volumus and firmiter praecipimus, quod praedictas libertates and consuetudines
habeant and teneant cum omnibus libertatibus praedictae Gildae suae and Hansis
suis pertinentibus, ita been and in pace libere and quiet sicut unquam melius
liberius and quietius habuerunt and tenuerunt tempore praedicti Regis Henrici
Avi patris nostri, sicut Carta ejusdem Patris nostri and Carta Regis Ricardi
fratris nostri rationabiliter testantur. Praeterea Sciatis nos concessisse and
praesenti Carta confirmasse omnibus civibus nostris Eboraci quietanciam
cujuslibet Thelonei, and lestagii, and Forsan de Wrec.
Dewree, and Pontagii, and Passagii and de trespass and de omnibus Costivis per
totam Angliam and Normanniam, and Aquitaniam and Andegaviam and Pictaviam, and
per omnes portus and Costas maris Angliae and Normanniae Aquitaniae Andegaviae
and Pictaviae. Quare volumus and firmiter praecipimus quod inde sint quieti,
and prohibemus ne quis super hoc disturbet super december libras forisfacturae,
sicut Carta Ricardi Regis fratris nostri rationabiliter testatur. Testibus G.
(...) Eboracensi Archiepiscopo, Ph. (...) Dunelmensi Episcopo, Gaufrido filio
Petri Comitis Essex, etc.

Data per manum S (...) Wellensis Archidiaconi and Johannis de Gray apud
Eboracum Vicesimo quinto Die Martii, Anno Regni nostri primo.
Norwich. 1 Johannis. Cart. 1. Johan. p. 1. m. 11. n. 146.

JOhannes Dei Gratia, etc.
Archiepiscopis, etc.
Sciatis nos concessisse Civibus nostris Norwici quod nullus eorum placitet
extra Civitatem Norwici de nullo placito praeter placita de tenuris
exterioribus, exceptis Monetariis and Ministris nostris. N. 22.
Concessimus eis etiam quietantiam murdri and Gawitam infra Civitatem, and quod
nullus eorum faciat duellum, and quod de placitis ad coronam pertinentibus se
possint disrationare secundum consuetudinem Civitatis Londoniae, and quod infra
Civitatem illam nemo hospitetur vel capiat quicquam per vim. Hoc etiam
concessimus eis, quod omnes Cives Norwici sint quieti de Theloneo and Lestagio
per totam Angliam and per portus maris, and quod nullus de misericordia
pecuniae judicetur nisi secundum legem quam habent Cives nostri Londoniae, and
quod in Civitate illa in nullo placito sit Miskenninga, and quod Hustinga semel
in ebdomade tantum teneatur and quod terras suas and tenuras, and vadia sua and
de vita sua omnia just habeant, quicunque eis debeat, and de terris suis and
tenuris quae infra Civitatem sunt, rectum eis teneatur secundum consuetudinem
Civitatis, and de omnibus debitis suis quae accommodata fuerint apud Norwicum
and de vadiis ibidem factis placita apud Norwicum teneantur. Et siquis in tota
Anglia Theloneum vel consuetudinem ab hominibus Norwici ceperit, postquam ipse
a recto defecerit, Praepositus Norwici Namum inde apud Norwicum capiat. Has
praedictas consuetudines eis concessimus and omnes alias libertates and liberas
consuetudines quas habuerunt and habent Cives nostri Londoniae, quando meliores
vel liberiores habuerunt secundum libertates Londoniae and leges Civitatis
Norwici. Quare volumus and firmiter praecipimus, quod ipsi Cives and haeredes
eorum haec omnia praedicta cum Civitate and pertinentus ejus haereditarie
habeant and teneant de nobis and haeredibus nostris, reddendo per annum Centum
and octo libras Sterlingorum blanceas de Civitate Norwici per manum Praepositi
Norwici ad Scaccarium nostrum in termino Sancti Michaelis. Et Cives Norwici
faciant Praepositos de se per annum, qui sint idonei Nobis and eis. Testibus H.
(...) Sar. (...) Episcopo, S. (...) Wellensi Archidiacono J. (...) de Gr. (...)

Data per manum H. (...) Cantuariensis Archidiaconi Cancellarii nostri apud
Genom. (...) Vicesimo secundo die Septembris anno Regni nostri primo.
FINIS.
THE INDEX.
A.
ARundel-Castle, on whom it held, and what it paid Fol. 14. A.
B.
BArnstaple, on whom it held, and who their Patron in the Conqueror's time,
Fol. 5. F. Barons of London, who, and why so called Append. Fol. 26. C. D.
Bath, when made a Burgh, on whom it held, and what it paid Fol. 12. D.
Blodemyta, what Append. Fol. 14. A Boston Case about Elections Fol. 61. E. F.
No Burgesses sent from thence to Parliament for many Kings Reigns Fol. 64. C.
Bridport Case about Election of Burgesses Fol. 60. F. Bridtol, what it means
Append. Fol. 28. F. Buckingham, on whom it held in the Conqueror's time Fol. 7.
A. Under the Protection of Foreign Lords and Patrons Fol. 9. A.
Burgh, a German word Fol. 1. F. From whence derived, and what it signifies
Fol. 2. 3. How and when Burghs became Parlementary Fol. 24. E. F. What they
were in the Saxons times, and in the Reign of William the Conqueror Fol. 4. to
the 16. What Number found in Domesday-Book Fol. 16. A. Many of our present
ones, not found in Domesday Fol. 43. B. C. All had their Patrons and Protectors
Fol. 16. B. When their free Condition began Fol. 17. D. Erected and Confirmed
by the Kings Grants Fol. 17. E. F. Why called Free Fol. 18. F. and 47. B. 49.
F. What their Freedom was, and wherein it consisted Fol. 19. A. B. Who of them
sent Burgesses to Parliament Fol. 35. D. E. Why called Demeasn Fol. 41. A. How
Amercied by King Edward the Third Fol. 39. C.D. Their Origin from their
Charters Fol. 50. E. Such as were Erected by Earls had their Dominion from the
King Fol. 50. f. and 51. A. The Sheriffs directed which of them should send
Burgesses to Parliament Fol. 52. A. etc. Many never sent Burgesses constantly
till 1641. and 1642. and the Reasons for this Intermission Fol. 55. 56. 57.
Burgesses, when first summoned to Parliament Fol 25. B. and 32. F. Their
Compliance with the K. Demands called a Grant Fol. 27. C. None summoned to
Parliament the 22d of Edw. the First Fol. 29. B How Taxed when not summoned Fol.
31. C. They were distinct from the Alii de Regno Fol. 33. E. They gave one
Third more than the Earls, Bar. and Knights Ibid. Why summoned to Parliament
Fol. 34. C. Frequently excused upon Account of their Poverty Fol. 57. 58. They
never complained for being omitted Fol. 59. F. Who were Electors Fol. 60 B.
They only named in the Dorse of Writs Fol. 63. 64. Sometimes chosen in
County-Courts Fol. 75. C. D. Of Dunwich, not to Marry their Sons or Daughters
but by the King's License Append. Fol. 10. E. They paid Tallage for their free
Trading and Liberties, Fol. 48. 49. 50.
Burgi Dominici Regis, what they were Fol. 35. B. and 50. A. Burgh-Laws of
Scotland, when first published Fol. 18. B. What Freedom was given by them Fol.
19. C. D.

C.
CAnturbury, how many Burgesses, and on whom they held in the Conqueror's time
Fol. 10. F. Charter of the Conqueror granted at the Request of William Bishop
of London, to the Citisens Fol. 16. C. Interpreted, it was a Protection rather
than a Charter, Fol. 17. A.B.C.
Cirencester anciently no Burgh Fol. 76. D. Citisens, Vid. Burgesses. Civitates
Dominicae, what they were Fol. 35. B. C. Clergy, when first summoned to
Parliament by their Proxies Fol. 34. E. F. Commonalties, or Communities of
Cities and Burghs by whom Erected, Fol. 17. E.F. Interpreted to be a select
Number, Fol. 20. C. 21. A. B. 23. C. D. E. 75. A. B. 79. A. What Constitutes
them, and when they first began in France, Fol. 18. A. Large Immunities granted
to them by William the Second, Henry the First, and King Stephen Ibid. C. D. Of
London, by whom, and when granted Fol. 20. E. F. Of Roven in France Fol. 23. F.
They were distinct from other Burgesses Fol. 24. A. B. When the use of
Corporation-Seals began Ibid. C. D. Signify the Governing Party Fol. 62. E.F.
Communitatis, and Villae Assensus, the same Fol. 65. 67. 68. Composition for
Taxes admitted by the King Fol. 27. F. Cricklade, on whom it held, what it paid
to the King, and its Patrons, Fol. 14. F. 15. A. B. C.
D.
DAnegeld, what Append. Fol. 8. F. Demeasn Cities and Burghs what they were
Fol. 39. D. E. Their Number in the Reign of Edward the Third Fol. 41. E. F.
Dunwich, how, and by whom held in the Conqueror's and Confessor's time, Fol.
4. B.
E.
ELections, how to be made where no Charter or Custom Fol. 60. B. C. Made by
Bailiffs with the Assent of the Communities Fol 63. B. Electors of Burgesses,
who Fol. 60. B. Ewagium, what it means Append. Fol. 10. D. Excester, how it
held in the Conqueror's time Fol. 5. D. Eye, on whom it held in the Confessor's
time, and the Number of Burgesses, Fol. 6. F.
F.
FEe Farms, the Original Fol. 39. F. Fifteenth granted to Edward the First Fol.
26. D. Several Cities, Counties and Abbeys Composit. for them Fol. 27. 28. Upon
what account granted, and how settled Fol. 39. A. B.
Folkmot, what it signifies Append. Fol. 26. F. Free-Tenents, who they were
Fol. 31. B.
G.
GEresgive, what it signifies Append. Fol. 28. F. Geresumma, what it means
Append. Fol. 13. D. Gilda Mercatoria explained Append. Fol. 10. F. Grauntpont
made a Burgh by John Earl of Cornwall Fol. 45. B.
H.
HAnsa, what Append. Fol. 10. E. Hedon made a Burgh by King John Fol. 46. F.
Henry the Second made Preston a Burgh Fol. 46. B. Hertford, the Number of the
Burgesses, and how Taxed in Domesday Fol. 9. D. E. Huntington, the Number of
Burgesses, on whom they held, and what they paid, Fol. 11. C. D. Hustengs, how
interpreted Append. Fol. 26. F.
I.
INfangthef, what it signifies Append. Fol. 8. D. John Earl of Cornwall made
Grauntpont a Burgh Fol. 45. D. Earl of Moreton made Lancaster a Burgh Fol. 46.
C. Eldest Son of the Duke of Britain made Richmund a Burgh, Fol. 46. E. King of
England made Hedon a Burgh Fol. 46. F.
Ipswich, on whom it held, and what Burgesses in the Confessor's time Fol. 6.
D.
L.
LAgan explained Append. Fol. 10. E. Lancaster, when, and by whom made a Burgh
Fol. 46. C. D. Lanceston, when, and by whom made a Burgh Fol. 43. D. E.
Law-worthy, who, and by what means made so Fol. 16. E. Leirwyte, what it
signifies Append. Fol. 14. E. Lescard, when, and by whom made a Burgh Fol. 44.
F. Lestagium explained Append. Fol. 8. D. Leve, what it means Ibid. F. Jews,
on whom it held, and what it paid Fol. 13. A. Lideford, how held in the
Conqueror's time Fol. 6. A. London, when Constituted a Community Fol. 20. F.
21. D. E. When Divided into Wards Ibid. Who to choose the Mayor, Aldermen, and
Sheriffs Fol. 22. A. B. C. The Conqueror's Charter, a Protection only Fol. 16.
B. etc. How interpreted Ibid. E. F. and 17. A. B. C. No stranger to be lodged
there Append. Fol. 26. B.

M.
MAsham (Sir William,) declared duly Elected Burgess for Colchester, Fol. 60.
F. Merchants, who they anciently were Fol. 20. A. B. Meskenninge explained
Append. Fol. 26. E. Murdrum, how understood Append. Fol. 25. F.
N.
NOrthampton, the Number of Burgesses, and on whom it held in the Conqueror's
time Fol. 9. B. Norwich, the Number of Burgesses, and on whom they held Fol. 4.
D. 5. B.
P.
PAagium and Passagium interpreted Append. Fol. 8. D. Parlement-Burghs, what
they were, and when they first began Fol. 24. E. F. Pevensey, on whom it held,
how many Burgesses, and what they paid Fol. 13. C. D. Plympton, by whom Erected
into a Burgh Fol. 46. A. Pontagium, what Append. Fol. 8. E. Port-Reeve, from
whence derived Fol. 16. D. Portsoka, what Append. Fol. 27. F. Prescription only
cannot make a Burgh Fol. 76. D. E. Not allowed against the Liberties of Free
Burghs Append. Fol. 7. E.
Preston made a Burgh by Henry the Second Fol. 46. B. Procuratores Cleri, when
first summoned Fol. 34. E. F. Protection and Charter of London in the
Conqueror's time the same Fol. 17. A.
R.
REgard and Regarders, what and who Append. Fol. 14. F. Reginald Earl of
Cornwall, his Charter to Truro Fol. 44. A. Returns of Writs the first that are
extant Fol. 63. etc. Of Boston Fol. 64. A. Of Bristol Ibid. E. Of Excester Fol
65. C. Of London Ibid. E. Of York Fol. 67. A. B. Of Derby, Ipswich and Oxford
Ibid. C. D. E. Of Wallingford Fol. 68. 69. Of Helston and Windsor Fol. 70. Of
Reding, Len, Yarmouth, and Wells Fol. 71. Of Bridport, Colchester, Warwick and
Lincoln Fol. 72. Of Grimsby, Rochester, Bath and Bridgwater Fol. 73. 74. Under
no certain Form Fol. 76. A. Their Form since Henry the Eighth Fol. 77. F.
Richard Earl of Cornwall, made Lanceston and Lescard Burghs Fol. 44. D. E. F.
Richmund, by whom made a Burgh Fol. 46. E. Roelent, when Erected into a Burgh,
and on whom it held Fol. 18. E. F. Romeney, on whom it held, and how many
Burgesses in the Conqueror's time, Fol. 11. B.
S.
SAca, what it signifies Append. Fol. 8. B. Salisbury, when made a City, and
granted to the Bishop as his proper Demeasn Fol. 47. E. How Tallaged by the
Bishop Fol. 48.
Saltash, by whom made a Burgh Fol. 45. E. Scotale, what it means Append. Fol.
13. D. Seals of Communities, when first used Fol. 24. C. D. Sheriffs at first
directed what Burghs should send Burgesses to Parliament Fol. 52. A. and 53. 54.
59 The reason why they returned Non sunt plures Burgi, etc. Fol. 55. A. They
were never complained against, or questioned for such Returns Fol. 59. F.
Soca, what Append. Fol. 8. B. Southampton, on whom it held, and what it paid
Fol. 12. F. Stallagium, how interpreted Append. Fol. 8. B. Stafford, the Number
of Burgesses, and on whom they held Fol. 12. B.
T.
TAllage why paid and imposed Fol 47 D. Paid by Citisens and Burgesses for free
Trading and their Liberties Fol. 48. 49. 50.
Taunton how many Burgesses, and what they paid Fol. 12. E. Taxes how anciently
levied Fol. 38. F. Tenants in ancient Demeasus distinct Members in Parl. from
Burgesses Fol. 37. D. Sometimes omitted in Commissions Fol. 38. A. By whom
represented Fol. 77. A.
Theme explained Append. Fol. 8. B. Thetford, the Number of Burgesses, and on
whom they held in the Confessor's time Fol. 3. F. The Case of the Right of
Electors Fol. 78. D. E.
Toll, what it signifies Append. Fol 8. B. Toriton discharged from sending
Burgesses upon their Petition to the K Fol 60. A. Towns that sent
Representatives to Parliament, and paid Tenths, were not all of them Burghs Fol.
36. A. B. Frequently signifies Community Fol. 65. A.
Tradesmen in the Saxons and Conqueror's time had their Patrons Fol. 16. A.
They were the Ancient Burgesses and Merchants Fol 9. F.
Truro, by whom made a Burgh Fol. 43. E. Tutbery-Castle how many Burgesses, on
whom they held, and what they paid Fol. 12. C.
U.
UTfangthef how explained Append. Fol. 8 D.
W.
WAllingford, how and what it held in the Confessor's time Fol. 6. A.
Warwick-Case about Election of their Burgesses Fol. 62. A. B. On whom it held,
and by whom Taxed Fol. 14. C.
Wrec what it signifies Append. Fol. 10. D. Writs and Returns from the 17 of
Edw. 4th, to Edw. 6th, all lost Fol. 77. E.
Y.
YArmouth when made a Royal Burgh, and what it paid to the King Fol. 3. D. and
35. D. Why called a Free Burgh Fol. 36 A. How it held in the Confessor's time
Fol. 3. C.
York how many Mansions, and how taxed in Domesday Fol. 10. A. B.
FINIS.
A SUPPLEMENT TO THE Preceding Advertisement; And to be read with, and after it.
AD Petitionem Comunitatis Villae de Huntingdon and Simonis de Broughton
Magistri Hospitalis Sancti Johannis de Huntingdon suggerentium Regi Quod licet
idem Simon jam per viginti Annos and amplius Magister praedicti Hospitalis
Extitisset and ad Episcopum istius loci per Comunitatem praedictam
praesentatis, Rot. Parl. 8. Ed. 2, n. 235. Pro Comunitate and Magistro
Hospitalis Sancti Johanis de Huntingdon.
and ad ipsorum Praesentationem in dicto Hospitali prout Praedecessores ejusdem
praesentati semper hactenus extiterunt Institutus fuisset; Willielmus de
Langeele nihilominus Domino Edwardo Regi nunc, dedit intelligi non est Diu quod
dictum Hospitale vacabat. Quodque Praesentatio ejusdem ad Regem pertinuit, per
quod idem Willielmus de Langelee versus Comunitatem, and Magistrum praedictos
diversa Brevia de Quare Impedit, ad certos Dies coram Justiciariis Domini Regis
de Banco returnabilia; Nomine Regio Impetravit, ad quos Dies idem Willielmus de
Langelee usque finem Termini, ut ipsos Comunitatem and Magistrum vexaret inde
indebite and gravaret, se voluntary and maliciose absentavit, in ipsorum
Comunitatis and Magistri Damnum, etc. Unde petunt, etc.

Responsum est per Concilium.
Mandetur Justiciariis coram quibus Loquela ista pendet quod procedant
indilate, Ibm.
eo non obstante quod Willielmus de Langelee qui sequitur pro Rege se per
Maliciam sic absentat, quia Rex non vult quod per hujusmodi Maliciam, Justicia
deferatur.

Upon the Petition of the Comunity, For the Comonalty and Master of the
Hospital of St. John in Huntington.
or Comonalty of the Town of Huntingdon, and Simon de Broughton, Master of the
Hospital of St. John of Huntingdon, suggesting to the King, That although the
said Simon had been Master of the said Hospital above twenty Years, and was
presented by the said Comonalty to the Bishop of the Diocese, and instituted to
the said Hospital according to their Presentation, as his Predecessors always
had been, Nevertheless William of Langele informed the Lord Edward that now is
King, That the said Hospital was not long since void, and that the Presentation
to the same belonged to him. By which the same William obtained in the King's
Name diverse Writs of Quare Impedit against the Comonalty, etc. returnable at
certain Days before the Justices of Common Pleas, at which Days, the same
William of Langele until the end of the Term willingly and maliciously absented
himself, That he might thereby unduly vex and disturb the said Comonalty and
Master, to their Damage, etc. Whence they beg, etc.

To which Petition 'twas answered by the Council.
Let the Justices, before whom the Suit is depending, be commanded to proceed
without Delay, notwithstanding William de Langele, who sues for the King, by
Malice absents himself, because the King will not, That Justice should be
delayed, by such Malice.

No man I think can affirm otherwise, Then that this Comonalty was the
Corporation, the Body politic, or Governing part, of the Burgh or Town of
Huntington, that presented to the Bishop the Master of the Hospital to be
Instituted, that was sued by Writ of Quare Impedit for so doing: For no number
of Ordinary Freemen, as such only, could have a Capacity to do such Acts, and
to be sued for doing them; nor the Herd of Common Freemen or Burgesses, who in
themselves never were or can be qualified for any such Purposes, as Distinct
from, and not Members of the Body politic or Governing part of the Town.

To this ancient Record I shall subjoin several modern Charters, by which
Burghs have been erected, that prove the meaning of the Word Comunity or
Comonalty, and who were the Comonalty or Comunity in Burghs or Corporations.

The first shall be that of Banbury, Pat. 1. Mariae, part 10. in the Rolls
Chapel. She granted Inhabitantibus Villae de Banbury, quod dicta Villa de
Banbury de coetero sit and erit liber Burgus corporatus; in re, facto, and
nomine, in perpetuum; De Vno Balivo, Duodecim Aldermannis, ac Duodecim
Burgensibus, per Nomen Balivi, Aldermannorum and Burgensium Burgi and Parochiae
de Banbury. Ac quod Ballivus, Aldermani and Burgenses Burgi and Parochiae
praedictorum sint and erunt Corpus corporatum and politicum, and una Comunitas
perpetua de se, in re, facto, and nomine, in perpetuum, per Nomen Ballivi,
Aldermannorum, and Burgensium Burgi praedicti and Parochiae de Banbury,
habeantque Successionem perpetuam, Ipsosque Ballivum, Aldermannos, and
Burgenses, unum Corpus corporatum, and unam Comunitatem de se, realiter and ad
plenum erigimus, facimus, ordinamus and creamus, pro Nobis, Haeredibus and
Successoribus Nostris, in perpetuum per Presents, etc. Then it follows, That
the same Baylif, Aldermanni, and Capitales Burgenses, facient and erunt ac
vocabuntur Comune Consilium Burgi praedicti, pro omnibus rebus, materiis,
causis and negotiis, Burgum praedictum ac Regimen and Gubernationem inde
tangentibus and concernentibus. After the Erection and Constitution of the
Burgh, She Grants there should be one Burgess to serve in Parliament for this
Burgh, and that only the Baylif, Aldermen and Burgesses, should choose him.
Volumus ac pro nobis and Successoribus nostris per Praesentes concedimus and
ordinamus quod sit and erit in dicto Burgo de Banbury unus Burgensis
Parliamenti nostri, Haeredum and Successorum nostrorum. Quodque praedicti
Ballivus, Aldermanni, and Burgenses dicti Burgi and Parochiae de Banbury and
Successores sui super Brevi nostro Successorum and Haeredum nostrorum de
Electione Burgensis Parliamenti eis directo, habeant and habebunt Authoritatem,
Potestatem and Facultatem, eligendi and nominandi unum discretum Virum dicti
Burgi, fore Burgensem Parliamenti nostri, Haeredum and Successorum nostrorum,
pro eodem Burgo. Eundemque Burgensem sic electum ad onera and custagia dicti
Burgi, Parochiae, and Comunitatis, mittent ad Parliamentum nostrum, Haeredum
and Successorum nostrorum ubicunque ad tunc tentum fuerit iisdem modo and forma
prout in aliis Burgis Regni nostri Angliae usitatum and consuetum fuerit. Quem
quidem Burgensem sic el^ctum and nominatum volumus interesse, and moram facere
ad Parliamenta nostra and Successorum nostrorum ad onera and custagia dicti
Burgi, and Parochiae and Comunitatis ejusdem, durante tempore quo hujusmodi
Parliamenta teneri contigerunt in eodem modo and forma prout alii Burgenses
Parliamenti pro quibuscunque aliis Burgis aut alio Burgo quocunque infra dictum
Regnum nostrum Angliae faciunt seu facere consueverunt. Et qui quidem Burgensis
in hujusmodi Parliamentis nostris, Haeredum and Successorum nostrorum habebit
vocem suam, tam affirmativam quam negativam, caeteraque omnia and singula
faciet ibidem and exequetur quae alii Burgenses, aut alius Burgensis
Parliamenti nostri, pro quibuscunque aliis Burgis aut alio Burgo quocunque
facient aut exequantur, aut habere, facere aut exequi valiant, Ratione aut Modo
quocunque

By this Charter it is very manifest, That the Corporation, and Comunity or
Comonalty of this Burgh, were the same thing, and that the Bailiff, twelve
Aldermen, and twelve Burgesses, who all together were the Common Council of the
Burgh, were that Corporation and Comunity or Comonalty, and had only the power
and authority to choose a Burgess or Parliament man.

In the second and third of Philip and Mary, part. 8. the Patent by which
Higham Ferrers in Northamptonshire was made a Burgh, runs thus. Concedimus
Inhabitantibus Villae de Higham Ferrers, quod dicta Villa sive Burgus de Higham
Ferrers de caetero sit and erit Liber Burgus corporatus in re, facto, and
nomine, in perpetuum; de uno Majore, septem Aldermannis, and tredecem
Burgensibus Burgi and Parochiae de Higham Ferrers. Ac quod Major, Aldermanni,
and Burgenses Burgi and Parochiae praedictorum, sint and erunt Corpus
corporatum and politicum, and una Comunitas perpetua, de se, in re, facto, and
nomine, in perpetuum, per nomen Majoris, Aldermannorum, and Burgensium Burgi
and Parochia de Higham Ferrers, etc. as in Banbury; and then Orders that seven
of the best, most able, and discreet Inhabitants, should be called Aldermen,
and thirteen more of the best and most able should be called Capital Burgesses,
and that the said Mayor, Aldermen, and Burgesses, should be the Common Council
of the Burgh and Town, to transact all things belonging to it; and then gives
the Mayor, Aldermen and Burgesses only, Power and Authority to choose one
Burgess for Parliament, etc. Quodque Major, Aldermanni, and Burgenses dicti
Burgi, etc. habeant and habebunt Potestatem, Authoritatem and Facultatem,
elegendi and nominandi unum discretum Hominem Burgi, fore Burgensem
Parliamenti, etc. ad onera and custagia dicti Burgi, Parochiae, and Comunitatis
ejusdem, etc.

In the same year of the same King and Queen, part. 6. Patentium, Abington in
Oxfordshire was made a Burgh and Corporation, consisting of a Mayor, two
Bailiffs, and nine Aldermen; which twelve were to be called principal
Burgesses, and there named who had power to elect sixteen or more secundary
Burgesses, to be with them the Common Council of the Town for all Things. Ac
quod idem Major, Ballivi, and Burgenses ejusdem Burgi, etc. erunt unum Corpus
corporatum and una Comunitas perpetua, etc. who only, and their Successors, had
a Grant to choose one Burgess for Parliament. Concedimus praefatis Majori,
Ballivis, and Burgensibus, and Successoribus suis, quod habeant and habebunt
(as often as there should be Summons to Parliament) Potestatem, Authoritatem
and Facultatem elegendi and nominandi unum discretum and probum Virum dicti
Burgi fore Burgensem Parliamenti, etc. as in all things in the Patents or
Charters of Banbury and Higham Ferrers. And there needs nothing further to be
observed upon these two places than has been upon Banbury.

All the time of Queen Mary, the Returns for these new erected Burghs are
either lost, or so much perished and rotten as they are not legible. Yet the
Returns about this time of some other Towns and Places not far distant are
answerable to this Constitution; as of Oxford in the first of Queen Mary, and
the first and second of Philip and Mary.

Haec Indentura facta apud Civitatem Oxon. etc. inter Johanem Williams Militem,
etc. ex una part, etc. and Richardum Atkinson, Majorem Civitat. praedict. and
totam Comunitatem Civitatis praedict. ex altera part, Testatur quod praedicti
Major and Comunitas Virtute, etc. unanimi Assensu and Consensu suis eligerunt
Thomam Walkinson and Edwardum Clinton, duos idoneos Cives, etc. Data apud Oxon.
27 die Martii, Anno Regni Reginae primo.

And also of Wallingford, in the first of Queen Mary, Haec Indentura facta apud
Wallingford -- inter Robertum Cockson Majorem and Comunitatem Villatae and
Burgi Wallingford ex -- Vicecomitem Oxon. and Berks. ex altera part, Testatur,
Quod nos dicta Comunitas Villatae and Burgi praedictorum -- Edmundum Asschesyld
and Robertum Cockson Majorem Villae and Burgi antedictorum Burgenses, ad -- In
quorum Testimonium Sigillum nostrum Commune, nomine omnium Interessentium prae
sentibus est appositum.

FINIS.

