BRADSHAW'S GHOST; A POEM: OR, A Dialogue between John Bradshaw, Ferry-man
Charon, Oliver Cromwell, Francis Ravilliack, and Ignatius Loyola. 1660.
Bradsh. COME, Charon, come -- Cha. What unexpected shade
Is this that thus imploreth Charon's aid?

Brad. It Is I. Char. Raven, I know that tone,
That durst to boad destruction to a Throne:
Thy guilt's too heavy, and in vain implores
A Scullers help; your Lordship should have Oars.
Lay down your Burden, then I Will carry you;
I cannot waft Bradshaw and a Murderer too.
Have you drunk Lethe yet that you'ave forgot
Noll lately passed; alas, he broke my Boat:
Besides the Foord is shallow. Brad. Never think
Of that, your danger then is less to sink.
It Is strange, shall I water want? It cannot be:
I have spilt Blood enough to make a Sea.
By all that is bad, we will swim it over: then come,
My Keel shall plow my Mare Mortuum.
Let but the winds be good, and we will prevail,
Curses and Sighs shall swell the laboring Sail.

Char. First, let met know what haste has brought thee here:
Did thou ride Post upon the Tyburn,
three-leg'd Mare?
Or did thy Murdering Soul unto this Foord
Fly from the point of some Revenging Sword?

Brad. I Murdered not my self; and none but I
Dur^ attempt that venturous Act, to vie
With Hell for the Ruff, and double over again
The seventy sevenfold Punishment of Cain.
My P^^ow was my block, and Swans did bring
My Scarlet Soul upon their milky wing.

Char. It Is strange; yea, and unnatural, to see
That such a Rogue should dye, and naturally:
Sure millions would have Ravished thy Breath,
But that none durst attempt that deed but Death.
For Justice could not be Revenged on you,
Unless ^e could kill Soul and Body too.
But why do you come here? get you to Hell
For to Read Lectures unto Machiavel:
Your Borgia could do that, and I have Reason
To keep you back; Pluto would think it Treason.
You and your Partner sure will pluck him down,
Hell is not dark enough to hide his Crown.

Brad. Charon, don't fear, I Will warrant we will agree,
For Hell and I were never at enmity.

Char. Give me your Naulum, then take here this cup
Of Lethe, think it is Blood, and swill it up. --

Brad. That will not wash Guilt, it is as good let it alone:
And as for Money, I will give you none. --
I Have a Commission, mind from whom I am sent;
You're Ferry-man unto the Parliament. --

Char. Lambert has shut that Door, and as for me,
You shall not enter here without a Fee.
Should I waft Roundheads over for naught, I find,
C^elion-like, my Sails must live by wind.
Had you the Bishops Lands, and could not bring
One Tithe to me? at least an Offering.
You shall not over on tick, for pay you must;
When Infidels do meet, never talk of trust.

Bradsh. There Is Sixpence. Cha. What Is the Motto? O, it is thus;
The Commonwealth of England; God with us.
You Worship Coin, your Golden Calves, I see,
Have got a pretty stamp, a Deity.
But prithee, Bradshaw, now thou art come, lets know
How thou and Pride did chance to fall so low.
You went for Saints on Earth, were (...) not far
More fit for you in the Heavens to shine a Star?

Brad. My Brother Pride his thoughts on Hell did fix,
For to brew merry Beer and Ale with Styx.
His Trash would not vent there; the Angels they,
He thought drank nothing but Ambrosia:
And somewhat else besides increased his Fears,
There was a grudge betwixt him and the Bears.
And Charon, as to me your Questions are
Most Foolish; know you not that Charles is there?
To drive black Pluto's Coach I Would rather dain,
Than to be VVaggoner to Charles's wain.

Char. Were you out, you should scarce come in again:
This Ferry-boat was never made for Man.
But you may go 'cause you're Noli's stalking-horse,
Rather for Beast, or something that is worse.

Brad. More Ass I; but I am rid on it I suppose,
And shall be even with him in spite of's Nose.
I must confess my Purple Robes alone
Did serve to make a Foot-stall for his Throne.
Naught could be done, I say it to my Disgrace,
By's Iron-sides, but for my brazen face:
I scorned to pluck off Hat to Majesty*
Although I made him pluck off's Head to me:
Though he amazed, it stirred not me; his Breath
Could not move me, although it frightened Death.
My Perjured Soul could easily dispense
To cut a way for Noll through Innocence.
Yet entered not I on the Mine before
I thought my self secure of half the Ore:
I thought my gains were good, the stakes being down;
I quickly made a Football of the Crown:
But Noll trip'd up my heels, that surly Soul;
And I was glad at last I escaped the Goal.
He got the gain, and lost his Soul and all,
That Nolls Wife.
Jone might sell her Kitchen-stuff at White Hall.
Here Is Land: what Clouds are these? what, does Hell turn
Out all her Lights? 'cause she for me might mourn.
Has Pluto Tinder-boxes? Char. No. Brad. What then?
Has Noll a Nose will light those Flames again?

Char. Beware, lest hood-winked thus, you stray go on
Close by Coetus, then by Acheron.
Cerberus longs to see you, he will afford
Three Salutations to you in one word.
Fling him a Heart, for there belongs a fee
To the Doorkeeper as well as unto me.

Bradsh. Thanks for this needless Counsel: But never tell
Me that I ere was out of the way to Hell.
Cromwell the Great being Link-boy, sure he knows
The way, if not, we will follow both his Nose.
Farewell. But now I stray, the darkness is
So great, I shall not find the way to miss:
I never walked wrong, though I am never right, for where
So e're I am, Hell properly is there.
But stay, what is that? why should I be afraid
Of what is but the Shadow of a Shade?
Methinks I hear a voice, which cries, stand back:
Why, who art thou? Rav. I am Ravilliack.

Brad. What empty thing art thou? As for my part,
I am as the Soul of the Rump should be a fart
Lately let, you shortly shall have more;
Lambert has kicked their Arse-ships out of door.

Rav. Welcome, most Reverend shade; then you art sent
With an Embassage from the Parliament.

Brad. No: for Infernal Aid we always were
Sure to have that as well in Peace as War.
Your Counsel needless was, for we were so evil,
None there but could be Tutor to a Devil.
I Am come to commence Villain, something more;
I did perform my Acts on Earth before:
The World and Hell my Merits know, and to
Be short, Ravilliack, I Will take place of you.

Rav. Pardon, bold Shade, if I desire to know
If ever you have deserved that place or no.
First, we will dispute, what do you think of that?
And we will choose Pluto for to moderate.

Brad. Go, Pupil, undergraduate Friend; tush he
That well can Judge, must more than Devil be.
If that we must, let us be tried by such things
As well do know what it is to Murder Kings.
Such should be Judges for us: Ay, such should,
Whose guilty Souls speak nothing under Blood.
Fiends of a double die, such as do scorn
To swear, unless they are sure to be forsworn:
Nor for Secluded Members they are sent,
For Judges we will have an Old Parliament;
There Is Members here enough, why do I stick?
Enough to make a Body Politic.

Rav. Pretty State-Monster, a fine hoddy doddy,
One, as they say, that is more Arse than Body.

Brad. Disdain 'um not, you cannot parallel
Such true false-hearted Devils not in Hell.
There was no Reason for it; though Lambert bore
A spite to the House to turn it out of the door:
To me it always seemed exceeding fit,
What Members, pray you, 'sides the Rump shall sit?
Yet 'cause you stand upon it, I Will never abuse
Your Privilege: Ravilliack, you may choose.
I and my Partners shall not value you,
With Machiavel, and all Loyola's crew.
Farewell, prepare against the Judges Call,
For I must speak a word or two with Noll.
Lie, Swear, Forswear, all this I Will grant to you:
Nay, and your Mental Reservations too.
You shall Condemn your selves, you will see in fine,
And Bellarmine shall confute Bellarmine.

Oliver. Welcome to mourning; welcome, Shade in brief,
You're very welcome to the Joys of Grief.
I pray do you no Letters with you carry?
Nor from soft 2 of Olivers Sons.
Richard, nor from simple Harry.
Methinks it is very strange, that Olivers Secr.
Thurlow's grown
So proud, he will not write a word for Olivers Wife.
Jone.
Poor wretch, her Breeding never taught her a word,
She knew no Character but that of the Sword;
Though Lambert's Wife and I to the cotquean
Did read the Horn-book over and over again.
But waving Pusses Majesty, pray how
Does Mice and Rats in the House of Commons do?
Their leaving of the House, makes me to think
That the Foundation e're belong will sink.

Brad. My heart is almost broke, you cannot believe
How I am vexed: I made no more to grieve,
Now all things do concur to misery,
All because you and I did disagree.
Fools that we were, to mind we did not call,
Satan divided against himself, must fall.

Oliver. Tush, that is only Scripture; why, I say
That all the Bible is Apocrypha.

Brad. What if we went for Saints? it is all one thing
For to abuse the Scripture and the King.
Nay, our Thanksgivings too were always least,
When such long Graces we had at a Feast,
Before you would kill, you would have Peter's Call,
And make your Enemy a Mock-Funeral.
He laughs your Army's Sanctified Word;
His Wit did lend an edge unto your Sword.
Nay, and the Devil does on Scripture call,
Then when he would be Devil most of all.

Oliver. It Is very true. But prithee let me know
A brief Relation, how all things do go.

Brad. Why Noll, 'twould make a heart of stone Relent,
A Booth does dare the House of Parliament.
They talk of Kings: Nay, which is worse, I do
Fear all the Nation will turn Honest too.
One true Religion hies unto its Mother;
The Church and Taxes do avert another.
One thing or other makes 'um all to cry
We Will be Apostates to Apostasy.
Things are so bad, they would all be good, were not
For these three Fiends, Vain, Haslerig, and Scot.
Dippers and Quakers they their Lepers be;
All in the Nations Discord do agree.
Vain was Anointed Rogue, though so to do,
Were for to lose the Oil and Labor too.
Noll, why were you not King? when you did see
A Pilate was, you well might Herod be.

Oliver. Why, I was more; the truth to lay you down,
No Hat but mine in the Kingdom wore a Crown.
I only Lords created, truly seeing
Me out of nothing leap into a Being.
I made 'um better than my self, Earls then,
It was below 'um to be Gentlemen.
What odds have Awls and Swords when they go to it?
I vampt the old worn-out Hewson Lord to boot.

Brad. You Hewson'd it, it is twenty now to ten,
But that his Lordship's at his Last again.

Oliver. But hark, now Quakerism begins to down:
Think you that Puritans will put on Lawn?

Brad. No; white is Innocent: nay, I Will tell you what,
The Whore of Babylon's Smock is made of that.
Peter's to try this Turkish point, thought meet
A while for to do penance in a sheet.

Oliver. That was a merry Rogue, and truth to tell,
I liked his way of Laughing Men to Hell:
Dull heavy looks I like not, I protest,
Except in Quakers, such as are possessed.

Brad. Alas, the Times are Honest like to be;
Men must not wear Cloaks for Piety.
Satan will go no more to Church I fear,
If that the Fashion brings up such lewd ware:
To let him have no Pew, it were uncivil;
Where Surplices are Jerkins, farewell Devil.

Oliver. In my Time 'twas not so; the Clergymen
Had not such plenty sure of Linen then.
The Bishops were so poor, that they, alack,
Were glad they had a Surplice next their back:
I stripped their Mother Church, and without jest,
I think that Scotch-cloth fits Religion best;
For pray now, why should not the wear of Cloaks
As well fit John of Styles, as John of Nokes?
As for the honest Scotch, we never shall want
Their Aid, for they have took the Covenant:
Against all that is good, they are quite Bankrupt now,
They Sold their King and their Religion too.
They against Nature sin, should they be good;
They Are born perfidious, and should
They Love Religion, then we needs must all
Confess that Act to be unnatural.
None yet was ever good, till he forgot,
And was ashamed of the Name of Scot.

Brad. The Court is set, I must away, and try
To bear away the Prize of Villainy.
I a Solicitor want, and may go look
For one, unless I chance to meet with Cook.

Oliver. Go on and prosper; as for the other, he
Is an honest man, if but compared to thee:
If Murder can add merit to thy Praise,
The Elizian Fields can never supply thee Bays.
But why talk I of Bays? I there did Flatter,
Thy Symon's Neck better becomes a Halter.

Brad. Ravilliack, speak, for I will give thee first,
Or any odds, because thy Cause is worst.

Ravilliack's Oration.
Rav. Know then, most Reverend Loyola, I do
My self and cause both recommend to you:
Were I indifferent bad, I Would never engage
Your Devil-ship into my Patronage.
This Hand brought Harry's Letter, whose sad date
Ended his days, I was the Post of Fate.
He scarcely Read a Sentence, I did doom
His Life unto a period should come.
I made the Flower-de-luce to bleed, and yield
For to be quartered in a bloody Field:
I Murdered Harry, whose Auspicious Birth
Presaged a League even 'twixt Heaven and Earth:
And what does aggravate my business, I
Did kill Religion out of Piety.
I offered up that Sacrifice alone,
None else durst make an Altar of the Throne:
And shall I now be brought in Competition
With Bradshaw? Youngest Son unto Perdition.
I bathed my self all over in the Flood;
He only washed his hand in Royal Blood.
He thinks one Action will Surname him Great,
When all my Life was a Religious Cheat:
But talk detracts from deeds. Not Tully's wrack
Of words could reach unto Ravilliack.
I Will say no more, but keep the place, were it
For nothing but 'cause I am a Jesuit.

Bradshaw's Oration.
Brad. You Have said too much, but not enough; go to:
There is not one of the Rump but's worse than you.
You killed the King of France, and then all is said;
I King of France and England Murdered.
My fault exceeds yours, and more weight does carry
Than it, by how much Charles excedeth Harry:
Yours was Lay-murther. Sacrilege mine. You cannot
Like me boast: You a King killed, I a Saint.
They me in the Book of Martyrs will Remember,
And as to Faux, give a day in November.
Your Murder was Religious; true, and I
Committed too a Pious Villainy.
In Charles I killed the Church, that is more than you;
I Sacrificed the Priest and Temple too:
I made the Cushions Blocks: The Butchers wore
The Sleeves that Canterbury had before.
I Capel slew, if they the Saints did track
I slew, they would muster up an Almanac:
Their Bloods would add new Rubricks, whilst that they
Blush all the Year into one Holy Day.
Nor sinned I singly, I made hundreds be
Copartners with me in that Villainy.
I made them sin, in that I made 'um join,
So that I challenge all their Sins as mine.
I did Hell far more Service than you can,
'Twas I that favored the Puritan:
Nay, I did Love the Scots and Quakers too,
Ravilliack, Cook must have the place of you.
You Will not be in my class: Nay, all my pack
Of Hell Hounds are above Ravilliack.
Not one of Charles's Silver hairs I shed,
In value but might purchase Harry's Head.
And does your Dagger think for to out-brave
My Ax? I killed, but yet debarred a Grave:
So that in hindering Charles a Tombstone, I
A Monument built to my own Infamy.
I plucked his Statue down; what should I have
For my Deserts? I Murdered his Grave:
Nor was I this alone content to do,
I made Cloaks Preach him Traitor, Tyrant too:
And made 'um swear't, I did so watch their waters,
All Treason did commit, except the Traitors.
What think you then, that he deserved has,
That killed both the Defender, and the Faith?
Judge all! and if the place you me deny,
Why then you are worser Devils all than I.

Loyola's Oration.
Loyola. It Is bravely said of both: Nor can I tell,
If this Man, or if that Man do excel:
Degrees are wanting due to both to give,
For they must be beyond superlative.
They both are Rogues in grain, both dipped in blood
Of Kings -- But yet methinks I should
Give one the place: It grieves me sore to see
The Rump thus baffle my Society.
Bradshaw did kill a God: My Rogue comes after,
And can amount no higher than Manslaughter.
The thoughts of Bradshaw's worth does make me mad,
For's one that has outdone whatever's bad.
O that I lived but again, that I
Might be the Founder of a Rump, and die!
For their Association scorns to be
Companions with my Society.
Learning is needless, they a way have hit,
That makes 'um to be wise beyond all wit.
Like Foxes Tayls (I must unto you tell)
One Rump does far a thousand Heads excel.
They cut Men's throats by Law: Nay, and they do
Make Justice guilty of the Murder too.
So when you say, the King's killed, it is not meant
By Bradshaw, but by my Lord President.
Their Laboring Souls first bring forth Mischief, then
They Christn'd after it was cast; so when
Rape, Murder, Sacrilege, called that Pious Hector
Their God-Son, Butcher Cromwell, Lord Protector.
Cowards oth' Rump were Worthies: Fleetwood thus
From's Valor scorned to be called Valourous.
See what an Act of Parliament can do!
If they but Vote him Valourous, he is so:
For though the sniveling Sinner deserved banging,
For he had never the wit to merit hanging.
Strange Operation of the Rump, the Fool
The Devil, he is but Clerk to their Close-stool.
For the Rumpish Members Honor, I think fit
We Act that Member first of all should sit.
I like this topsy-turvy, we will be led
By England, and the Arse shall be the Head:
And next Thanksgiving-dinner, our Old Nick
Shall feed on Rump, 'twill make him Politic.
We Will Knight it, if your Judgments be like mine,
It shall be Sir Rump, we will have no more Sir Loyn.
They should be welcome all, but that I fear
They would prescribe new Models to us here:
They merit not this place alone, but well
Do for themselves deserve another Hell.
But 'cause here are not all, till the other please
To come, let us Entertain and Honor these.
In the mean time, that Bradshaw may Inherit
Present Possession of his former Merit,
To him as Rump oth' Rump let us present
The Chair, for he was still their Fundament.
If you think fit, all I Would have you do,
'S to speak your mind then in a word or two.

Applaudunt Omnes. Because thou'st done so ill, thou have done well;
Bradshaw, thou art Lord President of Hell.

FINIS.

