A FAIR WARNING, FOR ENGLAND To take heed of the PRESBYTERIAN GOVERNMENT OF
SCOTLAND; As being of all others most Injurious to the Civil Magistrate, most
Oppressive to the Subject, most Pernicious to both. Also the sinfulness and
wickedness of the COVENANT, to Introduce that Government upon the Church of
England. By Dr John Brumhall Lord Archbishop of Armagh, and Primate of all
Ireland.

LUKE 9.35. No man having drank old wine straightway desires new, for he
says the old is better. Now reprinted for the good and benefit of all his
Majesty's Subjects.

THE CONTENTS.
CHAP. I. THe Occasion and Subject of this Treatise. page 1 CHAP. II. That this
new Discipline does utterly overthrow the Rights of Magistrates, to convocate
Synods, to confirm their Acts, to order Ecclesiastical Affairs, and reform
the Church within their Dominions. p. 3 CHAP. III. That this Discipline robs
the Magistrate of the last appeal of his Subjects. p. 12 CHAP. IV. That it
exempts the Ministers from due Punishment. p. 13 CHAP. V. That it ^^bjects the
Supreme Magistrate to their Censures, etc. p. 16 CHAP. VI. That it robs the
Magistrate of his Dispensative Power. p. 17 CHAP. VII. That the Disciplinarians
cheat the Magistrate of his Civil Power in order to Religion. p. 1^ CHAP. VIII.
That the Disciplinarians challenge this exorbitant Power (...) Divine Right. p.
24 CHAP. IX. That this Discipline makes a monster of the Commonwealth. p. 26
CHAP. X. That this Dicipline is most prejudicial to the Parliamen^. p. 2^
CHAP. XI. That this Discipline is oppressive to particular persons. p. 30 CHAP.
XII. That this Discipline is hurtful to all orders of men. p. 32 CHAP. XIII.
That the Covenant to introduce this Discipline is void and wicked, with a short
Conclusion. p. 3^
A FAIR WARNING, To take heed of the Presbyterian Government, as being of all
others most Injurious to the Civil Magistrate, most Oppressive to the Subject,
most Pernicious to both.
CHAP. I. The Occasion and Subject of this Treatise.
IF the Disciplinarians in Scotland could rest contented to dote Diana which
themselves have canonized, I should leave them to the best School-Mistris, that
is Experience, to feel where their shoe wrings them, and to purchase
Repentance. What have I to do with the regulation of foreign Churches to burn
mine own fingers with snuffing other men's Candles? Let them stand or fall to
their own Master: It is charity to judge well of others, and piety to look well
to our selves.

But to see those very men who plead to vehemently against all kinds of
tyranny, attempt to obtrude their own dreams not only upon their
Fellow Subjects, but upon their Sovereigne himself, contrary to the dictates of
his own conscience, contrary to all Laws of God and Man, yea to compel
foreign Churches to dance after their pipe, to worship that counterfeit image
which they seign to have fallen down from Jupiter, and by force of arms to
turn their neighbors out of a possession of above 1400 years, to make room
for their Trojan horse of Ecclesiastical Discipline, (A practice never
justified in the world but either by the Turk or by the ^ope). This put us upon
the defensive part, They must not think that other men are so cowed or grown so
tame, as to stand still blowing of their noses, whilst they bridle them and
ride them at their pleasure. It is time to let the world see that this
Discipline which they so much adore, is the very quintessence of refined
Popery, or a greater Tyranny than ever Rome brought forth, inconsistent with
all forms of civil Government, destructive to all sorts of Policy, a ra^k to
the conscience, the heaviest pressure that can fall upon a people, and so much
more dangerous, because by the specious pretense of Divine Institution, it
takes away the sight, but not the burden of slavery. Have patience Reader, and
I shall discover unto thee more pride and arrogance through the holes of a
threadbare coat, then was ever found under a Cardinals Cap or a tripple-Crown.
All this* I undertake to demonstrate, not by some extraordinary practices
justified only by the pretense of invincible necessity, (a weak patrociny for
general Doctrine,) not by the single opinions of some Capricious fellows, but
by their books of Discipline, by the acts of their general and provincial
Assemblies, but the concurrent votes and writings of their Commissioners.

I foresee that they will suggest that through their sides I seek to wound
foreign Churches. No, there is nothing which I shall convict them of here,
but I hope will be disavowed, though not by all Protestant auctours, yet by all
the Protestant Churches in the world. But I must take leave to demand of our
Disciplinarians, Syn. Genesis 1647. Declar. Parl. 1648. etc.
who it is they brand with the odious name of Erastians, in the Acts of their
Parliaments and Assemblies, and in the Writings of their Commissioners, and
reckon them with Papists, Anabaptists, and Independents; Is it those Churches,
who disarme their Presbyteries of the Sword of Excommunication, which they are
not able to weeld? so did Erastus; or is it those who attribute a much greater
power to the Christian Magistrate, in the managery of Ecclesiastical affairs
than themselves? So did Erastus, and so do all Protestant Churches. The
Disciplinarians will sooner endure a Bishop or a Superintendent to govern them,
than the Civil Magistrate. And when the Magistrate shall be rightly informed,
what a dangerous edged tool their Discipline is, he will ten times sooner admit
of a moderate Episcopacy, then fall into the hands of such hucksters.

If it were not for this Disciplinarian humor, which will admit so latitude in
Religion, but makes each nicity a fundamental, and every private opinion an
Article of faith, which prefers particular errors before general truths. I
doubt not but all reformed Churches might easily be reconciled. Before these
unhappy troubles in England, all Protestants both Lutherans and Calvinists did
give unto the English Church the right hand of fellowship; the Disciplinarians
themselves, though they preferred their own Church as more pure, (else they
were hard-hearted) yet they did not, they durst not condemn the Church of
England, either as defective in any necessary point of Christian Piety, or
redundant in any thing that might virtually or by consequence overthrow the
foundation.

Witness that Letter which their General Assembly of Superintendents, Assemb
Genesis Anno. 1556.
Pastors and Elders, sent by Mr John Knox to the English Bishops, wherein they
style them Reverend Pastors, fellow-Preachers, and joint opposers of the Roman
Antichrist. They themselves were then far from a party, or from making the
calling of Bishops to be Antichristian.

But to leave these velitations and come home to the point. I will show first
how this Discipline entrencheth most extremely upon the right of the civil
Magistrate, secondly that it is as grievous and intolerable to the Subject.

CHAP. II. That this new Discipline does utterly overthrow the Rights of
Magistrates, to convocate Synods, to confirm their Acts, to order
Ecclesiastical Affairs, and reform the Church within their Dominions.
ALl Princes and States invested with Sovereignty of power, do justly challenge
to themselves the right of Convocating National Synods of their own Subjects,
and ratifying their constitution.

And although pious Princes may tolerate or privilege the Church to convene
within their territories annually or triennially, for the exercise of
Discipline, and execution of constitutions already confirmed, (nevertheless we
see how wary the Synod of Dort was in this particular, Can. 50.
) yet he is a Magistrate of straw, that will permit the Church to convene
within his territories, whenever, wheresoever they list, to convocate before
them whomsoever they please, all the Nobles, all the Subjects of the Kingdom,
to change the whole Ecclesiastical policy of a Commonwealth, to alter the*
Doctrine and Religion established, to take away the legal Rights and
Privileges of the Subjects, to erect new Tribunals and Courts of Justice, to
which Sovereigns themselves must submit, and all this of their own heads, by
virtue of a pretended power given them from Heaven, contrary to known Laws and
lawful Customs, the Supreme Magistrate dissenting and disclaiming. Ench.
cand. S. min. ex decreto fall. The Edit. Gron. 1645. page 161.
Synods ought to be called by the Supreme Magistrate if he be a Christian,
etc. And either by himself, or by such as he shall please to choose for that
purpose, he ought to preside over them. This power the Emperors of old did
challenge over General Councels, Christian Monarchs in the blindness of
Popery over National Synods, the Kings of England over their great Councels of
old, and their Convocation of later times, The Estates of the united Provinces
in the Synod of Dort, this power neither Roman Catholic or Protestant in
France dare deny to his King. None have been more punctual in this case then
the State of Geneva, where it is expressly provided, Les ordium Eccles. printed
at Geneva 1562. page 66.
that no Synod or Presbytery shall alter the Ecclesiastical policy, or add
any thing to it, without the consent of the civil Magistrate. Their Elders do
not challenge an uncontrolable power as the Commissioners of Christ, ^ag. 20.
but are still called the Commissioners of the Signiory. Pagin. 20.
The lesser Council names them with the advice of the Ministry, (their consent
is not necessary) The great Council of 200. does approve them or reject them.
At the end of the year they are presented to the Signiory, who continue them or
discharge them as they see cause. At their admission they take an Oath, to keep
the Eccesiasticall Ordinances of the civil Magistrate. Page 9.
The final determination of doctrinall differences in Religion, (after
conference of, and with the Ecclesiastics,) is referred to the Magistrate.
Page 11.
The Proclamations published with the sound of Trumpet registered in the same
Book, do plainly show, that the ordering of all Ecclesiastical affairs, is
assumed by the Signiory.

But in Scotland all things are quite contrary, the civil Magistrate has no
more to do with the placing or displacing of Ecclesiastical Elders, than he
has in the Electoral College, about the Election of an Emperor. The King
has no more legislative Power in Ecclesiastical causes, than a Cobbler, that
is a single Vote in case he be chosen an Elder, otherwise none at all. In
Scotland Ecclesiastical persons make repeal, alter their Sanctions every day,
without consent of King or Council. King James proclaimed a Parliament to be
held at Edinburgh, and a little before by his Letter required the Assembly to
abstain from making any Innovations in the Policy of the Church, October. 10.
1597.
and from prejudging the decisions of the States by their conclusions, and to
suffer all things to conti^ue in the condition they were until the approaching
Parliament. What did they hereupon? They neglected the Kings Letter, by their
own Authority they determined all things positively, questioned the Archbishop
of St Andrews upon their own Canons, For collating to benefices, and Voting in
Parliament, according to the ^ndoubted Laws of the Land. Yea to that degree of
sauciness they arrived, and into that contempt they reduced Sovereigne Power,
Assemb. Abherd. 1600.
that twenty Presbyters (no more at the highest, sometimes but thirteen,
sometimes but seven or eight) dared to hold and maintain a General Assembly,
(as they miscalled it,) after it was discharged by the King, against his
Authority, an Insolence which never any Parliament durst yet attempt.

By their own Authority, 1. Book disc. 1. head.
long before there was any Statute made to that purpose; they abolished all the
Festivals of the Church, even those which were observed in memory of the Birth,
Circumcision, Resurrection, and Ascension of our Savior.

By their own Authority they decreed the abolition of Bishops, Ass. D^n. 1580.
requiring them to resign their offices, as not having any calling from Gods
Word, under pain of Excommunication. And to des^st from Preaching, until they
had a new Admission from the General Assembly. And to complete their own
folly, added further, that they would dispose of their possessions as the
Churches Patrimony in the next Assembly, which ridiculous Ordinance was
maintained stiffly by the succeeding Synods, notwithstanding the Statute, that
it should be Treason to impugn the Authority of the three Estates, Parl. 1584.
or to procure the innovation or diminution of ^^y of them. Which was made on
purpose to control their vain presumption. Notwithstanding that themselves had
formerly approved, and as much as in them lay established Superintendents, to
endure for term of life with their numbers, bounds, salaries, larger than
those of other Ministers, 1. Book discip. 4. and 6. head.
indewed with Episcopal power, to plant Churches, ordain Ministers, assign
Stipends, preside in Synods, direct the censures of the Church, without whom
there was no Excommunication. The world is much mistaken concerning Episcopacy
in Scotland: for though the King and Parliament were compelled by the clamours
and impetuous violence of the Presbyters to annex the temporalities of Bishops
to the Crown, Anno. 203.
yet the Function it self was never taken away in Scotland, from their first
conversion to Christianity, until these unhappy troubles. And these very
temporalities were restored by the Ad of restitution, 1606. Ass. Glasg. 1610.
Parl. Edenb. 1612.
and their full power was first established Synodically, and afterward
confirmed by the three Estates of the Kingdom in Parliament.

By their own Authority when they saw they could not prevail with all their
iterated endeavors and attempts to have their book of discipline ratified,
they obtruded it upon the Church themselves, ordaining that all those who had
born, or did then bea^^ any office in the Church, Ass. Edenb. 1590.
should subscribe it, under pain of Excommunication.

By their own Authority, or rather by the like unwarrantable boldness they
adopted themselves to be heirs of the Prelates and and other dignities and
orders of the Church, suppressed by their tumultuous violence, and decreed that
all tithes, rents, lands, oblations, yea whatsoever had been given in former
times, a should be given in future times to the service of God, was the
Patrimony of the Church; 2. Book disc. Chap. 9.
and ought to be collected and distributed by the Deacons, as the Word of God
appoints. That to convert any of this, to their particular or profane use of
any person, is detestable Sacrilege before God. 1. Book disc. 6. head.
And elsewhere, Gentle^^^, Barons, Earls, Lords, and others must be content to
live (...) their just rents, and suffer the Kirk to be restored to her Li^erty.
Ibidem.
What this Liberty is, follows in the same place, all things given in
hospitality, all rents pertaining to Priests, Chanteries, Colleges, Ibidem.
Chappetries, Frieries of all orders, the Sisters of the Seens, all which ought
to be retained still in the use of the Kir^. Give them but leave to take their
breath and expect the rest. T^^ whole reven^es of the temporalities of Bishops,
Deans, and An^Deans Lands, and all rents pertaining to Cathedral Kirks. Then
supposing an Objection, that the Possessours had Leases and Estates, they
answer, That those who made them were thieves and murderers, and had no power
to alienate the common Good of the Kirk. Ibidem.
They desire that all such Estates may be anulled and avoided, that all
Collectours appointed by the King or others, may be discharged from
intermedling therewith, and the Deacons permitted to collect the same: yea to
that height of madness were they come, as to define and determine in their
Assembly, (judge whether it be not a modest constitution for a Synod. Ass.
Edenb. 1647.
) That the next Parliament the Church should be fully restored to its
Patrimony, and that nothing should be p^st in Parliament until that was first
considered and approved. Let all Estates take notice of these pretensions and
designs. If their project have not yet taken effect, it is only because they
wanted sufficient strength hitherto to accomplish it.

Lastly by their own Authority, under the specious title of Jesus Christ, King
of Kings, and Lord of Lords, the only Monarch of his Church, and under pretense
of his Prerogative Royal, they erected their own Courts and Presbyteries in
the most parts of Scotland, long before they were legally approved or received,
as appears by their own Act, alleging that many suites had been made to the
Magistrate for approbation of the Policy of the Kirk, Ass. Glasg. 1581. Ass.
Edenb. 1590. Ass. Edenb. 1591.
which had not taken that happy effect which good men would crave: And by
another Act acknowledging that Presbyteries were then established (Synodically)
in most parts of the Kingdom. And lastly by the Act of another General
Assem^ly at Edenburg, ordaining that the Discipline contained in the Acts of
the General Assembly should be kept, as well in Agnus and Mernis as in the
rest of the Kingdom.

You see sufficiently in point of practice how the Disciplinarians have
trampled upon the Laws, and justled the civil Magistrate out of his Supremacy
in Ecclesiastical Affairs. My next ^ask shall be, to show that this proceeds
not from Inanimadvertence or Passion, but from their Doctrine and Principles.

First, They teach that no persons, Magistrates nor others, have to Vote in
their Synods, 2. Book disc. Chap. 7.
but only Ecclesiastical.

Secondly, They teach, that Ecclesiastical persons have ^he sole All
Ecclesiastical Assemblies have power to convene lawfully together, for
treating of things concerning the Kirk. They have power to appoint times and
places. Chap. 12.
Again, National Assemblies of thi^ Country ought always to be retained in
their own Liberties, with power to the Kirk to appoint times and places. Thus
they make it a Liberty, that is a Privilege of the Church, a part of its
Patrimony, not only to convene, but to convocate, whomsoever, whenever,
wheresoever.

Synods have the judgment of true and false Religion, Ass. Edenb. 1570.
of Doctrine, Heresies, etc. the election, admission, suspension, deprivation
of Ministers, the determination of all things that pertain to the Discipline of
the Church. The judgment of Ecclesiastical matters, causes ben^ficiary,
matrimonial and others. Jurisdiction to proceed to excommunication against
those that rob the Church of its Patrimony. ^. Book disc. Chap. 7.
They have legislative Power to make rules and constitutions for keeping good
order in the Kirk. They have power to abr^gate and abolish all Statutes and
Ordinances concerning Ecclesiastical matters, that are found noisome and
unprofitable, and agree not with the time, Chap. 12.
or are abused by the people. And all this without any Reclamation, or
Apellation to any Judge, Civil (...) Ecclesiastical.

^. Book disc. Chap. 1.
Fourthly, They teach that they have these privileges not from the Magistrate
or People, or particular Laws of any other Country. The Magistrate can not
execute the censures of the Church, nor prescribe any rule how it should be
done, but Ecclesiastical power flows immediately from God, and from the
Mediator Jesus Christ. Theoremata III. imp. Edenb. 1647. decreto Synodi Theor.
4. Theor. 9.
And yet further, The Church cannot be governed by others, than those Ministers
and Stewards set over it by Christ, nor otherwise than by his Laws. And
therefore there is no power on earth that can challenge to it self a Command or
Domini^^ upon the Church. And again, It is prohibited by the Law of God and of
Christ, for the Christian Magistrate to invade the Government of the Church,
and consequently to challenge to himself the right of both Swords, spiritual
and temporal. And if any Magistrate do arrogate so much to himself, the Church
shall have cause to complain and exclaim, that the Pope is changed, but the
Papacy remains. So if Kings and Magistrates stand in their way, they are
Political Popes, as well as Bishops are Ecclesiastical. Whatsoever these men
do, Theor. 68.
is in the Name of our Lord Jesus, and by Authority delegated from him alone.

Lastly, They teach that they have all this Power, not only without the
Magistrate, but against the Magistrate, that is, although he dissent,
Informatio^. ^r^m S^otland page 1^.
and send out his prohibitions to the contrary, Parliamentary ratifications can
no way alter Church Canons concerning the Worship of God. For Eccclesiasticall
Discipline ought to be exercised, whether it be ratified by the
civill-Magistrate or not. Theor. 98.
The want of a civil Sanction to the Church, is but like Lucrum cessans, non
damnum emergens. As it adds nothing to it, so it takes nothing away from it.
If there be any clashing of Jurisdictions, or defect in this kind, they lay the
fault at the Magistrates door. It is a great sin or wickedness, for the
Magistrate to hinder the exercise, Theor. 82.
or execution of Ecclesiastical Discipline.

Now we have seen the pernicious practices of their Synods, with the Doctrines
from which they flow; it remains to dispel umbrages, wherewith they seek to
hide the ugliness of their proceedings and principles from the eyes of the
world. We (say they) do give the Christian Magistrate a political Power to
convocate Synods, to preside in Synods, to ratify the Acts of Synods, to
reform the Church. We make him the keeper of both Tables. Take nothing and hold
it fast, here are good words, but they signify nothing. Trust me whatsoever
the Disciplinarians do give to the Magistrate, it is always with a saving of
their own stakes, not giving for his advantage, but their own. For they teach
that this power of the Christian Magistrate is not private and destructive to
the power of the Church but cumulative, Theor. (...)
and only auxiliary or assisting.

Besides the power which they call abusively authoritative, but is indeed
ministerial, of executing their decrees, and contributing to their settlement,
they ascribe to the Magistrate concerning the Acts of Synods that which every
private man has, a judgment of ^iscretion, but they retain to themselves the
judgment of Jurisdiction. And if he judge not as they would have him, but
suspend out of conscience the influence of his political power, where they
would have him exercise it, they will either teach him another point of Popery,
that is an implicit faith, or he may perchance ^eel the weight of their
Church Censures, and find quickly what manner of men they be, as our late
Gracious King Charles and before him his Father, his Grandmother, and his great
Grandmother did all to their cost.

Then in plain English, what is this political Power to call Synods to preside
in Synods, and to ratify Synods, which these good men give to the Magistrate,
and magnify so much? I shall tell the truth. It is a duty which the Magistrate
ows to the Kirk, when they think necessary to have a Synod convocated, to
strengthen their summons by a civil Sanction, Theor. 50, ^1.
to secure them in coming to the Synod, and returning from the Synod, to
provide them good accommodation, to protect them from dangers, to defend their
Rights and Privileges. To compel obstinate persons by civil Laws and
punishments, to submit to their censures and decrees. What gets the Magistrate
by all this to himself? He may put it all in his eye, Ibid.
and see never a whit the worse. For they declare expressly, that neither all
the power, nor any part of the power, which Synods have to deliberate of, or to
define Ecclesiastical things, (though it be in relation to their own Subjects)
does flow from the Magistrate, but because in those things which belong to the
outward man, (mark the reason) the Church stands in need of the help of the
Magistrate. Fair fall a^ ingenuous confession, they attribute nothing to the
Magistrate, but only what may render him able to serve their own turns, and
supply their needs. I wish these men would think a little more of the
distinction, between habitual and actual Jurisdiction. After a Schoolmaster
has his License to teach, yet his actual Jurisdiction does proceed from the
Parents of his Scholars. And though he enjoy a kind of Supremacy among them, he
must not think that this extinguisheth, either his own filial duty, o^ theirs.

Like this power of presiding politically in Synods is the other power which
they give him of reforming the Church, that is when the State of the Church is
corrupted, but not when it is pure, as they take it for granted, that it is,
when the Jurisdiction is in their own hands. Although godly Kings and Princes,
someti^^ by their own Authority, 1. Book disc. ^hap. 10.
when the Kirk is corrupted, and all things out of order, place Ministers, and
restore the true service of the Lord, after the example of some godly Kings of
Iud^^, and diverse godly Emperors and Kings also in the light of the New
Testament; yet where the Ministry of the Kirk is once lawfully constituted, and
they that are placed, do their office faithfully, all godly Princes and
Magistrates ought to hear and obey their voice, and reverence the Majesty of
the Son of God speaking in them. Leave this juggling; who shall judge, when the
Church is corrupted; the Magistrates or Churchmen? if the Magistrates, why not
over you, as well as others? If the Churchmen, why not others as well as you?
here is nothing to be answered, but to beg the question, that they only are the
true Church. Hear another witness, in evil and troublesome times, and in a
lapsed state of affairs; when the order instituted by God in the Church, Theor
84, and ^5.
is degenerated to Tyranny, to the trampling upon the true Religion, and
oppressing the professors of it, when nothing is sound, the godly Magistrate
may do some things, which ordinarily are not lawful, etc. But ordinarily and
of common right, in Churches already constituted, if a man fly to the
Magistrate complaining that he is injured, by the abuse of Ecclesiastical
Discipline, or if the Sentence of the Presbyteries displease the Magistrate,
either in point of Discipline or of Faith, he must not therefore draw such
causes to a civil tribunal, nor introduce a Political Papacy. Ibidem.
And as the Magistrate has power in extraordinary causes, when the Church is
wholly corrupted, to reform Ecclesiastical abuses; so if the Magistrate shall
Tyrannize, over the Church, it is lawful to oppose him, by certain ways and
means, extraordinarily; how ever ordinarily not to be allowed. This is plain
dealing, the Magistrate cannot lawfully reform them, but in cases
extraordinary; and in cases extraordinary they may lawfully reform the
Magistrate, ^y means not to be ordin^rily allowed, that is by force of arms,
See the principles from whence all our miseries; and the loss of our gracious
Master, has flowed; and learn to detest them; They give the Magistrate the
custody of both Tables, Theo^. 48.
so they do give the same to themselves, they keep the second Table, by
admonishing him; he keeps the first Table by assisting them: they reform the
abuses, of the first Table by ordinary right, of the second Table
extraordinari^y. He reforms the abuses against the second Table; by ordinary
right: and the abuses against the first Table extraordinarily.

But can the Magistrate, according to their learning call the Sy^od to an
account for any thing they do, can he remedy the erto^rs of a Synod either in
Doctrine or Discipline? Theor. 97.
No, if Magistrates had power to change, or diminish, or restrain the Rights
of the Church; the Condition of the Church, should be worse, and their
Liberties less, under a Christian Magistrate, than under an Heathen. For (say
they) Parliaments and supreme Senates, are no more infallible th^n Synods,
Theor. 88.
and in matters of Faith and Discipline more apt to ^rre; And again, the
Magistrate is ^ot judge of Spiritual caus^s co^troverted in the Church. Theor.
82.
And if he decree any thing in such businesses; according to the wisdom of the
flesh, and not according to the rule of Gods Word, and the wisdom which is
from above, he must give an account of i^ unto God.

Theor. 82.
No, it is wickedness, If he do so far abuse his Authority, good Christians
must rather suffer extremities, th^^ obey him.

He may desire and procure a review in another National Synod, Theor. 91, 92.
that the matter may be lawfully determined by Ecclesiastical judgment. Yet
upon this condition, the notwithstanding the future review, the first sentence
of the Synod be executed without delay, This is one main branch of Popery, and
agrosse incrochment, upon the right of the Magistrate.

CHAP. III. That this Discipline robs the Magistrate of the last appeal of ^i^
Subjects.
England, if any man find himself grieved with the sentence o^ consistoriall
proceedings of a Bishop, or of his Officers, he may appeal from the highest
judicatory of the Church to the King i^ Chancery, who uses in that case to
grant Commissions under the great Seal, to Delegates expert in the Laws of the
Realm, wh^ have power to give him remedy, and to see Justice done. In Scotland
this would be taken in great scorn, as an high indignity upon the Commissioners
of Christ, to appeal from his Tribunal, to the judgment of a mortal man. 1582.
In the year 1582. King James by his Letter by his Messenger, the Master of
Requests, and by an Herald at Arms, A^^. Saint Andrews, 1532.
prohibited the Assembly at Saint Andrews to proceed in the case of one
Mongomery, and Mongomery himself appealed to Caesar, or to King and Council.
What did our new Matters upon this? They slighted the Kings Letter, his
Messenger, his Herald, reject^d the Appeal, as made to an incompetent Judge,
and proceeded most violently in the cause. About four years after this, Ass.
Saint Andrews, 15^^.
another Synod held at Saint Andrews, proceeded in like manner against the
Bishop of that Se^, for Voting in Parliament according to his conscience, and
for being suspected to have penned a Declaration, published by the King and
Parliament at the end of the Statutes; notwithstanding that he declined their
judicature, and appealed to the King and Parliament. When did any Bishops dare
to do such acts? There need no more instances, their Book of Discipline it
self being so full in the case, From the Kirk there is no reclamation, or
appellation, to any Judge Civil or Ecclesiastical, within the Realm.

CHAP. IV. That it exempts the Ministers from due Punishment.
THirdly, If Ecclesiastic Persons in their Pulpits or Assemblies, France to
some such seditious Sheba's, That if they would not let him alone in their
Pulpits, he would send them to preach in another climate. In the United
Provinces there want not examples of seditious Orators, who for controlling
their Magistrates too sawcily in the Pulpit, have been turned both out of their
Churches and Cities, without any fear of wresting Christ's Scepter out of his
hand. In Geneva it self, the correction of Ecclesiastical persons (qua tales,
Eccl. Ord. p 14.
) is expressly reserved to the Signiory. So much our Disciplinarians have
ou^-done their pattern, as the passionate writings of heady men outdo the
calmer decrees of a stayed Senate.

But the Ministers of Scotland have exempted themselves in this case from all
secular judgment, Declar 1581.
as King James (who knew them best of any man living) witnesses. They said, He
was an incompetent Judge in such cases, and that matters of the Pulpit ought to
be exempted from the judgment and correction of Princes. They themselves speak
plain enough. It is an absurd thing, that sundry of them, 2 Book disc. chap. 11.
(Commissaries) having no function of the Kirk, should be Judges to Ministers,
and depose them from their rooms. The reason holds as well against Magistrates
as Commissaries. To pass by the saucy and seditious expressions of Mr Dury, Mr
Mellvill, Mr B^lcanqu^ll, At Fdenb. 1567.
and their impunity. Mr James Gibson in his Sermon taxed the King for a
Persecutor, and threatened him with a curse, that he should die childless, and
be the last of his race; for which being convented before the Assembly, and not
appearing, he was only suspended during the pleasure of his brethren, (he
should have been suspended indeed, that is hanged.) But at another Assembly, in
August following, upon his all^gation, that his not appearing was out of his
tender care of the Rights of the Church, he was purged from his contumacy,
without once so much as acquainting his Majesty.

Master David Blake, 1596.
The case is famous of Mr David Blake Minister of St Andrews, who had said in
his Sermon, That the King had discovered the treachery of his heart, in
admitting the Popish Lords into the Country. That all Kings were the Devils
barns, that the Devil was in the Court, and in the guiders of it. And in his
prayer for the Queen, he used these words, We must pray for her for fashion
sake, but we have no cause, she will never do us any good. He said, that the
Queen of England (Queen Elizabeth) was an Atheist, that the Lords of the
Session were miscreants and bribers, that the Nobility were degenerated,
godless, dissemblers, and enemies to the Church, that the Council were holly
glasses, Cormorants and men of no Religion. I appeal to all the Estates in
Europe, what punishment could be severe enough for such audacious virulence?
The English Ambassador complains of it; Blake is cited before the Council. The
Commissioners of the Church plead, That it will be ill taken, to bring
Ministers in question upon such trifling delations, as inconsistent with the
liberties of the Church. They conclude, that a Declinatour should be used, and
a Protestation made against those proceedings, saying, It was Gods cause,
wherein they ought to stand to all haz^rds. Accordingly a Declinatour was
framed and presented. Blake desires to be remitted to the Presbytery, as his
Ordinary. The Commissioners send the Copy of the Declinatour to all the
Presbyteries, requiring them for the greater corroboration of their doings, to
subscribe the same, and to commend the cause in hand in their private and
public prayers to God, using their best credit with their flocks for the
maintenance thereof. The King justly incensed herewith, discharges the
Commissioners. Notwithstanding this Injunction, they stay still, and send
Delegates to the King, to represent the inconveniences that might ensue. The
King more desirous to decline their envy, than they his judgment, offers
peace. The Commissioners refuse it, and present an inso^ent Petition, which the
King rejects deservedly, and the cause was heard the very day that the Princes
Elizabeth (now Queen of Bohemia) was Christened. The witnesses were produced,
Mr Robert Ponte in the name of the Church makes a Pretestation. Blake presents
a second D^clinatour. The Council decree that the cause being treasonable, is
cognoscible before them. The good King still seeks peace, sends Messengers,
treats, offers to remit: but it is labor in vain. The Ministers answer
peremptorily by Mr Robert Bruce their Prolocutor, That the liberty of Christ's
Kingdom had received such a wound, by this usurpation of the Rights of the
Church, that if the lives of Mr Blake, and twenty others had been taken, it
would not have grieved the hearts of good people so much, as these injurious
proceedings. The King still woos and conferres. At last the matter is
concluded, That the King shall make a Declaration in favor of the Church, that
Mr Blake shall only make an acknowledgment to the Queen, and be pardoned: But
Mr Blake refuses to confess any fault, or to acknowledge the King and Council
to be any Judges of his Sermon. Hereupon he is convicted and sentenced to be
guilty of false and treasonable slanders, and his punishment referred to the
King. Still the King treats, makes Propositions unbeseeming his Majesty, once
or twice. The Ministers reject them, proclaim a Fast, raise ^ Tumult in
Edinburgh, Petition, prefer Articles. The King departs from ^he City,
removes his Courts of Justice, the people repent, the Ministers persist, and
seek to engage the Subjects in a Covenant for mutual Defense. One Mr Walsh in
his Sermon tells the people, That the King was possessed with a Devil, yea with
seven Devils; that the Subjects might lawfully rise and take the sword out of
his hands. The seditious encouraged from the Pulpit, send a Letter to the Lord
Hamilton to come and be their General. He nobly refuses, and shows their
Letter to the King. Hereupon the Mini^ters are sought for to be apprehended,
and fly into England. The Tumult is declared to be Treason by the Estates of
the Kingdom. I have urged this the more largely (yet as succinctly as I could)
to let the world see, what dangerous Subjects these Disciplinarians are, and
how inconsistent their principles be, with all orderly Societies.

CHAP. V. That it subjects the Supreme Magistrate to their Censures, etc.
1 Book di^c 7. head.
or the out-lawing of a Subject from the body politic^, Excommunication; that
very Engine, whereby the Popes of old advanced themselves above Emperors. To
discipline must all the Estates within this Realm be Subject; 2 Book disc.
Chap. 12.
as w^ll Rulers, as they tha^ are ruled. Theor. 8.
And elsewhere, All men, as well Magistrates, as Inferiors, ought to be subject
to the judgment of General Assembli^^. And yet again, No man that is in the
Church, ought to be exempted from Ecclesiastical Censures. What h orrid and
pernicious mischiefs do use to attend the Excommunication of Sovereign
Magistrates, I leave to every man's memory or imagination. Such cours^s make
great Kings become ciphers, and turn the tenure of ^ Crown Copyhold, ad
voluntatem Dominorum. Such Doctrines might better become some of the Roman
Alexanders, or B^nifaces, or Gregorius, or Pius Quintus, than such great
Prosessors of Humility, such great disclaimers of Authority, who have inveighed
so bitterly against the Bishops for their usurpations. This was never the
practice of any orthodox Bishop. St Ambrose is mistaken, what he did to
Theodosius was no act of Ecclesiastical jurisdiction, but of Christian
discretion. No, he was better grounded. David said, Against thee only have I
sinned, because he was a King. Our Disciplinarians abhor the name of
Authority, but hug the thing, their profession of Humility, is just like that
Cardinals hanging up of a Fishers Net in his Dining Room, to put him in mind of
his descent, but so soon as he was made Pope he took it down, saying, The Fish
was caught now, there was no more need of the Net.

CHAP. VI. That it robs the Magistrate of his Dispensative Power.
FIfthly, All supreme Magistrates do assume to themselves a etc. in which
cases, they say the offender ought to suffer death, as God has commanded. And,
If the life be spared, as it ought not to be to the offenders, etc. And, 1 Book
di^^ head 9.
the Magistrate ought to prefer Gods express commandment before his own
corrupt judgment, especially in punishing these crimes which he commands to
be punished with death. Ibid.
When the then Popish Earls of Angus, Huntley, and Erroll, Ass. Eden^. 1594.
Par. Ed. 1594.
were excommunicated by the Church, and forfeited for treasonable practices
against the King, it is admirable to read with what wisdom, and charity, and
sweetness his Majesty did seek from time to time to reclaim them from their
errors, and by their unfeigned conversion to the reformed Religion to prevent
their punishment. Wherein he had the concurrence of two Conventions of Estates,
the one at Falkland, the other at Dumfermling. And on the other side to see
with what bitterness and radicated malices they were prosecuted by the
Presbyteries, and their Commissioners, sometimes Petitioning, That they might
have no benefit of Law, as being excommunicated, Sometimes threatening, that
they were resolved to pursue them to the uttermost, though it should be with
the loss of all their lives in one day. That if they continued enemies to God
and his Truth, the Country should not brook both them and the Lords together.
Sometimes pressing to have their Estates confiscated, and their lives taken
away. Alleging for their ground, that by Gods Law they had deser^ed death. And
when the King urged that the bosom of the Church should be ever open to
penitent sinners, they answered, That the Church could not refuse their
satisfaction, if it was truly offered, but the King was obliged to do justice.
What do you think of those that roar out, Justice, Justice, now adays, whether
they be not the right spawn of these Bloud-suckers, Look upon the examples of
Cain, Esau, Ishmael, Antiochus, Antichrist, and tell me, if you ever find such
supercilious, cruel, bloodthirsty persons, to have been pious toward God, but
their Religion is commonly like themselves, stark naught, Cursed be their anger
for it was fierce, Gen' 49 ^
and their wrath, for it was cruel.

These are some of those encroachments which our Disciplinarians have made upon
the rights of all Supreme Magistrates, there be sundry others, which
especially concern the Kings of Great Britain, as the loss of his tenths,
first fruits, and patronages, and which is more than all these, the dependence
of his Subjects* by all which we see, that they have thrust out the Pope
indeed, but retained the Papacy. The Pope as well as they, and they as well as
the Pope, (neither barrel better Herrings,) do make Kings but half Kings, Kings
of the bodies, not of the souls of their Subjects: They allow them some sort of
judgment over Ecclesiastical persons, in their civil capacities, for it is
little (according to their rules) which ever is not Ecclesiastical, or may not
be reduced to Ecclesiastical. But over Ecclesiastic persons, as they are
Ecclesiastics, Vindicatiou of Commissioners: J^n. 6. 1648.
or in Ecclesiastical matters, they ascribe unto them no judgment in the
world. They say it cannot stand with the Word of God, that no Christian Prince
ever claimed, nor can claim to himself such a power, If the Magistrate will be
contented to wave his Power in Ecclesiastical matters, and over
Ecclesiastical persons, (as they are such,) and give them leave to do what
they list, and say what they list in their Pulpits, in their Consistories, in
their Synods, and permit them to rule the whole Commonwealth, in order to the
advancement of the Kingdom of Christ. If he will be contented to become a
subordinate Minister to their Assemblies, to see their decrees executed, then
it may be they will become his good Masters, and permit him to enjoy a part of
his civil power. When Sovereigns are made but accessaries, and inferiors do
become principals, when stronger obligations are devised, than those of a
Subject to his Sovereign, it is time for the Magistrate to look to himself,
these are prognostics of ensuing storms, the avaunt curriers of seditious
tumults. When Supremacy lights into strange and obscure hands, it can hardly
contain it self within any bounds. Before our Disciplinarians be well warmed in
their Ecclesiastical Supremacy, they are beginning, or rather they have
already made a good progress in the invasion of the temporal Supremacy also.

CHAP. VII. That the Disciplinarians cheat the Magistrate of his Civil Power
in order to Religion.
THat is their sixth incroachment upon the Magistrate, and the vertical 1 Book
disc. 7 he^d. 2 Book disc. Chap. 7.
as fraud in bargaining, false weights and measures, oppressing one another,
etc. and in the case of Ministers, bribery, pe^jury, theft, fighting, usury,
etc.

Secondly, Consider that all offenses whatsoever are made cognoscible in their
Consistories, in case of scandal, yea even such as are punishable by the
civil Sword with death: If the civil Sword foolishly spare the life of the
offender, yet may not the Kirk be negligent in their office, which is to
excommunicate the wicked.

Thirdly, 1 Book disc. 9 h^ad and Theor. 6^.
They ascribe unto their Ministers a liberty and power to direct the
Magistrate, even in the Managerie of civil Affairs: To govern the
Commonwealth, and to establish civil Laws is proper to the Magistrate: To
interpret the Word of God, and from thence to show the Magistrate his duty, how
he ought to govern the Commonwealth, and how he ought to use the Sword, Theor.
47, 48.
is comprehended in the office of the Minister, for the holy Scripture is
profitable to show what is the best government of the Commonwealth. And again
all the duties of the second Table as well as the first, between King and
Subject, Parents and Children, Vindicat. com. p. 6.
Husbands and Wives, Masters and servants, etc. are in difficult cases a
subject of cognizance and judgment to the Assemblies of the Kirk.Thus they are
risen up from a judgment of direction, to a judgment of Jurisdiction, And if
any persons, Magistrates or others, dare act contrary to this judgment of the
Assembly, Solemn acknowl^dgem^^^. October. 6 1648.
(as the Parliament and Committee of Estates did in Scotland, in the late
expedition) they make it to be an unlawfu^l engagement, a sinfu^l War, contrary
to the Testimonies of Gods servants, and decree the parties so offending, to be
suspended from the communion, and from their offices in the Kirk. I confess
Ministers do well to exhort Christians to be care^ull, honest, industrious in
their special callings: but for them to meddle pragmatically with the
mysteries of particular Trad^s, and much more with the mysteries of State,
which never came within the compass of their shallow capacities, is a most
audacious insolence, and an insufferable presumption. They may as well teach
the Pilot how to steer his course in a tempest, or the Physician how to cure
the distempers of his patient.

But their high^st cheat is that Jesuiticall invention, (in ordi^ ad
spiritualia,) they assume a power in worldly affairs indirectly, and in order
to the advancement of the Kingdom of Christ. Theor. 6^. vindication. ^.5*
The Ecclesiastical Ministry is conversant spiritually about civil things.
Again must not duties to God whereof the securing of Religion is a main one,
have the Supreme and first place, duties to the King a subordinate and second
place? The case was this. The Parliament levied forces to ^ree their Kings out
of prison. A meet civil duty. But the Commissioners of the Assembly declare
against it, unless the King will first give assurance under hand and seal, by
solemn oath, that he will establish the Covenant, the Presbyterian Discipline,
etc. in all his Dominions, and never endeavor any change thereof, least
otherwise his liberty might bring their bygone proceedings about the League and
Covenant into question, there is their power in ordine ad spiritualia. Humble
advise Edenb. (...) 10. 1648.:
The Parliament will restore to the King his negative voice. A mere civil
thing. The Commissioners of the Church oppose it, because of the great dangers
that may thereby come to Religion. The Parliament name Officers and Commanders
for the Army. A mere civil thing. The Church will not allow them, because they
want such qualifications as Gods word requires, that is to say in plain terms,
because they were not their confidents. Was there ever Church challenged such
an omnipotence as this? Nothing in this world is so civil or political, wherein
they do not interest themselves, in order to the advancement of the kingdom of
Christ.

Upon this ground their Synod enacted, that no Scottish merchants should from
thenceforth traffic in any of the dominions of the King of Spain, A^s. D^^b.
1598.
until his Majesty had procured from that King some relaxation of the rigor of
the Inquisition, upon pain of excommunication. As likewise that the Monday
market at Ed^nburgh should be abolished, It seems they thought it ministered
some occasion to the breach of the Sabba^h. The Merchants petitioned the King
to maintain the liberty of their trade, He grants their request but could not
protect them, for the Church prosecuted the poor merchants with their censuers,
until they promised to give over the Spanish trade, so soon as they had
perfected their accounts, and paid their Creditors in those parts.

But the Shoemakers, who were most interested in the Monday markets with their
tumults and threatenings comp^lled the Ministers to retract, whereupon it
became a jest in the City, that the Souters could obtain more at the Ministers
hands than the King. So they may meddle with the Spanish trade or Monday
markets, or any thing in order to Religion.

Upon this ground they assume to themselves a power to ratify Acts of
Parliament, So the assembly at Edinburgh enacted, That the Acts made in the
Parliament at Edinburgh the 24 of August 1560, (without either Commission or
Proxy from their Sovereign,) touching Religion, Ass. Edenb. 1597.
etc. should have the force of a public Law: And that the said Parliament, so
far as concerned Religion, should be maintained by them, etc. and be ratified
by the first Parialment that should happen to be kept within the Realm. See how
bo^d they make with Kings and Parliaments, in order to Religion. I cannot omit
that famous summons which this Assembly sent out, not only to entreat, but to
admonish ^ll persons truly professing the Lord Jesus within the Realm, as well
Noblemen as Barons and those of other estates, to meet and give their personal
appearance at Edinburgh the 20 of July ensui^g, for giving their advice and
concurrence in matters then to be proponed, especially for purging the Realm of
Popery, establishing the policy of the Church, and restoring the patrimony
thereof to the just possessours. Assuring such as did absent themselves that
they should be esteemed dissimulate professors, unworthy of the fe^lowship of
Christ's flock, who thinks your Scottish Disciplinarians know not how to ruffle
it?

Upon this ground they assume a power to abrogate and invalidate Laws and Acts
of Parliament, if they seem disadvantagious to the Church. Church Assemblies
have power to abrogate and abolish all statutes and ordinances concerning
Ecclesiastical matters, a Book disc. chapter 7.
that are found noysom and unprofitable, and agree not with the times, or are
abused by the people. So the Acts of Parliament 1584* at the very same time
that they were proclaimed, were protesied against at the market cross of
Edinburgh by the Ministers, in the name of the ^irk of Scotland. Vindication
page 11. p 10.
And a little before, whatsoever be the Treason o^ i^ pugni^g the authority of
Parliament, it can be no Treason to obey God rather than man. Neither did the
General assembly of Glasgow 1638, etc. commit any treason, when they impugned
Epis^opacy, and Perth-Ar^icles, although ratified by Acts of Parliament, and
standing laws then unrepealed. He says so far true, than we ought rather to
obey God than man, that is, to suffer when we cannot act; but to impugn the
authority of a lawful Magistrate, is neither to obey God nor man. God commands
us to die innocent rather than live nocent, they teach us rather to live nocent
than die innocent. Away with these seeds of sedition, these rebllious
principles, Our Master Christ has left us no such warrant, and the unsound
practice of an obscure Conventicle is no safe pattern. The King was surprised at
Ruthen by a company of Lords and other conspirators; this fact was as plain
Treason as could be imagined, and so it was declared; (I say declared not made)
in Parliament. 1582.
Yet an Assembly General (no man gain saying) did justify that Treason in
order to Religion as good and acceptable service to God, 1583.
their Sovereign, Ass. Edenb. 1582.
and native Country, requiring the Ministers in all their Churches to commend
it to the people, and exhort all men to concur with the actors, as they
tendered the glory of God, the full deliverance of the Church, and perfect
reformation of the Commonwealth, threatening all those who subscribed not to
their judgment with Excommunication. We see this is not the first time that
Disciplinarian Spectacles have made abominable Treason to seem Religion, if it
serve for the advancement of the good Cause. And if were well if they could
rest here, or their zeal to advance their Ecclesiastical Sovereignty, by
force of Arms, and effusion of Christian blood, would confine it self within
the limits o^ Scotland: No, those bounds are too narrow for their pragmaticall
spirits: Sept. 27. 1648. Ar. 3.
And for bus^e Bishops in other men's Diocesses, see the Articles of Sterling,
That the securing and settling Religion at home, and promoting the work of
Reformation abroad, in England and Ireland, be referred to the determination of
the General Assembly (of the Kirk) or their Commissioners. What, is old
Edinburgh turned new Rome, and the old Presbyters young Cardinals, and their
Consistory a Conclave, and their Committees a Juncto for propagating the faith?
Themselves stand most in need of Reformation; If there be a mote in the eye of
our Church, there is a beam in theirs. Neither want we at home God be praised,
those who are a thousand times fitter for learning, for piety, for discretion,
to be reformers, then a few giddy innovators. This I am sure, since they
undertook our cure against our wills, they have made many fat Churchyards in
England. Nothing is more civil, or essential to the Crown, then the Militia,
or power of raising Arms: Yet we have seen in the attempt at Ruthen, in their
Letter to the Lord Hamilton, in their Sermons, Theor. 84.
what is their opinion. They insinuate as much in their Theorems, It is lawful
to resist the Magistrate by certain extraordinary ways or means, not to be
ordinarily allowed. It were no difficult task out of their private Authors, to
justify the barbarous acts that have been committed in England. But I shall
hold my self to their public actions and records. A mutinous company of
Citizens forced the gates of Halyrood-house, to search for a Priest, and
plunder at their plrasure. A^n. 1562.
M. Knox was charged by the Council to have bin the author of the sedition;
and further, to have convocated his M^jesties Subjects by Letters missiv^ when
he pleased. He answered, that he was no preache^ of Rebellion, but taught
people to obey their Princes in the Lord; [I se^^ he t^ught them likewise, that
he and they were the compet^nt judges what is obedience in the Lord. Ass.
Edenburg; 1593.
] He confessed his convocating of the Subjects by virtue of a command form the
Church, to advertise the brethren when he saw a ^ecessity of their meeting,
especially if he perceived Religion to be in peril. Take another instance, The
Assembly having received an answer from the King, about the trial of the
Popish Lords; not to their contentment, resolve all to convene in Arms at the
place appointed for the trial; whereupon some were left at Edinburgh to give
timely advertisement to the rest. The King at his return gets notice of it,
calls the Ministers before him, shows them what an undutifull part it was in
them to levy Forces, and draw his Subjects into Arms without his warrant. The
Ministers pleaded, That it was the cause of God, in defense whereof they could
not be deficient. This is the Presbyterian wont, to subject all causes and
persons to their Consistories, to ratify and abolish civil Laws, to confirm
and pull down Parliaments, to levy Forces, to invade other Kingdoms, to do any
thing respectively to the advancement of the good cause, and in order to
Religion.

CHAP. VIII. That the Disciplinarians challenge this exorbitant Power by Divine
Right.
BEhold both Swords spiritual and temporal in the hands of the Presbytery,
the one ordinarily by common right, the other extraordinarily; the one
belonging directly to the Church, the other indirectly; the one of the Kingdom
of Christ, the other for his Kingdom, in order to the propagation of Religion.
See how these hoc as pocases with stripping up their sleeves and professions of
plain-dealing, with declaiming against the tyranny of Prelates, under the
pretense of humility and Ministerial duty, have wrested the Scepter out of the
hand of Majesty, and jugled themselves into as absolute a Papacy, as ever was
within the walls of Rome. O savior, behold thy Vicars, and see whither the
pride of the servants of thy servants is ascended. Now their Consistories are
become the Tribunalls of Christ. That were strange indeed I Christ has bet one
Tribunal, his Kingdom is not of this world. Their determinations pass for
the Santence of Christ. Alas there is too much fiction, and passion, and
ignorance in their Presbyteries. Their Synodall Acts go for the Laws of
Christ. His Laws are immutable, mortal man may not persume to alter them, or
to add to them; but these men are chopping and changing their constitutions
every day. Their Elders must be looked upon as the commissioners of Christ. It
is impossible! Geneva was the first City where this discipline was hatched;
though since it has lighted into hucksters hands. In those days they
magnified the platform of Geneva, for the pattern she^ed in the mount. But
there, the Presbyters at their admission take an oath, to observe the
Ecclesiastical Ordinances of the small, great, and general Councels of that
City. Can any man be so stupid, as to think, that the high Commissioners of
Christ swear fealty to the Burgers of Geneva? Now forsooth their Discipline is
become the Scepter of Christ, the Eternal Gospel. (See how success exalts
men's desires and demands.) In good time, where did this Scepter lie hid for
1500 years, that we cannot find the least footsteps of it in the meanest
village of Christendom? This world draws toward an end; was this discipline
fitted and contrived for the world to come? Or how should it be the Eternal
Gospel? When every man sees how different it is from it self, in all
Presbyterian Churches, adapted and accommodated to the civil policy of each
particular place where it is admitted, except only Scotland, where it comes in
like a Conqueror, and makes the Civil Power stoop and strike top sail to it.
Certainly, if it be the Gospel, it is the fifth Gospel, for it has no kindred
with the other four. There is not a Text which they wrest against Episcopacy,
but the Independants may with as much color of reason, and truth, urge it
against their Presbyteries. Where does the Gospel distinguish between temporary
and perpetual Rulers? Between the Government of a person, and of a
corporation? There is not a Text which they produce for their Presbytery, but
may with much more reason be alleged for Episcopacy, and more agreeable to the
analogy of faith, to the perpe^uall practice and belif of the Catholic
Church, to the concurrent Expositions of all Interpreters, and to the other
Texts of holy Scrip^u^e; for until this new model was yesterday devised, none
of those Texts were ever so understood. When the practice ushers in the
doctrine, it is very suspicious, or rather evident, that the Scripture was not
the rule of their reformation, but their subsequent excuse. This ( jure devino)
is that which makes their sore incurable, themselves incorrigible, that they
father their own brat upon God Almighty, and make this Mushrome which sprung
but up the other night, to be of heavenly d^scent. It is just like the doctrine
of the Pop^s infallibility, which shu^s the door against all hope of remedy.
How should they be brought to reform their errors, who bel^eve they cannot
err, or they be brought to renounce their drowsy dreams, who take it for
granted, that they are divine revelations!

(...) 1596.
And yet when that wise Prince, King James, a little before the National
Assembly at Perth, published in print 55 Articles or Questions, concerning the
uncertainty of this Discipline, and the vanity of their pretended plea of
divine right, and concerning the errors and abuses crept into it, for the
better preperation of all men to the ensuing Synod, that Ministers might study
the point beforehand, and speak to the purpose; they who stood effected to that
way were extremely perplexed. To give a particular account, they knew well it
was impossible; but their chifest trouble was, that their foundation of divine
right, which they had given out all this while to be a solid rock, should come
now to be questioned for a shaking quagmire. And so without any opposition they
yielded the bucklers. Thus it continued until these unhappy troubles, when
they started aside again like broken bows. This plant thrives better in the
midst of tumults, then in the times of peace and tranquillity. The Elm which
supports it, is a factio^^ multitude, but a prudent and courageous Magistrate
nips it i^ the bud.

CHAP. IX. That this Discipline makes a monster of the Commonwealth,
WE have seen how pernicious this Discipline (as it is maintained in Scotland,
and endeavored to be introduced into England by the Covenant,) is to the
supreme Magistrate, how it robs him of his Supremacy in Ecclesiastical
affairs, and of the last appeals of his own Subjects, that it exempts the
Presbyters from the power of the Magistrate, and subjects the Magistrate to the
Presbyters, that it restraines his dispensative power of pardoning, deprives
him of the dependence of his Subjects, that it does challenge and usurp a power
paramount both of the word and of the Sword, both of Peace and War, over all
Courts and Estates, over all Laws Civil and Ecclesiastical, in order to the
advencement of the Kingdom of Christ, whereof the Presbyters alone are
consti^^ted rulers by God, and all this by a pretended divine right, which
takes away all hope of remedy, until it be hissed out of the world; in a word,
that it is the top-branch of Popery, a greater tyranny, then ever Rome was
guilty of. It remains to show how disadvantagious it is also to the Subject.

First, to the Commonwealth in general, which it makes a Monster, like an
Amphishbaina, or a Serpent wi^h two heads, one at either end. It makes a
coordination of Sovereignty in the same Society, two supermes in the same
Kingdom or State, the one Civil, the other Ecclesiastical, then which nothing
can be more pernicious, either to the consciences, or the estates of Subjects,
when it falls out (as it often does) that from these two heads issue contrary
commands, 1 Cor. 1.^.
If the Trumpet give an uncertain sound, who shall prepare himself to the
battle? Much more when there are two Trumpets, and the one sounds an Alarm, the
other a Retreat. What should the poor Soldier do in such a case? or the poor
Subject in the other case? If he obey the Civil Magistrate; he is sure to be
excommunicated by the Church; if he obey the Church, he is sure to be
imprisoned by the Civil Magistrate; What shall become of him? 1 Kings ^, ^^^
I know no remedy, but according to Solomon's sentence, the living Subject must
be divided into two, and the one half given to the one, and the other half to
the other. For the Oracle of Truth has said, that one man cannot serve two
masters. But in Scotland every man must serve two Masters, and (which is worse)
many times disagreeing Masters. At the same time the Civil Magistrate has
command^d the Feast of the Nativity of our Savior to be observed, and the
Church has forbidden it. At the same time the King has summoned the Bishops
to sit and Vote in Parliament, and the Church has forbidden them.

In the year 1582. 158^^
Monsieur-le-mot, a Knight of the Order of the Holy Ghost, with an associate,
were sent Ambassadors from France into Scotland. The Ministers of Edinburgh
approving not his Message, (though merely Civil,) inveigh in their Pulpits
bitterly against him, calling his White Cross the badge of Antichrist, and
himself the Ambassador of a Murderer. The King was ashamed, but did not know
how to help it; The Ambassadors were discontented, and desired to be gone: The
King willing to preserve the ancient Amity between the two Crowns, and to
dismiss the Ambassadors with content, Febr. 16^
requires the Magistrates of Edinburgh to feast them at their departure; At
Saint Gil^^ Church.
so they did; But to hinder this feast, upon the Sunday preceding, the
Ministers proclaim a ^ast to be kept the same day the Feast was appointed; and
to detain the people all day at Church; the three Preachers make three
Sermons, one after another without intermission, thundering out curses against
the Magistrates and Noblemen which waited upon the Ambassadors by the Kings
appointment. Neither stayed they here, but pursued the Magistrates with the
censures of the Church, for not observing the Fast by them proclaimed; and with
much difficulty were wrought to abstain from Excommunicating of them; which
censure, how heavy it falls in Scotland, you shall see by and by. To come yet
nearer, the late Parliament in Scotland enjoined men to take up Arms for
delivery of their King out of prison; The Commissioners for the Assembly
disallowed it; and at this present how many are chased out of their Country?
How many are put to public repentance in sackcloth? how many are
excommunicated, for being obedient to the Supreme Judicatory of the Kingdom,
that is, King and Parliament? Miserable is the condition of that people where
there is such clashing and interfereing of Supreme Judicatories and
Authorities. If they shall pretend that this was no free Parliament: First,
they affirm that which is not true; either that Parliament was free, or what
will become of the rest? Secondly, this plea will advantage them nothing; for
(which is all one with the former) thus they make themselves Judges of the
validity o^ invaidity of Parliaments.

CHAP. X. That this Dicipline is most prejudicial to the Parliament.
FRom the Essential body of the Kingdom we are to proceed to the
representative body, which is the Parliament. We have already seen, how it
attributes a power to National Synods to restrain Parliaments, and to abrogate
their Acts, if they shall judge them prejudicial to the Church. We need no
other instance, to show what small account Presbyteries do make of Parliaments,
then the late Parliament in Scotland. Not withstanding that the Parliament had
declared their resolution to levy forces vigorously, and that the^ did expect
as well from the Synods and Presbyteries, as from all other his Majecties good
Sujects, a ready obedience to the commands of Parliament, and Committee of
Estates. The Commissioners of the Assembly not satisfied herewith, (...)
do not only make their proposalls, that the grounds of the War and the
breaches of the Peace might be cleared, that the union of the Kingdoms might
be preserved, that the popish and prelaticall party might be suppressed, that
his Majesty's offers concerning Religion might be declared unsatisfactory, that
before his Majesty's restitution to the exercise of his Royal power, he shall
first engage, himself by solemn Oath under his hand and Seal, to pass Acts for
the settlement of the Covenant and Presbyterian Government in all his
Dominions, etc. And never to oppos^ them, or endeavor the Change of them, (An
usurer will trust a bankrupt upon easier terms, then they will do their
Sovereign,) and lastly, that such persons only might be entrusted, as had
given them no cause of jealousy, (which had been too much, and more then any
Astates in Europe will take in good part from half a dozen Ministers. De^la^.
) But afterward by their public Declaration to the whole Kirk and Kingdom,
set forth that not being satisfied in these particulars, they do plainly
dissent and disagree, and declare that they are clearly persuaded in their
consciences, that the Engagement is of dangerous consequence to true Religion,
prejudicial to the Liberty of the Kirk, favorable to the Malignant party,
inconsistent with the union of the Kingdom; Contrary to the word of God and the
Covenant, wherefore they cannot allow either Ministers or any other whatsoever
to concur and cooperate in it, and trust that they will keep themselves free
in this business, and choose affliction rather then iniquity. And to say the
Truth, they made their word good. For by their power over the Churchmen, and
by their influence upon the people, and by threatening all those who engaged in
that action with the censures of the Church, they retarded the Levies, they
deterred all preachers from accompanying the Army to do divine offices. And
when Saint Peter's keys would not serve the turn, they made use of Saint Paul's
sword, and gathered the country together in arms at Machleene-Moore to oppose
the expedition.

So if the high court of Parliament will set up Persbytery, they must resolve
to introduce an higher court then themselves, which will overtop them for
eminency of authority, for extent of power, and greatness of privileges, that
is, a National Synod.

First for authority, the one being acknowledged to be but an humain
convention, the other affirmed confidently to be a divine institution. The one
sitting by virtue of the Kings writ, the other by virtue of Gods writ. The one
as Councellers of the Prince, the other as Ambassadors and Vicars of the Son
of God. The one as Burgesses of Corporations, the other as Commissioners of
Jesus Christ. The one judging by the law of the land, the other by the holy
Scriptures. The one taking care for this temporal life, the other for eternal
life.

Secondly for power, as Curtius says, ubi multitudo vana religione capta ^st,
melius vatibus s^uis quam ducibus paret, where the multitude is led with
superstition, they do more readily obey their Prophets then their Magistrates.
Have they not reason? Pardon us O Magistrate, thou threatenst us with prison,
they threaten us with hell fire. Thy sentence deprives us of civil protection,
and the benefit of the law, so does theirs indirectly, and withal makes us
strangers to the commonwealth of Israel. Thou can outlaw us, or horn us, and
confiscate our estates, their keys do the same also by consequence, and
moreover deprive us of the prayers of the Church, and the comfortable use of
the blessed Sacrament. Thou can deliver us to a Pursevant, or commit us to
the Black Rod, they can deliver us over to Satan, and commit us to the prince
of darkness.

Thirdly for privileges, the privileges of Parliament extend not to treason,
felony, or breach of peace, but they may talk treason, and act treason in
their pulpits and Synods without controlment. They may securely commit not
only petilar^iny but Burglary, and force the doors of the palace Royal. They
may not only break the peace, but convocate the Subjects in arms, yea give
warrant to a particular person, to conveen them by his letters missives,
according to his discretion, in order to religion. Of all which we have seen
instances in this discourse. The privileges of Parliaments are the Graces and
Concessions of man, and may be taken away by humane Authority, but the
privileges of Synods they say are from God, and cannot without Sacrilege be
taken away by mortal man. The two Houses of Parliament cannot name
Commissioners to sit in the intervalls, and take care ne quid detrimenti capi
at res^ publica, that the Commonwealth receive no prejudice; But Synods have
power to name vicars General, or Commissioners, to sit in the intervalls of
Synods, and take order that neither King nor Parliament nor people do incroach
upon the Liberties of the Church. If there be any thing to do, they are (like
the fox in Aesops fables,) sure to be in at one end of it.

Sco^t (...) page 57.58.
CHAP. XI. That this Discipline is oppressive to particular persons.
Toward particular persons this Discipline is too full of rigor* 1 ^o^ok dis.
7. head.
like Dracos laws that were written in blood. First in lesser faults,
inflicting Church censures upon slight grounds, As for an uncomely gesture, for
a vain word, for suspicion of covetousness or pride, for superfluity in
raiment, either for cost or fashon, for keeping a table above a man's calling or
means, for dancing at a wedding, or of servants in the streets, for wearing a
man's hair ala mode, for not paying of debts, for using the least recreation
upon the Sabbath, though void of scandal, and consistent with the duties of
the day. I wish they were acquainted with the practice of all other Protestant
Countries. But if they did but see one of those kirmess^s which are observed in
some places, the pulpit, the consistory, the whole Kingdom would not be able to
hold them. What dig^adiations have there been among some of their sect about
starch and cuffes, etc. just like those grave debates which were sometimes
among the Franciscans, about the color and fashion of their gowns? They do not
allow men a latitude of discre^ion in any thing. All men, even their Superiors
must be their slaves or pupils. It is true they begin their censures with
admonition, and if a man will confess himself a delinquent, be sorry for
giving the Presbyters any offense, and conform himself in his hair, apparel,
diet, every thing, to what these rough hewn Cato's shall prescribe, he may
escape the stool of repentance, otherwise they will proceed against him for
contumacy, to Excommunication.

Secondly this discipline is oppressive in greater faults. The same man is
punished twice for the same crime, first by the Magistrate according to the
laws of God and the land, for the offense: then by the censures of the Church
for the scandal. Theor, 63.
To this agrees their Synod, Nothing forbids the same fault in the same man to
be punished one way by the political power, another way by the
Ecclesiastical; by that under the formallity of a crime with Corporal or
pecu^iary punishment, by this under the formallity of scandal with spiritual
censures. 1 Book 9 ^ead Page 44.
And their book of discipline, If the civil sword foolishly spare the life of
the offender, yet may not the Kirk be negligent in their office. Thus their
Liturgy in express terms, All crimes which by the law of God deserve death,
Sco^* lit. 4^.
deserve also excommunication, 47.
Yea though an offender abide an assise, and be absolved by the same, yet may
the Church enjoin him public satisfacti^^, Or if the Magistrate shall not
think fit in his judgment, or cannot in conscience prosecute the party upon
the Churches intimation, the Church may admonish the Magistrate publicly. And
if to remedy be found, excommunicate the offender, first for his crime, and
then for being suspected to have corrupted the judge. Observe first that by
hook or crook they will bring all crimes whatever great and small, within their
Jurisdiction. Secondly observe that a delinquents trial for his life is no
sufficient satisfaction to these third Cato's. Lastly, observe that to satisfy
their own humor, they care not how they blemish publicly the reputation of the
Magistrate upon frivolous conjectures.

Thirdly, add to this which has been said, the severity and extreme rigor
of their Excommunication, 1 Book dis. 7. hea^.
after which sentence no person (his wife and family only excepted) may have
any kind of conversation with him that is excommunicated, they may not eat
with him, nor drink with him, nor buy with him, nor sell with him, they may not
salute him, nor speak to him, [except it be by the license of the Presbytery,]
His children begotten and born after that sentence, and before his
reconciliation to the Church, may not be amitted to baptism, until they be of
age to require it, or the mother or some special frind being a member of the
Church present the child, obhorring and damning the iniquity and obstinate
contempt of the Father. Add further that upon this sentence letters of horning
(as they use to call them in Scotland) do follow of course, that is an
outlawing of the praty, a confiscation of his goods, a putting him out of the
Kings protection, 79. Arti^l. 1599.
so as any man may kil^ him, and be unpunished; yea, the party excommunicate is
not so much as cited to hear th^se fatal Letters granted. Had not David reason
to pray, Let me fall into the hands of the Lord, not into the hands of men, for
their mercies are cruel. Cruill indeed, that when a man is prosecuted for his
life, prehaps justly, prehaps, unjustly, so as appearing and hanging are to him
in effect the same thing; yet if he appear not, this pitiful Church will
Excommunicate him for contumacy: Whether the offender be convict in judgment,
Scot. Lit. 47
or be fugitive from the Law, the Church ought to proceed to the sentence of
Excommunication; as if the just and evident fear of death did not purge away
contumacy.

CHAP. XII. That this Discipline is hurtful to all orders of men.
LAstly, this Discipline is burdensome and disanvantagious to all orders of
men. The Nobility and Gentry must expect to follow the fortune of their Prince.
Upon the abatement of, Monarchy in Rome, remember what dismal controversies
did presently spring up between the Patricii and Plebei. They shall be
subjected to the censures of a raw heady novice, and a few ignorant Artificers;
they shall lose all their advowsons of such Benefices as have cure of souls,
as they have lately found in Scotland, for every Congregation ought to choose
their own Pastor. They shall hazard their Appropriations and Abby-lands: A
Sacrilege which their National Synod cannot in conscience tolerate, longer
than they have strength sufficient to overthrow it. And if they proceed as they
begin, the Presbyters will in a short time either accomplish their design, or
change their soil. They shall be bearded and maited by every ordinary
Prisbyter, witness that insolent speech of M. Robert Bruce to King James, Sir,
I see your resolution is to take Huntley in favor; if you do, I will oppose;
You shall choose whether you will lose Huntley or me; for us both you cannot
keep. It is nothing with them for a pedant to put himself into the balance
with one of the prime and most powerful peers of the Realm.

The poor Orthodox Clergy in the mean time shall be undone, their straw shall
be taken from them, and the number of their bricks be doubled: They shall lose
the comfortable assurance of an undoubted succession by Episcopal Ordination,
and put it to a dangerous question, whether they be within the pale of the
Church: They shall be reduced to ignorance, contempt, and beggary; They shall
lose an ancient Liturgy, (warranted in the most parts of it by all, in all
parts of it, by the most public forms of the Protestant Churches, whereof a
short time may produce a parallel to the view of the world,) and be enjoined to
prate and pray nonsense everlastingly. For howsoever formerly they have had a
Liturgy of their own, as all other Christian Churches have at this day; yet now
it seems they allow no prayers, but extemporary. So says the information from
Scotland, It is not Lawful for a man to tie himself, Motus B^^^nici (...)
or be tied by others, to a perscript form of words in prayer and exhortation.

Parents shall lose the free disposition of their own children in marriage if
the child desire an husband or a wife, 1 Book dis. 9 hea^.
and the parent gainstand their request, and have no other cause than the
common of men have, to wit lack of goods, or because the other party is not of
birth high enough, upon the childs desire, the Minister is to travail with the
parents, and if he find no just cause to the contrary, may admit them to
marriage. For the work of God ought not to be hindered by the corrupt
affections of worldly men. They who have stripped the father of their Country
of his just right, may make bold with fathers of families, and will not stick
to exclude all other fathers, but themselves out of the fifth Commandment. The
doctrine is very high, but their practice is yet much more high, The
Presbyteries will compel the wronged parent to give that child as great a
portion as any of his other children.

It will be ill news to the Lawyers to have the moulter taken away from their
Mills upon pretense of scandal, or in order to Religion, to have their
sentences repealed by a Synod of Presbyters, and to receive more prohibitions
from Ecclesiastical Courts, than ever they sent thither.

All Masters and mistresses of families, of what age or condition soever, 1
Book dis. 9 he^d.
must come once a year before the Presbyter, with their households, to be
examined personally whether they be fit to receive the Sacrament, in respect of
their knowledge, and otherwise. And if they suffer their children or servants
to continue in wilful ignorance (what if they cannot help it?) they must be
excommunicated. It is probable, the persons catechized could often better
instruct their Catechists.

The common people shall have an High Commission in every parish, and groan
under the Arbitrary decrees of ignorant unexperienced Governors, who know no
Law but their own wills, who observe no order but what they list; from whom
lies no appeal but to a Synod, which for the shortness of its continuance can
afford, which for the condition of the persons will afford them little relif.
If there arise a private jar between the parent and the child, or the husband
and the wife, these domestical Judges must know it, and censure it. Scire
volunt secreta domus, atque inde timeri


And if there have been any suit or difference between the Pastor and any of
his flock, or between Neighbor and Neighbor, be sure it will not be forgotten
in the sentence. The practice of our Law has been, that a Judge was rarely
permitted to ride a circuit in his own country, least private interest or
respects might make him partial. Yet a Country is much larger than a Parish,
and a grave learned Judge is presumed to have more temper than such homebred
fellows. Thus we see what a Pandoras box this pretended holy Discipline is,
full of manifold mischiefs, and to all orders of men most pernicious.

CHAP. XIII. That the Covenant to introduce this Discipline is void and wicked,
with a short Conclusion.
BUt yet the conscience of an Oath sticks deep. Some will plead, that they have
made a Covenant with God, for the introduction of this Disciplne. Oaths and
Vows ought to be made with great judgment and broken with greater. My next
task therefore must be to demonstrate this clearly, that this Covenant is not
binding, but merely void, and not only void but wicked; so as it is necessary
to break it, and impious to observe it.

The first thing that cracks the credit of this new Covenant is, that it was
devised by strangers, to the dishonor of our Nation, imposed by Subjects, who
wanted requisite power upon their Sovaraign and fellow subjects, extorted by
just fear of unjust sufferings. So as I may truly say of many who took this
Covenant, that they sinned in pronouncing the words with their lips, but never
consented with their hearts to make any vow to God.

Again, error and deceit make those things voluntary to which they are
incident, espcially when the error is not merely negative by way of
conce^lement of truth, when a man knows not what he does, but positive, when
he believes he does one thing, and does the clean contray, and that not about
some inconsiderable accidents, but about the substantial conditions. As if a
Physician, either out of ignorance or malice, should give his Patient a deadly
poison under the name of a cordial, and bind him by a solemn oath to take it,
the Oath is void, necessary to be broken, unlawful to be k^pt; if the patient
had known the truth, that it was no cordial, that it was poison, he would not
have sworn to take it: Such an error there is in the Covenant with a witness,
to gull men with a strange, unknown, lately devised platform of Discipline,
most pernicious to the King and Kingdom, as if it were the very institution of
Christ, of high advantage to the King and Kingdom, to gull them with that
Covenant which King James did sometimes take, as if that and this were all one,
whereas that Covenant issued out by the Kings Authority, this Covenant without
his Authority, against his Authority; that Covenant was for the Laws of the
Realm, this is against the Laws of the Realm; that was to maintain the
Religion established, this to overthrow the Religion established: But because I
will not ground my Discourse upon any thing that is disputable, either in
matter of Right, or Fact; And in truth, because I have no need of them, I
forgive them these advantages, only with this gentle memento, That when other
foreign Churches, and the Church of Soctland it self (as appears by their
public Liturgy used in those days) did sue for aid and assistance from the
Crown and Kingdom of England, they did not go about to obtrude their own
Discipline upon them, but left them free to choose for themselves.

The grounds which follow are demonstrative; First, no man can dispose that by
vow, or otherwise, either to God or man, which is the right of a third person
without his consent: Neither can the inferior oblige himself to the prejudice
of his Superior, contrary to his duty, without his Superiors allowance: God
accepts no such pretenses, to seem obsequious to him, out of the undoubted
right of another person. Now the power of Arms, and the defense of the Laws,
and portection of the Subjects by those Arms, is by the Law of England clearly
invested in the Crown. And where the King is bound in conscience to protect,
the Subject is bound in conscience to assist. Therefore every English Subject
owes his Arms and his Obedience to his King, and cannot dispose them as a free
gift of his own; nor by any act of his whatsoever diminish his Sovereigns
right over him, but in those things wherein by Law he owes subjection to his
Prince, he remains still obliged, notwithstanding any Vow or Covenant to the
contrary; especially when the subject and scope of the Covenant is against the
konwn Laws of the Realm. So as without all manner of doubt, no Divine or
Learned Casuist in the world dissenting: This Covenant is either void in it
self, or at least voided by his Majesty's Proclamation, prohibiting the taking
of it, and nullifying its obligation.

Secondly, It is confessed by all men that, that an Oath ought not to be the
bound of iniquity, nor does oblige a transgressour. The golden rule is, in
malis pr^missis rescinde fidem, in turpi voto muta decretum, To observe a
wicked engagement doubles the sin: Nothing can be the matter of a Vow or
Covenant, which is evidently unlawful. But it is evidently unlawful for a
Subject or Subjects to alter the Laws established by force, without the
concurrence, and against the commands of the Supreme Legislator, for the
introduction of a foreign Discipline. This is the very matter and subject of
the Covenant. Subjects vow to God, and swear one to another to change the Laws
of the Realm, to abolish the Discipline of the Church, and the Liturgy lawfully
established, by the Sword, (which was never committed to their hands by God or
man,) without the King, against the King, which no man can deny in earnest to
be plain rebel^ion. And it is yet the worse, that it is to the main prejudice
of a third order of the Kingdom, the taking away whose rights without their
consents, without making them satisfaction, cannot be justified in point of
conscience, (Yea though it were for the greater convenience of the Kingdom, as
is most falsely pretended,) And is harder measure than the Abbots and Friars
received from Hanry the eight, or than either Christians or Turks do offer to
their conquered enemies.

Lastly a supervenient oath or covenant either with God or man, cannot take
away the obligation of a just oath precedent. But such is the Covenant, a
subsequent oath, inconsistent with, and destuructive to a precedent oath, that
is the oath of Supremacy, which all the Churchmen throughout the Kingdom, all
the Parliament men at their admission to the house, all persons of quality
throughout England have taken. The former oath acknowledges the King to be the
only supreme head, (that is civil head to see that every man do his duty in
his calling,) and Governor of the Church of England, The second aoth or
covenant, to set up the Presbyterian Government as it is in Scotland, denies
all this virtually, maks it a political papacy, acknowledges no governors but
only the Presbyters. The former oath gives the King the supreme power over all
persons, in all causes, The second oath gives him a power over all persons, (as
they are subjects,) but none at all in Ecclesiastical causes, This they make
to be sacrilege.

By all which it is most apparent, that this Covenant was neither free nor
deliberate, nor valide. nor lawful, nor consistent with our former oaths, but
enforced, deceitful, invalid, impious, rebellious, and contradictory to our
former engagements, and consequently obliges no man to performance, but all
men to repentance. For the greater certainty whereof I appeal, upon this
stating of the case, to all the learned Casuists and Divines in Europe,
touching the point of common right; And that this is the true state of the
case, I appeal to our adversaries themselves. No man that has any spark of
ingenuity will deny it. No Englishman who has any tolerable degree of
judgment, or knowledge in the laws of his country, can deny it, but at the
same instant his conscience must give him the lie.

They who plead for this rebellion, dare not put it to a trial at law, they
do not ground their defense upon the laws, but either upon their own
groundless jealosie and fears, of the Kings intention to introduce Popery, to
subvert the laws, and to ensla^e the people. This is to run into a certain
crime, for fear of an uncertain.

They who intend to pick quarrels, know how to feign suspicions. Or they ground
it upon the succ^sse of their arms, or upon the Sovereign right of the people,
over all laws and Magistrates, whose Representatives they create themselves,
whilst the poor people sigh in corners, and dare not say their soul is their
own, lamenting their former folly, to have contributed so much to their own
undoing.

Or lastly upon Religion, the cause of God, the worst plea of all the rest, to
make God accessory to their treasons, murders, covetousness, ambition. Christ
did never authorize Subjects to plant Christian Religion, much less their own
fancticall dreams, or fantastical devises, in the blood of their Sovereign,
and fellow subjects.

Speak out, is it lawful for Subjects to take up arms against their Prince
merely for Religion? or is it not lawful? If ye say it is not lawful, ye
condemn your selves, for your Covenant testifies to the world, that ye have
taken up arms, merely to alter Religion, and that ye bear no Allegiance to
your King, but only in order to Religion, that is in plain terms, to to your
own humors and conceits. If ye say it is lawful, ye justify the Independents
in England, for supplanting your selves, ye justify the Anabaptists in
Germany, John of Leyden and his cure. Ye break down the banks of Order, and
make way for an inundation of blood and confusion in all Countries. Ye render
your selves justly odious to all Christian Magistrates, when they see, that
they owe their safety not to your good wills, but to your weakness, that ye
want sufficient strength to cut their throats. This is fine doctrine for
Europe, wherein there is scarce that King or State, which has not Subjects of
different opinions and communions in Religion. Or lastly if ye say, it is
lawful for you to plant that which ye apprehend to be true Religion, by force
of arms, but it is not lawful for others to plant that which they apprehend to
be true Religion by force, because yours is the Gospel, theirs is not. Ye beg
the question, and make your selves ridiculously partial by your overweening
opinion, worse than that of the men of China, as if ye only had two eyes, and
all the rest of the world were stark blind. There is more hope of a fool, then
of him that is wise in his own eyes.

I would to God we might be so happy as to see a General Council of
Christians, at least a General Synod of all Protestants, and that the first
Act might be to denounce an Anathema Maranatha, against all brochers and
maintainers of seditious principles, to take away the scandal which lies upon
Christian Religion, and to show that in the search of piety, we have not lost
the principles of humanity. In the mean time, let all Christian Magistrates,
who are principally concerned, beware how they suffer this Cockatrice egg^ be
hatched in their Dominions. Much more how they (...) for Baal, or Baal-Berith,
the Baalims of the Covenant. (...) were worth the inquiring, whether the marks
of Antio^^ do not agree as eminently to the Assembly General of S^^^land, as
either to the Pope, or to the Turk: This we (...) plainly, that they spring out
of the ruins of the (...) Magistrate, they sit upon the Temple of God, and
they ^^^vance themselves above those whom holy Scripture (...) Gods.

FINIS.

