Mrs. SARAH BRADMORES PROPHECY Of the Wonders that will happen, Anno Dom. 1687.
Also what will be the EFFECTS OF THE WHALES Comeing up the River of Thames, and
continued the 4th. and 5th. of August, Anno Dom. 1686.
STrange and Wonderful, have been the Effects of such unusual Creatures as
Whales approaching in Rivers; so k^w^^e has been the appearance of Comets; But
I am certain, none knows what will be the Issue of these Signs and Wonders,
but the Almighty who is the Occasion of them; yet some Men have had the
Impudence to pretend (and put it publicly in Print) that they know the Will
and Pleasure of the Almighty; when there is nothing certainer in the World,
than their not knowing the Mind of another Man; how can Man know that, which
the Angels themselves are Ignorant of? the which they pretend to do by Starry
Influence; but Cornelius Agrippa says, that the Wise rule not the Stars, nor
the Stars the Wise, but God rules them both; and Cornelius Tacitus says, that
they are People Disloyal to their Prince, deceiving those that believe them;
and says Varro, the Van^ty of all Supertions flows from the Bosom of
Astrology; it is nothing but Poetical Fictions, by which the Astrologers do
sive, cheat, and cozen Men, and gain by their Fables and Lies, whilst (if you
have ever seen a Hackney Poet) you may see his A -- through his Pocket-holes.
If our Life and Fortune depend not on the Stars, then it is to be granted, that
the Astrologers Seek where nothing is to be found, but we are so fond,
mistrustful, and credulous, that we fear more of the Fables of Robin
Good Fellow, Astrologers, and Witches, and believe more things that, are not,
then the things that are, and the more impossible a thing is, the more we stand
in fear thereof; and the less likely to be true, the more we believe it, and if
we were not such, I think that those Deceivers, Astrologers, Couzenors, and
Blasphemors, if they had no other way or Employment to get an honest
Livelihood, they would dye for hunger.

Our foolish light Belief, forgeting things past, neglecting things present,
and very hasty to know things to come; so that if by our Astrologers, one Truth
be spoken by hap, it gives such Creddit to all their Lies, that ever after we
believe whatsoever they say, how incredible, impossible, or false soever it be,
etc. But now I shall proceed to my Prophecy.

According to the Constellations of the Stars which I converse with, there will
happen ( Anno. 1687.) a Great Rot amongst the Quack Doctors, but they will not
be half so much pitty'd, as if it had happened in Rumney Marsh, for the Honest
can spare them, and those as are not, will have no cause to Lament, for they
oftener kill than cure.

Likewise they have so daubed every Post, nay there is hardly a Creek or Corner
in or about London, but a Man shall be disturbed with the Appearitions of the
Quacks, (even at Noon Day) in making Water; for right before you, there stands
No Cure no Money, or No Money till the Cure be performed; but when a Gentleman
has Occasion, it is No Medicine without producing the Ready. And above him
stands, A Speedy Cure without Mercury: Also either to the right or left, there
is an Appearition clothed all in Black, known by the Name of Aqua
Tetrachymagogon, but for my part I have nothing to say against him, because I
am One as hates Reflections upon the Ingenious: Than too near him stands Medela
ab Alto, in Fanchurch-street near Magpy-ally; and now and then a Female Spirit
appears, and immediately vanishes. And last of all, which is the dreadfulest,
appears, Yah Coronzon Otheos On Panthon Bohu Tohu, or Read, Try, Judge, and
speak as you find etc. To give him his due, he is a delicate fellow, and not
only verst in one, but in three Arts viz, Poetry, Physi^k, and resolves all
Lawful Questions in Astrology, although he understands no more of it than his
Maid, I suppose might be in ill aspect with in the Action -- As I said before,
he is an excellent Poet, and his Lines so far exceeding the dull Pen of this
Age, I thought my self obliged to do him the Justice, of reciteing some of his
Poems, only Coating him as a faithful Friend of the Muses, and realy believing
he had no hand in the Plot.

ANd good Medicines cheap if that so you please,
For to cure any curable Disease
Bohu's best Pills better than the rest,
Deservedly have gained Name of Best,
In curing by a cause quite purging out
Of Scurvy, French Pox, Stone and Gout,
The head and belly, and the reins they
Will cure while you may work or play
His Pills often to their Makers praise,
Cure, yea eaven inth' Dog Days.
Let not the world wonder,
I will not my candle a Bushel put under.
For indeed it would be a Sin,
For to hide my Tallent in a Napkin.
Than his cheap pills at 3s. the Box,
A certain cure for the Pox,
Each box contains 36 pills I Am sure,
Never better made scurvy to cure,
The half box 18 pills at 18 pence,
Though it is to cheap in your own Sense.
So hoping you do not expect a Prophecy from one, who so much contemns them and
their Art, I rather did it for two Reasons. 1st. That the Wise as well as the
Ignorant might avoid the Rock of Deceit, if not, I cannot help it. The 2d. Is,
I will assure you it is very hard times, and I wanted Money; so taking my leave
till the coming up of the next Whale, I remain a True and Loyal Subject to His
Majesty, Whom God Preserve, and in General, your Humble Servant;

S. B.
Printed by Authority.
London Printed by S. J. 1686.


