The PASSION of our SAVIOR.

A PINDARICK ODE on the Suffering GOD. In Imitation of RAPINS CHRISTUS Patiens.

By Francis Brag Gent.

Engra^ (...) and sold by John S^ in Golden Lion Court in Aldersgate (...)

engraved title page

decorative border resembling a picture frame I.
WHAT Dark and Dismal shade is this?
What Gloomy Sadness spreading over the Skies?
What Black and Melancholy Vail,
Which Covers Mourning Natures Face?
Why has The Affrighted Sun forsook his Place?
And why the Universe so Pale?
Why does the Trembling Moon turn back her Weeping Eyes?
Sure there was never cause of grief like this!
The Sun beheld the DEITY,
decorative border resembling a picture frame Beheld his Maker Hanging on a
Tree.
He saw -- and started back -- and hid his Face,
Ashamed to show his own Created Rays,
When once he would seen the Source of Light,
The Eternal GOD, involved in Night.
II.
But where should I begin? where should I end?
This Sad, if there was ever sad Complaint?
Shall I relate his Flesh with Scourges ^orn,
And how he bore the Pain, and how he bore ye Scorn?
decorative border resembling a picture frame Or what is stranger yet that Man
could dare,
To pierce the GOD of Nature with a Spear?
Shall I tell how the Softer Rock,
When covered ore
With Heavenly Gore:
Unable to sustain the shock
Of so Impetuous and so just a Grief,
Burst -- and its Stony Heart did into pieces cleave?
Or JESUS shall I tell thy Bloody Sweat,
When on the Flowery top of Olivet,
decorative border resembling a picture frame Thou saw approaching near
The Dreadful Hour,
How exquisite thy Pangs, how earnest was thy Prayer!
Then what a Flood of Gore,
Ran down and Scarlet died each Briny Tear?
A wondering Angel saw the Trembling GOD,
Saw all his Grief but wondered more,
To see his Love Triumphant over his Fear;
To see him take the Cup, and kiss his Fathers Rod.
III.
decorative border resembling a picture frame Whither Audacious Man! O whither
do thou go?
Hold in thy Desperate hand and see.
It is the humble Deity!
O! Wound not him who Loves thee so,
All this he Suffers for Redeeming thee.
Yet while I speak, Behold! The Armed Throng
Pours like a Mighty Torrent in
See! how they drag the Patient GOD along
Who feels not half so quick their Fury as their Sin.
The Impious Crowd upon him Press,
decorative border resembling a picture frame One tears his Hair, another
wounds his Face;
And all with Eager Zeal contend,
Who shall the most abuse their Greatest Friend.
So when with stinging hunger Mad,
The Hyreanian Lions range the Forest ore;
Terror through all the Flocks and Herds they spread
And every trembling Shepherd Flies before;
If e're a Tender Lamb is left behind,
Not to one Savage does the Victim fall,
But with contending fierceness all,
Tear Limb from Limb, and into Atoms Grind.
decorative border resembling a picture frame IV.
And can the avenging Thunder hold,
And let such Monstrous Guilt unpunishd go?
Sure Heavens it self afraid to see so Bold
And so Triumphant Wickedness below!
As well it may, since GOD must plead his Cause
Before a Mortal Judge, and fall by Human Laws.
'Twas Night and all things hushed in a short lived repose,
Nature oppressed with Grief had fallen asleep,
Only the Silver Moon sat up to weep,
decorative border resembling a picture frame And restless Malice Rose.
The Raving Jews each other call,
And Drag the wearied JESUS to the Hall.
O! Let me never Describe the Dismal Scene
Of that sad Night! How piercing was his Pain!
How many Cruel Stripes in that sad Night he Bore,
Yet naught returned but Tears and Gore.
All that the Maddest Fury could Invent,
All that Revenge could Wish, or Guilt could Fear;
Or Keenest Hatred ever meant,
decorative border resembling a picture frame All this and more --
In that one Dismal Night they made him bear;
And thought it not enough, but Crowned the rest
With Scornful Jeers, and made their GOD their Jest.
V.
Scarce had Aurora showed the coming Light;
And Phoebus from his Watery Bed,
Rowz'd up his Fiery Steeds, and Chased away ye Night
When all Amazed he Looked, and of a Bloody Red.
Trembling he saw th'enrag'd Crow'd,
decorative border resembling a picture frame Athirst for their Redeemers Blood,
Trembling he heard their Horrid Cry,
Rending the Air with Crucify.
Crucify him, does all the Place Resound,
Crucify him, the unwilling Hills Rebound.
The Judge perceived his Spotless Innocence,
Tried to Assuage
Their swelling Rage;
And gave him to be Scourged for no Offense;
Away with Eager have they bear
The Afflicted GOD.
decorative border resembling a picture frame Still now and greater Torments
they prepare,
Naked they tie their Maker to a Stake,
Then with a twisted prickly Rod
The unrelenting Soldier Tears his Back;
Again renews the stroke and opens every Wound;
Again the Ecchoing Walls ye Hissing Stroke rebound.
VI.
Now thick as Summers Hail or Winter Rain
(When with a mighty Deluge Big
The teeming Clouds upon a Mountain break)
decorative border resembling a picture frame The trickling Blood pours down
from every Vein,
And all the Slippery Pavements covered over,
With Scarlet streams and knots of Clotted Gore.
This did the avenging Father See
Beheld his suffering Son in all his Agony,
And yet in never a Cloud of Thunder spoke,
Nor Crushed 'em down to Hell with one Almighty Stroke.
A Diadem of peircing Thorns they made,
And Crowned at once and Tore his tender Head.
A Reed they for a Scepter bring,
decorative border resembling a picture frame Cry Hail! and Bow the Knee, and
Mock their Bleeding King,
They See with Horrid Joy, the streaming Blood
Down from his wounded Temples pour,
They see his Face with Scars disfigured over,
And Laughing say -- Behold the Son of GOD!
Now does the Workman rend the sturdy Oak,
And Unconcerned redoubles every stroke;
Securely He the fatal Engine makes,
While at the Dreadful sight Affrighted Nature shakes.
decorative border resembling a picture frame VII.
It Is Done -- and Jesus bears away his Cross,
The Scene of all his Triumphs, all his Woes,
Against mighty Death he goes to take the Field
Resolved to Conquer, yet Resolved to Yield.
And now he sinks below the unequal weight
Of such a Load as Sin and That,
Too soon they fear his Pains would cease,
And out of Cruel Pity lend a little Ease.
Another takes the Cross, and on they go
decorative border resembling a picture frame To Lofty Golgotha's Aspiring Brow,
Thrice did the trembling Mountain sound,
And thrice the hollow Caverns Groaned,
All Nature into dire Convulsions fell,
To see the Drooping Heavens, and hear ye Shouts of Hell!
The hardened Jews alone with Fury Blind,
Stretch forth their Naked GOD;
His Hands and Feet upon the Cross they Bind,
And fix with Nails unto the Groaning Wood.
Aloft the Ponderous Trunk they rear,
decorative border resembling a picture frame And poize their Bleeding Maker in
the Air.
Amazing Sight! between two Thieves to see
Him hanging on one Slender Tree,
Who ye Prodigious weight -- of all ye Sins -- of the whole World did bear.
VIII.
Why Nature do thou Blush? why Tremble so?
It was not Thou that were to Blame,
Not all thy Powers th'amazing Deed could do;
'Twas Love that bore the Crime, 'twas Love that bore the Shame.
A Daring Soldier stabs the Expiring GOD,
decorative border resembling a picture frame And down there pours a Rapid
Stream of Blood.
No longer could the Affrighted Sun Behold
So Monstrous and so sad a Sight;
But headlong to the Ocean rolled,
And hid his Blushes in the Vail of Night.
Each Trembling Mountain shook its Snowy Head,
The all Devouring Grave gave up her Dead.
The Temples sacred Vail was rent in Twain
And all things felt their Makers grief, but Man.
Back to their Fountains did the Rivers flow
decorative border resembling a picture frame And falling Hills their Channels
filled below.
The hardest Rocks in pieces broke,
And all the Earth's Foundations shook;
While over the City Frightful Ghosts appear,
And horrid Specter fill the Dusky, Troubled Air.
IX.
Thee Jesus! did the hollow Grotts Bemoan,
And all were melted into Pearly Tears.
For thee the Lions and Getulian Bears,
For thee the Armenian Tigers Groan.
decorative border resembling a picture frame Each purling Stream ran murmuring
through the Plain
And told in Hollow Sighs its Makers Pain
Ore all the World a Pompous Sorrow spread,
All things were Sad, for GOD himself lay Dead.
And while the Savage Lions grieve,
Shall hardened Man alone refuse to give
His Tributary share of Flowing Tears,
Upon his Meek Redeemer's Hearse?
O! Let him weep a Mighty Flood,
Strong as his Saviors Love, and Reeking as his Blood.
decorative border resembling a picture frame Let every Distant Shore his
Griefs resound,
Nor let his Sorrows ever stay,
Till he has washed those Sins away
Which Crucified his GOD, and gave the Fatal Wound.
FINIS.

