A REVIEW and CONCLUSION OF THE ANTIDOTE Agianst Mr. BAXTER'S Palliated Cure OF
CHURCH-DIVISIONS.

WHEREIN Mr. Baxter's late Repentance is examined, All his Immodest Calumnies
confuted, AND The Grounds of Separation further cleared.

By EDWARD BAGSHAW.

Ephraim is joined to Idols: let him alone. Hos. 4.17.

If I build again the things which I destroyed, I make my self a transgressor.
Gal. 2.18.

London Printed in the Year 1671.

An Advertisement to the Christian Reader.
TO prevent all those Mistakes, and Misunderstandings which Mr. Baxter, in his
late Answer, was guilty of: these are to certify that I did desire several
Brethren ( 10, or 11. in number) to read diligently the following Treatise, and
to examine the Quotations, as I have cited them out of Mr. Baxters printed
Books, which they did, and have unanimously attested under their Hands, that I
have been very careful, to repeat, not only his very words, but also (according
to their best udnerstanding) his true Meaning. This, I thought good to give
thee notice of, Christian Reader, that thou may be confident as I dare not,
so I have not wronged Mr. Baxter, by any Wrested, False, or Mistaken Quotation.

Edw. Bagshaw.
8th M. 16th. 1671.
To Mr. Richard Baxter.
Mr. Baxter,
NOtwithstanding your angry intimation, that you intended not to answer me, yet
it was easy to foresee (and accordingly I told you) that you would not keep
your word; for I knew your Pride would put you upon writing, and your guilt
would necessitate you to do it, just in as unbecoming a manner as you have
done; for an ill cause must be maintained by Calumny. It shall not therefore be
any part of my concernment to return your unhandsom Language, but I am content
to let you enjoy the privilege of Railing alone: and if there be any of so
easy a belief, as to take your word, and can imagine I would be so foolish as
well as wicked, as in a matter of five or six sheets of Paper, to publish
fourscore untruths, I will not envy you such kind of partial Favorers, nor
trouble my self to rectify their erroneous apprehensions: only I shall desire
all that will be at a little pains to consider things, to judge seriously
betwixt us, and to determine impartially, whether that proud contempt and
folly, which almost in every line of your last book accompanies your
expressions, does not abundantly discover that your heart was never yet truly
humbled, and consequently that Repentance you take occasion to mention merely
Hypocrytical and Pretended.

Without entering therefore into other By-matters, which are nothing to the
Purpose of our main Controversy, I must bring you back to the Question as it
was first designedly handled between us; and that is briefly this, [Whether
Conformity at this day upon Conscientious grounds can be defended by any; or at
least, with any kind of honesty contended for by your self.] This, Sir, is the
thing I have enquired about, and I must keep you close to the stating of it;
for as you Stand or Fall in the right handling of this, so will all your
Reasonings appear, either Solid and Convincing, or else degenerate into a
railing and needless impertinence.

Sir, Whoever goes about to instruct the World (but especially the Churches of
Christ) in such a Critical day as this, had need be very careful to give all
possible satisfaction in two things: First, that he writes something that is
worth our knowing, and does not abuse the patience and leisure of his Readers:
Secondly, That he does himself show so much Stability and Stediness of
judgment, as that he may not discredit his own work, by having that replied
upon him, Thou that teach another, teach thou not thy self? In both these
particulars I have already proved that you are grossly Defective; For you plead
altogether for an Unclean thing; and that is, for Conformity after a Covenanted
for Reformation; and likewise (which is more absurd) this you do after you
have your self writ so much (and to speak truth, so well) against all such kind
of Communion.

Amongst other things that I charged upon you this was one, I said, It became
not you to blame the War, and the evil effects of it, with so much bitterness:
since you were as Active an Instrument in promoting of it, as any one
whatsoever. This, Sir, notwithstanding your peremptory denial, I must again
confirm; For you do in your Holy Commonwealth at large justify and defend
that War, you say, you did encourage many thousands to it, and, that you
thought when you engaged in it, you never did God that outward service as then:
Put all which together, and they serve to discover an Activity which very few
did equal, scarce any could exceed: and it will be a very vain excuse to say or
think you did but little, because perhaps some others might do more; for the
measure of every ones Activity in a common cause, must be taken from that place
which they fill up, which in your Capacity as a Preacher (especially if you
sent in Soldiers by Thousands) you did as notably discharge as any of the
Generals or Parliament Men, who would have signified but little, had they not
had such Chaplains to work upon Conscience: I therefore wronged you not by
asserting what you formerly did, but you much wrong the Truth and Goodness of
your own cause, (if indeed you think you ever had it) by seeking so meanly to
find out a Subter-fuge how you might disguise and hide it.

I am not ignorant that you now tell me you Repent, (and you ought to thank me
that I have been^ means to bring you to it) but as if you had long ago
foreseen whether your Temptations were likely to hurry you, you have very
seasonably forestalled and Antidoted, whatever ill use may be made of your
present Profession of Repentance: Your words, because they are very memorable,
I have taken pains verbatim to transcribe, as I find them in your Holy
Commonwealth page 486, 487. I cannot see, say you, that I was mistaken in the
main cause, nor dare I repent of it, nor forbear the same, if it were to do
again in the same state of things: I should do all I could to prevent such a
War; but if it could not be prevented, I must take the same side as then I did,
and my judgment tells me that if I should do otherwise, I should be guilty
of Treason and Disloyalty against the Sovereign power of the Land, and of
perfidiousness to the Common wealth, etc. And you conclude yet more remarkably,
It were too great folly by following Accidents that were then unknown, for me
to judge of the former Cause. That which is Calamitous in the event, is not
always sinful in the Enterprise: Should the change of times make me forget that
state, that we were formerly in, and change my judgment, by losing the sense
of what then conduced to its Infortion, this folly and forgetfulness would be
the way to a sinful, and not to an obedient Repentance. Thus (as I have already
told you) like Caiaphas, being High Priest for that Year, you Prophesied.

Sir, It is possible (for what may not a little Time, and change of success
produce in so variable an understanding) that you may once more Repent of your
late Repentance; For you have given in such Evidence against your self, and
laid down such convincing Arguments to make us belive your judgment is not yet
altered (although your Passion and Interest is) that I must entreat every
serious Reader, to judge, who has dealt most heartily, You, or I, and from
whom the greatest ingenuity is to be expected. For my own part, I desire to
speak it without any bitterness, upon the most exact and impartial reflection I
can make, I cannot see but your Repentance, and Mr. Lee's Recantation may
hereafter be bound up together in the same Volume, and both be held of equal
Credit and Authority.

For, Sir, to be serius, do you think it can be looked upon as any tolerable
degree of satisfaction, either to those whom you formerly deceived by Preaching
them into a Conscientious Disobedience, or to those who were then ruined and
oppressed by it, to tell them now twenty years after, so slightly, that you are
sorry, and that you repent you had no more Impartially, page 52.
and diligently consulted with the best Lawyers, that were agaimst the
Parliaments cause, for you knew no Contraversie in Devinity about it, but in
Politics and Law. What, Sir? did you help on to Engage a Nation in Blood, to
enter into a Covenant, Proclaim Fasts, make Solemn Apeals to God, and yet think
nothing of Divinity in such a Cause? Oh poor deluded People of England! How
have thy Preachers, thy Baxters, thy seeming Boanerges, caused thee to err,
and swallowed up the way of thy Paths? and after they have led thee into Deep
Waters, left thee miserably plunged and floating there to save themselves in
their own Cockboats? Sir, do you think you shall ever Preach with more
Evidence, Warmth, and Zeal any thing in your life, than you have already done
the Necessity, Justice, and Lawfulness of this War; and, that you may know I do
not speak at random, particularly when at Gloucester, you preached upon, Curse
ye Meroz; and now you say you Repent, do you expect ever to be believed again?
Did not you then think it visible on which side Christ and Religion stood? and
did not you profess to see it in the year Fifty nine (but the year before the
King came in) and are you now become Blind? O Rare Convert! What strange
changes will love of ease and fear of suffering, produce in a Corrupt and
Carnal understanding?

Sir, I am truly sorry I am forced to speak thus plainly, but Zeal for the
Glory of God which you have obscured; Love to that Cause of Christ, and
Nonconformity, which you have deserted; and earnestness of affection to the
Souls of my C^untrey men, whom you have abused; has filled me with a just
indignation: And pray do not think it sufficient to tell me as you do, that you
Retract your Book; For such childish Levity does not at all alter Matters of
Fact, but leaves things still as they formerly were, and discovers you only
to be deeplier plunged in the guilt of Unsetledness and instability.

And certainly, Sir, had you ever had patience, and allowed your self Time to
read over what you have formerly writ, you would havd found out some better
Argument to employ your la^^^r in, than to persuade the World to Conformity
now, with those very Men, Way, and Things which (not a year before their
establishment among us) you have thrown so much dirt upon, that the very
remembrance of them is still loathsome to us. Have you forgot, Sir, that when
the Bishops were down, and their calamity might have moved your pity, you then
trampled upon them, and in gr^^^ scorn upbraidingly told them, Five Disp.
Church governments prin. An. 1659. Dedicated to Richard Cromwell Protector.
pref. p. 17.
We see that most of the ungodly in the land, are the forwardest for your ways,
you may have almost a^^ the Blasphemers, and ignorant haters of godliness in
the Country (...) vote for you, and if they durst again to fight for you at
any time; and again, I know that the common sense of most that are serious in
Practical Christiainity is against your formal ways of worship, and the Spirit
of Profaneness complieth with you, and doteth on you in all places that ever I
was acquainted with; with much more railing Language to the same p^rpose. And
when you do purposely argue upon this subject [ Whether it be necessary or
profitable for the right order or peace of the Churches, page 31.
to restore the extruded Episcopacy] you do with much strength and vehemence
handle the Negative, and among sever^l other Arguments, you urge this for one:
page 36.
That Government which graifieth the Devil and wicked men is not to be restored
under any pretense of the Order or Peace of the Church; But such was the
English Episcopacy; therefore, etc. And in Explication of the Minor, you
enlarge very Emphatically, Who knows not, say you, for it cannot be denied,
that the generality of the Rabble of ignorant Persons, Worldlings, Drunkards,
Haters of Godliness are very zealous for Episcopacy; Whilst multitudes of truly
Conscientious people have been against it; And who knows not that they fetch
both their chief Motives from Experience? The ungodly found that Bishops let
them keep their sins and troubled them not with this precisenss; but rather
drove away the Precise Preachers and People, whom they abhorred; and those that
disliked Episcopacy, did it principally on the same Experience, observing they
befriended the wicked, at least by preserving them from the due Rod of
Discipline.

Sir we must needs say we stand amazed, ^ow it is possible, you should so soon
and so much forget all that you have said, and break through the bonds of such
convincing Arguments; For our parts, we, that want your easiness and
flexibility, are frighted at them, and dare not for our lives meddle with any
thing, in the worship of God, which such a man as you has already told us
tends to gratify the Devil and wicked men. And though we have many other
weighty Arguments, yet in this matter we are satisfied with your Authority, and
are content to take your word; and it as you say the Governm n^ and No
Discipline of the Bishops has such a dan^grous i^fi^^^c, we must by
withdrawing our Communion, declare both against it and them; and I am confident
they will themselves acquit us from any crime herein: For we dare appeal to any
moderate man of the Episcopal persuasion, if they be indeed such kind of
persons as you have represented them, whether they ought not immediately to be
fosaken and forborne as to any Acts of Church Communion: We think we need not
spend many words in so clear a case, for you have already decided it for us;
with much Triumphing and scorn you thus insulted, formerly over the Bishops,
and laid the foundation of all that which we now Conscientiosly practice; page
327, 328.
I tell you, said you, that which I suppose you know, That as free a toleration
of Praelacy in England as there is of Presbytery were the likelyest way to
bring you into perpetual contempt, For we cannot but know, that besides a few
civil engaged Gentlemen, Ministers, and others, your main body would consist of
those, that for their notorious impiety, scandal or ignorance, are thought
unmeet for Church Communion by others, and that when you came to exercise
discipline on them, they would hate you and flee from you, as much as ever they
did from Puritans; and if you did indulge them, and not reform them or cast
them out, your Church would be the con^^mpt of the sober part of the World; and
your own sober members would quickly relinquish it for shame; For the Church of
England (if you would needs be so called) would be taken for the sink of all
the other Churches in England: We need say no more, for whatever may be pleaded
to the contrary by others (with whom at present we are not disputing) yet as to
your self (with whom our contraversie is) I think no sober person, but will say
we are sufficiently furnished with Arguments to answer the uttermost you can
allege. For to fall in with that which you call sink of all the other
Churches, to join with those in Worship, who are, as you say, the contempt of
the sober part of the World, and whom all their sober Members are to relinquish
for shame, this must needs be an unjustifiable as well as an unbecoming
practice. And therefore do not disturb us any more, but let us alone, if you
can, to follow that Light in this matter which you your self once had, and give
us leave to tell you, that to the best of our understanding, your present Light
is nothing else but the confusion of Darkness.

You may perhaps Object (though we wonder you should do it) that were the
matter wholly left to our own liberty, you could not advise such Communion as a
thing of choice, but that which you call Authority (or Magistracy) interposing
in the case, we are no longer left free to our own dispose, but must be
obedient in things Indifferent for Conscience sake; we will not reply how much
that Romans 13. (upon which you lay the stress of your Argument) has been
abused already by wresting it to other cases, but yet we hope (whatever others
do) you will not forget that very Text has been urged by your self (no longer
since then the year 1659.) to justify your siding with the Parliament against
the King, When, Holy Com. wealth p. 477.
say you, the Parliament commanded us to obey, and not resist them; I knew not
how to resist and disobey them, without the violation of that command of God,
Romans 13. Let every soul be subject unto the Higher Power, etc. and without
incurring the danger of that Condemnation there threatened to Resisters; and I
think none doubts but that command obliges us to obey the Senate as well as
the Emperor. Sir, You may easily see what I could, if I pleased, and were
malicous, infer from hence, but I spare you, and without pressing that, I shall
only say that you have already in another place discharged us, from any
Conscientious subjection to Men's Commands in the Things of God upon the account
of that Text. For you say well and truly, First Disp. p. 457.
that If Men who have no Authority over us shall pretend Authority from God,
and go about to exercise it by Ceremonious Impositions, we have the more reason
to scruple obeying them even in things indifferent; lest we be guilty of
establishing their usurpation and pretended office in the Church, and so draw
on more evils than we foresee or can remove; All the difference then between
you and us (if indeed there be any) lies in the point of Authority, Which we
say plainly, that none upon Earth (no not an Angel from Heaven) has over us in
the Things of God, that whole power being incommunicably given to our Lord
Christ, who keeps it in his own hands, manageth it with his own Laws,
directs and influenceth it by his own Spirit, and has not by any Commission
that we know of invested the Rulers of this World with it; so that though you
lightly quit, yet we see cause still to keep our ground; For we dare not yield,
no not for a Moment, nor stir in a Circumstance from asserting that Liberty,
which we are commanded to Maintain, lest we forfeit our Lords Right, Partake in
other men's sins, and losing our hold, never be able to recover it again, when
we shall gave occasion to oppose some new and yet unheard of Imposition.

There remains but one Argument more in this whole Dispute, and that is taken
from Idolatry; Which we say all Devised Worship is a Species of; and even this,
though you do with much seeming earnestness declaim against it, yet it is
apparent, you had some Glimmerings of Light about; For after you had urged many
Arguments to prove the unreasonableness and sinftlness of Prescribing Forms of
Prayer, Preaching, etc. you conclude in these Words, If none of these, Five
Disp. page 378.
or other Reasons will allay the Imperious Distemper of the Proud, but they
must by an Usurped Legislation be making indifferent things become necessary to
others, and Domineer over Men's Consciences and the Churches of God, we must
leave them to him, that being the Lord and Lawgiver of the Church, is jealous
of his Prerogative, and abhorteth Idols, and w^ll not give his Glory to
another: Which expression of Abhorring Idols, why you should use, had you nor
taken every Humane Imposition to be a kind of Idol we cannot Imagine: And
therefore pray give us leave to sum up all together, and to say freely this,
that had we but little to say upon this Argument in answer to others, yet we
have enough for ever to silence you; and withal we profess, that though we do
not therefore follow that which we take to be the Truth in this Que^^i^n,
because you once asserted it before us; yet we w^ll not therefore peevishly
disdain and reject it, because you have unworthily rec^ded from it; but rather
we thankfully ^wn the goodness of God, and admire the great force of ^^^th,
that you should heretofore be stirred up to write ^o much (and of which you
have not (that we know of) yet Repented) by which you stand your self Self cond
^^^ed, and that Cause which y^u so eage^ly opp^se, ^^lly and ^^^pleatly
justified.

I might here ^^d, for I w^^ (...) Wordy faculty, and ^y pu^pose being mee^ly
to (...) ^ou, this is already so fully ^^^ne, that I re^d not (...) upon this
Subject; But your bo^d, and little le^^ (...) ^^theistical arguing against the
Divine and self evide^cing ^uthority of the Holy Scripture, r^quireth I should
^p^^ ^^^thing to it: The Position which you lay d^^n is ^^^ect^y contrary to
the Doctrine of all our Ancient Protestant Divines, and particularly to that of
the First Reformers, and besides is the very Foundation of the Roman (that is
of the Antichristian Church; For you say plainly (as Andradius, Stapleton,
Bellarmine, and others, page 188
the worst Defenders of the Trent Council do) that the Self evidencidg Light of
Scripture is not sufficient, without humane Help and Testimony to make us know
every Canonical Book from the Apocryphal, (...). And you instance Particularly
in Solomon's Proverbs, Gab. p. 61.
unto which our Savior himself and his Apostles have witnessed as to a Divine
Writing: And besides in defense of this, you urge an Argument, of a more
impious sense and sound, than ever I read in any but your self; And I think
that Bellarmine was modest, and but a Trifler to you; ^ab. p. 63. etc.
Mahomet, say you, and his followers (more numerous than the Christians)
pretend that Mahomets name was in Gospel of John, as the Paraclete or
Comforter, promised by Christ, and that the Christians have blotted it out, and
altered the Writings of the Gospel: and how shall we disprove them but by
Historical evidence: To which I shall only reply in short, that if matters
between them and us must be brought to this issue, Actum est, We have nothing
substantial to plead, and it is not God's but Man's Word that must be taken, we
having no certain nor infallible (...) left us, to discern and know the voice
of Scripture by; I might urge what Whitaker, Chamier, and others have replied,
but I shall content my self with what I find briefly, yet fully stated, by that
Judicious and Weighty Writer Mr. Hildersham, whose name in other cases
(particularly that of Conformity where you think he makes for you) you pretend
great Reverence to. Indeed the Testimony of the Church, says he, does first
incline us to think that the Scripture is the Word of God, and makes us
willing to hear and read it; but after we by hearing and reading it attain to
further certainty and assurance: John 4. Lect. 76.
For God himself speaks to us in the Scripture, Luke 1.79. Hebrews 1.1. and
that so clearly and evidently, that the Faithful are undoubtedly assured that
it is he that speaks. that it is indeed his Word; and they can say, as Cant.
2.8. It is the voice of my beloved. This is promised to the Faithful, Isa.
52.6. They shall know in that day, that I am he that speaks, behold it is I;
and John 7.17. If any man will do his Will, he shall know of the Doctrine,
whether it be of God, or whether I speak of my self; And indeed if we could not
now be undoubtedly certain, that is indeed Gods Word, the Case of the Church
were worse now, than it was when God spoke to his people in Visions and Dreams;
For they were without any external Testimony from Men, fully assured then, that
it was the Lord himself indeed that spoke unto them; Nay it is Certain that we
may be more sure that God speaks to us in his Word, then they could be of his
speaking unto them in Visions, 2 Peter 1.19. We have also a more sure Word of
Prophecy.

Thus far that worthy Writer, who asserteth no more in substance, than what is
the unanimous judgment of Calvin, Luther, and all our Ancient Protestant
Divines; and I wonder while you tax another of Falsehood, you should venture
thus to reproach their Memory, as if they held with you; when not one of them,
but some few bold Innovators of late (like your self) did ever assert that
Opinion; which overthrows and razeth to ground the whole Protestant cause, as
tending wholly to enthrone Tradition, and to advance the Authority of Men in
the Things of God.

I know you bear your self very high upon what you have already writ in defense
(as you call it) of Scripure; page 16.
And you do insolently tell us. I know of no man living in this age that has
written so much (I say not so well) for the things in Question, Scripture and
Christianity as I have done: To which Boast I reply. First, some have written
large Books, and pretended great earnestness for many things, on purpose that
they might attaque and set upon them afterward with greater advantage; Thus
Caesar Vanins wrote a very learned Book against Atheism, though it was his own
professed and avoiwed Impiety, in defense of which afterward he desperately
died. Secondly, give me leeve to ask you, To what purpose is all this Waste?
or who has required this at your Hands? And why do you undertake a Needless,
as well as an Impossible Task? That is to reconcile Religion to Natural Reason?
to bring down the Things of God unto the understanding of Man; which is in
effect to say you do not believe them to be Tremendous Mysteries. Thirdly, Me
thinks you should be frighted by the dreadful falls of those pretendedly
Rational men that went this way before you, from following after their bold and
daring Example. Socinus, a man of no little Reason, proceeded so far as to deny
the Divinity of Christ; And Grotius, who wrote as learnedly on the Truth of
Christian Religion as any, yet himself died of none, or if as you say he died a
Papist, Pres. to five Disp.
it was worse than none: So that I may say of the^e Rational Arguing^, what the
Apostle has concerning meats, They have not profited those that walked in
them. Lastly, Heb. 13.9.
This I must testify from my own Experience, and leave it as a warning to all,
in whom the Itch of curious Enquiry is not yet healed, that had not I learned
the Truth of Christian Religion from better A^guments, and a more Certain way
of Reasoning than any your Bo^ks afford, I had still been plunged in the depths
of Atheism; and I look upon your whole Discourse about the Nature, Being, and
Decrees of God, the Immortality of the Soul, and The reward of the Life to come
(which you pretend to found upon Natural Reason) to be so far from the Cogency
of Demonstration, and the Evidence of Rational Light, that such kind of
Discourses serve much rather to Teach, then to preserve from Unbelief, while
they give Corrupt Reason leave to argue, and justify it self, against that
which is accounted the weakness and simplicity of believing. I look upon it as
sound Doctrine, and so I held it long before I read it in Mr. Hildersham, That
this glory is due to Christ and to him alone to believe him upon his Word; John
4. lect. 32.
even without the Testimony or Authority of any man, yea though we see no
Reason for it, yea though it seem never so contrary to our own Reason: we must
in this case be-like Pythagoras his Scholars, and so rest in that (...); when
once we hear Thus says the Lord, this must suffice us instead of all Reasons,
here we must rest and satisfy our selves. This is called the Obedience of
Faith, Romans 16.26. Yea this is the first and chief Obedience that God requires
of us: The first work of his Grace in us is to subdue our Reason, 2 Cor. 10.5.
Till we have attained to this simplicity, we shall never be wise unto
Salvation; nor come to any comfortable Certainty in the matters of Religion.
The same worthy Author goes on, this serves, says he, to reprove the Disputer
of this World, of whom the Apostle speaks 1 Cor. 1.20. Where is the Disputer of
this World? such as will receive no more in Religion then they can see Reason
for, Scripture will not serve their turn, they must have Reason; But, says he,
it is a dangererous thing not to rest in the Authority of the Scriptures, not
to count it (...); For there be many truths of God revealed in the Word, which
are such Mysteries, as it is not possible for Man by Reason and by Light of
Nature to conceive; Nay, indeed the whole Doctrine of the Gospel is so, 1 Cor.
2.7. 1 Timothy 3.16. Yea, the more a man excels in Natural Reason and
Understanding, the more unable shall he be to conceive them, Romans 8.7. The
Wisdom of the Flesh is enmity to God: It is God alone that by the supernatural
Light of his Spirit, reveals those things, Mat. 16.17. And God will reveal it
to none but to those that are Meek and Humble; to none that have such ^igh
conceit of themselves, and attribute so much to their own Reason, Psalm 25.9.
The Meek will he teach his way. I have at large repeated this passage of that
truly judicious and excellent Writer, because he speaks suitably both to
Scripture, and to what every Person truly enlightened can witness to; But to
show how much you differ, both from him and others of our soundest Divines in
this point, and to make a full discovery of your spirit and temper, I shall
compare it with a quite contrary pass^ge, which some years ago I read, and much
wondered at in your self. (...) the (...)
I know there is a sort of overwise, and overdoing Divines, who will tell their
followers in private, where there is none to contradict them, that the Method
of this Treatise is perverse, as appealing too much to Natural Light, and
over-valuing Humane Reason: and that I should have done no more but briefly
tell men, that all that which God speaks in his word is true, and that Propria
Luce it is evident that the Scripture is the Word of God, and that to all Gods
Elect he will give his Spirit, to cause them to discern it, and that thus much
alone had been better than all these Disputes and Reasonings; But these
Over-wise men who need no Reason for their Religion and judge accordingly of
others, and think that those men who rest not in the Authority of Jesus Christ,
should rest in theirs, are many of them so well acquainted with me as not to
expect that I should trouble them in their way or Reason against them -- as
much as I am addicted to scribbling, I can quietly dismiss this sort of men
without the Labor of opening their ignorance. Thus you, who are, if compared
to them, but a Rash and Insolent Seribler, because you have nothing to do, but
are at leisure to be a Voluminous Trifler, dare with your breath blow upon, and
seek to blast the Credit of all these worthy weighty Writers (whom you call
Over-wise, and Over-doing Divines) such as Calvin, Preston, Hildersham,
Perkins, etc. whom I quoated before, as if they were all but Bubbles for you to
play with, and blow up and down at your pleasure; but their Name, and Doctrine
shall live and flourish, when yours shall wither, as not being able to endure
the Fiery Trial; So far therefore, as I can by Entreaties or Example prevail
with any, I do earnestly warn all persons truly fearing God, that they be not
deceived by Names, nor take any thing upon trust from a commonly Received and
Mistaken Repu^ation: For if I understand any thing of the true nature of
Religion, your writings do contain that secret Leaven, which will sour and
infect the Mind of an unwary Reader, with such Erroneous Apprehensions, and
Mis-conceits of the Truth, that nothing but a new and thorough Conversion will
be able to recover them; For laying your Foundation in the Corrupt Will of Man,
and building your Superstructure in the Carnal Understanding, you leave no room
for true Holiness and Mortification; but the Root of sin which lies within,
remains untouched, and Carnal Presumption, or at the best Doubting (if not
Despair) will be the utmost that such Principles can possibly end in, or lead
unto: I shall therefore here leave off, and for the present (if not for ever)
end any farther Controversy with you, as being one of whom I cannot say (what
you do of me after all your virulence) that I am upright in the Main; page 26.
For I hold you are altogether Rotten and Unsound in the Main, and so much the
more incurable, in that you have greatly sinned, and turned Scorner, since your
Admonition.

These being my most serious thoughts of all your Works, I do willingly pass by
lesser Matters, which yet afford me sufficient ground of Exception, such are --

First, Your Absurd, and Insigniflcant way of speaking, although I have already
reproved you for it; as when you talk of a Rash and Carolefly uttered Untruth,
page 29.
which is Privatively voluntary (that is where the Will omits its office)
Where I am much to seek, what can be meant by Privatively voluntary, or how any
action can be done where the Will omits its office. Add to this, your
discourse of a receiving Obediential Power in a Carnal Will, which receiving
Power you call a Passive Power: page 139.
where the Comment and Explication is much harder than the Text. Lastly, To
urge no more your saying that by Corruption and ^mposition barely seems to be
meant such Formaliter quoad Actum without including the degree of the Matter.
page 134.
Sir, These, and the like expressions, though you and the Schools call them
Distincteons, yet indeed are nothing else but Learned Non sense; Which although
they may not other wise have much hurt in them, yet they are those Big swelling
words of Vanity, which are the usual Language of False Teachers, and one of the
Marks which is foretold by which they may be known, 2 Pet. 2.

Secondly, I might except against your scornful trifling with things, that are
most sacred, and serious; as when you say, page 57.
I am verily persuaded if Christ came personally and visibly to demand it, the
King himself would yield up his Crown to him; and I am as verily persuaded the
Turk or Pope would do so too; which yet at present I do not look upon as any
great commendation to either of them: And besides, had ever the Terror of that
Day of the Lord fell upon you, and did you in spirit believe and apprehend how
dreadful that Appearance would be, you would not have spoke so like those
Mockers, who deride the Promise of his coming.

Thirdly, I might justly blame your scarce Tolerable Sophistry, and Fallacious
way of arguing, fit only for Boys and Children; as when you pretend to know no
difference in point of Imposition, between one that uses a Form of his own,
page 119, 120.
and he that is Imposed upon to use always the Form of another: Whereas, in the
one case, the hearer is at perfect liberty how far and how often he will join;
In the other he is always tied up, and must either join in such a Prescript
Form of Words or none at all: and this he knows beforehand, which makes the
difference vastly Disproportionable.

Lastly, Give me leave to wonder, since the Apostle makes it so dangerous a
sign of a proud distempered mind to dote about Questions, 1 Timothy 6. how it
comes to pass that you so strangely delight in asking of them, especially in
matters where Faith alone must give the last Solution; and therefore to all
your twenty bold Quaeries about the Scripture, take this general Answer that
when you have satisfied me you did not sin greatly in raising such Mists and
Doubts about them, and when you can give me security that you will not be
asking me twenty Questions more, I will endeavor your satisfaction.

I conclude therefore, with this Short but True Character of your self and your
late work, that you have writ neither with that Gravity, which became your Age;
with that Sobriety, which became your Profession; nor that Modesty which became
any tolerable Education; and since you so much forget your self, I must tell
you, that that Person, whom you so insolently despise, is (to say no more) that
your best, your Equal: but what he reckons he might Glory in, as some of his
outward Advantages above you, he willingly waveth, as choosing rather to glory
in this, as God has chosen him a Poor despised Publican (as one born out of
due time) together with those Women and Boys whom you contemn, to cry Hosanna
to the Lords Christ, and to bear witness unto that very Truth, and at that very
time of the Day, when you a Learned Scribe and Pharisee (under the Notion of
Repenting) have most unworthily betrayed and deserted it.

Farewell. Edward Baghaw.
From my Prison by Newgate, 9th m. 4th An. 1671.
A POSTSCRIPT: CONTAINING An ADVERTISEMENT to the CHRISTIAN READER.
IN Answer to Mr. Baxters Post script, I have this to say briefly, Holy Com.
Wealth. pef.
That I have read and considered those Words of his, The Lord Protector did
Prudently, Piously, Faithfully to his Immortal Honor, exercise the Government;
And I still think that Mr. Baxter could not be serious, if he meant them of
Richard Cromwell, who lost the Government, before he was well settled in it, and
never did any thing (that I have heard of) to deserve so large a Character: But
since Mr Baxter is pleased to affirm that he intended him, I shall not be
Critical in another man's words, but take it for granted that indeed it was so;
But then I shall desire to be sa^isfied in two things, First, what is become of
Mr. Baxters Repentance; For when I urged that passage to him, page 47.
as spoken of Oliver he tells me in one part of his Book, I thank you for
calling me to review those words, and do freely declare that I do take them to
be unmeet, and that I do unfeignedly Repent of them; and yet in the Conclusion
he complains that he too rashly believed me; For upon perusal he finds it
most Notrious that he spoke it not of Oliver but of his Son; at which he wipeth
his Mouth and thinks all is very well; But may not this be expected as likely
to be the issue of all Mr. Baxter's other Repentance, that upon second thoughts
he will complain he was too rash and hasty in it. Secondly, I would fain ^now
by what Propriety of speech, he can affirm (...) he does that Oliver Cromwell
was guilty of most ^erfidious Treason and Rebellion; page 42.
and he himself an unquestionable Usurper; ^^d yet own and allow his Son to be
a Pious, Prudent, Faithful Governor? Was not Richard his Fathe s Successor,
and did not he succeed him in his Sinful Usurpation? and can Mr. Baxter
continue to justify such words (which must be accounted either down ri^^^
calling against the one, or sordid Flattery to the oth^^) and yet hold himself,
Innocent?

As for the Oath of Allegiance, which I am in Prison for refusing, and Mr.
Baxter I perceive pleads for, and would fain engage all the Non-Conformists to
be Defenders of, I must needs say, that if I understood that Oath in no
stricter a sense, and had as many Distinctions to elude the true meaning and
force of it, as Mr. Baxter has lately found out about the Covenant, I might
perhaps be induced to take it too; But I bless God, I dare not Trifle with
Oaths; For I look upon one that is once deliberately Sworn to be always
strictly Obliged; and where the Name of God is used to make a Tie sacred, I
think that Reverence is due to it, that we are not afterward to mince Matters,
but bound to go unto the u^most Latitude, that the words will bear, for the
Advantage of the Party unto whom we are Sworn: This being my sense of every
Oath, I must take leave freely to profess that in this of Allegiance, I do not
understand the meaning of Crown and Dignity, for if those word, signify (as I
verily believe they do) The Laws in being (for so both Sr. Orlando Bridgeman,
and Dr. Sanderson have interpreted them) then I cannot swear to Defend them;
For some of those Laws (and particularly those about Conformity) I daily break,
and which is more, think I am bound in Conscience to do so: And though I should
err and be mistaken in the Grounds of such a Practice, yet every one knows,
and Dr. Sanderson has fully stared it, that even an Erroneous Conscience does
always oblige not to do any thing against the Dictates of it. More I could
say, but two Arguments against this Oath I have already pub^ickly urged at the
Bar, in which I have not yet received any satisfaction.

One is that I am required to say, Which Oath I acknowledge by good and full
Authority to be Lawfully Administered to me; which I am so far from being able
to swear, that on the contrary, I am fully satisfied, this Oath was to me most
unlawfully administered: The design and end of the Oath (which was to discover
and to suppress Popish Recusants) and many other Legal Circumstances having not
been at all observed.

Another Exception which I urged was, that I am to say, This Recognition I make
heartily, willingly, etc. Which word Willingly being then under an undue force
(detained a Prisoner after I was acquitted by a Jury) and to take that Oath as
the Condition of obteining my Liberty (unto which (...) my self, as having a
just title (...) unless I would directly h^ (...) ^^ed my self by some (...)

These were some of my Reasons, which I pleaded at the Bar, and whatever Mr.
Baxter thinks of them (who undervalueth most men's judgment but his own) yet
they are still of weight to me, and at that time they were judged so
considerable by those that heard them, that the Justice who passed Sentence
upon me, said publicly in the hearing of many Witnesses, That he did not
doubt, but I refused the Oath out of Conscience and from a good Principle;
wherein, though he did ill to cond^mn one whom he judged Innocent, yet he was
more just and Generous then Mr. Baxter, who calls me Brother, and yet uses
me as Edom did Israel; not fearing to add what weight he can to make my Bonds
heavier; and so far as his Censure can prevail, seeking to leave me without the
common Relief of Calamity, Pity. But the Lord will certainly judge between him
and me, with whom I leave my Cause, and the Issue of this whole Controversy;
who has already in his Word, and will in due time by his Works decide, who are
most to be approved for Integrity, whether those who are content to endure the
utmost Extremity, rather than deny the Truth, or depart from a well taken up
Resolution; or such who are, like ^^eds, shaken with every Wind, and scruple
not to change their Judgment, For, and Against things, as the stream of
outward success does guide and influence them. There being no other visible
Reason why Mr. Baxter should at this day, profess his Repentance, for what he
so stiffly held and defended before, but only that Argument of the Jewish
Conformists of old, Gal. 6.10.
That he may not be Persecuted by the Cross of Christ, in which yet, as the
Apostle did, so every True Christian ought to Glory.


