AN INQUIRY Into the Remarkable Instances of History, and Parliament Records,
used by the Author of the Unreasonableness of a new Separation on Account of
the Oaths; whether they are faithfully cited and applied.
THE Author of this Discourse makes Enquiry into two things, to clear what he
has before delivered.

Page 12.
1st. How far the Discharge or Release from a Person, who has Right, and is
concerned, is necessary to those who take the Oaths of Allegiance to another
Person in Possession of the Crown.

2dly, How far our Savior's Rule holds in this Case.

The Theological part of this Discourse I wholly pretermit, and leave it to
Divines; the Historical is only that I shall enquire into.

And before I enter upon this Enquiry I shall Note.

First, That the Saxons were a miscellaneous People, joined with the Francks in
Piracy and Rapine; who made Descents wherever they could upon the Coasts of
Gallia, Flanders, and Britain, as Ammianus Marcellinus, lib. 27. c. 7. and l.
28 c. 7. Bid in his History fol 58. col. 2. adds the Jutes and Angles to
those, who came or were invited into England. Mr. Seldom adds to these the
Danes and Frisons, in his Chronology at the end of Janus; and most certainly
under the names of Saxons were comprehended several other People; such as
joined with them in Rapine and Piracy, or such as they had subdued, which by
the Conquering Romans, or Neighbor Nations, had been forced for their own
safety into Islands, Bogs and Morasses, upon and near the Coasts of the German
Sea, from the River Eydor in Juteland to the Elve, and from thence to the Rhine
and Scheld; and it may not want probability, that the Heptarchy was here
erected by the Leaders of seven different sorts of People, Robbers and
Pillagers under the names of Saxons. Such as they were when they came, they
remained, especially during the Heptarchy, always Invading, Plundering, and
Burning one another Countries, frequently killing and murdering their Kings,
Earls, or Chief Governors, or those one another. So, as I think, very
Judicious Men would not look for Authentic and Well-grounded Precedents in the
History of these times; where things were always in a Flux, without permanent
settlement, or amongst the barbarous Usages of these rude, illiterate People;
unless in such Cases as may have a great appearance of Truth, and are reported
or confirmed by the unanimous consent of their Historians.

The order of Succession was certain in the West Saxon Kingdom, after Egbert
brought the greatest part of the Heptarchy under his Power and Government. Yet
from the various Expressions of the ancient Writers of the Saxon Story
concerning the Succession, an unwary Reader would think that the Saxons agreed
not in one Rule of Succession, or that they had no Rule at all; but whoever
considers with understanding, what those Historians say, will find they pursued
a sure Rule of Succession (as much, and as often as those times would permit)
which was either Right and Proximity of Blood; or the Nomination and
Appointment of a Successor by the Precedent King; which Nomination by the Saxon
Kings, before the Danes came in, mostly happened in the Minority or Nonage of
their Children, and that only in the turbulent State of the Nation, in
turbulento Reipublicae tempore, which was thought and allowed a sufficient
Cause, for the Father to prefer his Brothers Son before his own, Vit. Aelfred.
fol. 9. sect. 10. lin. 4. etc.
or a Bastard before his lawful Issue, ut pater fratris filium proprio, vel
etiam Nothum anteferret Germano. And by the following Instances it will plainly
appear, That the Saxons did in their owning of Subjection and Submission to
their Princes, acknowledge both Proximity of Blood, and Nomination by their
Kings often both together, sometimes only one of them, but never followed any
other Rule, nor did the People in the Saxon Monarchy set up any King themselves
in any formal, or pretended Assembly of the Nation. Of both Titles in the same
Person, there are these three Examples before the Danes Conquest.

Egbert the first Saxon Monarch had two Sons, Ethelwolth and Aethelstan; the
Eldest succeeded him in the Kingdom of the West Saxons; and he gave to his
other Son Aethelstan what he had subdued, or his Conquests; who died obscurely,
it not being known what end he came to. Malmsb. de Gest. Reg. Ang. f. 20. a. n.
30.
Ethelwolphus West-Saxonum regno contentus, caetera quae pater subjugaverat,
Appendicia, Aethelstano filio contradidit, Qui quanto and quo fine defecerit
incertum The Saxon Chronology Ann. Dom. 836. has it thus. Ethelwolphus
Occidentalium Saxonum regnum capessit, ( Feng to Weg-Sexana Rice, the Common
expression for Succession in that Language) filio autem suo Aethelstano,
Cantuariorum, Saxonum Orientalium, Suthregientium, and Suth Saxonum regnum
donavit. Florence of Worcester in the same year thus. Cujus post mortem
(meaning Egbert) Ethelulphus filius suus in West-Saxonia regnare coepit,
suumque filium Aethelstanum Cantuariis, East-Saxonibus, Suth-Regiis, and
Suth-Saxonibus regem perfecit. Egbert made his Son Aethelstan King of Essex,
Kent, Surrey, and Sussex. After whose death the whole Kingdom came into the
hands of Aethelwulph. Testam. Aelfred. in Asser. Meneven. f 22. n. 20. Malm. f.
22. a. n. 20. b. n. 30. chron. Saxon. Anno 854.
Aethelwulph notwithstanding his Sons by Proximity of Blood were his Heirs, and
also Heirs to one another; yet gave his Kingdom of the West Saxons to Ethelbald
his Eldest Son, Ethelred his third, Aelfred his fourth Son successively; and
gave to his second Son Ethelbert, Essex, Kent, Surry, Sussex. Ethelhald lived
but five years, and Aethelbert succeeded him in the whole Kingdom as next
Brother, Vt justum erat, says Asser. f. 4. n. 40. Flor. Worcest. and Simon of
Durham Anno. 860. Chon. Saxon. Anno. 860.
Aethelbaldus autem Quinquennium regnabat (Feng Aethelbryht, to Eallum Tham
Rice his Brother) Ethelbertus autem totum fratris sui regnum capessit. Flor.
Wigo^n. Anno. 866, 871.
After whom his two younger Brothers Aethel^ed, and Aelfred were possessed of
the Kingdom successively. This Historian calls this Testament or Will Epistola
haereditaria.

Id. Anno. 975.
So King Edward possessed the Kingdom after his Father King Edgar, both by
Proximity of Blood, as his Eldest Son; and by his Fathers Donation, and
Command, and Edwardum, ut pater ejus praeceperat, eligerunt, etc. Flor. Wig.
Anno. 975.

From Egbert the First Saxon Monarch, to Ethelred the last Saxon King, by
Proximity and right of Blood, for the space of 216 years, we do not often find
the words Elected, or Election; and where they do occur, they are bound and
limited by Proximity of Blood, or Nomination of the Successor by the
Predecessor: and as they are used, they signify only Recognition of, or
Submission to him, that was said to be Elected.

Secondly, The Danes (a promiscuous People as the Saxons were, Danes,
Norwegians, Goths, Sweves, Frisons, etc. and under the name of Danes Aelfred
vit. f. 10. c. 14.
) ever since the beginning of King Egbert, having by continued Invasions, and
Piracies, harassed, and grievously wasted and molested England, in the Reign of
King Aelfred, by pact and bargain between him and Guthran, enjoyed East Saxony,
or Essex, and the County of the East Angles; and, as Faedus Aelfr. and Guthr.
c. 1. Lamb. fol 36.
some say, a far greater part of the Nation. In King Ethelred's Reign, Swane,
King of Denmark, with a great Army Invaded, and made himself Master of the
whole Nation; forcing Ethelred and his Wife Emme, Sister to Richard the Second
Duke of Normandy, with their two Sons Edward and Alfred into that Country.

The Danish Kings stayed not long here after Swane had conquered the Kingdom;
they all four Reigned not much above 25 years, their only Title was the Sword;
notwithstanding they either brought hither the custom of the Predecessors
naming, or giving the Kingdom to his Successor, as probably it might have been
some times practiced in their own Kingdoms; or used it as they found it here
practiced in cases of Necessity, and in their Childrens Minority by the Saxon
Kings.

Encomium Emmae pr. by du Chesn amongst the old French Histor. fol. 164. B.
Swane made his Son Cnute his Successor. He married Emme the Widow of Ethelred,
by whom he had his Son Hard Cnute. To him his half Brother Cnute gave all that
had been any ways under his Government; but he being then in Denmark, Ibid. C.
Harold possessed himself of the Kingdom; who was a Bastard Son of a Maid
Servant brought into his Concubines Chamber, and imposed upon him by her; Fol.
174. A. B.
and for this reason Elnoth Archbishop of Canterbury refused to Consecrate him
King, and to deliver him the Crown and Scepter.

After the death of Harold, Hard Cnute called his half Brother Edward by his
Mother Emme (afterward called the Confessor) out of Normandy, and caused him to
live with him; and dying within less than two years after, left him Heir of his
whole Kingdom, Gul. Gemeticens. l. 6. c. 9.
Totius regni reliquit haeredem.

And he, not long before he died, made William the Conqueror his Successor.
Anno eodem (viz. 1065. Note the Reason.
) Rex Edwardus senio gravatus cernens Clitonis Edwardi nuper defuncti filium
Edgarum, Regio folio minus idoneum, tam cord, quam corpore, Godwinique Comitis
multam malamque sobolem, Quotidie super terram crescere ad Cognatum suum
Wilhelmum Comitem Normanniae animum apposuit, and eum sibi succedere in regnum
Angliae voce flabili sancivit. In the same year King Edward growing infirm with
Age, perceiving Edgar Aetheling, the Son of Prince Edward, lately Deceased,
neither in Mind nor Body fit for the Government, nor to bear up against the
growing Power and Malice of Godwin's Sons, thought upon his Cousin William Earl
of Normandy, Fol. 511. b. n. 30.
and by a firm Declaration Decreed he should be his Successor in the Kingdom.
Ingulph that Reports this, was at the very time Secretaty to this William Earl
of Normandy, and after he had given him a great Character for his Courage,
Conduct, and constant success in War; his Justice, Religion, and Devotion,
subjoyns, that King Edward sent Robert Archbishop of Canterbury, as Envoy to
him, to let him know he was designed his Successor in his Kingdom. Which
probably he would never have done, if this and the like Donations had been
questioned in those days. Nay Review of Tyrhs, p. 482.
Mr. Seldom says, This Donation was a lawful Title.

William Rufus had the same Right and Title of Succession by the Donation of
his Father, and as his Testamentary Heir Fragmt. de vita Gul. long. f. 32. n.
20. 30. 40. Orde. Vit. f. 39. C. D.
.

Ralph de Diceto, Dean of St. Paul's, (who lived in or very near the time)
says, Col. 505. n. 40. 50.
That Hugh Bigod, Steward of the King, made speed out of Normandy, (where King
Henry died) into England, and made Oath before the Archbishop of Canterbury,
That upon his Death bed, upon some Differences that happened between him and his
Daughter the Empress did disinherit her, and made Stephen Earl of Boloign his
Heir. Whereupon William Archbishop of Canterbury giving too much credit to the
Words of the Steward, consecrated Stephen Earl of Mortaign King at Westminster.
If this should be true, he succeeded as Testamentary Heir to King Henry.

King John was Testamentary Heir to his Brother Richard; who upon his
Deathbed, when he despaired of Life, devised to his Brother John the Kingdom
of England, and all other his Lands, and made all present swear Fealty to him,
and commanded that his Castles, and Three parts of his Treasure should be
delivered to him. f. 449. b. lin. 37. Walls. Hypodig. Neustriae f. 457. n. 40.
Roger Hoveden, who was a Domestic in the Family of King Henry II. and wrote
at this very time, delivers this.

King John, before he left the World, made Henry his First-begotten Son his
Heir. Paris, who f. 288. lin. 2. Mat. West. f. 276. n. 40.
writes this, was Historian to this Henry.

After what has been premised, the Author's History comes to be considered
upon his first Query, which he maintains upon Instances in the Saxon, Norman,
and subsequent times.

The Author's Words, P. 13.
As to the former, I say, the resolution of Conscience in this case does not
depend upon the Will and Pleasure of the Person to whom the former Oath was
made, but upon the ground on which it was made, and from which it had its force
to oblige; and if those cease, the obligation of the Oath ceases together with
them: And whether they do or not, no particular Person is so fit to judge, as
the Three Estates of the Realm, as I shall now prove from several remarkable
Instances to this purpose in our Histories and Parliament Records; whereby I
shall make it appear, that when a Dispute has happened about the Right of
Succession, and to whom the Oaths of Allegiance were to be made, they have
looked on it as their proper Right to limit the Succession, and determine the
Oaths. The Author's Words, and Application continued ibid. p. 13.
V;nder the British Government, we find a considerable Instance to our purpose,
Vortigern, A.G. 454. Magnates Brit. Regem Vortigernum penitus deserentes,
unanimiter filium suum in Regem sublimaverunt Mat. West. p. 83.
the British King had entered into a Secret League to bring over the Saxons:
upon which the Great Men of the Nation deserted him, and chose Vortimer in his
room (he was his eldest Son.) Here it is plain, they thought the introducing a
Foreign Power, a sufficient discharge of their Obligation to him, it being so
directly contrary to the public Good of the Nation, although Vortigern gave
them no Discharge. In the Desertion of Vortigern and advancing his Son
Vortimer, he cites Mat. West. Anno Domini 454. But in the whole Story there is
not one Syllable of a Secret League in Mat. West. in that, or in any other
following Year. What he cites in the Margin is in Mat. West.

HISTORY.
To prevent the Easiness, Supinity, Luxury and Effeminacy of all People; the
Ignorance, Avarice, Debauchery, and Simony of the Clergy; and an universal
lapse of the Nobility and People into notorious Extravagancies and Impieties;
and to repel the Violences, and hinder the Incursions and Invasions of the
Picts and Scots; Vortigern held a Counsel of his Great Men and Nobles, being
excited thereto by the Noise and Clamours of the People; wherein, by General
consent, it was agreed to call the Saxons out of Germany to their aid. Who no
sooner received the Invitations from the Britains by special Messengers, but
easily granted, what they themselves had a Thousand Gildas. page 46, 47, 48, 49.
times wished for. Vortigern excited by the noysiness of his People about the
Public State, asked the Advice of his Great Men; and it pleased them all to
call the English, and Saxons out of Germany, Mighty in Arms, Vagabonds, without
Habitations, with prospect of a double Profit, that they might easily conquer
their Enemies; and that hitherto, being void of Habitations, they might esteem
it a vast benefit to inhabit a nasty Soil, or Poor Country: But they were not
to attempt any thing against the Britains, because the memory of the Advantage
they received by coming thither, would soften, and reduce their natural Ferity
or Barbarity. The Advice was allowed, and there were sent into Germany Envoys,
very considerable Men, and such as worthily represented the Nation. The Germans
hearing what they had a Thousand times wished for Malms. fol. 3. b. n. 10.20.
, etc. they entered at first with great Joy Ibid. n. 40. 50.
and Favor of the People: but finding they cheated them, and came for their
Estates, when it was too late they would have Ibid. f. 4. a. n. 20.
expelled them. They leagued with the Scots, whom they were sent for to expel,
pretending they were not sufficiently rewarded, and provided for, etc. and with
their Assistance wasted, burnt, and spoiled all Cities and Countries from the
East to the West Sea Gild c. 24. p. 55, 56.
.

Part of the Story cited by this Author, tho he mentions only Mat West. is from
Geofry of Fol. 48. b.
Monmouth, the most Fabulous Historian (if he be worthy to be called so) extant
amongst the English; and therefore, it may be supposed, this Tale is brought in
by a side Wind, and fathered upon Mat. West.

Lues acerrima, and acrior mox hostium novorum, i. e. Anglorum est sequuta,
Flor. Wigorn. f. 541. Ann. Dom. 446.
Quos Britanni unanimi consilio cum Rege suo Vortigerio, quasi Defensores
Patriae, ad se invitandos eligerunt, sed statim Impugnatores and Expugnatores
senserunt. A more sharp, than the sharpest of Plagues followed, which was of
the new Enemies, the English, whom the Britains, by Unanimous Counsel and
Advice with their King Vortigern, had chosen to be invited to them, as
Defenders of the Country, but they presently proved Assaulters of it, and
Conquerors. The Saxon Chronology speaks to the same purpose. Anno. 446, 447
And the late Dean of St. Paul's agrees with, and approves of these Relations
of the Britains joining with their King Vortigern, in calling in the Saxons, in
his learned Book of the Antiquities of the British Churches. Page 304. 317, 318


The Author's Words, ibid. p. 13.
In the Saxon times Sigebert King of the West Saxons (in the time of the
Heptarchy) was complained of for misgovernment, and for changing their Laws for
his own ends: but when he persisted in his way, there was a Convention of the
Nobility and People ( convenerunt Nobiles regni cum populo universo, says Mat.
West.) and they declared themselves free from Allegiance to him, and chose
Kineulfus in his room Cum autem modi^ omnibus male tractaret eos legesque a
tecessorum suorum propter co^modum suum vel d^ pravaret, vel mutaret. Mat.
West. A. (...) 756. He Hunt. l. ^ p. 196.
. The following words here omitted in both Authors are, Kineulfus. Juvenis
egregius de Regia stirpe oriundus, electus est in Regem.

HISTORY.
Both Hen. of Hunt, and from him Mat. West. have this Story. But it is otherwise
reported, and by Florence of Worcester Fol. 57 An. Dom 755.
. Kineulfus de Prosapia Regis Cerdicii oriundus; auxilium sibi ferentibus
West-Saxonicis Primatibus, Regem illorum Sigebertum ob multitudinem suorum
factorum iniquorum regno exterminavit, and loco ejus regnavit. Kineulphus of
the Stock of Cerdic, (who was the first Saxon King) by the assistance of the
West Saxon Noblemen, for the multitude of his wicked Actions (that was
Kineulf's pretense, and without doubt a Common Good tacked to it) expelled
Sigebert the Kingdom (except out of Hampshire) and he reigned in his stead.
Almost the same relation is in the Saxon Annals. Kineulfus, West-Saxonum
primatibus adjutus Sigeberti regnum pro malefactis suis totum quidem, excepta
Hamtonensium provinia, occupavit. Kineulf, by the help of the West Saxon
Nobility, usurped or possessed himself of Sigebert's whole Kingdom for his
misdeeds, except Hampshire Saxon. Chron. A. D. 755.
. Whence Kineulf is also derived from Cerdic, the Founder of the West Saxon
Kingdom. This was in the time of the Heptarchy, when the petty Kings, Earls,
and Pretenders to his Government, took all Opportunities and Pretenses to
destroy and overturn one another. And it was the Action and Contrivance of
Kineulf, assisted by the rebellious and mutinous Subjects of Sigebert, that
thrust him out of his Kingdom. Malmsbury has it thus, Arripuit regnum
Sigebertus, vir apud suos saevitia immanis, idemque foris ignavia perinfamis;
quocirca omnium odio conspirante, post annum Solio deturbatus, meliori locum
fecit. l. 1. fol. 7. ^. n. 20.30.
Suscepit regni gubernacula Kienulphus, clarus and ille quidem morum
compositione, militiaeque gestis. Sigebert invaded, or seized the Throne, a man
very cruel at home, and abroad very infamous for Sloth and Cowardice: wherefore
he was hated of all Men, and after one Year being dethroned, made way for a
better. Kineulf, famous for his good Temper and Military Actions, undertook the
Government. In these three most Authentic and Ancient Histories there is
nothing of a Convention of the Nobles and People, or an Election of Kineulf,
but they affirm, that both he and Sigebert, whom he dethroned, invaded the
Government by Force or Fraud, and entered upon it by indirect means; and by
such it was to be kept; and for that reason the People hated Sigebert.

The Author's Words, p. 14.
In the Kingdom of Mercia, Beornredus for not governing by the Laws, was by a
Convention of the Nobility and People set aside from the Government, and Offa
chosen King, who was of the Royal Stem, but not the next Heir: and so William
of Malmsb. observes, in the West Saxon Kingdom after Ina, That no Lineal
Succession was then observed, but still some of the Royal Line sat in the
Throne; and of Ina himself, that he was rather put into the Throne for his
Virtue, than by his Right of Succession. This Paragraph he makes good by the
three parcels of History there noted A. D. 758. Gensde regno Merciorum, contra
Regem suum Beornredum insurgens, pro eo quod populum non aequis legibus, sed
per tyrannidem gubernaret, convenerant in unum omnes, tam Nobiles, quam
ignobiles, and Offa Duce ipsum a regno expulerunt. Mat. West.

Nam and ipse Brithricus and caeteri infra Inam reges, licet Natalium splendore
gloriantes (quippe qui de Cerdicio originem traherent) non parum tamen a linea
regiae Stirpis exorbitaverant Will. Malms. degest. Reg. Ang. l. 1. c. 2.

Regnum per Inam novatum qui Cinegissi ex fratre Cuthhalbo pronepos magis pro
insitivae virtutis industria, quam sucessivae sobolis prosapia in principatum
ascitur. id. ib.


.

What he says of Beornredus and Offa is to be found in Mat. West. but nothing
to that purpose in the Saxon Chronology. All that is there to be found of them
as to this particular is in Anno Domini 755. toward the latter end of the Year.
Eodem anno Aethelbaldus Rex Merciorum Secan-dunae occissus est; Bearnredus
autem regnum capessit, and aliquantisper tenuit. Eodemque anno Rex-Offa regnum
suscepit, annosque triginta and novem tenuit. In the Year 755. Ethelbald King
of the Mercians was killed at Secandune, and Beornredus possessed the Kingdom,
and held it a small time. And the same Year King Offa took the Kingdom, and
held it 39. Years. Nor in Florence of Worcester, he only says, Rex Merciorum
Aethelbaldus in Segeswald occiditur; cujus regnum Beoruredus tyrannus invasit,
and per modicum tempus in parva letitia tenens regnum cum vita perdidit; quo
mortuo successit in regnum Nepos patruelis Aethelbaldi Regis Merciorum Offa. A.
D. 755. f. 574.
Ethelbald King of the Mercians was killed in Segeswald (i. e. Secandunt) whose
Kingdom Beornred the Tyrant invaded, and holding it a little while with small
joy, lost both the Kingdom and his own Life; and Offa the Brothers Son of
Aethelbald King of the Mercians succeeded him.

Malmsbury, speaking of Aethelbald, says, Hic alta pace, and multo tempore, id
est Quadraginta uno Annis rerum perfunctus, and novissime a Subjectis occisus,
fortunae rotam volvit, author ejus necis Bernredus nil memorabile dedit, nisi,
quod mox ab Offa necatus, dignum finem Insidiarum tulit. fol. 14. b. n. 30.
Aethelbald managed his Affairs in a full Peace One and forty Years, but at
last the Wheel of Fortune turned, and he was killed by his Subjects; the Author
of his Death, Bernred, left nothing memorable behind him, unless his being
killed by Offa, and thereby receiving a worthy Reward of his Treachery.

In these Historians here is nothing of a Convention, that either set aside
Beornred, and chose Offa for their King; but only that Beornred was a Tyrant
and Traitor, who with his Accomplices murdered his peaceful Sovereign
Aethelbald, who in great quiet had governed his Kingdom one and forty years,
which he invaded and set up himself, and that Offa revenged his Uncle
Aethelbald's Murder, killed Bernred, and succeeded in the Government; and
doubtless by the means of the power and force with which he subdued Bernred.

The other two parcels of History are not fairly cited, or duly placed and laid
together; for the Author has placed that last, which is first mentioned in the
Historian; and by these he would prove, That in the West Saxon Kingdom after
Ina no lineal Succession was then observed; and of Ina himself, that he was
rather put into the Throne for his Virtue, than by right of Succession.

HISTORY.
The words of the Historian are Malms. degest. Reg. l. 1. c. 2. f. 7. a. lin. 6.
; Eo Roman eunte Regnum per Inam novatum, (and so on, as cited by the Author)
he going to Rome (that is, King Ceadwalla, concerning whom the preceding
Discourse had been) Ina seized upon the Kingdom, or changed the Succession, who
was the Grandchild of Cuthbald, Brother of Kinegils, and was called to the
government more for his real Virtue, than by successive Birthright.

The Saxon Chronology A. D. 689.
thus expresses his coming to the Government; Ine Feng to West-Seaxna Rice,
etc. Ina West-Saxonum regnum capescit, Eodem anno Cadwalla Romam Profectus est,
Baptismumque a Papa suscepit, Quem Papa Petrum cognominavit, atque circiter
Septimanam unam postea defunctus est. Ina took upon him the Government of the
West Saxon Kingdom, etc. Flor. of Worcester thus: A. D. 688.
Abeunte Ceadwalla Romam, suscepit Imperium Ina de stirpe Regia; cujus pater
Kenredus, cujus pater Ceolwaldus, cujus pater Cutha, cujus pater Cuthwinus,
cujus pater Ceanlinus. Ceadwall going to Rome, Ina undertook, or put himself
upon the Government, whose Father was Kenred, whose Father was Ceoldwald, whose
Father was Cutha, (or according to Malmsb. Cuth-bald) whose Father was Cuthwin,
whose Father was Ceanlin. In these Histories there is nothing how he ascended
the Throne, whether he was called to it, or otherwise placed himself upon it;
or received it, as recommended to it by his Predecessor Ceadwald, as he
himself when he went to Rome recommended his Successor Aethelhard. Relicto
Imperio ac Flor. Wig. A. D. 728. f. 572.
Aethelhardo de prosapia Cerdici Regis oriundo, commendato Rex Ina ad limina
beatorum Apostolorum profectus est. Ina left his Government, and having
recommended Aethelhard, went to Rome. The Saxon Chronology only says, A.D. 728.
Ina Romam abiit, ibique Spiritum efflavit; and Aethelhardus West-Saxonum
regnum capessit, tenuitque annos quatuordecim. f. 7. b. n. 20.
Malmsbury's words are; Successit Principatui Aedelardus Inae consanguineus,
per quatuordecim annos quietissime regnum retentum Cuthredo cognato reliquit.
Aethelhard the Kinsman of Ina succeeded in the Government, enjoyed it quietly
fourteen years, and left it to his Kinsman Cuthred, who held it about the like
time. In the Saxon A.D. 741.
Chronology and Flor. of Worcester, it is, Cuthred took upon him the Government,
or succeeded in the Kingdom.

The two next Rulers after Cuthred, were Sigebert and Kineulf, of whom before.

Brithric succeeded Kineulf, but how, and when, none of these three Historians
tell us. In his Story we meet with the Author's last parcel of History, but
very partially cited. They all report, that he married the Daughter of Offa
King of Mercia, at that time most potent, Malms. l. 1. c. 2. f. 8. a. n. 10.
cujus affinitate fultus, Egbertum solum Regalis Prosapiae Superstitem, quem
validissimum suis Vtilitatibus metuebat, Obicem Franciam fugandum curavit: nam
and ipse Brithricus, and caeteri infra Inam Reges, licet Natalium splendore
gloriantes (quippe qui de Cerdicio originem traherent) non parum tamen aliena
regiae stirpis exorbitaverant: illo igitur expulso securo resolvi coeperat
otio, etc. Supported by the Affinity of Offa, he caused Egbert, the only
Survivor of the Royal Race, to fly into France, fearing he would be a great
check to his Affairs: for Brithric himself, and the other Kings since Ina,
although they might glory in the splendour of their Births (as deriving their
Origin from Cerdic) yet they were not a little out of the way from the line of
the Royal Progeny: When Egbert was expelled the Kingdom, he began to live
securely, etc.

From this Observation of Malmsbury's, as the Author calls it (if it be one)
the lineal Succession before Ina (which might be here set forth, if needful) is
as much proved as no lineal Succession after him; and notwithstanding the
several Usurpations that had been between the Reign of Ceadwally, or Ina, and
Egbert, who was much feared by Brithric, as being the only Survivor, and of
right Successor of the Royal Line, and therefore banished into France; the
lineal Succession in the West Saxon Kingdom, was in time revived and continued
in the Saxon Monarchy which he founded, as will appear in the further Enquiry
into (the Author's) other Saxon Instances. This if it had been fairly cited,
could not have been useful to him; but he took what served his turn, and left
out the rest.

The Words of the Author, p. 14.
Aethelulphus, King of the West Saxons, went to Rome, Matt. West. A. D. 854.
867.
and there crowned Alfred his youngest Son King; and married the King of
France's Daughter, in his return, and made her Queen against the Laws; for
which reason he was excluded his Kingdom, his eldest Son and Alston Bishop of
Shireburn, being at the top of this Act of Exclusion; and he came back only
upon the terms of receiving his Son into a Share of the Kingdom; which shows
that they looked on the Laws as the measure of Allegiance: and where those were
openly broken, that it was in their power to transfer it.

HISTORY.
Rex Occidentalium Saxonum Aethelulphus cum honor maximo Romam profectus, etc.
Aethelulphus King of the West Saxons went with great honor to Rome, carrying
with him his younger Son Alfred, whom he loved beyond all his other Sons, that
he might be instructed by Pope Leo in Manners and Religion, where he stayed a
year with his Son, and caused him to be crowned King by the Pope; and after few
days returning to his Country, he brought with him Judith, Daughter to Charles
King of France, whom he had married. But in the mean time, while the King was
beyond Sea, there was a Conspiracy of certain great Men formed against him; the
chief of the Conspiracy were Aethelbald his eldest Son, and Alston Bishop of
Shireburn, and Landulph Earl of Somersetshire, who had resolved, that upon his
return he should never be received to the Government; for which they had two
causes; One, for that he had caused his younger Son Alfred to be crowned at
Rome, and postpon'd and excluded his other Sons; the second was, That he had
despised all English Women, and married a Stranger. Moreover, the Conspirators
had heard, that contrary to the Custom and Statutes of the West Saxon Kings, he
called the King of France's Daughter, whom he had lately married, Queen; and
caused her to sit by him at the Table, and eat with him; which the West Saxon
Nation did not permit, nor that she should be called Queen, but the King's
Wife. Haec autem infamia ab Eadburga Offae Regis filia, ejusdem generis regina,
exorta est: Quae Virum suum Brithricum ^eneno perdidit, etc. The occasion of
which non permission arose from Eadburg the Daughter of Offa, a Queen of the
same sort, who destroyed her Husband with Poison, and sitting by the King, was
wont to accuse all the Noblemen of the Kingdom; and those she could not accuse,
she killed by Poison. Therefore for the lewdness of the Queen, all conspired
that they would never permit a King to reign over them, Qui in praedictis
culpabilis inveniretur, who should be found culpable in what has been said.
Revertente tandem a Roma Aethelulfo Rege Pacifico, praedictus filius ejus
Aethelbaldus, conceptam nequitiam ad effectum producere attentavit; sed Deus
omnipotens id fieri non permisit, etc. When the peaceable King Aethelulph
returned from Rome, his Son Aethelbald attempted to effect his wicked
Contrivance; but God would not permit it: for to prevent a more than Civil War
between Father and Son, by the ineffable Clemency of the King, the Confederacy
of all the Nobles and Bishops was broken, he dividing the Kingdom of the West
Saxons between himself and Son, which before was undivided, so as his Son
possessed the East part, and the Father the West part; Et cum tota regni
Nobilitas pro Rege decertare, and filium a Jure regni depellere vellent, si
Pater id fieri permisisset, ipse mentis nobilitate ab avaritiae sese vitio
excludens, filii sui concupiscentiae satisfecit sicque ubi Pater justo Dei
Iudicio regnare debuerat, illic filius pertinax and iniquus regnavit; and when
as the whole Nobility of the Kingdom would have fought for the King, and forced
his Son from the right of the Kingdom, if his Father would have permitted it to
be done; but he being free from all Covetousness, satisfied the unruly Appetite
of his Son; and so where the Father ought to have reigned by the just Sentence
of God, the obstinate and wicked Son reigned. This Story Mat. Westminster. had from
Flor. of Worcester A. D. 675.
, tho it is not in the last altogether so formal. f. 21. b. n. 50. l. 22. a. n.
10. 20.
Malmsbury likewise has it, tho not entirely. But the Saxon Chronology has
nothing of it, nay rather it has something contrary to it. A. D. 854.
Eodem anno Aethelwulfus rex magno cum honor Romam perrexit, ibique per Menses
Duodecim moratus est, cui mox domum redeunti Carolus Francorum Rex filiam suam
in Reginam dedit; hinc postea ad populum suum reversus est, qui mirifice
laetabatur: sed post biennium, ex quo a Francis redierat, defunctus est, corpus
autem Wintoniae sepultum jacet. In the Year 854. Aethelwulph went in great Pomp
to Rome, where he staid Twelve Months. To whom, as he returned home, Charles
King of France gave him his Daughter for his Queen: Afterward, when he
returned to his People they rejoiced wonderfully; within Two Years after he
died, and his Body lies buried at Winchester. Not one Word here, or any where
else in this Chronology, of this improbable and Romantic Story. But be it
true, as it is told in Mat. Westminster, was it against their Laws ( i. e. the
West Saxon Laws) for Aethelwulph to marry the King of France his Daughter, and
make her his Queen? Where is this Law? It is not amongst Ina's Laws. But the
Law was made in Brithric's time, by reason of the wickedness of his Queen
Eadburgh. If she was as wicked as the Story makes her, was the Anger and Humor
of the People against her, sufficient to make a Law, That for the time coming
no West Saxon King should permit his Wife to sit and eat with him, or be called
Queen? Why was she not put to death for her transcendent Wickedness, if true?
Why was she permitted to go into France, with innumerable Treasure after her
Husband's death? If there was such a Law made then, 'twas in the time of the
Heptarchy. Can any Man think that Egbert the first Saxon Monarch did not suffer
his Wife to sit and eat with him, and to be called Queen? And that our
Aethelwulph, who had Four Sons by a former Wife, did not permit her to sit and
eat with him, and to be called Queen? There was a Conspiracy and wicked Design
of Aethelbald to dethrone his Father, carried on by Alston Bishop of Shireburn,
and the Earl of Somersetshire, etc. the pretense was, for that he had caused
his youngest Son Alfred to be crowned at Rome. What Laws had Aethelwulph broken
in this, except the Laws of Birthright, Lineal Descent, and Proximity of
Blood? Upon which the Succession of the Monarchy was fixed, if Alstan,
Ethelbald, or the Earl of Somersetshire understood any thing of it. Nor could
there be any Exclusion of Aethelwulph, when the whole Nobility offered to fight
for, and defend him; nor could there be any Terms of receiving his Son into a
share of the Kingdom, when out of ineffable Clemency he himself divided it, to
avoid a Civil War, and would not suffer the Nobility to force his Son from the
Right of the Kingdom. What right was this? Was it not from Proximity of Blood,
and Lineal Succession, he being his eldest Son?

The Author's Words, p. 15.
If our Allegiance cannot be transferred by the States of the Realm; it must be
because, (as some think) by the Fundamental Constitution of this Kingdom, we
are bound in Allegiance to the next Right Heir in a Lineal Succcession. But I
find no such thing in the Saxon times; for although they generally kept to the
Royal Line, yet not so, but that when it appeared to be much more for the
Public Good, they did not stick upon the Point of Proximity.

What may be opposed to the Words and Assertion of the Author.
Those, who in these cases our Author, and all others that have written upon
this, or the like Subject, do call the States of the Realm, and what is due to
the Heir in a Lineal Succession by the Laws of our Land, and consequently by
the Constitution of the Kingdom, shall be considered afterward. Concerning the
Saxon Succession, what has been already said might be sufficient; but upon
further occasion given in his Instances, there will be more said of it. The
Public Good, which the Author here, and in many other places, seems to rely
mainly upon to support what he asserts, is chiefly to be enquired after.

Public or Common Good is a common Notion, and signifies nothing unless it be
stated, and explained; the true import of the Words are, That every Individual
of the common Body, according to the capacity of the Person, should and ought
to be made a partaker of the benefit and advantage that ought to accrue to the
whole; for if it be such a Good, (or rather such an Evil) as is only for the
benefit of a Party, and in respect of the whole, of the least, or a small
number; it is impossible it should be a Public Good, but a most horrid cheat
put upon the People under that pretense, to gull them into Slavery, and to make
them the Authors of their own, and the Public Ruin of the Nation. All
designing Men of whatsoever Persuasion, though if called together, cannot say
what they would have; yet in all Ages have pretended to procure the Public
Good of the People. Every Party, (though in the beginning never so
inconsiderable) that intends to advance it self, declares for it until it gets
Power to manage, and appropriate to themselves what they call so; and then it
appears the Interest, Gain, and Advancement of the Party were the End; and the
pretense of Common Good, but the Means to that End. And this pretense, and
false light, has at all times so Lowbell'd the blind and ignorant World, that
Men fly into the Net, though they see all the Laws broken that maintain the
Public Good, and the very Foundations of it eradicated; all the goodly
Pretenses and fair Promises relinquisht, and utter desolation coming upon them:
And therefore where it is manifest the Public Laws are, or cannot but be
broken, contemned, and vilified by any Party, it is Private and Party-Good they
only intended; and to accomplish their ends, and secure themselves, must
proceed against all the Measures and Rules of Public Good, by fraud, force,
and violence, accompanied with stupendous Devastation. For nothing can be a
Public Good to any Nation, where the exercise and practice of it is not
warranted by the Law, Custom and Constitution of that Nation. So that the
Authors Argument, upon the account of Common Good, signifies little, unless he
can prove the Saxons waved Proximity of Blood; and that they did it according
to the Law and Constitution of the Kingdom.

The Author's words, p. 15.
Page 101. Brompton p. 862. l. 1. c. 3. p. 14.
I shall not meddle with the Kingdom of the Northumbers, which alone was
Originally Elective, as appears by Mat. Westminster. and wherein there happened so
great Disorders and Confusions, that at last William of Malmsb. says, none
could be persuaded to accept of the Kingdom.

HISTORY.
Regnum Northanhumbrorum exordium sumpsit. M. Westminster. A. D. 548. f. 101. n. 20.
Cum enim Proceres Anglorum magnis laboribus and continuis Patriam illam
subjugassent, Idam juvenem Nobilissimum Regem sibi unanimiter praefecerunt. In
the year 548 the Kingdom of the Northumbers first began. The chief Men, or
Leaders of the English, having conquered that Country, unanimously set up Ida,
a most noble young Man, for their King. What if the English in the beginning of
the Kingdom of the Northumbers did set up Ida (in all probability at that time
the great Leader of them) to be their King? Does it therefore follow that
Kingdom was Elective, or that they chose their King afterward? A. D. 547
The Saxon Chronology says only, Ida caepit regnare, Vnde Northanhymbrensium
Genus Regale ortum est. In the year 547. Ida began to Reign, from whom arose
the Royal Race of the Northumbers. Eod Anno.
Florence of Worcester says, In provincia Berniciorum Ida regnum suscepit, and
12 annis regnavit; hic ex Reginis sex filios habuit, and sex habuit ex
Pellicibus. Ex Quibus Regalis Northanhymbrorum prosapia propagata est. In the
Province of Bernicia (part of the Kingdom of Northumberland) Ida took the
Kingdom. He had six Sons by his Queens, and as many by his Harlots; from whom
the Royal Stock was propagated. Malmsbury says, Ida Reigned the first in the
Kingdom of Northumberland, Fol. 8.^ n. 40.
but whether he made himself King, verum atrum ipse per se Principatum
invaserit, or took it by the consent of others, he could not define, parum
definio quid Veritas in abdito est. In Brompton, whom he cites in the Margent,
there is nothing to be found of an Election, but only that the Northumbers
tumultuously set up some Kings, and Murdered and Dethroned others; which was a
common Practice in most Kingdoms during the Saxon Heptarchy; and the same
Reason the Author gives, that he would not meddle with this Kingdom, might have
been given for the passing by all the other, except the Kingdom of the West
Saxons.

The Author's words, p. 15.
But if by the Fundamental Constitution, Allegiance were indispensably due to
the next Rightful Heir in this Monarchy, how came Aethelsian to be Crowned
magno consensu Optimatum, says Malmsbury, when he was not the rightful Heir?

HISTORY.
^lor. Wi^rn. A D. 24. f. ^2.
Invictissimus rex Edwardus senior ex hac vita transiens Aethelstano filio
regni gubernacula reliquit; nec multo post filius ejus Aelfwardus (alias
Edwardus) apud Oxenfordam decessit, and sepultus est ubi and pater illius.
Aethelstanus vero in Kingestune, i. e. in Regia Villa, in regem elevatur, and
honorificie ab Athelmo, Dorobernensi Archiepiscopo, consecratur. The invincible
King Edward the Elder, passing out of this World, left the Government of his
Kingdom to his Son Aethelstan; and not long after him, his Son Aelward (or
Edward) died at Oxford, and was buried where his Father was; but, or then,
Aethelstan was saluted King, and was honorably Consecrated or Anointed and
Crowned by Athelm Archbishop of Canterbury at Kingston. Anno Dominicae
Incarnationis 924. ^lms. f. ^. n. 10.
Aethelstanus filius Edwardi regnare coepit, frater ejus Ethelwardus (alias
Edwardus) paucis diebus post patrem vita decedens, sepulturam cum eodem
Wintoniae meruerat. This is what Florence of Worcester says, and needs no
Translation. ^dem.
Itaque magno consensu optimatum Electus, apud Regiam villam, Quae vocatur
Kingston Coronatus. Therefore being Elected, or Recognized by full consent of
the Great Men, he was Crowned at Kingston; and in another Place, ^. f. 27. ^.
30. Westminster. 84. n.
Post mortem Patris, and Interitum Fratris, in Regem apud Kingston coronatus
est. Anno. Gratiae 924. Rex Anglorum Edwardus cognomento senior diem clausit
extremum, Aethelstanus quoque filius ejus primogenitus, apud Kingstonam rex
creatus, ab Athelmo Dorobernensi Archiepiscopo consecratur. Here Mat. Westminster.
says, Aethelstan was King Edward's Eldest Son, which was true after his Brother
was dead. If the Author had taken notice of these Historians, especially of
Malmsbury, whom he cites, he would have known how Aethelstan came to be
rightful Heir.

The Authors words, p. 15.
Some say (from an old Monk in Malmsbury) that his Father left him his Crown by
his Testament; (which does not clear the difficulty, as to the inviolable right
of Succession by the Constitution) But this cannot be true, for his Elder
Brother Edward died after his Father, and none pretend that his Father
disinherited him.

History and Inquiry into these Words.
A pretty Story. This old Monk in Malmsbury, was William of Malmsbury himself
(whom he cited but two Lines before) Jussu Patris in Testamento Aethelstanus in
Regem acclamatus est. This the Historian says of himself, without vouching any
old Monk for it. By the command of his Father in his Testament, Aethelstan was
Proclaimed or Saluted King. Which clears the difficulty about Election, and the
States having power to dispose of the Crown. As to the truth of it, no body can
doubt, that observes what is said before of his Elder Brother Edward.

The Author's Words, p. 15.
And if Athelstan was Lawful Heir, M. Westminster. A. D. 934. A. D. 939.
what made him to dispatch his Brother Edwin out of the way, and to build two
Monastries for expiation of that Guilt?

HISTORY.
Florence of Worcester has nothing of this Idle Story; and Malmsbury, from
whom Matt. Westminster transcribed the very words of it (and added something of
his own) did not believe it, and tells it as a Fable; but before he begins it,
he Apologizes for telling it; and after he had reported the Design, and
Conspiracy of Alfred against King Athelstan, who would have made him a Bastard,
and so kept him from the Throne, says thus, Et haec quidem fide integra de
rege conscripsi: Malmg. f. 29 a. n. 10, l. 2. c. 6.
sequentia magis Cantilenis per Successiones temporum detritis, quam libri ad
Institutiones posterorum elucubratis didicerim. Quae ideo apposui, non ut earum
veritatem defendam, sed ne Lectorum scientiam defraudem, ac primum de
Nativitate dicendum. And these things I have written concerning the King, may
entirely be believed. Those which follow, I rather learnt from old Songs and
Tales, then Books written for the Information of Posterity, which I have
inserted here, Ibid. n. 20, 30, 40.
not that I shall defend the truth of them, but that I may not keep from the
Readers what is to be known; and then proceeds to tell a Romantic Prodigy of a
Shepherds Beautiful Daughter, out of whose Womb a Moon shone, that irradiated
all England, etc. With this Virgin Edward the Elder stole a leap, by the
assistance of his sometime Nurse, and upon the first Enjoyment of her, begat
Aethelstan, etc. And goes on to tell, Edwin his Brother was accused by some to
have been in the Conspiracy with Alfred, and for that Reason, out of Jealously,
he was by order of Aethelstan put into a small Pinnace, without either Tackle,
or Oars, accompanied only with one Page, with grief whereof he leaped into the
Sea and drowned himself. After this he immediately subjoyns; Haec de fratris
nece, etsi verisimilia videantur, eo minus corrobero, quod mirabilem suae
pietatis diligentiam in reliquos fratres intenderet. Quos cum pater pueros
admodum reliquisset, ille parvos magna dulcedine fovit, and adultos regni
consortes fecit. Although these things concerning the death of his Brother may
seem probable, yet I esteem them less firm, by reason of the admirable Piety he
showed toward his other Brothers; whom he cherisht with great kindness, when
his Father left them very Children; and when they were grown up, made them
sharers in the Government. Not one word in Malmsbury of Athelstan's building
two Monasteries, to expiate the Guilt of Edwin's murder. This was Westminster's
own.

The Author's Words, p. 15.
How came Alfred to oppose his Election, as being Illegitimate, as Malmsbury
confesses?

HISTORY.
He also confesses, That Alfred and his Accomplices were factious People, who
reported he was born of a Concubine, Malmsb. l. 2 (...) 2 (...) 10.
to obviate his being Crowned; and that Sedition never wants Abettors.
Aethelstanus apua Regia villa quae vocatur Kingston coronatus, quamvis Quidam
Alfredus cum factiosis suis, (quia seditio semper invenit accomplices) obviare
tentasset: occasio contradictionis, ut ferunt. quod Aethelstanus ex Concubina
natus esset; and in another place, King Edward and his Son Elward, (...).
or Edward, being dead, Tunc omnium spebus in Ethelstanum erectis; solus
Alfredus magnae insolentiae homo cum suis clam restitit quoad potuit,
dedignatus subdi Domino, quem suo non delegisset arbitrio. Then all Men's hopes
were placed upon Ethelstan, only Alfred a Man of great insolence, and his Party
opposed him, disdaining to submit to a Governor, that he himself had not set
up.

The Author's Words, p. 15.
But Mat. Westminster. gives the Reason: The times were then difficult, and Edwards
other Sons were too young to m^nage the Government, and therefore they set up
Athelstan, as one fit for Business.

HISTORY.
Mat. Westminster. transcribes many of the Words of Malmsbury in the place last
cited; but leaves out that Clause of Alfred's being an Insolent Man, and his
making opposition to Athelstan; and adds this of his own, A. D. 934. f 186. n.
20.
Spreto Edwino, nondum ad regnandum propter teneros annos idoneo, Aethelstanum
in Kingstona consecraverunt. From the partial Construction and Explication of
these last Words above what they will bear, the Author has set up a particular
Sense of his own, against the Sense and Report of all other Historians; nay,
against the Report of M. Westminster. himself, A. D. 924.
who says, Aethelstan was made King, and Crowned as Edward's eldest Son.

After the Death of Aethelstan, his own Author says, M. Westminster. A. D. 940. f.
187. lin. 5.
Successit ei in regnum frater ejus, and haeres legitimus Eadmundus. His
Brother, and lawful Heir, Edmaend succeeded him.

The Author's Words, p. 16.
How came Edred to succeed Edmund, and not his own Sons Edwin, and Edgar? Mat.
Westminster and Brompton give the same Reason, M. Westminster. A. 946. Brompt. p.
862. Flor. Wig. A. 949.
They were incapable by reason of their Age: Repugnance illegitima aetate patri
succedere non valebant. Florence of Worcester says, The Northumbers swear
Allegiance to Edred; and he says, He was next Heir; and yet there were two
Sons of Edmond before him; for he confesses, that they were the Sons of Edmond
and Algiva his Queen.

HISTORY.
M. Westminster. f. 188. n. 30.
Defuncto Edmundo and apud Glastoniam sepulto, Eadredus frater ejus, in
Kingstona regia villa, regni diadema a B. Othone Archiep. Cantuariensi
suscepit. Reliquit quoque duos filios, haeredes legitimos, Eadwinum and
Eadgarum, qui repugnante illegitima aetate, patri succedere non valebant.
Edmund being dead, his Brother Edred was Crowned by Otho Archbishop of
Canterbury. He left also two Sons his lawful Heirs, Edwin and Edgar; who by
reason of their Nonage, could not succeed their Father.

Mortuo Edmundo rege, Brompton, col. 862. n. 20.
Edredus frater suus, filiusque Regis Adelstani, eo quod pueri Edwinus and
Edgarus filii Edmundi, pra immatura aetate adhuc regnare non poterant, sibi in
Regem successit, and ab Odone Dorobernensi Archiep. consecratus est, A. D. 947.
Edmund being dead Edred his Brother, and the Son of King Athelstan, succeeded
him as King, for that the Children Edwin and Edgar, the Sons of Edmund, by
reason of their tender Age, could not as yet reign.

Magnificus rex Anglorum Edmundus die festivitatis Sancti Augustini, etc.
interficitur; Flor. Wig. f. 604. A. D. 946.
mox proximus haeres Edredus fratri succedens, regnum natural suscepit, a
Sancto Odone, etc. The Magnificent King Edmund was killed on the Festival of
St. Austin; presently the next Heir Edred, succeeding his Brother, took upon
him the Government according to Nature, or according to Natural Duty and
Affection.

If the Author had fairly and truly cited these Three Pieces of History, it had
not been impossible to have found out that Edred was but only Tutor, Curator,
Regent, or Protector of the young Princes, and Kingdom; and so took upon him
the Government, until they were of sufficient Age. Westminster says, Edwin and
Edgar were the lawful Heirs of Edmund, (which Words the Author left out) but
could not succeed him by reason of their Nonage, or that they were not of
lawful Age. Brompton says, Edred succeeded his Brother, for that his Sons Edwin
and Edgar, by reason of their immature Age could not yet reign. As much as to
say, Tho in respect of their Age they could not at present, yet afterward in
their riper Years they were to reign; and so they did successively. Lastly,
Florence of Worcester says, Edred was next Heir. What Heir could he be to his
Brother, but Epistolary or Testamentary Heir, or Successor? (For in that sense
Hares is commonly used.) And so 'twas most probable, by some Instrument or
other he made him Tutor, Curator, Regent, or Protector of his Sons and Kingdom;
or that by Consent of the Great Men, he took upon him the Tutorship, and
Regency. For what other Meaning can those Words have, regnum natural suscepit,
than that according to natural Duty and Affection he took upon him the
Government, and Protection of his Nephews, and their Kingdom? But how then came
it to pass, that he was Crowned, and called King? It Is not hard to answer this
Question: For anciently the Sons and Heirs of Emperors, Kings, Dukes, Earls,
Barons, were not always called so; but Heirs only of the Empire, Kingdom,
Dukedom, Du Fresn Gloss. vol. 2. in verb. Haeredes, col. 686, 687.
etc. And the Tutor, Curator, Governor, or Protector, and such as had the Care
of them, and the Administration of the Government, were then called Emperors,
Kings, Dukes, Earls, etc. of such Empires, Kingdoms, Dukedoms, etc. until the
Heir came of Age; and sometimes those Curators and Guardian Kings and Emperors
were anointed and crowned: But when the Heirs were of lawful Age, they quitted
their Curatorships and Regency, and parted with or laid down all Royal Marks of
Majesty, retaining only the Name and Honor of King: And the Title of King, and
the Ceremony of Coronation, was allowed and granted to such Regents, that they
might have the greater Authority with the People. Of such Curators, Tutors, or
Regents, Du Fresn gives several Examples; and of Odo Duke of Aquitain, Tutor to
Charles the Simple, not much before this time, and of other Kings of France,
that had Crowned Tutors with the Titles of Kings.

The Author's Words, p. 16.
A. 957.
After the Death of Edred, the eldest Son of Edmond succeeded; but being found
under a Moral Incapacity (for in Florentius his words, and M. Westminster, In
commisso regimine insipienter egit) he was set aside, as to all the Government
beyond Thames, and Edgar put into it.

HISTORY.
Obiit Edredus Rex die S. Clementis festo, in aetatis vigore, Chron. Sax. A. D.
955
december circiter annos regnabat, deinceps Eadwigus, Eadmundi Regis filius,
regnum capessit, and Sanctum Dunstanum de terra fugavit.

Eadwigus rex Calendis Octobris obiit. Ibid. A. D. 957.
Eadgarus autem frater ejus regnum capessit. Hic Sanctum Dunstanum accersit,
eique Episcopatum Wigorniensem donavit, and postea Londinensem.

King Edred died in the Festival of St. Clement, in the vigor of his Age, after
he had reigned about Ten years. Then Eadwy the Son of Edmund enjoyed the
Kingdom, and banished St. Dunstan.

Eadwy died the First of October, and his Brother Edgar took the Kingdom, and
recalled St. Dunstan, and gave him the Bishopric of Worcester, and afterward
that of London. This Chronology has not one word of the Northumbers and
Mercians rejecting Edwy, and choosing Edgar.

Rex Anglorum Eadwigus, Flor. Wigorn. eodem An.
quoniam in commisso regimine insipienter egit, a Mercensibus and
Northimbrensibus contemptus relinquitur. and suus germanus Clito Eadgarus ab
eis rex eligitur, sicque res Regum sejuncta est, ut flumen Thamesii regnum
disterminaret amborum: mox Rex Mercensium Eadgarns heatum Dunstanum Abbatem
(then Abbot of Glastenbury) cum honor and gloria revocavit. King Edwy, because
he acted foolishly in his Government, was despised, and deserted by the
Mercians, and Northumbrians, and his Brother Prince Edgar chosen; and the
Government of the Kings was so divided, as the Thames bounded both their
Kingdoms: and King Edgar presently called back St. Dunstan the Abbot with
honor and glory. The Words of M. Westminster are mostly the very same, as
these before-cited; the Sense differs not. After this, they both tell, how
Abbot Dunstan was made, first Bishop of Worcester, then of London, by King
Edgar. The Author at his first entrance upon the Saxon Instances, p. 15. said,
he would not meddle with the Kingdom of Northumbers (which in this place both
the Historians he cites do expressly mention) for Reasons there given; and
therefore thinking this Instance to be for his purpose, he cunningly omits to
mention that Nation, as believing for his own Reasons it might undervalue the
Instance; and only says, Edwy was set aside as to all the Government beyond
Thames, and Edgar put into it.

But what if the Northumbrians and Mercians did reject him? 'Twas no more than
the Northumbrians had done in the two preceding Reigns. Flor. Wig. A. D. 926.
They made a League with Aethelstan, and confirmed it by Oath; yet they called
in Anlaf a Pagan King, and raised War against him: And though he, Ibid. A. D. 937.
and Constantine King of Scots his Assistant, and the Northumbrians were
baffled with great Slaughter of their Men, yet but Four years after, and in the
First year of King Edmund, Ibid. A. D. 941.
Northimbrenses fidelitati, quam magnifico regi Anglorum Edmundo, debebant,
infidelitatem praeferentes, Regem Northmannorum Anlafam sibi in regem
eligerunt. The Northumbrians preferring Infidelity to the Fealty they ought to
the Magnificent King Edmund, chose Anlaf King of Norway for their King. Ibid.
A. D. 944.
Three years after, Magnificus rex Anglorum Edmundus duos reges Anlafum, Regis
videlicet Sithrici filium, and Reignoldum Guthfredi filium de Northumbria
expulit, eamque suae ditioni subegit. King Edmund drove two Kings, Anlaf the
Son of Sithric, and Reinold the Son of Gutred, out of Northumberland, and
conquered, or reduced it under his Power. Ibid. A. D. 949.
And Five years after that, Wolstanus Archiepiscopus Eboracensis, proceresque
Northimhembrenses omnes, egregio regi Anglorum Edredo fidelitatem juraverunt,
sed non illam diu tenuerunt. Wulstan Archbishop of York, and all the Great Men
of Northumberland, swear Fealty to the famous King Edred, but did not long keep
it: Namque quendam Danica stirpe progenitum (Ircum nomine) super se Regem
levaverunt. For they set up Iric, a Dane, King over them: And the very next
year King Edred threatening to destroy the whole Country, Ibid. A. D. 950.
they threw down Iric, (Ircum quem sibi regem praefecerant abjecerunt) and
compounded with Edred for a great Sum of Money. Ibid. A. D. 957.
And seven years after they revolted from Edwin, and set up his Brother Edgar:
And like them were the Mercians. Would any Man fetch an Instance from these
People, to confirm and warrant what he would prove, or have thought to be a
just and regular Proceeding?

But what was his Crime? How did he play the Fool? Why, Malmsb. l. 11. c. 7. f.
30. a. n. 20. 30.
he banished Dunstan Chief of the Monks, turned the Monks out of Monasteries,
and put in Secular Priests, and made bold with the Monks Revenue: By which
Folly he made them his Enemies, and lost the People, so as he could not
chastise the Northumbrians, as Edred had done before him; and so was forced to
be content to let his Brother Edgar enjoy Mercia and Northumberland; Chron.
Sax. A. D. 957.
who forthwith recalled Dunstan from Exile, and restored the Monks, where he
could; which made him secure against his Brother Edwy, after whose Death he
possessed the whole Nation.

The Author's Words, p. 16.
How came there to be a Dispute about the Election, after the death of Edgar,
between his eldest Son Edward, and Etheldred his youngest?

HISTORY.
Malmsbury answers the Question. L. 2. c. 9. f. 33. b. n. 40.
Edwardum Dunstanus and ceteri Episcopi consentanci, regali culmine
sublimarunt, contra voluntatem quorundam (ut aiunt) Optimatum and Novercae,
quae vix Septem annorum puerulum Ethelredum filium, suum provehere conabatur,
ut ipsa potius sub ejus nomine imperitaret. Dunstan and the other Bishops that
agreed with him, set Edward in the Throne, against the mind (as they say) of
some great Men, and his Stepmother, who endeavored to set up her Son Ethelred,
a Child scarce Seven Years old, that under his name she might reign.

The Author's Words, p. 16.
I lay no force upon his Mothers endeavors to advance him; but if there had
been such an unalterable Right of Succession, there had not been any color or
pretense for it.

It Is true, there neither was nor could be any; yet she with her Friends
endeavored it, and seeing she could not do it that way, she afterward caused
Edward to be murdered, that the Right of Succession might be in her Son after
the Eldest was taken away; so much the unalterable Right of Succession was then
understood. But says Flor. Wig. there was a great Contention amongst the great
Men about the choice of the King. A. 975.
How could there be any dispute if they knew the Constitution of the Kingdom to
be, that the next Heir must inherit the Crown.

HISTORY.
Flor. Wig. f. 607. A. D. 975.
De rege eligendo magna inter regni primores oborta est dissentio. Quidam
namque Regis filium Edwardum, quidam autem fratrem illius elegerunt Ethelredum
Quam ob causam Archipraesules, Dunstanus and Oswaldus cum Corepiscopis,
Abbatibus, Ducibusque quam plurimis, in unum convenerunt, and Edwardum, ut
pater ejus praeciperat, elegerunt, electum consecraverunt, and in Regem
unxerunt. There was a great Contention amongst the prime Men of the Kingdom
about choosing, or setting up a King. Some were for Edward, some for Ethelred;
For which cause the Archbishops Dunstan and Oswald, with their Suffragans, the
Abbots, and very many great Men, assembled and chose Edward, as his Father had
commanded, consecrated and anointed him King. From what has been said before,
it appears those that would have set up Ethelred against the Right of
Succession, and against Edward, King Edgar's eldest Son, were his Stepmother
and her Party: the others that opposed her Design, and kept fast to Edward,
were for the Right of Succession: with the last the Parliament, as the
Constitution then was, or the Great Assembly of the Nation, that is, the
Archbishops, Bishops, Abbots, and very many Noblemen concurred, and chose, or
recognized and crowned Edward their King; whom his Father at his Death Regni
and morum Haeredem reliquit, Ibidem.
left Heir of his Kingdom and Temper. It cannot be thought but this Assembly
understood the Constitution of the Nation; and yet there arose a dispute about
the Succession. The best Laws in the World cannot keep Men from being wicked,
nor secure the Government from the Attempts of Intruders and Usurpers, when
they think they have Opportunity and Means to set themselves up, let the
Constitution be never so clear and well known. If the Author would have looked
into, or considered the cause of this Contention about the Succession, he might
as well have asked how can there be any Intruders against the known
Constitution, as how could there be a Dispute about the Succession? M.
Westminster says, A. D. 977
Edward retained only the Name of a King, and by the Flattery of his
Stepmother, he permitted to her and her Son Aethelred the Transaction of all
the Affairs of the Kingdom. Ibid. A. D 978. Flor. Wig^eod Anno.
Yet so powerful a thing, and so agreeable to the Constitution, was Succession
by Birth right, that for the establishing her Son in the Throne, the very next
Year she caused Edward to be murdered, and triumphed at his Death.

The next are his Danish Instances. These People had the Sword only for their
Title, and staid but Five and twenty Years or thereabouts: Nor can any Man
affirm from our Historians what the Constitution of the Kingdom was then, as to
the Government or Governors; and the manner of, and chief pr^tence to the
Succession, was Donation; as has been noted before, to which the Reader is
referred. Edmund Ironside, the true lineal Saxon Heir, made an agreement with
Canutus, and divided the Kingdom with him, who had no other pretense to the
Throne, than his Father Swane's Conquest, and his own Army of Danes to make it
good. After the Death of Edmund, the Bishops and English Nobility swear they
would have Cnute for their King, would humbly obey him, and pay his Taxes for
his Army. ^^id. A. D. ^16. f. 18.
Eique humiliter obedire vellent, and suo exercitui vectigalia dare. Let the
Author say, whether it were not Force and Fear made these Men swear?

The Author's Words, p. 17.
After the death of Canutus, a new difference arose about the Succession;
(...). 1055.
some were for Harold, his supposed Son by Algiva; others for Hardecnute. his
Son by Emma.

HISTORY.
After the Death of Cnute, ^almsb. l. c. 12. f. ^. b. n. 50. 43. a lin. etc.
Elegerunt Haraldum Dani and Londoniae cives, qui jam pene in Barbacorum mores
propter frequentem convictum transierant. Angli diu obstiterint, magis unum ex
filiis Ethelredi, qui in Normannia, vel Hardecnutum filium Cnutonii ex Emma,
qui tunc in Danemarchia erat, regem habere volentes. The Danes, and Citizens of
London, who were almost become barbarous by their Converse with them, chose
Harald: the English opposed, and had rather have had for their King one of the
Sons of Ethelred, who were then in Normandy, or Hardecnute, the Son of Cnute by
Emme, who was then in Danemark, Earl Godwin, who professed himself Tutor or
Curator of the Children (pupillorum Tutorem se professus) headed the English;
but at length, being unequal in Force and Number, gave way to violence; sed
tandem vi and numero impar, cessit violentiae. All Historians concluded Harald
to have been a Bastard; yet without doubt he had a very great Command in his
Father's Army, which set him up; and it may be with the Assistance of the
complying English.

The Author's Word's, p. 17.
If the Lineal Succession were a part of our Constitution; how come such
perpetual Disputes to be concerning it? For if it had been owned as a
Fundamental Law, the right of Succession must have been clear beyond dispute.

What may be said to the Reasoning of the Author.
The Author would be thought to have read much History; but certainly he never
considered what he read. Did he in all his reading never meet with Usurpers,
Invaders, and Intruders? Did he never read of Men, that above all things
desired to be Kings, though they knew they had no right to be so? Did he never
read of the Attempts of such Men to make themselves so; and that some have
failed, and others succeeded in those Attempts? Did he never read, that such
Men always had Abbettors, and a Party to carry on their Designs? Did he never
hear of such wicked Men, as have acted contrary to the light of Nature, and
their own Consciences? or to the great Rule of all Mankind; Do as you would
have others do unto you? The Fundamental Law of Succession may be as clear, as
the light it self; yet Invaders, though they know it, will not see it, nor do
think themselves bound by it; but their whole Contrivance is how to evade,
baffle, and enervate that Law, and every other Law that stands in their way,
and yet pretend to advance the Public Interest, the Common Good of the People,
when they intend only to set up their own, and the Interest of the Party,
against the known Laws of the Nation. If these things have frequently been,
they may be so again. It Is the Invader, and Intruder, makes the Dispute, not
the Person in Possession by a Lawful Title; he never goes about to quarrel with
his own Right and just Occupancy; and therefore it is not hard to know, how
Disputes come to be about Lineal Succession. Though the Right be clear beyond
dispute, Men of designs against the clearest Right will take hold of, and make
advantage of every opportunity to do their business.

The Words of the Author subjoined to his Reasoning, p. 17.
But reason of State, and the public Interest still overruled this matter;
and so Ethelred's Sons by Emma, who were the true Heirs by Legal Succession,
were set aside; and Harold, being upon the place, and so best able to manage
the Affairs of the Kingdom, carried it.

What may be said to the Authors Inference from his precedent Reasoning.
A fine Piece of Art and Legerdemain. How did Harold carry it? Malmsbury tells
us by force and violence. What reason of State, or public Interest could make
the Saxons set aside the next Heir, (if they could have had him for their King)
and place in the Throne a Stranger, the Son of a Conqueror, with his Fathers
Army at his Heels? Had not the Danes the greatest share in making him King? and
could the Saxons think otherwise, than that they would have the greatest share
in the Government? What Affairs of the Kingdom was Harald best able to manage?
Certainly not the Affairs, and public Interest of the Saxons: They could not
believe it, when he had an Army, and great numbers of his own Countrymen, with
their Families, to provide for; and when they could not but see, the Nation was
to be planted by Foreigners, who must be their Masters. Therefore what reason
of State, what public Interest could there be, for Harolds carrying of the
Crown and Kingdom, as the Author neatly Phraseth it?

The Words of the Author, p. 18.
For if there be no Rule, it is not possible to satisfy Conscience in the
Niceties of Titles, If there be a Rule, the general consent of the people,
joined with the Common Good, seems to have been that which our Ancestors
proceeded by.

What may be opposed to this saying.
The general Consent of the People, in conjunction with Common Good, or these
two joined, never was actually in Practice, nor never can be. Where, or how can
all the People meet? or if that could be, how can they join in establishing of
the Notion of Common Good? Were they ever all of one mind? Were not they ever,
since things were, of diverse Parties, and those of different Judgments, what
the Common Good was? Was there not partiality in every Party? And did not every
Party helieve that was the Common Good, which they apprehended to be so, and
suited best with their Interest, and Proposals to themselves? But the People
meet by their Representatives. Did ever all the People meet to choose them?
Has not a Party commonly chosen for the whole, excluding all others? Or have
not Men of a Party imposed themselves upon the People, and usurped the general
consent of the whole? Upon a strict enquiry, this will appear to have been the
general Practice. Where then is the General Consent of the People; as for
Common Good, enough has been said before to invalidate that pretense; and for
the Conjunction of the General consent of the People and Common Good, the
Author talks of, let him show it practicable if he can. Do as you would be done
by, is the Ground and Foundation of Common Good (as has been said before) but
when, and where did the general and free Consent of the People, high and low,
concur and unite in this Foundation? If all Men would build upon it, none could
receive wrong or injury; there could be no Disputes about any matter whatever,
if Men would make this Rule the measure of their Actions. In the mean time,
while Men can arrive at this perfection, The Legal Constitution by which the
Kingdom has flourisht, and been supported in great Reputation for some
hundreds of years, is the best and safest Rule for all sober Men (to use the
Authors Phrase) to proceed by. When Men go from the Law, and legal
Establishment, they walk in the dark, and go they know not whither, and travel
while they make themselves not only uneasy but miserable.

It Is a strange fate upon the People, that their name is always used; their
benefit pretended; their power to create right to Govern, and Governors
magnified by restless Projectors, whose only design is to dig up the very
Foundations of Legal Settlements, and such as by many Ages have been found by
experience to have been for the ease, quiet, and benefit of the People, who are
never in greater danger, than when they listen to such Men, that promise to
make them happy by Eutopian, Illegal, and Impracticable Schemes and Devices;
after misery and desolation is brought upon them, their Consent is pretended,
and vouched to warrant it. If the Author could have prevailed with himself to
have read the several Declarations, Remonstrances, and almost innumerable other
Papers, printed between the years 1640. and 1660. all filled with the Consent,
Rights, and Authority of the People; and holding forth Common Good, and Public
Interest, and asserting and maintaining both those impracticable Notions (after
such manner, as the People are made to believe they belong unto them) in every
change of Affairs and Government, that then happened; he could not have been so
fond of, or so often have vainly, and to no purpose repeated these two empty,
idle sayings, and expressions.

The Author's Words, p. 19.
I take ours to be a true, original Monarchy; especially after the Rights of
the lesser Monarchies were swallowed up, or delivered into that of the
West Saxon Kings. And farther, I do not stick to affirm, that it was
Hereditary, where the Right of Succession and the Public Good, did not
interfere, i. e. where there was not a natural or moral Incapacity; a natural,
as in the Sons of the Elder Edmond, when Edred was made King before them; a
Moral, as when Edgar's Elder Brother was set aside for ill Government by one
half of the Nation, and the other never disputed the matter with them.

What may be said this.
As to his Distinction of natural or moral Incapacity, since a Protector, or a
Protector and Council may supply, and have often supplied both those
incapacities, it signifies nothing. And as to his Examples of Edred's
Government in the Minority of Edmunds Sons; and of Edwy, Edgar's elder Brother,
being deserted by half the Nation, they have been spoken to before.

The Author's words in the same Page.
These things I mention to show, That although this were a true and successive
Monarchy in ordinary course; yet where the Public Good was by the Estates of
the Realm judged to require it; they thought it no Perjury or breach of Faith,
to transfer their Allegiance, although it were without the consent of the
actual Governor, or the next Lineal Heir.

What may be said to this Passage.
The things hitherto mentioned by the Author, were his Saxon and Danish
Instances; and whatever appears by those Instances to have been done, was done
by a Party (as has been shown from undoubted History) and not by
Representatives of the Nation; yet such Party or Parties he calls the States of
the Realm, as his Tutor Robert Parsons the Jesuit, alias Doleman, has taught
him; especially in the 4th, 7th, 8th, and 9th Chapters of the first part of his
Conference about the Succession to the Crown of England: where are to be found
all the Author's Saxon and Danish Instances urged, and applied in the same
manner, and to the same purpose, as they are in this Author; and also his two
Norman Instances, that of Maud the Empress, Hen. 2, and King Stephen; the other
of the two Houses of Tork and Lancaster, in his Second Part of the Conference,
cap. 2. and 3. and likewise in Mr. Pryns first Part of the Sovereignty of
Parliament and Kingdom, p. 7, 8, 9. and the two Norman Instances p. 94, 95. Mr.
Pryn followed Doleman, who says all Kings that take Coronation Oaths are
Elected. Conf. of Success: part 1. cap. 5. and all Invaders, or Intruders, that
set up themselves by the help of a Party only, were Elected and set up by the
States, or Commonwealth. Those Parties the Jesuit calls the State or
Commonwealth, Mr. Pryn calls Parliament or Kingdom in the very same Instances;
but this Author is best pleased with the Jesuits Expressions, and uses them
most frequently. But if he had considered what Mr. Pryn has written since the
year 1648. and in that year against his own former Notions and Opinions, about
the Sovereignty of Parliament and Kingdom, etc. especially his Plea for the
House of Lords, his four Parts of a brief Register of Parliament Writs, his
Animadversions upon Coke's 4th. Institute, and many other Writings, and the
Epistles to them; He would never have Published such Instances, baffled by him,
and many others.

If the States (as he calls them) had had upon the Consideration of Public
Good, the Power he speaks of, and that it was known and legal; or if the Crown
had according to the Constitution been at their Disposal; supposing the Saxon
Estates had freely chosen Canutus, as he vainly Asserts; what could prompt him
to cause Edwin, Flor. Wig. A. D. 1016.
Edmond Ironside's Brother, to be murdered, and to send his two Sons Edward and
Edmond to the King of Sweves, that they also might be murdered? And if the
Succession had not been notoriously, wholly, and completely Hereditary; what
need he to have feared the Title, and Succession of the Sons and Brother of
Edmond, if it had been true what the Author insinuates, that he was legally
Elected, and upon account of the Public Good? Besides imposing Parties, small
Numbers, and Factions upon his Readers, and calling them the States; he has
another pretty knack of imposing upon them, by telling them Oaths made to
foreign Kings (such as the Danes were) and forced upon the Nation by Foreign
Armies) was transferring of Allegiance; as if the People then were wonderfully
pleased, and satisfied with their new Masters. From these Instances and Topics
he might as well have proved, that because this Nation has been overrun, and
possessed by Saxons and Danes, with their miscellaneous Assistants; therefore it
may be expedient it should be so again. They seem to be Arguments to encourage
such another undertaking, rather than any thing else.

After the Saxon Constitution, he comes to the Norman, and there makes only two
Instances.

The words of the Author, p. 20.
The first Instance I shall bring, is in the Case of the Oath taken to Maud the
Daughter of Hen. 1. in the Thirty first year of his Reign: and there is no
question, but he designed signed her to succeed him, Malmsb. Hist. novest. l.
1. p. 100. 105. 2.
legitima and perenni successione, as Malmsbury's words are: but Stephen who
had before sworn Allegiance to her) watched his opportunity, and by the help of
a Party made by his Brother (the Bishop of Winchester) he was Crowned King; and
although at first, Malmsbury says, but three Bishops, and very few Noblemen
joined with him; yet he soon after says, that most of them went into him; and
even Robert of Gloucester, King Henry the first's natutural Son, took an Oath
to him, but with the Condition of his preserving his Honor and Covenants.
There are several things worth our observation, in this affair, with respect to
the Oaths of Allegiance.

HISTORY.
Malmsb. f. 99. a. n. 30.
Anno 27. Regni sui Rex Henricus Angliam venit mense Septembri, adducens secum
filiiam suam, etc. In the 27th. year of his Reign King Henry came to England,
in the Month of September, and brought with him his Daughter. He called
together at Christmas a great number of the Clergy and chief Men of the Kingdom
at London; and being much grieved he was like to have no Children by his Second
Wife, the ^uke of Lorrain's Daughter; he was very thoughtful about a Successor;
and having a long time before deliberated about that matter, Tunc in eodem
Concilio, omnes totius Angliae Optimates, Episcopos etiam and Abbate^
sacramento adegit and obstrinxit; ut si ipsi sine haerede masculo decederet,
Matildam filiam suam, quondam Imperatricem, incunctanter and sine ulla
retractatione Dominam reciperent, Then in the same Council he bound all the
chief men of England, the Bishops also, and Abbats by Oath, that if he should
die without Heir Male, they should forthwith, without retraction or revoking
their Oath, receive his Daughter Maud, late Empress, for their Queen. Having
before told them what a great loss the Nation sustein'd by the death of his Son
William, to whom by right the Kingdom belonged; and now that his Daughter
survived, to whom only the lawful Succession was due, from her Grandfather,
Uncle, and Father, that were Kings, and from the Stock of her Mother many Ages;
Ibid. n. 40.
cui soli legitima debeatur successio, ab avo, avunculo, and patre regibus, and
a materno genere multis retro seculis; siquidem ab Egbirtho West-Saxonum rege,
etc. For from Egbert, King of the West Saxons, who first subdued the other
Saxon Kings, in the year 800, during the Reign of The Historian does not reckon
the Danish Kings amongst them, there were 14 Saxon Kings beside them. Ibid. n.
50. b. lin. 1. etc. Ibid. f. 100. a. n. 40.
Fourteen Kings, unto the year 1043. when Edward the Confessor was Crowned
King, the Line of the Royal Blood never failed, nor was there one wrong step,
or halt made in the Succession; nec unquam ejusdem regalis sanguinis linea
defecit, nec in Successione regni claudicavit. All Persons of any moment in
this Council did take the Oath, first William Archbishop of Canterbury, then
the other Bishops and Abbats. The first of the Laymen that took it, was David
King of Scors, the next Stephen Earl of Mortaign, and Bologn (afterward King
Stephen) and then Robert Duke of Gloucester, King Henry's natural Son.

Anno. 31. Regni sui Rex Henricus rediit in Angliam, etc. In the thirtyfirst
year of his Reign, King Henry returned into England, and the Empress also; and
in a great Assembly of the Nobility or Great Men at Northampton, those which
had sworn before, renewed their Oath, and those that had not, did then swear,
or give their Faith unto her.

King Henry died in the Thirty fifth year of his Reign; Ibid. b. n. 30.
and in his Sickness being asked by Robert Earl of Gloucester, and the Nobleman
that were then with him, about a Successor; a quibus de successore
interrogatus, filiae omnem terram suam, citra and ultra mare, legitima and
perenni Successione adjudicavit, he gave all his Lands every where to his
Daughter, as to his Lawful Successor.

After the death of King Henry, Ibid. f. 101. a. lin. 5.
which happened upon the first of December that year; the Empress, Robert Earl
of Gloucester, with most of the Noblemen, delayed their return for England:
whereas Stephen made all the haste he could, and by the readiest Passage being
come, the Londoners and People of Winchester own him a King: Ibid. n. 10.
And he drew unto him Roger Bishop of Salisbury, and William de Pont Larch,
Keeper of the King's Treasure: But all his Endeavars had come to nothing, Ibid.
n. 20.
if his Brother Henry Bishop of Winchester, and at that time the Pope's Legate,
had not been his best Assistant. William Archbishop of Canterbury required of
him an Oath, That he would restore and preserve the Liberties of the Church,
and the Bishop of Winchester became his Surety^ for the doing of it. He was
very sweet in his Promises, but they wanted performance. He was Crowned the 22
of December, there being present only three Bishops, the Archbishop, the
Bishops of Winchester and Salisbury, no Abbats, and but few Noble or Great Men.
Ibidem.
Coronatus est ergo in regem Angliae Stephanus, undeci^o Calend^^ Januarii
1135. tribus Episcopis prasentibus, Archiepiscopo, Wintoniensi, Saresberiensi,
null^ Abbatib^s, pancissimus Optimatibus.

Ibid. n. 40.
Having made the Treasurers of his Party, he immediately became Master of the
Treasure, which was near 100000 l. in ready Money, besides Gold and Silver
Vessels of great weight, and inestimable value. Having so great Treasure, he
could not want Assistants, Ibidem.
hanc copi^m Gazarum habenti, auxiliatores d^esse non poterant, especially
being very profuse in his Gifts. All sorts of Soldiers stocked to him out of
Flanders, and Britany, most notorious Plunderers, Ibid. n. 50.
and cruel People, who robbed Churches, and pulled Men of Religious. Orders
from their Horses, and imprisoned them, without regard, Erat genus hominum
rapacissimum and violentissimum, qui nil pensi haberent vel caemeteria
frangere, vel Ecclesias expilare, Religiosi quinetiam ordinis viros non solum
equis proturbare, sed etiam indigenae militer, etc. Ibidem.
Neither were Strangers only, but homebred Soldiers or Knights, who hated
Times of Peace, toward the end of King Henry's Reign, because then they lived
meanly, easily brought to his Party, raising thereby their Fortunes from the
Loss and Ruin of the People, Ibid. b. lin. 2. Ibid. lin. 3, 4.
Provineialium dispendio suas fortunas urgentes; Further, Stephen when he was
Earl, by his easy and jocular Conversation, and his Familiarity with there
meanest Persons, had wonderfully gained the Affections of the People, Ibid.
lin. 5.
so that all the Noblemen of England came readily in to him. In the mean time,
the wise Earl of Gloucester was folic ous how he might show them their Faults,
and by Discourse bring them back to a better Opinion; for there was nothing to
be attempted by Force, Ibid. lin. 7.
for the Causes before mentioned; nor was it free for him to come into England,
unless for a time he could dissemble, and appear as if he were a Party in the
Defection, (quasi defectionis eorum particeps) wherefore he did Homage to the
King upon Condition, Ibid. n. 10.
that is to say, so long as he kept his Dignity entire, and performed his
Agreement and Covenants, scilicet quamdiu ille dignitatem suam integre
custodiret, and sibi pacta servaret: For long before he knew the Temper of the
King, and foresaw the Instability of his Faith, spectato enim jamdudum regis
ingenio, instabilitatem fidei praevidebat.

In the same Year, Ibidem.
not much after the coming of the Earl, the Bishops swear Fealty to the King,
so long as he should preserve the Liberty, and strict Discipline of the Church;
Ibid. n. 20. 30.
which he then swore to do according to his Charter, that consists mostly of
Privileges granted to the Clergy, and is there repeated, and is dated 1136, in
the first Year of his Reign. But the Historian says, He disdained to put the
Names of the Witnesses, which were many, because he changed all things so
perversely, as if he had only sworn, that he might show the whole Kingdom, he
had sworn to what he never intended to perform; Ibid. n. 40.
nomina Testium, qui multi fuerunt, apponere fastidio; quia pene omnia ita
perperam mutarunt, quasi ad hoc tantum jurasset, ut praevaricatorem sacramenti
se regno toti ostenderet. In this Grant, he says, he was chosen King by the
Clergy and Laity, crowned by William Archbishop of Canterbury, and afterward
confirmed by Pope Innoeent; the Bull of which Confirmation may be seen in the
History of Richard Prior of Hagulstad, col. 313. n 30. The Witnesses to his
Charter, or Grant, were most of the Bishops, Earls, and Noblemen, and all
Normans, and may be found in the same History, Col. 314. n 60. This is the true
History, how Stephen came to be King, taken from William of Malmsbury, who
lived and wrote at the very time these things were done, and wrote them at the
Request of Robert Earl of Gloucester.

The Author's Words, p. 20.
The first Observation upon his own History of Maud's Title, and Stephen's
coming to the Crown before noted, is, That if it hold that an Oath was first
taken to Maud by the Bishops and Nobility, and afterward to King Stephen, an
Oath of Allegiance may cease without Discharge from the Party to whom it was
made; and so the Archbishop of Canterbury, and the Bishops of Winchester and
Salisbury, as well as the Nobility, thought themselves at liberty to take a new
Oath of Allegiance, without a Release from the Party concerned in the former
Oath.

What may be said to this.
It Is not to be doubted, but the Author knows what Religion was professed in this
Nation at that time, and only that; and knows also, those of that Persuasion
did, and do believe the Head of their Church had, and has Power to make an
Oath cease, without discharge from the Party to whom it is made: And so the
three Bishops thought themselves at liberty to take a new Oath of Allegiance,
without a Release from the Party concerned in the former Oath, when they had
his Authority; and that they so had, is manifest from the following brief
Narrative. Stephen was crowned on the Eleventh of the Kalends of January, Ibid.
f. 101. a. n. 20. Ibid. n. 40. Ibid. b. n. 10.
or 22 of December; and the Earl of Gloucester came into England after Easter
next following; and it was after his coming, that the Bishops swear Fealty to
Stephen, Eodem anno non multum post adventum Comitis juraverunt Episcopi
Fidelitatem regi, etc. at which time he also swore to preserve the Liberty, and
strict Discipline of the Church, as they were drawn up in a Charter or Grant,
in which the Pope's Confirmation of his Title is mentioned; the beginning
whereof runs thus: Ego Stephanus Dei gratia, Ibidem.
assensu Cleri and Populi in Regem Angliae electus, and a Domino Wilielmo
Archiepiscopo Cantuariae, and Sanctae Ecclesim Romanae Legato consecratus, and
ab Innocentio Sanctae sedis Romanae Pontifice postmodum confirmatus, etc. I
Stephen by the Grace of God, by the Assent of the Clergy and People chosen King
of England, crowned by William Archbishop of Canterbury, and the Legate of the
Roman See, (who was his Brother) and confirmed by Pope Innocent, etc.

And notwithstanding he was at first set up by the Fraud and Artifice of three
or four Persons, and the Bishops especially, who then governed the Nation, and
that he immediately forced himself upon the then Norman Government by an Army
of Foreigners, plundring and cruel Flemmings, and Britans, and homebred Norman
Soldiers, that knew not how to live, as appears by the History before-recited;
yet the Archbishops and Bishops suggested to to the Pope, Richard Prior of
Hagustald or Hextiam Col. 313. n. 30, 40, etc. in the Body of the Bull.
That after the Death of King Henry, Religion in England was disturbed, turbata
est religio in regno Angliae, and nullum mandatum pacis seu justitia in
adjutorio regali vigebat, and there was no Royal Command for either Peace or
Justice: and that the greatest Wickednesses were committed with impunity, atque
atrocitatem tantorum scelerum comitabatur impunitas, and that for the putting a
stop to such Evils, Stephen was chosen King communi voto, and unanimi assensu
tam procerum, quam etiam populi, by the common Vote and unanimous Assent of the
Great Men and People, and crowned by the Bishops; and all this was testified by
the Letters or Instruments of the Archbishops and Bishops of the Country, and
the Lovers of the Holy Roman Church, the glorious King of France, and
illustrious Earl This was Theobald, Earl of Blois, Stephen's eldest Brother.
Theobald; Q^emadmodum venerabilium fratrum nostrorum, Archiepiscoporum
earundem Regionum. and Amatorum Sanctae Romanae Ecclesiae, gloriesi Francorum
Regis, and illustrius Viri Comitis Theobaldi scripta testantur. Then upon this
recounting the Suggestions, the Pope and Title-Maker, says, Nos cognoscentes
Vota tantorum Virorum, in personam tu^m praecunte divina Gratia convenisse,
etc. We knowing the Votes of such great Men to have concurred in the Choice of
thy Person, by the Guidance of Divine Grace. And for these things, and his
promise of Obedience, and doing Honor to St. Peter, he confirms wh^t had been
done, and grants him the same Honor and Prerogative he had granted to his
Predecessor Henry. This Bull of Confirmation was directed to King Stephen;
Innocentius Episcopus, etc. carissimo in Christo filio Stephano illustri
Anglorum regi salutem and Apostolicam benedictionem. From the precedent
Narrative it is evident the Bishops solicited this Bull of Confirmation, and
obtained it before they swear Fealty to King Stephen, though upon false
Suggestions: However, the Pope knew he was chosen by the Guidance of Divine
Grace, and the Bishops and Nobility believed him to be infallible; or, at
least, had such a D ference to his Confirmation of Stephen, that they took
themselves to be discharged and released from their Oaths made to Maud; for if
this Confirmation was valid, her Title was made null and void.

Ma^msb. f. 108. a.n. 40, 50.
That such as favored Stephen, owned his Title from the Pope, it is evident
from his Brother the Legat's Speech (who left Stephen, and adhered to Maud; and
then revolted from her, to him again,) when he called a Council at Westminster
by his Legantine Power, wherein chiding Letters from the Pope were read,
because he had not delivered his Brother Stephen, then in Prison; in which he
was exhorted to do it, either by Ecclesiastical or Secular Power: After the
reading whereof, he made a Speech in excuse of his faithless Actions, and
commanded those present, on b^h^lf of God and the Pope, (ex part Dei and
Apostolici) that they should aid the King with their utmost Power, who was
anointed by the Will of the People, and Assent of the Apostolic See,
(voluntate populi, and assensu Ap^stolicae sedis inunctum) and to excommunicate
all Perturbers of the Peace, that favored the Duchess of Anjou, i. e. Maud.

If the Author had understood this, he would scarcely have ventured upon this
Instance, to have confirmed his Opinion about the Release and Discharging of
Oaths.

The Words of the Author, p. 23.
Secondly, That upon the Agreement between King Stephen and Henry II. M^^d her
self was set aside, and Stephen was to continue King for his Life, and Henry
II. to succeed him. Now, if Oaths of Allegiance must not be interperted by the
public Good, here are insuperable Difficulties as to the Obligations of these
Oaths, for the Allegiance was transferred from the right Heir, to an Usurper;
as Stephen must be owned to have been by th^se who deny that Allegiance can be
transferred from the right Heir: And they must continue Allegiance to the
Usurper for his Life, which is repugnant to the nature of our Constitution, if
it be founded in a Line^ and Legal Succession. And again, Maud, to whom they
had sworn, is set aside, and the Reversion of the Crown it entailed on her Son,
although she was living.

What may be replied to this.
The insuperable Difficulties have been overcome before in the Discourse about
the Pope's Confirmation of King S^ephen: As to Maud's having been set aside, it
shall be considered in the last Paragraph of this Instance, and also something
more said of this Public Good, which brought on this Agreement, and what it
was; but it must needs be so, because done by the Common Council of the Nation.

The Author's Words in the same Page.
A. 1153. Paris, ibid.
Matt. Westminster. and Paris say, The Right of King Henry II. was declared by King
Stephen, in conventu Episcoporum, and aliorum de regno Optimatum; which was the
D^scription of a Parliament at that time, for as yet the Baronage represented
the Nation; which sh^ws how far the public Good was thought to be the Measure
of the Obligation of these Oaths. G^^ Newburge^sis says, L. 1. c. 30.
the B^num publicum was the Foundation of this Agreement: A. 1153.
And M. Westminster, that the King and Lords did all swear to it, and a solemn
Charter was made of it, and k^pt in a most secure place.

HISTORY.
M.W stm. A. D. 1153 f. 246. n. 10
Diligentia Theobaldi Archiepiscopi Cantuartensi, and Episcoporum r^gni Rex
Anglorum Stephanus, and D x N^^mannorum H^nricus, apud Wa^ingford talem
concordiam inierunt, etc. By the D ligence of Theobald Archbishop of
Canterbury, and the Bishops of the Kingdom the following Agreement was made
between King Stephen, and Henry Duke of Normandy, at Walingford. King Stephen
not having an Heir, except only Duke Henry, did acknowledge, in an Assembly of
the Bishops, and other chief Men of the Kingdom, that Duke Henry had the
hereditary Right to the Kingdom of England; and the Duke kindly granted, that
King Stephen should, during his Life, peaceably enjoy his Kingdom. The
Agreement was so co firmed, that the King him elf, and the Bishops then
present, with the rest of the best Men of the Kingdom, swear that Duke Henry,
after the Death of the King, if he should outlive him, should enjoy the
Kingdom, without all Contradiction: O^ which Agreement there was a Charter
made, which was kept in a most secure place. Ibid. n. 20.


This is what the Historian has, in both places, cited by the Author. The
whole Charter is in Brompton, Brompton, col. 1037. n. 60.
and begins thus: Stephanus R^x Angliae, Archiepiscopis, Episcopis, Abbatibus,
Comitibus, Justitiariis, Vicecomitibus, B^ronibus, and omnibus fidelibus, suis
salutem: Sciatis, quod Ego Rex Stephanus Henricum Ducem Norman^^ae post me
Successorem regni Angliae, and hae edem meum j^re haereditario constitus, and
sic e: and haeredibus suis regnum Ang iae donavi and consi^mavi: D^x vero
propter hunc honorem, and Donationem and Confirmationem, sibi a me factam,
Homagio michi and Sacramento securitatem fecit, scilicet q^od fidelis m^chi
erit. and vitam and hon^rem meum pro suo posse custodiet, per Conv^ntiones
inter nos praeloc^tas quae in hac Charta continentur. Stephen, K ng of England,
etc Know ye, that I have appointed Henry Duke of Normandy, Successor of the
Kingdom of England after me, and my Heir by hereditary Righ^; and so have given
and confirmed the Kingdom of England to him and his Heirs: For which Honor,
Donation and Confi^mation made by me to him, he gave me Security by Homage and
Oath, that he would be faithful to me, and preserve my Life and Honor to the
utmost of his power, according to the Agreements made by us, which are
contained in this Charter. Neubrigensis speaking of this Treaty, says, L. 1. c
30. p. 104. In Paris, Ed. 1610.
P^acu^t inter eos (that is, the King and Duke) solemn and salubre colleq^ium
celebrari, ubi amicis mediantibus, and circa bonum publicum pia and prudenti
provisione satagentibus, p^x inter eos and caute formata, and solid firmata
est. They agreed to have a solemn and wholesome Treaty, where, by the Mediation
of Friends, having a pious and prudent respect to the common Good, a Peace was
warily made, and solidly confirmed. Ibidem, p. 105.
Quibus Deo propitio sal^briter actis, Rex Angliam, and Anglia pacem recepit:
annis enim jamplurimis, fere nudo regis nomine insignis, tunc recipere visus
est hujus rem nominis; and quasi tunc primo regnare coepit, quia tunc primo
purgata Invasionis, Tyrannica macula, legitimi principis justitiam induit.
Which things being done by God's Assistance, the King received England, and
England received Peace; for having had the bare name of King for many Years,
now he enjoyed the thing it self, and began then first to reign because then
the Blot of Tyrannical Invasion being first wiped out, he exercised the Justice
of a lawful King.

The Author's further Words about this Accord, p. 22.
And thus the Oaths of Allegiance were continued to one that had no Right, for
his Life; and made to one who predended to no R ght, but after his Mother, who
was set aside in this Agreement; for we never read that she was present at the
Agreement, or resigned her Right to the Crown. So that here were three Oaths of
Allegiance at once; that to Maud the Empress, that to King Stephen, and to
Henry II. and yet the general Good of the Nation must give an equitable Sense
of these Oaths, or there must be Perjury on all sides.

The Answer to what the Author says, about this Agreement, and the Exclusion of
Maud, etc.
By this Accord it was owned by King Stephen, Bishops and Barons, which were
then the Parliament, or Colloquium, as the Author confesses, that the
hereditary Right was in Duke Henry, and he granted that King Stephen, during
his Life, should peaceably enjoy his Kingdom. And if the Right was in Henry,
might he not recede from it if he pleased? And the Agreement says, he did
during Stephen's Life. This Retrocession made the Bishops and Barons Oaths to
the Agreement lawful; and if he had not some testimony of a Cession, or
Resignation, by and from his Mother, though not mentioned in the Agreement,
this Convention could not, upon Stephen's Acknowledgment only, have owned his
hereditary Right upon Oath. And that by Cession, or some other way, she did
quit and leave her Right to govern, to her Son, it is most probable, from what
follows. M^nd the Empress, Malm^b. f. 104. a.n. 10.
upon the death of her Father, and the Invasion of Stephen, on the 30^h of
September, in the Year 1139, came into England with her Brother Robert, and
managed the War against him in her own Person, her Son being but a Child, He
was born, A.D. 1133.
and her Husband engaged in the Defense of Normandy, Anjon, etc. against the
King of France. Her three great Supports were, her half Brother Robert Earl of
Gloucester, Ranulph Earl of Chester, and Milo Earl of Hereford; the last,
Chaon. Gervas. Col. 1359. n. 10, Col. 1361. n. 10. Col. 1362. n. 10. lin. 1.
to her very great Grief, died in the Year 1143. the second made his Peace with
King Stephen, 1145. and the first, Robert Earl of Gloucester, died in the
beginning of November, in the Year 1146. of an high Fever, after he had sent
Henry, then being about thirteen Years of Age, over to his Father, into
Normandy.

After the loss of these Friends and Supports, the Empress, Ibidem, Col. 1363.
lin. 1.
wearied out with these Commotions and Wars in England, before Lent, in the
Year 1147. passed over into Normandy, choosing rather to live there with her
Husband in Peace, than undergo so many Troubles.

In the Year 1149. Ibidem, Col. 1366. n. 30. Col. 1367. n 30. Chr. Norm. f. 984
B.C. A.D 1150 M W^stin. eod. An.
Henry came into England with an Army, in the Month of May; and returned into
No^mandy in the beginning of January next following, without Success.

In the Year 1150. Henry took possession of his Mother's Inheritance,
(haereditatem matris,) the Dukedom of Normandy, and did Homage to Lew^s King of
France, for it; his Father Geofrey being present both when he took Possession,
and did Homage; and they returned together from Paris rejoicing; and no doubt,
if they two were so well pleased with what had been done, the Mother could not
be dissatisfied, nor could it be done without her Consent.

Ibidem, D. A. D. 1150
On the 7th of September his Father Geofrey died, and gave to Henry Duke of
Normandy, his eldest Son, the Earldom of Anjou. Henrico Duci Normanniae,
primogenito suo concessit Comitatam Andegavensem.

Chr. Gerv. Col. 1372. n. 30. The old Historians began the Y^ar at Christmas.
In the Year 1153. Duke Henry, all things being quiet beyond Sea, came with some
Forces into England, on the 1st of January: His C^ming was no sooner known, but
the Earls and great Men flocked to him; and upon the 8th of the same Month, the
Year following, the Agreement was made between King S ephen and Duke Henry.
Matthew. Westminster says it was made A. D. 1153.

Chr. Norm. f 1101. D A. D. 1166
From the time Maud the Empress left England, in the Year 1147 she is not so
much as mentioned by any Historian, until the time of her death, which was on
the 4th of the Ides, or 10th of September, 1166.

From these Particulars it is most probable, if not certain, that she was
satisfied with, and consented to this Agreement, either at the time it was
made, or by Cession from the Kingdom and Government, by relinquishing it, and
leaving the who^e Management to her Son, who was now Duke of Normandy, Earl of
Anjou, Ibid. f. 985. C.
and, in Right of his Wife Alienor, Duke of Aquitain; and being now above
twenty Years of Age, fit for Action. When he came for England, she was in her
declining Age, her Years being then about fifty; and fixing her Mind upon Works
of Charity, she spent the rest of her Days in performing of them; Ib. f. 1101.
D.
for she built three Monasteries in Normandy; one of Cistersians, in the
Country of Caux; another of Canons, near Cherburgh; and a third of Canons, in
the Forest of Goser; and for the building of the Stone B^idge of Rhoven, over
the River Seyn, which had been begun by her, she gave a great Sum of Money.
She was a Woman of a very brisk and high Spirit, as appears by her Actions in
England; and after she left it, she lived nineteen Years, and twelve or
thirteen after her Son was King: So as, if she had not relinquished her Right
to England, as she had done about three Years before this Agreement, to
Normandy, the Historians could not have been so silent concerning her.

So that from hence it is evident, that such as had taken the three Oaths were
safe; for, upon Ma^d's Cession, or relinquishing her Right, the Obligation of
the Oath made to her ceased. Then the Oath made to Stephen, seeing it was done
by the Consent of Henry, who had the Right, became lawful. And thirdly, The^e
can be no Scruple about the Legality of the Oath made to H nry, who, upon the
Cession of his Mother, had the hereditary Right; and this is suggested and
owned in the Agreement.

But the Author says, The general Good of the Nation must give an equitable
Sense of these Oaths, or there must be Perjury on all sides. What could this
general Good then be? It could not be the Public of the Nation in a true
sense, for the Bu^k and Body of the People were English Saxons; (for though the
Normans had taken away their Estates, and made them Slaves, as appears by
Dooms-day-Book, and the black Book in the Exchequer, yet we read not that they
massacred or murdered them.) And what general Good did they receive by, or
what equitable Sense did, or could, what was general Good to them, give to the
Normans Oaths? For all the Bishops and Noblemen that took these Oaths, were
Normans: All the Bishops, Earls and Barons, that were Witnesses to the
Instrument of Agreement, and swear to it, in number thirty seven, were Normans,
except Geofrey of Monmuth, a Welshman, or Britain, then Bishop of St. Asaph.
That England was an Habitation of Strangers, (meaning the Normans,) and
governed by Foreigners. Malms. f. 52. a. n. 40.
Malm^bury wrote at this time, and says, when he wrote, there was no natural
Englishman a Duke; that is, a great, or leading Man, a Bishop, or an Abbot; all
sorts of Outlandish-men devoured the Riches and Bowels of England, nor was
there any hopes this Misery would have an end. Anglia facta est exterorum
habitatio, and alieniginarum dominatio; nullus hodie Anglus, vel Dux, vel
Pontifex, vel Abbas. Advenae quique divitias and viscera corrodunt Angliae, nec
ulla spes finiendae miseriae. And in another place, speaking of the Battle of
Hastings, he says, Ibid. f 57. a. n. 30.
That was the fatal Day to the English, the lamentable Destruction of his sweet
Country, by its receiving new Lords and Masters. Illa fuit dies fatalis Anglis,
funestum excidium dulcis patriae pro novorum Dominorum commutatione.

Let the Author tell the World, how the general Good of a Nation that were
miserable People, and Slaves, could give an equitable Sense of their
Conquerors, and cruel domineering Masters Oaths. Let him show how the general
Good of any Nation can give an equitable Sense to the Oaths of such Men who
were educated in Perjury, Rapine, Murder, and and all sorts of Barbarities and
Wickedness; whose Gain and Advantage was the Measure of all their Actions. In
the Year 1104, or 1105, notwithstanding all the great Normans had swore Fealty
to their true and lawful Duke Robert, yet when Henry came from England with
good store of Money, they ran after him, and delivered to him Castles and
fortified Towns. Eadmer. f. 80. lin. 1. A D. 1104. Hoved. f. 289 b. n. 30 A. D.
1105
Anno millesimo centesimo quinto, Rex Anglorum Henricus transiit mare, omnes
autem pene majores-Normannorum ad ejus adventum, spreto comite Domino suo, cui
fidelitatem juraverant, in aurum and argentum regis, quod ipse de Anglia
portaverat cucurrerunt, eique castra munitasque civitatis tradiderunt.

It was the way in Normandy, and from thence brought hither, when any Earl or
great Man found himself grieved by another, injured, or highly affronted, they
frequently got together all their Men at Arms, their other Tenants, and poor
Dependants, and as much Assistance from their Friends and Confederates as they
could, and burnt one another Castles or Houses, destroyed their Lands and
small Territories, and carried away the Inhabitants Prisoners. The Norman
Histories abound with these Stories. Ordericus Vitalis, in the Lives of Rufus,
Henry I. and this King Stephen especially, has many Relations of such inhumane
Ravages. And even at this very time, the Norman Commanders and Soldiers, and
other Foreigners, as well of Maud's, as Stephen's Party, practiced the same
Barbarities in this Nation: The Country, or Husbandmen, such as ploughed and
sowed, such as cultivated Towns and Villages, and the Inhabitants thereof, were
given to the Soldiers as their Wages, and were sold with their Goods and
Substance. Contin. ad Flor. Wig. f. 672.
Militibus in stipendium dantur, and venunduntur, vicorum and villarum cultores
and habitatores, cum rebus suis universis, ac substantiis. Cambden. Brit f. 199
200.
In this King's Reign there were in England so many Tyrants, as there were
Lords of Castles; and many Flemings and Britains flocked to him from beyond
Sea, who were accustomed to live by plundering, that came into England in
expectation of geat Booty. Malmsb. fol. 105. a. n. 20.
Sub Stephano plures ex Flandria and Britannia, rapto vivere assueti, spe
magnarum praedarum Angliam involabant. England was then made a Prey to all
Invaders and Villains.

But the Author tells us, that the general Good of these inhumane People did
give an equitable Sense to the Oaths then taken. If it were not as he says,
there must be Perjury on all sides; for those who had first sworn to Maud,
could not transfer their Allegiance on any other Account, (that is, of the
general Good, etc.) either to Stephen, or Henry II. during her Life. What was
thought of the Perjury of those Times, and especially of the Perjury of his
three Bishops, (who were all N^rmans,) which the Author calls transferring of
Allegiance, will be evident from the following Testimonies.

f. 221. a. n. 5.
Henry Archdeacon of H^ntington, who lived and w^ote at this time, and
continued his H st^ry only unto the Year 1154, tells his Readers, That in
Succession of the most fl^gitious time, in which the Rage of the Norman Fury
appeared, whatsoever Henry h^d d^ne tyrannically, or royally, in comparison of
worse things, seemed to have been the best; for immediately upon his death,
Stephen, (Vir magnae strenuitatis and audac^^e,) a Man of great Confidence and
Boldness, though he had sworn Fealty to the Daughter of King H nry, (fretus
tamen vigore and imp dentia,) furnished with R^ olution and Impudence, (regna
d^ ^^^ma D^um tenta^s invasit,) temp^ing God, (...) 6. lin. 1, etc.
invaded the Crown. But alas! Will iam Archbishop of Canterbury, who first made
Oath to the Daughter of Henry, cr wned him; for which Act, God appointed the
same J^^gment for him, which he had done to the High Priest Jeremias, (that is
to say,) that he should not live a ^^a^ after. Gul. Neub. l. 1. c 4 p. 18, 19.
Cum ergo, ut praedictum est, ^ex ld ^ricus ob^^sset idem Stephanus Sacrament^^
q ^^ fi^^ae ejus de conservanda fi^^tate p^aesticerat, p aevaricator regn^m
arripuit. Therefore, as has b en said, when K ng Henry died, Stephen b^^ke his
Oath of Fealty made to his Daught r, and seized the Kingdoms; the B^sh^ps and
great Men, that were bound by the same O^th, giving their Assi ance:
Archiepiscopus q^idem, e^usd^m (ut creditur) perjuria merito, ipso
pr^varicationas anno defecit: And truly the Archbishop, as it was believed, for
the same Come of Pe^jury left the World within a Year. Ibid. p. 19.
Stephanus ergo. ut contra jus humanum pariter and divin^m; humanum sc^^icet,
quia legitimus here is non erat; and divinum, id est violata jurisjurandi
religione, sublimaretur in regem; pactus est quaecunque praesules and proceres
exigere voluerunt. Stephen therefore, because he was made King against both
humane and divine Laws; humane, as not being the lawful Heir; divine, as having
violated his Oath; promised and agreed to do whatsoever the Bishops and Great
Men exacted of him.

As to Roger Bish^p of Sa^isbury, if we may believe Malmsbury, he swear to Maud
what ^he never intended to perform. The Testimony is from what the Hi ^orian
heard him say: Malmsb. f 99. b. n. 10.
Ego Rogerium Sa^esberiensem Episcopum saep^e aud^vi dicentem, solutum se a
Sacramento, quod Imperatrici fecerat, etc. I have often heard R ger Bishop of
Salisbury say, he was free from the O^th he had made to the Empress beca^se he
made it upon condition that the King should not marry his Daughter to a
Stranger, out of the Kingdom. Nec vero haec ita dixerim, quod credam vera
fuisse verba hominus, qui se unicu^que tempori, pro volubilitate fortunae
accommodare nosset Neither have I said these things, that I b lieve the M^n's
Words to be true, who knew how to comply with all Times, and accommodate
himself to every Turn of Fortune. This Roger was an illiterate P^iest, Gul.
Neub. l. 1. c. 6.
who got his Living by his saying M ss in the Suburbs of Caen, in Normandy.
King Henry took him to be his Chaplain, because he was ready at h s Office, and
a cunning, crafty Man, and promoted him to the Bishopric of Sa^^b^^y; and not
only so, but committed to him the public Administration of Secular Affairs: Vt
esset non tantum in Ecclesia magnus, sed etiam in regno a rege secundus: So as
he was not only great in the Church, but second, or next to the King, in the
Kingdom. Sed r^ge defuncto, Ibid.
qui ei tantae in seculo claritatis author extiterat, circa legitimos ej^s
haeredes infid^s; ut Stephanum sacramento illo aeque astrictum alliceret, non
est veritus incurrere perjurium, ver^m etiam aliis insigne pej^^andi
praestruxit exemplum. But the King being dead, who had made him so glorious in
the World, he proved unfaithful to his lawful Heirs; that he might please
Stephen, who was bound by the same Oath, did not only commit Perjury himself,
but became a famous Example to others to do the like.

As to the Third, Henry Bishop of W^nchester, the Pope's Legate, who was first
m^de Abbot of G^astenbury, and then p omoted to that See by K ng Henry. There
needs no more to be said of him, than that he first swear to be true to Maud,
and to maintain her Title after her Father's death; yet used all the Endeavor
that he could, to set up his Brother Stephen, by making the Clergy (who then
ruled all) for him, and then swear to be true to him. When Stephen was beaten,
and made Prisoner by Maud, he lef^ him, and swear again to Maud; and when he
was at liberty, he left Maud, and made Oath of Fealty to him again, and
continued Pope's Legate all the time.

The Conclusion of the Answer to this Instance shall be, the Judgment and
Opinion of Mr. Pryn in this very Case in his Concordia Discors, P. 33, 34.
first printed 1659 and reprinted, 1683. The perfidious V^olation of the Oath
made to Maud, in crowning Stephen after King H^nrys death, brought exemplary
Judgments on the wilful Violators thereof, and a bloody, long, lasting, Civil
War, within the Bowels of the Realm, between Maud, her Son Henry, and the
Usurper Stephen, to the great Oppression, Devastation and Desolation of the
Public and People, as our Hi^ orians observe: Hollinshed, v. 3. f. 46.
All the Good they hoped for, by disinheriting Maud, and crowning Stephen, upon
their own Terms, against his own, and their Oaths, becoming void and null by
his Perfidiousness, through Divine Justice, which will never permit any good
things to spring out of such enormous Evils as Perjury and Treachery; which
produced sundry Judgments, and Civil Wars; never ceasing, till Henry, the right
Heir, was restored to the Crown by a friendly Agreement; the only probable
speedy way now, to end our present Wars, oppressions, distractions, Military
Government, and restore Peace and Prosperity in our Nations.

As to his Instance about Oaths taken during the Controversies between the
Houses of York and Lancaster, a true Transcript of the Parliament-Rolls will be
the b^st and plainest Answer; which here follows.

Memorand. that the xvj day of Octobre, Rot. Parl. 39 H. 6. n. 10.
the ix day of this present Parliament, The Counseill of the right high, and
mighty Prince, Richard Duc of York, brought into the Parliament chamber a
Writeing, conteigning the cleyme and title of the right, that the seid Duc
pretended unto the Coro^es of England, and of France, and Lordship of Ireland,
and the same Writeing delivered to the right reverent fadre in God George
Bishop of Exc^stre, Chancellor of Eng^ond, desiring him that ^he same
writeing might be ope^ed to the Lords Spirituelx and Temporelx assembled in
this present Parliament, And that the seid D^c might have brief and exp dient
answer thereof; wheruppon the seid Chancellor opened and showed the seid
desire to the Lords Spirituelx and Temporelx, askyng the Ques ion of them
whether they would the seid writeing should be openly radde before them or no.
To the which Question it was answ^red and agreed by all the seid Lords.
Inasmuch as every person high and low, saying to this high Court of Parliament
must be herd, and his desire and peticion understand, that the seid writeing
should be radde and herd, not to be answ^red without the King's Commandment,
for so much as the matter is so high, and of so great ^^ght and poyse, which
writeing there than was radde; The tenor whereof follows in these words: It
is not to be forgotten, n. 11.
etc. as in Numb. 19. follows.

And afterward the xvij day of Octobre, n. 12.
the x day of this present Parliament, the seid Chancellor showed and declare
to the seid Lords Spirituelx and Temporelx, being in the same Parliament, how
that the Counseill of the seid Duc of York greatly desired to have answer of
such writeing, as upon the xvj day of Octobre last passed was put into this
present Parliament, on the behalf of the seid Duc; and thereupon asked the seid
Lords what they thought was to be done in that m^tier. To the which Question
it was answered and thought by all the said Lords, That the matter was so
high, and of such might, that it was not to any of the King's S^bge^^s to enter
into communication thereof, without his high commandment, agreement, and
assent had thereto. And fe^th^rmore forasmuch as the seid D^c d^sired and
required brief and un^^^aied answer of the seid wryteing, and in eschneing and
avoiding of g^ete and manyfold inconveniences, that weren lykly to ensue, if
hastly provision of good answer in that behalf were not had; it was thought
and agreed by all the Lords, that they all should go unto the King to declare
and open the seid matier unto h^s Highness, and to understand what his good
Grace would to be done se there therein. And the upon incontinent all the seid
Lords Spirituelx and Temporelx went unto the King's high p^e^ence, and
thereunto open^d and decla^ed the seid mat^er by the mouth of his seid
Chancellor of England; and the seid mate^r by the King's Highness herd and
conceyved, It pleased him to pray and c^mmand all the se^d Lords, that they
should s^che for to find, in as much as in them was, all such things as might
be objecte and laid a^enst the cleyme a^^ title of the seid Duc. And the seid
L^rdes b^^aught the King, that he would remember him, if he might find any
reasonable matier that might be objected against the seid cleym and title, in so
much as his seid Highness had seen and understonden many diverse Writeings and
Chronicles; wheruppon on the morn, the xviij day of Octobre, the xj day of
this present Parliament, the foreseid Lords sent for the King's Justices into
the Parlement-chambre, to have their Avis and Counseill in this behalf; and
there delivered to them the writeing of the cleyme of the seid Duc, and in the
King's name gave them straitely in commandment, sadly to take avisament
therein, And to search and find all such objections, as might be leyde against
the same in fortefying of the King's right.

Whereunto the same Justices, the Monday, the xx day of Octobre then next
ensuing, for their answer upon the seid writeing to them delivered seiden,
that they were the King's Justices, and have to determine such matiers as come
before them in the Law; between party and party they mey not be of Counseill:
An^ since this matier was between the King and the seid Duc of York as two
pa^ties, and also it has not be accustumed to call the Justices to Counseill
in such matiers; and in especial the matier was so high, and touched the
King's high Estate and Regalie, which is above the law, and passed their
lerning, wherefore they durst not enter into any communication thereof, for it
perteyned to the Lords of the King's blood, and thapparage of this his land,
to have communication and meddle in such matiers; And therefore they humble by
sought all the Lords, to have them utterly excused of any avyce or counseill
by them to be yeven in that matier.

And then the seid Lords considering the answer of the seid Juges, and
entending to have the avice and good counseill of all the K ng's Counse^llours,
sent for all the King's Sergeau^ts, and Attournay, and gave them straight
commandment in the King's name, that they sadly and avisely should search and
seek all such things, as might be best and strengest to be allegged for the
King's avail, in objection and deferyng of the seid title and cleyme of the
seid Duc.

Whereunto the seid Sergeaunts and Attorney, the Wensday then next ensuring,
answered and seiden, that the seid matier was put unto the King's Justices, and
how the Monday last passed the same Justices seiden, and declared to the seid
Lo^des, that the seid matier was ^oo high, and of so great wight, that it
passed there lerning; and also they durst not enter any communication in that
matier, to yeve any avyce or counsel therein: And si h that the said matier
was so high, that it passed the lerning of the Justices, it must needs excede
there lerning; and also they durst not enter any communication in that matter,
and prayed and besought all the Lord^s to have them excused of yevyng any avyce
or counsel therein.

To whom it was answered, by the aavys of all the Lords, by the s^^d
Chaunceller, that they mygh^ not so be excused, for they were the K^ng's
pe^ticuler Couns^illers, and therefore they had there fees and wages: And as to
that the seid Sergeaunts and Attorney seiden, that they were the King's
Counsaillers in the Law, in such things as were under his auctorite, or ^y
Commissi^n; but this mat^er was above his auct^^ite, wherein they might not
meddle, and humbly besought the seid Lords to have them excu^ed of yevyng any
counsel in that matier: and it was answered them again, that the Lords wuld
not hold them excused, but let the King's Highness have knowleche what they
said; and theruppon the seid Chaunceller remembered the Lords Spirituelx and
T^mperelx of the seyings and excuses of the Justices, and seyings and excuses
of the Sergeaunts and Attorney, and also the great commandment of the King's
Highness, that they had, to find all such objections, as might be most mighty
to defend the King's right and title, and to defete the title and cleyme of the
seid Duk of York; And also that the King might understond, that the seid Lords
diden their true and faithful devoire and acquitall in the seid matier, desired
all the Lords that every of them should sey what he cowed sey in fortefying the
King's title, and in defeteing of the cleyme of the seid Duc: And than it was
agreed by all the Lords, that every Lord should have his fredome to sey wh^t
he would sey, without any reporting or magre to be had for his seying; And
theruppon after the seiyng of all the Lords every after other, It was
concluded that these matiers and articles, here undrewriten, should be alegged
and objecte against the seid cleyme and title of the seid Duc.

First, It is thought, Objectio contra titulum praedictum.
that the Lords of this Land must needs call to their remembraunces, the great
oaths the which they have made to the King our Sovereign Lord, the which may
be leyde to the Due of York; and that the Lords may not break th^o oaths.

Item. It is thought also, that it is to Acts of Parlements, made in diverse
Parlements of diverse of the King's Progeni^^urs, The which Acts be sufficient
and reasonable to be l^yd again the title of the seid Duc of York. The which
Acts been of much more auctorite than any Cronicle, And also of auctorite to
defete any manner of title be made to any person.

Item, It is thought, that there is to diverse entaills made to the heirs
males, as for the Corone of England, as it may appear by diverse Cronicles and
Parlements.

Item, It is thought, if the seid Duc Leonell, that the same Duc should bear the
Arms of the same Leonell, and not the Arms of Edmund Langley, late Duc of
York.

Item, It is to be allegged again the Duc, that the time that King Herry the
fourth took upon him the Corone of England, he said he entered and took upon him
the Corone as right enheriter to King Herry the third, and not as a Conqueror.

To the which Articles the seid Duc of York gave his answers in writeing as
folowen.

Responsiones praefati Ducis ad Objectiones tituli sui praedicti.
Here under folowen the answers of Richard Plantagenet, called commonly Duc of
York, etc. to certain raisons and colors alleged, as it is said, against the
matier of his right and title, etc.

First, Where it is said, that it is thought, n. 14.
that the Lords must needs call to their remembrance the great Oaths which
they have made to the King, which may be leid to the seid Duc, and that they
may not break thoo oaths.

The seid Richard answers and says, that every man, under the pain of
everlasting dampnation, is bound to obey to the law and commandments of
God, by the which law and commandments troth and justice owe to be
preferred and observed, and untrouth and injustice laid apart and repressed,
and so it is that of this bond, and duetye of obedyence to Godd's law, no
man may discharge himself by his own deed or act, promise or ooth, for else
of the contrary would ensue innumerable inconveniences; wherefore since it is
so, that the matier of the title and cleyme of the seid Richard Plantagenet is
openly true, and lawful, and grounded upon evident troth and justice; It
follows, that man should have rather consideration to troth, right and
justice in this matier accordingly with the will of the law of God, then to any
promise or ooth made by him to the contrary, considered namely that by the
law and determination of holy Church an ooth made by oo^ person unto the
prejudice or hurt of an other, contrary to troth, justice and charity, in the
which stands the plenitude and perfection of Godd's law, is void and of noon
effect, neither in any wise obligatory; And that the virtue and nature of an
ooth is to confirm troth, and in no wise to impugn it; And over that by the
ooth of feaute, homage, or ligeaunce, no man is bounden to any inconvenient or
unlawful thing; And how be it that this answer is ^uffisaunt to all manner
objections that may be made against his cleyme and intent in this party by
reason or occasion of any ooth, yet natheless the seid Richard, for as much as
the matier of oaths is a matier spirituell, for more declaration of his
conscience, honesty and troth in this party, offreth himself ready to answer
before any Juge Spirituell, competent in place, and time covenable to all manner
of men, that any thing woll purpose against him in that behalf.

And to show clearly, that lawfully withouten offense of God and conscience he
may cleyme and pursue his right, and desire Justice, in such form as he
does, and that all other persons, and namely the Peers and Lords of this
Reame may, and by the law of God and man ought to help, and assist him in
troth and justice, notwithstanding any ooth of feaute, or other by him or them
here before made.

Over this, where it is thought also, n. 15.
that it is to be called to remembrance the great and notable Acts of
Parliament, made in dyvers Parlements of dyvers of the King's progenitors, the
which acts been sufficient to be leyed against the title of the seid Duc, and
of more auctorite then any Cronicle, And also of auctorite to defete any manner
title made to any person.

And also where it is said, that it is to be leyde against the se^^e title dyvers
entailles made to the heirs males, as for the Corone of England, as it may
appear by diverse Cronicles and Parlements,

The s^id Richard Plantagin^t answers and says, that in troth there been
no such acts and tailles made by any Parliament herebefore, as it is surmysed,
but only in the vijth year of King Herry the fourth a certain act and
ordinance was made in a Parliament, by him called, wherein he made the Rea^mes
of England and F^aunce, amongs others, to be unto him, and to the heirs of his
body coming, and to his iiij sons, and the heirs of their bodies coming, in
manner and form as it appears in the same act; And if he might have obteigned
and rejoysed the seid Corones, etc. by title of inheritance, descent, or
succession, he neither neded, nor would have desired, or m^de them to be
granted to him in such wise, as they be by the seid act, The which takes no
place, another is of any force or effect against him, that is right enheritor of
the seid Corones, as it accords with Godd's law, and all natural laws; how
it be that all other acts and ordinances made in the seid Parliament, and
sithen been good and s^ffisant against all other persons.

n. 16.
Item, Where it is thought, that if the seid Duc should make any title or cleyme
by the line of Sir Leonell, he should bear the Arms of the same Sir Leonell,
and not the Arms of Edmund Langley late Duc of Y^^k.

The seid Duc answers, and says, that troth is, he might lawfully have
borne the Arms of the seid Sir Leonell here bisore, and also the same Arms
that King Edward the third bare, that is to say the Arms of the Reaumes of
England and of France, but he absteyned of beryng of the seid Arms, like as
he absteigned for the t^me of purposyng, and pursuing of his right and title,
etc. for causes not inknowen to all this Reaume; for though right for a time
rest, and be put to scilence, yet it roteth not, ner shall not perish.

n. 17.
Item, Where it is alleged against the title of the seid Duc, that the seid
Herry of Derby, at such time as he took upon him the Corone of England, said,
that he entered and took the same Corone upon him as right enheritour to King
Herry the third, and not as a Conqueror.

The seid Duc thereto says, that such saying of the seid King Herry the fourth
may in no wise be true, and that the contrary thereof, which is troth, shall
be largely enough showed, approved, and justefyed by sufficiaunt auctorite, and
matier of record: And over that, that his seid saying, was oonly to shadow, and
color fraudulently his seid unrightwyse, and violent usurpation, And by that
moyen to abuse deceyvably the people stonding about him.

Item, The Saturday, n. 18.
the xvij day of this present Parliament, it was showed unto the Lords
Spirituelx and Temporelx, being in this present Parliament, by the mouth of the
seid Chaunceller, that the seid Duc of York called besily, to have hasty and
spedy answer of such matiers, as touched his title aboveseid; And how that
for as much as it is thought by all the Lords, that the title of the seid Duc
cannot be defeted; and in eschewing of the great inconvenients that may ensue,
a mean was found to save the King's honor and astate, and to appease the seid
Duc if he would, which is this; That the King shall keep the Corones, and his
^state, and dignity royal, during his life, and the seid Duc, and his heirs,
to succeed him in the same; Exhorting and stering all the seid Lords, that if
any of them cowde find any other or better mean, that it might be showed;
whereupon after sad and ripe communication in this matier had, it was
concluded and agreed by all the seid Lords, that since it was so, that the
title of the seid Duc of York cannot be defeted, and in eschuing the great
inconvenients that might ensue, to take the mean above-rehersed, The oaths
that the seid Lords had made unto the King's Highness at Coventre, and other
places saved, and their consciences therein clered; and over that it was agreed
by the seid Lords, that the seid mean should be opened and declared to the
King's Highness: And forthwith they went toward the King, where he was in his
Chamber, within his Palice of Westminster; and in their going out of the
Parlement-chambre, the seid Chaunceller asked of the seid Lords, that since it
was so, that the seid mean should be opened by his mouth to the King's good
Grace, if they would abide by him howsoever that the King took the matier, and
all they answered and said, Ye.

All these premises thus showed and opened to the King's Highness, he inspired
with the grace of the Holy Ghost, and in eschuying of effusion of Christien
blood, by good and sad deliveration, and avyce had with all his Lords
Spirituelx and Temporelx, condescended to acord to be made between him, and
the seid Duc, and to be auctorized by thauctoryte of this present Pa^lement;
The tenor of which accord hereafter ensues in manner and form following.

Concordia facta inter Regem and p aefatum D^cem. n. 19.
Blessed be Jesu, in whose hand and bounty restith, and is the peace and unitee
betwixt Princes, and the well of every Reaume; through whose direction agreed it
is, appointed, and accorded as follows, Betwixt the most mighty Prince, King
H^rry the sext, King of England, and of France, and Lord of Irelond, on that
oon party; and the right high, and mighty Prince, Richard Plan^aginet, Duc of
York, on that other party, upon certain matiers of variaunce moeved betwixt
them, and in especial upon the cleyme and title unto the Corones of England,
and of France, and royal power, estate, and dignite apperteigning to the
same, and Lordship of Irelond, opened, showed, and declared by the seid Duc
before all the Lords Spirituelx and Temperelx, being in this present Parliament,
The seid agreement, appointment, and accord to be auctorised by the same
Parliament.

This is the same verbatim with the Writing put in^o the Parliament, n. 11.
First, Where the seid Richard Duc of York has declared, and opened as above,
his seid title and cleyme in manner as follows; That the right noble, and
worthy Prince, Herry, King of England, the third, had issue, and leefully gate
Edward his first begoten Son, born at Westminster, the XV Kalends of Juyll,
in the Vigill of St. Marc and Mercellian, the year of our Lord MCCXXXIX. and
Edmund his secund Son, which was borne on St. Marcell day, the year of our
Lord MCCXLV. The which Edward, after the death of the seid King Herry his
Fader, entitled and called King Edward the first, had Issue Edward his fir^^
begotten Son, entitled and called, after the decesse of the seid first Edward
his fader, King Edward the secund; which had Issue, and leefully gate the right
noble, and honorable Prince, Edward the third, the true and undoubted King of
England, and of France, and Lord of Irelond; which Edward the third, true and
undoubted King of England, and of France, and Lord of Irelond, had Issue and
leefully gate Edward his first b^goten son, Prince of Wales, William Hatfeld
secund begotten, Leonell third begoten Duc of Clarence, John of Gaunt fourth
begoten Duc of Lancaster, Edmund Langley fi^^h gotten Duc of York, Thomas W
d^stoke sixth gotten Duc of Glove, and William Windsore the seventh gotten; The
seid Edward Prince of W^^es, which dyed in the life of the seid Edward King,
had Issue and leefully gate Richard, the which succeeded the same Edward King,
his Grauntfi^e, in royal Dignite, entitled and called King Richard the secund,
and dyed without Issue. William Hatfeld, the secund gotten son of the seid
Edward King, dyed without Issue. Leonell, the third gotten son of the same
Edward King, D^c of Clarence, had Issue, and leefully gate Ph^lippe his only
daughter and heir, which by the Sacrament of Matrimony copled unto Edmund
Mortymer Earl of March, had Issue, and leefully bore R^ger Mortymer Earl of
March, his son and hei^e; which Roger Earl of March had Issue, and le^fully
gate Edmond Earl of March, Roger Mortymer, Anne, and Alianore; which Edmund,
Roger, and Alianore dyed without Issue, and the seid Anne under the Sacrament
of Matrimony copled unto Richard Earl of Cambrigge, the son of the seid
Edmund Langley, the fifth gotten son of the seid King Edward, as it is before
specified, had Issue, and leefully bare Richard Plantaginet, commonly called
Duc of York: The seid John of Gaunt, the fourth gotten son of the seid King
Edward, and the younger Brother of the seid Leonell, had Issue, and leefully
gate Henry Earl of Derby, which incontinent, after the time that the seid King
Richard resigned the Corones of the seid Reaumes, and the seid Lordship of
Irelond, unrightwisely entered upon the same, then beying on lyve Edmund
Mortymer Earl of March, son to Roger Mortymer Earl of March, son and heir
of the said Phelippe, daughter and heir of the seid Sir Leonell, the third
son of the seid King Edward the third; to the which Edmund the right and
title of the seid Corones and Lordship by law and custom belonged.

To the which Richard Duc of York, as son to Anne, daughter to Roger Mortymer
Earl of March, son and heir to the seid Phelippe, daughter and heir to the
seid Leonell, the third gotten son of the seid King Edward the third, the
right title, dignite royal, and estate of the Corones of the Reaumes of
England, and of France, and of the Lordship and land of Irelond, of right,
law, and custume apperteigneth, and belongs, before any issue of the seid
John of Gaunt, the fourth gotten son of the seid King Edward.

n. 20.
The seid title natheless notwithstanding, and without prejudice of the same,
The seid Richard Duc of York, tenderly desireyng the well, rest, and prosperity
of this land, and to set apart all that, that might be trouble to the same; and
considering the possession of the seid King Herry the sixth, and that he has
for his time be named, taken, and reputed King of England, and of France, and
Lord of Irelond, is content, agrees, and consents, that he be had, reputed,
and taken, King of England, and of France, with the royal estate, dignite,
and pre-eminence belonging thereto, and Lord of Irelond, during his life
natural; and for that time the seid Duc, without hurt or prejudice of his seid
right and title, shall take, worship, and honor him for his Sovereign Lord.

n. 22.
Item, It is accorded, appointed, and agreed, that the seid Richard Duc of Y^^k
rejoyse, be entitled, called, and reputed, from hens forth verrey and rightful
heir to the Corones, royal estate, dignite, and Lordship aboveseid; and after
the decesse of the seid King Herry, or when he woll ley from him the seid
Corones, estate, dignite, and Lordship, the seid Duc, and his heirs, shall
immediately succeed to the seid Corones, royal estate, dignite, and Lordship.

Item, n. 25.
For the more establishing the seid accord; It is appointed, and consented,
that the Lords Spirituelx and Temporelx, being in this present Parliament,
shall make ^oothes to accept, take, wurship, and repute the seid Richard Due
of York, and his seid heirs, as above is reherced; and keep, observe, and
strengthen, in as much as apperteigneth unto them, all the things aboveseid,
and resist to their power all them that wull presume the contrary, according to
their estates and degrees.

The King understanding certainly the seid title of the seid Richard Duc of
York just, lawful, true, and suffisant; n. 27.
by thavis and assent of the Lords Spirituelx and Temporelx, and Commons in
this present Parliament assembled, and by auctorite of the same Parliament,
declares, approves, and ratifieth, confermeth, and accepts the seid title
just, good, lawful, and true, and thereunto yeveth his assent, and agreement,
of his f^^e will and liberty. And over that, by the seid avis and auctorite,
declares, entitleth, calls, stablisheth, affermeth, and reputeth the seid
Richard Duc of York verrey, true, and rightful heir to the Corones, royal
estate and dignite of the Reaumes of England, and of France, and of the
Lordship of Irelond aforeseid; and that according to the wurship and reverence
that thereto belongs, he be taken, accepted, and reputed, in wurship and
reverence, by all the States of the seid Reaume of England, and of all his
Subgetts thereof, saving and ordeigning by the same auctorite, the King to have
the seid Corones, Reaumes, royal, estate, dignite, and pre-eminence of the
same, and the seid Lordship of Irelond, during his life natural. And
ferthermore, by the same avis and auctorite, wolle, consents, and agrees,
that after his decesse, or when it shall please his Highness to ley from him
the seid Corones, estate, dignite, and Lordship, or thereof cesseth; The seid
Richard Duc of York, and his heirs, shall ymmediately succeed him in the seid
Corones, royal estate, dignite, and Lordship, and them then have and joy, any
Act of Parliament, Statute, O^dynaunce, or other thing, to the contrary made,
or interruption, or discontinuance of possession notwithstonding. And moreover,
by the seid avis and auctorite, stablisheth, grants, co^fermeth, approves,
ratifieth, and accepts the seid accord, and all things therein contained; And
thereunto freely and absolutely assenteth, and agrees.

From this Record it is evident,

1. Richard Duke of York exhibited his bare Claim and Title to the Lords only.

2. R^chard Duke of York did not petition the Lords. n. 11.

3. His Council only delivered in a W^iting, containing his Descent, and Title
by Birthright, and Hereditary Succ^ssion, and nothing else.

4. The Matter was so high, the Lords could not answer it, nor enter into
Communication thereof, without the King's Command, Agreement, and Assent.

5. The King consented, and prayed and commanded the Lords to search and find
out what might be opposed to the Duke's Claim and Title.

6. They sent for the Judges, to advise what might be said against the Duke, to
fortify the King's Right.

7. The Judges excused themselves, for that the matter was so high, and touched
the King's high Estate, and Regality, which was above the Law, and passed their
Learning; wherefore they dare not enter into Communication thereof.

8. The Lo^ds, upon this Answer of the Judges, sent for the King's Sergeants
and Attorney, and gave them the same Command, who made the same Excuse the
Judges had done; but the Lords would not take it: Whereupon the Articles and
Reasons against the Duke's Claim and Title were exhibited, n. 13.

9. The Author. p. 22, 23.
That in the Articles and Reasons against the Duke's Claim and Title, the^e is
not the least word of Phileppe's being illegitimate, or that her F^ther was
divorced from her Mo^her; nor is there the least mention that the House of
Lancaster claimed by Prescription of sixty years Possession, (which comes from
Do^eman, and the Author is to find out both these things in the Parliament
Rolls, or be guilty of downright Falsehood; for he reports them both as pleaded
against the Duke's Title. As to the first, there needed no other Argument, if
it had been insisted on, and could have been made good: And as to the second,
neither was it insisted on, or mentioned, as was said before; and if it had,
N^llum tempus occurrit Regi would have been a sure Rule in this Case: For it is
absurd to think that Prescription, at least so sh^^t a Prescription as this,
could justifi^ a wrong, and make a Title in this Case; for there is another
Rule of Law, Non confi^matur Tractu temporis, quod de jure non subsistit; no
length of time makes that lawful which was not so from the beginning. If there
be a right Heir of the Crown, that claims or else would claim, but that he
wants either notice of his Right and Title, or Power to make it good, or
forbears to claim for other sufficient Reasons, Vide n. 16.
here Prescription signifies nothing.

10. It was allowed, at least not contradicted, that all Persons, and namely
the Peers and Lords, might, and by the Laws or God and Man ought to help and
assist him in Truth and Justice. n. 14.

11. It was the Judgment of all the Lords, that the Title of the Duke, which
was only Succession by Birthright, and Proximity of Blood, could not be
defeated.

12. That Richard Duke of York was by King Henry, and the Lords, acknowledged
as very and rightful Heir to the C^own, and that he was so to be called.

13. That the mean found out to save the King's Honor, and appease the Duke,
if he would, was not, or could be imposed or forced upon him, but he was at
liberty to accept or refuse it, and was no ways bound, but by his own consent
n. 18.

14 The Oath that Richard Duke of Y^rk took, was in pursuance of the Agreement;
and any man may lawfully take an Oath to make good a Bargain, where no man
receives Injury but himself; and so with his consent that is injured, any other
Person concerned in the Agreement, may swear to the observation of it.

Page 24.
Lastly, The Weal, Rest, and Prosperity of the Land (which the Author calls the
Public Good) followed this Agreement; and the Reason was, that the C^own was
restored to the right Heir; whereupon all Murmuring, Hatred; S^^^e, and
Contention amongst the People, and Evil-will and Contrivances against one
another ceased.

These are all the Instances the Author uses; yet two are wanting, the
Successions of Edward III. and Hen. IV. but seeing he may have peru^ed an
excellent Treatise, bearing the Title of the Grand Question, he may happily be
convinced by what the learned Author has said, Page 80, 81 83, 85, 86.
that they were both Usurpers; the first during his Father's Life, the second
from the very time he took upon him Kingship.

The Author's Words, p. 29, 30.
There are three sorts of Persons may be said to have Possession of the Crown,
an Usurper, a King de jure, and a King de facto; and because the Distinction
betewen these does not seem to be well understood, I shall briefly explain it.

1. An Usurper is one that comes in by force, and continues by force.

2. A King de facto is one, who comes in by consent of the Nation, but not by
virtue of an immediate hereditary right.

3. A King de jure is one, who comes in by Lineal Descent as next Heir; and
whose Right is owned, and recognized by the Estates of the Realm.

The Author may make what verbal, frivolous Distinction he pleases between a
King de facto and an Usurper, yet de facto they are the very same. Let him show
an Example in this Nation, if he can, of a King de facto set up without an Army
or Force; or of an Usurper that came in by Force, who did not make the Nation
own him; and though he took upon him the Name and Title by force, and the
assistance of a Party, yet afterward made the States and People consent to it.
Was not Edward II. made Prisoner by an Army, and afterward deposed; and Edward
III. in his Father's lifetime, set up by such as were under the power of that
Army? And Henry IV. set up by such as acted, and were under the power of that
Force? Our Laws make no difference between an Usurper, and a King de facto
according to the Author's description.

The Author's Words, page 32.
A King de facto, according to our Law, (as I said,) is one in quiet possession
of the Crown, by Consent of Parliament, without hereditary Right; such as Henry
IV. V. VI. VII. were all thought to be by those who made this Distinction. For,
as far as I can find, the Distinction of a King de facto, and de jure, was then
started, when the House of York so much insisted on their hereditary Right, and
so many of our Kings had governed the Kingdom by Consent without it; therefore
the Lawyers, to find a sufficient Salvo for the Kings of the House of
Lancaster, framed this Distinction of Kings de facto, and de jure.

Records, Law, and History.
Rot. Parl. 1. Ed. IV. n. 8.
In the First of Edward IV. the Commons exhibit a Petition in Parliament,
wherein they set forth his Title by Birthright, and Proximity of Blood; and
say, Richard II. was lawfully, rightly, and justly seated and possessed of the
Corone of England, Royal Power, Estate, Dignite, Pre-eminence, Governaunce,
and Lordship of Irelond, and the same joyed in rest and quiet, without
interruption or molestation, Ibid. n. 9.
unto the time that Henry late E^le of Derby, son of John of Gaunt, the
fourth gotten son of King Edward III. and younger brother of Leonell,
temerously, ay^nst rightwiseness, and justice, by force and arms, against his
fe^th and ligeance, rered-werre at Flynt in W^les, against the seid King
Richard; him took, and imp^esoned in the Tower of London of great violence. And
the sam^ King Richard so being in prison, and lyvying, usurped and intruded
upon the Royal Power, Estate, Dignity, Preeminence, possessions, and Lordships
aforeseid; taking upon him usurpously the Corone and name of King and Lord of
the same Reaume and Lordship; and not therewith satisfied or content, but more
grevous thing attempting wykidly, of an unnatural, unmanly, and cruel Tyranny,
the same King Richard, King enoynted, coroned, and consecrate, and his Liege
and most high Lord in the E^th, against God's Law, Manne's Ligeance, and O^ch of
Fidelite, with uttermost pu^icion attormenting, murdered with most vile,
heinous, and lamentable death.

Ibid. n. 10.
And that the same Henry unrightwisely, against Law, Conscience, and Custume of
the seid Reaume of England, usurped upon the seid Corone and Lordship. And that
he, and also Henry, late called King Henry V. his son^e, and the seid Henry,
late called King Henry VI. the son of the seid Henry, late called King Henry
V. occupied the seid Reaume of England, and Lordship of Irelond, and exercised
the governaunce thereof by unrightwise intrusion, and usurpation, and in noon
otherwise.

It Is true, the Distinction of a King de facto, and de jure, was first heard of
in this very Parliament, which declared the hereditary Right of the House of
York, in in the First of Edward IV. cap. 1. in print; which agrees with the
Record in the Parliament-Roll, n. 41. and not before; but not started then by
the Lawyers, to fi^d a sufficient Salvo for the Kings of the House of
Lancaster; but an Expression intended by Parliament (before they used it) to
denote and make known an unlawful, pretended, or pretensed King, that had not
obtained the Crown by just Title; or to signify an Usurper, by way of
Antithesis, or Contradistinction to a K ng de jure, or in Right. For this very
Parliament, that had declared Henry IV. V. VI. Usurpers, calls them all, in
this Act, or Statute, Kings de facto; or in Deed, and not in Right; and their
Reigns, pretensed Reigns; and very often affi^ms them to be but pretensed
Kings, such as did not reign lawfully, nor possess the Crown by just Title. And
that this was the intention of the Parliament in the use of this Expression,
the Statute it self will inform the Author, or any indifferent Reader that will
peruse it.

The Lawyers did not comment or descant upon these Words, or declare what power
a King de facto had, before Easter-Term, in the Ninth of Edward IV. and then
they acknowledge Henry VI. King de facto in the Instance, to have been an
Usurper, and that he was not King, forsque per usurpacion, but by Usurpation.
This Ninth of Edward IV. was a troublesome Year, and Make-king Warwick, in all
probability, with many others of the Nobility, were at this very time
contriving against him, and to reinthrone King Henry; for in July following he
was in open Rebellion against King Edward, and about the end of that Month, or
beginning of August, mad^ him Prisoner; who soon made his Escape, left the
Nation, and went into Holland, etc and on the sixth of October, in that Year,
Henry VI. was restored. The Earl of Warwick was popular, almost beyond
Imagination; and probably the Lawyers, during the Contrivance, when they saw
the People move that way, might start such Notions about the Power of a King de
facto, as might encourage the Undertaking of W^^wick and his Friends, for Henry
VI. against Edward IV. It Is observable, that the Judges did not argue, or give
any Opinion in this Case, but only the Sergeants and Apprentices of the Law, as
appears in the C^se it self. Third Institut. fol. 7.
Sir Edward Coke has outdone the Year-Book, 9. Ed. IV. Term. Pasch.
concerning whole Opinion, the Author may read Mr. Pryn, Page 482, etc.
in his Plea for the Horse of Lords. This is a brief Account of a King de
facto, and the Origin of the Expression; by which it is most manifest, that by
the Parliament-Roll, the Statute and Case of the Ninth of Edward IV. he is no
other than a pretensed, unlawful King, and an Usurper, though set up as the
three Henry's were; and therefore the pretended Distinction is idle, as may
also further appear by the following Statute; which, because not common, is
here recited at large.

Statutes at large, 17. Ed. IV. c. 7.
Item, Whereas in the most dolorous Absence of ou^ Sovereign Lord the King out
of this his Realm, being in the parties of Holland, and before his victorious
Regress into the same Realm, Rot. Parl. 17. Ed. IV. n. 34 This Writ of Summons
to the Parliament is dated, 15. Octobr. Rot. Cl. 49. Hen. VI. M. 6. Dors.
in a pretensed Parliament unlawfully, and by usurped Power, summoned by the
Rebel and Enemy to our Sovereign Lord the King, Henry VI. late in Deed, and not
of Right, King of England, holden in the Palace of Westminster, the 26th Day of
November, in the Ninth Year of our Sovereign Lord the King that now is, under
the colored Title of the said Henry, the Forty ninth Year of the Incoation of
his pretensed Reign, and the First Year of the Readeption of his usurped Power
and Estate, diverse and many Matters were treated, communed, wrought to the
destruction and disherison of our Sovereign Lord the King, and his Blood Royal,
by the Labou^ and Exhortation of Persons not fearing God, nor willing to be
under the Rule of any earthly Prince, but inclined of sensual Appetite to have
the whole Governance and Rule of this Realm under their Power and Domination:
Which Communications, Treaties and Workings do remain in Writing, and some
exemplified; whereby many Inconveniences may ensue to our said Sovereign Lord
the King, and his Blood Royal, (which God defend,) and all Noblemen at this
time attending about the King, and all his other Liege People and Subjects,
unless due Remedy be provided in this behalf. Our said Sovereign Lord the King,
by the Assent of the Lords Spiritual and Temporal, and at the Request of the
Commons in the said Parliament assembled, and by the Authority of the same, For
the Surety of his noble Person, his noble Issue, and the inheritable Succession
of the same; and for the Surety of all the Lords, Noblemen, and other his
Servants and Subjects, has ordained and stablished, that the said pretensed
Parliament with all the Continuances and Circumstances depending upon the same,
be void, and of none effect; and that all Acts, Statutes, Ordinances, Treats,
Communications, Conventions and Worki^gs in the same pretensed Parliament
treated, communed, accorded, wrought, had, or by Authority of the same
Parliament enacted and ordained; and all Exemplifications made upon the same,
or any part of them, and every of them, shall be reversed, cancelled, void,
undone, revoked, repealed, and of no fo^ce, nor effect.

Henry VI. was a King de facto, according to the Author's Description, as well
before, at, and after this Parliament, in the Ninth of Edward IV. and Forty
ninth of Henry VI. and is said to be in this Statute; yet in all these Times he
is declared an Usurper, at this time a Rebel, and his Reign a pretensed Reign;
and this Parliament is also declared a pretensed Parliament. Statutes at large,
1. H^n. VII. cap. 6.
Richard III. was acknowledged to be a King, by a Parliament of his own
calling, and was, according to the Author's description, a King de facto; yet
in the First of Henry VII. he is declared an Usurper of the Realm, and not so
much as allowed the name of King, or pretensed King, in that Statute.

After the King de facto, and Usurper, Enquiry is to be made what Right and
Title a King de jure may pretend to the Crown, according to the Constitution,
Law, and Statutes of the Kingdom; and it appears by the following plain Proofs,
that it is on^y by Descent, and not o^herwise. This is an hereditary,
successive Mo^archy; and immediately upon the Death o^ Cession of th
Predecessor, the Crown is vested in the lawful Successor by Inheritance and
Proximity of Blood. Which appears,

1. By the Record before cited of the Comprom^se and Agreement between R^chard
Duke of Yo k and Henry VI. in the Thi^ty ^inth Y^ar of his R^ign, wherein he
makes his Cla^m only by lineal D^scent. He exhibited only a bare Title by
Descent, and Proximity of B^ od, which could not be denied; and upon such
showing of his Right, the L^rds concluded, it could not be defeat^d, Rot. Parl.
1. Edw. IV. n. 10. This was p^ t of the Pet^tion and Declaration of the Commons
before mentioned, and p^ssed into an Act. n. 15.
notwithstanding what King Henry's Council could say against it.

2. By the R^cord of the First of Edward IV. The Commyns being in this present
Parliament, having sufficient and evident kn^wlege of the seid unrightw se
Usurpation, and Intrusion, by the s^id Henry late Earl of Derby, upon the s ^^
C^rone of England; knowing also certai^ly, without doubt or ambiguite, the
Right and Title of our seid Soverayne Lord thereunto true, and that by God's Law
Manne's Law, and Law of Nature, he an^ none other is and owe to be their true,
rightwise, and natural Liege and Sovereign Lord; and that he was in Right from
the death of the seid noble and famous P^i^ce his Fader, very just King of the
seid Reaume of England. And yet his Father was never poss^ssed of the Crown.

3. Ibid. n. 10.
And that the Taking of Possession, and Entree into the Exercise of the Royal
Estate, Dignite, Reign, and Governaunce of the seid Reaume of England, and
Lordship of Irelond, of our seid Soverayne Liege Lord King Edward IV. the seid
4th Day of March; That Day he took Possession of the Crown and Government.
Ibid. n. 11.
and the Amocion of the seid Henry, late called King Henry VI. from the
Exercise, Occupa^ion, Usurpation, Intrusion, Reign, and G^vernaunce of the
seid Reaume and Lordship done by our seid Soverayne, and L ege Lord King Edward
IV. the seid 4th Day of March, was and is rightwi^e, lawful, and according to
the Laws and Cu ^umes of the seid Reaume, and so owe to be taken, holden,
reputed, and accep ed. And over that, that our seid Sov^rayne, and Liege Lord
King E^ward IV. the seid 4 h Day of March, was lawfully sea^ed and possessed of
the seid Corone of England in his seid Right and Title; and from thencefor^h
h^ve to him and his Heirs, K ngs of E^glond, all such Manners, Castells,
Lordships, Honors, Londs, Tenements, Rentes, Services, Fees, Fee-farm Rentes,
Knights F^es, Avousons, Gifts of Offices, to year at his pleasure, Feires,
Markets, Iss es, Fynes and Amerciamentes, Libertees, Franchises, Prerogatifs,
E^chetes, Custumes, Reversions, Remey^ders, and all other Hereditamentes with
her Appurtenaunces, whatsoever they b^, in England, Wales, and Irelond, and in
^aleys, and the Marches thereof, as the seid King Richard had in the Fe^^ of S.
Matthew the Apostle, (about three Weeks before he was deposed) the Twenty third
Year of his Reign, in the Right and T^tle of the Corone of England, and
Lordship of I^elond; and sh^ld, after his Decesse, have descended to the s^id
Edmund Mortymer Earl of March, Son of the seid Roger Mortymer Earl of
March, as to the next Heir of Blood of the same King Richard, after his death,
if the seid Usurpation had not been committed; or after the seid Edmund, to his
next Heir of Blood, by the Law and Custume of the seid Reaume of England.

4. The general Opinion of the N^tion in these Times, that the Right and Title
to the Crown was by Inheritance only, and Proximity of Blood, caused Henry IV.
^o claim it, Rot. Part. 1. Hen. IV. n. 53. Rot. Parl. 1 R^c. III. in Exact
Abridgment fol. 712 713, 714.
als descendit be right Line of the Bl^de, comeynge fro the good Lord Henry
Therde.

And for the same Reason, Richard III. was by the three Estates, that is to
say, the Lords Spi itual and Temporal, and Commons, in Parliament assembled,
declared to be undoubted Heir of Richard Duke of York, Father to Edward IV.
very Inheriter of the Crown of England, and Dignity Royal, and, as in Right,
King o^ England by way of Inheritance. T^ ssel's C^nt^n. fol. 231.
All this was insinuated by himself, in his Answer to Buckingham's Speech, when
he took upon him Kingship. Likewise Henry VII. upon the same Account, prefers
his Title by Conquest and Succession before that by Act of Parliament, which
Pope Innocent VIII. In Cotton's Library, Cleopatra, E. 3.
in his Bull of Confirmation of his Title, says, belonged to him, non modo jure
belli, ac notorio and indubitato proximo successionis titulo, verum etiam
omnium Praelatorum, Procerum, Magnatum, Nobilium, totiusque ejusdem regni
plebis Electione, and noch and decreto statuto, and ordinatione ipsius Angliae
regni trium Statuum in ipsorum Conventu Parlamento nuncupato: Bacon's History
of Henry VII. f. 1. and 3.
Not only by Right of War, (being saluted King by the Army in Bosworth-Field,
and had there King Richard's ornamental Crown put on by Sir William Stanley.)
and the notorious and indubitable next Title of Succession; but also by the
Election of all the Prelates, and Great Men of the who e Commonalty of the
Kingdom of England, and by a known and decreed Statute and Ordinance of the
three Estates of the same Kingdom of England, in their Meeting called a
Parliament. But that he thought himself most safe in the Pope's Confirmation is
clear, for that in the Thirteenth Year of his Reign he procured the Bull to be
renewed, and the Act of Parliament confirmed, by Pope Alexander VI. Cotton,
Lib. ut supra.
under pain of Excommunication and Curse to such as should, upon any pretense
whatsoever, disturb the Peace of the Nation, and create Troubles against the
Title of Henry VII.

Henry VIII. in all his extravagant Acts concerning his Queens, and the
Succession, founded them in pretended legal Proximity of Blood, according to
the due course of Inheritance; the pretended want of which was the Ground and
Suggestion still for passing those Acts. See 25 Hen. VIII. cap. 22. 28. Hen.
VIII. cap. 7. And 35. Hen. VIII. cap. 1.

5. Statut. 1. Mar. Sess. 2. cap. 4.
Where it has pleased Almighty God, the 6th Day of July last past, to call out
of this transitory Life, unto his Mercy, our late Sovereign Lord King Edward
VI. by, and immediately after whose decease, the Imperial Crown of this Realm,
with all Dignities, Dominion, H^nours, Pre-eminencies, Prerogatives, Styles,
Authorities, and Jurisdictions, to the same united, annexed, or belonging, did
not only descend, remain and come unto our most dread Sovereign Lady the
Queen's Majesty, but also the same was then immediately, and lawfully inv^sted,
deemed and adj^dged in Her Highness's most Royal Person, by the due Course of
Inheritance, and by the Laws and Statutes of this R^alm.

6. Stat. 1. Jac. cap. 1.
The Act of Recognition in the First of King James, does not take notice of
Henry VII. his Title, but of his Daughter Margaret's, as descended from
Elizabeth her Mother, Daughter and Heir to Edward IV. and declare, that he was
lineally, rightfully and lawfully descended or the Body of the most excellent
Lady Margaret, eldest Daughter of the most renowned King Henry VII. and the
high and noble Princess Queen Elizabeth his Wife, eldest Daug^ter of King
Edward IV. In consideration whereof, the Parliament does acknowledge King James
their on^y rightful Liege Lord and Sovereign; and further say, as being bound
thereunto both by the Laws of God and Man, they do recognize and acknowledge,
that immediately upon the D^ssolution and Decease of Elizabeth late Queen of
England, the Imperial Crown of the Realm of England, and all the Kingdoms,
Dominions and Rights belong^ng to the same, did b^ ^^erent Birthright, and
lawful and undoubted Succession, des^^nd and come to His most Excellent
Majesty, as being linea^ly, justly and ^lawfully next and sole Heir of the
Blood Royal of this Realm; as it is aforesaid.

In the First of the same King, there was a Conspiracy formed against him, by
Persons of diverse Persuasions: Term. Mi^. 1. Jac. kept at Winchester.
Watson and Clerk, two Priests, pleaded it could not be Treason, because he was
not crowned. All the Judges resolved, That King James being right Heir to the
Crown by Descent, was immediately upon the death of Queen Elizabeth, actually
p^ss^ssed of the Crown, and lawful King of E^gland, before any Proclamation, or
Coronation of him, which were but Ceremonies. For their Treason they were
condemned, and executed at Winchester, the 29th of November.

These are impregnable Proofs from the Constitution, Laws and Statutes of this
Nation, what the Right and Title to the Crown is, and to whom the Succession is
due.

FINIS.

