ELIJAH'S EPITAPH, AND THE MOTTO OF ALL MORTALS: IN THE Other Reason in the
Text, persuading him into a willingness to Dye, in these words,

I am no better then my Fathers, 1 Kin. 19.4. By Thomas Bradley, D.D. one of
his late Majesty's Chaplains, and Praebendary of York; and Preached in the
Minster there, and in his Rectory of Ackworth, 1669. Aetatis suae, 72.

YORK, Printed by Stephen Bulkley, and are to be sold by Francis Mawbarne, 1670.

Elijah 's EPITAPH, AND The MOTTO of all Mortals, in the other Reason of the
Text, persuading him into a willingness to Dye, in these Words, I am no better
then my Fathers.
AND now, after this long Parenthesis, I fall upon the (...) of the Text, the
other Motive persuading the Prophet to make this his Suite to Almighty God to
take away his Soul, as it lies in these words, Nam non sum melior Majoribus
meis: For I am no better then my Fathers.

In which words, note these four things clearly offered to our consideration.

1. An humble Confession. 2. An ingenious Concession. 3. A serious Observation.
4. A contented Submission to the common Condition of Mortals; namely, To Dye,
and to be gathered unto his Fathers, all comprised in these words, For I am no
better then my Fathers.
First, An humble Confession, wherein he does not prefer himself before
others; but others rather before himself.

Secondly, An ingenious Concession, wherein he acknowledges of himself, He was
no better then he should be.

Thirdly, A serious Observation, most generally true in all successions, That
seldom comes the better.

Fourthly, A contented Resolution to submit to the common condition of
Mortals, To Dye, and to follow the Generation of his Fathers: All these four
you may Read plainly in these words, For I am no better then my Fathers.

Of all which I shall speak something briefly, if first, by the way, you will
give me leave to take notice of the expression: It is usual with the Ancients,
especially in the Old Testament, frequently upon occasion to make Honorable
mention of their Fathers. So old Jacob telling Pharaoh of his Age, numbers his
Days and Years, by comparing them to the Days and Years of his forefathers:
Genesis 47.9. Few and evil are the Days of the Years of the Life of thy servant,
and I have not attained to the Days of the Years of the Life of my Fathers. So
Joseph's brethren, asking him forgiveness for the wrong they had done him, and
fearing now he would revenge himself upon them, Genesis 50.17. Forgive we pray
thee, the trespass of the servants of the God of thy Fathers. So David, upon
his Deathbed, giving ghostly counsel to Solomon his Son, in the like terms
does even adjure him; 1 Chronicles. 28.9. And thou Solomon my Son, know thou the
God of the Fathers, etc. So frequently, especially in the Scriptures of the Old
Testament; and so here.

Reasons.
First, It is a grave expression, and well-becoming the gravity of holy and
wise men to use; it strikes reverence into the minds both of the speaker, and
the hearer.

Secondly, It adds Authority to that which is spoken, and commands heedfull
Attention to what is spoke, with respect and reverence.

Thirdly, It Is for the honor of the Ancestors to have honorable mention made
of them upon occasion; The Righteous shall be had in everlasting remembrance:
but the name of the wicked shall rot.

Fourthly, It Is for the honor of Posterity too, to be descended of such
Ancestors: The Jews bare themselves high upon this, That they had Abraham to
their Father; though they were removed from him by the distance of many
Generations.

Fifthly, It Is much for the benefit and advantage of Posterity many ways; that
they can derive themselves from such Religious and gracious Ancestors: By this
means they come to be partakers of many great blessings, and to have an
interest in the Promises of many good things, both temporal and spiritual;
both concerning this life, and the life to come. Blessings and good things, often
times become haereditary: Precious Promises made to Abraham, and his Seed: To
David, and his Seed: The Promise is made to you, and to your Seed, Acts 2.39.
Saint Paul commends the faith that was in Timothy; but withal takes notice, It
was not only in him, but also in his Mother Eunica, and in his Grandmother
Lois.

Sixthly, It Is an advantage to Posterity in respect of imitation, an
invitation, and encouragement to tread in their steps, and to imitate them in
the best things: It is a shame to Posterity, and a great reproach, to be
descended of worthy Ancestors, famous for their faith, grace, and holiness,
and to degenerate from them, and to become lewd and loose, vicious and
graceless, whereby they become a reproach, and a dishonor to their Relations,
and the Stock they come of: The Virtues of their Ancestors are the great
aggravation of their vitiousness, and will be their great condemnation another
day: Let us so walk in the steps of our forefathers, that if they were living,
they need not be ashamed of us, nor our Posterity after us to derive themselves
from such Fathers.

Thus of the expression: We now come to the Observations raised out of it: Of
which,

The first is, His humility, in thinking and speaking meanly of himself, in
comparison of others: He does not exalt himself above them, but makes himself
equal to them that were of a lower sort; I am no better then my Fathers: It
was his modesty to say so; for he was better then his Fathers, in more respects
then one: For,

First, He was a Prophet; and we do not Read of any of his Race, that they
were so: It was an Honor, and an Office, that was not haereditary; it went not
by descent, as the Priesthood did, in the Tribe of Levy.

Secondly, He was no ordinary Prophet, he was a Prophet extraordinary, mighty
in word and deed, that wrought such Miracles, as none of the Prophets did
besides, not Moses excepted: By his Prayer, he shut up the Heavens for three
years and six months, that it should not Rain: And by his Prayers opened them
again, that they sent down Rain in abundance, James 5.17, 18.

Thirdly, In respect of his miraculous Assumption into Heaven in a fiery
Chariot, wherein he exceeded Enoch. He was taken up into Heaven also; but not
with that State that Elijah was: Elijah was taken up in a fiery Chariot: And in
many other things this Prophet was singular; The Lord did honor him
exceedingly, and made him, as it were, his Deputy on Earth, and gave him power
to do great and mavelous things; yet see, when speaking of himself, he
lessons himself in his own estimate, comparing himself with others far below
him, Non sum melior; I am no better then they:

Humility is the badge of Christianity: Hear the Voice of it in the great
Patriarch Jacob, Genesis 32. Lord I am less then the least of all thy mercies.
Moses a great Prophet of the Lord, that was a King in Jesurum; yet in his
temper, the meekest man in all the Earth. Saint Paul an Arch-Apostle, the great
Doctor of the Gentiles; yet speaking of himself, see how he lessens himself, If
he speak of Saints, I am (says he) the least, Ephesians. 3.8. If of sinners, I am
the greatest, 1 Timothy 1.15. The truth is, they that have Grace, know they want
more then they have, they are enlightened, and so see their wants, their
corruptions, their infirmities, and are sensible of them: Those that are void
of Grace, as they have it not, so they do not feel the want of it, nor hunger
and thirst after it, for it is an Act of Grace to be sensible of the want of
Grace: And a further Act of Grace, to hunger and thirst after it, in spiritual
things. None think better of themselves, then they that have least cause. Empty
Vessels make the greatest noise, and sound; those that are full do not so:
They are the light Ears of Corn that stand staring up in the field,
over-looking, and over-topping the rest; those that are weighty with Corn,
hang down their heads. In the Pharisee, and the Publican in the Gospel, you
have them both, Luke 18. ver. 10.11, etc. I thank God, I am not as other Men,
nor as this Publican: I fast twice a week, I pay Tithes of all that I have,
etc. An empty Vessel, see what a sound he makes, and all this while, but as
sounding brass, and a thinkling Cymball: The other, with a penitent heart, and
a submissive Voice, makes his humble Confession, and Petition to Almighty God,
Lord be merciful to me a sinner: He goes away justified rather then the other.
The Voice of humble Saints in the estimate of themselves, was wont to be that
of David, 1 Chronicles. 29. Lord, who, or what am I, that thou have dealt thus
bountifully with me, that thou have brought me hitherto? But now, the Voice of
empty, and conceited Christians, hypocrites rather, is clean contrary: What am
I not? am I not knowing? am I not wise? am I not holy? had such a conceited
Christian all that he pretends to have, and pride himself in it, that very
humor would mar all the rest, and take away from it all the thanks,
acceptance, and reward, in that he prides himself in that, which is not his
own, and robs God of his glory; For what have thou, which thou have not
received? And if thou have received it, to whom is the praise of it due? to the
Receiver, or to the Giver? to the Owner, or to the Donor? David apprehended
rightly of this, when he confesses, That in all the largeness, which he, and
the people had given toward the building of the Temple, to the Honor and
Worship of God, they had given him nothing, but what was his own: 1 Chronicles.
29.14. Of thine own have we given thee: Of his own every way; For first, 'Twas
he that gave them the substance, which they contributed to that pious use.
Secondly, 'Twas he that gave them the heart to do so; so it was his own every
way: Of thine own have we given thee. If there be any good in us, whether
Natural, Moral, or Spiritual, it is his own: If any evils, that is our own;
and this is so much, in comparison of that good which is sound in the best of
us, that it does so over balance it, that it is no more then a drop of water
in a bucketfull, in comparison. To keep us humble therefore, and to make us so,
look not upon that little good that is in us, which is none of our own; but
look upon that evil which is in us, and is truly our own; our sins, our
corruptions, our infirmities, our inordinate affections, sinful lusts, unruly
passions, and if in this examen, we will deal impartially with our selves, I
believe there is no man knows so much evil by another, as he does by himself;
and therefore shall do himself no wrong, if he confess, as in the Text, He is
no better then others. If so worthy a Prophet as Elijah, does acknowledge, He
is no better then his Fathers; well may we, the best of us confess, we are much
worse. This of the first Observation, The Prophet's humble Confession.

The second now follows, and that is, His ingenious Concession, That he was no
better then he should be. For though there was singular modesty, and humility,
in this testimony he gives of himself, That he was no better then his Fathers:
yet withal, he speaks it as sensible of his infirmities, and that he was not
free from those Passions, and corruptions, which humane frailty is subject
unto. Saint James making Honorable mention of him, James 5.17. yet baukes not
that, Elias was a man subject to like passions with us: And this very request
of his in the Text, That the Lord would now take away his Soul, was not
altogether free from blame, it discovered some infirmity in him, in not being
willing to stay the Lords time, for taking of him out of the World: the Lord
had more work for him to do, before he took him away, as it appears afterward
in his Story. But God does not take the advantage of his servants infirmities
against them, though we do so one against another; but where he sees an honest
heart, an upright mind, truth in the affections, sincerity in the desires,
seriousness the endeavors, and the bent of the will to be toward him, and to
the fear of his Name, he will pass by many infirmities, and failings in his
servants, and lay his hand upon them, that he may not see them to be displeased
with them for it, and take notice of that which is good in them, to approve it,
to commend them for it, and to reward it; such is the indulgence of our
Heavenly Father, Lord have mercy upon us, if he should strictly mark what is
done amiss, and deal extremely with us in this matter; the best of us, yea,
the best that ever were, we, or our Fathers, Noah, Abraham, Lot, Levi, Moses,
Aaron, David, Solomon, Peter, etc. saints of the first List, famous for their
faith and ^iety, holiness and obedience, yet had their ^aylings, and those
foul ones too, in sins of high nature, scandalous and fearful, upon Record,
all Written for our instruction, ^ot for our imitation: But,

First, For caution, that we may walk warily and circumspectly, and at every
step we tread, ^ook to our footing.

Secondly, For humiliation, that we should not be high-minded, but fear,
considering what weaklings, what nothings we are, if God leave us to our selves.

Thirdly, For admonition, that we may judge charitably of others in case of
offense. And,

Fourthly, For consolation, in case it may be our own case, that we may not
therefore give our selves for lost, or forsaken of God, but lay hold on Christ
by Faith, and recover our selves by Repentance, assuring our selves, that the
Lord will accept us to grace and mercy, as he did these our Fathers,
notwithstanding all these breaches in their obedience, he owned them still to
be his servants, and himself to be their God. He is the same God still, that
pardons, and passes by the iniquity, and the transgressions of his people,
Micha 7.18. because he delights in mercy: He will not Sue us at the extremity
of his Law, but relieve us in the Chancery of his Gospel, remembering whereof we
are made, considering that we are but dust. Gracious, and precious is that
Declaration which the Lord makes of himself to usward, Malachi 3.6. I am the
Lord, I change not, therefore ye sons of Jacob are not consumed. Alas! we do
change, and most commonly every change is for the worse: Which brings in the
third Note, or Observation arising out of these Words,

That seldom comes the better.
In all things wherein there is succession, this Observation is found to be so
true, that it is come into a common Proverb, That seldom comes the better;
but the World grows worse and worse. It were as endless, as needless, to
instance in all particulars, how this is made good: Take one or two in stead of
the rest; When God at first Created the World, Behold, all that he had made was
exceeding good; and Man more excellent then all the rest: But how soon, and how
fast, did he, and his Posterity degenerate, and fall from their primitive
purity; so fast, that in ten, Generations, they were so corrupt, That it
repented God, that he had made them: and their wickedness so great, That the
Earth was not able to bear it, nor the Lord to forbear punishing of it; and
that with so great a Judgment, as sweept them all away from the face of the
Earth. And after the Flood, when in Noah, God had set them upon a new score;
How soon was this New World fallen back into the sins of the Old, not only
in the Posterity of Cham, which fell off in the very next Generation; but even
in Shem, that great Patriarch, after a few Generations, fallen to Idolatry, and
to the worship of strange gods in Terah's days, the Father of Abraham? and who
knows how long before him? remembered by Joshuah, Josh. 24.2. Your Fathers dwelt
beyond the Flood in old time, even Terah the Father of Abraham, and the Father
of Nachor: and served other gods. After God had by miraculous Providence
brought his People into the Land of Canaan, and there settled them in a happy
condition, affording them all helps, and means to keep them so, and to continue
them in his fear, and in his true Religion; how soon had they cast off all,
and by their multiplied rebellious, murmurings, disobediences, and unsufferable
provocations, tontinually renewed, even sorc't him (after many means used for
their reformation in vain, and without success) to cast them off, and to remove
them out of his sight, and out of that good Land, that he had given them, and
to give them up into the hands of their enemies, Salmanasar King of Asyria, and
Nebuchadnezzar King of Babylon, under whose tyranny they suffered great
hardship a long time, as is remembered at large, in the 78. Psalm, and 2 Chronicles.
36.

Thus take the World in what Epoche, or section of time you will; As, from the
Creation to the Flood: From the Flood to Abraham: From Abraham to the settling
of them in the Land of Canaan: From thence to the Captivity, and so all along,
till the coming of Christ, and so downward from time to time, you shall find
it still declining from bad to worse, and generally every Age worse then other;
so that if God should not sometimes purge the Land, and take away the evil
that is upon it, either by some general Judgments, as of Famine, Sword,
Pestilence, Fire, inundations of Water, and the like; or by working some
general Reformations in it, to stop the course and current of sin,
prevayling and overflowing, if he should not frequently keep (as it were) his
Courts of Visitations and corrections in the World, for the suppressing of
sin, continually growing, and increasing, the World would grow monstrous, in
all manner of sin and iniquity; and the wickedness upon it would be so great,
that the Earth would not be able to bear it, every Generation of men adding to
the iniquity of their forefathers, and so making the World worse and worse.
The Ancient Poets had some apprehension of this, when dividing the World into
four Ages, they represented every succeeding Age worse then the former, under
the similitude of four kinds of Mettalls, every one baser then the other;
Gold, Silver, Brass, and Iron. The first Age they termed the Golden Age. The
second, the Silver Age. The third, the Brazen. And the fourth, the Iron Age:
Every one worse then other. Or, as another of that apprehension, elegantly has
expressed it, in few words, to the same sense; Aetas Parentum avis, pejor nos
peperit progeniem deteriorem: Our Parents Age, worse then that of our
Grandfathers, has brought forth us an Offspring worse then both of them.

And as in matters of Religion; so also in matters of civil concern, (if we
compare) we shall find, that we are much worse then our Fathers: We have more
Light, but they had more Love: We have more Knowledge, but they had more
Conscience: We have more Preaching, but they more Practice, more Charity, more
Devotion, more Works, without which, all the rest is but sounding Brass, and
we with it, but tinkling Cymballs: Their Love shall outweigh our Light: Their
Conscience, our Knowledge: Their Practice, our Profession: Their Charity, our
fruitless Faith: Their Fruit, our Leaves and Blossoms, be they never so fair;
who exceeded us as far in all Moral Honesty, Truth, Sincerity, and
Uprightness, as we do them in the shows of it, and pretenses to it. They would
deal justly with all men, pay every man his own, do to others, as they would
be done unto: In paying of Tithes, they made such Conscience of it, that you
shall scarce Read an old Will, but you shall find something set down in it
for Tithes forgotten. In making Conveiances, they made not half that ado,
that now adays we do, no more but this, In witness that this is sooth,
I bite it with my Tooth;
And that was Seal good enough. But now, if a man make, or take a Conveiance,
there is much more to be done, there must be long Leases, Deeds, Bonds,
Secucurities, Counter-securities, general Warrantyes, Fines, Recoveries, and a
World of businesses, (which the simplicity of our forefathers never knew, nor
used) and yet all little enough to secure a man from a loose, and false
Chapman, and too little too sometimes. In buying and selling, or bargaining,
(in those innocent times of our forefathers) a man might have dealt freely,
and safely, and one believe another, and trust him upon his word. But in these
dissembling times, that we live in, for the most part, every man in these
transactions, must deal as warily with another, as if he dealt with a Cheat;
and if he have not good skill in the Commodity he deals for, he is sure to be
Cheated, more or less: And if the other he deals withal has not the like
skill, he is as like to be Cheated on the other hand; For there is no trust to
be given to words in this case, Thus much it cost me; Thus much it is worth;
Thus much I have been bidden for it, says the Seller, and never a word true.
Then on the other hand, It is naught, it is naught, says the Buyer, but when
he is gone, he boasts, as Soloman observes. So that our Savior was not
mistaken, Matthew. 21. when speaking of such Chapmen in buying and selling, he
calls them both Thieves, both the buyer, and the seller, It is Written, My
House shall be called the House of Prayer; but you have made it a Denn of
Thieves: To set forth this by a Comparison, there is (me thinks) the same
difference between us, and our Fathers of former Generations, in these matters,
that there was between Jacob and Esau: The Scripture tells us, Jacob was a
plain Man, and dwelt in Tents; but Esau was a cunning Hunter: Even so, our
forefathers were plain men, and dwelt in Tents; plain in their dealing, plain
in their diet, plain in their apparel, plain in their buildings, plain in
their speech, plain in their carryage and behavior every way; and above all,
plain and rich in the rich Jewel of plain Dealing: But the men of our after
Ages, (like Esau) are cunning Hunters, they hunt for their Neighbors Goods,
for their Houses, for their Lands, for their Farms over their heads, for their
substance, for their Possessions, for their Places, for their Offices, yea,
(and where they can have opportunity for it, or any hope they may prevail) for
greater gain.

And thus we have made out the third Observation to be generally too true, That
in those things wherein there is Succession, seldom comes the better: Elijah
tells us, He was no better then his Fathers; well were it with us, if we were
no worse.

And so much of the third Observation gathered out of this expression of the
Prophet, For I am no better then my Fathers. The fourth follows, and that is,

4th. Obs. His contented submission to the common condition of Mortals, to
Dye, and to follow the Generations of his Fathers. And here, by his Fathers,
may well be meant, all the Generations that were before him, as well the
Fathers that were before the Flood, as those that followed after in the second
World, from Adam that was first Created, to the last Generation that was before
him, I am no better then they, but mortal, as they were, made of the same
mould, the Dust of the Earth, as they were; under the same Law and condition
that they were, to return to Dust again: They all had their Pilgrimages here on
Earth for a time, and in their time served their Generations; their Pilgrimages
are ended, and they are dead, and gone, and turned to their Dust; I also have
now had my time upon Earth in a tedious Pilgrimage, and now I pray thee, let
this day be the last of it, and this place the end of it, here let me dye, and
be gathered unto my Fathers, For I am no better then my Fathers. In which words
we have,

His humble acknowledgement of his mortality; and in him, of our own, and of
all Mankind, throughout all Generations, we, and all our Fathers before us,
and our Posterity after us, All Mortals.

It is usual in the Scriptures, especially of the Old Testament, to periphrase
the death of men departed out of this world, by saying, They are gathered unto
their Fathers. Here in this world, men are scattered one from another, in
respect of time, by the interposition of many Generations; in respect of place,
by the distance of many hundreds of miles; in respect of state and condition,
by the variety of differences of high and low, rich and poor, learned and
unlearned, bond and free, Kings and Captives, mighty and mean, strong and
weak, etc. but Death gathers all together in the Grave, we shall all meet, in
the Dust we shall find one another, Death gathers us all into it is Nett, and
lays us up in the Dust. How Courtly the Prophet brings in the Kings, and
mighty men of the Earth, brought down to the Dust, saluting one another, and,
as it were, complementing one another in the Grave, being met there, and those
that were there foremost, well-comming those that came after them to the same
House of Darkness! There lies Adam, Seth, Enes, Methushalem, and the rest of
the Fathers of the Old World before the Flood. There Noah, Shem, Arphaxad,
Terah, Abraham, Isaac, Jacob, and the rest of the Patriarks since the Flood:
And there all the Generations of our Fathers since them, to these times,
wherein we now live; some of them lived longer then others; some of them did
great and glorious Acts, in their time, and so were more famous in their
Generation then others; but the conclusion of all was this, at the last, And he
dyed, and was gathered unto his Fathers. Adam lived nine hundred and thirty
years, and he begat Sons and Daughters, and he dyed. Seth lived nine hundred
and twelve years, and begat Sons and Daughters, and he dyed. Methushalem, the
longest liver of them all, he lived nine hundred sixty and nine years, and
begat Sons and Daughters and he dyed; and so of all the rest, after all the
Story of their long Lives, and great things done by them, in their time; yet
this was the Catastrophe of them all, And he dyed. Neither Wisdom, nor
Wealth, nor Power, nor Policy, nor Greatness, nor Goodness, nor Grace, nor
Holiness it self, can privilege from this common condition of the Sons of
Adam, but they must dye. We see, That wise men dye, as well as fools, Psalm.
49.10. and rich men dye, as well as poor; and strong men dye, as well as weak;
and Kings dye, as well as Captives, etc. It puts me in mind of a Sage, and
grave saying of an Ambassador, (from whom I do not now well remember) but
coming to Rome in an Embassy, he was showed all the glory, the state, and the
magnificence of that famous City: but it chanced, that while they were showing
him all these glorious things, there past by a Corpse, carried to the Grave to
be buried; which this wise Ambassador observing, took occasion from thence, to
speak these words, That notwithstanding all that greatness, and glory, yet he
saw, that men dyed at Rome, as well as in their Country: so impartial, so
inexorable is this common devourer of men, there is no Covenant to be made with
Death, no agreement with the Grave: It is one of Solomon's insatiables, which
never says, it has enough, till it has us all with our Fathers, For we are
no better then our Fathers.

But what need I Preach mortality to mortals, whose very bodies that they
carry about them, daily Preach unto them the same thing; and the spectacles of
mortality which we daily see, Preach it more powerfully to our Eyes, then
Funeral Sermons can do unto our Ears? Daily we hear the Tollings of the
Passing bells, calling us to our long home: Daily we see the bones and skulls
of our friends deceased, raked out of the Grave: daily we see others following
after them, and the mourners about the streets. It strikes me deeply into the
meditation of mortality, when I do but look over the Register Book, to see in
the turning over of how few leaves, I find the same man Baptized, Married,
Buried: Thus one Generation passes away, and another succeeds, and hastes
after it, as we after them, till we all lie down in the Dust of Death: For we
are no better then our Fathers.

But to draw to an end; I will only show you some Reasons, proving not only
the certainty, but the necessity of dying, that so we may make account of it,
look for it, and provide for it, and so conclude this Observation also.

And there are six Reasons which make it not only certain, but necessary, that
we should dye.
First, Because we are all sinners: And the wages of sin, is Death, Romans 6.23.
And in the fifth of the Romans, ver. 12. By one man sin entered into the
World, and death by sin: and so death went over all men, in whom all men have
sinned.

Secondly, The Sentence of Death is gone out against all mankind, not to be
reverst: This Sentence was pronounced in Paradise, and daily put in execution
ever since; In quo die commederis, morte morieris: In the day that thou eatest
thereof, thou shall dye the death.

Thirdly, The matter whereof we are made, necessitates it, the mean and
corruptible dust of the Earth: And of this God puts us in mind, from the very
beginning of our being, Pulvis, and in pulverem: Dust thou art, and to Dust
thou shall return.

Fourthly, From the continual conflict that is between the four contrary
qualities that are in us; Of Heat and Cold, Drought and Moisture, one against
another: These being the prime qualities of the four Elements, of which we,
and all compound, or mixed bodies do consist, are found in us, in one degree,
or other; all which being contrary the one to the other, are in continual
fight one with another, which never cease, but with the dissolution of the
compositum, the compound body wherein they are: Where here these qualities are
in aequilibri^, equally ballanc't, and in some due proportion mingled in the
body; there the body is healthful, strong, of an excellent temper, and of long
continuance, which was the happiness of Adam, in his first Creation, and of the
long-lived Fathers before the Flood, in a great measure: But where one of these
qualities does predominate, and get the upper hand over the other, there
follows a distemper, and upon that sickness, and weakness, which by the Art,
and care of the skillfull Physician may be helped, at least in some measure, and
for a time, if he be skillfull in these two things. First, to find out, and to
discover which of the qualities it is, which has the predominancy. And
secondly, How to correct that quality, and to relieve the other, which is
oppressed by it, and so to set them in some equal proportion, and due temper
again. But this can no Art of man do so, as to keep them always in an equal
balance, but the qualities being so diametrally opposite one to the other, the
fight will still be renewed again, and the conflict continued, till the one
has destroyed the other; upon which must needs follow the dissolution of the
whole body: so that in these very Elements that we consist of, we carry Death
about us, we only stay while the one has gotten the mastery of the other, and
so bring us down to our dust.

Fifthly, There is a nocessity that we should taste of death, and be turned to
our dust again, that so our gross, and corruptible bedies being first
putrified, may be purifyed and refined, and defaecated from all those dreggs,
and terrestrial groseness, which was in them, while they lived here in the
Flesh, and so be raised again spiritual, and incorruptible. This Reason Saint
Paul gives, 1 Cor. 15.36. Thou fool, that which thou sowest, is not quickened,
except it dye. And ver. 53. This corruptible must put on incorruption: but
before it put on incorruption, it must put off corruption, and that must be
done by death: It shall be raised spiritual; but first, it must lay down that
which is carnal in it; this is done by Death, and the Grave, where the body is
first putrified, and turned to Dust, that so, as the Phaenix out of it is own
Ashes; so the body may be raised out of it is own Dust, and renewed out of it is
own Materials, that so, becoming incorruptible, spiritual, and immortal, it
may be fit to enter into the Heavenly habitations, and to be partaker of the
inheritance with the Saints in glory.

Sixthly, and lastly, It is necessary that all men should dye, and be laid up
in the Earth, in order to the great Assizes, the great and general Judgment
to come, that so they may be all brought forth, together to their trial, for
the greater honor of the Judge our Lord Jesus Christ, the greater glory of the
solemnity, and the greater state of the proceedings in that high Court, and in
that great day. This is the Reason the Apostle gives of the necessity of all
men's dying, before the general Judgment: And in order to it, Heb. 9.27. It is
appointed for all mon once to dye, and after that to come into Judgment. Some
particular judgments we see daily executed in the World, in which God does
punish some particular sins, by Judgments National, Local, and Personal,
that men may know, There is a God that Judges the Earth; and that sin shall
not always go unpunished: But these are but as petty Sessions, in respect of
the Great Assizes to be holden at the General Judgment of the Great Day.
That Is the Day indeed, the Day of all Days, called, The Day of the Lord, the
Day wherein the Lord will be glorified in the sight of Men and Angels, good,
and bad, when they shall see the Son of Man coming in the Clouds, with power
and great glory, and all the holy Angels with him, with flaming fire rendering
vengeance to them that would not know him, nor obey his glorious Gospel, when
all Nations shall be gathered before him; and all the Generations of men which
have been upon the Earth, from Adam, to the end of the World; when the Angels
shall gather the Elect from the four Winds, from all quarters of the World:
and the Sea shall give up her dead, and the Earth shall give up her dead; and
they shall all, great and small, appear before the Throne, and be set in two
mighty bodies, the one on the right hand, and the other on the left, and there
stand to hear their final doom; Those on the right hand, the Sentence of
Absolution, Venite benedicti: Come ye blessed. And those on the left hand, the
Sentence of Condemnation, Ite maledicti: Go ye cursed: So they shall go into
eternal life; and these into everlasting fire. I conclude this Discourse with
the words of Saint Peter, upon the same subject, 2 Epist. 3. chap. 11. ver.
Seeing all these things must come to pass, what manner of people ought we to be
in all holy conversation, and godliness? And those of Saint Paul to the same
purpose, 2 Cor. 5.11. Considering the terrors of the Lord, we admonish you;
What to do? To reconcile your selves unto God, to go quickly, and make your
peace with your adversary, while you are in the way, that is, in this life,
before you dye, and your soul be taken away; to break off your sins by
repentance, that they may be blotted out, and not be found upon the fyle
against you; in the day of account, to make your accounts straight, and ready,
that when the Master shall call for them, you may give them up with joy; to get
oil into your Lamps, and your lights burning, that you may be ready to enter
in with the Bridegroom; to purge your selves from all filthiness of flesh and
spirit, by the sanctifying virtue of the holy Ghost, and get your souls washed
in the blood of the Lamb, that so when they shall be separated from the body
by death, you may with comfort and confidence, commend them into the hands of
God, in the words of the Prophet, and of the Text, and say, Lord take away my
soul, and he may own it, and accept it, and take it into the highest Heavens,
and assign it a place among the holy souls of the Saints in light, where it
shall rest in joy, happiness, and glory for evermore.

And so we have now put up the Prophets Petition to Almighty God, in his own
words, Lord take away my soul.

But there is no Petition, but referrs to some Answer, which leads us to
enquire after the Answer to this: What Answer did the Lord give to this his
request? Did he grant his desire, by taking away his soul, or no?

No, he did not: And why so?

First, He had more work for him to do, before he meant to take him away: He
was to Anoint Huzael King of Syria: Jehn King of Israel: And Elisha Prophet, in
his room. It was after this, that he had that great bussle with Ahab, about
Naboth's Vineyard, and denounc't a heavy judgment from the Lord upon him, for
that his oppression, and injustice, which fell upon him accordingly; And as
great a controversy with Ahaziah his Son, whom he sentenc't to death, for
seeking to the god of Ekron for help in his sickness. And many other great
things did he, before God took him away. Therefore the Lord would not grant
this his request at this time, though it seemed to be reasonable, and modest,
To take away his soul; he would not do it yet, he had more work for him to
do first.

Secondly, If God had granted this his request now, it had been much to his
loss, it had prevented his glorious assumption into Heaven in a fiery Chariot,
which honor he had afterward, as we read, 2 Kings 2. Besides, the glory that
he got upon those two Kings, Ahab, and Ahaziah, in sentencing them to death for
their wickedness: And upon the two Captains of Ahaziah, in calling for fire
from Heaven to devour them, and their fifties, sent to take him, 2 Kings 1. It
had been much to his loss, if God had granted him his request, therefore he
would not grant it, to take away his life, but sent an Angel with Provision,
to satisfy his hunger, and his thirst, and to preserve him from famishing in
the Wilderness, he had no worse Katerer, 1 Kings 19.6. and afterward taken up
both body and soul into Heaven in a fiery Chariot.

From hence I raise these two Observations.
The first, That God does not always grant the Suits of his servants, but
sometimes may, and does for good reason deny them.

The second this, That God does oftentimes give unto his servants greater
things, then they ask, he out-grants their own asking.

To the first, Moses had a desire to go into the Land of Canaan: God would not
suffer him; He carried him up to the top of Mount Nebo, where he might take a
view of it; but he would not grant he should go into it: but there he took
away his soul, Deuteronomy. 34.4, 5. Saint Paul was a great favorite of Heaven, and
he Prayed again and again, that the Messenger of Satan might depart from him;
yet was content to sit down without an Answer: And when, at last, with much
importunity, he obtained an Answer, it was not so directly to his request; but
only a general promise of Gods Grace to support him under the conflict, My
Grace is sufficient for thee: For this thing I besought the Lord thrice, that
it might depart from me: and at last he obtained this answer, My Grace is
sufficient for thee. Supplicat primo, Grace is denied: Supplicat secundo, Grace
is denied again: Supplicat tertio, Grace is granted; yet all this while, he
does not gratify him in granting what he requested in specie; but granted him
something else, that he in his wisdom thought fitter for him, My Grace is
sufficient for thee. Deus non semper dat ad voluntatem, sed Deus dat at
sanitatem: God does not always give according to our will; but God always
gives for our weal, as a Father speaks, Deus audit misericorditer, Deus non
audit misericorditer: When God hears us it is in mercy; when God hears us
not, it is in mercy too. Sometimes we in our ignorance ask such things, as are
not fit for us to receive; sometimes such things, as it is not fit for him to
give: In both these cases, it is no wonder, if we ask, and have not, sometimes
we ask amiss; and then, no marvel, if he deny us, sometimes unseasonably; and
then no marvel, if he delay us: Yet let not all this discourage from asking,
but let it make us, First wise, and prudent, in framing our Petitions, both for
the matter, and the manner of them: To take to us words, and go to God; to
consider he is in Heaven, and we on Earth, and therefore to let those words be
few, but weighty. Secondly, To mark well the returns of our Prayers, whether
God has answered them, or no? or how? If he has answered them in specie, and
directly, then there is a special ground of Faith, and farther confidence in
God. 2ly. By special matter, and occasion of praise, and thanksgiving, I will
hear thee, and thou shall praise me, Psalm. 50.15. And thirdly, Great
encouragement, and invitation to Pray again, and to go with boldness to the
Throne of Grace, not doubting to obtain like help again in the time of need, I
am well pleased, that the Lord has heard the Voice of my Prayer, that he has
inclined his ear unto me: Therefore will I call upon him as long as I live,
Psalm. 116.1, 2.

But, if God has not so answered in specie, by granting thee, just the thing
that thou did desire, mark well if he has not commuted with thee, giving
thee something else in the room of it, that may be to thee as good as it, as he
did to Saint Paul, or far better, as here to our Prophet in the Text: And
then, If where thou ask a stone, he give thee bread: Or, Where thou ask a
scorpion, he give thee a fish: Or, Where thou ask temporal things, he give
thee spiritual; say, thou art no loser by the change, though thou have not
punctually that, which thou did desire. So it is here with our Prophet in the
Text, He desires the Lord to take away his soul: No, says God, I will not do
so; but I will do that which is far better for thee: I will preserve thy
soul in thy body for a time, wherewith thou shall do me more service and that
honorable service, which shall be to thy eternal fame and glory: and that
done, I will take away thy soul and body both, and carry them to Heaven in a
fiery Chariot. Which brings in the second Observation.

2. Obs. That God oftentimes does better for his servants, then themselves
desired, he out-grants their own asking: Thus he dealt by Solomon, 1 Kings 3.

That King had a large offer, and promise from Almighty God, That let him ask
what he would, it should be given him, 1 Kings 3.5. He asked Wisdom that he
might be able to govern that mighty people committed to his charge. The Lord
was so well pleased that he had asked this thing, that he tells him, That he
has not only given him that which he ask't; but he also gave him that which
he had not asked, Riches, and Honor, etc. ver. 13. and that in such abundance,
that no King ever had the like, nor should have after him. Jacob being to take
a long Journey, through dangerous ways, into a strange Country, and being but
ill provided with viaticum for such a Journey, beggs of God, That he would but
grant him food and raiment, and he should be happy; he asks no more: Oh if God
will but give me Bread to eat, and Raiment to put on, how thankful shall I be
for it? And if you look but a little farther in the Story, to the 32. Chapter,
you shall find how abundantly God answered his request, with measure running
over, pressed down, and shaken together; He gave him not only Food and Raiment
in his Journey, but Wealth, and Honor, and Riches in abundance, as he does
thankfully acknowledge, ver. 10. O Lord, I am less then the least of all thy
mercies, for with my staff came I over this bridge, and lo, thou have made me
two bands; so far does his bounty exceed our very hopes and expectations. As
in Jael's entertainment of Sisera, Judges 5. He asked Water, and she gave him
Milk. And as Naaman to Gebazi, He asked him one change of Raiment, and one
Talent of silver; nay, (says he) take two. Such is the bounty of our Heavenly
Father, that gives abundantly, above all that we can ask, or think, Ephesians. 4.
We ask temporal blessings, and he gives us spiritual; earthly, and he gives
us heavenly. He asked life of thee, and thou gave him a long life, yea, even
for ever and ever.

Uses.
First, It serves to admonish us, to give unto God the Glory that is due unto
his Name in this respect, even the Glory of his bounty, that delights in
giving, and is never weary of giving, that loads us with his mercies, and
pours his benefits upon us, an inexhausted treasure, a Fountain never drawn
dry, but continually springing up, with new supplies of Grace, and good things
of all sorts, to all them that seek them, and to him for them.

Secondly, It Is much for the consolation of his poor Saints, and servants,
though of themselves they have nothing, nor are nothing, but with the
Laodiceans, are poor, and miserable, and blind, and naked; yet, as long as they
have such a Heavenly Father, they have enough, what can they want, that have
such a Magazine to go unto, such a Father to turn themselves unto in all their
wants, and necessities, as willing as able to relieve, and to supply them, that
takes care for them, and is engaged by promise to see they shall want nothing
that is good for them: All is yours, and you are Christ's, and Christ is Gods:
What would they more?

Thirdly, Here Is encouragement enough, to go boldly unto the Throne of Grace,
(where the gate of mercy stands open, and the Golden Scepter is held forth unto
us) with full assurance, that we shall speed in our suits surely, and if we
have not, it is because we ask not; and if we ask and have not, it is because
we ask amiss.

Fourthly, Let this teach us wisdom, and good manners too, in all our suits,
never to put them up, but with submission to his will: If Christ the Son of
God did so, well may we ever put in, or at least tacitly imply, Not my will,
but thy will be done: Beware of limiting the holy one of Israel, or prescribing
what he shall give, or in what measure, or when, or how, or in what manner he
shall answer our suits; he may deny, delay, commute, give less then we ask, or
more, and all in great wisdom too, and upon good reason. The Disciples seeing
Christ now risen from the dead, and thereby having such an experiment of his
power and glory, will needs know, Whether now he will restore the Kingdom to
Israel, which the Romans had lately taken from them, Acts 1.6, 7. And the two
favorites, James and John, expecting such a Kingdom now to be set up, put in
betimes, and bespake high places under him in it; That the one may sit on his
right hand, and the other on his left in this Kingdom, (though it was their
Mother, which they put upon it, to prefer the Petition;) yet that they had a
hand in it, appears by the indignation the rest of the Disciples took against
them for this their ambition: Christ liked neither of these suits, and
therefore answers both accordingly; To the former, Non est vestrum: To the
latter, Non est meum: To the former, It is not for you to know the times, and
the seasons, which the Father has kept in his own power: To the latter, To sit
on my right hand, and on my left, is not mine to give; but it shall be given to
those, for whom it is prepared, Mat. 20.23. Again, in other cases, he is
pleased to over-grant the Petitions of his servants, and to give them
abundantly, beyond their own asking, as in the instances before given, and in
the Text, The Lord does not immediately take away the Prophets soul, at his
request, but reserves it in his body for a time, till they had done some more
work, which he had for them to do; And then he takes up both his soul and
body, in a wonderful manner into Heaven, in a fiery Chariot, 2 Kings 2.11.

I conclude this Petition of the Prophet, and my discourse upon it, in the
words of the Prayer of the Church, set forth, and commended to us, in our
despised Liturgy, as the conclusion of the Prayers of the second Service.

O Lord, which know our necessities before we ask; and our ignorance in
asking; we beseech thee have compassion upon our infirmities, and those things
which for our blindness we cannot ask; or, for our unworthiness we dare not,
vouchsafe to give us, for the worthiness of thy Son Jesus Christ our Lord, to
whom with thee, and the holy Spirit, three Persons, and one God blessed for
ever, he all Honor and Power, Praise and Glory (as is most due) for evermore,
Amen.

FINIS.

