THE SERPENT SALVE, OR, A REMEDY For the Biting of an ASPE: WHEREIN, The
Observators Grounds are discussed and plainly discovered to be unsound,
Seditious, not warranted by the Laws of God, of Nature, or of Nations, and most
repugnant to the known Laws and customs of this Realm.

For the reducing of such of His Majesty's well-meaning Subjects into the right
Way who have been misled by that Ignis fatuus.

Printed in the year 1643.

To the READER.
WHen that Sign or rather M^teor called Castor and Polinx appears single to
the Seafaring Men, it portends a dangerous Tempest, because of the density or
toughness of the matter which is not easily dissolved: And when it appears
double divided into two, it presageth Serenity and a good Voyage. But it is
otherwise in the Body Politic. When the King and Parliament are united, it
promises Happy and Halcionian Days to the Subject; and when they appear
divided, it threatens Ruin and Dissipation to the whole Kingdom. This is our
present condition, the Heads are drenched with the oil of Discord, and it runs
down to the skirts of the Garment. Of all Heretics in Theology, they were the
worst who made two beginnings, a God of Good and a God of Evil: Of all
Heretics in Policy, they are the most dangerous, which make the Commonwealth
an Amphisbena, a Serpent with two heads, who make two Supreames without
subordination one to another, the King and the Parliament. That is to leave a
Seminary of Discord, to lay a Trappe for the Subject to set up a Rack for the
Conscience, when Superiors sends out contrary Commands (as the Commission of
Array, and the Order for the Milita.) If they were subordinate one to another,
we had a safe way both to discharge our Conscience toward God, and secure our
Estates to the World, that is by obeying the Higher Power according to that
golden Rule, in presentia Majoris cessat authoritas Minoris. But whilst they
make them coordinate one with another, the Estate, the Liberty, the Life, the
Soul of every Subject lies at Stake: what passage can poor Conscience find
between this Scilla and Charybdis, between the two horns of this Dilemma? No
Man can serve two Masters.

All great and sudden Changes are dangerous to the Body Natural, but much more
to the Body Politic. Time and Custom beget Reverence and Admiration in the
minds of all men; frequent Alterations produce nothing but Contempt, Break ice
in one place, it will crack in more. Mountebankes, Projectors, and Innovators,
always promise golden Mountains, but their performance is seldom worth a
cracked Groat. The credulous Ass in the Fable believed, that the Wolf (his
counterfeit Phisiitian) would cure him of all his Infirmities, and lost his
skin for his labor. When the Devil tempted our first Parents, he assured them
of a more happy Estate, then they had in Paradise: but what says our common
Proverb seldom comes the better. It is the Ordinance of God, that nothing
should be perfectly blessed in this World, yet it is our weakness to impute
all our sufferings to our present condition, and to believe a change would free
us from all Imcombrances. So thought the Romans, when they changed their
Consulls into Consulary Tribunes: So thought the Florentines when they
cashiered their Decem-Viri; both found the disadvantage of their Novelties;
both were forced to shake hands again with their old Friends. Other Nations
have used to picture an English man with a pair of sheares in his hand, thus
deriding our newfanglednesse in attire: But it is far worse to be shaping new
Creeds every Day, and new forms of Government, according to each man's private
humor. When a sick man tosseth from one side of his bed to another, yet his
Distemper follows him. They say our Countryman never knows when he is well,
but if God Almighty be graciously pleased once again to send us Peace, I trust
we shall know better how to value it. In the mean time, let us take heed of
credulity and newfanglednesse. Those States are most durable, which are most
constant to their own Rules. The glory of Venice is perpetuated not so much by
the strong Situation, as by that Sanction or Constitution, that it is not
lawful for any man to make mention of a new Law to the grand Counsel, before
it have been first discussed and allowed by a selected Company, of their most
intelligent most experienced Citizens. Among the Locrians no man might propose
a new Law, but with an halter about his neck, that if he did not speed in his
suite, he might presently be strangled. The Lacedaemonians did so far abhor
from all study of change, that they banished a skillful Musition, only for
adding one string (...) to the Harp.

I desire that no man will interpret what I say in this Discourse as intended
to the Prejudice of the lawful Rights, and just privileges of Parliament. The
very name of a Parliament was Music in our ears; at the Summons thereof our
hearts danced for joy. It is rather to be feared that we idollized Parliaments,
and trusted more in them then in God for out temporal well being. God who gave
the Israelites a King in his anger, may at his pleasure give us a Parliament in
his anger. That we reap not the expected fruit (next to our sins) we may thank
the Observator, and such Incendiaries. I confess my self the most unfit of
thousands to descend into this Theater, as one who have lived hitherto a Mute;
but to see the Father of our Country threatened and villified by a common
Soldier, is able to make a dumb man speak, as it did sometimes the Son of
Craesus. Quando doler est in capite (says Saint Bernard) when the head aches
the tongue cries for assistence, and the very least members, the Toe, or the
little Finger is affected. We are commanded to be wise as Serpents. Math. 10.
16. A chief wisdom of the Serpent is in time of Danger to wrap and fold his
head in the circles of his body, to save that from blows. I pretend not to
skill in Politics, the Observator may have read more Books and more Men, but
let him not despise a weak Adversary who comes armed with evident truth, I know
I have the better cause, the better second. The Birds in Aristophanes fancying
an all sufficiency to themselves, did attempt for a while to build a City
walled up to Heaven, not much unlike such another Fiction of the Apes in
Hermogenes, but at length the one for fear of Jupiters Thunder, and the other
for want of convenient tools, gave over the Enterprise. Believe it, the frame
of an ancient, glorious, well-tempered, and settled Monarchy, though it may be
shaken for a time, will not, cannot be blown upside down, with a few windy
Exhalations, or an handful of Sophistical squibbes. The World begins to see
something through the holes of these men's cloakes, and to espy Day through the
midst of the Millstone. And now that men may borrow a word edgeway with them, it
will be pealed into their ears daily.

I shall deal more ingenuously with the Observer, then he has done with his
Sovereign, to catch here and there at a piece of a Sentence, and pass by that
as mute as a Fish, to which he had nothing to say. If His Majesty's clear.
Demonstrations (which to a strong judgment seem to be written with a beam of
the Sun, and like the principles of Geometry do rather compel then persuade)
did leave any place for further confirmation, the Observers silence were
sufficient to proclaim them unanswerable. There needs no other proof of His
Majestyes Lenity and Goodness then this, That a Subject dare publish such
observations in a Monarchy, and maintain argument with his Liege Lord, Multa
donanda ingeniis, sed donanda vitia, non portenta sunt. He deserves small
pity, who priseth his word more then his Head. King Jews said of some
seditious Preachers in France, If they tax me in their Pulpits I will send them
to preach in another Climate. Pollio said of Angustus, Non est facile in eum
scribere, qui potest proscribere. The King of the Bees, though he want a sting,
yet is he sufficiently armed with Majesty. So should King Charles be to the
Observer and his pewfellowes if they were profitable Bees, as they are a nest
of Waspes and Hornets.

I find two branches of this Family (I cannot call them the Family of Love) as
a verse one to another as Sampsons Foxes. It is hard to say whether is the
ancient House; for they both sprung up, the one in Spain, the other at Geneva,
about the same time, the year 1536. The Captains of the one are Bellarmine,
Simancha, Mariana, etc. The chieftains of the other, are Beza (if it be his
Book de jure Magistratus, as is believed,) Buchanan, Stephanus Iunius, etc. The
former in favor of the Pope, the latter in hatred of the Pope; yet both former
and latter may rise up in Judgment with our Incendiaries and condemn them;
for if they had had as gracious a Prince as King Charles; they had never
broached such tenets to the World, I have busied my self to find out the
Progenitors of these two different Parties: and for the former, I cannot in
probabillity derive them from any other then Pope Zachary, Who it seems (as
the Oestridge) left an egg in the Sand, which after a long revolution of time,
was found and hatched by the care of some Loyolists, for thus he in Aventine, A
Prince is subject to the People, by whose benefit he reigns; whatsoever Power,
Riches, Glory, Dignity he has, he received it from the People, Regem Plebs
constituit, eundem destituere potest. As for the latter (because I know they
will scorn to ascribe their Original to a Pope) I cannot fine one of their
Ancestors in all the Church of Christ, for fifteen hundred years, until I
come as high as Saint Iudes dreamers, or the Pharisees of whom Josephus says,
that they were a Sect, cunning, arrogant, and opposite to Kings. And they have
one Pharasaicall virtue in great eminency, that is, self-love and partiallity,
to make their own case different from all other men's, as may appear by these
particulars.

First, a question is moved concerning the Kings Supremacy in Ecclesiastical
Affairs. They give Power to Kings to reform the Church, just as Bellarmine
gives to the Pope to depose Princes, not certainly, but contingently, in the
case of an ungodly Clergy (that is in their sense, all other but themselves:)
but if they be once introduced, neither King nor Parliament have any more to
do, but execute their Decrees, then the whole Regiment of the Church, is
committed by Christ to Pastors, Elders, and Deacons, so Cartwright; then
Magistrates must remember to subject themselves, submit their Scepters, thr^w
down their Crowns to the Church, and as the Prophet speaks, to lick the dust
of the feet of the Church, that is, of the Presbitery, what is this but kissing
of the Presbiters toes?

Secondly, where they have hope of the King, there the Supreme Magistrate may,
nay he ought to reform the Church, yea though the Statutes of the Kingdom be
against it, so say the Authors of the Protestation printed 1605. But what if
the King favor them not? then he is but a conditional trustee, it belongs
to the States and representative body of the Kingdom: but what if the Nobility
will not join? then the People must, so said Field, since we cannot bring this
to pass by Suite, or Dispute, the People and Multitude must do it, yea,
though it be with blood, as Martin threatens in his Protestation. The People
(says Buchanan) have as much power over Kings, as Kings have over particular
Persons. Nobility (says the Book of Obedience) is the Bounty of the People to
some Persons, for delivering them from Tyrants, which prerogative, the Children
kept, by the Peoples negligence. And of late, have not the Peers been exhorted
to mingle themselves with the meanest of the People, and for the procuring a
parity in the Church, to consent to a parity in the State, and for the subduing
of the pride of Kings, for a time, to part with the power of Noblemen. For a
time, what is that? that is, according to the former Doctrine, till the People
be pleased out of their Bounty to advance them according to their several
Talents, for their zeal to shed the blood of the ungodly. The Misery beginns
now to open itself, and I trust will shortly appear in its right colors. By
these reverend. Fathers (I mean the Rabble) the Discipline was brought into
Genevah it self, against the will of the Syndicks, and two Councels. In illa
promiscua colluvie suffragiis fuimus superiores, says Calvin. Thus these men
make Kings and Nobles, but as Counters which stand sometimes for a pound,
sometimes for a penny pro arbitrio supputantis, just like Chawcers Friar, he
knew how to impose an easy Penance, where he looked for a good Pittance.

Thirdly, the wheel of Heaven, has not yet wound up one thread more of the
^lew of our Life, since we heard nothing but Encomiums of the Law, Treason
against the Fundamental Laws, and Declarations against Arbitrary Government.
Now the Law is become a Formallity, a Lesbian Rule, Arbitrary Government is
turned to necessity of State. It is not examined what is just or unjust, but
how the party is affected or disaffected, whether the thing be conducible or
not conducible to the cause; we are governed not by the known Laws and Customs
of this Realm, but by certain farrfetched, dear-bought Conclusions, or rather
Collusions, drawn by unskilful Empericks, without Art or Judgment from the
Law of Nature and of Nations, which may be good for Ladies by the Proverb, but
not for English Subjects. Now are we taught downright, that the Laws of the
Land are but mans-inventions, moral precepts, fitter for Heathens then
Christians; that we must lead our Life's according to Gods word, (as if Gods
word and the Law of the Land, were opposite one to another) and that
notwithstanding the Law, men must not think that Gods Children in doing the
work of their Heavenly Father (that is, reforming Religion) will faint in their
Duty (that is, in raising Arms.) So, farewell Magna Charta, and the Laws of
England for ever, if this man may have his will: and welcome the judicial Law
of Moses. Now I see the reason, why they have taught so long, that the King
cannot pardon any crime condemned by the judicial Law; because no Man can
dispense with the Law of God, But how many* thousands have been drawn into this
action which never Dreamed of such a bottomless Gulf of Mischief, and when
they do see it will abhominate it, and the Contrivers of it.

Fourthly, they have cried Bishops out of Parliament, because no man that
warreth must entangle himself with the affairs of this Life: yet they
themselves have been humble Motioners, both in England and in Scotland, to have
a number of wise and grave Ministers admitted into Parliament, in stead of
Bishops. It was the men then, not the thing they misliked.

Fifthly, they say, to be a Clergyman and a Privie-Councellour, are
incompatible: yet Calvin and Bezae were of the Council of Sixty at Genevah*
and the Syndicks and Councillors there of the Ecclesiastical Senate: yea,
(...) home in a great Treaty of late, and in a Commission now on foo^, we have
seen a (...) a prime Commission^ and their greate^ P^vie-Councellers are of
their Lay Elders, which by their new Learning are a part of their
Ecclesiastical Hierarchy.

Sixthly we have heard a great noise lately about an Oath decreed in the
Convocation; about another Oath called Ex officio, as if it were against the
Law of Nature, for a man to accuse himself, Nemo tenetur prodere sseipsum* and
lastly ab^ut the Subscription which is ^equired to o^ Articles of Religion: yet
for the first, the Citizens of Genevah took the like Oath f^ their new
Discipline (which the Sun had ne^r beheld before) that we prescribed here for
our old Discipline. There every Minister at his Admission takes an Oath in
these words I do promise and swear to keep the (...) Ordinances, which are
passed by the sm^ll, great, ^d General Counsels of this City. This is a n^te
higher then ours. And of late we know w^o they were, that took an Oath to
stand to^ose (...) and Decisions, which should be m^de in an Assembly to come.
For the second, ^at is, the Oath Ex Officio, it is allowed in th^r
Presbiteries; Calvin in an Epistle to Favellus ^cknowledged, that he himself
admini^red it* And for Subscriptions they are so miliar among them, that there
is not a Minister admitted to a ^harge, nay not a Boy metriculated in a
College, but he knows it. Is not this Partiality?

Seventhly, they complain, that the Ecclesiastical Courts did extend their
Jurisdiction to Civil Causes: yet there is not that offense in the World, from
Dancing and Feasting to Treason and murder, which is either a violation of our
piety toward God, or Charity toward Man, which they do not question in their
Presbiteries: And which is worse, their Determinations are not Regulated by any
known Law, but are merely arbitrary, secundum sanas Conscientias. Neither does
there lie any appeal from them (as their did from Ecclesiastical Courts,) he
that durst but bring a prohibition to one of their Elderships, he would quickly
feel, what it was to pull the Scepter of Christ out of his hands.

Eighthly, they groaned hard under the burden of the High Commission: yet
themselves would erect an high Commission in every Parish; I do not know
whether all their Presbi^eries be endowed with the like Power, but ^re I am,
some of them have had both their Prisons and their Pursevants* And where the
High Commission here was confessed to be a temporary Institution, they plead
for the other as a Divine Institution. Yet fearing this Parrochiall
Jurisdiction might not produce an uniforme Reformation, some of them have
desired, others accepted general Commissions; for Nationall-Superintendency.

Ninthly, they s^ieght all old Counsels, and new Convocations, and call their
Cannons in scorn, the precepts of Men: yet where they have power to call a
Synod or Assembly, every man must submit at his uttermost peril, as if
themselves were not men, but a Company of Angels.

Lastly, they call for Liberty of Conscience; yet no Men impose a heavier yoke
upon the Conscience. They cry out against Martial Law in others, and approve
it in themselves. They hate Monopolists, but love Monopoli^, They condemn an
implicit Faith, yet no Men more con^iding and implicit; grounding their actions
neither upon Reason, Law, no^ Religion, but upon the authority of their Leaders
and Teachers. They magnify the obligation of an Oath, yet in their own case,
dispense with all Oaths, Civil, Military, Religions, (witness Master
Marshall and Master (...)) we are now taught that the Oa^ we have taken, must
not be examined according to the interpretation of Men, no? How then? surely
according to the Interpretation of (...).

They complained that Excommunication^ was used for trivial Causes, yet
themselves stick not to cast abroad this thunderbolt, for Feasting, or Dancing,
or any the least (...). They complain of severity against their Pastors; yet
themselves do teach in their own case, that they are more rigorously to be
dealt withal, who poison the Soule^ of Men with false Doctrine, then they that
infect their Bodies with poison. A false Principle I confess, and repugnant to
the practice of all the world: men are willingly perve^d, but not willingly
poisoned: The Poison^ knows the power of his Poisons, the false Teacher does
not always know his own Error: Repentance may be a Remedy for the one, but
there is no Cure for the other. The Diseases of the Soul, are indeed, greater
then the Diseases of the Body, if you consider them in the same Degree;
otherwise, a sullen ^it of Melancholy (though an infirmity of the Mind) is not
^o terrible as a raging ^it of the Stone, yet is it but an infirmity of the
Body. They cry out against the Disorders of our Ecclesiastical Courts, but
will not see the beam in their own Eye, that in their Consistories the same
man is both President and Register, the same Parties both Accusers, Witnesses,
and Judges; the proof sometimes upon Oath, sometimes without Oath, sometimes
taken publicly, sometimes privately, so as the Person accused neither knows
who is his Accuser, nor what is proved; sometimes Records are kept, sometimes
not kept,: As for matter of lawful exception and defense, it is accounted
superfluous and superstitious. I plead not for any former abuses, I desire not
to abridge the lawful power of any other Church, but only show the extreme
Partiality of these Men: Yea, what is that which themselves have condemned in
others, that themselves do not practice where* they have power in a much higher
Degree? Is not this fine hocas po^as? a Man and no Man, hit a bird and no bird,
with a stone and no stone, on a Tree and no Tree. In this Riddle there may be*
something in Nature which seems to be intermedious, to salve the contradiction
in show, but in their case no manner of Difference to make the same thing just
and unjust, but Self-love and Partiality. Was it Treason in the Northern
Rebels to make an Insurrection, and is it now become P^ty* I delight not in
Domestical Examples, let us rather cast our eyes beyond Sea, and see where
ever Protestants were accused for Rebellion, but where either Anabaptisme, or
this Discipline did take place, and yet none of them (I except only
Anabaptists) were half so criminous as ours: They had sundry pleas, which we
cannot make for our selves. As first, that they did not rise up against their
lawful Prince, but only against a Protector to whom they did owe no
Allegiance, but an honorable Acknowledgement; but our Laws binds us not only
to owe Allegiance, but to swear it: Or secondly, that they did not rise up
against the Person of their Prince, but against some enraged Minister of his,
reserving still their Obedience to their Sovereign inviolate; but we have not
only resisted, but invaded the Kings Person: There were more great shot made
at the very place where the King was at Edgehill, then the same proportion of
Ground throughout the Field* the ^ery li^ Cu^esy was offered to the Queen at
^urlington, to welcome her into England: Or thirdly* their Princes did go abo^t
to force their Consciences, withot Law or, against Law; and by an Arbitrary
Power set up an Inquisition among them; but good King Charles is so far^ from
this, that for the ^ase of his Subjects* he has taken away an High Commission
established by Statute, and is still ready to condescend to any thing that can
be reasonably proposed for the ease of tender Consciences. What is it then?
Has His Majesty been a hard Master? No. Hear a Witness that will not violate
his Conscience to do Hi^ Majesty service. I see many h^re, the most
^toriously obliged, indeed as much as Serv^s can be to a Master, in this good
Cause h^ve ^stered those vulgar Considerations, and had the Courage to despise
him (that is the King) to His Face. A good Panegyricke, and His Majesty may
live to requite them, as Ca^us did (...) the Traitor, when his Son had slain
(...) Ironside, and he saluted the King with A^ Rex solus, his Reward was a
Good* Gibbet, Ego te body ob ^nti Obsequii meritum* cunctis Regni (...).

These Seditious and Schismatic Principl^, were not the ^esults of a (...),
(...), and uningaged Judgemen^, but rather the excuse of criminous, or the
(...) o^ ne^ssitated Persons, when (...) produces new Opinions; and (...)
follows the Dictates of the Will, there is small hope of T^* When Men o^
Belial, Factious Persons, had shaken off (...) yoke of a just Government,
being neither Pretenders themselves in point of Right, nor capable of
Soveraignity by reason of their ob^curity, that they might retain that i^
part, which they could not graspe in the whole; they broached these desperate
Devises of the Omnipotency of the People: when others, o^ the same Men, either
having expelled Bishops to gain their Revenues, upon pretense of Superstition,
or living under a Sovereign of another Communion, could not have Bishop^ of
their own, and yet did find the necessity of Discipline; then they fancyed the
new form of Presbiteries, in imitation of the Jewish Synedriums throughout
their Synagogues, though that be most uncertain and all Men know this for
certain, that the Synagogues were but humane Institutions, Acts 15. 21. not
from the Law, but from old Time. Which new form of Discipline, was so adapted
and accomodated to the Politic State of the City of Genevah, that (as it was
there established) it cannot possibly ^it any other place, except it have four
Syndicks, a greater and a lesser Council: Then (as all Sects are modest in
their beginnings) they desired their Neighbor Churches only to certify that
their Discipline was not repugnant to the word of God; yet now they would
obtrude it on the world as the Eternal Gospel. So our new upstart
Independents, which run gadding about the World like Lapwings with their shells
upon their Heads, having been kept under the hatches here in old England,
performing their divine Offices in Holes and Corners, and having no Assemblyes
but such as did of their own accord associate themselves to them, now deny the
name of true Churches to all Societies but such blind Conventicles: And shall
we make their excuses to be our grounds? shall we that live in the most
temperate part of the temperate Zone, and enjoy a Government as temperate as
the Climate it self, we who cannot complain either of too much Sun, or too
little Sun, where the Beams of Sovereignty are neither too perpendicular to
scorch us, nor yet so oblique but that they may warm us, shall we go about in
a madding humor, to dissolve a frame of Government, which made our
Forefathers happy at home, and famous abroad? shall we whose Church was the
Envy and Admiration of Christendom, neither too garish, nor too sluttish,
excelling some as far in Purity, as it did others in Decency, now learn
Religion out of Tubbs, as if the little toes could see further then the eyes?
If they have an extraordinary calling, where are their Miracles? menda^ia video
miracula non video, we hear there lies, not see their wonders. Saint Paul
became all things to all Men, but that was compatiendo non mentiendo, as St.
Augustine says. Shall we without need put our life's into the hands of
crackbrain'd unskilful Empericks? which have taught us already to our loss,
that a new Physician must have a new Churchyard: rather mutemus clipeos, let
us leaf them old England, and content our selves with new England. It will be
better to live in hollow Trees, among Savages and Wild Beasts, then here, to be
chopping and changing our Religion every new Moon. Be not deceived, as if these
men did desire no more, then only the rectifying of some former Obliquities
and Irregularities: we are now told in plain English, that it is to subdue the
pride of Kings, Monarchy it self is the only Object worthy of these men
Wrath. May not one here exclaim (as the great Turk did to his Council, when
the Templers and Hospitaliers advised him by letter, how Frederick the
Christian Emperor might be taken) Ecce fidelitas Christianorum, behold the
Loyalty of our great Reformers! But what is this pride of Kings? If we will
believe one of their Authors in his application of the Story of Cleomedes his
Daughter, to the Domestic Custom of the Spartan Kings, (pater hos^es, manus
non habet,) it is a one piece of their pride to have a man to pull off their
shoes, and yet they say the Author had one to brush his Clothes. Now they
stick not to let us know why they maligned Episcopacy; whilst Bishops stood,
they could not fill all the Pulpits of the Kingdom with their Seditious
Orators, who might incite the people that their zeal to God may not be
interrupted by their Duty to the King, that by the Christian Labors of their
painful Preachers, they may not want hands to bring their wishes to pass,
(they are their own words.) Is this the reason we have not a word of Peace and
Charity from that Party, but all Incentives to War, and to join in making that
great Sacrifice to the Lord. Yet whilst they are so busy in in getting hands,
(too many of them perjured hands,) let them remember Rodolphus the Duke of
Sweveland his hand in Cuspinian, who being drawn into a rebellious War
against the Emperor, and in the Battle having his right Hand cut off, held
out the Stump to those that were about him, saying, I have a just reward of my
Perjury, with this same Hand I swore Allegiance to my Sovereign Lord. Yet the
good Emperor buried him Honorably, which being disliked by some of his
Friends, he replied, utinam omnes mei Adversarit eo ornatu sepulti jacerent. We
have sworn Allegiance as well ash, and God is the same he was, a severe
Avenger of Perjury. Only Zedekia^ of all the Kings of Judah (a perjured Person
to Nebuchadnezzar) had his eyes put out, because (says one) he had not that
God by whom he swear before his eyes. Another instance of Perjury we have in
Uladislaus, when Huniades had made Truce with Amurath for ten years, the King
by the incitement of Cardinali Julian, did break it; the Turk in distress,
spreads the Articles toward Heaven, saying, O Jesus, if thou be a God, be
avenged of these false Christians; presently the Battle turned, Uladislaus was
slain in the Fight, the Cardinal in flight. When God had justly punished
Corah and his rebellious Company, the Common People murmured against Moses and
Aaron, saying, Ye have killed the Lords People. Numb. 16. 49. What was the
Issue? the Lord sent a Plague which swept away fourteen thousand and seven
hundred of them: So dangerous a thing it is only to justify Traitors. Do
thou desire to serve God purely according to his word? So thou may without
being a Traitor to thy Prince, if our practice were but conformable to the
truth of our Profession, we might challenge all the Churches in the World. God
Almighty lighten the eyes of all those that mean well, that we may no longer
shed one another blood, to effect the frantic Designs of Fanaticall Persons,
and by our contentions, pull down what we all desire to build up, even the
Protestant Religion, the Law of the Land, and the Liberty of the Subject.

Treason never yet wanted a cloak, we are not to judge of Rebels by their
Words, but by their deeds; their voice is Jacobs voice, but their hands are the
hands of Esau. The Adulterous woman eats and wipeth her mouth, and says,
what have I done? yet sometimes God suffers the contrivers of these
Distractions, unwittingly to discover themselves, that unless we do wilfully
hoodwinke our eyes, we cannot but see their aims. Among others, that Speech
which exhorts us to subdue the pride of Kings; to purchase a Parity in the
Church with a parity in the State; to shed the blood of the ungodly; that
sleights all former Oaths and Obligations, and vilifies the Laws of the Land as
the inventions of men: may be a sufficient Warning-Piece to all Loyal Subjects
and good Christians. And so may the late Petition be, though from meaner Hands
to a Common Council, wherein they do nakedly and professedly fall upon His
Majesty's Person without any Mask, and sawcily and traytorously propose the
alteration of the Civil Government, which every true-hearted English Man will
detest. Say not these are poor vulgar Fellows: These have been the
Intelligences that have of late turned the Orb of our State about, or at least
the visible Actors. And who sees not that this is cast abroad thus by the
cunning of their sublimated and Mercuriall Prompters, to try how it will
relish with the palate of the People, as an Introduction to their actual
Design, that when it comes to pass, the World may not wonder at it as a
Prodigy. So was it given out among the People by Richard the third, that his
Wife was dead, when she was in good health: but she wisely concluded what was
intended by her kind Husband to be her next part. Where are our English Hearts?
why do we not at last all join together, to take a severe account of them who
have blemished our Parliament, subjected our Persons and Estates to their
arbitrary Power; who have sought to de-throne our Sovereign, and to rob us
of our Religion, Laws, and Liberties? But now to the Observator.

Observer.
IN this Contestation between Regal and Parliamentary power, for method sake,
it is requisite to consider, first of Regal, then of Parliamentary Power, and
in both to consider the efficient and final Causes, and the means by which
they are supported.

Answer
Stay, Sir before we enter into these Consideratitions, let us remember the
Rule in Rhetoric, cui bono, what advantage will this inquiry bring us? Do you
desire to be one of the Tribunes or Ephori of England to control your King?
or would you have the great O^ke cut down, that you might gather some sticks
for your self? Thus we are told lately, the wisest men will not think thems
elves incapable of future Fortunes, if they use their uttermost power to reduce
him (that is the King) to a necessity of granting. Or would you have us play
the Guelphes and Gibellines, to cut one another throats for your pastime?
Pardon us Sir, we cannot think it seasonable now when poor Ireland is at the
last gasp, and England it self lies a bleeding, when men's minds are
exasperated by such Trumpeters of Sedition, to plunge our selves yet deepe^ in
these Domestic Contestations; what could the Irish Rebels desire more?
Comparisons are always odious, but Contestations are worse, and this between a
King and His Parliament worst of all. This dismal question did never yet
appear in this Kingdom, but like a fatal Screech-owle, portending blood,
Death, and public Ruin. This was the Subject of the Barons War; the
consequent of this in the wrong offered to a lawful Prince, was the fountain
of those horrid Dissentions between the red Rose and the White, which purpled
all our English Soil with native Blood, we have had too much of this already.
Half of that Money which of late has been spent, of that blood which has
been shed about this accursed Controversy; would have regained Ireland, and
disingaged England; whereas now the sore festers daily more and more under the
Surgeons Hands. Our Fore fathers have settled this question for us, we desire
to see what they have done, before we go to blindmans buffet one with another:
If it has been composed well, or but indifferently, it is better then Civil
War: And though it had not, when the jarring strings of men's minds are turned
again, it is probable it may sleep for eve^. It were much better to pur it off
as the Areopagites did knotty questions to a very long Day; or with the Jews
for Elias to resolve when he comes.

But good Sir, if it may be without offense satisfy me in one doubt, what Sect
you are of? whether some newly sprung up Mushrome, or you derive your self from
those Non Conformists, which were in the Days of Queen Elizabeth and King
James. They have solemnly Protested in Print, that In the face.
no Christians under Heaven, do give more to the Regal Supremacy then they;
yea, Page
without Limitation or qualification, that for the King Page
not to assume such a power, or for the Churches within his Dominions to deny
it, is damnable Sin (mark it) although the Statutes of the Kingdom should
deny it him (and Statutes are more then bare Votes.) That it is not tied to
their Christianity, but their Crown, from which no Subject or Subjects have
power to separate it. If no Subjects collectively, then not one or both Houses.
But they go further, and I pray you make it one of your Observations; that page
though the King command any thing contrary to the Word of God, yet we ought
not to resist, but peaceably forbear Obedience and sue for Grace, and when that
cannot be obtained meekly submit our selves to punishment. How you have
practiced this of late, the World sees, and this Kingdom feels. They declare,
That page
it is utterly unlawful for any Christian Churches by armed Power against the
will of the Civil Magistrate, to set up in public the true worship of God,
or suppress any Superstition, or Idolatry. They abjure all Doctrines repugnant
to these as page
Anabaptisticall and Antichristian. They condemn all practices contrary to
these, as page
Seditious and sinful. I forbear sundry other things avouched by them in the
same Protestation, as that page*
the King only has power within his Dominions to convene Synods of Ministers,
and by his Authority Royal, to ratify their Canons, yea, that if it should
please the King and Civil State to continue Bishops, page
they could be content without envy, to suffer them to enjoy their State and
Dignity, and to live as Brethren with those Ministers that should acknowledge
homage unto them. By this time I suppose you h^ve enough of the Protestation,
my quaere is but short, whether you can change your Doctrine as the Ch^aelion
her colors, according to the present exigence of Affairs? or will acknowledge
your opinions to be Anabaptisticall and Antichristian, your practice Seditious
and Sinful, in the Judgment of your Predecessors.

And yet I am not ignorant, that both before, and after, and about the time of
this Protestation, a Cockatrice Egg was hatching; when a Subject durst style
the great Senate under which ^e l^ved, tumultuosa ^erditorum hominum sactio, a
tumultuous Faction of (...). Ep. 40, ^p. 10.
desperate Men; and the Judges discordiaram Duces: then the Mystery began to
work closely, but shortly after it showed it self openly, when his Successor
did publish to the world, that if Kings observe not those pactions to which
they were sworn, subordinate Magistrates ^jure ^ist. page (...) 95.
have power to oppose them, and the Orders of the Kingdom to punish them if it
be needful, till all things be restored to their former Estate. That what
power ^ae General Council has to depose a Pope for Heresy, the same the
People have over Kings, that are turned Tyrants. A woeful Argument drawn from
an elective Pope, to an hereditary King, from a free and oecumenicall Council,
to a Company of limited and sworn Subjects, from an action grounded on known
Law to an Arbitrary Proceeding. The Kings Crown sits closer, The Counsels
Power is greater, The like Law is wanting. Others teach that the People must
bridle Princes if the Nobility will not. Our Countryman ^de in^ni, p. 57.
Cartwright speaks very suspitiously, To think the Church must be framed
according to the Commonwealth, and the Church Government according to the
Reply Whitg^ page 181.
Civil Government, is as if a man should fashion his house according to his
hangings; whereas indeed it is clean contrary; that as the hanging^ are made
fit for the house, so the Commonwealth must be made to agree with the Church,
and the Government thereof with her Government. Add to this their other tenet;
that the Government of the Church with them is Democraticall, or at best bur
Aristocraticall, and what will follow? that the Civil Government must be the
same, or at the least if it be inconsistent with the form of Discipline which
they fancy, it must be regulated and conformed thereunto. I omit the Traiterous
Opinions of Goodman, Gilby, Whitingham, teaching Sheriffs and Jailers to let
loose them whom they call Saints; teaching Subjects to reduce their Sovereigns
into order by force, yea, to depose them, or put them to Death. But these
seditious principles were suppressed then by the Learning and Authority of
Grindall, Sands, Parkburst, Jewel, Beacon, Nowell, Coxe, Barlow, etc. who
being exiled for Religion, at Franckford accused Knoxe of High Treason about
them, and put him to make use of his heels. Let this very Confusion of them in
this matter be a warning to us, how we have the the faith of our Lord Jesus
Christ in respect of Persons, James*
or be so glued to the Persons of our Teachers, that we suck up their errors as
greedily as their good Lessons, forgetting that they were but men, and that
particular Relations and Engagements, have an insensible influence upon the
best tempered minds.

Observer
The King attributes, the original of his Royalty to God and the Law, making
no mention of the grant, consent, or trust of Man therein; but the the truth
is, God is no more the Author of Regal, then of Aristocraticall Power, nor of
Supreme, more then of Subordinate Command. Nay, that Dominion which is usurped
and not just, yet while it remains Dominion, and till it be again legally
divested, refers to God, is to the Author and Donor, as much as that which is
hereditary.

Answer
That Royalty and all lawful Dominion considered in the abstract, is from God,
no Man can make any doubt, but he who will oppose the Apostle, the 13. 1.
powers that be are ordained of God; and God himself who says, by me Kings
reign and Princes decree Justice. 8. 15.
But the right and application of this Power and Interest in the concrete to
this particular man, is many times from the grant and consent of the People. So
God is the principal Agent, man the Isntrumental; God is the Root, the
Fountain of Power; M^n the Stream, the Bough by which it is derived; the
Essence of Power is always from God, the Existence sometimes from God,
sometimes from Man: yet Grant and Consent differ much, and Consent it self is
of several kinds, explicit or implicit, antecedent or subsequent, a long
continued Prescription or Possession of Sovereignty, without Opposition or
Reluctatation, implies a full Consent, and derives a good title of Inheritance,
both before God and Man. These grounds being laid, take notice of four gross
Errors, which the Observer runns into in this Section.

First he supposes that all Dominion, is from the grant or consent of the
People; whereas in truth all Dominion in the abstract is from God. The People
could not give what they never had, that is, power of Life and Death: But true
it is, that Magistrates in the concrete, are styled the Ordinance of Man;
subjectively because they are Men, objectively because 1 Pet. 2. 13.
they reign over Men, and many times effectively, because they are created or
elected by Men. But this last holds not in all cases, I say nothing of such
Kings as were named immediately by God: Those whose Predecessors or themselves
have attained to Sovereignty by the Sword, by Conquest in a just War, claim
immediately from God. Those also who were the first Owners or Occupants of
waste Lands, might admit Tenants or Subjects upon such Conditions as they
themselves would prescribe. Thirdly, those who plant at excessive Charge in
remote parts of America, will give and not take Laws from their Colonies.
Fourthly, upon the spreading of a numerous Family, or the great increase of
Slaves and Servants, ditis examen domus, how often have the Fatherly or
Magistrall power been turned into Royalty? And though these were but petty
Kingdoms at the first; yet as great Rivers grow from the Confluence of many
little Brooks; so by Wars, Marriages, and Treaties, they might be enlarged. In
all these Cases there is no Grant of the people. This i^ one Error.

His Second Error rests in the Hypothesis; His Majesty's original Title to
this Kingdom was not Election, either of the Person, or of the Family, but
Conquest, or rather a Multitude of Conquests, the very last whereof is
confirmed by a long Succession of four and twenty royal Progenitors and
Predecessors, glorious both at home and abroad, in Peace and War, except ^hen
this dismal and disasterous question, did eclipse t^eir luster, and hinder the
happiness of this Nation, ^n the D^yes of King John, Henry the third, Edward
and Richard the second, or in the bloody Wars between the two Houses of York
and Lancanster, which were nothing else but the fruits and consequents thereof.
Neither can the Observer collect from he^e, that this is to enslave our Nation
as Conquered Vassalls. It is a gross fallacy to dispute ae dicto simpli^ter ad
dictum secundum quid, from the right of absol^e Conquerers, to His Majesty now,
as if so many good Laws, so many free Charters, so many acts of Grace in so
long a succession had operated nothing. This is a second Error.

Thirdly, the Observer teaches, that subordinate Commm^nd is as much from God
as Supreme. His Majesty i^ much bound unto him, to make his Royal Commands of
no more force by Gods Institution^ then a Pe^ty Constables. We have hitherto
learned otherwise, that Kings hold their Crowns and Scepters from God, and
subordinate Magistrates have their places by Commission from them. But it is
familiar with these men, to leap over the backs of intermedious Causes, and
derive all their fancyes from God as the Heathens did their Genealogies;
whereby they destroy the Beauty and Order of the World, and make many
superfluous Creatures, which God and Nature never made. In sum, Subordinate
Commands are from God, yet neither so immediately, nor so firmly as supreme:
but as a row of iron rings touchching one another, and the first touching the
Lodestone, Philo.
in their several degrees, some more loosely, some more remotely then others;
The case is not altogether like for Regal and Aristocraticall Power: One God
in the World, one Soul in the Body, one Master in a Family, one Sun in the
Heaven, and anciently one Monarch in each Society. All the first Governors
were Kings. Both Forms are warranted by the Law of Nature, but not both in the
same Degree of Eminency. If an old Man had the eye of a young Man, he would see
as well as a young Man (said the Philosopher) the Soul of an Idiot is as
rational, as the Soul of a States man, the difference is in the Organ: So the
Soul of Sovereign Power, which is infused by God into Democracy or
Aristocracy, is the same that it is in Monarchy: but seeing the Organ is not so
apt to attain to the end, and seeing that God and Nature do always intend what
is best; and lastly, seeing that in some Cases the existence of Government as
well as the essence is from God, who never inst^tuted any form but
Monarchical, the Observer might well have omitted his comparison.

The fourth aand last Error is worst of all, [That usurped and unjust Dominion
is referred to God as its Author and Doner, as much as hereditary.] This is
right, we have been taught otherwise, before a se^ vain upstart Empericks, in
Policy troubled the world, that Dominion in a tyranicall Hereditary Governor,
is from God even in the concrete, (I mean the power not the abuse) that such an
one may not be resiste^ without Sin, that his Person is sacred: But
contrariwise, that Dominion in a tyranicall Usurper or Intruder is indeed from
God permitting, whereas he could restrain it, if it pleased him; or from God
concurring by a general influence, as the Earth gives nourishment to
Hemlocks, as well as Wheat, in him w^ live, we move, and have our being, or
from God ordering and disposing it as he does all other accidents and events to
his own glory; but that it is not from God as Author, Donor, or Instituter of
it. Neither dar^ we give to a Tyranicall Usurper the essential Privileges of
Sovereignty; we deny not that any Subject may lawfully kill him as a public
Enemy, without legal eviction. Much less dare we say wit^ the Observer, that
Power usurped and unlawful, is as much from God, as Power Hereditary and
lawful. If it be so, cough out man, and tell us plainly, that, God is the
Author of Sin.

Observer
And the Law which the King mentions, is not to b^ understood to be any
special Ordinance sent from Heaven, by the Ministry of Angels or Prophets,
(...) amongst the Jews it sometimes was. It can be nothing else among
Christians, but the pactions and agreements, o^ such an^ such Corporations.

Answer.
There is a double right considerable; the right to the Crown, and the right of
the Crown: the right and title to the Crown is with us undoubted, there needs
no Angel from Heaven to confirm it, where no man can pretend against it. The
Right of the crown is the only subject in question. This is from the Law of
God, the Law of Nature, and the Law of Nations. That this Power in an absolute
Conqueror may be limited by Statutes, Charters, or municipall Laws, in Court of
Conscience, in Court of Justice, to God, to his People, I grant, without
communicating Sovereign Power to subordinate or inferior Subjects, or
subjecting Majesty to censure: Which Limitation does no^ proceed from mutual
pactions, but from acts of Grace and Bounty. I would know to what purpose* the
Observer urges this distinction of Laws, will it ^er ^he State of the
question, or the obligation of Subjects? Nothing less. Whether the calling of
the Prince, be ordinary or extraordinary, mediate or immediate, the title of
the Prince, the tie of the Subject is still the same. Those Ministers who were
immediately ordained by Christ or his Apostles, did far exceed ours in
personal perfections: but as for the Ministerial Power, no tract of time can
bring the least diminution to it. God was the first Instituter of Marriage; yet
he never brought any couple together but Adam and Eve; other marriages are made
by free election: yet for as much as it is made by virtue and in pursuance of
Divine Institution, we do not doubt to say and truly, those whom God has
joined together. His Majesty's title is as strong, the obligation and relation
between him and his Subjects is the very same, as if God should say from
Heaven, take this Man to be your King. Again, if the Liberty of the Subject be
from Grace, not from pactions or agreements, is it therefore the less? or the
less to be regarded? what is freer then gift? if a Nobleman shall give his
Servant a Farm, to pay a Rose or Peppercorn for an acknowledgement, his title
is as strong as if he bought it with his Money. But the Observer deals with
his Majesty, as some others do with God Almighty in point of merit; they will
not take Heaven as a free gift, but challenge it as Purchasers. In a word, the
Author of these Observations, would insinuate some difference betwixt our
Kings and the Kings of Israel, or some of them who had immediate vocation,
wherein he would deceive us or deceives himself, for their request to Samuel
was make us a King to judge us like all other Nations. ^am. 8. 5.


Observer.
Power is originally inherent in the People, and it is nothing else but that
might and vigor, which such or such a society of Men contains in it self;
and when by such or such a Law of common consent and agreement, it is derived
into such and such hands, God confirms that Law: and so Man is the free and
voluntary Author, the Law is the Instrument, and God is the Establisher of
both: and we see, not that Prince, which is most potent over his Subjects, but
that Prince which is most potent in his Subjects, is indeed most truly potent
(...) for a King of one small City, if he be entrusted with a large
Prerogative, may be said to be more potent over his Subjects, then a King of
many great Regions, whose Prerogative is more limited: and yet in true reality
of Power, that King is most great and glorious, which has the most and
strongest Subjects, and not he which tramples upon the most contemptible
Vassalls. This is therefore a great and fond error in some Princes, to strive
more to be great over their People, then in their People* and to Eclipse
themselves by impoverishing, rather then to magnify themselves by
infranchising their Subjects. This we see in France at this Day, for were the
Peasants there more free, they would be more rich and magnanimous, and were
they so, their King were more puissant; but now by affecting an adulterate
power over his Subjects, the King there loses a true power in his Subject,
embracing a Cloud in stead of Juno.

Answer.
It has ever been the wisdom of Governors, to Sect. 4
conceal from the promiscuous multitude its own strength, and that rather for
the behoof of themselves then of their Rulers. Those Beasts which are of a
gentle and tractable Disposition, live sociably among themselves, and are
cherished by Man; whereas those that are of a more wild and untameable nature
live in continual Persecution and Fear of others, of themselves; but of late
it is become the Masterpiece of our Modern Incendiaries, to magnify the power
of the People, to break open this Cabinet of State, to prick forward, the
headie and raging multitude, with fictitious Devises of Bulls and Minotaurs.
And all this with as much sincerity, as Corah, Dathan, and Abiram said to
Moses, and Aaron, you take too much on you ^mb. 16. (...) 10. ^to, lib. 6.
Repub. ^ing 18. and (...). 5. 2.
seeing all the Congregation are holy. I desire the Observer at his leisure, to
read Platoes description of an Athenian Sophister, and he shall find himself
personated to the life, that one egg is not liker another: if the Coat fit
him, let him put it on. The Scripture phraseth this to be troubling of a
Church, or of a State: It is a M^taphor taken from a Vessel wherein is Liquour
of several parts, some more thick, others more subtle, which by shaking
together is disordered, and the dreggs and residence is lifted up from the
bottom to the top. The Observer has learned how to take Eeles; It is their
own Rule, they that would alter the Government, must first trouble the State.

Secondly, posito sed non concesso, admitting, but not granting, that Power is
originally inherent in the People, what is this to us who have an excellent
form of Government established, and have divested our selves of this Power?
can we play fast and loose and resume it again at our pleasures? Lesbia was
free to choose her self an Husband when she was a Maid, may she therefore do
it when she is a Wife? Admitting that His Majesty were elected in His
Predecessors, yea or in His own Person for him and His Heirs, is this Power
therefore either the less absolute or less perpetual? Admitting that before
election, we had power to covenant, yea, or condition by what Laws we would be
governed, had we therefore power to condition that they should be no longer
Laws, then they listed us? This were to make our Sovereign not a great and
glorious King, but a plain Christmasse Lord: or have we therefore Power still
to raise Arms to alter the Laws by force, without Sovereign Authority? This
seems to be the Observers main Scope, but the conclusion is so odious, (as
which has ever been confessed Treason) and the consequence so miserably weak,
that he is glad to deal altogether Enthemematically.

Thirdly, admitting and granting that the last exercise or execution of Power,
that is the posse commitatus, or Regni, is in the People, is the right also in
the People, or from the People? Excuse us if we rather give credit to our
Savior, Thou could have no Power at all against me, except it were given
thee from John 19.
above. If Pilate had his Power from Heaven, we may conclude strongly for King
Charles; Nil dat quod non habet, some power the People qua talis never had, as
power of Life and Death, it is the peculiar right of God and his Vicegerents.
Put the case the King grants to a Corporation such and such Magistrates, with
power also to them to elect new magistrates (which yet holds but sometimes) from
whom do those Magistrates hold their power? not from the People who elect them,
but from the King who creates them.

Fourthly, you tell us that the Power of a King, is to have powerful Subjects,
and to be powerful in his Subjects, not to be powerful over his Subjects.
Your reason halts, because it wants a caeteris paribus: several Kings may have
several advantages of greatness. The truth is, neither many powerful
Subjects without obedience, nor forced obedience without powerful and loving
Subjects, d^ make a great and glorious King: But the concatenation of
Superiors and Inferiors in the Adaman tine bonds of Love and Duty. When
Subjects are affected, as Scillurus would have his Sonns for concord as Scipio
had his Soldiers for obedience, which they prised above their life's, being
ready to throw them selves from a Tower into the Sea at their Generall^
command: this is both to be great in Subjects, and over them. The greatest
Victoryes, the greate^ Monarchies, are indebted for themselves to this lowly
beginning of obedience. It is not to be a King of Kings, nor a King of slaves,
nor a King of Devils, (you may remember to whom that was applied,) but to be
the King of Hearts, and Hands, and Subjects, of many rich, loving, and dutiful
Subjects, that makes a powerful Prince. As for the present puissance of
France, can you tell in what Kings Reign it was greater since Charlemaine?
Nevertheless admitting that the Peasants in France (as you are pleased to call
them) suffer much: yet nothing near so much as they have done in seditious
times, when Civil Warr^ raged among them, (when their Kings had less power
over them,) which is our case now. God bless us from Tvrany, but more from
Sedition. If the Subjects of France be Peasants, and the Subjects of Germany be
Princes, God send us Englishmen to keep a mean; between both extremes, which
our Forefathers found most expedient for all parties.

Observer.
But thus we see that Power is but secondary and derivative in Princes the
Fountain and efficient cause is the People, and from hence the inference is
just, the King though he be singulis Major, yet is he universis Minor, for if
the People be the true efficient cause of Power, it is a Rule in Nature,
quicquid efficit tale est magis tale. And hence it appears that at the founding
of authorities, when the consent of Societies conveyes rule into such and such
Hands, it may ordain what conditions, and prefix what bounds it pleases, and
that no dissolution ought to be thereof, but by the same power by which it had
its Constitution.

Answer.
Thus we see your Premises are weak and naught, Sect. 5.
your argument proceeds from the staff to the corner, and your whole discourse
is a Rope of Sand. First, your groundwork (that the People is the Fountain and
efficient of Power) totters, and is not universally true. Power in the abstract
is not at all; Power in the concrete is but sometimes from the People, which is
rather the application of power then Power itself.

Next, your inference from hence which in this place you call just, and a
little after say, that nothing is more known or assented unto, that the King is
singulis major but universis minor, greater then any of his Subjects singly
considered, but less then the whole collected Body, is neither just, nor
known, nor assented unto unless in that Body, you include His Majesty as a
principal Member. And yet if that should be granted you, before it would do
you any good, these universi, or this whole Body, must be reduced to the Major
or greater part, and this diffused and essential Body must be contracted to a
representative Body (unless we may believe your new Learning, that the
Essential and Representative Body are both one.) But waving all these
advantages, tell me Sir, might you be persuaded to follow Licurgus his advise,
to try this Discipline at home, before you offer it to the Commonwealth? could
you be contented that all your Servants together, or the Major part of them had
power to turn you out of your Mastership, and place your Steward in your
room; or your Children in like case depose you from your Fatherhood? No I
warrant you, the case would soon be altered. And when the greatest part of the
sheep dislike their Shepherd, must be presently put up his Pipes and be
packing? Take heed what you do, for if the People be greater then the King, it
is no more a Monarchy but a Democracy. Hitherto the Christian World has
believed, that the King is post Deum secundus the next to God, solo Deo minor,
only less then God, no Person, no Body Politic between; that he is Vicarius
Dei, Gods Vicegerent. The Scriptures say, that Kings reign not over Persons,
but Nations; that Kings were anointed over Israel, not Israelites only. Saul
is called the head of the Tribes of Israel. Our Laws are plain, we have ^am
15. 17
all sworn that the Kings Highness is the only Supreme head, if Supreme, then
not subordinate; if only Supreme, then not coordinate; and Governor of this
Realm, His Highness is Supreme Governor, that is, in his Person, in his
Chamber, as well as in his Court. The ancient Courts of England, were no other
then the Kings very Chamber and moveable with him from place to place, whence
they have their name of Courts. Supreme Governor of this Realm collectively,
and not only of particular and individual Subjects. In all causes and over
all Persons, then in Parliament and out of Parliament. Parliaments do not
always sit, many Causes are heard, many Persons questioned, many Oaths of
Allegiance administered between Parliament and Parliament. The same Oath binds
us to defend him against all conspiracies and attempts whatsoever, which shall
be made against his Person or Crown; to defend him, much more therefore not to
offend him; against all Conspiracies and Attempts whatsoever, that Oath which
binds us to defend him against all attempts whatsoever, presupposes that no
attempt against him can be justified by Law, whether these attempts be against
his Person or his Crown. It will not serve the turn to distinguish between his
Person and his Office, for both the Person and the Office are included in the
Oath. Let every Subject lay his hand upon his heart, and compare his Actions
with this Oath in the fear of God. When the great representative Body of
Parliament are assembled, they are yet but his great Council, not Commanders.
He calls them, he dissolves them; they do not choose so much as a Speaker
without his approbation: and when he is chosen he prays His Majesty to
interpose his Authority, and command them to proceed to a second choice; plane
propter modestiam, sed nunquid contra veritatem? The Speakers first request is,
for the Liberties and Privileges of the House: His Majesty is the fountain
from which they flow. When they, even both Houses do speak to him, it is not by
way of mandate, but humble Petition as thus, most humbly beseech your most
excellent Majesty, your faithful and obedient Subjects, the Lords spiritual
and temporal and Commons, in Parliament assembled; or thus, ^ab. 30.
We Your Majesty's loving, faithful, and obedient Subjects representing the
three Estates of Your Realm of England etc. except we should overmuch forget
our Duties to Your Highness etc. do most humbly beseech etc. Here the three
Estates of the Kingdom assembled in Parliament do acknowledge their subjection
and their duty, do beseech Her Majesty. Where by the way I desire to know of
the Observer, whether that of the three Estates were a Fundamental
Constitution of this Kingdom, and who were the three Estates at this time, and
whether a third Estate have not been since excluded? Howsoever, we see they do
but rogore legem pray a Law, the King enacts it, and as he wills or takes time
to advise, so their Acts are binding or not binding. They challenge no
dispensative Power above the Law: he does. In a word, He is the Head not only
of the Hand or of the Foot, but of the whole Body. These things are so evident,
that all our Laws must be burned, before this truth can be doubted of. But to
stop the Observers mouth for ever take an Authentic Testimony, in the very
case point blanck, By diverse old Authentic Histories and Chronicles, it is
manifestly declared, that this Realm of England is an Empire, and so has been
accepted in the World, governed by one Supreme Head and King, having the
Dignity and royal Estate of the Imperial Crown of the same, unto 24. He^ cap.
12
whom a Body Politic compact of all sorts and degrees of people, divided into
terms, and by names of Spiritualty and Temporalty, being bounden and owen next
to God a natural and humble obedience, he being instituted and furnished by
the goodness and sufferance of Almighty God with plenary, whole, and entire
Power, Preeminence, Authority etc. Now Sir observe, first that not only
individual Persons, but the whole compacted Body Politic of the Kingdom,
are not only less then His Majesty, but do owe unto him a natural and
humble obedience, (how far is this from that Majesty which you ascribe to the
representative Body?) Secondly, that the Spiritualty were ever an essential
part of this Body Politic. Thirdly that His Majesty's Power is plenary.
Fourthly, that he derives it not from inferior compacts, but from the
goodness of God. It is true, were His Majesty as the Prince of Orange is, or
you would have him to be, not a true Possessor of Sovereign Power, but a
Keeper only, as the Roman Dictator or an arbitrary Proctor for the People,
your rule had some more show of reason: but against such evident light of truth
to ground a contrary assertion, derogatory to His Majesty, upon the private
authority of Bracton and Fle^ (no Authentic Authors) were a strange degree of
weakness or wilfulness, especially if we consider, first, upon what a
trifling silly Homonomie it is grounded, quia comites dicuntur quasi socii
Reqis, et qui habent socium habent Magistrum. If he had called them the Kings
Attendents, or subordinate Governors of some certain Province or County, as
the Sheriff Vice Comes was their Deputy, there had been something real in it.
Secondly, if we consider, that this assertion is as contrary to the Observers
own grounds, as it is to truth, for what they (Bracton and Fleta) do
appropriate to the House of Lords curiae Comitum and Baronum, he attributes to
the collective Body of the whole Kingdom, or at the least to both Houses of
Parliament: that is far from the Observers meaning and nothing to the purpose.
This Catachresticall and extravigant expression, with the amphibologicall
ground of it, is either confuted or expounded by the Authors themselves, as
saying, the King has no Peer, therefore no Companion; that he is Vicarius Dei
Gods Vicegerent, that he is not sub homina, under Man. And if the words have
any grain of truth in them, they must be undestood not of an Authorative, but
only of a Consultive Power to advise him, or at the most approbative, to give
their assent to Laws propounded, he having limited himself to make no Laws
without them. So we may say a Man's promise is his Master; as if a man should
say that the Judges in the House of Peers, who have no Votes, but are mere
assistents, yet in determining controversies in point of Law, are in some sort
superior to the Lords, not in Power which they have none, but in skill and
respect of that dependence, which the Lords may have upon their Judgment and
integrity.

Neither will your logical Axiom, quicquid efficit ^ale est magis tale, help
you any thing at all, for first your quicquid efficit must be quando efficit.
If a cause have sufficient vigor and efficacy at such time as ^he effect is
produced, it is not necessary that it should ^eteine it for ever after, or that
the People should re^ein that power which they have divested themselves of by
election of another. To take your case at the ^est, they have put the staff
out of their own hands, and cannot without Rebellion and sin against God,
^doe what they have done. Secondly, for your magic tale, there is a caution in
this Canon, that the same quality must be both in the cause and in the effect,
which yet is not always, not in this very case, it must be in causes total
essential and univocall, such as this is not. The Sun is the cause of heat,
yet it is not hot it self, Sol and homo generant hominem viventem, yet the Sun
lives not. If two Litigants consent to license a third Person to name another
for Arbitrator between them, he may elect a Judge, not be a Judge. Yet I shall
not deny you any truth, when and where the antecedent consent of free societies
not preingaged, does instrumentally conferr and convey, or rather apply power
and authority into the hands of one or more, they may limit it to what term
they please, by what covenants they please, to what conditions they please, at
such time as they make their election: yet Covenants and Conditions differ much
which you seem to confound, breach of Covenant will not forfeit a Lease, (much
less an Empire.) I have seen many Covenants between Kings and their People,
sometimes of Debt, and many times of Grace, but I do not remember that ever I
read any Conditions, but with some old elective Kings of Arragon (if they were
Kings) long since antiquated, and one only King of Polonia.

You add and truly, that there ought to be no dissolution of Sovereignty, but
by the same power by which it had its Constitution, wherein God had his share
at least: but this will not serve your turn, if you dare speak out plainly,
tell us, when a King is constituted by right of Conquest and long Succession,
yea or by the election of a free people, without any condition of forfeiture,
or power of revocation reserved (as the Capuans gave themselves to the Romans,)
and so according to your position it is established by God, can the People, or
the Major part without gross Treason attempt to dethrone this King, or send
him a writ of ease? They that are so zealous in Religion, to have every thing
ordered according to the express word of God, let them show but one Text,
where ever God did give this Power to Subjects, to reduce their Sovereigns to
order by Arms. If this were so, Kings were in a miserable condition. Consider
the present Estate of Christendom, what King has not Subjects of sundry
Communions and Professions in point of Religion? upon these men's grounds he
must be a Tyrant to one party or more. Moses seemed a Tyrant to Korah and his
rebellious Company; Queen Elizabeth and King James did seem Tyrants to Squire,
Parry, Sommervill, and the Powder-Traytors. Licurgus of whom Apollo once
doubted whether he should be numbered among the Gods or Men, was well near
stoned, and had his eyes put out in a popular tumult. Thus Barabbas may be
absolved, and the King of Kings condemned. What Divellish Plots would this
Doctrine presently raise, if it were received? what murders and assassinates?
would it ^sher into the World? especially considering that the worst men are
most commonly active in this kind, to whom nothing does more discommend a King
then his Justice.

Observer.
As for the final Cause of Regal Authority, I do not find any thing in the
Kings papers denying, that the same people is the final which is the efficient
cause of it, and indeed it were strange if the People in subjecting it self to
command, should aim at any thing but their own good in the first and last
place. It Is true according to Machavills Politics, Princes ought to aim at
greatness, not in but ^ver their Subjects, and for the atchieving of the same,
they ought to propose to themselves no greater good then the spoiling and
breaking the spirits of their subjects, nor no greater mischief then common
Freedom, neither ought they to promote and cherish any servants, but such as
are most fit for rapine and oppression, nor depresse and prosecute any as
Enemies, but such as are gracious with the populacy for noble and gallant acts,
And a little after, His Dignity was erected to preserve the Commonalty, the
Commonalty was not created for his Service, and that which is the end, is far
more valuable in Nature and Policy, then that which is the means.

Answer.
Still this Discourse runs upon elective Kingdoms: Sect. 6.
As for those which have had other originalls, here is a deep silence, s^is tu
simul^e ^upressum, quid hoc? you can paint a Cypress Tree, but what is this to
the purpose? Let it be admitted that in such Monarchies, the aim of the People
is their own Protection, Concord, and Tranquillity, Rulers are the Ministers of
God for our good; so on the other side, (...). 13. 4.
Sovereign Princes have their ends also, who feeds a flock, and eats not
of the milk thereof? So there are Cor. 9. 7.
mutual ends, and these ends on both sides are lawful and good, so long as
they are consonant to the rules of Justice. And though Prince and People do
principally intend their own respective good, yet it were folly to imagine to
atteine to such high ends of such consequence and concernment, without the
mixture of some Dangers, Difficulties, Troubles, and Inconveniences: as Saint
Ambrose says, that since the fall of Adam, thorns often grow without roses,
but no true roses without thorns: we must take the rose with the thorn, the one
with the other in good part, for better for worse, fructus transit cum onere
the benefit passes with the burden. If we can purchase tranquillity which we
intend, with Obedience and Subjection which we must undergo; we have no cause
to complain of the bargain. It is a most wretched Government, where one real
suffering, is not compensated with ten benefits and blessings.

Again, this public good of the people, is (to use your own phrase) either
singulorum or universorum, public or private, of particular Subjects, or of
the whole Commonwealth: howsoever the actual intentions of individual
Members of a Society may aim at the private, yet when these two are
inconsistent (as sometimes it falls ou^) a good Governor must prefer the
public; and particular Members must not grumble to suffer for the general
good of the Body Politic.

But you say the end is far more honorable then the means, and the
Preservation of the Commonalty is the end of Regal Dignity. True, but this
preservation must be understood, sub modo, according to Law, which is not
alterable at the discretion of humorous Men, but with the concurrence both of
King and Subjects. Likewise this is to be understood, where the ends are not
mutual (as here they are) the King for the People, and the People for the
King: and where the end is not partial but adaequate (as this is not.) Lastly,
the end is more valuable, how? qua finis as it is the end in the intention of
the efficient, not always in the nature of the thing. If the Observer had
argued thus, the public Tranquillity of King and People is the end of
Government, therefore more valuable, hi^ inference had been good, but as he
argues now, it is a mere Paralogisme, which I will clear by some instances.
The Tutor is elected for the preservation of his Pup^ll, yet the Pupil qua
talis is less honorable: The Angels are Ministering Spirits for the good of
Mankind, are men therefore more honorable then Angels? The Redemption of
the World is the end of Christ's Incarnation, is the World therefore more
excellent then Christ?

Whether the Observer cite Machiavell true or false, I neither know nor regard?
Such a Character might fit Caesar Borgias a new Intruder, but not King Charles,
who derives his Royalty from above an hundred Kingly Predecessors, whom Malice
itself cannot charge with one drop of guiltless Blood, nor with the tear of
an innocent, such a Prince as Vespa^ian, of whom it is said, that justis
suppliciis ill^chrimavit and ingemuit. But I offer two issues to the Observer,
out of these words of Machiavell, if he please to accept the challenge. First,
that more Noble Worthies have been cru^hed to nothing by the insolency of the
People, (proportion for proportion) then by the Power of Kings. As in Athens
for instance, Socrates, Aristides, Themistocles, Alcibiades, and many more. The
Second, that gallant and veruous Actions do not more often ingratiate men with
the People, then a rouling tongue, a precipitate head, vain glorious Profusion,
oily Insinuations, feined Devotions, Sufferings (though deserved) from
Superi^rs, and above all opposition to the present Sta^. So that he that is a
Favorite to the King, is ipso facto, hated by the People or the major Part: and
to be slighted by the Prince, is frequently a re^y way to be honored by the
People. Judas of ^lilee was a great Favorite of the ^s 5. 37.
Commons, how did he indeare himself? by seditious Orations. Wh^ more popular
then Simon Magus? (...) 8. 10.
It Is megas so^ great one, and this only with juggling. When Abs^om sought to
ingratiate himself ^m. ^5.
with the vulgar, wh^ course did he take? to be more eminent in virtue? No such
thing; but ostentation, lying, flattery and ^ucing the present State. Who has
not heard, ho^ ^stratus and Dionisius two execrable Tyrants, did cut ^d sl^sh
themselves, and perswa^ the credulous ^titude, how it was done by the
Malignants for their zeal to the Commonwealth, till by these Arts they had
first gotten a guard allowed for themselves, and after invaded the Government.

Observer.
To be deliciae humani generis is grown fordid with Princes, to be public
torments and Carnificines, and to plot against those Subjects, whom by nature
they ought to protect, is held Caesar- like, and therefore bloody Borgias by
mere treachery and cruelty has gotten room in the Calender of witty and of
spirited Heroes. And our English Court of late years has drunk too much of
this State-poyson, for either we have seen Favorites raised to poll the People,
and razed again to pa^ifie the People; or else (which is worse for King and
People too) we have seen engines of Mischief preserved against the People, and
upheld against Law, merely that mischief might not want encouragement.

Answer.
Curse not the King (says the Wiseman) no not in thy thought. Thou shall not
revile the Gods, nor speak Sect, 7. Eccl. 10. Exo. 22. and Act 5. 2. Pet. 2^
and Ju^
evil of the Ruler of thy People. Two Apostles bear record that there cannot
be a surer note of a Schismatic, then to despise Dominion, and speak evil of
Dignities. Evil language against a Sovereign Prince, has ever been reputed an
Injury to al his Subjects: but this age has hatched such Vipers, which dare
not only like some Rabshakeh, ^aile against some foreign Prince, but cast dirt
in the face of their natural Lord; as if they were the colls of a wild Ass in
the Wilderness, subject to no man, accountable to no Man: and that not only
in thought, which Solomon disliked, or in a word, which God did forbid, but
even to make the Press groan under daily bundles of Lies and slanders and
fictitious Fables. I say the Press, which has been ever esteemed a peculiar
Priveledge of Supreme Majesty, N^y, one King is not an object worthy of their
wrath, but as it is said of Julian, that he sought to destroy both Presbyteros
and Presbyterium, not Priests only, but Priesthood it self: So it is not one
or two Monarchs, but the destruction of Monarchy it self which these Men aim
at; witness our Observer here, to be public torments and Carnificines, is
held Caesar- like with Princes, and one of his Friends lately, He errs not much
who says, that there is an inbred hatred of the Gospel in all Kings, they do
not willingly suffer the King ^eiae adelphi
of Kings to rule in their Kingdoms, the Lord has his among Kings, but very
few, one perhaps of an hundred. Increpet te Deus Satan. The Lord himself will
one day call them to an account for these Blasphemies against his anointed. Is
this a Coal taken from the Altar, or rather from the fire of Hell? There is
hope our Countrymen will rob the Jesuits shortly of their reputation:
Anabaptisme has got it loose to be the Liers and the Rebels Catechism. Sir,
lay aside your eye of envy, which cannot endure the beams of Majesty, and tell
us what it is in King Charles which does so much offend you? take Diogenes his
lanthorn, and look at Noonday among all his Opposers throughout your Classes
and Forms, if you can find one to match or parallel him, for piety toward
God, justice toward Man, Temperance in His Diet, truth in His Word, Chastity
in His Life, Mercy toward the oppressed; yea take your multiplying glass and
look through His Government from end to end, if you can find His Crown
sprinkled with one drop of innocent blood. He needs not with Caius the Emperor
assume Mercuries Rod, Apolloes bow and arrows, M^rs his sword and shield, to
make himself resemble God, He has better ensigns of the Diety. Unhappy we
only because we do not know our own good, that might enjoy a temperate and
sweet Government, Sunshine days under our own Vines and Figtrees, the free
Profession of true Religion, equal administration of Justice, Peace and
Plenty, with a daily growth of all arts that may enrich or civilize a Nation,
under the radicated succession of a Princ^ly Family. If the Observers eyes had
not been like the old Lamiaes, to take out and put in at his pleasure, he might
have seen a Titus at Home, a Darling of Mankind.

But what is the ground of all this great cry? forsooth we have had Favorites.
I do not yet know any hurt in a good Favorite, such an one as Joshua was to
Moses, or Daniell to Darius, or Maecenas and Agrippa to Augustus, or Craterus
and (for any thing I know) Ephestion also to Alexander. Wise men think a
wellchosen Favorite may bring great advantage both to King and People. But I
leave the discourse: it is well known, His Majesty is as opposite to Favorites
as the Observer, and never raised any to the height, but they might be opposed
and questioned ^y their Fellow-Councellers. But if the Observer have a mind to
see some of those Favorites, (whom he call^ Pollers, engines of Mischief, or
Monopolists) he may find them moving in another Sphere: To side with His
Majesty is no ready way to impunity.

Observer.
But our King here does acknowledge it a great business of His Coronation Oath
to protect us: and I hope under this word protect, he intends not only to
shield us from all kind of evil, but to promote us to all kind of Political
happiness, according to his utmost Devoir: and I hope he holds himself bound
thereunto, not only by his Oath, but also by his very Office and by the end of
his Sovereign Dignity. And though all single Persons ought to look upon the
late bills passed by the King, as matters of Grace with all Thankfulness and
Humility: yet the King himself looking upon the whole State, ought to
acknowledge, that he cannot merit of it, and that whatsoeven he has granted,
if it be for the prosperity of his People, (but much more for their ease) it
has proceeded but from mere duty. If Ship Money, if Star Chamber, if the High
Commission, if the Votes of Bishops and Popish Lords in the upper House be
inconsistent with the welfare of the Kingdom, not only Honor, but Justice
itself challenges that they be abolish't. The King ought not to account that a
Profit or Strength to him, which is a loss or wasting to the People, nor ought
he to think that perish't to him, which is gained to the People: The word
Grace sounds better in the Peoples mouth then in His.

Answer.
His Majesty is bound in Conscience both by his Sect. 8.
Oath and Office, not only to protect his People committed to his charge in
Wealth, Peace and Godliness, but also to promote their Good: But this
Protection must be according to Law, this Promotion according to Law. Now if a
good King at seasonable and opportune times, (so it may not be like the
borrowing of a shaft for the Hatchet to cut down the great Oak, nor like the
plucking off one or more feathers out of the Eagles wings, wherewith to feather
an arrow to pierce through that King of Birds,) shall freely according to the
dictates of his own Reason, part with any of those Jewels which do adorn his
Royal Diadem, for the behoof of his Subjects, it is an act of Grace, not
only to individual Persons, but to the collected Body of his People, and so
both Houses have acknowledged it: yet you say it is mere duty, that both
Honor and Justice do challenge it from him. It is a strange and unheard of
piece of Justice and Duty, which is without and beyond all Law. You say the
word Grace sounds better in the Peoples mouth then in His, O Partiallity how
do thou blind men's eyes! The Observer sees that Grace sounds ill in the Kings
mouth, and yet he does not or will not see how ill duty and mere duty sounds
in his own mouth, being a Subject toward his Sovereign. The truth is, it is
most civil for Receivers to relate benefits, sufficit unus huit operi, si vis
me loqui, ipse tace: But where the Receivers forget themselves, yea deny the
favors received (as this Observer does) it is very comely for the Bestowers to
supply their defect.

Next, to your taking away of Ship Money, Starchamber, High Commission, etc. It
is an easy thing to take away, but difficult to build up, both in nature and in
respect of men's minds, which commonly agree sooner in the destructive part then
in the constructive. All the danger is either in exceeding the golden mean (by
falling from one extreme to another) or in taking that away, which by
correcting and good ordering skill, might have been of great use to the Body
Politic. We are glad to be eased of our former Burdens, yet we wish with all
our hearts, that our present ease may not produce greater mischiefs, that in
true real necessities and sudden dangerous Exigences, the Commonwealth may
not be left without a speedy Remedy. That if the Laws have not sufficiently
provided for the suppressing of riots and tumultuous disorders in great men?
yet the ordinary Subject may nor be left without a Sanctuary whither to fly
from oppression. That in this inundation of Sects, which do extremely deforme
our Church, and disturb the Commonwealth, there may be a proper and sure
Remedy provided before it be too late, and we be forced in vain to dig up
Antigonus again out of his Grave. As for the taking away of Bishops Votes at
this time. I do not doubt but that great Council of the Kingdom had reasons
for it, and may have other Reasons (when it pleases God) to restore them
again: There is much difference betwixt a coercive and a Consultive Power: No
Nation yet that ever I read of, did exclude their Religious from their
Consultations: To make a Law perfectly good, Piety must concur, and who shall
judge what i^ piou^? shall they first be excluded from all other Professions,
and then from their own? British Bishop have been of no^e in great Counsels
Foreign and Domestique these one thousand four hundred and thirty years. It is
your own Rule, quod omnes tangit ab omnibus tractari debet: All other
Professions in the Kingdom are capable ^oth of electing and being elected; but
for this I do submit, and leave it to time to discover what is good for the
Kingdom.

Observer.
This directs us then to the transcendent achme of all Politics, to the
P^ramount Law, which shall give Law to all Humane Laws whatsoever, and that is
salus Populi. The Law of Prerogative it self is subservient to this Law, and
were it not conducing thereunto, it were not necessary nor expedient.

Answer.
If this Author could commit the Law of Prerogative, and this Supreme Law of
salus Populi together, Sect. 9.
as opposite one to another, he had said something; but he cannot see Wood for
Trees: the same transcendent achme which he magnifies, is the Law of
Prerogative it self: because a general Law cannot take notice of the equity
of all particular circumstances, nor of the necessity of all particular
Occurrences; therefore the supreme Prince is trusted with this Power Paramount.
That which the Law of Nature warrants in a private Man, as in a scathfire, to
pull down a Neighbors House to prevent the burning of a City; to cast another
man's corn overboord in a Tempest; to defend himself from Thiefes, in cases
where he cannot have recoarse to the Magistrate, or the suddenness of the
Danger will admit no formal Proceeding in Law: So public necessity does
justify the like Actions in a King, where the exigence of the State is
app^tant. If this Power be at any time misimployed, if this Trust be violated;
yet the abuse of a thing cannot take away the use and lawful and necessary
right, which is grounded upon the universal and perpetual Law of salus
Populi, which comprehends the good of the Sovereign, as well as of the
Subject. But it is now grown into fashion for Subjects without Authority,
Equity, or Necessity, to urge this Law upon all occasions. Salus Populi, is
like the Fox in AEsops Fables, it is in at every end. Men's Persons are
imprisoned, their Houses plundered, there Lands sequestered, their Rights
violated without the Judgment of their Peers, contrary to the known Law,
contrary to the great Charter; and nothing pretended for this, but the Law
Paramount, Truly Sir, if this be salus Populi, u^a salus sanis nullam sperare
salutem. A remote Jealousy or Suppofition is no good ground for the exercise
of this Law: as to pull down another Man's House, for fear of a Scathfire to
come, God knows how or when, perhaps foretold in a Prognostication. The Dangers
must be very visible, before this Rule take place, not taken upon Trust or an
implicit Faith, like Seoggins fiery Draggons in the air. All true Englishmen
will desire to be governed by their known Laws, and nor to hear too often of
this Paramount Law, the application or misapplication whereof, has been the
cause of the past and present Distempers of this Kingdom. Extraordinary
Remedies like hot Waters, may help at a Pang, but being too often used, spoil
the Stomach. Sir H. (...)


Observer.
Neither can the Right of Conquest be pleaded to acquit Princes of that which
is due to the People, as the Authors and ends of all Power, for mere Force
cannot altar the course of Nature, or frustrate the tenor of the Law, and if
it could, there were more reason why the People might justify force, to
regaine due Liberty, then the Prince might to subvert the same. And it is a
shameful Stupidity in any Man, to think that our Ancestors did not fight more
n^bly for their free Customs, and Laws, of which the Conqueror and his
Successors had in part disinherited them by violence and perjury, then they
which put them to such conflicts; for it seems unnatural to me, that any
Nation should be bound to contribute its own inherent puissance, merely to
abet Tyranny, and support Slavery; and to make that which is more excellent; a
prey to that which is of less worth. And questionless a native Prince if
mere force be right, may disfranchise His Subject as well as a Stranger, if he
can frame a sufficient party, and yet we see that this was the foolish Sin of
Rehoboam, who having deserted and rejected out of an intolerable Insolence the
Strength of ten Tribes, ridiculously sough^ to reduce them again with the
Strength of two.

Answer.
This Author intends not to halt on one side only in this Discourse, qui s^mel
verecundiae limits transiverit, ^ct. 10.
guavit^ (...) esse oportet. First, That just Conquest in a lawful War,
acquireth good right of Dominion, as well as Possession, is so consonant to the
universal Opinion and Practice of all Nations, yea, to ^he infallible and
undoubted Testimony of holy Scriptures, that he that denies it, may as well
affirm, Nil intra est ^leam, nil extra est in nu^e durum. Force is not mere
Force, where Justice goes hand in hand ^ith it, Omnia dat qui justa negat.
Neither is this to alter the course of Nature, or frustrate the ^enour of Law,
but it self is the Law of Nature and of Nations,

Secondly, Tha^ Subjects who have not the power of the Sword committed to them,
after a long time of Obedience and lawful Succession, after Oaths of
Allegiance, may use force to recover their former Liberty, or raise A^ms to
change the Laws established, is without all ^ontradiction both false and
Rebelliou^. They that are overcome (says Josephus most truly) and have long
obeyed, if they seek to shake off the yoke, they do^ the part of desperate Men
not of Lovers of Liberty* Surely, if any Liberty might warrant such Fo^ce, it
is the Liberty of Religion, but Christ never planted his Religion in blood: He
cooled his Disc^ples heat with a sharp Redargution, ye know not of what
spirit ye are of. It is better Luke 9. 5^
^o dye innocent then live nocent, as the Thebaean Legion, (all Christans of
approved valor) answered the bloody Emperor Maximian, Cognosce Imperator,
know O Emperor that we are all Christians, we submit our Bodies to thy Power,
but our free Souls fly to our Savior, neither our known Courage nor
Desperation it self has armed us against thee, because we had rather dye
inn^cent, then live guilty; thou shall find our Hands empty of Weapons, but our
Breasts a^med with the Catholic Faith. So having power to resist, yet they
suffered themselves to be cut all in pieces. The Observer is still harping upon
Tyranny and slavery, to little purpose; he is not presently a Tyrant, who has
more Power then Nature did comm^ to him, nor he a Sl^ve who has subjected
himself to the Dominion of another: That which is done to gain Protection or
Sustenance, or to avoid the evils of Sedition, or to perform a lawful
Engagement, is not merely done to abet Tyranny and support Slavery.

Thirdly, to the Observers instance of our Ancestors in the Barons Wars, I
know not whether Wars he intends, the former or the latter, or both: This is
certain, no party gained by them. They proved fatal and destructive sometimes
to the King, sometimes to the Barons, sometimes to both, and evermore to the
People. And howsoever the name of free Customs and Laws was mae use of as a
plausible pretense, yet it is evident, that Envy, Re^enge, Coveteousnesse,
Ambition, Lust, Jealousy, did all act their several parts in them. And if
there were any (as I doubt not there were many) who did solely and sincerely
aim at the public good, yet it cannot be denied there was too much
stiffenesse, and animosity on both side^: a little yielding and bending is
better then breaking outright, and more especially Conscience requires it of
them who are Subjects, and of them who contend for an alteration. Pliny relates
a Story of two Goats that met in the midst of a narrow planke, over a swift
current, there was no room for one to p^sse by another, neither could turn
backward, they could not fight it ou^ for the way, but with certain peril of
dro^ning them both; that which only remained, was that the one couching on the
planke made a Bridge for the other to go over, and so both were saved. But the
Subject is so direful and tragical, and the remembrance of those times so
odious to all good Men, that I pass by it, as ^ot much material to the
Question in hand: Both Parties are dead and have made their accounts to God,
and know long since whether they did well or ill: neither can their example
either justify or condemn our actions. It is probable there were some
Shebahs, Trumpetters of Sedition in those days, as this Author proves himself
now: yet none so apt as these Catalines to cry out against Incendiar^es. It is
a good wish of Saraviah, that such seditious Authors might ever be placed in
the front of the battle. Yet thus far the Authors ingenuity does lead him, to
distinguish the Barons then, from His Majesty's Opposites now. The Barons then
fought for their Laws* not to change the Laws and alter the Government both in
Church and Commonwealth, which was the very case of the Lincolnshire,
Yorkshire, and Northren Rebels in the Days of Henry the eight, and Queen
Elizabeth. I wish none of His Majesty's Subjects were involved in it at this
present.

Fourthly, whereas he urges that a native Prince may disfranchise His Subjects
by Force, if He can make a Party, as well as Strangers: either he intends that
he may do it de facto, that is true; so may a Thief take away an honest man's
purse* or else that he may do it de jure, lawfully and conscionably; that is
most untrue: There is a vast difference betwixt a just War and an unjust
Oppression. His instance of Rehoboam is quite beside the Cushion, his error was
threatening and indiscretion, the fault they found was with Solomon, thy Father
has made our yoke grievous: And yet it is most certain, they never had so
gracious so happy a Reign as Solomon's was for Peace and Plenty, who made
Silver as plentiful as stones, and Cedars 1. King. 27.
as Sicamores in Jerusalem. So unthankful we are naturally, so soon troubled
with trivial matters as Haman was, and like flies feed upon sores, leaving the
whole Body which is ^ound. This is sure, that against Rehoboam, was a meditated
Rebellion, witness the place chosen Shechem, in the midst of the Faction;
witness their Prolocutor Jeroboam, a seditious Fugitive, and ungrateful
Servant of Solomon's, by 1 King 3.
whom he had been preferred; they sent for him out of AEgipt. And howsoever the
Author makes Rehoboams attempt ridiculous, yet it proved not so shortly 2. Chr^
13. 1^
after, His Son Abijah discomfi^ed Jeroboam, and ^lew of his Soldiers five
hundred thousand men; the the greatest number that we have read of slain at
once; yet had Jeroboam all the advantages in the World, of numbers, Stratagems,
and every thing except the justice of the Cause. And that which is mo^e for our
learning, the House of Judah had many pious and virtuous Kings after this
Revolt, but the House of Israel not one but Tyrants and Idolaters.

Observer.
I come now from the cause which conveyes Royalty, and that ^or which it is
conveyed, to the nature of the conveyance. The word trust is frequent in the
Kings papers, and therefore I conceive the King ^oes admit that His Interest in
the (...) is not absolute, or by a mere Donation of the People, ^t in part
conditionate and ^duciary. And indeed all good Princes, without any express
contract betwixt them and their Subjects, have acknowledged, that there did
(...) a great and high trust upon them; nay Heathen Pri^es that have been
absolute, have acknowledged themsel^es Servants to the public, and born for
that service, and professed that they would manage the public Weal, ^s being
well satis^ed populi ^em esse non suam: And we cannot immagi^e in the fury o^
War (when Laws have the least vigor) that any Generalissimo can be so
unc^rcumscribed in Power, ^ut that if he should turn hi^ ^ons on his own
Soldiers, they were ipso facto absol^ of all Obedience, and of, all Oaths, and
ties of Allegi^e whatsoever for that time, and bound by a higher Duty to seek
their own preservation by Resistance and De^e* Wherefore if there be such
tacit trusts and reserv^tions in all public Commands, though of most (...)
nature that can be supposed, we cannot but admit, that in all well formed
Monarchies, where Kingly Prerogative has any Limits set, this must needs be
one necessary condition, that the Subject may live safe and free. The Charter
of Nature intitles all Subjects of all Countries whatsoever to safety by its
supreme Law.

Answer.
The Observer needs not bring any confessions of Sect. ^11
Princes, Christian or Heathen, to prove that good Kings account themselves
great, though glorious servants to their Subjects, like a Candle burning away
itself to give light to others; which a Germane Prince stamped on His Coin
with this inscription aliis serviens meipsum contero: Whilst other men ^lept
Ahasuerosh waked, and thoughts troubled Nebuchadnezars Head. They have many
Causes of care, which private Persons want, and patet in cura^ a^ (...) su^s:
Queen Mary said, they would find Callic^ written in her heart. He is very
incredulous who will not believe readily, that these Distractions have pierced
deeper into the breast of King Charles, then of this Observer; and this because
he knows and populi rem esse and suam: Yet further, His Majesty will
acknowledge a trust from His People, a subsequent and implicit consent implies
a trust but not a gift: But the inference which this good Man (I can neither
call him good Subject nor good Logician) makes from hence, that the King hereby
admits that His Interest in the Crown is not absolute but a mere Donation,
yea a conditional donation from the People, is such a pretty treasonable (I
should say topicall) Argument, drawn just from Te^erden Steeple to Goodwin
Sands, confounding Gods r^st with man's trust, and in man's trust a trust of
(...) with a trust of dependence, a trust recoverable with a trust
irrecoverable, a trust absolute with a trust conditional, a trust antecedent
with a trust consequent: I hope the Author trusts in God, will he therefore
make God his Donee, yea his conditionate Donee? In plain terms, Sir, your
collection is foundred of all four, and will not pass current in Smithfield,
and man well take your Generalissimo by the hand: But good Sir, without offense
may I ask you, what Countryman your Generalissimo was? For no man that I meet
with, will believe that there ever was such a Creature in the World: But
certainly if there was, he was stark mad. Now Sir in the first place, he that
shall go about to shake in pieces an healthful and beneficial Institution,
for fear of such a Danger, as was never yet produced into act, since the
Creation of the World; deserves the next Room in Bedlam to your Generalissimo.
These groundless panicall Fears, these ifs and suppositions of incredible
Dangers, have been the Raisers and Fomenters of these present Distractions: Dic
mihi si sius tu leo qualis eris? If the Sky should fall, what price will Larkes
bear? Secondly, it is a piece both of incivillity and knavery, for a Servant
first to withdraw his Obedience from His Master undutifully, and then to plead
sawcily that some Masters have been mad. Thirdly, has a Generalissimo as large
an extent of Power in all respects, as unlimited for time as a Sovereign King?
When a Generalissimo runs into such a fran^cke Error, it is si^ he should
lose his place: but when a^ Hereditary King falls into it, it is just he should
have a Pro^ex named, a Deputy or Protector (which you will) during his
Distraction, always saving the right both to himself and his Posterity. I
have read such rebellious suppositions as this in late Pamphlets, as of a Pilot
seeking to split his Ship upon the rocks: of a Patient calling to his Physician
for poison; but never read one of them urged in a Classicke Author. Put the
case a man is to sail by Sea, the Pilot may runn mad, and seek to split the
Ship upon rocks; shall we therefore make an Ordinance, that it shall not be
lawful for a Pilot to move his rudder according to the alterable face of
Heaven, or different disposition of Wind and Weather, before he have consulted
and gained the consent of all the Passengers, or at the least of every
inferior Mariner, or of the Major part of them? Interea perit Nau^agus,
before this can be done the Ship may be cast away: howsoever it leaves small
hope of a prosperous Voyage. If you will prescribe Limits and Bounds and
Conditions to Kings, you must find them written in plainer Characters then any
you produce hitherto. The Charter of Nature, Lex nata non data, is indeed to
preserve our selves, as Water contracts it self into a Globe or Circle in a
dusty place; an Emblem of Association, which cannot be without Nerves, Bonds,
Ligaments, Laws, and Kings. What is this against the Magistrate, who is the
Minister of God for our preservation and safety? The Subject never finds more
safety or more Liberty, then under a gracious King, neque unquam Libert^
gratior aut tutior extat quam (...) Re^e pio.

But because the Observer does so often press the Charter of Nature, even to
the dissolving of all Oaths and ^es of Allegiance and all mutual Compacts and
Agreements: as also to animate Subjects to raise Arms against their
Sovereigns, as a thing that is not only lawful but necessary, to which they
are bound by a higher duty, unless they will be fellonious to themselves and
rebellious to Nature: That it is not just nor possible for any Nation so far to
enslave themselves, and that there are tacit trusts and reservations in all
public Commands. To give him an answer once for all in this point of
Resistance. First, I affirm though it be nothing to us, (who are free Subjects
and might well have been omitted by him, as making naught to his purpose) that
even by the Laws of Nature, of Nations, and of God, one Man, or a Society of
Men might enslave themselves to another for sustenance or protection. All
Histories both sacred and profaine are full of Examples, and the Law of God is
plain Exodus 21. 6. Levit, 25. 47. etc. And it seems strange, that the Observer
should so far overreach or beat the air to no end at all: this confessed
truth quite overthrowes his whole structure of tacit trusts and conditions and
rebellions against Nature.

Secondly, to come nearer our own case, I answer, that though the Law of Nature
cannot be destroyed or contradicted, yet it may be limited by the positive Laws
of the Land. And so it is; the Observer will not deny it in his own case,
though he mete with another measure to his Sovereign. The Charter of Nature
intitles mankind indefinitely to ^e whole Earth, will the Observer therefore
give ^is Neighbor leave to enter as a Coparcener into his Freehold? I believe,
not; but would tell him readily ^here is a new Charter made by which he holds
it; that is, the Law of the Land. It is usual with these Men to divest Men of
all due relations, as if it were ^he same to be a Subject and a Man. A Man qua
^alis, might do many things, which in a Subject is ^lat Treason,
notwithstanding the Charter of Nature.

Thirdly, beyond and above both these, there is the Law of God, there is the
last Will and Testament of our Savior, by which we hold our hopes of
happiness, which to Christians must be as the Pillar of Fire to the
Israelites, a direction when to go, where to stay. Here we read of Tyrants, and
of the sufferings of the Saints, but not a word of any tacit trusts and
reservations, or of any such rebellion against Nature, or dispensation with
Oaths, nor of any resistance by Arms. Certainly there is no one duty more
pressed upon Christians by Christ and his Apostles then Obedience to
Superiors. Give unto Caesar that which is Caesar's, says our Savior. Submit
your selves to every Ordinance of Man, for the Lords sake, says Saint Peter.
Put them in mind to be subject to Principallities and Powers, says Saint Paul:
and in that well known place to the Romans, Let every Soul be subject to the
Higher Powers, whosoever resists the Powers, resists the Ordinance of God,
and they that resist shall receive to themselves Damnation. To this evidence of
Holy Scripture for want of one good answer, the Observer has devised three bad
ones, ut quae non vale^nt singu^ multa juvent, the clearing of which will help
to (...) an end to the Controversy.

First, they say, The Apostle tells us not which Po^ Observe. de^ended page 7.
is highest, but that that Power which is the highest (...) to be obeyed. A
strange Evasion, the Apostle els^ where names these two together,
Principallities (...) Powers: yea in this very Text he expresses himself,
that by the higher Powers, he understands the Magistrate verse. 3. him that
bears the Sword, verse 4. him to whom tribute is paid verse 7. none of all
these will agree either to the People or to the Senat^ but to the supreme
Magistrate only, which Saint Peter tells us, is the King, whether it be to the
King (...) Supreme. Pet. 2. 13.


A second Evasion is this, Saint Paul speaks to (...) few particular dispersed
Men, and those in a primitive Obs. defen^ed. page 8.
condition, who had no means to provide for their own preservation. It skills
not whether he borrowed this from the Jesuits defuerunt vires, they wanted
strength; or of Buchanan, Finge aliquem e nostris Doctoribus, Imagine one of
our Doctors did write to ^ucha.
the Christians which live under the Tunke, to poor^ faint-hearted and unarmed
Men, what other Counsails could he give, then Saint Paul did to the Romans,
Thus they transform a Precept into a Counsel, I had thought they had allowed
no Evangelicall or Apostolical Counsails: and what the Apostle enjoynes to be
do^ for Conscience sake verse 5. under pain of Damnation verse 2. they say is
to be done for discretion sake, under pain of plundering. Do not these Men
deserve well of Christian Religion to infuse such prejudicate conceits into the
bre^ of Monarchs? that Christians are like the frozen snake, which if they take
into their bosom, so soon as ^he is warmed and inlived, they shall be sure to
feel ^er sting for their favors. Let Christians be guilt^esse, and let the
Mischief fall upon the heads of the ^editious Contrivers. That it was not
weakness or want of Courage, but strength of Faith that kept the Primitive
Christians quiet under the persecutions of ^he Heathen Emperors, Tertullian
and the Ancients ^oe abundantly witness, and it has been sufficiently cleared
by our Divines against the Jesuits. This is verse. 16.
^s Saint Jude says, to have men's persons in admira^ion, because of advantage.

The third answer whereupon they do most insist, (...) that this subjection is
due to the Authority of the ^ing, not to the Person of the King, that this
Authority resideth in his Courts and in his Laws, that ^he Power which Saint
Paul treats of, is in truth the Kingly Office, that to levy Force or to
raise Arms against the Personal commands of a King, accompanied with his
presence, is not levying War against the King: but War against his Authority,
residing in his Courts, is war against the King. Yet ^et me give the Observer
his due, he is more favorable to Princes then many of his Fellows in this,
that he would have the Person of his Prince inviolable. And good reason, for
what can the poor Kingdom expect, where the Person of the Prince is not held
sacred? but Combustion and confusion: witness our own Civil Wars; witness
the Histories of the Gothish Kings, and the Roman Emperors from Julius Caesar
to Constantine the great, b^ ing five and sorty, whereof thirty perished by u^
timely deaths, diverse of them good Princes: and a^ that while the
Commonwealth sympathized in the common Calamity. No offense can be so great
(...) that it deserves to be punished by parricide. B^ this is a greater
Courtesy in show then in deed: if a^ arrow shot at adventure, did wound the
King of I^ rael (...) King 22. 34.
mortally between the joints of his harness, wh^ shall secure King Charles
from a bullet? so all thi^ moderation ends in this, to give the King wa^ ning
to avoid the field, or otherwise to take what fall^ at his peril. But that I
may not deny truth to an Ad^ versary, I grant three truths in this Answer.

First, that the Person and Office of a King at^ distinguishable: a good man
may be a bad King, an^ a bad man a good King. Alexander the great ha^ his two
friends Ephestion and Craterus; the one wa^ Alexanders Friend, the other was
the Kings Friend the one honored his person, the other his Office* But yet he
that loved Alexander did not hate the King, and he that loved the King, was no
enemy t^ Alexander.

Secondly, I grant in active Obedience, if the King command any thing which is
repugnant to the Law of God or Nature, we ought rather to obe^ God then Men.
The Guard of Saul refused justl^ to slay the Priests of the Lord; and Hanania^
Act. 5. 29. (...) Sam. 22. 17
Mishael and Azariah to worship Nebuchadnezar^ golden Image; it is better to
dye then to do tha^ which is worse then Death: Da veniam Imperato^ pardon me,
O Sovereign, thou threatnest me wit^ Austin.
prison, but God with Hell. In this case it is not lawful to yield active
obedience to the King. Again if the King command any thing which is contrary to
the known Laws of the Land, if it be by an injury to a third Person, we may not
do it: as for a Judge to deliver an unjust sentence, for every Judge ought to
take an Oath at his admission, that he will do right to every person,
notwithstanding the Kings letters Anno 18. Ed. 3. Stat
or any other persons; there is danger from others as well as from the King:
And generally we owe service to the King, but innocence to Christ. But if this
command entrench only upon our own private Interest, we may either forbear
active Obedience, or in discretion remit of our own right, for avoiding further
evil: So said Saint Ambrose, If the Emperor demand our fields, let him take
them if he please, I do not give them, but withal I do not deny them.
Provided always, that this is to be understood in plain cases only, where the
Law of God, of Nature, or the Land is evident to every man's capacity: otherwise
if it be doubtful, it is a Rule in Case Divinity, Subditi tenentur in favorem
Regis and Legis judicare: It is better to obey God then Man, but to disobey the
King upon Surmises, or probable pretense, or an implicit dependence upon other
Men's judgments, is to disobey both God and Man: and this duty (as the
Protesters say truly) is not tied to a Kings Christianity, but his Crown.
Tiberius was no Saint when Christ bid give unto Caesar that which was Caesar's.
Thus for active obedience, now for passive. If a Sovereign shall persecute his
Subjects, for not doing his unjust Commands; yet it is not lawful to resist by
raising Arms against him: They that resist shall receive to themselves
damnation. But they ask, i^ there no limitation? I answer, ubi lex non
distingui^ nec nos distinguere debemus, how shall we limit where God has not
limited, or distinguish where he has not distinguished? But is there no remedy
for (...) Christian in this case? yes, three remedies.

The first is to cease from sin, Rex bonus est dextra, malus sinistra Dei, a
good King is Gods right hand, a bad his left hand, a scourge for our sins: as
we suffer with patience an unfruitful year, so we must do an evil Prince as
sent by God. Tollatu^ culpa ut cesset Tyrannorum plaga, (said Aquinas,) remove
our sin, and God will take away his rod.

The second remedy is prayers and tears, In that day you shall cry unto the
Lord because of your King. Sam. 7. 18.
Saint Nazianzen lived under five persecutions and never knew other Remedy: he
ascribed the death of Julian to the prayers and tears of the Christians.
Jeremy armed the Jews with prayers for Nebuchadnezar, not with daggs and
daggers against Nebuchadnezar. Saint Paul commands to make prayers and
supplications for Kings, not to give poison to them. Saint Peter could have
taken vengeance with a word as well on Herod as Ananias, but that he knew that
God reserves Kings for his own Tribunal. For this cause Saint Ambrose a Man of
known courage, refused to make use of the forwardness of the People against
Valen^ian the Emperor. And when Saul had slain the Priests of God and
persecuted David, yet says David, who can stretch forth his hand against the
Lords anointed and be guiltless? It was Duty Sam. 26. 9.
and not a singular desire of perfection that held David's hands; who can
stretch out his Hand? No Man can do it.

The third remedy is flight, this is the uttermost which our Master has
allowed, when they persecute you in one City fly to another. But a whole Mat.
10.
Kingdom cannot fly, neither was a whole Kingdom ever persecuted by a lawful
Prince: private men tasted of Domitians cruelty, but the Provinces were well
governed: The raging desires of one Man cannot possibly extend to the ruin of
all. Nor is this condition so hard for Subjects, This is thankworthy 1 Pet. 2.
if a man for Conscience toward God endure grief, and if a man suffer as a
Christian let him glorify God on 1 Pet. 4.
this behalf. This way has ever proved successful to Christian Religion:
the blood of the Martyrs is the seed of the Church; caedebantur, torquebantur,
nrebantur, and tamen multiplicabantur.

But all these Remedies are not sufficient, they are nothing, and they that
think otherwise are stupid fellows in the judgment of the Observer; unless
the People have right to preserve themselves by force of Arms, yea
notwithstanding any contracts that they have made to the contrary; for every
private man may desend himself by force if assaulted, though by the force of a
Magistrate, Page 17.
or his own Father, etc. First I observe how the Observer enterferes in his
Discourse, for in the forty fourth page he tells us quite contrary, that the
King as to his own Person is not forcibly to be repelled in any ill doing. But
passing by this contradiction, I ask two questions of him, by his good leave,
The first is, if a Father should go about only to correct his Child and not
to kill him or maime him, whether he might in such a case cry Murder Murder,
and try M^steries with his Father, and allege his own judgment against his
Fathers to prove his innocence? My second question is, if an enraged Father
should offer extreme violence to his Son, how far he might resist his Father
in this case, whether to give blow for blow, and stabbe for stabbe, or only to
hold his Fathers hands? For if it be a mere resistance without any further
active violence, (which is allowable,) if it be only in extreme perils where
the life is ind^ngered, and against manifest rage and fury; what the Observer
gets by this, he may put in his eye and see never the worse. But to give his
remedy and his instance for it a positive answer, I say further, that this
which he calls a Remedy is ten times worse then the disease itself, even such
a Remedy, as the lukewarm blood of Infants newly slain is for the Leprosy: and
in this respect worse, that a Leprosy is a disease indeed, but where shall a
Man almost read in story of a Father slaughtering his Son (except perhaps some
frantic Anabaptist in imition of Abraham:) it will not be difficult to find
two Sons that have made away their Fathers, for one Father that has made away
his Son, notwithstanding the Fathers Authority. So this case is inter raro
aut nunquam contingentia, and may be reckoned amongst the rest of the Observers
incredible suppositions, which are answered before in the beginning of this
Section. But if the Observers Doctrine were once received into the world
thoroughly, for one instance of a Parracide now, we should hear of an hundred. A
Mischief is better then an inconvenience; a Mischief that happens once in an
Age, then an inconvenience which is apt to produce a World of Mischiefs every
day: as where the King is able to make good his Party, res facile redeunt ad
pristinum statum; or where Foreign Princes shall engage themselves, on the
behalf of Monarchy it self, or perhaps do but watch for an opportunity to
seize upon both parties, as the Kite did on the Frog and the Mouse; and
howsoever, where Ambition, Covetousness, Envy, Newfanglednesse, Schism shall
gain an opportunity to act their mischievous intentions, under the cloak of
Justice, and zeal to the Commonwealth. We are now God knows in this way of
Cure which the Observer prescribes. I may say it safely, This Kingdom has
suffered more in the trial of this remedy in one year, then it has done under
all the Kings and Queens of England, since the union of the two roses, I think
I may enlarge it, since the Conquest (except only such seditious times.) Leave
a right to the Multitude to rise in Arms, as often as they may be persuaded
there is Danger, by the Observer or some such seditious Orators for their own
ends; and every English Subject may write on his door, Lord have mercy upon us.

Thirdly, I do grant, that to levy Arms against the authority of the King, in
the absence of his Person is to war against the King; otherwise we should,
have few Treasons. Some desperate Ruffian or two or three Raggamuffins
sometimes (but rarely) out of revenge, most commonly upon seditious principles,
and misled by some factious Teachers, may attempt upon the Person of the
Prince: but all grand conspiracies are veiled under the mask of Reformation,
of removing greivances and evil Councillors, Fallit enim vitium specie
virtutis and umbra* I go yet further, that when a Kings Person is h^ld captive
by force and his commands are merely extorted from him by duresse and fear of
further Mischief* contrary to the dictate of his own reason, (as it was in the
case of Henry the sixth) there his commands are to be esteemed a nullity of no
moment, as a forced marriage or a bond sealed per minas. But where the King
has Dominion of his own Actions, though he be actually misled, and much more
though he be said to be misled; the case is far otherwise. These three truths
with these Cautions I do admit in this distinction of the Kings Person and
Office.

But yet further here are sundry rocks to be avoided in it. The first is not
only to distinguish in reason but actually and in deed to divide the Kings
Person from His Authority; that is, to make the King a Platonicall Idea wi^out
personal subsistence, or as the Familists do make their Christ, a Quality and
not a Man: as if the King of England were nothing but Carolus Rex written in
Court hand, without flesh blood or bones. To what purpose then are those
significant solemnities used, at the Coronation of our Kings? Why are they
crowned? but to show their personal and Imperial Power in Military Affairs:
why inthroned? but to show their judiciary Supremacy: why ino^led? but to
express their Supremacy in matters of Religion. That the Kings Authority may
be where His Person is not, is most true: that His person may be without
Authority, is most false. That his Office and Authority may be limited by Law,
is true: but a King without personal Authority, is a contradiction rather then
a King; such a King as the Soldiers made of Christ, with a scarlet Robe, a
Crown of Thorns, a Scepter of Mat. 27. 2^
a Reed, and a few Courtesies and Formallities. The Person of a bad King is to
be honored for his Office sake, to what purpose? if his Person and his Office
may be divided: How dull were the Primitive (...), that suffered so much,
because they were not cap^ble of this distinction. By this distinction S. Paul
^ight have justified his calling Ananias whited Wall, without pleading that he
knew not that he was Gods High Priest, Acts 23.
and have told him plainly that be reverenced his Office, but for his Person
and illegal commands, ^e did (...) respect them. When Maximian commanded ^he
Christian Soldiers to sacrifice to Idols, this ^as an unlawful command; yet
they c^ose rather to ^e cut in pieces then to resist. When the same Maximian
and Dioclesian, published a cruel Edict ^t Nicomedia against Christians; That
their Chur^hes should be demolished, their Scriptures burned, their Apostate
Servants infranchised, (this was but a Personal Arbitrary Edict) A principal
Professor ^ore it in pieces, and suffered death for it (even in the judgment
of his Fellow Christian*) deservedly.

A second Danger is to leave too great a Latitude of Judgment unto Subjects to
censure the doing^ of their Sovereign, and too great a Liberty, not only to
suspend their obedience, but also to oppose his commands, till they be
satisfied of the legallity thereof. A miserable a condition for Princes, as it
is pernicious for Subjects, and destructive to all S^ cieties. A Master
commands the Servant an unju^ act in the opinion of the Servant; yet the Serva^
must submit or be beaten: Does not the Master hi^ self owe the same Subjection
to his Prince? t^ Master denies the act is unjust; so does the Prince who shall
be Arbiter? it were too much sawcines^ for a Servant to arrogate it to
himself; what is then for a Subject? will a Judge give leave to an E^
ecutioner to reprive the Prisoner, till he be satisfy of the Legallity of the
Judges s^ence? A Sup^ riour may have a just ground for his Command, which he is
not alwa^es bound to discover to his Subjects nor is a Subject bound to sift
the grounds (...) his Superiour^ Commands. In sum a Subje^ should neither be
tanquam scipio in manu, like staff in a man's hand, alike apt to all motions;
read to obey his Prince, though the act to be done be e^ dently against the Law
of God or Nature: nor ye^ on the other side, so scrupulou^ as to demurre upon
a^ his commands, until he understand the legallity an^ expedience of each
circumstance, which perhaps he (...) not capable of, perhaps reason of State
will not pe^ mit him to know it. The House of Commons have a close Committee,
which shows their allowance o^ an implicit confidence in some cases; yet are
the^ but Proctors for the Commonalty, whereas the Kin^ is a Possessor of
Sovereignty. But it is alleged, tha^ of two evils the less is to be chosen,
it is better to disobe^ Man then God; Rather of two evils neither is to b^
chosen: but it is granted that when two evils ar^ feared, a Man should incline
to the safer part: No^ if the Kings Command be certain, and the other danger
but doubtful or disputable* to disobey the certain command for fear of an
uncertain or surmised evil, is (as Saint Austin says of some Virgins, who
drowned themselves for fear of being defloured,) to fall into a certain crime
for fear of an uncertain.

A third error in this distinction is to limit the Kings Authority to his
Courts. All Courts are not of the same Antiquity, but some erected long after
others* as the Court of Requests: Neither are all Justices of the same nature,
some were more eminent then others, that were resident with the King as his
Council in points of Law; these are now the Judges: Others did justice abroad
for the ease of the Subject; as Justices of Assise, Justices in Eire, Justices
of Oier and Terminer, Justices of Peace. The Barons of the Exchequer were
anciently Peers of the Realm, and do still continue their name: but to
exclude the King out of his Courts is worse, a strange Paradox, and against the
grounds of our Laws, The King alone Bract. 3. cap. 9.
and no other may and ought to do justice, if he alone were sufficient, as he
is bound by his Oath. And again, If our Lord the King be not sufficient
himself to determine every cause, that his labor may be the lighter, Cap. 10.
by dividing the burden among more Persons, he ought to choose of his own
Kingdom, wise Men and fearing God, and of them to make Justices. These
Justices have power by Deputation, as Delegates to the King. The Kings did use
to sit personally in their Courts: We read of Henry the fourth and Henry the
fifth, that they used every day for an hour after dinner to receive bills and
and hear causes: Edward the fourth sat ordinarily in the Kings Bench: Richard
the third (one who knew well enough what belonged to his part) did assume the
Crown sitting in the same Court, saying, He would take the Honor there where
the chiefest part of his duty did lie; to minister the Laws: And Henry the
eight sat personally in ^we.
Guild Hall. The Writs of Appearance did ^un coram me vel Iusticiariis meis,
before me or my Justices; ^rtin.
Hence is the name of the Kings Bench, and the test of that Court is still
test meipso, witness our self. If the King be not learned in the Laws, he
may have learned Assistents, as the Peers have in Parliament. A clear and
rational head is as requisite to the doing of Justice, as the profound
knowledge of Law: It is a part of his Oath, to do, to be kept in all his
judgments, Right Justice, in Mercy, and Truth; was this intended only by
Substitutes, or by Substitutes not accountable to him for injustice? we have
sworn that he is supreme Governor in all causes, over all Persons within his
Dominions, is it all one to be a Governor, and to name Governors? David
exhorts be wise now therefore O ye Kings. Moses requires that the King read in
the book of the Law all the days of his ^ut. 17.
Life. Quorsum per^itio haec? what needs all this expense of time, if all must
be done by Substitutes, if he have no Authority out of his Courts, nor in his
Courts but by delegation? When Moses by the advice of Iethro deputed
subordinate Governors under him; when Iehosophat placed Judges City by City
throughout Judah: It was to ease themselves and the ^hron. 19.
People, not to disingage and exinanite themselves of Power. It is requisite
that His Majesty should be eased of lesser burdens, that he may be conversant
circa ardua Reipublicae, about great affairs of State, but so as not to divest
his Person of his royal Authority in the least matters. Where the King is,
there is the Court, and where the Kings Authority is present in His Person or
in his Delegates, there is his Court of Justice. The reason is plain then, why
the King may not control his Courts; because they are himself: yet he may
command a review, and call his Justices to an account. How the Observer will
apply this to a Court, where neither His Majesty is present in Person, nor by
his Delegates I do not understand.

The fourth and last error is to tie the hands of the King absolutely to his
Laws. First in matters of Grace, the King is above his Laws, he may grant
especial Privileges by Charter to what Persons, to what Corporations ^e
pleases, of his abundant Grace and mere motion; he may pardon all crimes
committed against the Law of the Land, and all penaltyes and irregularityes
imposed by the same: the perpetual Custom of this Kingdom does warrant it.
All wise men desire to live under such a Government, where the Prince may with
a good Conscience dispense with the rigor of the Laws. As for those that are
otherwise minded, I wish them no other punishment then this, that the paenall
Laws may be executed on them strictly, till they reform their Judgments.

Secondly, In the Acts of Regal Power and Justice, His Majesty may go besides
or beyond the ordinary course of Law, by his Prerogative. New Laws for the most
part (especially when the King stands in need of Subsidies) are an abatement of
Royal Power. The Sovereignty of a just Conqueror, who comes in without
pactions, is absolute, and bounded only by the Laws of God, of Nature, and of
Nations; but after he has confirmed old Laws and Customs, or by his Charter
granted new Liberties and Immunities, to the collective Body of His Subjects or
to any of them; he has so far remitted of his own right, and cannot in
Conscience recede from it. I say in Conscience, for though humane Laws as they
are humane, cannot bind the Conscience of a Subject, and therefore a fortiore
not of a King who is the Lawgiver, yet by consequence and virtue of the Law of
God, (which says submit your selves to every ordinance of Man for the Lords
sake, and again Thou shall love thy neighbor as thy self) they do bind, or
to speak more properly, Gods Law does bind the Conscience to the Observation of
them. This is that which Divines do use to express thus; That they have power
to bind the Conscience in se ^d of the ^rch.
sed non a se, in themselves but not from themselves; non ex authoritate
Legislatoris, sed ex aequitate Legis, not from the authority of the Lawgiver,
but from the equity of the Law: many who do not grant that to violate the Law
of Man is sin universally, yet in case of contempt or scandal do admit that
it is sinful. So then the Laws and Customs of the Kingdom, are Limits and
bounds to His Majestyes Power; but there are not precise Laws for each
particular Occurrence, And even the Laws themselves, do often leave a latitude
and a pre-eminence to His Majesty, not only for circumstances ^d forms of
Justice, but even in great and high Privileges. These we call the Prerogative
Royal, as to ^e the fountain of Nobility, To coin Money, To ^eate
Magistrates, To grant Protection to his Deb^rs against their Creditours, To
present to a Bene^ce in the right of his Ward being the youngest Co^arcener
before the eldest, Not to be sued upon an or^inary writ, but by Petition, and
very many others which are beyond the ordinary course of Common Law, being
either branches of absolute power or Pre^ogatives left by the Laws themselves.

Thirdly, in the c^se of evident necessity, where the who^e Commonwealth lye^
at stake; for the safety of King and Kingdom, His Majesty may go against
parti^ular Laws. For howsoever fancyed and pretended invisible dangers have
thrust us into real dangers and unseasonable Remedies, have produced our
present Calamityes: yet this is certain, that all humane Laws and particular
proprietyes, must veil and strike top-sayle to a true public necessity. This
is confessed by the Observer himself every where in this Treatise, that Salus
Populi is the transcendent achme of all Politics, the Law Paramount that gives
Obs. defe ded page
Law to all humane Laws, and particular Laws cannot act contrary to the
legislative intent to be a violation of some more sovereign good introducible,
or some extreme and general evil avoidable, which otherwise might swallow up
both Statutes and all other Sanctions. This preservative Power the Observer
ascribes to the people, that is to say in his sense, to the Parliament in case
the King will not join with them. Though we all know a Parliament is not ever
ready, nor can be s^ suddenly called as is requisite to meet with a sudde^
Mischief. And he thinks it strange that the King should no^ allow to the
Subject a right to rise i^ Arms for their o^n necessary defense, without his
consent, and that he should assume or challenge such a share i^ the Legislative
^ewer to himself, as that without hi^ concurrence the Lords and Commons should
have no right to make tempora^y orders for putting the Kingdom into a posture
of Defense. Strange Phrases and unheard of by English ears, that the King
should join with the People, or assume a share in the legislative Power, Our
Laws give this honor to the King, that he can join or be a sharer with no man.
Let not the Observer trouble himself about this division; The King like
Solomon's true Mother challenges the whole Child, not a divisible share, but
the very Life of the Legislative Power: The Commons present and pray, The Lords
advise and consent, The King enacts. It would be much for the credit of the
Observers desperate cause, if he were able but to show one such president of an
Ordinance made by Parliament without the Kings consent, that was binding to the
Kingdom in the nature of a Law. It is a part of the Kings oath to protect the
Laws, to preserve Peace to His People: this he cannot do without the Power of
the Kingdom, which he challenges not as a Partner, but solely as his own, by
virtue of his Seigniory. So Edv. pri^i
the Parliament it self acknowledged, It belongs to the King and his part it
is, through his royal seigniory straightly to desend sorce of armor, and all
other force against his peace, at all times when it shall please him, and to
punish them which shall do contrary according to the Laws and usages of the
Realm, and that the Prelates, Earls, ^arons, and Commonalty, are bound to
aid him as their ^overaigne Lord, at all seasons when need shall be. Here is a
Parliament for the King even in the point. The Argument is not drawn as the
Observator sets it own negatively from Authority, or from a maimed and
imperfect induction, or from p^rticular premis^es to a general conclusion;
(every one of which is Obs. defended page 4.
^ophisticall:) is thus, Such or such a Parliament did ^ot or durst not do,
this or that, therefore no Parlia^ents may do it, or thus, Some Parliaments
not com^arable to the Worthies of this, have omitted some good ^t of supinesse
or difficulty, therefore all Parliaments ^ust do the same: but it runns thus,
no parliaments did ever assume or pretend to any such Power, some Parliaments
have expressly disclaimed it, and ac^nowledged, that by the Law of the Land,
it is a ^ewell or a Flower which belongs to the Crown, Therefore it is His
Majesty's undoubted right, and ^ay not be invaded by any Parliament. Yet
further, ^t were well the Observer would express himself, that he means by
some more Sovereign good introducible; the necessity of avoiding ru^ne, and
introducing greater good is not the same: Dangers often ^come like torrents
suddenly, but good may be in^roduced at more leisure, and ought not to be
brought ^in but in a lawful manner; we may not do evil that good may come of
it. Take the Observers two instances, When the Sea breaks in upon a County, a
bank may be made on any Man's ground without his consent: but may they cut away
another man's Land, to make an Harbor more safe or commodious with the owners
consent? No. A Neighbors Ho^ may be pulled down to stop the fury of a
Scath-fire: b^ may they pull it down to get a better prospect, (...) gain a
more convenient high way? No. We des^ to know what this Sovereign good
introduci^ means, and are not willing to be brought into^ Fools Paradise with
general insinuations. Let it a^ pear to be so Sovereign and we will all
become su^ ters for it: but if it be to alter our Religion, or our for of
Government, we hope that was not the end of the Militia. Lastly, when necessity
dispenses with pa^ticular Laws, the danger must be evident to all, t^
concurrence general, or as it were general; one o^ two opponents are no
opponents: but where the danger is neither to be seen not to be named, so u^
certain that it must be voted whether there be an^ danger or not, or perhaps
be created by one or tw^ odd Votes; this is no warrant for the practice o^
that Paramount Law of salus Populi.

By this which has been said we may gather a re^ solution, whether the King be
under the Law an^ how far, I mean not the Law of God or Nature but his own
National Laws. First by a voluntar^ submission of himself, and quod sub Lege
esse debet^ evidenter apparet, cum sit Dei Vicarius ad similitu^ dinem Bract
lib. 1. ^ap. 8.
Jesus Christi cujus vices gerit in terris: bu^ Christ was under the Law no
otherwise then by voluntary submission. Secondly, the Law has a directive
Power over Kings, and all good Kings will follow it for example sake to their
Subjects, for Conscience sake to themselves. Tacitus says of Vespasian that
being antiquo cultu victuque observing the old customs in his Diet and his
apparel, he was unto the Romans, praecipuus adstricti moris Author, an
excellent pattern of Frugalitie. But the Law has no coercive Power over him.
This (besides his Power of pardoning and dispensing) may appear by these two
reasons. First that no writ lies against him in Law, but the party grieved has
his remedy by Petition or supplication. Secondly, that if upon petition he does
not right the wronged party, there is ^o course in Law to compel him, satis
sufficit ei ^d paenam quod Dominum expectet ultorem, and elsewhere, incidit in
manus Dei viventis he falls into the Bracton
hands of the living God, which the Scripture says is a fearful thing;
wi^nesse Pharaoh, Senacherib, Nero, Domitian, Dioclesian, Deci^s, Aurelian,
Julian, etc. Some slain by themselves, some by others, some drowned, some
smitten with Thunder, some eaten with Worm^. how seldom Tyrants escape
punishment even in this World I see not why the Obser^er should be so angry,
that this Doctrine should be pulpitted (as he phraseth it,) or why he should
accuse it of flattery; whether is the greater curb to restreine Princes, the
fear of Man or of God; of tempor^ll only, or of temporal and eternal
punishment? Si genus humanum and mortalia temnitis arma,
At sperate Deosmemores fandi atque nesandi.


The Observer acknowledges as much in effect, The King is not accountable for
ill done, Law has only a directive no coercive force upon his Person. There is
a fourth answer to this Text, by distinguishing between private Persons and
subord^te Magistrates, (...). 44.
but because the Observer makes no use of it, I pass by it.

Observer.
But Freedom indeed has diverse degrees of La^tude, and all Countries there
in d^ not participate al^ but positive Laws must every where assign those
(...) The Charter of England ^s not strait in Privileg^ (...) us, ^ther is the
Kings Oath of small strength to (...) Charter, o^ that though it be more
precise in the care (...) Canonical Privileges, and of Bishops and Clergy-me^
(is having been penned by Popish Bishops) then of the Commonalty, yet it
confirms all Laws and rightful. Customs, amongst which we most highly
esteem Parliamentary Privileges* and as for the word eligerit whether it be
future or past it skills not much, ^or if by the Oath, Law, Justice, and
Discretion be executed among^ us, in all judgments, (as well in ^s out of
Parliaments) and if Peace and godly agreement be (...) kept amongst us all, and
if the King defend and uphold all ou^ Laws and Customs, we need not ^eare but
the King (...) bound to consent to new Laws, if they be necessary, a^ well as
defend old, for both being of the same necessity the public trust must needs
equally extend to both; an^ we conceive it one Parliamentary Right and Custom
that nothing necessary ought to be denied. And the word eligerit if it be in
the perfect tense, yet shows tha^ the Peoples election had been the ground of
ancien^ Laws, and Customs, and why the Peopl^s Ele^ion in ^arliament, should
not be now of as great moment as ever I cannot discover.

Answer.
^omento fit cinis, diu silva, The Observer has Sect 12.
(...) long weaving a Spiders Web, and now he ^selfe sweepes it away in an
instant: for if (...) Laws must every where assign the degrees of li^ what
will become of those tacit trusts and re^ions, of those secret and implicit,
but yet ne^ry limits and conditions of Sovereignty, which if the Prince exceed,
the Subject is left free, nay (...) is bound by a higher duty then Oaths and
all* Ties of Allegiance whatsoever, to seek his own preservation and defense.
Calvin was of another mind, Superior si p^testate su^ abutitu^, rationem quidem
olim re^det Deo, In 1 Pet*
non tamen in presentia jus suum amit^it. Admitting this Doctrine that there
are such secret reservations and condition, and these as general as ^afety
Liberty and Necessi^, and make the People their own ^udges when necessity i^;
what is a violation of Liberty, and what does endanger their safet^: and all
that great and glorious Power, which we give unto Princes, will become but like
the Popes infallibility, and his temporal Dominion, which his Flatterers do
give unto him with so many cautions and reservations, that they may take it
away when they please: Take nothing and hold it fast.

But leaving these flegmaticke speculations, I do readily join hands with the
Observer herein, That the positive Laws of a Kingdom are the just measure and
standard of the L^berty of the Subject. To say nothing of the great distance
that is between ou^ Euro^aean P^nces in extent of Power over their (...), ^o
come ^ome to our selves* we see some Corpor^ons are endowed with more liberties
and Privileges then others (thanks to a favorable Charter, not to any
an^ecedaneous P^ctions;) we see what difference of Tenures is amongst u^, some
are Coppy-holders, some are Freeholders; some hold in Ville^ (...) some in
Knight service, some in free soccage, (...) in Frank Almaine: whence springs
this diver^ but from custom and the pleasure of the Do^ who freely imposed
what conditions he liked at such time as he endowed the ancestor^ of the
present Possessors with such and such Lands. We have a surer Charter then that
of Nature to hold by, Magna Charta, the English Man's jewel and Treasure, the
fountain and foundation of our Freedom, the Walls and Bulwark, yea the very
life and soul of our security: He that goes about to violate it, much more to
subvert it in whole or in part, I dare not curse him; but I say for my self,
and let the Observer do the like, let him prove the shame and abject of Men,
and his Posterity slaves. But do you think it was penned by Popish Bishops?
fair fall them for it: certainly they did that as English Bishops, and as
Christian Bishops, not as Popish Bishops: long may their reformed Successors
enjoy the fruit of their Labors, if they do not, others may look to
themselves. Jam tua res agitur paries oum proximus ardet.


It is no new thing to begin with Bishops and ^end with Nobles. It troubles
you that they were so ^recise in the care of Canoicall Privileges. It Is probable
they did it out of D^otion (...) call instinct, as foreseeing or fe^ring (...)
Times. Yet you confess withal, that it confirms (...) Laws and rightful
Customs to all Subjects (...). Now Sir we are come to a fair^ Issue, hold (...)
foot there: your next task must be to show ^at part of Magna Charta is
violated by His Majesty; what Liberties there granted, are by him dete^ned from
the Subject: if you do not this, you have made us a very long discourse to
little purpose. Your Argument consists of a Proposition and an Assumtion; The
Proposition is this, All Laws and lawful Customs are confirmed to the Subject
by Magna Charta, and His Majesty's Oath for observation thereof. Your Assumtion
stands thus, But to have nothing necessary denied us is a lawful Custom, a
Parliamentary Right and Privilege: you amplify your Proposition (as the blind
Senator commended the fish) at dextra jacebat piscis; It is your assumtion Sir
which is denied, bend your self the other way; and show us in what particular
words of Magna Charta or any other Charter, or any Statute this Privilege is
comprehended, or by what prescription or president it may be proved: if you can
do none of these, sit down and hold your peace for ever; The Charter of
Nature will be in danger to be torn in pieces, if you stretch it to this also.
To be denied nothing? (...) is a Privilege indeed, as good as Fo^natus his
purse, or as that old Law which one found ou^ for the King of Persia, that he
might do what he would. But you limit it, he ought to deny them nothing which
is necessary: what necessity do yo^ mean, a simple and absolute necessity?
that has no Law indeed; or a necessity only of convenience (...) but
conveniences are often attended with greater inconveniences. A cup of cold
Water to one who (...) a feverish distemp^r, is convenient to ass^ge (...) sent
thirst, but pernicious to the future habit (...) of his body. Many things may
produce pr^sent (...) yet prove destructive to a State in their consequents.
These things therefore must be carefully balanced, and by whom? will you be
your own Judge? or will ^ou permit His Majesty to follow the Dictate of his own
reason? so it is meet and just if you will have him supersede from his own
Right. Lay your hand upon your heart, if you have any Tenants who hold of you
in Knight Service, and they shall desire to have their tenure changed to free
Soccage, as being more convenient and conducible for them, ^re you bound to
condescend? It is well known to all this Kingdom that the Kings thereof have
ever had a negative voice, (otherwise they had less power then a Master of a
College or a Major of a Corporation,) That no Act is binding to the Subject
without the Royal Assent, That to say the King will advise was evermore a
sufficient stop to any Bill. Yet the ground of this bold demand is but the
Authors conceit, We conceive it to be one Parliamentary right; and his reasons
are such as may make a show, but want weight to beget a very conceit. The
former is, that new Laws and old being of the same necessity, the public tr^
must equally extend to both. How often must he be told that the public trust
is only a trust of dependence, which begets no such Obligation as he Lord.
Ver^ lam.
conceits, Offices of inheritance are rather ma^ters that ^ound in interest
then in confidence. Neither is there, neither can there be the same necesity of
observing (...) old Law, to which a King is bound both by His ^ter and by His
Oath, and of a new Law to which he has not given his Royal Assent. If Mag^
Charta did extend to this, it were Charta maxim^ the greatest Charter (...)
ever was granted* If the Kings Oath did extend to this it were an unlawful
Oath and not binding* To swear to confirm all Laws that should be presented
to him, though contrary to the Rule of Justice, contrary to the Dictate of his
own reason. Among so many improbable suppositions, give leave to the other
party to make one; The Author is not infallible, nor any Society of Men
whatsoever. Put the case a Law should be presented for introducing or (...) of
Socinianisme or Anabaptisme, or the new upstart independenc^; is His Majesty
bound to give his Assent? Surel^ no, Not to assume his just power of Supremacy
(as your late new Masters confess) were damnable sin. His other Reason is
this, it kills not whether the word eligerit (he should say elegerit) in the
Kings Oath be in the future tense or in the perfect tense, whether he swears
to all such Customs as the People have chosen, or shall choose; for it shows
that the Peoples election was the ground of anci^ Laws, and that ought to be of
as great moment no^ as ever. It is a rare dexterity which the Observe^ has,
with Midas to turn all he touches into Gold, whatsoever he finds, is to his
purpose, past or ^o come all is one, but he would deceive us or deceives
himself; for the Peoples election never was, nor now is the sole cause of a
Law or binding Custom* but the Peoples election was the Sociall or Subordinate
Cause, and the Royal Assent concurring with i^ they were ever jointly the
adaequate ground of (...) and still are of the same moment that they we^
jointly and severally, which the Observer might have discovered with half an
eye.

But because His Majesty's oath at his Coronation, is so much insisted upon, as
obliging him to pass all (...) Kings ^th.
Bills that are tendered unto him by His Parliament, it will not be amiss to
take this into further consideration, which I shall do with all due Submission.

First, It must be acknowledged by all Men, that the King of England in the eye
of the Law never dies. Watson and Clarke (two Priest^) (...) that they could
not be guilty of Treason, because King James was not crowned: The Resolution
was, that the Coronation was but a Ceremony to declare the King to the People,
so they were adjudged Traitors. The like measure in the like case suffered the
Duke of Northumberland in Queen Maryes da^es, only with this difference;
Watsons and Clarks Treason was before the Coronation, but the Dukes before the
very Proclamation. Co^sensus expressu^ per verba de presenti facit matrimonium,
a contract in words of the present tense, is a true Marriage and indissolvable:
and yet for Solemnity sake, when the parties come to receive the Benediction of
the Church, The Minister though he knew of the cont^act, yet he asks will thou
have this Woman to thy Wedded Wife? There is no duty which our Kings do not
receive; as Oaths of Fealty, of Allegiance; no Acts of Royal Power which they
do not exercise, as amply before their Coronation as after. And therefore M.
Dolman (otherwise Parsons the Jesuit, from whom these Men have borrowed all
their grounds) erred most pitifully in this, (as he did in many other of your
Tenets,) that a King is no more a King before his Coronation, then a Major of a
Corporation is a true Major after his Election, before he have taken his Oath.
To think a few scattered People, assembled without any procuration have the
power of the Commonalty of England, is an Error fitter to be laughed at then to
be confuted.

Secondly, the words of the Oath (which bears marks enough in it self, of
the time when it was made) are not to be pressed further then Custom and
practice (the best Interpreters of the Law) do warrant, otherwise the Words
quas vulgus elegerit, cannot without much forcing be applied to the Parliament.
But admit the word vulgus might be drawn with some violence to signify the
House of Co^ons, by virtue of their representation: yet ho^ have the House of
Lords lost their interest, if the King be bo^nd to confirm whatsoever the
House of Commons shall present?

Thirdly, it cannot be denied, that if the King (...) bound by a lawful O^th
to pass all B^lls; it is not the form of denying it, but the not doing it,
which makes the p^rjury. Therefore the form of the King^ answer Le Roy
Savisera, can^ excuse the perjury in not doing. Ne^her does it prove that the
King had no power to deny, but that ^e is tender of a flat d^nyall, and
attributes so much to the judgment of His great Council, that he will take
further advice. This would be strange Doctrine, (indeed incredible) that all the
Kings of England who have given this answer have been forsworn, and neither
Parliament nor Convocation to take notice of it, in so many Ages, nor in the
not succeeding Parliament after so long advise to c^l for a further answer.

Fourthly, it is confessed that in Acts of Gra^, the King is not bound to
assent (it is well ^f he have not been restreined of this Right,) That in all
Acts where His Majesty is to dep^rt from the particular Right and Interest of
His Crown, he is not obliged to assent (and was not that of the Militia such a
case?) Lastly, that though he be bound by oath to consent, yet if he do not
consent, they are not binding Laws to the Subject. Thus farre-well But then
comes a handful of Gourds that poisons the pottage* except in cases of
necessi^. Give to any person o^ Socie^y a Legislative power without the King in
case of necessity; permit them withal to be sole Judges of necessity, when it
is, how long it lasts: and it is more then prob^ble the necessity will not
determine till they have their own desires, which is the same in effect as if
they had a Legislative Power. Necessity excuses whatsoever it does, but first
the necessity must be evident: there needs no such great stir who shall be
Judge of necessity, when it comes indeed, it will show it self; when extreme
necessity is disputable, it is a sign it is not real. Secondly, the Agent
must be proper, otherwise it cuts in ^under the very sinews of Government, to
make two Supremes in a Society, and to subject the People to contrary commands:
If the Trumpet give an uncertain sound, who shall prepare him self to Battle?
1 Cor. 1^
There can be no necessity so pernicious as this very Remedy.

Fifthly, the great variety of Forms and presidents seems to prove that one
precise form is not simply necessary: and the words adjiciantur quae justa
^erint, and King Henry the eights enterlining it with his own hand, do prove
that it is arbitrary at least in part. To interline it, to interline it with
his own hand, to leave it so interlined upon Record, O stange* If this clause
had been of such consequence, we should have heard of some question about it,
eit^er then or in some succeeding Parliament; but we find a deep silence.
Thomas (...) Archbishop of Canterbury, in Parliament charge Henry Stow p.
the fourth with his Oath which he did voluntarily make. But to the forms.
First, the Oath which King James and King Charles did take runns thus. Sir will
you to grant to hold and keep the Laws and rightful Customs which the
Commonalty of this Kingdom have. Here is neither have chosen, nor shall choose.
The Oath of Edward the sixth was this, Do you grant to make no new Laws, but
such a^ shall be to the Honor and glory of God, and to the good of the
Common-^lth, and that the same shall be made by the consent of your People, as
has been accustomed. Here is ^o ^gerit still, yet ^is Age freed him from the
very thught of improving His Prerogative. King Henry the eight corrected the
form then presented to Hi^ thus, And affirm them which the Nobles and People
have chosen with my consent. Here is have chosen and the Kings Consent added to
boot. Doctor Cow^ in his Interpreter, recites the Kings Oath out of t^ old
abridgement of Statu^es set out in Henry t^ eights Days much different from
this, as that the King should keep all the Lands Honors etc. of the ^rown
whole without diminution and reassume those wh^h had been made away. And this
clause in questin runs thus, He shall grant to hold the Laws and Customs of
the Realm, and to his Power keep them and affirm them, which the Folk and
People have made and chosen; and this seems to have been the Oath of His
Predecessors. But perhaps if we look up highe^ we shall find a perfect
agreement in thi^ point. Our next step must be to Henry the fourth and Richard
the second, a Tragical Time when the State run contrary waves like a
whirligigge, fi^ter for the honor of the Nation to be buried in oblivion then
drawn into president. But this Oath being no Innovation, it may serve well
enough. Yet the Oaths of these two Kings do not agree so exactly as to settle a
certain form, as to instance only in the clause in question: Henry the
^ourths Oath runs thus, concedis justas Leges and constudines esse tenendas,
and promittis pro te eas esse pro^gendas and ad honorem Dei corrobora^d quas
vulgus ^gerit: which last word signifies indifferently either ^ave chosen or
shall choose. Neither does the Re^ord say that this was the very (...) taken by
Henry ^e fourth, but that it was the usual for^ taken by ^e Kings of England,
and twice by Richard the ^econd, and for proof of what it says, referres us ^o
the Registers of the Archbishops or Bishops pro^t in libris ponti^calium
Archiepis^. et Episc. before ^ontinetur This prout is a clear evidence that
this pre^se Form had no ground in Statute or in Common ^aw, but was a
Pontifical rite. The Oath of Ri^hard the second, related in the close Rolls of
the first Year of his Reign, even in this very clause differs ^n two material
things: one is, that to justas Leges and Consuetudines, there is added
Ecclesiae: the other is, that to elegerit is added just and rationabiliter*
which the People have chosen or shall choose justly and reasonably: which
limitation, if the Oath look forward to future Laws, must of necessity be
either expressed or understood, otherwise the Oath is unlawful and does not
bind, jusjurandum non debet esse vinculum iniquitatis. Here also the word
elegerit is doubtful whether past or future. If it be urged that to
corroborate must de understood of such Laws as have not passed the Royal
Assent; the answer is easy, that the best confirmation of Laws is the due
execution of them. Now from our English and Latin Forms, our last step is to
the French, which was taken by Edward the second and Edward the third, (as it
is said) and runs thus. Sire grantes vo^ a tenir and garder lesleys and l^s
custumes droiture les les q^ else la communante de vostre Royaume aur es^u and
les de^ fenderer and afforcerer al honn^ur de dieu a vostre po^ First how it
shall appear that this Oath was taken by Edward the second and Edward the
third, we are ye^ to seek. A Bishops Pontifical, and much more (...) Heralds
notes taken cursorily at a Coronation, do^ not seem to be sufficient Records
nor convincing proof in our Law: And Bracton who lived about the same times
sets down the Oath otherwise. Deb^ Rex in Coronatione sua in nomine Jesus
Christi pr^stito Bracton lib. (...) cap. 9.
Sacramento, haec tria promittere populo sibi Subdito; primo se praecepturum
and pro viribus impen^urum, ut Pax Ecclesiae and omni populo Christiano omni
suo tempore observetur: Secundo ut omnes rapacitate^ and omnes iniquitates
omnibus gradibus interdicat, Tertio ut in omnibus judiciis aequitatem
praecipiat and misericordiam. Here is neither have chosen nor shall choose.
Secondly, though the French do agree with the Latin much for Sense and
substance, yet it is not the same Form. Thirdly the King grants to defend the
Laws and Customs, but it is no Law till it has received Royal Assent, it i^
no Custom till it be confirmed by a lawful prescription. Fourthly, that the
word Elect is joined immediately to Customs, which seems not so proper if
reddendo singula singulis, it ought to be referred to Laws and not to Custom.
Fifthly, what the Norman French may differ from the Parisian, or both of them
then from what they are now, or both then and now from our Law French, I cannot
determine: But take it at the worst, the words in question aur eslu make less
for the Observer then (...) it self, and do^ ^gnifie have chosen, or in the
most Gramm^ticall Pe^nticall construction that can be m^de shall have (...);
whereas if it were shall choose, it should be (...) or (...). If the Herald
did take his notes as ^l as he translates, his remembrances are but of small
^oment. Before all these Forms I read of others (...) late Authors (for I
have not opportunity to see ^e original Records,) as that of King Richard the
^rst, agreeing much with Bracton. To o^rve ^eace honor and Reverence to
Almighty God, to his Church and to the Ministers of the same, To administer Law
and justice equally to all, To abrogate evil Laws and ^ustoms and to m^intein
good. Here is indeed a refe^ence to future Law^, but no dep^ndence on other
^ens judgments. And to this King John's Oath ^ame nearest of any Form yet
mentioned, though ^ot exactly the same as differing in the first clause in
^his, To love and defend the Catholic Church.

To sum up all th^n in a word, First, here is no cer^ain form to be found.
Secondly, for those Forms that are, the Parliament Rolls refer us to the
Bi^hops Register. Thirdly, few of those Forms have ^e word elegerit or ^hoose
in them, and those that ^ave it, haveit doubtfully, either have chosen or shall
choose. Fourthly, admitting the signification to be fu^ure, yet the Limitation
which is expressed in the Oath of Richard the second just and rationabiliter,
justly and ^easonably, must of necessity be understood in all, otherwise the
oath is unlawful in it self, to oblige the King to p^rform unjust and
unreasonable Propositions, and binds not: Whether it be expressed or
understood, it leaves to the King a latitude of Judgment, (...) examine what
is just and reasonable, and to follow the Dictate of his own understanding; the
practice of a^ Parliaments in all Ages confirms this exposition Lastly,
admitting, but not granting, the word eleger^ to be future, and admitting that
the limitation o^ just and rationabili^er could be suspended, yet it would not
bind the King to confirm all Laws that are ten^dred, but only excl^sively to
impose no other Laws o^ his Subjects, but such as shall be presented and
approve^ in Parliament. I^ has been questioned by some (...) whom the
Legisl^ive Power did rest by Law, whether in the King (^lone as some old Forms
do see^ to insinuate,) Co^ssimus, Rex concedit, Rex ordina^ Rex statuit,
D^inus Rex de communi suo concil^ statuit, Dominus ^ex in Parliamento statuit,)
or i^ the King and P^liament jointly* And what is the power of Parlia^ents in
Legisl^tion, Receptiv^ Consultive, Ap^obative, or Cooperative. An^ whether the
ma^g of Laws by Parliament be (a^ some have said) (...) merciful Policy to
prevent complaints not alter^le without great peril; or (as (...) seems
rather) a^ absolute requisite in Law and (...) matter of necessity, there being
sundry Acts infer^ our to Law-mak^g, which our Lawyers declare i^valid, unless
the^ be done by King and Parliamen^ Yet howsoever it be, abundans Cautela non
nocet, for greater Caution it yields more satisfaction to the People to give
such an Oath, that if the King ha^ no such power he would ^ot usurp it, if he
had suc^ a Power, yet he would not assume it. And this (...) clearly the sense
of that oath of Edward the six^ That he would make no new Laws but by the
consent of His People, as had been accustomed. And this may be the meaning of
the clause in the Statute, Since the Law of the Realm is such, that upon the
Mischiefs 25 Edv. 3.
and Damages which happen to this Realm, He is bound by his Oath with the
accord of His People in His Parliament, thereof to make Remedy and Law. Though
it is very true, that this being admitted (as then it was) to be a Law in Act,
the King is bound by another clause in his Oath, and even by this word elegerit
in the perfect tense has chosen, as well or rather more then if it were in the
future shall choose. And so it follows in that Statute plainly, that there was
a Statute Law, a Remedy then in force not repealed, which the King was bound by
his Oath to cause to ^e kept, though by sufferance and negligence it has been
sinc^ attempted to the contrary. So the Obligation there intended, is to the
execution of an old Law not the making of a new. Richard the second confesses
that he was bound by his oath to pass a new grant to the Justices of Peace.
But first it appears not that this was a new Bill: Secondly, if it did, yet
Richard the second was then but fourteen years old: And thirdly, if his age
had been more mature, yet if the thing was just and beneficial to the People,
without prejudice to the rights of his Crown, and if his own reason did dictate
so to him, he might truly say that he was bound to do it both by His Oath and
his Office. Yet his Grandfather Edward the third revoked a Statute, because it
wa^ prejudicial anno 15. E^ward. 3.
to the rights of his Crown, and was made without his free consent.

Observer.
That which results from hence is, if our Kings receive all Royalty from the
People, and for the behoof of the People, and that by a special trust of
safety and Liberty expressly by the people limited, and by their own grants and
Oaths ratified, then ^ur Kings cannot b^ said to have so inconditionate and
high a propriety in all our Life's, Libertyes and Possessions, or in any thing
else to the Crown apperteining, as we have in their dignity or in our selves,
and indeed if they had, they were ^ot born for the People, but merely for
themselves, neither were it lawful or natural for them to expose their Life's
and Fortunes for their Country, as they have been bound hitherto to do
according to that of our Savior, Bonus Pastor ponit vitam pro o^ibus,

Answer.
Ex his praemissis necessario sequitur collusio. All your main Pillars are
broken reeds, and your Building ^ct. 13.
must needs fall: For our Kings do not receive all Royalty from the People,
nor only for the behoof of the People, but partly for the People, partly for
themselves and theirs, and principally for Gods glory: Those conditionate
reservations and limitation^ which you fancy, are but your own drowsy dreams;
neither does His Majesty's Charter, nor can His Oath extend to any such
fictitious privilege as you devise: The propriety which His Majesty has in our
Life's, Libertyes, and Estates, is of public Dominion not of private
Possession: His interest in things apperteining to the Crown is both of
Dominion and Possession: the right which we have in him is not a right of
Dominion over him, but a right of Protection from him and under him: and this
very right of Protection which he owes to us, and we may expect from him, shows
clearly that he is born in (...) for his People, and is a sufficient ground
for him to expose his Life and Fortunes to the extremest perils for his
Country. The Authors inference, that it is not lawful or natural according
to these grounds, is a silly and ridiculous collection, not unlike unto his
similitude from the Shepherd whom all men know to have an absolute and
inconditionate Dominion over his Sheep, yet is he bound to expose his Life for
them.

Observer.
But now of Parliaments. Parliaments have the same efficient cause as
Monarchies, if not higher: For in truth the whole Kingdom is not so properly
the Author as the essence it self of Parliaments, and by the former Rule it
is magis tale, because we see ipsum quid quod efficit tale. And it is I think
beyond all Controversy, that God and the Law operate as the same causes both in
Kings and Parliaments, for God favors both, and the Law establishes both, and
the act of Men still concurres in the sustentation of both. And not to stay
longer on this, Parliaments have also the same final ^use as Monarchies, if
not greater, for indeed public Safety and Liberty could not be so effectually
provided for by Monarchs, till Parliaments were constituted, for supplying of
all defects in that Government.

Answer.
The Observer having showed his teeth to Monarchs, ^ct. 14.
now he comes to fawn upon Parliaments: the Italians have a proverb, He that
speaks me fairer then he uses to do, either has deceived me or he would
deceive me. Queen Elizabeth is now a Saint with our Schismatic Mar-Prelates;
but when she was alive, those railing Rabshekehs did match her with Ahab and
Jeroboam: now their tongues are silver Trumpets to sound out the praises of
Parliaments; it is not long since they reviled them as fast, calling them
Courts without Conscience or Equity. God bless Parliaments, and grant they may
do nothing unworthy of themselves or of their name, which was Senatus
Sapientum: The commendation of bad men, was the just ground of a wise man's
fear. But let us examine the parculars. Parliaments (you say) have the same
efficient cause as Monarchies, if not higher, (it seems you are not resolved
whether) Higher? How should that be? unless you have devised some Hierarchy of
Angels in Heaven to overtoppe God, as you have found out a Court Paramount
over his Vicegerent in Earth. But you build upon your old sandy Foundation,
that all Kings derive their power from the People. I must once more tell you,
the Monarchy of this Kingdom is not from the People as the efficient, but from
the King of Kings. The only Argument which I have seen pressed with any show
of probability (which yet the Observer has not met with) is this, That upon
deficiency of the Royal Line, the Dominion escheats to the People as the Lord
Paramount. A mere mistake, they might even as well say, that because the Wife
upon the death of her Husband is loosed from her former obligation, and is free
either to continue a Widow, or to elect a new Husband, that therefore her
Husband in his Life time did derive his Dominion from Her, and that by his
Death, Dominion did escheat to Her as to the Lady Paramount: yet if all this
were admitted it proves but a respective Equallity. Yes, you add that the
Parliament is the very essence of the Kingdom, that is to say, the cause of
the King, and therefore by your Lesbian Rule of quod efficit tale it is in it
self more worthy and more powerful. Though the Rule be nothing to the
purpose, yet I will admit it and join issue with the Observer; whether the
King or the Parliament be the cause of the other, let that be more worthy. That
the King is the cause of the Parliament, is as evident as the Noonday light;
He calls them, He dissolves them, they are His Council, by virtue of His writ
they do (otherwise they cannot) sit: That the Parliament should be the cause
of the King, is as impossible as it is for Shem to be Noah's Father. How many
Kings in the World have never known Parliament, neither the name, nor the
thing? Thus the Observer, In the infancy of the World most Nations did choose
rather to submit themselves to the discretion of their Lords, then to rely
upon any Limits; And* little after, yet long it was ere the bounds and
conditions of Supreme Lords, were so wisely determined, (...) quietly conserved
as now they are. It is apparent then, Kings were before Parliaments even in
time: Ou^ French Authors do affirm, that their Kingdom^ was governed for
many Ages by Kings without Parliaments happily and prosperously; Phillip the
fair^ was the first Erecter of their Parliaments of Paris and Mountpelliers. As
for ours in England, will you hea^ Master Stow our Annalist; thus he in the
sixteenth of Henry the first, in the name of our Historiographers, not as his
own private opinion, This do the^ Historiographers note, to be the first
Parliament i^ England, and that the Kings before that time were never wont to
call any of their Commons or People (...) Council or Law making. It may be the
first held by the Norman Kings, or the first held after the Norman manner, or
the first where the people appeared by Proctors, yet we find the name of
Parliament before this, either so called then indeed, or by a P^olepsis as
Lavinia Littora. And not to contend about the name, this is certain, that long
before in the days of the Saxon Kings, there was the Assembly of Wise Men or
Mickle Synod, having an Analogy with our Parliaments, but differing from them
in many things. So does that Parliament in Henry the first his time differ from
ours now: Then the Bishops had their votes in the House of Lords, now they have
none; Then Proctors of the Clergy had their Suffrages in the House of Commons,
now they are excluded; Then there were many more Barons then there are now
Burgesses, every Lord of a Manor ^ho had a Court Baron was a Parliament man
natus ^y right; Then they came on general summons, after upon special Writ.
But both the one and the ^ther were posteriour to Kings, both in the order ^f
nature and of time: How should it be otherwise? ^he end of Parliaments is to
temper the violence of ^overaigne Power, the Remedy must needs be later then ^e
Disease, much more then the right Temper. ^egenerate Monarchy becomes Tyranny,
and the cure ^f Tyranny is the mixture of Governments; Parliments are proper
adjuments to Kings; Parliaments ^ere constituted to supply the defects in that
Government, says the Observer himself; here you may apply your Rule to
purpose, that the end is more ^xcellent then the means. I deny therefore that
the ^ingdome is the essence of Parliaments: there is a ^hreefold Body of the
State, the essential Body, ^he representative Body, and the virtuall Body: the
^ssentiall Body is the diffused company of the whole Nobility, Gentry,
Commonalty throughout the King^ome; the representative Body are the Lords,
Cit^yzens and Burgesses in Parliament assembled and in^rusted: the Virtuall
Body is His Majesty, in whom ^ests the life of Authority and power legislative,
exe^utive virtually: yet so as in the exercise of some ^rts of it, there are
necessary requisites, the consent and concurrence of the representative Body.
From this mistaken ground the Observer draws fundry erroneous conclusions,
Posito uno absurdo sequuntur ^mille.

Hence proceeds his Complaint, That severance has been made betwixt the
Parties chosen and the Parties choosing, and so that that great privilege of
all privileges, that unmovable Basis of all Honor and power, whereby the
House of Commons claims the entire right of all the Gentry and Commonalty of
England, has been attempted to be shaken. A power of representation we grant
respective to some ends, as to consent to new laws, to grant Subsidies, to
impeach Offenders, to find out and present grievances, and whatsoever else is
warranted by lawful Customs; but an entire right to all intents and purposes
against Law and lawful Custom we deny. An entire right, what to out Wifes and
Children, to our Lands and Possessions? this is not tolerable.

Hence also he tells Magistrally enough, of an arbitrary Power in the
Parliament, That there is an arbitrary Power in every State somewhere, it is
true, ^is necessary and no inconvenience follows upon it, every man has an
arbitrary power over him self, so every State has an arbitrary power over it
self, and there is no Danger in it; for the same reason, if the State entrust
this to one Man, or few there may be danger, but the Parliament is neither one
nor few, it is indeed the State it self. Now the Mask is off, you have spunne
a fair thread, is this the end of all your goodly pretenses? if this be your
new Learning, God deliver all true English men from it: We chose you to be our
Proctors not to be our Lords: We challenge the Laws of England as our
Birthright and Inheritance, and dislike Arbitrary Government much in one, but
twenty times worse in more. There is no Tyranny like many-headed Tyranny: when
was ^ver so much Blood shed and Rapine under one Tyrant, as under three in the
Triumvirate? And the more they are, still of necessity there will be more
^ngagements of Love and Hatred and Covetousness and Ambition, the more packing
and conniving one with another, the more Danger of Factious and Seditious
tumults, as if the evils of one Form of Government were not sufficient,
except we were overwhelmed with the deluge of them all; and he that is most
popular (who is most commonly the worst) will give Laws to the rest. Therefore
it has ever been accounted safer to live under one Tyrant then many: The Lust,
Covetousness, Ambition, Cruelty, of one, may be sooner satisfied then of many,
and especially when the power is but temporary and not hereditary nor of
continuance: We see Farmers which have a long term, will husband their grounds
well; but they that are but Tenants at will, plough out the very heart of it.
No Sir (I thank you) we will none of your Arbitrary Government. And supposing,
but no way granting, that the Parliament were the essential Body of this
Kingdom, or (which is all one) were endowed with all the power and Privileges
thereof to all intents and purposes; yet it had no Arbitrary Power over it
self, in such things as are contrary to the Allegiance which it owes to His
Majesty, and contrary to its Obligation to the received Laws and Customs of
this Land.

Hence be ascribes to Parliaments a power to call Kings to an account, hear
himself, That Princes may not be now beyond all Limits and Laws by any
private Persons, the whole community in its underived Majesty shall convene to
do justice. Here we have it expressly, that the Parliament is the whole
Commun^ty, that it has a Majesty, that this Majesty (...) underived, that it
has power ^o ^ry Princ^s, ^e (...) do justice upon them. Hit^erto we have
misunderstood Saint Peter, Submit your selfs to every Ordinance of Man for the
Lord sake, whether it be to t^ Pet. 12. 3.
King as Supreme. It seems the Parliament^ which passed the Oaths of Supremacy
and Allegiance, did no^ understand their own right, till (...) third Cato
dropp^d from Heaven to inform them: And above all, o^ Nonconformist Ministers
in their sol^e Protestation are deep^st in this guilt, w^o affirm so
confidently, that for the King ^ot to assume (...) or for the Church to deny
it, were (...) Yea, though the Statutes of the Kingdom should de^ it unto Him.
What man his fellow Subject^ expe^ from the O^server, who is ^o saucy with his
Sovereign? But before I leave thi^ poi^t, I desire to be informed (...) this
new Doctrine agrees with that undeniable principle of our Law, The King can do
(...) wrong? The Observer glosseth it thus. That He can do no wrong de jure,
but de facto he may; which is the drowsi^st dreaming devise, that ^ver dropped
from any Man^ pen in his right Wits: Judas or the Devil himself can do no
wrong de jure, unless both (...) of a contradiction can be true: A fair
Privilege to give a Prince, which a high way Thief may challenge. It may with
more probabillity be expounded thus, That the King is to discharge the public
Aff^ires of the Kingdom, not by himself, but by His Officer^ and Ministers*
therefore if any thing be amiss or unjust, they are faulty, they are
accouncountable for it, not He. But there seems to be something more in this
principle then thus: For first (...) the same reason a man might say the King
can do no right, if he can do nothing by himself, he ^s not capable of such
thanks as Tertull^ gave to Acts. 24. 2^
^elix: Secondly, it would be very strange, that a King should be excluded from
the personal discharge of all manner of duties belonging to his high calling,
and might occasion the renewing of the Woman's complaint against Philip of
M^edon, why then art ^hou King? this were to make His Majesty ano^er
Childerick, one of the old Ciphers or titulary Kings of France, and put all the
power into the hands of a Major of the Palace, or a Marshall, or some other
Subjects. What is it then? there ^ust be something more in this old Maxim of
^ur Law, that The King can do no wrong. And it ^s thi^ doubtless, that in the
intendment of Law his Person is sacred, he is freed from all defects, (as
though he be a Mino^ or an Infant, yet in the eye of ^he Law he is always of
full age,) he owes account of his doings to God alone, the Law has no coercive
power over him. This is that which Samuel calls The Law of the Kingdom, not to
show what a King may lawfully do, but what a Subject ought to bear from a
lawful King. To the alone have I sinned, said David; he had trespassed against
Uriah and Bathsheba, yet he says to thee only have I sinned, quia R^x erat,
because he was a King, and accountable to none but God, as Clemens
Alexandrinus, Arno^ius, Saint Jerome, Saint Ambrose, Venerable Bede, Euthymius,
and sundry others do all affirm upon this one place: and Gregory of Towers, Si
quis de nobis, If anyone of us O King, do pass the bounds of justice, you
have power to correct him, but if you exceed your limits who shall chastise
you? We may speak to you, if you list not hearken, who can condemn you, but
that great God, who has pronounced himself to be Righteousness. And even
Antoninus whom the Observer so much commends for a renowned and moderate
Prince, yet is positive in this, Solus Deus Iudex Principis esse potest, God
alone can be Judge of a Sovereign Prince. In the Parliament at Lincoln, under
Edward the first, the Lords and Commons unanimously affirm the same, with a
wonder that any Man should conceive otherwise, That the King of England neither
has answered, nor ought to answer for his Right, before any Judge
Ecclesiastical or Secular, ex praeeminentia status sui, by reason of the
pre-eminence of His Regal Dignity, and Custom at all times inviolably
observed.

To try Princes and to do justice; Some man would desire to know how far
this Justice may be extended? whether peradventure to depose them and dethrone
them, to exalt them and depresse them, Constituere destituere, construere
destruere, fingere diffingere? But for this they must expect an Answer from the
Observer by the next post, when he sees how the people will dance after his
pipe, and whether his misled Partners will go along the whole journey or leave
his Company in the mid way; when he has sufficient strength, then it is time
and not before to declare himself: Till then he will be a good child, and
follow Saint Paul's advice in part; Stoppage is no payment in our Law. Suppose
the Prince faile^ ^n his duty, are the Subjects therefore free from that
^bligation which is imposed upon them by the Law of God and Nature? When His
Majesty objects that a deposition is threatened, at least intim^ted, what does
the Observer answer? he does not disclaim the power but only deny the fact:
Thus he says, It may truly be denied that ever free Parliament, did truly
consent to the dethroning of any King of England, for that Act whereby Richard
the second was dethroned, was rather the Act of Henry the fourth and His
victorious Army, then of the whole Kingdom. Mark these words, that any free
Parliament. So, it seems that some Parliaments are not free: And again did
truly consent, there may be much in that word also; First, whether they who
are overawed with power of unruly Mermidons, may be said to consent truly and
ex animo? Secondly, whether they who consent merely for hope of impunity to
escape questioning for their former oppressions and extortions, may be said to
consent truly? Thirdly whether they who consent out of hope to divide the
spoil, may be said to consent truly? Fourthly, whereas by the Law of Nations,
the rights and voices of Absentees, do devolve to those that are present; if
they be driven away by a just and probable fear, whether they may be said to
consent truly? Lastly, they that follow the Collier in his Creed by an an
implicit Faith without discussion resolving themselves into the Authority of a
Committee or some noted Members, may they be said to consent truly? That which
follows of Henry the fourth and his victorious Army, shows the Observer to be
as great an Heritick in ^olicy as Machiavell himself: he (...) better have
said the Usurper and his rebellious A^my. For a Subject ^o raise A^ against his
Sovereign, to dethrone him (as Bullenbrooke did,) and b^ violence to snatch
the Crown to him self in preju^ of the right Heire^, is Treason confessed by
all men* His acquisition is mere usurpation, and for any Person or Society of
Men to join with him, or to confirm^ him is to be partakers of his sin. But
Gods judgemen^ pursue such disloyal Subjects and their posterity, as it did
them. The greatest Contrivers and Actors in that Rebellion, for a just Reward
of their Treason, did first feel the edge of Henryes victorious Sword, and
after them Henry's Posterity, and the whole English Nation sm^rted for Richards
blood. It is o^served that all the Conspirators against Julius Caesar, perished
within three years, some by judgment of Law, others by Ship-wracke upon the
Sea, others by battle under the sword of their conquering Enemies, others with
the fame bo^k in wherewith they had stabbed their Emperor; one way or other
vengeance o ertooke them every Man. What others say of Richards resignation, is
as weak, which was done by duresse and imprisonment, or at the best for fear
of imminent Mischief.

To conclude this Section; God and the Law operate both in Kings and
Parliaments: but not in both alike. God is the immediate cause of Kings, the
remote of Parliaments. Kings and Parliaments have the same ultimate and
Architectonicall end, that is, the tranquillity of the whole Body Politic:
but not the same proper and next ends, which in the Parliament is to advise the
King, supply the King, and (...) the constitu^ion of new Laws to concur with
the ^ng: I grant (to spe^ke in his Majestyes own words ^s more full then the
Observers,) That Parliaments are so essential a part of the constitution of
this Kingdom, that we can a^ein ^o happiness without them. But to conclude
from hence their Sup^riority above Kings, or equality with Kings, is to subject
the principal efficient to every secund^ry cause, subordinate, i^strumentall,
or sine qua^on.

Observer.
Two things are aimed at in Parliaments, not to be at^eined to by other means.
First, that the interest of the People might be satisfied, Secondly, that Kings
might ^e better counseled. In the summons of Edward the first (claus. 7. 111.
3. dors.) we see the first end of Parliaments expressed: for he inserts in the
writ, that whatsoever affair is of public concernment, ought to receive
^ublicke approbation, quod omnes tang (...), ab omnibus approba^i debet or
tract^ri. And in the same writ he since, this is Lex notissima and provida
circumspectione stabilita, there is not a word here but it is observable,
public approbation, consent or treaty is necessary in all public
expedients, and this is not a mere usage in England but a Law, and this Law is
not subject to any doubt or disp^e, there is nothing more known, neither is
this known Law extorted from Kings, by the violence and injustice of the
people, it is duly and formally established, and that (...) a great deal of
^eason, not with^t the providence and circumspection of all the States. Were
there no further Antiquity then the Reign d^ Edward the first to recommend
this to us, certainly s^ there ought to be no reverence withheld from it, for
this Prince was Wise, Fortunate, just and valiant b^yond all his Predecessors,
if not Successors also, and therefore it is more glory to our Freedoms that as
weak and peevish Princes have most opposed them, so that he first repaired the
breaches, which the conquest had made upon them. And yet it is very probable,
that this La^ was far ancienter then his Reign, and the words Le^ stabilita
and notissima seems to intimate, that the Conquest it self had never wholly
buried this in the public ruin and confusion of the State. It should seem at
this time Llewellins troubles in Wales were not quite suppressed, and the
French King was upon a design (...) invade some pieces of ours in France, and
therefore he sends out his summons, ad tr^ctandum, ordinandum, faciendum, cum
prelatis (...) and aliis incolis Regni, for the prevention of these dangers.
These words tractandum, ordinandum, faciendum, do fully prove that the people
in those days were summoned ad consensum as well as consilium, and this Law
quod omnes tangit etc. shows the reason and ground upon which that consent and
approbation is founded.

Answer.
The Observer is just like a winter Brook, which ^ct. 15.
swells with water when there is no need, but in summer when it should be
useful, is dried up: for all the absurd Paradoxes which he brings in this
treatise, he produces not one Authority but his own; and here to confirm a
known truth which no man de^es, he cites Rolls and adornes them with his
glosses. ^r my part I know no man that did ever en^y or ^aligne the honor of
Edward the first, except Io^nnes Major, who was angry with him for his Nor^ren
Expedition, Edvardus Longshankes c^m long^s ^biis suis venit in Scotiam. But
what is this to your ^rpose? yes, it makes for the glory of our Freedoms, ^at
as weak and peevish Princes opposed them, so he re^ired the breaches of them:
How do you know that? (...) this summons also? I see you are dextrous, and ^n
soon make an ell of an inch: but in truth you are ^ry unfortunate in your
instances, Edward the first ^as a much greater Improver of the Royalty then ^y
of his Predecessors, in which respect he is styled ^y our Chroniclers, the
first Conqueror after the Con^erer. That which was urged to his Fathers, was
^ever that I read of tendered to him, for the Parlia^ent to have the nomination
of the chief Justice, ^hancellour, and Treasurer, but only once in his ^hole
time, and then being rejected with a frown ^as never moved more. It is more
probable or rather ^pparent, that the Lenity, irresolution, and mutable
^isposition of Princes, have been that which has im^oldened Subjects to make
insolent and presumptu^us demands to their Sovereigns.

Thus for the Man, you are as ample for the Law, that it is Lex notissima, and
not only notissima but stabilita, lastly stabilita provida circumspectione. A
trim gradation, quid tanto dignum feret Observator hiatu? who reads this and
believes not that some great mountain is traveling? yet in very deed it is
with nothing but a ridiculous mouse: postquam incruduit p^ na, after the fray
grows hot, dishes and trenchers a^ turned to weapons, said Erasmus. Let your
La^ speak itself, That which con^erns all Men ought to (...) approved or
handled by all Men. Who denies it? (...) shall easily grant you that this Law
is not only a^ cienter then the first Edward, but even as ancient (...) the
first Adam; a part of the Law of Nature, (...) least in the grounds of it. But
that you may not s^ away in a mist of Generalities, (as it is your use) o^ word
of your tangit, another of your approbari debe^ That which concerns all Men,
Sir all Men may be sai^ to be concerned two ways, either in the consequen^ of
affairs, or in the management thereof. This latt^ concernment gives a right
sometimes to counsel only sometimes both to counsel and approve, sometime
both to counsel approve and act according to the private constitutions of
Societyes, but the former implies no right, neither ad approbandum nor yet ad
tractandum. As for example, the meanest Freshmen ar^ concerned in the Statures
and Orders of the University; yet are none admitted to deba^e them but the
Visiters, Heads, and at the lowest the Regent Masters. And this exception holds
in all cases, where either Inferiors or their Predecessors have legally
divested themselves of this power by their proper act, or where this trust is
committed to Superiors, by the Laws divine, natural, or national.

Secondly the Counsel, Consent, or act of Proctors, Atturnyes, and generally
of all Trustees, whether one or more, whether rightfully elected or imposed,
according to the latitude of their trust ought to be interpreted as the
counsel, consent, act of thos^ ^ersons by whom, or over whom, or for whom they
^e so trusted, and whose power virtually they do re^ine. So as a present and
posteriour consent, is not ^cessary to His Majesty, for the exercise of any
^anch of that Imperial power, which by Law or ^wfull custom, is annexed to
his Crown. And ^erefore Edward the first his Summons ad tractandum, ^dinandum,
faciendum, which is the same in effect ^ith all summons since, will do your
cause no good (...) the world, unless you may have leave to do as ^e Devil
did with Christ, leave out in viis tuis: (...) you may put out in quibus dam
and thrust in place ^ereof in omnibus, as you do in the next page, In ^ll
things perteining to the People. Leave these fri^olous these false suggestions;
your own-Conscience ^nnot but tell you, that reddendo singula singulis, in
^omethings the Houses of Parliament have power ^o consent, in somethings to
order, in somethings to ^ct, but in all things they have neither power to act,
^or order, nor consent, and that will appear by your ^ext Section.

Observer.
It is true we find in the Reign of Edward the third, that the Commons did
desire that they might forbear counselling in things, de queux ils nount p^s
cognizance; the matters in debate were concerning some intestine commotions,
the guarding of the Marches of Scotland, and the Seas; and therein they
renounce not their right of consent, they only excuse themselves in point of
counsel, referring it rather to the King and his Council How this shall
derogate from Parliaments either in poi^ of consent or counsel, I do not
know, for at last the they did give both, and the King would not be satisfie^
without them. And the passage evinces no more but this that the King was very
wise and warlike, and had a very wis^ Council of War, so that in those
particulars, the Commons thought them most fit to be consulted, as perhaps the
more knowing men.

Answer.
This is the first time that the Observer is pleased to ^ect. 16.
honor his adverse Party, with the mention of one Objection; and that with so
ill success, that he cannot unty the knot again with all his teeth, I will put
it into form for him thus; That which the Parliament in the reign of Edward
the third had not, that no succeeding Parliament has, but that Parliament had
no universal cognizance, Therefore the same Rule holds in this and all other
Parliaments. The Proposition is infallibly true, grounded upon an undeniable
Maxim, that quod competit tali qua tali, competit omni tali, that which is
true of one Parliament not by accident, but essentially as it is a Parliament,
must of necessity be true of every Parliament. The Assumtion is as evident,
confessed by the Parliament itself, who best knew the extent of their own
power, that there was somethings of which ils nount pas cognizance, they had no
cognizance. And if we will believe the Observer, these things which did not
belong to their cognizanc^, were the appeasing some intestine or Civil
Commotions, and the guarding of the Seas and Marches: why, these are the very
case now in question concerning the Militia. And does a Parliament here
confess that they have no cognizance of these? yes, what says the Observer to
this? he says they do not renounce their right, but only excuse themselves
in point of Counsel; Most absurdly, as if there were either consent or
counsel without cognizance. But he says they did give both consent and
counsel, and the King could not be satisfied without them. It may be so: but
there is a vast difference between giving counsel when the King licenseth, yea
and requires it; and intruding into Counsel without calling: between an
approbative consent such as the Saints give to God Almighty, the only
Authoritative Judge of Heaven and Earth; and an active consent, without which
the Kings hands should be so tied that he could do just nothing. The former all
good Kings do desire, so far as the exigence of the service will give way to
have their Counsels communicated: But the latter makes a great King a Cipher
and transformes an Emperor into a Christmasse Lord. You tell us, that King had
a very wise Council of War, and perhaps more knowing in these things then
the Commons. It were strange if they should not be so, if the Commons who are
Srangers to the affairs and engagements of State, should understand them
better then those who have served sundry Apprentiships in that way: qui pauca
considerat facile pronunciat, he that knows not or regards not the
circumstances, gives sentence easily, but for the most part is mistaken.
Ignorance of the true state of things, begets Iealousies and Fe^es where there
are no Dangers, and confidence wh^e the Peril is nearest: It makes a field of
thistles (...) Army of pikes, and an Army of pikes a field of thi^les. Let old
Statesmen sit at the Helm still, a^ steer the Ship of the Commonwealth.
The Co^ons are the best Council in the World for redre^ng of grievances, for
making of new Laws, for ^inteining the public interest of the Kingdom ab^d,
and private interest of the Subject at home; ^et this be their Work and their
Honor.

Observer.
Now upon a d^ comparing of these passages, with some of the Kings la^e papers,
let the World judge whether Parliaments have ^ot been of late much lesned and
injured. The King in one of his late Answers alledge^, that his Writs may teach
the Lords and Commons the extent of their Commission and Trust, which is to be
Counselors not Commanders, and that not in all things, but in quibusdam
arduis, and the case of Wentworth is cited, who was by Queen Elizabeth
committed (sitting the Parliament) for proposing that they might advise the
Queen in some things, which she thought beyond their cognizance, although
Wentworth was then of the House of Commons. And in other places, the King
denies the Assembly of the Lords and Commons, to be rightly named a Parliament,
or to have any power of any Court, and consequently to be any thing but a mere
convention of private Men.

Many things are here ass^rted utterly destructive to the Honor, Right and
being of Parliaments. For first because the Law has trusted the King with a
Prerogative to discontinus Parliaments etc.

Answer.
Having laid these former ground^, the Observer Sect. 17
proceeds to some exceptions, against some passages in his Majestyes Papers,
(that is his phrase) as if they were old Almanacks out of date, fit for nothing
but to cover Mustard pots, metuentia carmina scombros aut thus. His first
exception is, that His Majesty is trusted by the Law, (which the Observer calls
now a formallity of Law, with a Prerogative to discontinue Parliaments, leaving
no remedy to the People in such a case, which he says is destructive to the
Honor, Right and being of Parliaments, and may yet be mischi^vous in the
future dissolution of them, and make our Trienniall Parliaments of little
service, if it be not exploded now. What is this to the Observers grounds or
His Majestyes Declaration? This is rather an exception against the Law it self
then the King: So the Observer and his pewfellowes deal with Laws and
Lawmakers; if they make for them, suscipiunt ut Aquilas, they admire them as
Eagles, if they make against them despici^nt ut graculos, they despise them as
Dawes, the Fundamental Constitutions of the Kingdom, must be straight
exploded, the Law is become a Formallity. Are you in earnest Sir, that this is
destructive to Parliaments? you might have said more truly the productive
cause of all Parliaments, that ever were in England, or of any Assembly that
had an Analogy with Parliaments, I took you only for a Reformer of some abuses
newly crept in: but it is plain, you intend to be another Licurgus, to alter
the whole frame of Government. Truly Sir you begin very high, and jumpe over
the backs of a great many Generations at once: Doubtless you are either very
wise, or have a great opinion of your own Wisdom. But to the point, It is
confessed that sometimes some evils do flow from inconsiderate trust, but
many more from needless Jealousy. incommoda non solvunt Regulam,
Inconveniences do not abrogate a Law. Restraint commonly makes p^ssion more
violent. When you have done what you can, there must be a trust either reposed
in one or many; and better in one then many. Do but look home a little,
without trust a Man knows not his own Father; without trust a man knows not
his own Children. Some trust there must be, and who fitter to be trusted then
he that has the Supremacy of power: unless you will make two Supremes. You
confess that Parliaments ought to be used as Physic, not as constant Diet.
And the Law has ^ow set down a fair term for the continuance of an ordinary
Parliament, unless you would be continually in a course of Physic.

The second exception is, His Majesty declares, that the Parliament has no
universal power to advise in all things, but in quibusdam arduis, according to
the Writ, and cites the president of Wentworth, a Member of the House of
Commons, committed by Queen Elizabeth, (the Parliament sitting,) for proposing
to advise Her, in a matter She thought they had nothing to do with. The
Observer magnifies Queen Elizabeth, for Her Goodness and Clemency, but withal
he adds, But we must not be presidented in apparent violation of Law by Queen
Elizabeth. A grave Historiographer tells us of a close and dangerous kind of
Enemies, tacitum inimicorum genus, such as make a man's praises an introduction
to their venomous invectives, as if it were not malice but pure love of truth
that even forced them to speak so much: such an one is a good Man, but etc. So
Queen Elizabeth was a good Queen, but in this particular she played the Tyrant.
To violate Laws, to violate them apparently, therefore wilfully, to have no
respect to the House of Commons (whereof Wentworth was a Member,) was no sign
of Grace and Clemency. Certainly Queen Elizabeth (a wise and merciful
Princess, one that so much courted Her People) would not have done it, but
that She thought She had just grounds: or if She might err in her judgment,
yet She had as wise a Council as any Prince in Europe, and a business of this
consequence could not be done without their advice, who doubtless were some of
them Members of the same House, or if both She and they should be mistaken, yet
why were the House of Commons themselves silent, whilst such a known Privilege
was apparently invaded? why did they not at least in an humble Petition
represent this apparent violation of their Libertyes that it might remain as a
memorial to plead for them to Posterity, that they were not the betrayers of
the Rights of Parliaments? She that was so gracious as he Observer
acknowledges, and whose goodness was so perfect and undissembled, could not
choose but take it well, and thank them for it. Neither will it suffice to say
She gained upon them by Courtesy: such an apparent violation, so prejudicial
to the Highest Court of the Kingdom, passed over in deep silence, shows as
little Courtesy on the one side, as Discretion on the other. In brief, as I
cannot conceive that these words in quibusdam arduis, are so restrictive that
the House may consult of nothing but what shall be proposed, or was intended at
the time of the Summons: so on the other side I do not see, how either the
Commission or Prescription, do give them such an universal Cognizance or
Jurisdiction. Queen Elizabeth declared Herself oftener then once in this point;
in Her first Parliament (when in reason She should be most tender) to the
Speaker and the Body of the House of Commons, out of their Loves humbly moving
Her to Marriage, She answered that She took it well, because it was without
limitation of Place or Person, if it had been otherwise, She must needs have
misliked it, and thought it a great presumption, for those to take upon them to
bind and limit, whose duties were to obey.

The third exception is, the King says, they must merely counsel and not
command, (a strange charge if you mark it) For it is impossible that the same
trust should be irrevocably committed to the King and His Heirs for ever, and
yet that very trust, and a power above that trust be committed to others. The
Observer answers first (little to the purpose) that though there cannot be two
Supremes yet the King is universis minor, less th^n the collective Body of His
Subjects, as we see in all conditionate Princes, such as the Prince of Orange
etc. His Maxim that the King is singulis Major, univerversis Minor (except the
King himself be included in the universi) has been shaken in pieces before.
The Law is plain, The Kings Most Royal Majesty of mere droit and very Right,
is very Head, King, Lord and 26 Hen. 20.
Ruler of this Realm. And does he now intend to include the King of England in
his, etc. among condionate Princes. Take heed Sir, this will prove a worse etc.
then that in the late Canons. Secondly, he answers that though the Kings power
be irrevocable, yet it is not universal, the people have reserved something to
themselves out of Parliament, and something in Parliament. It were to be wished
that he would distinctly set down the particular reservations; a deceitful Man
walks in Generallityes. Still the Observer dreams of Elective Kingdoms, where
the people have made choice either of a Person or a Family: To us it is
nothing, they that give nothing can reserve nothing. Trusted and yet reserved?
How the Observer joins Gryphins and Horses together? if trusted how reserved?
if reserved how trusted? but how does the Observer prove either his trust or
reservation? nay it is a tacit trust; in good time, so he proves his intention
by a Company of dumb witnesses. In conclusion his proof is, that it is a part
of the Law of Nature. A trim Law of Nature indeed, which is Diametrally
opposite to the Law of God and of Nations. The Observer deals in this just as
if he had a Kinsman died testate, and he should sue for a part of his goods,
and neither allege the Will nor Codicill, not Custom of the Country, but the
Law of Nature only for a Legacy.

Next the Observer raises a new Argument out of His Majestyes words, A
temporary Power ought not to be greater then that which is lasting. This is
first to make Draggons and then to kill them; or as Boys first make bubbles in
a shell, and then blow them away without difficulty. The Sinews and Strength
of His Majestyes Argument did lie in the words to Him and to His Heirs, and
not in the word above: but if he will put the word above to the trial, if he
reduce it into right Form it is above his answer. To give a power above His
Majesty, sufficient to censure His Majesty, to a Body dissolvable at His
Majestyes pleasure, is absurd and ridiculous: as if the King should delegate
Judges, to examine and sentence the Observers seditious passages in this
Treatise, and yet withal give power to the Observer to disjustice them at his
pleasure; in such a case he need not much fear the Sentence. The Observer
pleads two things in answer to his own shadow. First, that then the Romans had
done unpolitickly, to give greater power to a Temporary Dictator then to the
ordinary Consulls. Secondly, that it was very prosperous to them sometimes to
change the Form of Government, neither always living under circumscribed
Consulls nor under uncircums^ibed Dictators. We see what his Teeth water at; he
would have His Majesty a circumscribed Consul, and gain an Arbitrary
Dictatorian Power to himself and some other of his Friends. But in the mean
time he forgets himself very far in his History: for first the power of the
Dictator and of the Consulls was ^ot consistent together; but the power of the
King and the Parliament is consistent. Secondly the change of Government was so
far from being prosperous ^o the Romans, that every change brought that State
even to Deaths door. To instance only in the ex^ulsion of their Kings as most
to the purpose; How ^ear was that City to utter Ruin, which owes its
subsistence to the valor of a single Man, Horatius Co^les: if he had not after
an incredible manner held a whole Army play upon a Bridge, they had paid for
their new fanglednesse, with the sacking of their City. Thirdly, the choosing
of a Dictator was not a change of their Government, but a branch of it, a piece
reserved for extremest perils, their last Anchor and Refuge either against
Forre in Enemies, or the Domestic Seditions of the Patricii and Plebei: and is
so far from yielding an Argument against Kings, that in the judgment of that
Politic Nation, it shows the advantage of Monarchy above all other Forms of
Government.

The Observer still continues His Majestyes Objection, To make the Parliament
more then Counselors, is to make them His Commanders and Controllers. To which
he answers, To consent is more then to counsel, and yet not always so much as
to command, for in inferior Courts, the Judges are so Counselors for the
King, that he may not countermand their judgment, yet it were a harsh thing to
say that therefore they are His Controllers, much more in Parliament, where the
Lords and Commons represent the whole Kingdom. If there were no other
Arguments to prove the Superiority of Parliament above the other Courts then
this that it represents the Kingdom as they do the King; it would get little
advantage by it. To consent is more then to counsel, and yet not always so
much as to command. True, not always: but to counsel so ^s the p^ty
counseled has no Liberty left of dissenting, is always either as much as to
command or more: a man may command and go without; but here is only advise,
and yet they must not go without. What a stir is here about consent? If he
underst^nd consen^ in no other notion then Laws and lawful Customs do allow;
it is readily yielded, but makes nothing to his purpose. One said of Aristotle,
that he writ waking, but Plato dreaming, The one had his eyes open and
considered Men as they were indeed, the other as he would have them to be: but
if ever Man writ dreaming, it was this Observer; his notes may serve rather
for the Meridian of new England then old England, and of Eutopia rather then
them both. He calls the Judges the Kings Counselors, as if they were not also
his Delegates, Deputies, and Comissioners, what they do is in His name and His
Act: yet if they swerve from justice, he may grant a review and call them to
account for any misdemeanour by them committed, in the exercise of their
places; and this either in Parliament or out of Parliament. But the inference
hence, That because the Parliament may take an account of what is done by His
Majesty in His inferior Courts, therefore much more of what is done by him
without the Authority of any Court, seems very weak. It is one thing to take
an account of Himself, another to take an account of His Commissioners. His
Majesty has communicated a part of his judiciary power to his Judges, but ^ot
the Flowers of his Crown nor his entire prero^ative, whereof this is a
principal (...), to be free from all account in point of justice except to Go^
and His own Conscience.

The last exception is, That the King makes the Parliament without his consent,
A livelesse convention without all virtue and power, saying that the very name
of Parliament is not du^ unto them. Which Allegation (says the Observer) at
one blow confounds all Parliaments and subjects us to as unbounden a Regiment
of the Kings mere Will, as any Nation under Heaven ever suffered under* For by
the same Reason, that the Kings dissertion of them makes Parliaments
virtuelesse and void Courts, He may make other Courts void likewise. Here is a
great cry for a little Wool: if he proves not what he aims at, yet one thing
he proves sufficiently, that himself is one of the greatest Calumniators in
the World, in such gross manner ^o slander the Footsteps of Gods Anointed,
Agnos^as primogenitum Sathanae. Where did ever the King say that Parliaments
without his presence are virtuelesse and void Courts? but he denies them the
name of Parliaments which is all one? yes* if a Goose and a Feather be all one.
The name Parliament with us signifies most properly, the Par^y of the King and
his People, in a secondary sense it signifies a Parley of the Subjects among
themselves, neither of these virtuelesse, but the one more vigorous then the
other So the Body is sometimes contradistinguished to the Soul, and includes
both Head and Members, sometimes it is contradistinguished to the Head, and
includes the Members only. It is one thing to be (...) True Parliament, and
another to be a Complete Parliament, Complete to all intents and purposes, and
particularly in respect of the Legislative power. In this latter sense only
His Majesty denies it, and in this sense the Observer dares not affirm it. To
dispute about the name is a mere Logomachy, and from the name to infer this
height of Power is a trifling Homonomy. But the Observer will either be Caesar
or no body, either all power o^ no power: just like a little Child who if he
wants some one thing he desires, throws away all he has and falls a crying.
To his fear of his Majestie^ deserting his other Courts; he may as well fear
hi^ deserting of himself. This may go amongst the rest of his improbable
possibilities, which never were, never will be deduced into Act. If he will
admit no institution which is subject to any abuse, he must seek for
presidents in the new World of the Moon.

Here he takes occasion to declaime against ou^ new Masters of Division, whose
Founder is Machiavell, their rule divide and impera, their first erection was
since the third of November 1640. Hi^ Majesty is the Principal of the College
whose paper^ (says the Observer) are freighted scarce with any thing else but
such Doctrine of Division, tending to the subversion of our Fundamental
Constitutions, yet find such applause in the World. His plea against them
consists of a fourefold charge; first, they have divided between the King and
the Parliament. Secondly betwixt the Parliament and the Kingdom withdrawing
themselves from their representatives, Yet there is nothing under Heaven (if we
may trust him) next to the renoun^ing of God, can be more perfidious and more
pernicious to the people then this. Thirdly, by dividing between the Parliament
and a part of the Parliament. And fowerthly, in the Major part between a
Faction misleading and a party misled. Who reads this and would not take the
Observer for another Cal^ or Constantine for peacemaking, whereas in truth all
this is but a personated passage of Demetrius, or one of his craftsmen, railing
against the Town Clarke of Ephesus, as a Ringleader of Division, and a
Disturber of them in their service to Diana, the Idol of their own brains,
and an Hinderer of them in doing Gods own Work, that is, shedding the blood
of the ungodly Apostles, and is done with the very same grace that Athaliah
cried out Treason, Treason. Sic oculos, sic illa manus, sic ora ferebat.


He is ever snarling at His Majestyes Papers, and and I do not much blame him:
for where these Papers have had free passage, they have sweyed down the scale
of men's judgments with the weight of unanswerable reason, that this Observer
and all his Fellows may compare their notes, and put their hands and heads and
shoulders and all together, and never be able to lift it up again to an
equilibrium. If they could have purchased every paper of them at the same price
that the Romans gave for the Sybills Books, it would have been well bestowed
for their cause, to have them suppressed. I plead not for Masters of Division,
Gods abomination, the Devils Factors, the baine of the Commonwealth; Da unum
and habeb^ populum, toll unum and habebis turbam. It was not Phillip, but the
dissentions of Athens, Thebes, Sparta, that destroyed Greece. It was not
Scipio, but the Factions of Hanniball and Ha^o that destroyed Carthage: we have
had too many such Masters of Division, indeed. Our Schisms in the Church
proclaim it, the question is not now of round or square, or black or white, or
sitting or kneeling: our burying and marrying, our christening, our
communicating are all questioned; our Churches, our holy Orders, our public
Liturgy, the Lords Prayer, the Creed, our Scriptures, the Godhead of Christ,
the doctrine of the Trinity, all our Fundamentalls are questioned. It is not
twins but litters of Heretics that struggle in the womb of the Church;
Disciplinarias, Independents, Brownists, Anabaptists, Familists, Socinians,
etc. -- pudet haec opprobria nobis,
Et dici potuisse, and non potuisse refelli.


Our Sedition in the State proclaims it, whilst some are for the King, some
for the Parliament, some for the Law, some for Arbitrary Government, some for a
Monarchy, some for Democracy. The Superiority of the King or Parliament is
questioned, the Kings negative voice is questione^ the right of the Militia is
questioned, the privileges our Parliament, the liberty of the Subject, e^ry
thing is questioned. Thus to use the Observers words, Those rock Foundations
are razed, upon which this State has been so happily settled, for so many ages
now past, The Pillars of Law and Policy (and Religion,) are taken away, and the
State (and Church) set upon a new Basis: each day produces new opinions, new
presidents, new questions; and woe be to those Men who are not only
occasionally, but intentionally the Authors of these Divisions: They are guilty
before God of all that blood which is powered out like water upon the face of
the Earth, of all that Spoil which is committed: better were it for them that
a Millstone were hanged about their necks, and they cast into the bottom of
the Sea. How deep the Observers share is herein, I leave it to his own
Conscience. This is certain, a Man may keep his Possession by Force, but he
that shall go about to thrust another out of his lawful Possession, is the
true Author of the tumult, and whatsoever he suffers, he can blame no man but
himself.

Now to your four Charges. First, who divided the King and Parliament. There
may be a quaere of others, but it is beyond all question that those base
tumults and disorders at Westminster and upon the Thames tending to the danger
of His Majestyes Person, but much more as they were unsufferable affronts to
Sacred Majesty, and all those who are accessory to them, as Contrivers,
Fomenters, or Connivers, are the principal grounds of this cursed Division:
they that make two Supremes coordinate one with another, make a division with a
witness. Next, for your separation between the Parliament and the Kingdom.
First your mouth runs over extremely when you call it the most pernicious
thing that can be, next to the renouncing God: we have stricter obligations to
others then to our Proctors. Secondly, to regulate their trust, according to
their first intentions and former Presidents, is not to withdraw
^epresentation; if it were who taught it them, but those who first practiced
the same to their King? But that you may clearly discern who are the Authors
of this separation, hear a near Friend of yours in his plain English or
rather plain Sedition, thus he, If ever the Parliament should agree to the
making up of an unsafe unsatisfying Accommodation, this will beget a new
question, whether in case the representative Body can not ^r will not discharge
their trust, to the satisfaction not of fancy, but of reason in the People,
they may resume if ever yet they parted with a power to their manifest undoing,
and use their power so far as conduces to their safety? You see the high ad
ultimate Judicature is neither now the Kings, nor the Parliaments. Your third
division is between the Parliament and a part of it. Of this charge they are
guilty who made the distinction, of good and b^d Lords, of well affected and
ill affected Members. The votes of Absentees doubtless by the Law of Nations
devolve to those that are present: but if the place of the Assembly be not
free, if the absence be necessitated by unjust force or just fear, the case is
otherwise. Your fourth division is between the Major part misled, and a Faction
in the major part misleading. I wonder you should think this so impossible.
Near instances may be dangerous; let us look upon the great Council of
A^iminum, the question was of no less consequence then the Diety of Christ,
the Major part of the Counsel voted for the Arrians, and in the major part the
misleading Faction were but few, the well meaning party were far the more,
but misled by the subtle manner of proposing the question, whether they would
have Christ or Homoousio^? which neither being discussed, nor understood as it
ought to ^ave been, they voted wrong and repented at lei^ure.

In the last place you distinguish between deserting and being deserted, If the
Wife leave her Husbands ^ed and become an Adulteress, it is good reason she ^ose
her dowry, but if her Husband ca^selesly reject ^er, it is injustice she should
suffer any detriment, Your case is true as you propose it: but suppose the
Adultresse should stay at home and outbrave her Husband, or by her power in the
Family thrust him good Man out of doors; suppose she should refuse to cohabite
with him, except she may be Mast^r and do what she will without controllment,
and forget her Matrimonial Vow of Obedience. This alters the case.

Observer.
Now of that Right, which the Parliament may do the King by Counsel, i^ the
King could be more wisely or faithfully advised by any other Court, or if his
single judgment were to be preferred before all advise whatsoever, it were not
only vain, but extremely inconvenient, that the whole Kingdom should be
troubled to make elections, and that the Parties elected should attend the
public business.

Answer.
We have had both Counsel and Consent befo^ but now we must have them again.
The question ^ect. 18.
raised by the Observer are of such an odious nature that no good Subject can
take delight in them, whos^ duty is to pray for the like concent among the
sev^rall orders of this Kingdom, that is supposed t^ be among the several
orbs of Heaven. His Majesty is undoubtedly the primum mobile, (whatsoeve^ the
Observer in sundry parts of this Treatise prattl^ to the contrary,) The two
Houses of Parliament, t^ great and privy Council are the lower Spheres, which
by their transverse yet vincible motions ought to allay the violence of the
highest Orb for the good an^ preservation of the universe. Where there are no
such helps and means of temper and moderation, there Liberty is in danger to be
often trodden under Foot by Tyranny. And where these adjuments by the
unskilfulnesse or sinister ends of some young or ambitious Phaetons become
impediments, by a stiff froward and unseasonable opposition, in stead of a
gentle vincible reluctation, it sets the whole body Politic in a miserable
combustion, as daily experience shows. But I must trace the Observer. The
calling of Parliaments is not vain and inconvenient, but his inference is vain
and inconsequent; there are other ends of Parliaments besides Counsel, as
consenting to new Laws, furnishing the public with Money, (the nerves and
sinews of great actions,) mainteining the interest of the Kingdom, and liberty
of the Subject. From removing one sociall end to infer ^at an action is
superfluous, deserves no answer but (...) and contempt.

Secondly, even in point of advise, there is more re^uired in a good Counselor
then natural wisdom and fidelity; our fancyes are not determined by nature to
every thing that is fit for us, as in Birds and Beasts: but we must serve
apprentiships ^o ^ble us to ^erve one another. There is a thing called
experience, of ^igh concernment in the managery of public affairs. He that
will steer one Kingdom right, must know ^he right constitution of all others;
their strength, their ^ffections, their councels and resolutions, that upon
each different face of the sky, he may alter his rudder. The best Governments
have more Counsels ^hen one, one for the public interest of the Kingdom,
another for the affairs of State; a Council for War, and a Council for
Peace: and it were strange if it were not as requisite to have a Council for
the Church. Every Man deserves trust in his own Profession: many are fittest
for resolving, few for managing. The exigence of things require, sometimes
secrecy, sometime speed. We see the House of Commons, though they be but
deputed by the People (and a Delegate cannot make a delegate, where their right
is in confidence rather then in interest) yet they have their Committees and a
Council in a Counsel. Neither are all Parliaments of the same temper, if we
may believe Sir Henry Wotton (one that was no Fool,) thus he, in the
eighteenth of King James, many young ones being chosen into the House of
Commons, more then had been usual in great Counsels (who though of the
weakest wings, are the highest flyers,) there (...) a certain unfortunate
unfruitful Spirit in some places not sowing but picking at every stone in the
field rath^ then tending to the general harvest.

Thirdly, let them be as wise and as faithful Councellers as the Observer
pleases, only let them be but Councellers. Let their conclusions have as much
credit as the premises deserve; and if they can necessitate t^ ^rince to assent
by weight of reason, an^ convincing evidence of expedience, let them do it o^
Gods name, necesse est ut lancem in libra ponderib^ impositis deprimi, sic
animum perspicuis cedere: But (...) hope they will never desire to do it out
of the authority of their votes, or obtrude a conclusion on His Majesty, before
he understand how it is grounde^ upon the Premises. This seems to be the same,
which the Disciplinarians would impose upon the King in the Government of the
Church, to be the Executor of their decrees, His Respect to their judgment
ought to make him t^nder in denying, but inferres no necessity of granting.

Fourthly, I wonder the Observer is not ashamed to tell of His Majestyes
preferring his single judgment before all advise whatsoever, when the Observer
charge him with following the advice of his Cabinet Council, when he has
his Privy Council with him, when in the great Council, if they might meet
freely, he believes that two third parts approve of his doings. Are the most
part of the Nobility and Gentry of this Kingdom, no Body? Are the flower of
the Clergy and Universities, no Body? are so many grave Solid Lawyers, no Body?
So many of the Loyal Commons, no Body? Sir, you do see, and you will see
daily more, That His Majesty is not single in His Course.

Lastly, It is the part of good Counselors, to present their whole advise
together, what they desire to remove, and what they desire to introduce; as
well what they desire to build up, as what the^ ^esire to pull down. So the
Observer himself p^eth in another case, Before we demolish old structures, we
ought First obse^ vat. page
to be advised of the fashion of new. His Majesty has required one entire full
view of their demands, that He might judge more perfectly what to assent to,
and what to advise further upon. This is a sure way not to be overreached, not
to cut down an old Tree, before there be a new one ready to be planted in its
place: many Men will agree in the destructive, which will never agree in the
constructive part. The old Senators first of Capua and after of Florence, found
this to be true by experience; the People did not agree so well in taking them
away, but they disagreed ten times as much in the choice of new: and they that
were voted down whilst they looked upon them positively, were voted to stand
when they looked upon them comparatively, they were not so worthy as they
desired, but much more worthy then those that should be subintroduced. To
instance in the case of the Church, there are many Schismatic Factions at
this day, never an one of these can have their own ends, except the present
government be taken away; so far they agree: yet if it should be taken away,
not one of six should have his own ends; here of necessity they must fall in
pieces, and in probability will cry out with the Capuans and the Florentines,
The old is the better of the two. If every Man's single suffrage were
ascertained to his proper object, as it is in the election of our Knights and
Burgesses, we should soon see who would have most voices: and perhaps the old
(in a free meeting) might have more then all the new put together.

Observer.
But little need to be said, I think every man's hear^ tells him, that in
public Consultation^, the many eyes of so many choice Gentlemen of all parts
see more then fewer.

Answer.
It Is not sufficient for an adviser to see, unless he ^t. 19.
can let another see by the light of Reason. A Man ought not implicitly to
ground his actions upon the authority of other Men's eyes, whether many or few;
but of his own. Many see more then few; True caeteris paribus if all things be
alike: Or otherwise one Physician may see more into the state of a Man's Body
then many Empericks, one experienced Commander may know more in Military
Affairs, then ten Fresh Water Soldiers, and one old Statesman in his own
Element is worth many new Practitioners, one Man upon an Hill may see more then
an hundred in a Valley. But yet if all things be alike, you will say many eyes
see more then one? They do so commonly, but not always: one Paphnutius did
see more in the Council of Nice, then many greater Clerks. How often have you
seen one or two Men in the Parliament change the Votes of the House? certainly
the Eyes of so many choice Gentlemen see the Grievances of the Kingdom, better
then any other Council; That is their proper object.

Observer.
And the great interest the Parliament has in common Justice and tranquillity,
and the few private ends they can have to deprave them, must needs render their
Counsel more faithful, impartial, and religious then any other.

Answer.
The interest is the Kingdoms and each Subjects; To be Parliament Men adds to
their trust not to their Sect. 2^.
interest. The Observers grounds are presumptuous, and tend only to beget an
implicit confidence: what Men's private ends are, is not known to us but to God
above. This we know, that good ends cannot justify bad means, nor bad
actions. Men may have good ends, and yet be led hoodwinked by others whose ends
are worse: and private ends will steal upon well affected Men. Discontent works
strongly upon some, vain glory upon others; Delinquents may aim at their own
impunity, and timorous Persons at private Security. But this is to be left to
God that is the searcher of hearts.

Obsever.
That dislike which the Court has ever conceived against Parliaments, without
dispute is a pregnant proof of the integrity and salubrity of public advise,
and is no disparagement thereof, for we have ever ^ound Enmity and Antipathy
betwixt the Court and the Country.

Answer.
If you make a strict survey of the Parliaments ^ct. 21.
party, I believe you will find as many Courtiers as Countrymen (proportion for
proportion). To see the Revenues of the Crown be not diminished by needless
profusion, to see His Majesty be not prejudiced in the accounts of his
Officers, To take away Monopolyes, and the like, are the proper Works of
Parliaments, and in probability cannot be so pleasing to some Courtiers: but
this is far from a fancyed Omnipotence. Here he falls into his old Complaint
of the Peoples not adhering to the Parliament, but we have had this Dish often
enough upon the Table.

Observer.
The King says, It Is improbable and impossible that His Cabinet Counselors, or
His Bishops, or Soldiers, who must have so great a share in the misery, should
take such pains in the procuring thereof, and spend so much time, and run so
many hazards, to make themselves Slaves and to ruin the Freedom of this
Nation. How strange is this? we have had almost forty years experience that
the Courtway of preferment, has been by doing public ill offices, and we can
nominate what Dukes, what Earls, what Lords, what Knights, have been made
great and rich by base disservices to the State, and except Master Hollis his
rich Widow, I never heard that promotion came to any man by serving in
Parliament: but I have heard of trouble and imprisonment: but now see the
traverse of Fortune; the Court is now turned honest, and there is no fear now
but that a few Hipocrites in Parliament will beguile the Major part. And page
23. The whole Kingdom is not to be mastered against consent by the train
Bands, nor the Train Bands by the Lords or Deputy Lieutenants, nor they by the
Major part in Parliament, nor the Major part in Parliament by I know not what
Septemvirat. There is some mystery in this which seems yet above, if not
contrary to nature, but since the King has promised to open it, we will
suspend our opinion and expect it as the final issue of all our disputes. And
page 22. We are now at last fallen upon an issue fit to put an end to all other
invectives whatsoever, let us stick close to it. The King promises very
shortly a full and satisfactory narration of those few Persons in Parliament,
whose design is and always was to alter the whole frame of Government both in
Church and State, and subject both King and People to their own Arbitrary power
and Government; a little of this Logic is better then a great deal of
Rethorick as the case now stands. If the King will please now to publish the
particular Crimes of such as he has formerly impeached of Treason, and the
particular names of such as now he sets forth in those characters, and will
therein refer himself to the strength of his proofs, and evidences of his
matter, it is impossible that any jealousy can cloud his integrity, or check
his power any longer. Et eadem pagina. By the performance of this promise, he
shall not only do right to himself but also to the whole Kingdom, for the
distracted Multitude being at last by this means undeceived, shall prostrate
themselves and all their power presently at his feet.

Answer.
There is no dealing with the Observer without a Notary public and good store
of Witnesses. The ^t. 22
King says, So he: the Contrivers of the Declaration say, so the King. It is
nothing to mistake an objection for a position: but it is something more to
thrust in Cabinet Counselors, Bishops and Soldiers; though I suppose never an
one of these will love their Profession the worse for a dash of his Tongue or
Pen. Are there none for the King but those whom he terms in disgrace Cabinet
^ouncellers Bishops and Soldiers? he will find many as eminent for piety,
virtue, wisdom, Courage, Nobility, Estate, as our British World affords, such
as want no Titles, no means that the condition of a Subject is capable of: or
if they did, need not make use of such oily ways to flippe into pre^erment.
Admit some few have raised themselves by sinister course^, what are they in
comparison of such a cloud of worthies, but as the gleanings to the vintage?
Apparent rari nantes in gurgite vasto.


He says he can name Dukes, and Earls, and ^ords, and Knights: if he can, let
him look where he finds them now; they that can serve the time dextrou^y, will
apply themselves to one as well as another. I ^m not so wilfully blind as not
to see that some have ^gratiated themselves by dissembled goodness, or ^y such
services as are not warrantable by Law, though ^hen they were justified by the
Professors of the ^aw: much less am I so childishly credulou^, to be^eve all
those hideous Lies, which Envy or Selfe^ve has cast upon Favorites or public
Ministers of ^tate. Now to let us see he can shoot short as well ^s over, he
tells us that he never heard that promotion ^ame to any Man by serving in
Parliament. If he ^d not, it is because he has stopped his ears and (...) his
eyes when he looked that way: otherwise ^e might have seen both in this
Parliament and for^er Parliaments within forty years, honors offi^es and
estates, gained either by service in Parlia^ent, or disservice, or both; though
I do not love ^o particularise as the Observer does. Some Men's advancements
do show it is a good way to get preferment, to put the King to a necessity of
granting. Good Woodmen say that some have used Dea^-stealing as an introduction
to a Keepers place, and I have seen a Non-Conformists mouth stopped with a good
benefice, as if he did but show them before that if he were not satisfied he
could ^ape as wide as his Neighbors.

Next, he makes it near a prodigy, a mystery above if not contrary to Nature,
that a few Hipocrites should beguile the Parliament, or the Major part be
mastered by a Septemvirate. I will nor argue with the Observer utrum sit
whether it be so; my Reverence to the great Council of the Kingdom pull^ me
by the ear: but utrum possit whether it may be so. Then for the present we
will change the Scene to Greece or Italy. And I wonder why the Observer should
think it so strange that few should have an influence upon many, or that
affections and passions, love, hatred, fear, hope, grief, etc. should betray
Men's judgments. Let him peruse all Historyes, and take a view of all Free
States and Senates, as Rome, Areopagus, Delphos etc. Consular, Tribunitian,
Pretorian, etc. of all kinds: and he shall find siding and faction and packing
and conniving and an implicit dependence of many Followers upon few Leaders. H^
may be pleased to remember the brag of an Athenian boy, that his Father ruled
all Athens, his Mother ruled his Father, and he ruled his Mother. There are
many Dames in the World that would think much not to have as great an
influence either upon their Husbands or the State, as Madam Themistocles had.
Even say Sir, do you think that private quarrels and the memory of former
suffering^ did never work upon any Man? That disconten^ and envy at other Men's
preferment, (whom the^ conceived to be l^se deserving then themselves) di^
never transport some others further then the bias o^ judgment did draw them?
That fear of the las^ and a desire to se^re themselves, has never force any
men to personate a part from the teeth outward? That great Offices and Honors
have never been apearle in any Men's eyes to hinder their sight (though like
Lapwings they made least noise when they were nearest their nests?) That others
have never been like organ pipes to whom the wind of popular applause has
only given a sound? Is it never possible for a party who have premeditated
their parts, and before their design be discovered, to exclude or vote out
those whom they conceive to be their opposites, upon some pretenses or others,
(suppose of an unlawful election, or being Monopolists or the like?) I say
nothing of the bewitching power of Oratory, nor of that sheepish Humor of
following the Drove, nor of the vehement impression that fancyed dangers make
in some men, as of him that died in an innocent Bath, when the Bystanders only
told him, that his hearts blood was coming out now. But you may say these will
never hold on to the journyes end: Though we often see that when Men are too
far engaged, have passed the Waters of Rubicon and cannot retire with safety,
they grow desperate and run head long upon the mouth of the Cannon: yet
considering the gracious disposition of our Dread Sovereign, whose joy it is
as it was his Saviors to find the sheep that was lost, I do verily believe
they will not hold on to the last indeed; why should they lose themselve to be
laughed at for their labors by them that had other ends then they? But yet till
this departure be, they make one body visibly. When the Body natural is
infested with contrary distempers, that which is used as a good cure ^or the
one, may be poison to the other: So in the Body Politic, they who are aptly
chosen for the ^emedy of one Grievance, suppose the violation of Liberty, may
be most unfit and never would have been chosen for the settlement of Religion.
In sum, the Observers Argument may be thus paralelled, It ^s not discernable
how the whole City and State of Athens could be mastered by a Militia
consisting but of three thousand, or those three thousand by the Major part of
thirty Tyrants, or the Major p^rt of thirty by Critias and one or two more: Or
thu^, It is not discernable, how the World should be mastered by Italy, or
Italy by Rome, or Rome by I know not what Triumvirate. A very poor Mercury may
reconcile the Observers understanding in this, if he be pleased. A trained Band
of eighty or an hundred thousand fighting men, well armed; well exercised, are
able to master a greater Kingdom then England; Armies are not so soon raised,
armed, disciplined; he that is ready for the Field may easily suppress
another, upon his first motion, or but offering to stir. It is as easy to
conceive how the train Bands may be at the disposition of their Commanders,
who pay them, reward them, punish them: and it is certain that they who have
the naming of them will choose such as they may confide in. The Observer talks
much of Nature, what Arms has Nature given but teeth and nails? these will
do little service at push of pike or against a volly of muske^s.

This brings us to the issue which is propounded by the Observer, and is
accepted by His Majesty, which may put an end to all other invectives: God
grant it ^ay prove true, we see no signs of it yet. The Ob^erver says, Let us
stick close to it; and I say, he that ^tarts from it, let him be reputed guilty
of all the ^nnocent blood that is shed. He adds, which will ^ring the
distracted multitude to prostrate themselves at His Majesty's Feet. Alas the
countenance ^s not always to be credited, but speech is the Arch-Deceiver. If
this be not a vain flourish, an empty aerie offer, but meant in good earnest,
there is hope we may be happy. His Majesty has satisfied this demand long
since, by His Declaration of the 12. of August 1642. and yet we find not these
fruits here promised with so much confidence; He has named the parties, He
has specified the crimes. Take the accusation in his own words, 1. Of entering
into a solomne Combination for altering of the Government of Church and State,
2. Of designing Offices to themselves and other Men, 3. Of soliciting and
drawing down the Tumults to Westminster, 4. Of bidding the people in the height
of their rage and fury go to Whitehall, 5. Of their scornful and odious
mention of His Majesty's Person, 6. Of a design to get the Prince into their
hands, 7. Of treating with Foreign Power to assist them. He is willing also to
refer himself to the strength of his proofs, and evidence of the matter,
which is all the Observer desires. Hear Him for that also, We desire that the
L. K. M. H. M. P. M. H. Sir A. H. M. St. M. M. Sir H. L. A. P. and C. V. may be
delivered into the hands of Justice, to be tried by their Peers, according to
the known Law of the Land. If we do not prove them guilty of High Treason,
they will be acquitted and their innocence will justly triumph over Us. Now if
they desire to show themselves great Patriots and Lovers of their Country
indeed, here is a fair opportunity offered, if they have as much courage as
Codrus had to leap into the gaping gulf of Division, and to reduce the
Kingdom to its former continuity and unity, if they dare trust to the
touchstone of Justice, and if the bird in their breast sing sweetly to them that
they are innocent: here is a course provided whereby they may vindicate their
good names, and out of the feined reports of malignant Sycophants make
themselves a triumphant Garland or Crown of lasting Honor. But we see no have,
I know not men's hearts. There is an unhappy story in Plutarch, (but I dare not
apply it,) of Pericles a Stickler in the Athenian Commonwealth, who being busy
and private in his study to make his account to the State, was advised by his
Nephew Alciliades (it was pestilent Counsel) rather to study low to make no
accounts: which he did effect by engaging the Commonwealth in a War, so as
they had no leisure to call for his accounts after that. There can be nothing
pleaded in bar^e to the performance of this Proposition, but the privilege of
Parliament. A great plea indeed; so the Observer, That none of the Members of
the Parliament may be apprehended in case of suspicion, where no information or
Witnesses appear to make good the prosecution, without acquainting the
Parliament, if leave may be conveniently obtained. He adds that by the same
Act the whole House might have been surprised. And in another place, that by
this means, the mere imputation of Treason shall sweep away a whole
Parliament. And his reason is thus grounded, That if way be given to this, so
many Members of either House may be taken away at any time, upon groundless
pretenses, as may make a Major part of whom they will: And then farewell to the
Freedom of Parliaments. Which truly seems to be urged with great show of
equity, where the parties are taken away by dozens or greater numbers, and the
trial is long deferred to serve a turn. You shall find the same Argument used
and pressed after the same manner by Steven Gardener to the Parliament,
alleging that nothing could be of worse Example then to Auno 154
allow such a president, that by that means it shall be at the pleasure of him
that rules to do the same in more. But for all that we do not find that
either the Parliament did afford him relief, or were sensible of any such
danger: doubtless it stands both with natural equity and the known Law of the
Land, that they who have the honor to be the great Council of the King and
Kingdom, should have all such Privileges and immunityes as are conducible to
the furtherance of those ends for which they are convocated; such are free
access and recesse, to be exempted from attendence upon Inferior Courts, so
long as they are in that employment, To have their Servants free from arrests,
that whilst themselves are busy about the great Affairs of the Commonwealth,
their Estates and occasions may not suffer in their absence, and that
universal privilege of all Councellers, that whilst their intentions are
real, they should not be questioned for a slip of the tongue, or a mistake
in their judgments. We see ordinary Courts do not only protect their
Ministers of Justice in the exercise of their places, but even those Witnesses
which a^ summoned to appear before them. A Clerk o^ the Chancery cannot be
called to any other Cou^ to answer in any Cause that is cogniscible in tha^
Court.

But here are sundry things considerable, as fir^ that His Majesty is the true
fountain of these Privileges, not any mutual compacts. This is plain by that
petition, which Sir Thomas Moore (then Speaker for the House of Commons) made
in his Oration to King Henry the eight, which I think has been observed by
all Speakers that ever were since, That if in communication, or reasoning, any
Man in the Commons House should speak more largely then of duty they ought to
do, that all such offenses should be pardoned.

Secondly, these Privileges ought not to be destructive to the essence or
Fundamental Ends or righ^ Constitution of Parliaments: and such a Privilege i^
that the Observer claims, to be denied nothing. For whereas our Parliament is
so sweetly tempered an^ composed of all estates, to secure this Nation from the
evils which are incident to all Forms of Government: he that shall quite take
His Majestyes negative voice away secures us from Tyranny, but leaves us open
and stark naked to all those popular evil^ or Epidemicall diseases which flow
from Ochlocracy; as Tumults, Seditions, Civil Wars, and that Ilias of Evils
which attends them; and seems to reduce the King (be it spoken with reverence)
to the ^ase of the old Woman in the Epigrammatist, when she had coughed out her
two last teeth, Iam libere possis totis tussire diebus
Nil isthic quod agat tertia tussis habet.


From hence appears a ready answer to that question so often moved, what great
virtue is in the Kings single vote to avert evils from us, that an ordinance
of both Houses may not be binding to the whole Kingdom without His consent? The
case is plain, it is of no great virtue against the evils of Tyranny, but is a
Sovereign Remedy against the greater Mischiefs which flow from Ochlocracy:
and I trust God will ever preserve it to us.

Thirdly, these Privileges must not transcend the condition or capacity of
Subjects by making destructive reservations, or so as to deck the Temples of
inferior Persons with the flowers of the Crown. Such a Privilege seems this
to be which the Observer here claims, a Dictatorian Immunity from all
question, to owe no account but to God and their own Consciences: and yet by
this new Learning they may take an account of the King. What is this but to
make Kings of Subjects and Subjects of Kings? When some Ancients more skillful
in Theology then in Philosophy or Geography, did hear of the Antipodes, they
reasoned against it (as they thought) strongly, that then there were pensiles
homines and pensiles arbores, men that did go with their heads downwards, and
Trees that did grow with their tops downwards; they forgot that Heaven is still
above, and the Center below: but what they did but imagine the Observer really
labors to introduce, to make whole Kingdoms to walk with their Heads
downwards and their heels upwards.

Fourthly, the just measure or standard, whereby all Privileges ought to be
examined and tried, is not now the Law of Nature, which is applyable (though
not equally) to all Forms of Government; this were to put the shoe of Hercules
upon an Infants foot. The Law of Nature may be limited, though not contraried
by the known Laws and Customs of this Realm, as they shall appear by Charters,
Statutes, Presidents, Rolls, Records, Witnesses. His Majesty cites a confession
of the Parliament it self, to prove that their Privileges extend not to the
cases of Treason, Felony, or breach of Peace, which heretofore has been the
common belief of all Men. And it seems no satisctory Answer to say, that
therefore they extend not to these Cases because the Houses do usually give way
in these cases for them to come to trial, either in Parliament if it be
proper, or otherwise in other Courts. For it is a great doubt how a Commoner in
case of Treason can be tried in Parliament per pares by his Peers: and if it
be in their own power to give way or not to give way, the Privilege extends to
these cases as well as others. The case being thus, why do we quarrel one
with another? why do no^ we all repair to the common Standard (that is the Law
of the Land,) and crave the resolution or information of those that are
Professors in that study? This will determine the doubt without partiali^ or
blood, and he that refuses it, let him be accounted as one that desires not to
uphold but subvert the Fundamental Laws of the Land, upon a supposition of
Fears and such cases as never happened in the World. Now it appears how the
former objection is not applicable to the case in question, where the Parties
are Commoners and ought to be tried by their Peers; where His Sacred Majesty is
the Informer; where the crimes are specified; where a speedy trial according
to the known Law is desired: where the Parties themselves out of a love to
their Country, out of a care to prevent the effusion of Christian and of
English blood, out of a desire to vindicate their own reputations, should
themselves become Suitors for a lawful hearing, that they might not still
suffer under such a heavy charge: at which trial they may legally plead the
Privilege of Parliament, if there be any such L^wfull Privilege.

Observer.
But let us consider the Lords and Commons as mere Counselors, without any
power or right of counsailing or consenting, yet we shall see if they be not
less knowing and faithful then other Men, they ought not to be deserted,
unless we will allow that the King may choose whether he will admit of any
Counsel at all or no, in the disposing of our Lives, Lands, and Libertyes. But
the King says, that He is not bound to renounce His own understanding, or to
contradict His own Conscience for any Counselors s^ke whatsoever. It Is granted
in things visible and certain, That Judge which is a sole Judge, and has
competent power to see his own judgment executed, ought not to determine
against the light of nature or evidence of fact. The Sin of Pila^e was, that
when he might have saved our Savior from an unjust Death, yet upon accusations
contradictory in themselves, contrary to s^range Revelations from Heaven, he
would suffer innocence to fall and pass sentence of Death, merely to satisfy
a blood-thirs^y Multitude. But otherwise it was in my Lord of (...) case, for
the King was not sole Judge, nay He was uncapa^le o^ sitting Judge at all etc.
And therefore the King might therein with a clear Conscience have signed a
Warrant for his Death, though He had dissented from the judgment. So if one
Judge on the same Bench dissent from three, or one Iuror at the Bar from
eleven, they may submitt to the major number, though perhaps less skillful
then themselves, without imputation of guilt: and if it be thus in matters of
Law a fortiori, it is so in matters of State, where the very satisfying of a
Multitude sometimes in things not otherwise expedient, may prove not only
expedient but necessary for the settling of Peace and ceasing of strife etc.
Where the People by public Authority will seek any inconvenience to
themselves, and the King is not so much interested i^ it as themselves, it is
more inconvenien^e and inju^ice to deny then grant it; what blame is it the
(...) Prin^es, when they will pretend reluctance of Conscience and Reason, in
things beh^vefull for the People?

Answer.
That which His Majesty says that a Man may not go against the Dict^te of Hi
own Conscience, (...). 23.
is so certain, that no Man that has his eyes in his head can deny it. The
Scripture is plain, he that doubts is damned if he eat, because he eats
not of Romans 14.
Faith, for whatsoever is not of Faith is Sin. Reason is as evident, that all
circumstances must concur to make an action good, but one single defect does
make it evil. Now seeing the approbation of Conscience is required to every
good action, the want thereof makes it unlawful, nor simply in it self, but
relatively, huic, hic, nunc, to this Person, at this time, in this place.
Therefore all Divines do agree in the case of a scrupulous Conscience, that
where a Man is bound by positive Law to do any Act, and yet is forbidden by
the Dictates of his own Conscience to do it, he must first reform his
understanding, and then perform obedience. And this in case where a thing
already is determined by positive Law: but in His Majestyes case where the
question is not of Obedience to a Law already constituted and established, but
of the free election or assenting to a new Law before it be enacted, it holds
much more strongly. But yet this is not all, there is a third obligation (and a
threefold cord is not easily broken.) Take one instance, the King i^ and by His
Coronation oath to defend the Church, to preserve to the Clergy all Canonical
Privileges and the free franchises granted to them by the glorious King Saint
Edward and other Kings. Now suppose such a Bill should be tendered to His
Majesty to deprive them of their temporal goods, as was tendered to Henry the
fourth in that Parliament called the Lay Parliament; suppose that His Majesty
is very sensible of the obligaon of His Oath, but sees no ground of
dispensation with his oath.; the Clergy (as then Thomas Arundell, Archbishop
of Canterbury) are his Remembrancers and consent not to any alteration; what
should a King do in this case? in the one ^cale there is Law, Conscience, and
Oath, in the other the tender respect which he bears to a great part (yet but
a part) of his people. I presume not to determine: but our Chroniclers tell us
what was the event then, That his Majesty resolved to leave the Church in as
good State or better then he found it, That the Knights confessed their error,
and desired forgiveness of the same Archbishop, That when the same motion was
renewed after in the same year of his Reign, the King commanded them that from
thenceforth, they should not presume to move any such matter. Even as his
Predecessor Richard the second in the very like case had commanded the same
Bill to be cancelled: Kings then did conceive themselves to have a negative
voice, and that they were not bound by the votes of their great Council.

These grounds being laid, the Observers instances will melt away like Winter
ice. First the Oath and obligation is visible and certain, but the dispensation
or necessityof alteration, is invisible and uncertain. Secondly the rule that a
man may not contradict his own Conscience for the advice of any Counselor, is
universal, and holds not only in actions judiciary whether sole or sociall,
but generally in all the actions of a Man's Life. Thirdly the understanding is
the sole Judge or Directer of the will: the sin of Pilate was not to contradict
Revelations (which he never had,) but for fear of complaints, and out of a
desire to apply himself to an enraged Multitude, to condemn an innocent
Person. The ^bservers instance in the Earl of Strafford, might well ^ave been
omitted, as tending to no purpose, unless (...) be to show his inhumanity and
despite to the dead ^shes of a Man, who whilst he was living might ^ave
answered a w^ole Legion of Observers: and at ^is death by his voluntary
submission, and his own ^etition to His Majesty, did endeavor to clear this
^oubt and remove these scruples. Take the case as ^he Observer states it, yet
justice is satisfied by his ^eath: and if it were otherwise, yet it is not meet
for ^im or me for to argue of what is done by His Majesty ^r the great Council
of the Kingdom; That rancour ^s deep which pursues a Man into another World.

But where the Observer adds, That His Majesty was not the sole Judge and that
he was uncap^ble of sitting Judge at all: I conceive he is much mistaken. His
Majesty may be Authoritative Judge where he does not personally sit: and the
naming of a Delegate or High Steward to be a pronunciative Judge, does not
exclude the principal. The instance of a Judge giving sentence according to
the major number of his Fellow Judges though contrary to his own opinion, is
altogether impertinent: for this is the judgment of the whole Court not of the
Person, and might be declared by any one of the Bench as well as another. Such
a Judge is not an Authoritative Judge, but pro^unciative only: neither can he
make Law but declare it, without any negative voice. The other instance of a
Juror concurring with the greater number of his Fellow Jurors, contrary to his
Conscience, is altogether false and direct Perjury. Neither of them are
applic^ble to Hi^ Majesty, who (...) power both to execu^e and pardon* It is
true, necessity of St^te justifies many things which otherwise were
inexcusable: and it is as tru^ that it is not lawful to do evil that good
may com^ of it.

His last assertion, that where the People by publick^ authority will seek any
inconvenience to themselves, an^ the King is not as much interessed as
themselves, it (...) more injustice to deny then grant it, i^ repugnant to wha^
he says a little after, that if the People should be s^ unnatural as to
oppose their own pr^servation, the Kin^ might use all possible means for their
safety, and much more repugnant to the truth. The King i^ the Father o^ his
People; he is a bad Father that if his Son ask^ him a stone in stead of
bread, or a Scorpion in stea^ of a Fish, will give it him. That Heathen was
much wiser who prayed to Jupiter to give him good things though he never opened
his lips for them, and to withhold such things as were bad or prejudicial,
though he petitioned never so earnestly for them. Suppose the People should
desire Liberty of Religion for all Sects; should the King grant it, who is
constituted by God the Keeper of the two Tables? Suppose they should desire the
free exportation of Arms, Monyes, Sheep, (which they say Edward the fourth for
a present private end granted to the Kings of Castile and Arragon) and that
this should be assented to by the Observers advise; would not the present or
succeeding Ages give him many a black blessing for his labor? God help the
Man so wrapped in errors endless train.


First to say that the People may seek to obtein their desires of the Prince by
public Authority, (...) too M^gistrall or fl^t no (...), a p^rase inu^ to
English ears. Heary the sixth was no^ Fy^ht nor awefull Sover^igne, (...) when
the (...) and (...) presented a just req^st unto (...), ^ey (...) k^ling upon
their knee, (no si^ of Author^y (...).) Secondly the King o^es a strict (...)
God of his Government, and is bound by his Of^ce to promote the good of His
(...) To (...) A^ (...) may be impeditive to this end, (...) ^isfaction of an
humorous (...), is no^ (...) with this Obligation. Thirdly, His Majesty
con^eive the thing now desired, to be mo^e then a ^ple (...) single
inconvenience, that ^selfe is deeply inte^essed in it, and not himself only,
but his (...) and all succeeding Kings, and that it is not the desire of all
His Subjects, not ye^ of the greater ^art, much less of the sounder ^art who
(...) it: and therefore even upon the Observers grounds, (...) is ^ot bound to
give his assent.

Observer.
So much for the ends of (...) Power, I come now to the true Nature of it,
public Con^nt etc.

Answer.
We had done with Consent before, but now we mee^ (...) ^4.
with it again: such Windings and Mea^ders there a^ in this Treatise. But
though Consent be like the titl^ set upon the outside of an Apothecaryes box,
yet i^ we look into the subsequent Discourse, we shall find little or nothing
of it. The Observer tells us a long st^ry, that after the fall of Adam the Law
written (...) Man's breast was not sufficient to make him a socia^ ble Creature,
that without Society Men could (...) live, and without Laws Men could not be
sociabl^ that without Magistr^tes Law was a void and va^ thing: it was
therefore quickly provided that Law^ ag^ble to the Dictates of Reason, should
be rat^fied by common consent, and that the execution a^ interpretation of
those Laws should be entrusted (...) some Magistrate. To all which I readily
assen^ wit^ this animadversion, that the rule is not cat^ pantos or universally
true. A^ for the order of Law^ or Magistrate^, it is confessed on the one side
tha^ sometimes the People did choose their Magistrat^ and Law both together,
and sometime the Law before the Magistrate, especially upon the extinctio^ of a
Royal Family: but o^ ^he other side it cannon be denied that many times, very
many times, Magis^es did either assume Sovereignty by just Con^, o^ were
absolu^ely elected without any suc^ restriction. So much the Observer
confesses a li^ after, that in the infancy of the World, most Nation^ did
choose rather to submit themselves to the mere disdiscretion of their Lords,
then rely upon any limits, and be ruled by Arbitrary Edicts, rather then
written Statutes, In which case it is plain, that the Law is posteriour to the
King, both in order of Nature and of Time.

The Observer proceeds to show; That entrusted Magistrates did sometimes
tyrannize over their People; that it was difficult to invent a Remedy for this
mischief. First because it was held unnatural to place a Superior above a
Supreme. Secondly, because the restraint of Princes from doing evil, by
diminu^ion of Sovereign Power, does disable them also from doing good, which
may be as mischievous as the other; That the World was long troubled between
these extremityes; That most Nations did choose absolute Governors; That
others placed Supervisors over their Princes, Ephori, Tribuni, Curatores,
(which remedy the Observer confesses to have proved worse then the disease,
and that the issue of it commonly was to imbroile the State in blood;) That in
all great distresses the Body of the People was constreined to rise and by the
force of a Major party to put an end to all intestine Strifes; That this way
was too slow to prevent sudden Mischiefs; That it produced much spoil and
effusion of blood, often exchanging one Tyranny for another; That at last a way
was found out to regulate the moliminous Body of the People by Parliament,
where the People may assume their own power to do themselves Right, where by
virtue of Election and Representation, a few act for many, the wise for the
simple: That the Parliament is more regularly formed now then when it was
calcalled the Mickle Synod, or where the real Body of the People did throng
together; That the Parliament yet perhaps labors with some defects that might
be amended, and that there are yet some differences and difficultyes concerning
it, especially the Privileges of it, which would be resolved. This is the sum
of his Discourse here, and a little after in the 21. page and the three pages
following, he falls into a needless commendation of the Constitution of
Parliaments, of their Wisdom and Justice, how void they are of danger, how
full of advantage to the King and People, how Princes may have sinister ends,
but that it was never till this Parliament withstoo^ that a Community can have
no private ends to mislea^ it.

In all which there are not many things to be much misliked, saving some
results of his former false an^ seditious Principles; as that the People are
the Primogenious Subject of Power, that the essential an^ representative Body
of the Kingdom are all one^ (he might as well say that a whole County and
(...) Grand Jury are convertible terms.) To place a Superior above a Supreme
is monstrous, and opens (...) ready way to an infinite progress, which both A^
and Nature abhor. I join with him in this tha^ to limit a Prince too far is
often the cause o^ much mischief to a State. But the Observer havin^ given a
good meal casts it down with his Foot: for after in the 40 page he tells us
that the People had better want some right, then have too much wrong done them*
It may be so, it may be otherwise: but ordinaril^ the sufferings of one year in
a time of Sedition, a^ more burdensome to the Subject, then the pressures they
sustein from a hard Sovereign in a whole Age. A limited Commission may now and
then bring ease to a Society, but an unsufficient Protection exposes them to
an hundred hazards and blows, from Superiors, Inferiors, Equals,
Forreiners, Domestics. The Observer would have such a Prerogative as has
great power of Protection and little of oppression. Can you blame him? he would
have his fire able to warm him, but not accidentally to burn him. Protection is
the use, oppression the abuse of power. To take away power for fear of the
abuse, is with Lycurgus to cut down all the vines of Sparta, root and branch,
for fear of Drunkenness. By the same reason he will leave neither a Sun in
Heaven, nor any Creature of eminency on Earth. If he will have no Bees but such
as have no stings, he may catch Drones, and want his honny for his labor. To
limit Princes too far is as if a Man should cut his Hawks ^ings that she
might not fly away from him: so he may be sure she shall never make a good
flight for ^im. Saint Bernard tells us a Story of a King who ^eing wounded with
an arrow, the Surgeons de^ired Liberty to bind him, because the lightest
mo^ion might procure his Death: his answer was non ^ecet vinciri Regem, it is
not meet that a King should ^e bound, and the Father concludes Libera sit Regis
and semper salva potestas.
In two particulars this third Cato is pleased to express himself, he would
have the disposition of great offices, and power of calling and dissolving
Parliaments, shared between the King and the People. Yesthe great Offices of the
Kingdom and the Revenues of the Church have been the great wheels of the
Clock, which have set many little wheels (...) going; doubt you not the
Observer meant to lick (...) own fingers. These speculations might be
seasonab^e in the first framing of a Monarchy: Now when a Power is invested in
the Crown by Law and lawful^ Custom, they are saucy and seditious. Howsoever
his bolt is soon shot, He that is wise in his own eyes, there is more hope of
a Fool then of such a Man. Other^ ^s much wiser then he is, almost as he
conceives him^lfe to transcend them, are absolu^ely of another mi^; that this
were to open a sluice to Faction and Sedi^on, to roll the Apple of Conten^ion
up and down both Houses of Parliament and each County and Borough in the
Kingdom, to make laboring for places and packing for votes, and in a word to
disunite and dissolve the contignation of this Kingdom; This in Policy. They
say further, that in Justice, If the King be bound by His Office and sworn by
His Oath, to cause Law, Justice, and Discretion, in mercy and truth to be
executed to His People, If he be accountable to God for the Misgovernment of
his great Charge, that it is all the reason in the World why he should choose
his own Officers and Ministers. Kings are shadowed by those brazen Pillars
which Hiram made for Solomon, having Chapiters upon their heads adorned with
Chains and Pomgranates. If these Sons of Belial may strip Majesty by Degrees
of its due Ornaments, first of the chains, that is the power to punish evil
Doers, and then of the Pomegranates, the ability to reward good deserts, and so
insensibly to rob them of the dependence of their Subjects; the next step
is to strike the Chapiters or Crowns from of their heads. But how can this be,
except all Parliaments were taken as deadly Enemies to Royalty? Still when the
Observer comes to a piece of hot Service, he makes sure to hold the Parliament
before him, which devise has saved him many a blow. They that are not haters
of Kings may be Lovers of themselves: We are all Children of Adam and Eve: He
would be a God and she a Goddess. His instance that this is no more then for
the King to choose a Chancellor or a Treasurer upon the recommendation of such
or such a Courtier, is ridiculous; there His Majesty is free to dissent, here
is a necessity imposed upon him to grant. Yet says he, the Venetians live more
happily under their conditionate Dukes, then the Turks under their absolute
Emperors. The Trophies which Rome gained under conditionate Commanders, argue
that there could be no defect in this popular and mixed Government. Our
Neighbors in the Netherlands being to cope with the most puissant Prince in
Christendom, put themselves under the conduct of a much limited General, which
streigthned Commissions have yielded nothing but victoryes to the States, and
solid honor to the Prince of Orange. Were Hanniball, Scipio etc. the less
honored or beloved because they were not independent? was Caesar the private
Man less succesfull or less beloved then Caesar the perpetual Dictator?
Whatsoever is more then this, he calls the painted rays of spurious Majesty,
and the filling of a fantastical humor with imaginary grandour. Whose heart
does not burn within him to hear such audacious expressions? yet still he
protests for Monarchy, A fine Monarchy indeed, a great and glorius Monarchy, an
Aristo-Democracy nicknamed Monarchy, a circumscribed, conditionate, dependent
Monarchy, a Mock-Monarchy, a Monarchy without coercive Power, able to protect,
not to punish; that is in effect neither to protect nor punish, a Monarch
subordinate to a Superior and accountable to Subjects, that may deny nothing,
a Monarchy in the Rights whereof another challenges an interest Paramount.
Quorsum haec? he is more blind then a Beetle that sees not whither all this
tends, To advance King Charles to the high and mighty Dignity of a Duke of
Venice or a Roman Consul: whilst this Gentleman might sit like one of the
Tribunes of the Common People to be his Supervisor. It were to be wished that
the Observer would first make trial of this model of Government in his own
House for a year or two and then tell us how he likes it. That Form may fit
the City of Venice that will not fit the Kingdom of England. I believe he
has not carefully read over the History of that State; Though now they enjoy
their Sun-shines and have their Lucida intervalla; yet heretofore they have
suffered as much misery, from their own Civil and Intestine Dissentions as any
People under Heaven: and so have their Neighbor States of Genoah, Florence,
etc. And of Florence particularly it is remarkable, that though ^ngtons ^y of
any
their Prince hu^band his Territory with as much advantage to himself and
pressure to his People, as any Prince in Europe: yet they live ten times more
happily now, then they did before in a Republic; when a bare legged Fellow out
of the Scumme of the People could raise Tumults, surprise the Senate, and
domineere more then two great Dukes; so that now they are freer then when they
did enjoy those painted rays of spurious Liberty. If the Romans had not found
a defect in their popular Government, they had never fled to the choice of a
Dictator or absolute Prince, as a sacred Anchour in all their greatest
extremityes. And for the Netherlands; it is one thing for a free People to
elect their own form of Government; another for a People obliged to shake off
that Form which they have elected. It is yet but early of the day to
determine precisely whether they have done well or ill. The danger of a Popular
Government is Sedition; a common Enemy has hitherto kept them at unity; and
the King of Spain has been their best Friend. Scipioes opinion that Carthage
should not be destroyed was more solid and weighty then Catoes, (as experience
plainly showed.) Those Foreign Wars preserved Peace at home, and were a
Nursery of Soldiers to secure that State. When the United States come to have
peace a while, then let them take heed of falling in pieces. The condition of
the English Subject when it was at the worst under King Charles (before these
unhappy broiles) was much more secure and free from excises and other burdens
and impositions, then our Neighbors the Netherlanders under their States. If
His Majesty should use such an Arbitrary Power as they do, it would smart
indeed. I wonder the Observer is not ashamed to instance in Hanniball: he knows
the Factions of Hanno and Hannibal did ruin themselves and Carthage: whereas
if Hannibal had been independent, Rome had run that fortune which Carthage did.
How near was Scipioes Conquest of Affricke to be disapointed, by the
groundless suggestions of his Adversaryes in the Roman Senate? When he had
redeemed that City from ruin, how was he rewarded? Slighted, called to the
Bar by a factious Plebeian, and in effect banished from that City whereof he
had been (in a kind) a second Romulus or Founder: but if he had been
independent, he had been a nobler gallanter Scipio then he was. And if Caesar's
Dictatorship had not preserved him from the like snuffles, he might have tasted
of the same sauce that Scipio did and many others. It is true he was butchered
by some of the Observers Sect, (a Rebel is a civil Schismatic, and a
Schismatic an Ecclesiastical Rebel, the one is togata, the other is armata
seditio,) and some of them as notoriously obliged as Servants could be to a
Master: but revenge pursued them at the heels as it did Korah and his
Rebellious Crew, Zimri, Absalom, Adonijah, Achitophel, Judas etc. Frost and
falsehood have always a foul ending.

Neither is it true altogether, That Parliaments are so late an invention. What
was the Mickle Synod here but a Parliament? what were the Roman Senates and
Comitia, but Parliaments? what were the Grecian Assemblies, Amphictionian,
Achaian, Boetian, Pan-AEtolian, but Parliaments? what other was that then a
Parliament, Moses commanded us a Law, even ^tr. 33. 4.
the inheritance of the Congregation of Jacob. And he was King in Jesurum, when
the Heads of the People and Tribes of Israel were gathered together? Here is
the King and both Houses with a legislative power. Non de possessione sed de
terminis est contentio; the difference is not about the being of Parliaments,
but the bounds of Parliamentary Power. As Parliaments in this latitude of
signification have been both very ancient, and very common: so if he take the
name strictly, according to the present constitution of our Parliament, he will
not find it so very ancient here at home, nor a Policy common to us with many
Nations; yea, if the parts of the comparison be precisely urged, with none, not
so much as our Neighbor Nation. I pray God it be not some Men's aim to reduce
our settled Form to a conformity with some foreign Exemplars. But if it be
understood to have such a fullness of power, as he pretends, according to his
late found out art, to regulate the moliminous body of the People; it is
neither ancient, nor common, nor ours. He may seek such presidents in
republics, but shall never find so much as one of them in any true Monarchy
under Heaven.

I honor Parliaments as truly as the Observer, yet not so as to make the name
of Parliament a Med^saes head, to transform reasonable Men into stones. I
acknowledge that a complete Parliament is that Panchreston, or Sovereign
salve, for all the Sores of the Commonwealth. I do admire the presumption of
this Observer, that dare find holes and defects in the very constitution of the
Government by King and Parliament, (which he should rather adore at a
distance,) as if he were of the posterity of Jack Cade, who called himself
John A^ead all. It is l^wfull for these Men only to cry out against
innovations, whilst themselves labor with might and maine to change and
innovate the whole fram^ of Government both in Church and (...). We read of
Philip of Maced^n, that he g^thered all the naughty seditiou^ fellows in his
King^ome together, and put the^ ^ll into (...) C^y by themselves, which he
called (...) or (...) Che^er. I wish King Charles would do the like (if a
City would contein them,) and make the Observer the head of the Corporation,
where he might molde his Government according to hi^ pr^vate conceit.

And yet it cannot be denied, but the greatest and most eminent Counsels in
the World, may be either made or wrought by their Major Part to serve private
end^. I omit the Lay Parliament 1404, and Sir Henry Wottons young Parliament
18. Iacobi: our Historians tell us of a Mad Parliament 1258, and the Parliament
of B^tts or B^ttownes 1426; a kind of Weapon fitter for Cav^leers then
peaceable Assemblyes. The Statu^es of Oxford were confirmed by the Parliament
at We^minster 1259, and ratified by a course against the breakers of them:
shortly after the King and Prince were both taken Prisoners: yet in the
Parliament following at Winchester 1255, all the said Acts were rescinded and
dis^nulled, and the King cried quittance with his Adversaryes. In the reign of
Edward the second after the Battle at Burton, we see how the tides of the
Parliament were turned, until the coming of Queen Izabell and then the Floods
grew higher then ever. In the days of Richard the second, how did the
Parliament^ change their Sanctions? as the C^maelion her colors, or as Platina
writes of the Popes, after Stephen had taken up the body of Formosus out of
his grave, It became an usual thing for the Successors either to infringe or
altogether to abrogate the Acts of their Predecessors. The Parliaments of 1386.
and 1388. were contradicted and revoked by the subsequent Parliaments of 1397.
and 1398, and these again condemned and disanulled by the two following
Parliaments in 1399. and 1400: yea though the Lords were sworn to the
inviolable observance of that of 1397, and Henry Bullenbrooke who was a great
Stickler for the King in that Parliament, of 1397. against the Appealants; yet
in that of 1399, was elected King by the Traiterous deposition of Richard, and
the unjust preterition of the right Heirs. Parliaments are sublunary Courts,
and mutable as well as all other Societyes. If we descend a little lower to the
times of Henry the sixth, we shall find Richard Duke of York, declared the Lord
Protector in Parliament, yet without Title to the Crown in 1455. Shortly after
we find both him and his Adherents by Parliament likewise attainted of High
Treason in 1459. The year following 1460, he was again by Parliament declared
not only Lord Protector, but also Prince of Wales and right Heir to the Crown,
and all Acts to the contrary made void, and the Lords swear to the observance
thereof. It rests not here, the very next year 1461. his Son Edward the
fourth not contented to be an Heir in reversion, assumes the Imperial Diadem,
and in Parliament is received actual King. The end is not yet, ten years
after this 1471, King Henry is admitted King by Parliament again, and King
Edward attainted of High Treason, declared an Usurper, and the Crown intailed
upon King Henry and his Heirs Males, and for want of such issue, to George of
Clarence and his Heirs. But this lasted but a while; disinherited Edward and
Clarence are reconciled, and the very next Year, Edward is Crowned again, and
received King in Parliament. You see here, Signa pares aquilas and peila
minantia peilis,


Parliaments against Parliaments: and this in that very question which you say
is properly to be judged by Parliament, who is the right King? When the
election is not of a particular person and his Heirs, but of a Person and his
Family, so as the People have liberty to elect whom they please of that stock,
(as it was long since in Scotland, till it was rescinded by Act of Parliament
to take away those storms of discord and Faction which it raised,) The
Parliament was the most proper Judge who should succeed: but where the Crown is
hereditary, there needs little question of the right Heir, which for the most
part every Country Man knows as well as the great Council of the Kingdom. How
easily were Queens raised and deposed in Henry the eights time by Authority of
Parliament? Add to this with what facillity Religion was reformed in part by
Henry the eight, more by Edward the sixth, altered by Queeen Mary, and restored
again by Queen Elizabeth, and all this by Authority of Parliament within the
compass of a few years; and it will evidently appear out of all that has
been said, that Parliaments are not excepted from the defects of all humane
Societyes, Nescience, Ignorance, Fear, Hope, Favor, Envy, Self-love, and the
like, That they may err both in matters of Fact, and in point of Right, That
it is the incommunicable property of God alone, to be the same Yesterday, to
Day, and for Ever, That though we owe a tender respect to Parliaments, yet we
may not follow their directions as infallible, nor resolve our reason into
their mere Authority, as if their sole advice or command were a sufficient
ground for our actions, which is the maine scope which this Iehu our Observer
does so furiously drive at in all his writings, That no evil is to be presumed
of the representative Body of the Kingdom. And so far he is right; it ought
not indeed to be presumed without proof. But he goes further that it may not
be supposed or admitted, It is of dangerous consequence to suppose that
Parliaments will do any injustice, it loses one of the firmest sinews first
ob. p^ 7.
of Law to admit it.

But such Communities can have no private ends. What had the Shechemites by the
suggestion of a worthy Member of their City? Or the Brethren of Joseph? Genesis
34 Genesis 37.
If any Man boggle at it, may he not be overvoted or overawed, as Reuben was?
What ends had the Romans when they made that arbitriment, quod in medio est,
populo Romano adjudicetur? What had the whole City of Ephes^, being persuaded
by Demetrius and his Craftsmen, that there was a strange plot against Diana?
The High Priests, and Scribes, and Elders, and if you add to these, Pilate,
Judas, the Soldiers and the Devil, all had their private ends. The High
Priests and Elders to satisfy their envy, Pilate to keep his place, Judas to
get the thirty piece^, the Soldiers for Christ's Garments: yet all these
concurred in a general design to take away Christ. Which shows us thus much,
That a Community may have private ends, yea, and contrary ends, all te^ding to
mischief, though upon contrary grounds: and yet all agree well enough so long
as they keep themselves in a negative or destructive way. I intend these
instances no further then to show the weakness of the Observers grounds;
Parliaments are more venerable: yet till this corruptible have put on
incorruption, private ends will seek to crowde into the best Societyes. When a
Bill was tendered to Richard the second to take away the temporalties of the
Clergy, there was old sharing: And Thomas Walsingham says, he himself did
hear one of the Knights swear deeply, that he would have a thousand marks by
year, out of the Abbey of Saint Albons. The very like Bill was put up to King
Henry the fowerth, with this motive or addition, That those temporal
Possessions would suffice to find an hundred and fifty Earls, fifteen hundred
Knights, six thousand and two hundred Esquires, and an hundred Hospitalls more
then there was in the Kingdom, (it had been a great oversight if they had not
stuck down a few feathers.) Do you not see private ends in those days? but
even then they found themselves mistaken in their accounts. And now when the
Lord Verulam and sundry others of our most eminent Countrymen have acknowledged
(I have heard the very same from Sir Ed^ Sands) that all the Parliament^ since
the 27. and 31. of King Henry the eight, seem in some sort Considerations
dedicated to Kin^ James
^o stand obnoxious and obliged to God in Conscie^ to (...) somewhat for the
Church, to reduce the Patrimony thereof to a competency. Now I say when the
Temporaltyes of the Clergy are so inconsiderable in comparison of the Honor of
the Nation and the Order of the Church, and so unable to satisfy the appetite
and expectation of (...); in so much as I dare speak it confidently, that all
the Temporaltyes of the Archbishops, Bishops, Deanes, Archdeacons, Deanes and
Chap^ers, Preben^, Petty Canons, Vicars Chorall, (which are recited in folio to
make a show,) and of all the Ecclesiastical Dignita^yes and Corporation^
whatsoever, let them take Masters of Hospitalls in to boo^, (except the two
Universityes and (...) of Benefices with cure,) do not all amount in penny rent
to the Revenues of some two Earls: Such a proposition seems now to be much
more unseasonable then it was then, yet even then the Bill was commanded by the
King to be cancelled. I confess the true and uttermost value, may be double or
triple to this, but what is redundant above the rent is in the hands of the
Gentry and Commons, who will think much to lose either their Interest or
Tenent-right. I confess likewise that besides their Temporaltyes, they have
Spiritualtyes consisting of Tithes and Oblations: but to think of taking these
away also, will highly displease their Leaders of the old Edition. Hear the
humble (...), It is the duty of the Commonwealth to convert those things which
by their foundation were meant to the service of God to that very use, that
Reformation be not rather thought a bait to feed our bellyes, then to proceed
of godly zeal. He calls it a plain mockery of God, a scorn of Godliness, the
most Divellish Policy in the World, that upon pretense to further Gods Service,
Men should rob and ransack the Church. To the same purpose Mr. Cartwright, This
is our meaning, not that these goods should be turned from the Possession of
the Church, to the filling of the bottomless sacks of their greedy appetites,
who gape after this prey, and would thereby to their perpetall shame purchase
to themselves a field of blood. After he calls them Cormorants and protests
against it as plain Sacrilege. A supply from hence, As it is Sacrilegious in
the opinion of their greatest Reformers: so it would be inconsiderable either
to enrich the Crown, or to disingage the Kingdom, or to satisfy the appetites
or private ends of necessitous Persons.

Observer.
Having now premised these things, I come to the maine difficulties lying at
this time in dispute before us, etc.

Answer.
We have now done with all the Observers grounds; The remainder of his Treatise
is either a repetition (...). 25.
of the same matter in a new and diverse dress; as the Host of Chalcis served
Titus Flaminius, when he gave him several services of a tame Hog, and yet by
Cookery made him believe he fed upon choice variety of Venison; Fair fall a
good Cook: or else it is but superstructions builded upon the former Grounds,
which (the foundations being subtracted) remain as Castles in the air, ready
to fall of themselves without any further battery: or else it is matter of
fact, which howsoever it be disguised by fictions in this feculent Age, when
the Father of lies is let loose; yet it is well enough known to the greater and
better part of the Kingdom. Such is the question of the Militia, so often
iterated by the Observer, both in point of right and in point of fact: such is
the case of the impeached Members: and that of the Tumults and Commotions at
London and Westminster: and that of those infamous Libells and invectives
against his Majestyes Government, both out of the Pulpit and Press, if not
with encouragement yet without any restraint; and some of them not only
against his Government, but against Monarchical Government in general, as
this very Treatise of the Observers. Concerning the first, His Majesty has set
forth an express Declaration of the first of July, yet unanswered: to say more
in this were to bring Owls to Athens. Concerning the latter, His Majesty
passing by ordinary and misled Persons, charge the Heads and Contrivers of
these Distractions and Libellous Invectives, in his Declations of the 12 of
August etc. so as it seems needless to take any further notice of them. Such
others are that of the Scotch Army, and the surprising of Newcastle, and the
Earl of Straffords case: whereas the Observer knows well enough that for the
two former there is an Act of Oblivion, and for the latter a proviso that it
shall not be drawn into president, which in effect is as much. He cannot
choose but know, that otherwise something might be said in these cases which
perhaps would trouble him to untwist: To insult over one that has his hands
tied, or to brave one who i^ bound to the peace, argues a degenerous Adversary.
Therefore to omit these and the like, and to insist upon such only as afford
us either new matter, or have more weig^t of Reason added to them.

Whereof the principal without comparison is the Hull and John ^ham.
business o^ Hull or S^r John Hotham, which runs so much in the Observ^s mind,
that he falls upon it nine or ten times in thi^ little Treatise, and after he
professes to have done with it page 30; yet he relapseth into it again thri^
in the 33. 35. and 43. pages. I shall not omit any thing that has the least,
scruple of weight or moment to advantage Sir John Hothams cause.

First it is confessed b^ the Observer, That to possess a Town and shut the
g^es against the King is Treason. A liberal concessio^ ^e had an hard forehead
that should deny it. To d^in one of the Kings ships or Castles only, with^t
danger to His Person, is Treason: what is it then, ^rst to in^rude forcibly,
and then to detein injuriousl^ not a Pinnace or little Tower, but one of the
pri^ Ports and Strengths of the Kingdom, and in it t^ Kings whole Magazine or
provision of War, a^ to raise His Majestyes own Subjects to keep it with
Muske^s bent against His Royal Breast? They ha^ need to be very saving
Circumstances that can alte^ the nature of such an act, or have virtue to
transubstantiate Cataline into Camillus, and change Treason into Loyalty. Who
made the Observer a Distinguisher where the Law does not distinguish? But let
us view his Reasons without prejudice.

Three things are alleged, first the circumstances of the action, Secondly,
the intention of the Actors, Thirdly the Authority of the Commanders. For the
first he says, The King was merely denied entrance for the time, his general
Right was not denied. I do easily believe, that Sir John meant not to hold
Hull for ever: If he did, he is not such a Child to say so. When the Lord Gray
and his Accomplices had plotted to surprise the Tower or Dover Castle, and to
possess themselves of the Persons of King James and his Council, it was not
their design to hold those Forts, or detein them Prisoners for ever: but
until they had gained their own conditions, which were the alteration of
Religion, and the distribution of the great Offices of the Kingdom among
themselves; yet it was never the less adjudged Treason, and they condemned for
it.

He adds, No defying language was given to the King. No more did Judas give
the King of Kings when he cried, Hail Master and kissed him. The Prophet
complains, of some that the words of their mouth^ were softer then butter,
but War was in their hearts. It was as true as tarta censure, which Johannes
Capocius a noble Roman, gave of Innocent the third, who did privately blow the
coals betwixt Otho and Frederick, O Holy Father, your words are the words of
God (peaceable and pious) bu^ your deeds are the deeds of the Devil.

He proceeds, No act of violence was used, though the King for diverse hours
together did stand within musket shot, and did use t^rms of defyance, and this
makes the act merely defensive o^ rather passive. Passive! how can that be?
notwithstanding the intrusion of Sir John, the King is still the Possessor, and
the deteining is forcible in the eye of the Law. This very plea argues a rotten
and a traiterous heart: To kill an innocent and an anointed King in the sight
of the Sun, requires an height of impiety, a longer preparation of Partners,
and instruments fleshed in Blood and Mischief. He that should have commanded
such a shot, had need to have given his charge in ambiguous terms, as Edvardum
occidere nolite timere bonum est, or otherwise might have been thrown over the
walls for his Labor. If such a shot had failed, it had been destructive to the
Actor and all his Partakers: if it had taken it would have made them stink in
the (...) of all good Men; but for my part I do not believe there was any such
intention. Howsoever we have been told that in the place of the Barons Wars, we
should expect the Commons Wars: yet generally the English Nation delights not
so much in Democracy as the Observer does; and a more gracions King they could
not have, whose death would have dissolved many men's hopes. Howsoever as King
Alphons^s answered his Physician, when he persuaded him not to handle the works
of Livy (which were sent unto him by a great Florentine) for fear of poison,
The ^s Syl^
Life's and Souls of Kings are secure under the providence and protection of
God: or as a Traitor answered the King of the Danes, That he wanted neither
Saxo.
mind nor sufficient means to have effected his intentions, but the assistence
and concurrence of God was always wanting. Which was verified in a conspiracy
against King James, when the Murderer smitten into an amazement by Gods just
judgment, could neither stir hand nor foot.

It follows, How should this administer to the King any grounds to levy guards
at York? etc. Did the King without fear treat with Sir John Hotham as a
Traitor in the face of his Artillery, and offer to enter Hull with twenty
horse unarmed, and continue such a harsh Parley so many hours; and yet when he
was in York, in a County of so great assurance, could nothing but so many
Bands of Horse and Foot secure him from the same Sir John Hotham? I wonder the
Observer does not blush to be His Majestyes Remembrancer how much he descended
from his Royal State that day, in his attendence so many hours, and his
courteous proffers. Is it because he thinks good Subjects take delight to hear
of such an audacious affront put upon their Sovereign? Or of that base
scandalous picture so much gazed at in Foreign parts, of Sir John Hotham
standing aloft armed Cap a^pe, incircled with Gallants and great Ordinance,
like another Achilles, Impiger, iracundus, inexorabilis, acer;


Whilst His Sacred Majesty was pictured below like a Chancery Petitioner with
his hat in his hand, pitifully complaining and suing to Sir John for
admission? But the King called Sir John Traitor, and gave him harsh language.
Did he so? you may remember what Philip answered for the Macedonians, when some
of his own wicked instruments complained they called them Traitors; that his
Countrymen were plain dealing men to call things by their right names, and
could not for their life's think one thing and say another. If Philip a Prince
benefited by those Creatures, pleaded so for his Subjects; why might not King
Charles who was injuried, and a loser, have leave to speak for himself to his
own Subjects? But if the King were so confident there, why did he raise Forces
at York, a place of more assurance? First show us your Commission to take his
Majesty's answer, or at least tell us why Sir John began to raise Forces first?
His Majesty is authorized by God and the Law to raise Forces, and owes no
account to the Observer. And to His Majestyes confidence then, and diffidence
after, I can say nothing positively: if it were in another case, there might be
sundry reasons given. Perhaps the second cogitations are the sounder; or Men
may hope for better measure then they find; or the latter day is a Scholar to
the former; or a Man may desire to surprise him and cannot, whom he has no
desire to kill if he could; or Mischief grows not to maturity in an instant,
but by Degrees.

But, The King might have prevented this repulse, by sending a Messenger before
hand, or by coming without such considerable Forces in so unexpected a manner.
How considerable His Majestyes Forces were, and what was His manner of coming
to Hull, Himself has published in a true satisfactory. Declara^ion long
since: if it had been otherwise, how could ^is Majesty imagine or expect such a
repulse against ^ll Laws, beyond all presidents. An impartial man ^ould rather
think that Sir John Hotham should ^ave taken it to heart, that His Majesty
should so ^arre suspect his Loyalty as to send such a Message before him. This
is certain, if there were an omis^ion in point of discretion or good manners,
it was ^n Sir John Hothams part, who was privy to his own ^esolutions: and
though he h^d forgotten his Allegiance, yet in point of Courtesy, he ought to
have given His Majesty a fair advertisement. It is very hard the Observer
should go about to reduce his King to the condition of an ordinary Passenger,
that must send his Harbinger before to try whether he may have enterteinment at
his Inn or nor.

Nondum finitus Orestes, His circumstances are not yet done; He adds, the
things remaining at Hull in the Kings trust for the use of the Kingdom were
Arms, and by consequence of more danger then other kind of Chattells. If I
entrust my cloak to another custody, I may not take it again by force, but if
it be my sword, and there is strong presumption that it may be drawn upon me, I
may use any means to secure it. I wish all the Observers Faction had been of
his opinion in one point; His Majesty and many of His good Subjects have been
plundered deeply, and have had both their Cloaks and their Coats etc. taken
away by force, wherein they challenged a right of interest, which is more then
trust. Still the Observer builds upon his former extravigants: His Majesty is
not Rex ad placitum one that has merely the custody of Regal power, as the
Lord Keeper has of the great Seal, or as the Observer may give his Cloak to
his Neighbor to hold: but he is the very owner and Possessor of Sovereignty to
him and to his Heirs; and this not by the antecedent trust, nor by the gift
of the People, but by the goodness of God. It would be known what presumptions
the Observer had that the sword should be drawn upon him; except he that has
given his Superior a box on the ear may lawfully disarm him when he has
done, for fear least being provoked he should strike again. The Observer
intimates no less, Whether is more probable at this time, ^ag 43.
that the King is incensed against the Parliament or the Parliament against the
King? That very Argument which he uses here is sufficient to convince
himself. What is the thing detained? The Magazine. To whom does the right of
Armor belong? To the King alone and not to the Parliament; witness a
Parliament it self 7. Edvardi primi: much less to the Observer or Sir John
Hoth^m. Uzza was smitten Sam. 16.
dead for presuming but to take hold of the Ark of God: God will rather have
the Arc of the Church or Commonwealth to shake and totter under his own
immediate protection, then to have such men presume to lay hold on it, who have
no calling from him.

There is only one saving circumstance left behind, Hear it, The Kings
interest in Hull is not such an in terest as in other movables, neither is the
Kings inte^est taken away, the same things are reserved for him in better
hands: and if it were the same, yet the State has an interest Paramount in
cases of public extremity. The State has an interest Paramount; what State?
have we any State in England without the King? the Observer is still in his old
dreams. Well, what is the interest of this imaginary State? an imaginary
interest. An interest Paramount in cases of extremity. What a mixture of pleas
is here? extremity is the plea of private Persons. In case of extremity where a
Man can not have recourse to the Magistrate, every Man becomes a Magistate to
himself: an Interest Paramount is the right of Superior Lords. But first,
here was no such extremity, if there had, still his plea is stark naught:
necessity does arm a private Man against a Thief, but not authorize a private
Man to disarme a lawful Magistrate. His other plea of an interest Paramount is
well worse; If the People (to comply with his own sense,) have an interest
Paramount in whatsoever the King holds either jure Coronae, or jure Personae,
then they are the Sovereign, and he but a Subject. But it was reserved for him
in better hands. Reserved for the King? how do you mean? as Tophet is said to
be prepared for the King; that is to shoot at the King at Edgehill or elsewhere:
otherwise I do not see how it was reserved for the King. This plea or the like,
might serve a highway Robber or any Oppressor, to say it is taken into more
needful hands, or into their hands that knew better how to use it; or that it
was but borrowed, and should be repayed (at the Greek Calends.) None so fit to
judge in what hands a thing should be kept as the true owner of it. But the
Kings right is not the same in Hull that it is in other movables. True he has
not the same right of property or possession to sell it, or give it, but he
has a right of Dominion, and Sovereignty, and protection, which is altogether
inconsistent with his exclusion or shutting out of Hull. If he be held out of
it by force, he is a King de jure, but not de facto, even as he is King of
France, or at least of Normandy Aquitaine etc. or as the King of the Romans is
King of Rome. The King has another interest in Hull beside that of Dominion:
other Towns are indebted to the King for their Protection, but this Town for
its very Foundation. The Crown purchased it when it was capable of nothing but
herds of Cattle and flocks Camden.
of sheep, The Crown builded it, the Crown endowed it with Privileges and
Possessions, made it a distinct County and able to support such a Dignity, the
Crown fortified it and made it so strong as it is: and was all this done with
an intent to be thrust out of it? O that Edward the third who builded it, or
Henry the eight who fortified it with Blockhouses, were but in it for a day or
two, with a Regiment of their old Cavaleers to try who should be King of Hull
and Humber. The proper name of it is not Hull, but Kingston upon Hull. The
Observer does well to decline the right name, for according to his notions, it
may be called Kingston per Antiphrasin, because it is none of the Kings Town.

If the circumstances will not justify the action, the Observer flies to the
Common Sanctuary of Transgressors; a good intention: so he goes on, The next
thing considerable is the Parliaments intention. If the Parliament have
hereupon turned any of the Towns Men out of their estates, or claimed any
interest in it themselves, or have (...) the King, utterly denying his right
for the future, or have made any other use of their possession, but merely to
prevent Civil War, and to disfurnish the Kings Soldiers of Arms and
Ammunition, Let the State be branded with Treason: but if none of these things
be by any credit, though their Enemies should be Judges, the essential
property of Treason must needs here be absent in this Act. There needs no
Enemies to be made Judges; if it were before a Court of Areopagites, this plea
would be laughed at or hissed out of Court. How shall we judge of Men's
intentions best, by their words or by their actions? Who Tully.
ever Proclaimed in the Streets that he had rotten Wares to sell? Who ever
confessed that his meaning was naught? Men's intentions may be pleaded at the
Bar of Conscience before God for mitigation, not at the Bar of Justice
before Man for Justification. Nei^s it likely that Sir John and his Partners
had all the same Intentions; their Actions speak their Intentions sufficiently.
And admitting their Intentions were good, yet that cannot justify an unlawful
Action; They John 16. 2.
shall put you out of the Synagogues, yea, whosoever kills you, will think he
does God service: Those Persecuters had good Intentions, but their Actions were
stark naught. You sa^, they claimed no Interest, yet your self claim an
Interest Paramount for them. You say they disseised not the King, because they
denied not His Right for the future; as if there might no^ be a disseisure
without such a denial. You say they made no other use of the possession: The
Inhabitants say, they m^de other use of their Houses and dwelt in them; They
made other use of their Victuals and paid not for them: The Merchants say, they
made other uses of their Wines, Spices, and Wares, and sold them, and took
Money for them: The Countrymen say they made other use of themselves, and their
Servants, and their Goods, and disposed them as freely as if they had been
their own: The whole Country complains, That Hull has been used as a Nest and
Refuge for seditious Persons, A Seminary of War, to the great damage of the
Subject thereabouts, besides all the blood that has been spilt upon that
occasion; Whom shall a Man trust, the Townsmen, or the Observer? But you say,
They turned none of the Townsmen out of their Estates; Perhaps not so soon as
you Writ; Either there are Liars, or some Men's eyes were more upon Yorkminster
and Cawood-Castle, then upon Hull or any Houses in Hull: But since, that
Faction has turned out whomsoever they either disliked or suspected, and have
seized Men's Estates at their pleasure, and sent out their Emissary Legions
roming and Plundring about the Country, as if Satan were sent out from the
face of the Lord, to scourge the World; Trojan or Tyrian, Papist or Protestant,
all was fish that came to their Netts. And if there can be no forgiveness of
sin without restitution, some of them have a great account to make either in
this World, or in the World to come. He tells us, this was the only means to
prevent Civil War, and to disfurnish the Kings seducers of Arms and
Ammunition: But the truth is, this has been the only Source and Fountain from
whence all our Civil Wars have sprung. Whether the King or Kingdom have
been seduced, and by whom, the God of Heaven will discover? I would every
Englishman had it engraven in his forehead, how he stands affected to the
Commonwealth. We Beetles did see no signs of civil War, but all of Peace
and Tranquillity: but the Observer and his Confederates being privy to their
own plots, to introduce by the sword a new form of Government both into State
and Church, might easily foresee, that they should stand in need of all the
strength, both in Hull and Hell and Hallifax to second them: whereof yet all
true Englishmen do acquit the Parliament in their hearts desires; though the
Observer be still at his old ward, shuffling Sir John Hotham out, and the
Parliament in, so changing the state of the question. But what weight that
consideration has, follows in his next and last Allegation.

Sir John Hotham is to be looked on as the Actor, the Parliament as the Author,
in holding Hull. And therefore it is much wondered at, that the King seems more
violent against the Actor, then the Author, but through the Actor, the Author
must needs be pierced, etc. And if the Parliament be not virtually the whole
Kingdom it self, If it be not the Supreme Judicature as well in matters of
State, is matters of Law: If it be not the great Council of the Kingdom as
well as of the King, to whom it belongs by the consent of all Nations to
provide in extraordinary cases, Ne quid detrimenti capiat Respublica; Let the
brand of Treason stick upon it: Nay if the Parliament would have used this
forcible means, unless petitioning would not have prevailed, or if the grounds
of their Jealousy were merely vain, or if the Jealousy of a whole Kingdom
can be counted vain; Let the reward of Treason be their guierdon. Hitherto the
Observer like the wily Fox, has used all his sleights to frustrate the pursuit
of the Hounds: but seeing all his fetches prove in vain, he now begins to act
the Catte, and flies to his one great help, to leap up into a Tree, that is,
the Authority of Parliament, ut lapsu graviore ruat, that he may catch a
greater fall. By the way the Observer forgets how the King is pierced through
the sides of Malignant Counselors.

Three things are principally here consider^ble. First whether Sir John Hotham
had any such Command or Commission from the Parliament. Secondly, if he had,
whether he ought to have produced it? Thirdly, supposing he both had it, and
produced it, whether it be valid against His Majesty, or whether an illegal
Command do justify a Rebellious Act.

To the first of these. I take it for granted, That a Commission, or an
Ordinance for Sir John to be a mere Governor of Hull, does not extend to the
Exclusion of His Majesty ou^ of Hull, nor Warrant Sir John to shut the Gares
against His Sovereign; if it did, every Governor might do the same, and
subordinate Command might trample upon Supreme. Neither can a posteriour
approbation warrant a precedent excess; for this is not to authorize, but to
pardon, the sole power whereof is acknowledged to be in His Majesty, without
any sharers. To the first question therefore, the answer is, Sir John Hotham
had no such Warrant or Commission from the Parliament: He himself confessed,
That he had no positive or particular Order. How should he know of His
Majesty's coming by instinct, or a Prophetical Spirit? A negative can not,
ought not to be proved; the proof rests whollyon Sir John's side, and can be no
other then by producing the Ordinance it self, or his instrument whereby he
can receive the sense of the House from Westminster to Hull in an instant: If
he have not a precedent Ordinance to show, it is in vain to pretend the
Authority of Parliament.

To the second question. Admitting, but not granting, that he had such an
Ordinance, whether could it be availeable to him, being not produced, when it
was called for and demanded so often by His Majesty? De non apparentibus, and
non existentibus eadem est ratio, Whether there was no such Ordinance, or no
such Ordinance did appear, is all one both in Law and reason; He that can
read and will not make use of his Clergy suffers justly: He that has a
Warrant and will not produce it, may cry, Nemo laeditur nisi a seipso, No Man
is hurt but by himself. A known Officer so long as he keeps himself within
the sphere of his own activity, is a Warrant of himself: But he that it
employed extraordinarily, or transcends the bounds of Common Power, must
produce his Authority, or take what falls. Sir John has not yet gained so much
credit, that his ipse dixit, his word should be a sufficient proof, or his
Testimony in his own case taken for an Oracle.

Thirdly, admitting that Sir John had such an Ordinance, and likewise that he
did produce it, (for if we admit neither, he can prove neither,) yet the
question is how valid this Ordinance may be as to this act. I doubt not at all
of the Power of Parliament, that is, a complete Parliament, where the King and
both Houses do concur: but an ordinance without the King, against the King,
alters the case; this may have the Authority of both Houses perhaps, but not of
a complete Parliament. Secondly the Power of both Houses is great, especially
of the Lords as they are the Kings Great Council, and in that relation are the
Supreme Judicature of the Kingdom: but before the Observer said it, I never
thought the Commons did challenge any share of this Judicature, except over
their own Members, or preparatory to the Lords: or that they had power to
administer an Oath, which the Apostle says is the end of all strife; who ^eb.
6. 19.
ever knew any Judicature without power to give an Oath? This makes the
Observers new devise, of the people meeting in their underived Majesty to do
justice, a transparent fiction. It is not the Commons, but the Lords or the
Kings Council that challenge Supreme Judicature. But take both Houses with
that latitude of Power, which they have either jointly or severally, yet His
Majesty says they have no power over the Militia of the Kingdom, or over his
Forts or Magazines: he avoucheth for it the Common Law, Statute Law,
Presidents, Prescriptions; we have not yet heard them answered, nor so much as
one instance, since the beginning of this Monarchy given for a president of
such an Ordinance, or of any new Ordinance binding to the Kingdom, without his
Majestyes concurrence, in Person or by Commission. If the Observer have any
Law, or President, or Case, he may do well to produce it: if he have none, he
may sit down and hold his peace; his remote inconsequent consequences drawn
from the Law of Nature are neither true nor pertinent. Yet I never heard that
Sir John did allege any authority from the House of the Lords; but from the
House of Commons only. This brings the Parliament still into a straiter room;
as if it were totum homogeneum, every part to bear the same name with the
whole: so he may give the Authority of Parliament to a particular Committee, or
perhaps to a particular Member. He says it is virtually the Kingdom. Not so,
it is virtually the Commons of the Kingdom: not to all intents neither, but to
some purposes. He adds, that it is the great Council of the Kingdom, to which
it belongs to provide that the Commonwealth receive no prejudice. It is a part
of the Great Council, and should provide for its safety, as the grand inquest
does for the whole County; by finding out the dangers and grievances, and
proposing remedies: but to prattle of a Majesty or plenitude of Sovereign
Power, derived now at this time of the day from the People, is to draw water
out of a Pumice, or to be mad with reason.

I have now answered all that the Observer has brought throughout his Book,
either concerning Hull or Sir John Hotham. Now will he hear with patience what
Hull Men say? They say that Sir John has been a prime occasion of these
Distempers, as the most severe and zealous Collector of 1634. and 1635.
Ship-mony that ever was, in his She^ivealty, a president to the rest of the
Kingdom, not only an Executor of the commands of others, but also a Plotter
and Contriver of this business: That he has had, not (...) Months mind, but
sixteen years mind to the Government of Hull, (ever since the Wars with Spain)
upon all occasions, and as an introduction to his designs has gotten the
Train bands of Hull added to his Regiment: That his Friends have been the
Raisers and Fomenters of these Fears and Jealousies, of the surprising of
Hull, sometimes by the Lord of Dunbarres Men that were trained under ground,
(surely they were not men, but Serpents Teeth that should be turned into armed
Men,) sometimes by Mr. Terret a Lincolnshire Gentleman and his Troops of
Horse; a fine devise indeed to have surprised Hull on a sudden, with horse,
and with horse from Lincolnshire, who knows how they should have got over
Humber, unless they were winged? They say that before ever the K^ngdome took
any notice of a breach between the King and the Parliament, Master Hotham
openly divided them at Hull, They that are for the King stand there, and they
that are for the Parliament stand here; did he know nothing then? judge you.
They tell who it was that threw away His Majestyes Letter in scorn, and told
the Major of Hull it was worth nothing: who it was that commanded the Burgesses
upon pain of Death to keep in their Houses, and not to appear when His Majesty
repaired to Hull: who it was that caused the bonefires to be put out upon the
day of His Majestyes inauguration upon pretended fear of the Magazine; whereas
at the same time his Soldiers had a great fire under the very Walls of it: who
it was that desired of the Towns Men of Hull a certificate to the Parliament,
that His Majesty came against Hull in an Host^le manner, with greater numbers
then he had; which was refused by the greater and sounder part, as good reason
they had, both because it was untrue, and also because during all the same time
they were confined to their Houses upon pain of Death: who it was that
administered an Oath or Protestation to the Towns Men of Hull, so directly
opposite both to their Oath of Allegiance, and to the Oath which they take when
they are admitted Burgesses or Freemen of that Corporation. They say Mr.
Hothams Mot^o of his Cornet is, For the public liberty but that it was not for
the public Liberty either for him to promise the Towns men that none should
be troubled with billeting Soldiers against their wills, and so soon as he was
gotten into Hull to fill their houses with Billiters, and tell them it was
Policy of State to promise fair till they were in possession; or for his Father
to hold a Pistol to the breast of the Kings Lieutenant, to beat and imprison
their Persons, to banish them from their habitations, to drown their Corn and
Meddow, to burn their Houses, to rob them of their goods, and allow the owner
but ten pounds out of a thousand, for the maintenance of himself, his wife,
and Children; to suffer his Officers to charge an honest Woman with felony,
for coming into her own house, because her Husband was a Delinquent, and Sir
John had disposed his goods. If you desire to know where was the first forcing
of billets? it was at Hull: where was the first plundering of goods? at Hull:
the first drowning of Grounds? at July 5.
Hull: where was the first burning of Houses? at July 9.
Myton near Hull: where was the first shedding of blood? at July 27.
Anlaby near Hull; and to aggravate the matter in a time of Treaty and
expectation of Peace. They say the first men banished from their Habitations,
were Mr. Thornton, Mr. Cartwright, Mr. Perkins, Mr. Faireburne, Mr. Kerny, Mr.
Topham, M^. Watson, Mr. Dobson of Hull. They say the first Impositionof four
pound a Tun upon some kind of Commodityes was at Hull: and wish that the
Father had been translated into Lincolnshire with the Son, that Yorkshire
might have sung, Laetentur Caeli etc.

You have seen what they say, whereof I am bu^ the Relater, if it seem too
sharp^, blame the Pellica^ and not me. Now I must crave a word with the Town.
Besides the oath of Allegiance which every good Subject has taken or ought to
take, every Burgess of that Town takes another Oath at his admission, to keep
that Town and the Blockhouses to the use of the King and his Heirs, (not of
the King and Parliament.) I cannot now procure the Copy to a word: but I shall
set down the like Oath for York; and of the two, the oath of Hull is stricter.
I desire the Londoners and all the strong Towns in the Kingdom, who I conceive
have taken the same form of Oath, to take it into serious consideration for
their Souls health. This hear ye my Lord Major, Mr. Chamberlen^, and good Men
that I from hence forth shall be trusty and true to Our Sovereign Lord the
King and to this City. And this same City I shall save and maintein to our
said Sovereign Lord the King His Heirs and Successors etc. So help me God.



The Oath begins as solemnly as that of the Roman Faeciall, Hear O
Jupiter, and thou Iu^, Quirinus thou etc. And being affirmative, though it bind
not a Townes-man ad semper, to be always upon the Walls in Arms; yet it binds
him semper, to be ready upon all necessityes, it binds him never to do any
thing that may be contrary to his Oath. And was not that Protestation contrary,
which was by Sir John Hotham imposed upon the Inhabitants of Hull and by them
taken? Forasmuch as the King being seduced by wicked and evil Counsel,
intends to make War against this Town of Hull, who have done nothing but by
Order of Parliament: We therefore whose names are here under written, do
protest before Almighty God and all good Christians, to be ready with all
cheerfullnesse and willingness to our powers with our Life's and Estates, to
defend the same against all opposition whatsoever.



Observe first what Gudgeons he makes them swallow. How do they know that the
King is seduced? Sir John tells them so: Or that His Majesty intended to make
War against Hull, unless because their Consciences told them they had given
him just grounds to do so? It was Sir John Hotham, not the Town of Hull, which
was accused by His Majesty. Observe how he makes his act, the act of the whole
Town, who have done nothing: and yet they poor men were mued up in their
Houses whilst it was a doing. Lastly how they affirm that he has done
nothing but by order of Parliament: yet it is certain many who were require to
protest, and were banished for not pro^esting, I believe not one of them all
did ever yet see this Order: (how could they see that which never was?) for
these men to know that he had an Order, to know that he did not exceed his
Order, is miraculous. Upon these feined grounds they build their solemn
Protestation; what to do? To defend Hull against all opposition whatsoever,
His Majesty is not excepted: and the first words, For as much as the King being
seduced etc. shows that His Majesty is principally intended. To save and defend
the Town to Our Sovereign Lord the King and His Heirs; So says the Oath: To
defend it against all opposition whatsoever, yea of the King seduced; so says
the Protestation. Now if these two be not repugnant directly one to another, if
every man that has taken this Protestation, be not directly perjured; Reddat
mihi minam Diogenes, Let him that taught me Logique give my money again. What is
this but to entangle and engage God in Rebellion, and to put his broad Seal to
Letters counterfeited by themselves? They suffered much who were banished for
not protesting: but they more who stayed at home with such hazard of their
Souls. Some men may be so silly as to ask whether of these two engagements,
the Oath or the Protestation ought to be kept? The case is clear the former
Obligation does always prejudge the latter: the latter Will is best, but the
first Oath: The Protestation is plain perjury, and to persevere in it, is to
double the sin: Dura promissio, aecerbior solutio, to make the Protestation
was ill, to keep it ^nbr.
is worse; David protested as much against Naball, yet upon better
consideration, ensem in vagina^ revocavit, he retracted it.

Secondly, an Oath made by one that is not sui juris, who has not power over
him self, in that which he swears, is void even when it is made: As for a
Child or a Wife to swear against their Filial or Conjugall Duty, or for a
Subject to swea^ against his Allegiance, (and such an one was that
Protestation,) this is sufficient to make it void. To which much more might be
added, as that the former Oaths were grounded both upon a natural and a civil
Obligation, were freely assumed, but this Protestation was merely forced: the
former were taken before a lawful Magistrate, the latter before an Intruder,
who had no power to administer such a Protestation. But I have dwelt long
enough on this point: I wish our great Cities who have taken the like Oath may
lay it to heart.

In the close of this point, the Observer tells us, that if Faux had fallen by
a private man's sword in the very instant when he would have given fire to his
train, that act had not been punishable. What then? will he compare the
Sovereign Magistrate to a Powder Traitor; or his undermining the Parliament
House with the Kings repairing to his own Town; or his blowing up His Majesty
and the Peers, with the Kings requiring his own goods. This is false and
painted fire, the train was laid the other way, Quicquid ostendat mihi sic,
incredulus odi.


The next considerable Observation is concerning Irish Reb^ ion
Ireland: A Tragical Subject which may justly challenge our tears and
prayers. The Observer falls upon this in the 17. 29. and 36. pages of this
Treatise, and likewise in his Observator defended, and other Discourses lately
published, either without a name or under another name. The condition of
Ireland is so much the more to be deplored, by how much the less it could then
be expected: when Religion began to show its beams over the face of that
Kingdom, yea without any pressure to the Conscience of any man, except such as
were introducers of innovations into the public service of the Church; when
the Law had obtained a free current throughout the whole Island; when the scale
of equity gave the same weight to Gold and Lead, and the equal administration
of Justice to Rich and Poor, did secure the inferior Subjects from
oppression; when there was a daily growth of all Arts and Trades and Civility;
when that which was formerly so great a burden to this Crown in the ordinary
accounts every year, was now become able not only to defray its own charge,
but also make a large supply to His Majestyes Revenue; when all the orders of
that Kingdom had so lately given an unanimous expression of their Zeal and
Devotion to His Majestyes Service: That on a sudden the Sky should be so
totally overcast, with a pitchy cloud of Rebellion, That all our fairest hopes
should be so unexpectedly nipped in the bud; deserves a little inquisition into
the true reason of it.

Some who have long since learned, that a dead man cannot bite, are bold to
cast it on the Earl of Straffords score; how justly let these two
considerations witness. First that the prime Actors in this War, were as
great opposers and Prosecutors of the Earl: Members of the same Faction may
feine quarrels among themselves in public, only to gain upon a credulous
party, and to enable themselves to do more mischief, but this never proceeds
so far as blood. Secondly, look who they are in Ireland whose Heroical
actions, in such a scarcity of necessary supplies, have maintained the English
and the Protestant cause, and you shall find very many of them the intimate
Friends of the Earl of Strafford, and principal Commanders in the Irish Army
called the Popish Army, which was said to be intended against England: if you
inquire further into the long Robe for Counsel, you will find the same
observation made good. Then let the Earls ashes rest in peace for this.

Others bred out of the excrements of those Giants who made War against
Heaven, cast this upon his sacred Majesty. (To use the Observers words) An
absurd, unreasonable, incredible supposition, That he who may boast more truly
then Pericles could upon his deathbed, that never one Athenian did wear black
for his sake: Now, as if all his former goodness were but personated, or
Neroes Soul had transmigrated into his Body, should delight in the blood and
slaughter of his Subjects. To what end? to exhaust his Treasure, lose his
Revenues, weaken his Friends, and deprive himself of the certain assistence of
his Subjects, at a time when he conceives it to be so useful for his affairs.
They had need be strong proofs indeed, that can incline the judgment of any
rational Man, to such a senseless Paradox. Let us view them.

First, The Rebels said so, They pleaded the Kings Authority, They called
themselves the Queens Army. Is not this a doughty Argument? By the same reason
we may accuse Christ, as the Patron of all Schismatic Conventicles, because
they say, here is Christ, and there is Christ, some out of a credulous
simplicity, others out of a deep subtlety: or ascribe the Primitive Haeresies
to the Apostles, because the false Teachers did use their names, to make their
Haeresies more current: So Sir John Hotham and Sergeant Major Skippon, do
pretend the Authority of King and Parliament; the King disclaimes both the one
and the other: many who are now in Arms against the King, do verily believe
they fight for the King, against some bad Counselors, whom they cannot name.
The same Rebels sometimes pleaded an Ordinance of Parliament. Nothing is more
usual with Pirates then to hang out a counterfeit Flagge.

A second reason is, Sundry Commanders of note were passed over into Ireland,
by his Majestyes warrant, who were seen presently after in the head of the
Rebels. His Majesty has long since answered this, and demanded reparation of
such a groundless Calumny. I only add two things. The one how ignorant our
intelligencers are of the State of Ireland, to feign such a devise of a Brother
of Sir George Hamletons: yet Sir George has no Brother there but Sir
Frederick, who was then and long after in Manor Hamleton, as opposite to the
Irish Rebels as the Observer himself. The other is, if this were true, yet it
were but a poor collection; There are many who have had not only Warrants
under the Kings hand, but Letters Patents under his Broad Seal, who owe their
very subsistence to His Majestyes bounty; yet have made a shift to creep from
his bosom, out at his sleeve. If such a thing had been, (as it is an impudent
Fiction;) yet these are neither the first nor the last, that have betrayed the
trust of a Gracious King.

The third and last reason is, because His Majesty was not so active to
repress this insurrection, nor so ready to proclaim them Traitors: so the
Observer, He that will not accuse the King of zeal against the Irish Rebels,
yet he may truly say, there is not the same 1. Obser page 11.
zeal expressed that was against the Scots etc. The proffered supplies of the
English and Scottish Nation are retarded, opportunityes neglected, nice
exceptions framed. This plea is pertinent to make the King, though not the
Contriver, yet the Conserver of that Rebellion: but is as false as the Father
of Lies, from whom it proceeds Hear His Majesty himself, The Irish Rebels
practice Declarati^ upon the R^ monstran^ page 21.
such unhumane and unheard of outrages upon our miserable People, that no
Christian care can hear without horror, nor Story parallel. And as we look
upon this, as the greatest affliction it has pleased God to lay upon us, so
our unhappiness is increased in that by the distempers at home, so early
remedies have not been applied to those growing evils, as the necessity there
requires. And we acknowledge it a high Crime against Almighty God, and
inexcusable to our good Subjects, if we did not to the utmost employ all our
powers and faculties, to the speediest and most effectual assistence and
protection of that distressed People. He conjures all His loving Subjects to
join with him in that Work, He offers to hazard his sacred Person in that
War, To ing^ge the revenues of his Crown; what can the Observer desire more?
perhaps he may say these Offers came late and unseasonably. Then let us look
backward to His Majestyes Proclamation of the first of January 1641, soon after
his return from Scotland, in a time of so great Distractions here at home, when
that Remonstrance which ushered in all our Fears and Troubles, was ready to be
published. Let them show, that any Course was presented to His Majesty before
this, either by his great Council to whom he had committed the care of it, or
by his Lords Justices and Council of Ireland, who were upon the place? We
abhorring the wicked Disloyalty and horrible Acts committed by those Persons,
do hereby not only declare our just indignation thereof, but also do declare
them and their Adherents and Abetters, and all those who shall hereafter join
with them, or commit the like acts on any of our good Subjects in that
Kingdom, to be Rebels and Traitors against our Royal Person, and Enemies to
our Royal Crown of England and Ireland, etc. Commanding them to lay down Arms
without delay, or otherwise authorizing and requiring his Lord Justices there,
and the General of His Majesty's Army, to prosecute them as Traitors and
Rebels with fire and sword. But if we look further still; when the first
tidings of this cursed Rebellion came to His Majesty in Scotland, he did not
sleep upon it, but presently acquainted both His Parliaments with it, required
their assistence, recommended it to their care, promised to join in any course
that should be thought fit. Neither did His Majestyes care rest there, but at
the same time he named six or seven ^olonels in the North of Ireland, to raise
Forces instantly to suppress that insurrection, which was done accordingly:
and they say, if some had been as active then, as they were made powerful by
the confluence of that part of the Kingdom, in all probability that Cockatrice
egg had been broken sooner then hatched; before that ever any of the old
English, and many of the mere Natives had declared themselves. In pursuance of
these premises, when the Act for Undertakers was tendered to His Majesty, he
condiscended freely to give away all his Escheats to this Work (an Act not to
be paralelled among all his Predecessors:) yea though some clauses in that
Statute, (especially for the limitation of His Majestyes Grace,) might seem to
require a further discussion. The wants of Ireland and the present condition of
England do speak abundantly, whether those great Sums of Money, or those
great Forces raised for that end, have been employed to the use for which they
were solely designed: yet Rabshekeh will not want a pretext to rail a^ good
Hezekiah, though Spider like, he suck poison out of the sweetest Flowers.
Surely there must be some fire whence all this smoke has risen. Perhaps they
conceive that His Majesty was not willing without good advise, upon the first
motion to put all his strong Forts in the North of Ireland, into the hands of
the Scotch Army; can you blame him, considering the present State of Affairs
there? I dare refer it to any man's judgment that is not wholly prepossessed
with prejudice, whether it was expedient at that time, or conducible to the
speedy settlement of Ireland, for them to make that demand^ To divide a little
Army, sixty miles one part from another, as far as betwixt London Derry, and
Carigfergus or the Newry, where impassable Rivers and Mountains, and an
uncertain passage by Sea would not permit one part to assist another; was a
ready way either to a long War, or certain overthrow, and not to bring it to
a quick conclusion. Neither did these places stand in need of any addition of
Forces to secure themselves, whose Service and Victories against the Rebels,
may compare with any Forces in the North of Ireland: all their desire was that
this Army would but show themselves the Masters in the Field, to carry the
War home to the Rebels own doors. Or if they had desired more Garrisons,
Dungannon or Charlemount in the heart of Tyrone, had been much more convenient
to distress the Enemy, then to have all their Forces lie scattered up and down
the Sea coast. But these things were accorded quickly, and week after week,
and Month after Month passed before any Forces moved out of Scotland for the
Relief of Ireland.

Or perhaps His Majesty was not willing in a preamble of a Bill to Press
Soldiers for Ireland, to divest Himself altogether of the power of the
Militia here in England: We cannot be contented of late to gather the fruit,
unless we may break the bough that did bear it, or to quench our present
thirst, unless we may alter the property of the Fountain. Howsoever to
exstinguish all questions, His Majesty did freely offer to raise with speed
10000 English Volunteers for that Service; or to pass a Bill without any
mention of the right, which might do the Work without prejudice to any Person.

What is it then which may in probability be thought the ground of this
Rebellion? It requires not so long a search as the head of Nilus; for though I
deny not, but that the Hen might be sitting, and some Irish have been long
plotting such a thing in foreign Parts; yet they sat so far from their
Nests, that they Guiccardine
could never have hatched it, without some extraordinary helps. Some say that
by weak management, Sovereign Authority was grown contemptible; or that
desperate Estates or crying Debts, did engage the Ringleaders both in Ireland
and elsewhere, into such courses; or that Personal quarrels and Revenge might
challenge a share. Some say that there was a general desire to shake off the
English Government: but omitting these and the like, there are two grounds
visible enough. The one is the Example of the late Covenant of their Neighbor
Nation: As the Loadstone draws Iron to it; so Examples especially if they be
successful, have an attractive virtue and influence. I doubt not but the one
went upon much safer grounds then the other in point of Policy, neither do I
desire to argue the Lawfulness in point of Justice, being a mere Stranger to
their National Laws. This is certain, there was a vast difference in the
manner of prosecution, the one being more bloody then the other: which whether
it be to be ascribed to their several Principles, or to some particular and
accidental reasons I leave every man to his own Judgment. This is all I say,
That if the one had not piped, in probability the other had not dan^

A second reason was a general apprehension (...) Jealousy and Fears at that
time, That the Liberty both Civil and Religious, of the Subject and o^
Conscience, and the exercise of their Religion should be qui^e taken away from
them; occasioned by some indiscreet threatenings, and some high-flying
Petitions, and nourished and augmented by turbulent and seditious Persons, who
persuaded the Common People that there was no security, to be expected, either
for Life or for Religion, Soul or Body, without such a general insurrection.
Thus Men plunge themselves into real dangers, out of fancyed and imaginary
Jealousies and Fears.

The next thing in the Observer concerning Ireland, is the disparity between
the proceedings of the true Rebels in Ireland, and the misnamed Rebels here
in England. Their actions are all Blood, Rapine, Torture; All Ages, Sexes,
Conditions, have tasted of their infernal Cruelty; Their intentions were to
extirpate Religion, etc. to massacre the English Nation; their chief Leaders,
are Jesuits and mere Bandetto^s, etc. Far be it from me to justify, or so
much as qualify those barbarous Acts, which have been committed in Ireland.
Cruelty is an Argument of a Coward, not of an Heroical Nature. But it ill
becomes the Observer to inveigh against the Jesuits, until he have first taken
the beam our of his own eye. He that shall compare Dolman or Parsons the
Jesuit with this Observer, either for dangerous positions or virulent
detractions, may say aut Philo Platonizat, (...) Plato Philonizat, Good Wits
jumpe. The Observer does but suppe up what Parsons and some others had
disgorged before, that he might vomit it up again. When once the Banks are
broken, it is hard for him that was the cause of the inundation to prescribe
limits to it. Had the Observer and his Partners been as much the Major part of
England as the Papists were of Ireland, we should have seen what men they
were. In the mean time the Observer has given a Caution, that whilst
Christians remain in a Primitive condition, that is, are the weaker part and
want strength, it is discretion (not duty) to conceal themselves. The Irish
Rebellion is against the Authority of the King, not against his Person, this
both against his Person and Authority: the Irish seek a Liberty of Conscience
to themselves, these not only a Liberty, but to impose a necessity upon all
others: the Irish desire a capacity of Preferment, yet at his Majesty's
discretion to cull out whom he pleases; these Men will be their own Carvers
and not leave the King such a latitude: The Irish fight against Men of another
Religion, of another Nation; We like wild Beasts fight Protestant against
Protestant, Englishman against Englishman, Brother against Brother, Parent
against Child: they fight for to recover what they had lost; we fight to lose
what we have: they know what they fight for; the greatest part of us fight for
we know not what: like the two Paduan Brethren the one supposing he had as many
Oxen as there were Stars, and the other supposing that he had a Pasture as
large as the Heavens; the mortal quarrel between them was, whether the ones
conceited Oxen might feed in the others supposed ground. But believe it, they
that cannot make rational Men understand, why they put them by the ears
together, have secret reasons to themselves, that they dare not manifest to
others.

The last passage concerning Ireland, is an Answer to His Majestyes Objection,
That if the Major part of both Houses in Ireland, should vote a danger to their
Religion, or that Kingdom, and thereupon by Ordinance settle the Militia, in
the hands of such Persons as they may confide in, of the Roman Communion; they
had the same grounds and pretenses that our Men have. The Observer answers,
That this is improperly urged, for England and Ireland are the same Dominion.
That there is as true and intimate an Union betwixt them, as between England
and Wales. And though they do not meet in one Parliament, yet their
Parliaments to some purposes, are not to be held several: And therefore if the
Papists in Ireland were Stronger and had more Votes, yet they would want.
Authority to overrule any thing voted and established here in England. The
reason why the minor Part in all Suffrages subscribes to the Major, is that
blood may not be shed, (...) in probability the Major part will prevail, (...)
Strife and Bloodshed would be endless, wherefore the Major part in Ireland
ought to sit down and acquiesce, because Ireland is not a several Monarchy
from England. Nor is that a Major part of Ireland and England too, for if it
were, it would give Law to us, as we now give Law there, and their Statutes
would be of as much virtue here as ours are there, etc.

Such Doctrine as this, has helped to bring poor Ireland, to that miserable
condition wherein now it is. Will you hear with Patience, what the Irish
themselves say of this? If any Ordinance may be imposed upon us, without an
approbative, or so much as a receptive power in our selves, where is our
Liberty then? Our Government is merely Arbitrary, our condition is slavish. We
had Magna Charta granted to us as well as England, and since that time, all
other Liberties and Privileges of the English Subject: Shall that which is ours
be taken from us without our own Act, or our own Fault; and we never heard
either in our Persons or by our Proctors? We desire the Observer to remember
what he said before, That which concerns all, ought to be approved by all; We
have no Burgesses nor representatives there: and that it is unnatural for any
Nation to contribute its own inherent puissance, merely to support Slavery.
Let the Definition be according to the Major Part of the Votes; but shall the
Minor Part be denied a Liberty to discuss or vote at all? As we deny not but
the Kingdom of Ireland is united and incorporated to the Crown of England: So
we understand not, by what right any power derived from the English Subject,
can extend it self over us. That power which they have over us is relative, as
they are the Kings Council, wherein he confides: or by virtue of his
Delegation to his Judges representing his own Person. Thus they.

For further Answer. First, this is a mere trifling and declining of the Force
of His Majestyes Argument, which lies not in this, whether Ireland be (...)
distinct Kingdom: but supposing it to be a distinct Kingdom, (as without
doubt it either is or might be,) whether that in such a case as is propounded
by His Majesty, it were lawful for them to assume such a Power contrary to the
Law of God and of Nations; or if Ireland were as much bigger then England as
France is, (it is no strange thing for a greater Kingdom to be conquered by a
lesser,) whether in such a case they might give Law to us, or their Statutes be
of as great virtue here, as ours are there, merely because it is so voted, by
the Major part of the representative Body. An absurd incredible Assertion.

Secondly, there is not the like reason of Ireland and Wales. Wales is
incircled with the same Sea, a part of the same Island, and originally in the
Days of the Britains, a branch of the same Kingdom. Wales was incorporated
to the Realm of England by Act of Parliament 27. Henrici 8. cap. 26: so was
not Ireland. Wales have their Peers and Burgesses sitting in the English
Parliament: so has not Ireland. Wales has no distinct Parliaments of its own:
but Ireland has.

Thirdly, as the Irish readily grant, that their Common Law is the same with
ours: so they will not easily believe, that the English Statutes are all of
force in Ireland. What all? even to an Act of Subsidies? who ever heard that.
It is true, there has been a question moved among some Lawyers, and those
perhaps who were not the most concerned or versed in it, of the English
Statutes, what Statutes and in what cases, and how far they are binding to
the Irish Subject? but I have not heard their opinion was so high as the
Observers, or that ever the Bell was rung out yet. If all English Statutes be
of force in Ireland, what need was there for Henry the seventh to make an
express Statute in Ireland, to authorize and introduce all the English
Statutes before his time to be of force in that Kingdom? this Act had been
supervacaneous and superfluous. And since that time we see many Statutes of
force in England, that are of no force at all in Ireland: and many both before
and since that time of force in Ireland, that have no power in England.

Lastly, this Observer might be well one of Father Garnets Disciples; when he
was asked about the Powder Treason, whether it was lawful to take away some
Innocents with many Nocents? he answered yes; so it was compensated by a
greater benefit or profit, which may perhaps be true sometimes (as in time of
War) accidentally, in public and necessary, but not in private and
voluntary Agents. So the Observer makes profit and strength, to be the only
rule and measure, of all actions of State: Justice and Piety are banished by an
Ostracisme out of his Eutopia. This is to inslave Reason, and Crown bodily
strength; to silence Law and Justice, and to Deifie Force and Power.

The Observer is every where girding at the Clergy; it is well that his new
superstition reversed, will allow them that name. Have they not great cause to
thank him, as the poor Persians did their King, when they were condemned, That
he was pleased to remember them? Sometimes he scoffs at the Tribe; There were
seditious Schismatics of all Tribes. Sometimes he derides their Pulpetting,
(it may be he likes a Chair better) because they teach a Divine Prerogative,
which none understand but these ghostly Counselors who always express
sufficient enmity and antipathy, (...) Public Acts and Pacts of Men. He that
accuses another, should first examine himself. I do not believe that ever
there was any Divine in the World, that made Kings such unlimited Creatures, as
this Observer does the People. I have read some discourses of this subject, but
I did never see any one so pernicious to a settled society of men, or so
destructive to all humane compacts, as this seditious bundle of Observations;
which makes the Law of Salus Populi, to be a dispensation from Heaven, for the
breach of all Oaths of Allegiance, and all other Obligations whatsoever; which
measures Justice by the major part, and makes strength and power the rule of
what is lawful; which gives the People the last Judgment of necessity, and
upon this Judgment a power to rise in Arms. If any Divine have unwittingly
slipped into any such errors, in not distinguishing between an absolute and
respective Sovereignty, (which I can hardly believe,) yet the Observer might
have held his peace for shame; The one is so intent upon the Law of God, the
other upon the Law of Nature, that they both forget the known Laws of the Land.

Especially he shows his spleen against Bishop, sometimes calling them Popish
Bishops. If Popery ^he Calling (...) Bishops ^t Popish.
were as ancient as Episcopacy, the Observer might shake his Ears at it to
small purpose. Sometimes he styles them the Praelaticall Faction. If that be a
Faction which is established by the Fundamental Law of the Land, and has ever
been a radicated Order of the Kingdom, What may a man think, of hi^ Rev^rend
Co^hmen and Bu^ton makers, and the rest of that diversified Schismatic ^ie?
Sometimes he makes Levi and Sim^n, Hierarchists and Papists, the heads of the
maine Malignants. I ^ope the Observer will allow some Government in the Church,
either of Counsels, or Synods, or Assemblyes, or Consistoryes, or Senates, or
Presbyteryes either (...) as it is at Genevah, or Parochial as it is in the
Low Countries; either of Presidents, or Moderators, or Visiters, Pastors,
Doctors Curate or not Curate, Elders perpetual or Annual, Deacons, Widow^, or
some of them for they are not yet well agreed about any of these: In one place
Elders are Commissioners to the Seigniory, are placed and displaced by the
Magistrate, take an Oath of Obedience to the Magistrate* in other places the
King has not so much as the place of a Lay-Elder, except he be chosen. Or
perhaps the Observer is for none of all these ways, but as errant an
Independent in the Church, as he desires to be in the Commonwealth. Here are
many things very considerable in this business.

First, That in doubtful cases, Melior est conditio vossident is, Possession
is a strong plea, especially if it be of long continuance, as this of
Episcop^cy is; ever since Christianity was planted in this Kingdom. This is
certain, British Bishops have been of Note in Foreign Counsels, since the
second Council of Arles, which is above thirteen hundred years; to say
nothing of Aristobulus, mentioned in the Epistle to the Romans, whom some good
Authors make a Bishop in this Island. They that shall go about to shake in
pieces such an ancient Institution, which was brought into the Church, either
by the Authority, or at least, by the approbation of the Apostles, had need to
bring clear proofs, not blind conjectures, about which they themselves cannot
agree one with another. Bishops flourished long in this Kingdom, even when the
British Church enjoyed the Cyprian privilege, and acknowledged no subjection
to any foreign See whatsoever.

Secondly, That which the Observer says of Monarchy, that our Laws are locked
and Cabinetted in it, in such manner, that the wounding of the one, is the
bleeding of the other, (though he forget it throughout his Discourse,) is
likewise true of Episcopacy, that it is woven and riveted into the body of our
Law. Hear a Witness beyond exception, For the Government of Bishops, I for my
part not prejudging the presidents of lord Vern^ams Consilerations.
other Reformed Churches, do hold it warranted by the Word of God, and by the
practice of the ancient Church in the better times, and much more convenient
for Kingdoms, then parity of Ministers or Government by Synods. And presently
after, It is worth noting that the Scripture says, Translato Sacerdotio,
necesse est ut and legis fiat Translatio: It is not possible in respect of the
great and near sympathy between the State Civil, and the State
Ecclesiastical, to make so maine an alteration in the Church, but it would
have a perilous operation upon the Kingdom. And therefore it is fit that
Controversy be in Peace and Silence. It would not be forgotten what was cited
before, out of Cartwright, That as the hangings must be shaped according to the
House; so must the Civil Government, be conformed to the Government of the
Church. The Anabaptis^ ^egan with Bishops, but at length the Emperor was ^ith
them but Carolus a Gandavo, Charles of Gant* (...) leave it to others to Judge
by what fate or fortune it ^omes to p^sse, beyond the Sea, That wheresoever any
^ther Regiment of the Church takes place, if the fa^ourers of it be the Major
part, and have power in their ^ands, it either finds or makes a popular State;
every ^ans own imagin^ion will supply him with instances. And this may be the
reason why Calvin (a wise man) (...) an Epistle to the King of Polonia, does
represent, ^ot the Disciplinarian, but Episcopal Government as ^tter for
Monarchies. Having showed the Regiment ^f the Primitive Church by Patriarchs,
Primates, and ^ishops, he proceeds thus: As if at this Day one Arch-^ishop
Ep^st. 100.
should be over the illustrious Kingdom of Polonia, ^t to domineere over the
rest, or arrogate their right unto ^imselfe, but for orders cause, etc. And
further, there ^ould be a Bishop in each City or Province, to attend
pe^uliarly to the preservation of Order, (mark his Reason,) even as Nature it
self does dictate to us, that in ^very College one ought to be chosen, upon
whom the prin^ipall care of the College should rest.

Thirdly, Episcopacy is not only ancient and ce^ented into our Laws, but also
was universally re^eived, without any opposition, or so much as a que^tion
throughout the whole Christian World, among ^ll sorts of Christians of what
Communion or ^rofession soever they were, Grecian, Latin, Rus^an, Armenian,
Abissine etc: yea even among those ^ho by reason of the great distance and
remoteness ^f their Countries, never heard of the Pope, nor of the name of
Rome, ever since the Apostles did tread upon the face of the Earth until this
last Century of Years; so far is it from being a Relick of Popery. And the
Observer is challenged to name but one Church, or so much as one poor Village,
throughout the whole World, from the Days of the Apostles, till the year of
Christ 1500, that ever was governed without a Bishop; (I except the Acep^ali or
such disordered Persons that had no Governmen^ at all:) or to name but one
Lay-Elder, or one Ambulatory Bishop that governed by turn or course in the
Primitive times, in the whole Catholic Church before the year 1536, when
Calvine came to Geneuah. We find the proper and particular names of Apostles,
Evangelists, Bishop, Presbiters and Deacons in the Scriptures, in Counsels, in
Ecclesiastical Historyes, in the Fathers: if he and all his Friend^ be not able
out of all these Authorities, to name on^ particular Lay-Elder or ambulatory
Bishop; the reason must be, because there never was such a Creature in rerum
natura. And his Elders in Saint Ambrose and Saint Jerome, are much mistaken;
ho^ should they be otherwise, the one Author being (...) Bishop himself, and
the other deducing Bishops i^ Alexandria from Saint Mark, and telling us
plainl^ (that which we find to be true,) that without Episcopal ^pist. ad E^
Authori^y, there will be as many Schisms as Pries^ in the Church? The
Hierarchists (as he calls them* will be contented ^o wave all other Authors,
and (...) ^ed by either of these. The seven Angels in the Revelation cap. 2.
and 3, cannot be the seven Chu^ches, for the Angels and the Churches are (...)
distinguished, Rev. 1. 20: but it must be the seven Bishops of the Churches.
These were not Parochial Churches, each of them had many Pastors, and many
particular Flocks. Beza confesses that these Angell^ were Presidents over the
other Presbiters: but Answ to S^ ravia p. 160*
he believes not they had a priority: of Power, or that this Presidency was
permanent, but went by course. If the Government went by turns, I would gladly
know, why one of them is called an Angel more then the other. Surely he that
shall read the seven Epistles, how some of them are comm^ended for their
constancy and perseverance in their Government, and others reprehended for
suffering Heretick^ to continue in their Churches: will find sufficient ground
in every one of these Epistles to believe, that they were not changeable every
week, or Month, or quarter of a Year: but constant and permanent Governors,
having power of Jurisdiction to repress abuses; otherwise why are they taxed
for the abuses done in their Diocesses, if it were not in their power to remedy
them? And if he will give credit to the Testimony of the Primitive Fathers, he
may find both who sundry of these Angels or Bishops were, and also who were
their Successors.

Fourthly, though in such variety of new Forms of Church Regiment, he has not
expressed himself to what Form he inclines, saving that in one place ^e
speaks of a Iancto of Divines, (I cannot think but himself would have the
naming of them:) yet we will suppose that which we are far from believing,
that a few green Heads see more then all the Fathers, and Counsels, and
Schoolmen; and that the Observers busy working brain, could molde a Church
better then all the Apostles. Notwithstanding all this, Saint Austins rule to
Ianuarius is very considerable, if you will not err, do that which I use to
do, to whatsoever Church I come, I apply my self to the Ceremonies thereof: He
would have added the Discipline also, if there had been sundry Forms, but
there was none but Episcop^y then in the world. God is a merciful God, and
looks upon his Creatures with all prejudices of Education, Habitation, etc.
Faction is more offensive to him, and breach of Charity more dangerous to the
Soul, then any unknown error in Disc^pline; much more where the error is but
supposed or feined, and the Schism apparent. Now for the Discipline of the
Church of England, all Men know and grant that it has ever been Episcopal. In
the public Liturgy of our Church, confirmed by Act of Parliament, we pray for
Bishops. In our Book of Ordination confirmed by the same Authority, it is
directly affirmed, as evident by Scriptures and ancient Authors, that from the
time of the Apostles there have ever been these Orders of Ministers in Christ's
Church, Bishops, Priests and Deacons; and that these Orders are appointed by
the Holy Ghost. In our Book o^ Articles, which conteins the received doctrine
of our Church, (and therefore without doubt comes within the compass of our
late Protestation,) the same Book of Ordination is maintained, and it is
plainly affirmed, That there is nothing contained in it, which ^s either
superstitious or ungodly. In the Artic. 37.
Apol^gy of our Church, published to the whole Christian World, and by all
Protestant Churches approved and applauded, We declare that ^e believe that
there be diverse degrees of Ministers in the Church, whereof some be Deacons,
some be Priests, some Bishops. Which being so it deserves some consideration,
which King James says in the latter end of his Proclamation for Uniformity,
Such is the unquietness and unstedfastnesse of some dispositions, affecting
every year new forms of things, as if they should be followed in their
unconstancy, would make all actions of States ridiculous and contemptible;
whereas the steadfast mainteining of things by good advise established, is the
weal of the Commonwealth. I should not enlarge my self any further about this
Consideration, but for two reasons. The one is, I find it said by some, that
scarce any but Bishops have hitherto maintained Bishops. Take only three
Testimonies of many; they were all Members of the English Church, yet all
Strangers, and all had lived in places opposite to Episcopal Government, none
of them either Bishops, or their Chapleins, or Expectants. The first is King
James, the most learned Preface t^ Christian Moua^ c^
of Kings, I have always thought that there ought to be Bishops in the Church,
according to the Apostolical institution, and by consequence Divine
Ordination. The second is Learned Bucer, a Germane, and employed in the first
Reformation of this Church, to read Divinity in Cambridge: one that was so
opposite to Popery, that after his Death, his very bones were taken out of his
Grave and burned by the Papists. He is full in many places, take one. From De
reg^ Christ^ cap. (...)
the perpetual observation of the Churches, from the very Apostles themselves,
we see that it seemed good to the Holy Ghost, that among the Ministers, to whom
the charge of the Church was especially committed, one should undergo a
singular care of the Churches and the whole Ministry, and in that care and
solicitude was before all the rest: for which cause the name of a Bishop was
peculiarly attributed to these highest Procurators of the Church. The third is
Peter Martyr, at the same time employed to read Divinity at Oxford; having
expressed his consent and concurrence with Saint ^erome concerning Episcopacy,
he proceeds. So far it is from us to ^sp. ad ^rd. ad 50. ^ject.
bring confusion into the Church, that rather we follow the same way: for there
is no Diocese with us, or City, where of many Pastors, there is not some one
chosen excelling in Learning and Experience, whom they call the Superintendent
of the Church. He convocates all the rest, he admonishes them, he governs them
according to the Word of God, as the State of things requires. The second
reason is, that I see it lately published to the World in Print, that Doctor
Whitakers, Doctor Fulke, and Doctor Reynolds, were all Oppugners of Episcopacy.
Perhaps of Popish Episcopacy, that is, the ^face to ^r. Ba^.
abuse not the thing, or of an absolute necessity by Divine Right of such and
such an Episcopacy endowed with such or such degrees of Power or Pre-eminence,
or of such an Episcopacy as is held to differ from Presbiterate in the very
power of Order: but surely not of Episcopacy it self. I wondered at the
impudence of the Man. It is a bad cause which stands in need to be underpropped
with such pious impious frauds, and is only fortified with hideous and
palpable Lies: if he fable in this, let him have the just reward of a Liar not
to be trusted in other matters. And first for Doctor Whitakers; Bellarmine
objects against the Protestants, that they take away Bishops: He answers, Neq^
(...) tot^m Episcopo^ or^ (...), Cont. 2. de Eccles. qu. (...) cap. 3.
^t ille falso ^lumniatur, sed Pseud^ Episcop^ tantum Pontificios. We do not
condemn all the order of Bishops, as he (that is Bellarmine: we may say the
Prefacer,) falsely slanders us, but only (...) fals^ Bishops of the Church of
Rome. And about the same place, speaking of that ancient constitution, that
three Bishop^ should be present at the Ordination of a Bishop, he affirms that
it was a good and a godly sanction, and fit for those good times. Doctor Fulke
expresses upon Titus cap. 1.
himself home, That among the Clergy for order and seemly Government, there
was always one Principal to whom the name of Bishop or Superintendent has
been applied, by long use of the Church: which room Titus exercised in Crete,
Timothy in Ephesu^, others in other places. That though a Bishop and ^n El^r is
of one Order and Authority in preaching the Word and administering the
Sacraments: yet in Government, by ancient use of Speech, he is only called a
Bishop, who in Scripture is called proesta^enos, proest^s, ^egoumenos, Romans 12.
8. 1 Timothy 5. 7. Heb. 13. 17. that is, the chief in Government, to whom the
Ordination or Consecration by imposition of Hands, was always principally
committed. So according to Doctor Fulke, the name is from Man, but the Office
from God. I I beseech thee Reader view the three places cited by him at
leisure, and thou shall see who are the Rulers and Governors and Ruling Elders
mentioned in Ho^y Scrip^ures, in the judgment of Doctor Fulke. Lastly, Doctor
Reynolds is of the same mind, That the Elders Reynold. ad^ Heart. p. 53^
ordained by the Apostles, did choose one among them to be President of their
Company, and Moderator of their actions, as of the Church of Ephesus though it
had sundry Elders and Pastors to guide it: yet among these sundry, was there
one chief, whom our Savior calls the Angel of the Church, etc. And this is
he whom afterward in the Primitive Church, the Fathers called Bishop, etc. So
that by Doctor Reynolds, though not for the name, yet for the thing Episcopacy
was in the Church, even when Saint John writ the Revelation, and was approved
by our blessed Savior from Heaven.

Fifthly, In a difference of Ways, every pious and peaceable Christian, out of
his discretion and care of his own salvation, will inquire which is via
tutissima, the safest way. Now the Separatists themselves (such as have either
Wisdom or Learning,) do acknowledge that Holy Orders are truly (that is
validly,) given by the Ordination used in our Church, (I mean not such as
either hold no outward calling to be needful, as the Anabaptists, or make the
Church a mere Democracy, as the Independents:) but on the other side, a very
great part of the Christian World, and among them many Protestants, do allow
no Ordination to be right, but from Bishops. And even Saint Jerome, who of all
the Fathers makes the least difference between a Bishop and a Presbiter, yet
says, What can a Bishop do, which a Presbiter does not, except Ordination?
And seeing there is required to the essence of a Church, 1. a Pastor, 2. a
Flock, 3. a Subordination of this Flock to this Pastor; where we are not sure
that there is right Ordination, what assurance have we that there is a Church?
I write not this to prejudge our Neighbor Churches, I dare not limit the
extraordinary operation of Gods Spirit, where ordinary means are wanting
without the default of the Persons; he gave his People Manna for food whilst
they were in the Wilderness. Necessity is a strong plea* Many Protestant
Churches lived under Kings and Bishops of another Communion; others had
particular reasons, why they could not continue or introduce Bishops: but it is
not so with us. It was as wisely as charitably said of Saint Cyprian, If any of
my Predecessors through ignorance or simplicity have not holden that which our
Lord has taught, the mercy of the Lord might pardon them, etc: So if any
Churches through necessity, or ignorance, or newfanglednesse, or Covetousness,
or Practice of some Persons, have swerved from the Apostolical rule, or
Primitive institution, the Lord may pardon them, or supply the defect of Man;
but we must not therefore presume. It is Charity to think well of our
Neighbors, and good Divinity to look well to our selves. But the chief reason
is, because I do not make this way to be simply necessary, but only show, what
is safest where so many Christians are of another mind. I know that there is
great difference between a valid and a regular Ordination, and what some choice
Divines do write of case of Necessity: and for my part am apt to believe, that
God looks upon his People in mercy, with all their Prejudices, and that there
is a great Latitude left to particular Churches, in the constitution of their
Ecclesiastical Regiment, according to the exigence of Time and Place and
Persons, So as Order and his own Institution be observed.

Sixthly, those Blessings which the English Nation have received from that
Order, do deserve an acknowledgement. By them the Gospel was first planted in
the most parts of England: By their Doctrine and Blood, Religion was reformed
and restored to us: By the learned writings of them and their Successors, it
has been principally defended; Cranmer, Ridley, Latimer, Hooper, were all
Bishops, Coverdale excercised Episcopal Jurisdiction. With what indignation
do all good Protestants see those blessed Men, styled now in Print by a young
novice, halting and ^wo Books (...) Reforma^on.
time-serving Prelates, and common stales to countenance with their prostituted
gravities every Politic fetch. It was truly said by Seneca, that the most
contemptible Persons ever have the loosest tongues. The Observer confesses
that Magna Charta was penned by Bishops; (no ill service.) Morton a Bishop of
Ely was the Contriver and Procu^er of the Union of the two Roses; (a great
blessing to this Nation.) Bishop Fox was the instrument employed to negotiate
and effect the union of the two Kingdoms. In former Distractions of this
State, Bishops have been Composers and Peacemakers, according to their
Office: now they are contemned, and in their rooms such Persons are graced,
whose Tongues are like that cursed Bay Tree which caused brawling and (...).
contention wheresoever it came. England owes many of her Churches, Colleges,
Hospitalls and other Monuments of Piety and Charity, to Bishops. It requires
good advise before we expel that Order which of Infidells made us Christians,
and that the the reasons should appear to the World. An Act of any Society how
eminent soever, wherein are none of the Clergy, may sooner produce submission
then satisfaction to the Conscience.

Seventhly, we have had long experience of Episcopal Government: if it have
been accidentally subject to some abuses; I desire to know what Government in
the World is free from abuses: yet late and dear experience has taught us,
that much of that rigor which we complained of, was in some sort necessary. If
the Independents should prevail, who are now so busy breaking down the Walls of
the Church, to bring in the Trojan Horse of their Democracy, or rather Anarchy*
do but imagine what a confused mixture of Religions we should have: Affricke
never produced such store of diversified Monsters. But to pass by them as
unworthy of our stay, and to insist only in that Form of Church Regiment,
which of all new Forms is most received. I intend not accidental abuses, which
from ignorant and unexperienced Governors must needs be many: but some of
those many Grievances which flow essentially from the Doctrine it self. First
for one High Commission, we shall have a Presbytery or young High Commission
in every Parish. Our Bishops are bound to proceed according to Law: but this
new Government is merely Arbitrary, bounded by no Law but their own
Consciences. If the Bishops did us wrong we had our Remedy by way of appeal or
prohibition: but they admit no appeal, except to a Synod, which in a short
Session cannot hear the twentieth part of just grievances. Our Law allows not
a Judge to ride a Circuit in his own Country, least Kindred, or Hatred, or
Favor might draw him to injustice: what may we then expect from so many
Domestical Judges, whose affections are so much stronger then their reasons,
but siding and Partiality* yet they blush not to tell us, that this is the
Tribunal of Christ: Ch^st has but one Tribunal in Heaven, his Kingdom is not
of this World. That these are the Laws of Christ: the Laws of Christ are
immutable, They alter theirs every Synod. That their Sentence is the Sentence
of Christ: alas, there is too much Faction, and Passion, and Ignorance.
Heretofore we accused the Pope, for saying that he had one Consistory with
Christ: do we now go about to set up Petty Popes in every Parish? and are
they also become infallible in their Consistoryes, at least in their
conclusion, not only in matters of Faith, but also of Fact? These are general
Grievances.

In particular, His Majesty shall lose His Supremacy in Causes Ecclesiastical,
His Patronages, His first Fruits, H^s Tenths, and worse then all these, the
dependence of His Subjects, He shall be subjected to Excommunication, by which
Engine the Popes advanced themselves above Emperors: The Nobility and Gentry
shall be subjected to the censures of a raw rude Cato* and and a few
Artificers, They shall lose their Advowsons (the People must elect their own
Ministers,) They shall hazard their impropriations: The two eyes of the
Kingdom, the Universities, shall be put out: The Clergy shall have their straw
taken away, and the number of their bricks doubled: The People shall groan
under the Decrees of a Multitude of ignorant unexperienced Governors, be
divided into Factions about the choice of their Pastors, be subject to censure
in sundry Courts for the same offense, be burdened with Lay Elders, who if
they please may expect, according to the Apostolical institution (upon their
grounds,) double honor, that is, maintenance: If there arise a private ^arre
between the Parent and the Child, the Husband and the Wife, they must know it
and censure it, Scire volunt secreta domus atque inde timeri:


All men must undergo the danger of contrary Commands, from coordinate Judges;
then which nothing can be more pernicious to the Consciences or Estates of Men,
Nulla hic arcana revelo. These are a part of the Fruits, of their most received
Government who oppose Bishops: if they do not all show themselves in all
places, remember the Observers Caution, They wanted power to introduce them as
yet. As some Plants thrive best in the shade: so if this Form of Regiment shall
agree best with the constitution of some lesser Commonwealths, much good may it
do them, so they will let us enjoy the like favor, Petimus damusque vicissim.


Eighthly, those Arguments which they urge out of Scripture against Episcopacy,
are mere mistakes, confounding the power of Superiority itself, with the
vicious affectation or Tyrannical abuse of it; and are none of them to the
purpose. As those two Texts that are most hotly urged, The Kings of the Luke 22.
Gentiles exercise Dominion over them, but ye shall not be so: and that of
Saint Peter, Neither as being Lords 1 Pet. 5.
over Gods Heritage, but being Ensamples to the Flock; do admit as many Answers
almost as there are words in each of them, but they are not needful. For no
man that ever I read of, did say that Bishops had any such Despoticall or
Lordly Dominion annexed to their Office, but only a Fatherly power. And if
these Places be to be understood in that sense which they would have them, they
do as much overthrow all their new Presidents, and Moderators, and Visiters,
and their whole Presbytery, as they would have them to do Episcopacy. Neither
Christ nor Saint Peter did ever distinguish between temporary and perpetual
Governors: between the Regiment of a single Person, and a Society or
Corporation. They like not the name of Lord, but that of Master they love
dearly: yet that is forbidden as much as the other, Neither be ye called
Master, for one is your Master, even Christ. ^at. 23. 10.
And whilst they reject the Government of a President or chief Pastor, yet
they style their own new devised Elders, Ruling Elders: and understand them
still in the Scripture by name of Governors.

Ninthly, waving all these and all other advantages of Scriptures, Fathers,
Counsels, Historyes, Schoolmen: because it is alleged that all other
Protestant Churches are against Episcopacy, I am contented to join the issue,
whether Bishops, or no Bishops have the major number of Protestant Votes. First
the practice of all the Protestant Churches in the Dominions of the King of
Sweden and Denwarke, and the most of them in High Germany, do plainly prove
it; each of which three singly, is almost as much as all the Protestant
Churches which want Bishops, hut together, (to say nothing of His Majesty's
Dominions;) all these have their Bishops or Superintendents, which is all one.
But for the point of practice, hear Reverend Zanchy, a Favourer of the
Disciplinarian way, In Ecclesiis Protestantium non desunt reipsa Episcopi, etc.
In the Churches of the Protestants, Bishops, and Archbishops are not really
wanting, (whom changing the good Greek Names into bad Latin Names) they call
Superintendents, and general Superintendents. Where neither the good Greek
names, nor bad Latin names take place, yet there also there use to be some
principal Persons, in whose hands almost all the authority does rest. Neither
is their practice disagreeing from their Doctrine. To begin with those who first
were honored with the name of Protestants, who subscribed the Augustane
Confession, among whom were two Dukes of Saxony, two Dukes of Luneburge, the
Marquess of Brandburge, the Prince of Anhalt, and many other Princes,
Republics, and Divines: Thus they, Facile possent Episcopi legitimam
obedientiam retinere, etc. Bishops might easily retein lawful obedience, if
they did not urge us to keep Traditions, which with a good Conscience cannot be
kept. Again, Nunc non id agitnr, etc. It is not now Cap. sept. potest Eccl^
sought that the Government be taken away from Bishops but this one thing is
desired, That they will suffe^ the Gospel to be purely taught, and release some
few Observances, which cannot be kept without sin. This general Confession
may stand for a thousand Witnesses, under which all the Protestants in Germany
did shelter themselves. To this I may add the Apology for the same Confession,
Hac de re in hoc conventu, etc. We have often Cap. de n^ and us^ S^
testified of this matter in this meeting, that we desire wi^ all our hearts,
to conserve the Ecclesiastical Policy, an^ the degrees made in the Church by
Humane Authorit^ Again, This our Will, shall excuse us both before God an^ all
the World, that it may not be imputed to us, that the Authority of Bishops was
weakened by our means. The confession of Saxony is subscribed by seventeen
Superintendents of Bishops. The Suevick Confession i^ Harm. confe^ Sect. 19. p.
290. Harm. confess. Sect. 11. p. 65.
so far from opposing the spiritual power of the Praelates, that they do
not exclude them from secular Government; and complains of great wrong done
t^ their Churches, as if they did seek to reduce the power of Ecclesiastical
Praelates to nothing: And most plain ly they declare for the Ecclesiastical
Jurisdiction o^ Bishops, in the 33. Chapter of the secular Magistrat^ I might
produce the Articles of the Protestants, and more Confessions, and many
Witnesses to this purpose, if it were needful. But perhaps some may say^ That
these are all Lutherans, and no good Protestant^ That were strange indeed, that
they who made the Protestation, and from thence were called Protestants keeping
themselves to the same grounds, should become no Protestants; and they who made
no Protestation, nor have right to the name, but by communion with them, should
become the only Protestants. Bu^ to satisfy them in this also.

Upon the Words of the Augustane Confession^ before recited, the Observations
set forth in the nam^ of the French and Belgicke Churches, at the latte^ end of
the Harmony of Confessions, do divide Bishops into three kinds; 1
Apostolical, of Orde^ (...). 1.
not of Degree, common to all the Ministers of the word; 2. Humane, both of
Order and of Degree, which they confess to ^e ancient, and defined, and
circumscribed with many old Canons; 3. Tyrannical, in the Church of Rome,
wandering not only without the word of God, but also extra Canones aequissimos,
without those most equal or just Canons: which last they abhominate; but of
this more in the next Consideration. They say further, that it is the Office of
god^y Obs. 3.
Magistrates, to see how far it may be expedient for Bishops, to have some
kind of Civil Dominion: and upon the Saxonick confession they acknowledge,
that Bishops may make Laws belonging to Order Obs. 1.
and Decency, so it be not done Arbitrarily, but by the judgment of a lawful
Synod; and what do we say more? You have also seen the confession of the
Church of England, directly for Episcopacy; which neverthe^esse was so approved
and applauded by the Tigurine Divines, That they made no end of praising of it,
that ^hey judged nothing to have been published more perfect Pet. Mart. Ep. ad
Jewellum.
in those days, that they promise themselves that the Protestant Church shall
never want a Champion, so long as the Author thereof did live: yet it was both
for Bishops, and by a Bishop. Calvine was no Lutherane, yet he subscribed the
Augustane Confession, o^ the Apology for it, or both. And in his Institutions,
he describes at large the Regiment of the Primitive Church, after the days of
the Apostles, That though the Bishops of those times, expressed more in their
Canons Lib. 4. cap. 4. Sect. 1. 2. 3. 4.
then was expressed in the word of God, yet they composed the whole Economy of
the Church with that caution, that it may easily appear that it had almost
nothing strange from the word of God, That in each City the Presbyters did
choose one of their number to whom they gave the Title of Bishop, specially
least dissension might spring from equallity as commonly it comes to pass. He
shows out of Saint Jerome, that this institution was as ancient in Alexandria
as from Saint Mark. He proceeds to show the end of Archbishops, and the
Constitution of Patriarchs: and concludes, That this kind of Government some
called an Hierarchy, by a name improper, at least not used in the Scriptures:
but if we pass^ by the name and look upon the thing it self, we sha^ find
that the Ancient Bishops did go about to devise no other Form of governing
the Church, then that which God has prescribed in his word. There might be
sundry other places alleged out of his Epistle, and his Answer to Sadolet, to
the same purpose; but I omit them only with this note, that one of the most
conspicuous place^ in his Epistle to Sadolet, Talem nobis Hierarchiam, etc.
(against those that shall reject Episcopacy, being reduced to its due
submission to Christ, and Society with their Brethren,) is purged out in the
two latter Edition^ of Beza and Gallasius; to let us see, that the Romanist^
are not the only men, who cut out the Tongues o^ their own Witnesses. Zanchy
delivers the very same grounds, and adds, That nothing is more certain^ De
Relig. Christ. c. 25. Sect. 10. 11. and Observat. in eundem locum.
then this, That Episcopacy was received into the Church communi consensu
totius Reipublicae Christianae with the common consent of the whole Christian
Commonwealth, That it was free for them to do so, Tha^ it was done for honest
or just causes, That it cannot b^ misliked, That those things which are defined
and received by the Godly Fathers, congregated in the nam^ of the Lord, by the
common consent of all, without an^ contradiction to the Holy Scriptures, though
they be no^ of the same Authority with the Scriptures, yet they ar^ from the
Holy Ghost. Quae hujusmodi sunt, ea e^o ^probare nec velim, nec audeam bona
Conscientia, ^uch as he had neither Will, nor Confidence, nor (...) to
disallow. Which very place being ^rged by ^arraviah against Beza, he closes
with it, A quo ma^ime Resp. page 116.
certe dissentimus, cum Episcopatum illum mere di^inum and Apostolicum, ab
humano non quasi sint illa ^nter se repugnantia, sed tantum ut diversa and
imparis ^uctoritatis discernimus. From which opinion of Zan^y we do not
dissent, nor distinguish between that Apostolical and merely Divine
Episcopacy, from this other which is humane, as if they were re^ugnant one to
another, but only diverse and of unequal Authority. The same Book is full of
such places, Quod si nunc Ecclesiae Anglicanae instauratae, etc. Page 3.
If the English reformed Churches do now stand underpropped with the authority
of Bishops and Archbishops, as it has come to pass in our memoryes, that
they have had Men of that order, not only notable Martyrs, but most excellent
Pastors and Doctors; let them enjoy that singular Blessing, which I pray God
may be perpetual to them. And elsewhere speaking of humane Episcopacy (as he is
pleased to call it,) he adds, Quo sane fruantur, etc. Which let them enjoy who
persuade themselves Page 177.
that the right use of it may be observed by them. And again, Absit ut hun^
ordinem, etc. Far be it from me to reprehend this Order as rashly or proudly
erected, though Page 144.
it be not a Divine or merely Apostolical Constitution: whereof rather no man
can deny that there may be great use, as long as good and holy Bishops are over
the Church; Let them enjoy it therefore that will and can. This and poterint,
and can, was well put in: it was not the unlawfulness of the order, but the
inconsistency with the present State of Genevah, which excluded it thence. And
having spoken of the Apostolical Canon, and the Superiority of the Archbishop
above his Fellow Bishops, he concludes, quid aliud hic statuitur, etc. ^g. 116.
What else is here decreed, but that order which we desire to be restored in
all Churches?

It appears then plainly, by the confessions of Protestant Churches, by the
Testimonies of the most learned Divines, yea, even of those that lived under
another Government, that if Bishops be not necessary, yet at the least they are
lawful. It appears that three parts of four of the Protestant Churches, have
either Bishops or Superintendents, which is all one: and that those Churches
which have neither, yet they have some principal Men, Primarios, which have as
much power as Bishops, viis and modis. But if we should be contented to leave
three parts of Protestants to join with the the fourth, shall we find them
unanimous in this? No such thing. The Helvetian and other Churches ascribe the
Government of the Church to the Magistrate and allow no Lay Elders: But Genevah
and her Daughters to their Pre byteries, yet neither the Mother is like the
Daughters, nor the Daughters very like one another; as has been showed in part
before in this Treatise: and the Independents are for neither of these ways:
And all learned men do acknowledge our English Episcopacy to be lawful, yea
even the present President and Pastors of Genevah do the same. So if we desire
consent either of Protestants in particular, or of Christians in general, yea
of the whole Catholic Symbolicall Church; it is best for us to keep us where
we are.

My tenth and last Consideration rises higher, That according to their
grounds, who have been the greatest Oppugners of Episcopacy, the Government of
our English Bishops is not only lawful, but for the most part necessary, nor
only necessary but even an Apostolical and Divine Institution. This seeming
Paradox is yet most certain, and their opposition has been but beating the
air. For the clearer manifestation whereof, we must know.

First that the greatest impugners of Episcopacy, do not seek to bring such a
Parity into the Church: but that by the Ordinance of God and Dictate of Nature,
one Presbyter ought to be President above the rest, Ex Dei ordinatione
perpetua, necesse fuit, est and ^rit, ut in Presbyterio quispiam and loco and
dignitate Bezae defens. page 153.
primus, actioni gubernandae praesit, cum eo quod ipsi Divinitus attributum est
(...) (...) was, it is, it ever shall be necessary, by the perp^uall Ordinance
of God, that some one in the Presbytery as chief both in place and Dignity, be
set over the Action to govern it. He says that even then, whilst the
appellation of Bishops and Presbyters was common: yet the Presbytery had suum
aliquem primum and proest^ Presbyterum, Some one to be their ruling or
Presidentiall Presbyter. Page 140.
He says Saint Jerome did not so dote as to dream that no one of the
Presbytery was set over the whole company in the Apostolic times: and takes
it as a great injury, that any Man should think that they did go about to
abolish omnem unius Episcopen, in vel supra Page 160.
caeteros compresbyteros, All Superspection or Superintendency of one above his
Compresbyters. To the same purpose says Calvine, it is no mervaile that the
^nst. lib. 4. c. 6. Sect. 8.
twelve Apostles had one among them to govern the rest; this we have from
Nature, the disposition of Men requires it, that in every Company though they
be equal in power, yet one should be as Moderator.

Secondly, they teach (notwithstanding their drowsy, groundless, new-hatched
conceit, that this Presidency went successively by turns among the
Presbyters,) that either in the days of the Apostles, or immediately from
them, this Episcope or office of Superintendency, became Elective and
perpetual to ^e man, Quod certe, reprehendi nec potest nec debet, which
certainly neither can, nor ought to be blamed; especially seeing this ancient
Custom was observed in the famou^ (...) defens. page 141. 142. ^43.
Church of Alexandria; I am inde a Marco Evangelist^ Even from Saint Mark the
Evangelist. So as the Office is of Divine Institution, the form of Application
only is Humane: yet not merely humane neither; Humanum non simpliciter tamen
sed comparate, ^lla cum Patrum and tot Ecclesiarum injuria appellavero, I may
caell it humane not simply, but comparatively, without injury to the Fathers,
or so many Churches; Indeed all the Churches in the World, and all the Fathers
that ever were.

Thirdly, This Presidency of Order, which they give to one man, even upon their
own grounds is not destitute of all kind of Command and power. He has jus
regendae communis actionis, a right to moderate the Page ii4. 887.
Action of the College, or to govern the common Action, and that cert is
l^gibus, according to certain Laws. First, a right to moderate the Action, that
is, to (...) the Presbyters, to appoint the time and place, to propose matters,
to collect the Suffrages either by himself or by such as he appoints, to
pronounce Sentence. Secondly, certis legibus, according to certain Laws; this
brings us to the true question where the water sticks: The Law of God and the
lawful Constitutions of the Church, must be the just measure and limits of
this Presidents commands, of his Compresbyters obedience. So that Tyrannical
absolute Arbitrary power which is usurped by the Bishop of Rome and his
Instruments, is rejected by all Parties on the one side, and all Anarchy, Ataxy
and Disorder on the other side; yet this is not all.

Fourthly, this President has another power by Divine Right, or at least by
Divine Right is capable of another power: that is, not only to moderate the
whole Action by his Authority, but also to execute Calv. J^ lib. 4. cap Sect. 2.
that which is decreed by common consent. Neither can this executive Power in
reason be limited to the mere execution of Personal Decrees, concerning
particular Persons: but every where it extends it self to preparatory Actions
and matters of Form. Neither does it rest here, but admits, or at least may
admit a greater latitude, even to the execution of Laws; especially where the
Law is clear, the Fact notorious or evidently proved, where Succession and the
public are not concerned, where the presence of the whole College is not so
useful or convenient, and might rather incomber then expedite the business:
and all this more or less according to their certain Laws, the several
constitutions of several Churches: always reserving to the whole Body of the
Clergy, or those who by election or prescription do represent them, the power
of making and altering Laws and Canons Ecclesiastical, and to His Majesty His
Royal power of assenting and confirming, and to the representative Body of the
Kingdom their power of receiving, principally in cases of moment: and likewise
reserving to the Clergy, either Rural or Cathedral, according to their
distinct capacityes, their respective power of counselling, consenting, or
concurring, according to the constitutions of the Church, and Laws and Customs
of the Realm, which as they are grounded upon natural reason and equity, so
they are no way repugnant to the Law of God, whereof there are yet some
Footsteppes to be seen in our Ordinations, our Deanes and Chapiters, our
Semestriall Synods, etc. And if these old neglected Observations, were a little
quickened and reduced to their primogenious temper and constitution,: perhaps it
might remedy sundry inconveniences, and add a greater degree of Moderation and
Authority to the Government of the Church. Who can be so stupid a to imagine,
that the State, and Church, and People of Genevah at this day, do not, or may
not give to the President of their Ecclesiastical Senate a perpetuity of
Government for his Life: or enable him to execute some Ecclesiastical Laws, so
far as they shall see it to be expedient for the good of that Church and
Commonwealth, without swerving from the institution of Christ? This might yet
further be made plain, by those comparisons and representations which (...) and
(...) do bring of this Episcopal or Presidentiary power, of a Consul in the
Senate, of a Praetor in the Court, of a Provost in a College, of a Steward in a
Family: They ought to look upon him as their Superior and Governor, and be
upon them as Brethren and Fellow-Elders. This is that which our English Bishops
claim, whereunto they are entitled by the Fundamental Laws of the Land. How
far the power of the keys, of Ordination or Jurisdiction, is appropriated or
committed to them, singly or jointly by Divine Ordinance, (of which Subject
great Authors upon great reasons have declared themselves:) yet in our case it
is not so questionable, where another Lawful Right is certain: and this clear
satisfaction of Conscience they want, who are so busy seeking after new devised
forms of Ecclesiastical Regiment. And herein I may as justly admire the
excellent temper of our Church Government, asthe Observer does of the Civil; I
hope it is not in either of us, ut Pueri Iunonis avem, As Boys praise the
Peacock, with a desire to pluck his feathers. The Clergy present, the Bishops
approve, His Majesty confirms, the Parliament receives: all parties have their
concurrence, so as no Man can be prejudiced without his own act. If we alter
this Frame, we shall have a better in Heaven; I fear not upon Earth.

So then we see that upon these very grounds, which have been laid by the
greatest Opposers of Bishops in this Age, 1 there is a subordination of many
Pastors to one President by Divine Ordinance, 2 This Presidency, or
Superintendency, or Episcopacy, (all is one,) may without violation of Divine
Ordinance be settled upon one Man for his life, 3 This Person so qualified, has
a power essentially belonging to his place, to rule and moderate the public
meetings and Actions of the Church; yea to execute the decrees of the whole
College, 4 This executive power may receive a further latitude or extent, from
the positive Laws of Men. What is the result of all this? but that as
Presbyterate or the Office of a Priest, Presbyter, or Minister, (I shall
wrangle with no man about a name, whilst we agree upon the thing) is of Divine
institution, yet nevertheless there is something Humane annexed to it; as for
instance the Assignation of a single Pastor to a particular Parish, (which
custom was first introduced by Evaristus, long after Bishops were spread over
the World:) so likewise Episcopacy it self is of Divine Right, yet something
may be added to it, some extent of Power which is humane, and yet very lawful
and expedient; wherein every Church is to be its own Judge. If to this which
has been said of the Antiquity, Universality, Aptitude, Security, of this way,
etc, we shall add that Ambrose, Austin, Chrysostom, Cyprian, Basile,
Athanasius, and very many others, the lights of their times, were not only
Defenders of Episcopacy, but Bishops themselves; there can remain no scruple to
us of this Nation what Church Regiment is to be desired.

But some do say, why then do sundry eminent Protestant Authors inveigh so
much against Bishops? I answer, It is not simply against, their Function, but
against the sloth of some for not preaching, or the pride and Tyranny of some
particular Persons; and more especially it is against the Romish Bishops. I
might cite many Witnesses to make this as clear as the Sun; take one of many:
Neque vero cum hoc dico, Beza resp. page 1589.
^jus Tyrannidis eos Episcopos veram Christi Religion prositontes and docentes
intend^, absit a me tam im^dens arrogantia. Neither while I say these things,
do ^ccuse those Bishops of Tyranny, which profess and teach ^e true Religion
of Christ, Far be such impudent Arro^nce from me. And further he says, that
they are to be Page 126.
knowledged, observed, reverenced, as faithful Pastors the Christian Church.
And in an Epistle to the ^en Archbishop of Canterbury, he expresses him^fe,
that such invectives were never intended against ^e Government of the English
Church, but against ^ti-Christian Tyranny.

Secondly, it is objected that they did put away Bishops. I answer, that some
Reformed Churches were ^der Bishops, who were out of their Territories; as ^e
Helvetian Churches under the Bishops of Con^e: others were under Bishops of
another Com^union; as the French Churches: others could not both ^ntinue
Bishops and bring in the Reformation of Re^ion; as the Church of Genevah:
others did retein ^shops under the name of Superintendents, because ^e old name
had been abused by the Psu^do Episcopi or ^se Bishops, in the Church of Rome;
by the same ^son we should neither use the name of Christ, nor ^postle, nor
Gospel, nor Sacrament, because there ^ve been false Christ's, false Apostles,
false Gospels, ^se Sacraments: lastly, many retained both the name ^d the
thing; as the Churches of England Sweden, (...). And generally all Reformed
Churche^ were de^ous to have retained Episcopacy, if the Bishops that ^en were,
would have joined with them in the Reformation. This is evident for the Germane
Churches by the Augustane confession, and Apology, That Bishops might easily
have retained their places, if they would, they protest that they are not
guilty of the diminution of Episcopal Authority. And for the Helvetian
Churches, it appears by that letter of Zui^glius and ten others of their
principal Divines, to the Bishop of Constance; in all humility and observanc^
beseeching him, To favor and help forward their beginnings as an excellent
Work and worthy of a Bishop they call him Father, Renowned Prelate, Bishop;
the implore his Clemency, Wisdom, Learning, that (...) would be the first
Fruits of the German Bishops, favor true Christianity springing up again,
to hea^ the wounded Conscience; They beseech him by the common Christ, by our
Christian Liberty, by that Father affection which he owes unto them, by
whatsoever was (...) vine and humane, to look graciously upon them: or he
would not grant their desires, yet to connive at the^ So he should make his
Family yet more illustrious, a^ have the perpetual Tribute of their Praises,
so would but show himself a Father, and gr^ ^he request of his obedient
Sons; They conclude, God Almighty long preserve your Excellen^ Thirdly, for
the French Churches, it is plain Epist. ^73.
Calvine in one of his Epistles, touching a Reform Bishop, that should turn
from Popery: that he m^ retein His Bishoppricke, his Diocese, yea even (...)
Revennues and his Jurisdiction.

Lastly, it is objected, that Bishops have been (...) ^troducers of
Antichristian Tyranny, and all ot^ abuses into the Church. One said of
Physicians t^ they were happy Men, for the Sun revealed their Cure, and the
Earth buried all their in^mities: contrariwise we may say of Governors that in
this respect they are most unhappy Men, for the Sun reveals all their
infirmities: nay more, all the Ennormities of the Times, and the aberrations of
their Inferiors, are imputed to them; but the Earth buries all their cures.
Episcopacy has been so far from being an adjument to the Pope, in his
Tyrannical invasion of the Libertyes of the Church, that on the other side it
was a principal means to stay and retard his usurpation; as did well appear
at the Council of Treat, how little he was propitious to that Order, and by
the Example of Grodsted Bishop of Lincoln, who was malleus Romanorum, and many
others. And now much the rather when Bishops acknowledge no dependency upon
him. No Form of Government was ever so absolute as to keep out all abuses.
Errors in Religion, are not presently to be imputed to the Government of the
Church; Arrius, Pelagius, etc. were no Bishops: but on the other side if
Bishops had not been, God knows what Churches, what Religion, what Sacraments,
what Christ we should have had at this Day. And we may easily conjecture by
that inundation of Sects, which has almost quite overwhelmed our poor Church
on a sudden, since the Authority of Bishops was suspended. The present
condition of England does plead more powerfully for Bishops, then all that have
writ for Episcopacy since the Reformation of our Church.

I have made this digression by occasion of the Observers so often girding at
Bishops; he may either pass by it or take notice of it at his pleasure. There
are some small remainders of his work, but of no great moment; as this, That
there is a disparity between natural Fathers, Lords, Heads, etc. and
Political. Most true, (though the Observer has not met with the most apposite
instances) otherwise they should be the very same thing; every like is also
dislike. He conceives that there is only some slight resemblance between
them: but our Law says expressly otherwise, That His Majesty is very Head,
King, Lord, and Ruler of this Realm, and that of mere droit and very right.
First very Head and Lord, and then of mere droit and very right: It is
impossible the Law should speak more fully. But the maine difference which may
come near the question is this, that the Power which is in a Father, Lord, etc.
moderately and distinctly, is jointly and more eminently in a Sovereign
Prince; as was long since declared at Rome, in the case between Fabius Maximus
and his Son. No Father could deserve more reverence from a Son: yet he knew
that Domestic command, must veil and submit to Political, and that the
Authority of a Father of a Family, does disappear in the presence of the Father
of a Country, as lesser Stars do at the rising of the Sun. But his maine
ground is, that the King is the Father, Lord, Head, etc. of His Subjects
divisim, but not conjunctim, if you take them singly one by one, but not of an
entire collective Body. So it seems His Majesty is the King of Peter, and
Andrew, not of England, nor yet so much as of a whole Town or Village: yet the
Observer himself can be contented to be the Lord of a whole Manor. I conceive
he learned this doctrine out of Schola Salerni, Anglorum Regi, etc. If this
assertion were true, how extrmely has the World been deceived hitherto? and we
have all forsworn our selves in our Oaths of Supremacy and Allegiance. His
Majesty is much bound to him for making him King of so many pretty little
Kingdoms: but as Titus Quinctius said of Antiochus his Soldiers, when their
Friends did set them out by parcells, for Armies of Medes, Elemites, Cadusians,
etc; That all these in one word were but Syrians. So His Majesty is well
contented to reduce all these Kingdoms of Microcosmes, into one Kingdom of
England, if he may hold that in peace.

Such another Paradox is that which follows, that Page 19.
Treason or Rebellion in Subjects is not so horrid in nature, as oppression in
Superiors. One of the most absurd opinions, and most destructive to all
Societies, that ever was devised. By this new learning, when the Master shall
correct his Servant, without sufficient ground in the Servants conceit; he may
take the Rod by the other end, give His Master some remembrances, to teach him
his Office better: If it be a little irregular, yet it is the less fault upon
these grounds. Does any Man think that the Observer instructs his Family with
this doctrine, at home out of his chair? believe it not. By the very equity of
this conclusion it should be a greater sin, for a Man to mispend what is his
own, then to rob or steal that which is not his own. The Superior though
he abuse his power, yet has a right to it, but the inferior has none. How
discrepant is this from the judgment of former times? they thought no crime
could be so great, as that it ought to be punished with Parracide: or that for
discovery thereof, a Servant should be examined against his Master, or a Child
against his Parent. The Law of Parricides denied, lucem vivo, fluctuanti mare,
naufrago portum, morienti terram, defuncto Sepulchrum. Tully says, they were
to be sowed up quick in a Sack, and so cast into the River: not to the wild
Beasts, least the very Beasts should become more inhumane by such nourishment,
not naked least they should pollute that Element which purges all things. Our
Savior calls Judas a Devil, Have not I chosen you twelve and one of you is
a Devil? why a Devil? because he was a Traitor. Let the Observer find out a
worse name if he can.

Such another is his comparison, between the thirty Tyrants at Athens and the
Cavaleers at York. Comparisons are odious, I desire not to meddle with them.
But it is well known what the thirty Tyrants were. 1 They were a Company packed
together by Lysander for his purpose. 2 They were called Optimi, good Patriots,
and Administratores Reipublicae, the Administrators of the Commonwealth. 3 They
had the placing and disposing of the Senators or Counsels. 4 They made the
Magistrates of Athens out of their own Faction and Clients. 5 They were great
Profaners of Temples and Contemners of Religion, as appeared by their command
to pull Theramenes from the Altar. 6 They armed 3000 of their own party, and
disarmed all others. 7 They filled all Greece with Athenian Exiles. 8 They
killed more in eight Months, then the Spartan Wars had done in ten years. 9
Condebant Leges, They usurped both the legislative power; and more then that,
an Arbitrary power without Law,: so as there was need of a Law, that no Man
whose name was written in such a Catalogue, should be slain sine judicio
without lawful trial; other Men might. And yet as if both these were not
sufficient, they assumed an absolute Power over the Law and against the Law:
ego vero ne lege hac se tueri possit, nomen ejus deleo and morte condemno, to
depriye him of the benefit of this Law, I blotte out his name and condemn him
to dye. Lastly, they had their turns, according to that Prophetic Praediction
of Theramenes, when he had drunk up the cup of poison and cast the snuff
upon the ground, saying, propino hoc Critiae pulchro, a health to gallant
Critias the Arch-Tyrant; (which Story says Tully in his Tuscula^s no Man can
read without tears;) and shortly after Critias followed him into another
world to give an account of his bloody Administration.

Such flowers as these we find strawed here and Page 35.
there in his Book. And so he concludes abruptly, I find my reason already
captivated, I can no further --. Whether it were done to amuse the World, as if
he had much more matter, but that the Press prevented him; or that all this
while he has been uttering, his misterious Enthusiasmes and Oracles, and now
(propiore Deo,) he is rapt into an ecstasy or trance: or lastly, because he was
as confident of the success of his Observations, as the Spaniards of their
Invincible Armado. Zeno sometimes wanted opinions, but Anti-^
never wanted Arguments: What weighty reasons did the Franciscans urge on both
side, pro and contra, and with what fervor, even about the Color and fashion
of their Habits? I have heard of a like stir at Amsterdam about Starch: When
Men stretch and tenter their Wits to uphold a party, They will find something
to say, though it be in praise of Hellen, or commendation of Folly. It is
dangerous to leave old received ^ov. 22. 28.
rules, upon probable and specious pretenses: Remove not thou the ancient
bounds, which thy Fathers have set. It is the Wisdom of the Serpent, to stop
her ears, against the Voice of the Charmer: It is the Wisdom ^al. 58. 5.
of a good Christian, a good Subject, to preserve his Faith to God, and his
Loyalty to his Prince, and to bless himself from the Magical Spells of all
such Charmers and Observers.

FINIS.
GOod Reader, whereas an Anabaptisticall Speech is ^ked in the Epistle which
some say is of dubious Faith, bemoane with me the licenciousnesse of the times,
when the Press has brought the just reward of a Liar upon it self, and an
Academicall uncertainty upon us; but know that in this case it is not
material, nothing being cited but what agrees with the very grounds of the
Anabaptists.

Errata.
EPist. page 2. line 11. for Milita read Militia. p. 9. l. 7. for fine r.
find. p. 19. l. 4. after insurrection add for Religion. p. 23. l. 3 for leaf
r. leave. Lib. Page 2. l. 25. for turned r. tuned. p. 22. l. 18. for
anthorative, r. authoritative. p. 35. l. 6. for four hundred, r. three
hundred. p. 44. l. 5. for recoverable irrecoverable, r. revocable irrevocable.
p. 84. l. ^4. for oxibus r. ovibus. p 142. l. 12. for same year, r. eleventh
year. p. 156. l. 24. for course r. curse. p. 158. l. 11. for peila peilis, r.
pila pilis. p. 178. for Heb. 6. 19. r. Heb. 6. 16. And such like as sends for
send. presentia for praesentia. Phis^tian for Physician. Cataline, for
Catiline. ahe or he for the. Idollised for Idolized. psuedopiescopi, for
pseudoepiscopi ennormities for enormities, conjacture, for conjecture, Jesurum
for Jesurun. And the like.


