A SURVEY OF HISTORY. OR. A Nursery for GENTRY.
THEATRUM MUNDUS, AERANIU TEMPV' HISToriae The Caurvs.
Aring Aeetaris

Meliori nascimur aevo.

HERODOTVS.
T. LIVIUS.
THUCIDIDES.
C. TACITUS.
LONDON Printed by. N. and John Oaks 1^^^.

Will: Marshall sculpsit.
Are to be sold by Jasper Emery at the Eagle and Child in Paul's Churchyard
near watling street

Woodcut Frontispiece

HISTORY Surveyed In a brief EPITOMY: OR, A Nursery FOR GENTRY.

Comprised in an Intermixed Discourse upon Historical and Poetical Relations.
Wherein is much variety of Discourse and modest delight.

By Richard Braithwaite Esquire. Oxon.

Hor. Quod verum atque decens curo and rogo and omnis in hoc Sum. London,
Printed for J. E. and are to be sold by Nathanael Webb and William Grantham, at
the Greyhound in Paul's Churchyard. 1651.

TO THE RIGHT HONORABLE, HENRY Lord WRIOTHSLEY, Earl of Southampton,
(Learnings Select Favorite;) RI. BRATHWAIT wishes perpetual increase of best
meriting Honors. This Historical Survey was formerly addressed in this
Dedicatory Epistle to his Honor, whose living memory shall ever breath to
posterity a sweet smelling Odor. And whose unexpiring Fame, has begot a noble
emulation, in his hopeful Successor.

Right Honorable,
SO rarely is PALLAS Shield borne by the Noble, or supported by Such whose
Eminence might Revive her decayed hopes: as Britains Pernassus (on which,
never were more inhabitants planted, and Homer-like, more usually expulsed) is
grown despicable in herself, because protected by none but herself. Hinc
ferrea Tempora Surgunt --: wanting their Cherishers (those Heroicke Patrons)
whose countenance in former times made the Studies of the Learned more pleasant
(having their Labors by such approbation, seconded.) Yet in these times (my
Honorable Lord) we may find some royal Seeds of pristine Nobility (wherein we
may glory) reserved, as it were, from so great ruins, for the preservation of
Learning, and the continuance of all virtuous Studies; amongst which your Noble
Self, as generally reputed learned, so a professed friend to Such as be studious
of Learning: a character which ever held best correspondency with honor, being
a favorite to them who can best define honor: expressing to the life, what
proprieties best concord with so exquisite a Maister-piece.

It is observed, that all the Roman Emperors were singular in some peculiar
Art, Science, or Mystery: and such of the Patricians as could not derive their
native descent (with the particular relation of their Ancestors most noble
Actions) were thought unworthy to arrogate any thing to themselves by their
Virtues. These Romans were truly Noble, bearing their own Annals ever with
them, either to caution them of what was to be done, or excite them to
prosecute what was by them commendably done: nor knew they Honor better
limned, or more exactly proportioned, then when it was beautified by the
internal Ornaments of the Mind. Many I know (my good Lord) whose greatness is
derivative from their Ancestors unto themselves, but much Eclypsed by their
own defects: and Plants which had a Noble-Grafter, use now and then to
degenerate. But so apparent is Your Luster, it borrows no light but from
your-Selfe; no eminence but from the Lamp of Your Honor; which is ever ready
to excite the Virtuous to the undertaking of labors wel-meriting of their
Country, and generally profitable to all Estates. In Subjects of this nature
(my Honorable Lord) I cannot find any more exact then these Surveies of
Histories; many we have depraved: and every lascivious Measure now becomes an
Historian. No study in his own nature more deserving, yet more corrupted none
is there. O then, if those ancient Romans (Mirrours of true Resolution) kept
their Armilustra with such solemnity, feasts celebrated at the Surveyes of
their weapons: We that enjoy these Halcyon days of Peace and Tranquillity,
have reason to reserve some Time for the solemnizing this peaceable Armor of
Histories; where we may see in what bonds of Duty and Affection we are tied to
the Almighty, not only in having preserved us from many hostile incursions, but
in his continuing of his love toward us. We cannot well dijudicate of comforts
but in relation of discomforts: Nor is Peace with so general acceptance
entertained by any, as by them who have sustained the extreamities of War.
Many precedent experiments have we had, and this Isle has tasted of misery
with the greatest; and now revived in her self, should acknowledge her
miraculous preservation, as not proceeding from her own power, but derived
from the Supreme influence of Heaven; whose power is able to Erect, Support,
Demolish, and lay wast, as he pleases: Hinc Timor, Hinc Amor! Hence we have
arguments of Fear and Love! Fear from us to God; Love from God to us: Cause
we have to Fear, that subject not our understandings to the direct Line and
Square of Reason, but in our flourishing Estate (imitating that once renowned
Sparta) who was -- Nunquam minus faelix, quam cum faelix visa --; Abuse those
excellent gifts we have received, contemning the menaces of Heaven, and drawing
upon our selves the viols of Gods wrath, heavier diffused, because longer
delayed. We should re-collect our selves, and benefit our ungrateful minds
with these considerations: that our present felicity be not buried in the
ruins of a Succeeding Calamity.

These Histories (my noble Lord) be the best representments of these motives.
And in perusing Discourses of this nature (next to the Sacred Word of God) we
are strangely transported above humane apprehension, seeing the admirable
Foundations of Commonweals planted (to man's thinking) in the Port of
security, wonderfully ruinated: grounding their dissolution upon some precedent
crying sin, which laid their honor in the Dust, and Translated their Empire
to some (perchance) more deserving people. Here Civil Wars, the Original
causes of the Realms subversion: There Ambition bred by too long success:
here Emulation in Virtue, the first Erectresse of a flourishing Empire: There
Parasites, the Scarabees of Honor, the corrupters of Royally disposed
affections, and the chiefest Engineres of wrack and confusion, buzzing strange
motions in a Princes Ear, occasioning his shame, and their own ruin. Here
States happy, before they raised themselves to the highest type and distance of
happiness. And generally observe we may in our Humane Compositions, nothing so
firm as to promise to it self Constancy, so continuate as to assure it self
perpetuity, or under the Cope of Heaven, any thing so solid as not subject to
Mutability.

This Survey (my Lord) have I presumed to Dedicate to your Honor, (sprung from
a zealous and affectionate tender) not for any meriting Discourse which it
comprehends, but for the generality of the Subject: and Native harmony wherein
Your Noble disposition so sweetly closes with it.

Your Protection will raise it above it Self, and make me proud to have an
Issue so highly Patronized: It presents it Self with Fear, may it be admitted
with Favor: So shall my Labors be in all duty to Your Honor devoted, my
Prayers exhibited, and my self confirmed

Your Lordships wholly, Ri. Brathwait.

To the Understanding READER.
SO many idle Pamphleters Write to Thee now a days, as thy understanding (in
my Judgment) seems much disparaged. I have ever resolved to have this Motto:
Catoni solus dormio: But where that Cato is, This las^ Impression to afford the
Nobly and Historically affected all generous content; comes forth now otherwise
attired the^ it was at first Published: being revised, corrected, and copiously
enlarged.
there is the difficulty. He is too heavy for the Court, too Wise for the City,
and too precise for the Country. If my Book chance to find him, I know my
Subject shall be entertained, and my Petition shall be heard, for, Auriculos
Asini non habet -- To give my Labor but impartial censure.

How studiously, copiously and usefully this last Edition has been Enlarged,
may appear by Digits or Signatures in the Margent every where expressed.
Understand thy self, Reader, and thou understands me: If thou battle at
Ordinaries, thou art not for me, thou have thy Wit in the Platter: for I never
knew him wise, that only delighted to

Fare well. R.B.

An Exact Table, or Compendiary; no less plainly then briefly directing to all
such Subjects, Stories, Historical and Poetical Relations; with all other
intermixed Discourses materially and Methodically contained and continued in
this SURVEY Of HISTORY, or NURSERY for GENTRY.
THE Author Methodically brancheth these his Historical Relations into a
threefold Division. 1. Scope of Histories. p. 1. p. 2 2. Fruit of Histories. p.
1. p. 2 3. The profit redounding to private Families by Histories. p. 1. p. 2
What the Scope of all Historical Discourses should be. page ib. A full Survey
of what h'as been done, with a comparable Relation of what is now done; by
conferring persons and Actions preceding, with these now in present enjoying,
becomes an excellent benefit redounding from History to retired Spirits. page
4. Ignorance in writing, (and consequently, a deficiency in the Relation of any
memorable action) became a great want to that Imperial State of Congo. page 5.
History defined and described. p. 6. Those most fit to govern Nations, who
have power to moderate their natural passions. page 9. A Cities triumphant
Motto. p. 11. How amongst other memorable Monuments; Statues, Imperial Coins,
and Mettalls; an Vine proportioned to the Ancient Ovall Form, was l^tely found
near to the Borough-Towne of Kendall: And, which is more remarkable, in a
Dale, anciently called Pot-field. page 14. Ladies much addicted both to
perusing and compiling of Histories; illustrated by sundry instances, to their
succeeding memory. page 16. 17. etc. The Office of an Historian. p. 21. Use of
Transcriptories. p. 27. A memorable Caveat for all corrupters of Justice. page
ib. What honor the Worlds Monarch did to Homer. page ib. The Method Poets
retained in their Historical Measures, Historical Relations. p. 28.
Several Fruits of History. p. ib A more select and peculiar Fruit of History.
p. 29. Historians improved by intelligence and perusal of others Labors. p.
31. An error in the folio. The people of China retained a certain form of
Cyphering long before our invention of Printing. p. 32. Diverse memorable Works
amongst the ancient have perished, through want of Transcribing to posterity.
p. 33. As we have the benefit of Print, so are those Works to produce some
benefit, which we intend to Print. p. 34. Use of Travel and Example. p. 37.
Imitation in Virtue. p. 38. Excellent Emblemes for deblazoning corrupt Justice.
p. 39. True Fortitude described. p. 42. The Great man's Motto. p. 44.
WHat Style best serves an History. p. 50. Diversity of affections in Princes.
p. 51. Breach of promise held a great dishonor amongst the Ancients. p. 53
Memorable Examples in revenging Disloyalty. p. ib. Deserving men punished by
the suggestions of ill Offices. p. 54. No end of popular hate. p. ib. Security
the ruin of Sovereignty. p. 56. Civil Wars leave in a distracted State the
deepest wounds. p. ib. How studious the Romans were of Histories. ib. The
Excellency of a composed mind. p. 58. A princely Emblem of Mortality. p. 61.
Man's Life contracted to a narrow spanne. p. 62. DIvision of Histories; p. 64.
1. Divine. 2. Discursive. 3. Moral. 4. Physic. or 5. Mixed.
Such deservingly taxed as corrupt the Text, and rack the Sacred Sense with
their enforced Allegories. p. 65. Not to mix sacred with profane. p. ib.
Corrupters of Scripture. p. ib. Discursive Histories. p. 66. Division of
Discursive Histories. p. ib. An employment of especial consequence recommended
to our Gentry, to whom he addresseth this Survey of History. p. 67. The
Satyricall Historian, and the Sycophant Historian. p. 70. A Rule how to
rectify imitation of Errors; by Historical Directions. p. 73. States, when
seeming most secure from their Enemies, ought to be least secure in their own
confidence. p. 74 An apt resemblance of the humors in the body, to the
qualities of the mind: or a Relation of the outward humor, to the inward
tempe^. p. 75. Ample Pensions allowed in former times to Historians. p. 77. A
modest Caution for all Historians. p. 78. The Commendation of a sincere
Historian. p. 79. A free discussing and discarding of fruitless Labors,
comparing them to the Mindian Buildings. p. 80. A Reproof of Licentious
Libells. p. 81. A pretty passage betwixt a Scriviner and a trifling Author. p.
84. A Description of the Satyricall Historian. p. 85. An useful Observation of
the humor of seditious and factious Writers of our Time. p. 86. A true
Aphorism occasioned from them. p. ib. Trajan, that President of Princes for
Moral Piety and Royal Clemency, had factious and stirring Spirits both in
Camp and Court. p. 92. A Memorable, Christian and Royal Expedition. p. 94. A
mischievous plot to cross that Expedition. p. ib. Factious Historians amongst
the Ancient. ib.
AN excellent Mean for an Historian to observe betwixt those Two Extremes,
Assentation and State-invection. p. 95. The Description of a flattering
Historian. p. 96. Learning of too precious a Memory, to become Mercenary. p.
97. Scholars are to leave this deserving Motto of Solons to their Country;
and if she reward them not, let it redound to her ignominy. O my dear Country,
both in word and deed have I assisted thee! p. 98. Philosophy, and Poesy the
Flower of Philosophy, are Receipts against all adversity. p. ib. Moving
Historians. p. 100 How to move Passion, and by what circumstances. p. ib. An
excellent Art in moving Passion, instanced in Appian. Alexandrinus. p. 101. A
memorable Story of an unnatural Son, and his miserable end. p. 102. An
excellent Discourse of Imperial frailty; illustrated by Instances of
deservingst memory. p. 105. No Empire can confine the heart of her Emperor. p.
106. Lively Impressions of remorse, drawn from the Son to the Father. p.
107. Comparing of Histories very necessary. p. 108. A difference among the
Pagans in their Computation of years. p. ib. Transcriptions often times
uncertain and defective. p. 112. Plutarch styled the Father of Historians, and
prime Founder of Histories. p. 113. The variety of Discourse in Laertius. p.
ib.
FEigned Relations or Poetical Histories: Comprizing their Worth in this
Impresse: " Divina Poesis, generosa Phronesis. p. 114. Homer an Excellent and
Heroic Po^t^; only shadowed at, because the Author understood that his
Judicious Friend Mr. T.H. had long ago taken in hand (by his great industry)
to make a General (though Summary.) Description of all the Poets Lives; with
the Portratures of their Persons: to which He wishes far more felicity than
accrued to his Mysterious Discourse of Angels. p. ib. marg. Labors disparaged
by Translators. p. 115. Many illiterate of the exactest Judgment. p. ib. The
free passage of wanton Works, the maine Source of corrupting Youth. p. 116.
Unless Occasions be prevented, the most integrious may be impeached. p. ib. A
just reproof of indiscreet Translations. p. 118. The frequency and beauty of
the Latin Tongue. p. 121. A Relation of Hercules Labors. p. 123. How
Invention may stand with the contexture of an History. p. 124. Excellent
Emblemes shadowed under Poetical Fictions. p. ib. A witty Confutation of Pagan
Superstition. p. 125. Feigned Histories approved, tending to Instruction. p.
128. Such Histories only merit that name, which yield profit with delight. p.
129. He falls upon a just reproof of useless Readers of Histories: with
such as cull only grounds for themselve, to comply with their own desires.
And these He distinguishes into three sorts: Ambitious. p. 1^0. Voluptuous. p.
1^0. Covetous. p. 1^0.
The Ambitious man's Object in his Reading. p. ib. The Voluptuous man's Object in
his Reading. p. 131. The Covetous man's Object in his Reading. p. 134. He
resembles fruitless Readers to useless Travelers, who take notice of such
things as are most frivolous, or which is worse, vicious. p. 135.
HE descends to the second Branch of his Historical Division: treating of
Moral Histories. p. 136. Moral Histories, or Narrations in such Histories,
highly commended; with their ^ffects. p. 138. The praise of Moral History. p.
142 A Caution for our Silken Gallant. p 144. Plato's Definition of Man
inverted. p. ib. The fruit of Moral Reading. p. 145. Acknowledgment of our
Errors, whether it be in our Dialect and form of speaking, or manner of
living: with an ingenuous submitting of our Labors to the free Censure of
others, argues a great measure of Sobriety and Discretion in us. p. 146.
Self-conceit a blemish to the exactest Labors: Neither shall such Authors
free themselves from malicious Censure. p. ib. These Times old in Years, but
young in Hours. p. 150. A Reproof of the Age, in her disesteeming Authors:
and sleighting their Labors. p. ib. The Ca^se why Learning is contemned. p.
153. To whom Death is not terrible. p. 154. An excellent Observation by a
Tyrant. p. 155. Agathocles Emblem renewed; ib. is as it is portrai'd to Life.
p. 61. Morality, Man's Anatom. p. 155.
THE several kinds of Physical Observation. p. 156. The Crocodile and
Iohreumon, though two Beasts, in Nature differ^nt, are by one peculiar Nation
(Egypt) equally reverenced. He continues the Description of the Natures of
diverse Serpents; extracted from the Historical Description of Afric. p. 157.
The Region of Congo, by the Testimony of Signer Od^a^do, (a man principally
consequenc'd in those parts) as it is in Vipers numerous, so are they so
venomous, that such as are bitten by them do dye within the space of 24.
hours: But the Negroes are acquainted with certain Herbs that will heal
their wounds. p. ib. The various venomous qualities of Spiders cured by Music.
p. 158. Excellent Moralls upon those Relations. p. ib. The meanest Creatures
retain in them many secret qualities. p. 159. What Princes best affected those
Studies of discovering the Natures of Beasts, Birds, Serpents, etc. p. 160.
Courageous Dogs presented by the King of Albany, to Alexander the Great. p.
161. An exquisite Description of the Natures of Beasts. p. ib. Of the Natures
of Plants. p. 162. Of the Natures of Mines. p. ib. The Knowledge of these
e^pedient, though not necessary. p. 163. A just complaint against such, who
consume the Oil of their Life, in frequenting Loose places: how to rectify
this, that their own Families may become private Academies. p. 165. The
Emperor Octavian would not suffer his Daughters to be without some Art, Ego
possem de pau^erari, tunc ^iliae meae ^um labor ^ossent se ^utrire. ^id.
Aurel. ^ict.
Science, or Mystery; saying: He might become poor, and then his Daughters
might by their honest Labor relieve both themselves and their Father. p. 166.
A tempestuous Progeny in a calm time. p. ib. Emblemes of Birds. p. 169. The
Contemplation of the Creature, ministers admiration in us toward our Creator.
p. ib. The very Atheist condemned by Birds oth' Air: and how their Melody is
ever mounting with aerie wings to that Supreme Majesty. p. 170. How miserable it
is, for man to be silent in Gods praise, when Birds become heavenly Quiristers
in sending forth sweet Airs. p. 171. Creatures ordained to Sobriety and
Morality. p. 173. The distinct Natures of Beasts expressed. p. 175. Those Times
wherein the Roman Wars raged fiercest, and rung farthest, were not known to
that Vnfrier-like Invention of murdering Ord'nance. p. 176. He proceeds in
applying the Natures of several other Birds to the sundry different qualities,
or corruptions, rather, in Man. p. 178. Pleasant Poetical Fictions of the
Enmity of Birds. p. 180. A sweet-sented Courtier properly resembled. p. 182.
What the Poets intended by their Transformations. p. 183. A Countrey-seated
Citizen properly resembled. p. ib. The constant Love, and amicable League of
Birds amongst themselves. p. 184. Why Birds of Rapine are most hated. p. 185.
Why Night-Birds are had in pursuit. p. ib. Resemblances in Beasts. p. ib.
Several proprieties resembling several persons. p. 187. He recounts sundry
other Birds, which retain in them naturally, infallible Notions of the change
and various disposition of Weathers: illustrated by several Instances. p. 188.
A Divine Con^emplation upon Survey had to the lowest of Gods Creatures. p. 190.
Natures of Serpents, and of Pagan Adorations: wherein He refers the Reader
to that Discourse of ^sia, and Afric, entitled: The Fardell of ^ash ons. p.
192. Of the different Nature, Form, feeding and feature of Serpents,
especially upon the River Nilus. p. ib. The Worm a motive of Thankfulness;
and the best Character of humane frailty; instanced in a Meditation of
wonderful Piety. p. 193. Diversity of natures in Fishes. p ib. What rare
properties are in the Ambizimatare or the fish of the Rock. p. ib. Contention
amongst Fishes. 194. p. The different natu^es of Fishes; and wherein properly
they allude to Man. p. ib. The study of Kings in Plants, Herbs and Fruits,
etc. p. 198. To what especial Resemblances these Trees be accommodate. p. 199.
Teare-shedding Trees. p. ib. A resemblance of Odours, Flowers, and other
Beauties to the inward Graces and Ornaments of the Mind. p. 200. He amplifies
this discourse of Plants, Herbs, and Fruits. p. ib. The best Lecture any man
can read, is to read Man. p. 201. The wonderful various fruits of the
Palm Tree in Congo. p. ib. The proper ends and accommodations of apparel. p.
203. Of precious Stones. p. 204. The virtues of Stones described. p. 205. The
patient man compared to the Stone Galasia; Diamond, or Amiantus. p. ib. Strange
effects in Stones. p. 206. Allusions of certain Stones to internal graces. p.
ib. Resemblances of Precious Stones to those choice virtues which should
appear in man: with their distinct properties or effects. p ib. How Mahomet
the first deluded his credulous posterity, with an opinion of miraculous
Sanctity, in that very monument which he had caused to be erected at Mecha in
his memory: p. 210. Of Minerals: Mines the lower laid, the better when
discove^ed: the deeper grounded, the purer when refined. p. 213. The North part
famous for Copper-workes; a great improvement to the State and Country: with
the revivall of those Works, by Sir Basil Brooks and Captain Whitmoo^e, men
of incomparable industry and ingenuity. p. 214. A pretty Caution for a Miser.
p. ib.
Mixed Histories. p. 215. Mixed Histories composed of all lands. p. 216. The
Commendation of Mixed Histo ies; with instances of sun^ry Historians both
Ancient and Modern, who have been us^fully versed therein. p. ib. A singular
observation recommended to Gentlemen in their reading of History. p. 21^.
Plutarchs paraleling of Princes, highly commended. p. ib. Mixed Histories
require a general knowledge, and extend farther than all the rest. p. 220. A
judicious distinguishing of wits. p. 221. Example of mixed Histories. p. 221.
Mixed Histories most fruitful. p. 222 Occasions of enfeebling the greatest and
flourishingst Sta^es, take breath from these three particulars: MART! praelium,
ME^CVRIO prelum, utrunque timendum.
Innovation in Government, Manners, Habit. p. ib. GOVERNMENT. p. ib. MANNERS.
p. 214. HABIT. p. 225.
Innovation in Government, Mann^rs Habit, occasions of enfeebling a State, and
laying her honor in dust. p. ib. Causes preceedent, directors to the events.
p. ib. Distinct proprieties in all Histories. p. 226. Inclinations different in
Princes. p. ib. An observation worthy our note; Subtle Counsels ever produce
unprosperous ends: And to their Councillors popular hate. Contrariwise, Virtue
ever attended with a prosperous end. p. 227. Policy her own ruin,
exemplified. p. ib. The misery of Ambition. p. 228. Greatness can be no
Subterfuge to guiltiness. p. 230. Unconscionable Prollers should be made
Sponges of, for example of others. p. ib. What Subject best concords with mixed
Histories. p. 231. Three things necessarily required in Histories of this
nature: 1. Truth in relating. p. 232. 2. Explanation in discovering. p. 232. 3.
Judgment in distinguishing. p. 232.
Histories should be true, or retain a resemblance of truth. p. ib.
Probabilities in all Historical passages highly commended. p. 233.
Improbabilities in all Historical passages highly discommended. p. ib. Not
Craesus Treasure, but a preceedent Displeasure caused victorious Cyrus to
invade Lydia. p. 234. Absurdities in Historians of our time. p. 239.
Explanation in discovery of causes. p. 241. A concord in circumstances amongst
Historians. p. 241 The harmony of Historians in their Relations, though writ in
several Ages. p. 242. The event gathered by foregoing causes. p. 246. The
Armies strength balanced by the Generals worth. p. ib. The indiscretion of
Commanders, the utter subversion of their designs. p. ib. The rare expression
of a compassionate disposition. p. 249. Contempt of Religion, the cause of
Realms subversion. p. 250. This, even the very Heathen have observed: "If
rifling Temples were sacred, what could beeholden sacrilegious? p. ib. Such
things as be above us, be not to be argued of us. p. 251. Kingdoms brought to
acknowledgment, by the taste of miseries. p. 252. Sanctuaries never well
frequented, but when dangers approached. p. 253. Fear will supple the most
insensible Atheist, and enforce him to prayer. p. 254. Causes, Directories of
events. p. 255 A disposition (reflecting upon the Divine Ordinance) yet not
limited; an Order, yet not coacted; a means, yet not enforced. p. 256. Many
Kingdoms much renowned by that means, which makes them most debased:
Self-conceit. p. ib. Honor the best, when it is derived from our selves. p.
257. Degeneration. p. 258. The praise of such who raise a Family by their own
demerits: And this procured by three means: p. 259 1. Gown. p. ib. 2. Sword.
p. ib. 3. Mechanic Art. p. ib.
Emulation amongst men of Note p. ib. Some of our best Philosophers, Orators,
Rhetoricians and Historians, though they were not Coetaneans with those Princes
in living with them: yet were their Works, after their decease, highly
endeared and honored by them. p. 261. An Exemplary Lesson for all
Ambi^dexters. p. ib. The wonderful establishing of the Turkish Empire. p. 266.
Arguments of the approaching Subversion of the Turkish State. p. 267. Concealed
Reasons not to be searched. p. ib. We are not to pry too curiously into the
sealed Cabinet of Gods Counsel. p ib. That Sacred-secret Consistory is not to
be searched (because sealed) with too much Curiosity. p. 268. An excellent
Receipt for all such as labor of too much Singularity. p. 270. Dijudication of
Histories. p. ib. Two sorts of Discourses eclypsing the glory of an Historian:
1. Sensuality. p. 271. 2. Impertinency. p. 271.
Light and wanton Works are to be exiled in every Civil State. p. 273.
Learning never but then deserves the Laurel, when it is virtuously fruitful.
p. 274. Chymick Opinionists. p. 275. State Stigmatists. p. 276. Factious
Questionists. p. ib Menippus his free r^proofe of rigid Censurers; whose
judgment only consists in razing Labors, and disheartning Authors: while
their innocent'st Lines are often mis^construed; their Sense corrupted. p. 280.
Two sorts of sinister Readers of History: 1. Curious. p. 286. 2. Calumnious. p.
286.
An opinionate Reader, an incompetible Censor of another Labor. p. ib.
Deliberation needful in Histories of maine consequence. p. 287. Discovery of
Vices abroad, many times instruct us in the very same at home. p. ib. Many men
of maturest Experience, have and do give way to sen uall obedience. p. 288. He
holds him for stupid, who for fear of Death, dies all hi^ life long: And him
for wicked, who lives without fea^e of it, as if there were none at all. p 289.
Foreign vices become nat'rallized, and ^ade ours by imitation. p 291. Strange
Noveltie^ draw attention, move approbation, if probability be mixed in the
Discourse. p. 294. Opinions drawn from diverse Authors should be reconciled. p.
295. A double defect: 1. Obstinate. p. ib. 2 Ignorant. p. ib.
Words should be accommodate to the Matter, not the Matter to the Words. p. ib.
What dress both for choice of Words, and disposition or Phraze, best becomes
an History. p. 296. Whatsoever tastes of Affectation, digresseth from this
Disposition. p. ib. Tragical Acts breathing naught but passionate Airs, amply
illustrated by those inhumane cruelties lately committed by the Groats and
Curlings in Germany. p. 300. Benzo's sad Relations in the Island of Hispaniola.
Benz. in Hist. Ind. ib. The Worlds An^tomy. p. 302. A witty conce^t of a bold
Artizan. p. 305. A modest discovery of the abuses of the time; how they are to
be searched; how cured. p. ib. A threefold Discourse branched into a three
fold Observance; showing how: 1. Some Books are to be tasted. 2. Some to be
swallowed. 3. Few to be chewed and digested. p. 307. Three Observances worthy
our Consideration in Reading: 1. Willingness. p. 308. 2. Diligence. p. 308. 3.
Intelligence. p. 308.
Use of those three Observances. p ib. The Method prosecuted. p. 309.
Use of History p. ib. The true Characterall Portraiture of a Miser. p. 310.
His insatiate desire of increasing his State; his useless ends in disposing
his Store. Some whereof we have here lately had; who, as they abridged Nature
of her due, and dyed in her Debt; so they could not perform the Office of
Nature long before their Death. p. 312. The Misers profit by History. p. 314 A
Miser cannot be rich. p. ib. A Miser his own Executioner. p. 315. A
Contrariety in two different dispositions. p. ib. The Liberal man's Aphorism.
p. 316. The Character of a Liberal man. p. ib. Examples of Liberality. p. ib.
The bounteous dispositions of many noble Personages Historically amplifide. p.
317. Examples of opportunate bounty, extracted from the Storehouse of History.
p. ib. It closes with more Majesty to make Kings, than to be a King. p. 320 An
Usurer never found his Countries friend. p. 324. An Usurer bountiful against
his will. p. ib. Examples of bounty amongst the Syracusans. p. ib. A
Description of the City Agrigentum, planted on that flowery Mountain Agragas in
Sicily. p. 325. A memorable Instance of Hospitality. p. ib. Miserable ends of
Misers. p. 326 The Prodigalls humor displayed. p. 327. His Faunes or
Followers, his Spunges. p. 328. His Fathers injurious doings, his undoing: his
raising, his ruin. p. 330. The Young man's Maze. p. ib. Our Predecessors
Virtues, Motives of imitation. ib. Histories, best discoverers of Errors. p.
331. Instances of famous Delinquents. p. ib. History the best Touchstone to
dijudicate 'twixt what is good and ill. p. 332. How to be Masters over our own
affections. p. 333. Admirable effects drawn from History, in subduing our
affections. p. ib. No malady but may find a Receipt to ^ure her, or allay her
distemper by the help of History. p. 334. Passions proceeding from brainesick
Lovers, etc. p. 338. A Lovers Ecphonesis: closing with Loves Metamorphosis. p.
ib. What honor is to be ascribed to Continence. p. 339. The History of the
Sybarite Crathis. p. 342 How soon a precious name is lost; with what
difficulty regained. p. 343. The pleasure of Sense short; the purchase shame.
p. ib. The fall of Parasites. p. 345.
PArticular profit drawn from History, to particular persons: being the third
Branch methodically arising from this Survey. p. ib. What fabulous Histories
more suffered than approved. p. ib. The History of Don Quixotte, a witty
invention, but full of distraction. p. 346.
HIs Judgment of diverse approved Historians; extracted from the best Authors.
p. 347. Josephus commended. p. 355. Circumstances in the Jewish Watre give an
excellent beauty to the Discourse. p. ib. V^spatian is said to have his Tents
first pitched on Mount Olivet, where our Savior was taken. p. ib. The judgment
of God in that History most remarkable. p. 356. A commemoration of Divine
Histories. p. ib. Insolency punished. p. ib. An excellent Example. p. 357.
Punishment alluding to the condition of the fact. p. ib. Blasphemy punished p.
ib. The like exemplary punishments inflicted on other Delinquents. p. 358. The
corruption of Maximinus body seconded the Tyrants cruelty: dispatching such
with his stinch, whom he had reserved for that death in his healthful estate.
p. 359. An usual means used by the Ethnicks of reclaiming drunkards from
their bestiall filthiness. p. 361. Every Vice briefly decyphered. p. 362.
Oeconomicall Histories, teaching private Families how to be disposed. p. ib.
Necessary instructions for all private estates. p. ib. and p. 363, 364, 365.
Historians most profitable to the Commonweal. p. 365. Enmity amongst
Historians themselves. p. 366. A compendious discourse of the general profit
of History. p. 367. An apt Similitude comparing History to a Banquet. p. 368. A
review of those former collections, applying them to our present occasions. p.
374. History compared 1. to a Banquet. p. ib. 2. To a Field. p. 383 3. To
Builders. p. 385.
History to a discreet Ea^e, the delightfulst harmony. p. 381. An ^xact
Historian, a select companion. p. 382. Instruction the light of understanding.
p. 388. Histories, Mirrors of all States. p. 389 Histories must not partialize.
p. 389. History the best Herald for deblazoning Virtue or Vice. p. 390. Three
especial qualities suiting well with the condition of any Eminent Person. p.
391 Rome in her decay, comparable to the Phoenix. p. 395. A Christian
consideration of the Power and Majesty of God. p. ib.
PRofit derived from Histories to Private Families. p. 395. The description of
a Manners danger. p. 396. The Soldiers discipline by Histories. p. ib. A
Motive of thankfulness, derived from a commemoration of man's irreparable
misery, without Gods ineffable mercy. p. 397. Four several Philosophers
ascribed Deities to the four Elements. p. ib. All Arts may be reduced to noble
attempts and condign fortunes by their own professions. p. 402. The discovery
of Royal Errors; where, in former times Subjects to their Princes, became
Slaves to their Errors. p. ib. Machiavels Positiont p. 483. No Estate secure
without the protection of a Supreme Power. p. ib. Examples, best motives to
piety, confirmed by the Orator Demosthenes. p. 408. No Image so near to life,
as the History of man's life. p. 410. History directs man in the progress of
his life. p. 413. History prepares man in his passage from life. p. 414. The
conclusion of this Survey closed in this serious approvement: Historical
Relations, become Records of Public and Private Experiments. p. 415.
Imprimatur

THO. WYKES R. P. Episco. Land. Capell. Domest.
MARCH 26. 1638.
A SVRVEY Of HISTORY: OR, A NURSERY for the GENTRY.
JN the SURVEY OF HISTORIES, the true Relators of things done; with a probable
Collection of things to come, by precedent events: J thought good compendiously
to contract some especial Caveats, as well for observance in Historical
Discourses, A threefold Division.
as for prevention of such inconveniences (or exorbitances rather) as happily
might occur in such Narrations. 1. Scope of Histories.
First therefore I have propounded to my self this Method, (by way of
inference) to Describe the true scope at which all Histories ought to aim, 2.
Fruit of Histories.
and to which, they should principally be directed. Secondly, to distinguish of
several uses and Fruits of Histories: The end whereof being exactly set
down, a dijudicating power may easily collect from what Subject the choicest
and selectedst Fruits may be deduced. 3. The profit redounding to private
Families by Histories.
Thirdly, the profit which redounds to every State, either Aristocraticke,
Democraticke, or Monarchicke, by the true and understanding use of Histories.

THE true use and scope of all Histories ought to tend to no other purpose,
than a true Narration of what is done, or has been achieved either in
Foreign or Domesticke affairs; with a modest Application (for present use)
to caution us in things Offensive, and excite us to the management of
employments in themselves generous, and worthy imitation.


For the true description of History; as it has ever been held the Treasury of
Time, in which were laid up and deposited the Actions and glorious Exploits of
preceding Worthies: As we would be very loath, that any Evidence importing our
private estates, should be either diminished or darkened: so much more, in what
might consequently tend to the prudent mannagement of public Estates, to
suffer the least obscurity, would argue in us either an apparent dis-esteeme of
our Praedecessors actions, or a remissness in our selves, to neglect so
spreading or propagating a Seminary; which, as former times recommended to our
care, so should it be our care by a discreet circumspection, to preserve.

Let us then reflect a little upon the Vtility of it, besides those
incomparable delights, which to a modest and serious judgment, are highly
reputed.

First, should these Annals perish, what more could the merit or approvement of
Virtue gain to her self, but what the injury of Times usually throws upon
deserving personages, Oblivion? No difference betwixt the desperate attempts of
an impiously-audacious, and odiously-perfidious Cateline, and a noble
State-affecting Vtican. Nay, we should lose those Eminent Types and Copies of
all imitable Morality, should we in rubbish bury the Surviving Records of
History. We shall here see, what even Moral Natural men observed, and how
constantly they stood in defense of what their glorious lives have proposed. No
danger so apparent, no threat so truculent, no Opponent so over-awing or
violent, which could weaken their Resolves, or make them Recreants to their
just Designs. The whole progress of their Lives, as it was a continued Line,
whose period ever closed with Honor: so were their Deaths no less memorable,
and in their setting sent forth the best luster.

How sweetly then relish these Discourses to a retired Spirit? who, withdrawn
from employment either through infirmity of Age, weakness of Health, or
dis-respect of Time, may take a full Survey of what has been done, with a
comparable Relation of what is now done: An excellent benefit redounding from
History to retired spirits.
and so by conferring Persons and Actions preceding, with those now in present
enjoying; may collect the vicissitude of times, and become an Agent by reading,
what they could not aspire to by personal action.

And with what easy sweetness may this be acquired? With what a pleasing
privacy purchased? They need not expose themselves to the perils of a
feare-surprized Camp, nor the surging billows of a raging Ocean: Their private
Arbor may be their Centinell; no Alarmes to disturb them, no fears within,
nor foes without to distemper them. And having taken a full and free perusal
of former States, with the strange grounds of their rising, and their
unexpected Catastrophes in their declining: what singular uses may they
propound to themselves, by consideration had to the mutable and anxious
Conditions of all times: seeing how even those Republics, which promised to
themselves most security, were enforced to run into other channells, and to
have their memories drowned in them, when they had mounted to the highest pin
and pitch of Felicity: And these to discourse of with a confident judgment, as
if they had been Actors personally in these Scenes: what useful knowledge may
it beget to themselves, what delight to their Hearers?

Secondly, should these memorable Records be lost, which have only power to
keep men alive, when seeming dead, This that Imperial State of Congo, had she
been sensible of her own wants, might have perceived; who keeps no Histories
of their ancient Kings, nor any memorial of the Ages p^st, because they can
not write. They measure their times generally by the Moons: they know not the
Hours of the Day, nor of the night: but they use to say In the time of such a
Man, such a thing happened.
and by the Revivall of their Actions, to produce in stirring spirits a desire
of emulating their Virtues, the very form and Method of ancient governments,
whose platformes have not a little conduced to the mannaging and marshalling of
present Estates, should be utterly razed and extinguished.

What excellent Lawgivers have former Ages yielded? what useful Laws have
they enacted? How strongly these labored to preserve, what their care had
studied and published? How strictly moderate became many States, which discreet
Sobriety ever redounded to their succeeding glory?

Nor did they, though their darkened Judgments could never reach to a true and
infallible conceit of Eternity; show the least ostentation in the course or
pursuit of their Actions, or State-directions. Their desire was to express a
real goodness, without erection of Statues, to memorize them to after-ages.
Honor they sought not, being conferred on them unsollicited; and disvalued by
them, when freely offered. These, Histories commend, and tender them to our
observation, as Moral Presidents deserving our imitation.

Can we then eye these, and conceive no desire of rectifying our selves? Shall
Moral men, who confined their hopes to Elizian Chymera's, outstrip us, who
retain in us higher hopes, and make Eternity our Sphere? Shall we peruse
t^ese without a glowing blush, when we consider what beamlings of a divine
Intellect darted themselves on these, in comparison of that pure Diaphanicall
light which so gloriously shines upon us?

Melanct. in Epist. ad tert. Lib. Chron. Carrion.
He described History in a just model and proportion, who termed it the very
Picture, Emblem, or Mirror of Mankind: wherein are to be seen the
perplexities and perils of Empires, and of the Church it self: upon Survey
whereof, and an equal reflexe to our selves, we may learn how to demean us
in a modest way, both in respect of a civil Society, vid. Brit. Orig.
and politic government, as likewise in the Church Militant; especially, by
taking notice of our own and others infirmities, bethinking always of this,
how that Divisions from what Origin or Source so ever they spring, are not so
soon quenched; and how for the most part, long continued Wars, and mutations
of States are successively derived from one breach. These, former times have
ever observed; and by their Observations happily succeeded. They made use of
Histories, as principal directions for State-government. They collected what
was imitable, and they reduced them to use. They found no State so secure from
foes abroad, or fears within, as it felt not many times the hostile incursion
of the one, as well as the private intrusion of the other. This made them more
secured, because others mishaps kept them from holding themselves too secure.
They observed the occasions of rising States, with the probable reasons of
their decline. They found a period to the most flourishing Empires, and
gathered thence, (with a free and ingenuous acknowledgment, their dependence
upon another more absolute independent power) no policy nor humane providence
could divert, what that Divine Sovereignty had decreed.

This the prudent'st and powerfull'st have seen instanced, and in this Worlds
Theater presented, and in the discovery of them have trembled. Foolish wisdom
they found in whatsoever was humane: when many times, their own strength
became the ruin of their State; by converting their own powers, and turning
the edge of their own Swords upon their own bleeding Intralls; as if they had
aimed at nothing more, than to lay their own Provincial honor in the Dust,
and to raise a new fabric of Estate to some other surreptitious Nation. What
variety of Examples, Stories will afford us of this nature, I appeal to the
Candid and impartial Judgment of any pure or uncorrupted Censor.

Again, to take a view of the mutable condition of all States; and how
Victorious Princes, whose Motto's seemed to vie with the Herculean Non ultra;
became either personal Actors of their own Tragedies, or visible Spectators
of their unexpected miseries: And therein more unhappy, because once happy,
would afford no less matter of admiration, then motives of compassion.
Mithridates that invincible Prince and incomparable Artist, even He, who had
discomfitted in diverse set battles, Lucius Crassus, Oppius Quintus, and
Manius Acilius, being at last overcome by Scylla, Lucullus, and utterly by
Pompey, for all his Infinite Treasure in Talauris; those many Confederate
Princes which admired his Valor, interposing themselves to prevent his danger,
and the ample boundiers of his Kingdom so largely extended; had for all this,
his body (the poor remainder of so great glory) buried at the charge of the
Romans, being sent by Pharmaces in Galleys to Pompey.

Nor shall we have only here presented as in a Chrystalline Mirror, these
Tragic Disasters of eminent Princes, whose falls, as they were steps to
others rising, so were they excellent Lectures of Instruction to all
ambitiously aspiring; but likewise the infelicity of such who adheered to them:
yet, behold the misery of Greatness! Neither could others miseries inform
them, nor their precipitious falls caution them, nor those numerous Instances
of mutability recall them. Diadems were more attractive Objects than to be lost
through fear, or rejected for a powerful Competitor. Sovereignty is a taking
bait; yet is it ever accompanied with hopes and fears. This caused Antonies
Angel to be afraid of Octavius Angel.

Albeit, some, whose solid Judgments or bitter Experience had wrought deeper
impressions in their composed tempers, were so far aliened from this conceit
of admiring Greatness, or titular State, as they conceived nothing more
miserable than to be so surcharged. Seleuchus being King, and one of an
extensive power, was wont to say, that if a man knew with what cares a Diadem
was clogged, he would not take it up though it lay in the Street.

When the Romans had despoiled Antiochus of all Asia, he gave them great
thanks, saying, they had rid him of many insupportable cares.

This princely composure of affections wrought no less effects upon
Dioclesian, who voluntarily relinquished the flourishingst Empire in the world.

Nor can we esteem any person more truly deserving Honor, than he, who can
with a composed mind and cheerful affection, as if he were engaged to no
such glorious yoke, suffer himself to forgo it, and retain still the same
spirit, when in the eye of the World he seems most dejected. A Philosopher
perceiving Dionysius to sit merrily in the Theater, Those most fit to govern
Nations, who have power to moderate their natural passions
after he was expulsed his Realm, condemned the peop^ (...) banished him:
Holding those more fit to govern States, who could moderate their affections,
attemper their passions, and discover a cheerful countenance in troubled
waters.

Neither many of those ancient Heroes, so much transported with an ambitious
desire of Sovereignty, Cic. Tusc. Quaest lib. 1.
as they were with the apprehension of a glorious Victory. This made that
fluent, but affective Orator, so much enlarge himself, in the recital of
those noble and memoralble actions done by Themistocles and Epaminondas: which
he continues in this ample Memorial to their succeeding glory. The Sea shall
sooner overwhelme the Isle it self of Salamine, than it shall drench the
remembrance of the Salamine Triumph; and the Town of Leuctra in Boaetia shall
sooner be razed, than the remembrance of the Field there fought, forgotten;
exemplifi'de in the prowess of Themistocles and Epaminondas.

Their aims were confined to their own Fame, or Countries Renown: their
ambition was not to govern, but to conquer; as others of more remiss and
retardate spirits, rather to govern than conquer: which diversity of
dispositions may be found portrayed to life upon the Survey of History.

So as, it pleased the Orator to call History the Glass, or Mirror of man's
life; charactering the whole compass of this Universe, the states of Princes,
events of Wars, conquests of renowned Captains, even all Designs, either
public or private, by a succinct Description, or Map rather, expressing every
particular Affair: and what (as a worthy Historian has observed) can be
imagined more worthy admiration, then in a safe and retired Port, in the
Harbor of secure Rest, in our private Reposes, to see there a Prince
beleagured with many Hostile Opponents, straight by miraculous means defeating
them, and by his own policy, (the supreme purpose of the Almighty) to plant
himself in tranquillity, where (as far as humane Apprehension could reach)
naught but imminent ruin could be expected: there a City by wise and discreet
government wonderfully preserved: here amidst concealing or shadowing rather of
the Conquerours exploits by his moderation in conquering, implies how be could
bear his fortunes, if he were conquered. We may read no State in her self so
secure, but may be shaken; exemplified well in Rome, the Governesse of ample
Territories, and now made subject to those which were her subjects: No Prince
of so prosperous employments, so successive proceedings, or general forces,
but either vanquished at home or abroad: abroad by foreign powers, or at home
by his own illimited affections; instanced in that great and potent Prince of
Macedon, who (though Prince of the whole world) could not play Prince of his
little world, being slaved to distempered passions. No City but sore harased,
if not razed. Nor could that Italian Tryacala (which taking her denominate from
the Greek, comprehends all beauty) stand against the injury of Time, or
withstand the battry of all assaults, which makes me tax that City of
Arrogance, (whereof Hyppolitus speaks in his Book of the Increase of
Cities) upon the gates whereof was this Impresse engraven, The Cities Motto
tryumphant.
Intacta manet. To see these States so well and lively decolored, cannot
confer less delight (being grounded on Virtue, where all true and perfect
delights be seated) than the Relation of the Trojan Affairs (being made by so
excellent and experimented an Historian as Ithacus) delighted that chaste
Greek Penelope: Theseus Travels Ariadne, or Alcides Labors Omphale. But to
the use of History.

History being a Mint of profit and delight, the seasoning of more serious
studies, the Reporter of cases adjudged by event, the interlude of our haps,
the image of fortune, the compendiary directer of affairs, the representer of
humane success, the infallible character (by colation had with things past,
and things to come) of succeeding events: should not aim at lascivious
stories, amorous subjects (unless by way of digression to smooth a serious
discourse with a modest insertion of mirth) but to prosecute the argument of
the History without frivolous Ambages, or impertinent circumstances.
Affectation ill beseemes an Historian: For he should understand what office he
supports; not any thing drained from his own invention, but to perform the
charge of a sincere relation. I approve of his opinion that thought, Invention
to be least needful to an Historian, but Disposition more than to any. It is
sufficient for an Historian to express what he has read or seen, truly,
without concealing any thing, in partial respect to any person, making truth
the period of his discourse. The Philosopher thought a poor man was not to be
an Historian: for necessity would enforce him to temporise and observe humors:
Nor a rich man, for he had his eye fixed upon his estate, and durst not un-rip
great men's errors, lest he should lose by his labors. But I disapprove his
censure, and resell it with another opinion of the same sect: Si dives, de
fortunis and infortunijs scribat, sic enim utriusque fortunae sortem aequius
ferat. Si pauper, de fortunis scribat, ut cum eas attigerit, melius eas regat
and teneat. The error of judgment should not be appropriated either to want,
or eminence of fortune: for so should we subject the inward to the outward, the
intelectuall power to the external varnish; preferring the eye of the body
before the light of the mind. Yet to intermeddle in estates, so much as to
disable them (by extenuating their powers) lessening their revenewes, or
eclypsing their pristine honor and eminence, by mentioning some insuccessive
events they have had by war, or other occurrents, I wholly disallow it;
proceeding either from private envy to the State, or from malevolent nature
(unsitting for so good a professor) apt to sting all, because an enemy to
himself and all. States should not be laid too open: but when occasion serves
to describe the seats of Countries, Regions, etc. or to touch the manners and
conditions of inhabitants, how they live, and to what trades most inclined,
with whom they have commerce, or the like, will not derogate any thing from the
Scope of an History, or any way imply a digression. It is thought (and that by
the Authentick'st Historians) that Caesar, by the description of Volateranus,
which he made of Britain, declaring how the people were savage, and unapt for
military discipline, the places of defense unprovided: and then showing how
fruitful the whole Island was, replenished with all necessaries; was induced
to take his expedition into Britain, and to conquer it, though prevented by a
Brutus, who, to rid Rome of his tyranny, restored poor Britain to her
liberty, for his journey was stayed by Death.


Albeit, what sovereignty the Romans had in this Island, may appear by those
numerous Cohorts, Colonies, and Regiments disposed and dispersed throughout
most places of consequence in this Kingdom. Besides those many different
Coins, Monumentall inscriptions, ancient Sculptures and Impressures, all which
confirm their long reside, command and plantation with us.

Antiquities of this kind are very frequent, especially in the Northern
parts; where sundry sorts of Mettalls, Stones, with much Art and Curiosity
engraven, are oft-times found in the ruins of some demolished Fort, or turned
up with the plough-share; as an Urne, proportioned to the ancient Ovall form,
was lately found near to the Borough-Towne of Kendall: wherein were bones,
some solid, others turned to ashes; all whice imply what near society, and
continued corrospondence they held with us.

Nor should I with more free election or affectionate devotion, recommend any
Stories to the Survey of our Gentry, than these, which inform them in the
knowledge of their own Soil: wherein they shall find many memorable
Relations, worthy their observance and retention. For, albeit we esteem him no
man of Travail, unless he has traversed foreign Countries, and conversed
with them both in their Language and Manners: yet shall I ever hold this for an
undoubted positive Doctrine; that should we find a man who had entered
commerce with the whole World, could discourse of the diversity of all Tongues,
and return their proper distinct Idioms: yea, such an one, as had ingratiated
himself by his Gentile garb in the affection of all Estates; and in a
polished formal discourse could tell you, how he had seen Iudasses Lantern
at St. Dennisses, the Ephesian Diana in the Louure, the great Vessel at
Heidelberg, the Amphi-Theatre at Vlismos, the Pyramids of Egypt, with the
incredible manner of their Obits, the Stable of the great Mogol, or the
Solemnities of Mecha: yet were all these general Notions of foreign States
useless, being estranged from the knowledge of his own Native Soil. Yea,
should he enlarge his discourse in all these, by expressing himself in such a
Dialect, as might deservingly beget an Admiration in the Hearer, yet descending
to his own, and showing himself most ignorant, wherein he should be best
experienced, he could merit no less than just reproof: in so undervaluing his
own, as to publish himself sufficiently read in all places but at home. An
English fault I must confess; whose condition it is to admire nothing more,
nor with an eager affectation to pursue ought more, than the fancies and
shadows of Strangers: Whose fashions be they never so unbeseeming, they cannot
want our imitation, because introduced by a strange Nation. These resemble
Painters, whose Art it is to make f ces, but to forget their own.

Nor is it my purpose in this, to tax the commendable Travailes of such, who
with much danger and hazard have improved their own knowledge, and benefited
others by their undertakings in aslayes of this nature. Travail I know to be
the most accomplish^d ornament of a Gentleman: enabling him both for business
and discourse: but to travail so far from our own, as to make our selves
strangers to what neareliest concerns us, argues a neglect in our selves, by a
contempt or dis-esteeme of our own.

We shall read in all Records of antiquity, with what heat and height of
desire, all such persons as interessed themselves in compiling any Historical
relations, ever pitched upon description of their own Countries: with a
continuation of such Heroic acts, exployts, and designs, as might confer a
deserving luster upon her. Mean time, it was not the least of their care to
bestow an impartial pen in the deblazon of every person or action. Their
greatest ambition was, to magnify truth: to cloth virtue with her own native
habit, and discover the deformity of vice, were the subject never so eminent,
whereof they wrote.

Neither were these Tasks only for masculine Spirits: Ladies much addicted
both to perusing and compiling of Histories.
for many eminent Ladies were usually versed in these studies, to their
honors, and the admiration of their Successors. Zenobia after the death of
Odonatus her dear spouse, though a Barbarian Queen, yet by her reading of
both Roman and Greek Histories, so managed the State after the decease of
her husband, as she retained those fierce and intractable people in her
obedience: and in a Princely privacy reserving some select hours for perusal
of History, which held good correspondence with her Majesty, she abridged the
Alexandrian, and all the Oriental Histories: a task of no less difficulty
than utility, whereby she attained the highest pitch of wisdom and authority.
The like inward beauty might be instanced in many other eminent Personages of
that Sex; whose excellent composures in this kind survive the vading period
of time; as that virtuous Cornelia, mother to the victorious Gracchus; who, as
she was an Exemplar or Mirror of goodness and chastity, so by the improvement
of her Education to her children, she expressed her self a noble Mother, in
seasoning their unriper years in the studies of History, Poesy, and
Philosophy. Next her, Portia, Brutus his wife; Cleobula, daughter to Cleobulus
one of the seven Sages of Greece. The daughter of Pythagoras, who after his
death governed his School; excelling in all Historical discourses, which we
here so much commend; and afterward erecting a College of Virgins, she became
governesse or guardinesse over it. What shall I say of Theano daughter to
Metapontus, a disciple of the same Sect? What of Phemone, who first gave life
to an Heroicke Verse: and in exquisite composures recounted the memorable
actions and occurrents of her time? what of Sulpitia, Calenus his wife, who
left behind her most sovereign precepts touching wedlock, with the relations
of that age, in a most proper and elegant style? And Hortensia daughter to that
most famous Orator Hortensius, who for copiousnesse of speech, gravity or
weight of sentence, gave a living luster to her lines, a succeeding fame to her
works? And Edesia borne at Alexandria, one of such learning, sweetness of
disposition, as she was highly admired by those that lived in her time: and
amongst other excellences, singularly read in Histories; then held a study
worthy the entertainment of noblest Ladies? And Corinnathia, who is reported to
have surpassed the Poet Pindarus in artfull and exact composures: contending
with him five several times, as may be probably gathered by the testimonies of
the ancient, for the Garland or Coronet, usually bestowed upon such glorious
followers and favorites of the Muses? And Paula, Seneca's wife, a Matron not
only improved by his instructions, but highly enriched by the benefit of her
own proper studies: ever reserving some choice hours for the perusal of such
relations as either in those or preceding times had occurred. So as, we may
very well collect, whence the ground of her husbands sorrow proceeded, in
bewailing the ignorance of his mother, not sufficiently seasoned in the
precepts of his Father: by reflecting upon the abilities of his Paula, whose
discourse either for History or Moral Philosophy, appeared so genuine and
proper, as her very name conferred on her family a succeeding honor. Lastly
(that I may not insist too long on these feminine Mirrors, lest they should
tax some of our Modern Ladies of ignorance with other temporary errors)
Argentaria Pollia, wife to the Heroicke Lucan, is said to have assisted him in
the apt composure of his Verses: being no less rich in fancy, than he himself
when most enlivened by a Poetical fury. Nor did she restrain her more
prosperous studies only to dimensions, being no less conversant in
Historical relations, than Poetical raptures.

These, as they excelled not only the most of their Sex, but the eminent'st
personages of their time in a judicious and serious discussion of the fruits
and benefits of History: so they deserve to succeeding times a just renuall of
their memory: yea, some of their works wrought singular effect in the most
remiss and pusillanimous spirits of that time. For as in a Table we eye his
feature, whom we do here honor; whose representation conveighes to our heart
a vehement desire of imitation, of whatsoever we know imitable in him: So
History, the exact map or discovery of humane affairs; personates to us in
lively colors, the model of preceding times, with the dispositions of such
persons as flourished in those times: which Survey begets in a manly spirit, an
eager pursuit of their actions: considering, how fame is the constanst guardon
of resolution. For as Themistocles walked in the night time in the open street,
because he could not sleep: the cause whereof when some men did inquire, he
answered that the fame-dispersed triumph of Miltiades would not suffer him to
take his rest: Cic. Tusc. lib. 4
So the relation of others actions begets a glorious emulation in every noble
spirit.

And (doubtless) there is nothing which inflames the mind of man more unto
valor and resolution, than the report of the acts of their Ancestors, whose
monuments remaining of record with this impresse: Non norunt haec monumenta
mori, must needs stir up in them a desire of imitation.

Many examples I could produce herein, as the Trophies of Miltiades,
inducements of imitation to Caesar: the acts of Achylles to Alexander, of
Ulysses to Telamon; of the Greekish Heroes to Prymaleon, of Danaus to Linceus,
Aegeus to Theseus. Many times (we read) where a natural defect and want of
courage was seated, even a retrograde from the sphere of valor, there (though
a barren seed-plot to work on) by Historical discourse has magnanimity
shown her self in more perfect and real colors, than if nature her self
had implanted in that man a Native desire to fight; so powerful is History in
her self, where nature in her self expresses small power. This discourse
therefore should not be employed in any thing save in excitements to Glory,
motives to warlike designs; since by it valor is quickened, a desire of honor
inflamed, Countries fame dispersed, and monuments of never-dying glory erected:
O then, who should so disallow the precious treasure of a refined discourse, as
to mix it with impudent and scurrillous inventions; such fictions as are not
only in themselves fabulous, but to the unstaid Reader (of which sort we have
too many) mortally dangerous? Which fables in my opinion fall among the
impertinent and feigned Fables called Milesiae; only aiming at the depravation
of manners, and the effeminating best-resolved Spirits. The ripeness whereof
(by such unseasoned discourses) become blasted before their time: O that the
depravednes of these times should taint so generally approved study: making
Histories mere Panygiricks (Poems of adulation) to insinuate and wind
themselves into the affection of the Great, leaving the Scope of an Historian
to gain by their studious traffic.

But let us return to the office of a good Historian: Office of an Historian.
He will not write but upon singular Grounds, reasons impregnable; conferring
with the best to make his narrations confirmed of the best: He writes the
stories of Princes truly, without concealing their errors (by way of
silencing them) or comment upon an History, annexing to it an unnecessary
gloss. He will not be so engaged to any, as that he will be restrained of his
Scope; or so countermanded, as that he must of necessity illustrate vice;
virtue cannot pass without her character: A good Historian will always
express the actions of good men with an Emphasis, to solicit the Reader to
the affecting the like means, whereby he may attain the like end. This was
the cause, all the noble Heroes in ancient time did leave to posterity their
acts to imitate: not so much for recording their own memorable lives, as for
the propagating their Countries eternal honor by succeeding Worthies. As
those establishers of good and wholesome Laws made themselves with their
Country renowned: Mynos and Radamanth among the Cretensians; Orpheus among the
Thracians; Draco and Solon in Athens; Lycurgus in Laecedemon; Zamolxis among
the Scythians: Nor be Historians (if so the professors merit that style) of
less esteem than the prudentest and most experienced Statists. For these
direct every Senator in politic affairs, by producing such as excelled in
administration of justice; describing the very natures of such Laws, and the
causes why such Laws were anacted to present times.


True it is, that experience has begot wisdom, and memory as a Mother has
brought it forth. This might be instanced in nothing more to life than in these
Heroicke Actors, and Historical Relators of what is acted. The former by an
experienced hand and resolute heart not only contrives but atchieves what may
most conduce to the honor of his Country, and the succeeding renown of his
own family. The latter becomes a serious, constant and competible Record to
the former: by commending to writing whatsoever merited either approovement, or
might justly lay an aspersion of dishonor upon the undertaker. For as the
definition of History is to be circumscribed by no straiter bounds, than these
proper extensive attributes: The witness of times, the light of truth, the
life of memory, and the messenger of antiquity; so are all memorable actions of
preceding times by her to posterity recommended: and these with the light of
verity and perspecuity to be clothed; that the life of those actions may be
better preserved, and antiquity in her own native, though naked habit,
presented.

It is most certain, that many excellent Patriots, whose sole honor it was to
advance their Countries glory, though by their own ruin; preferring her
quarrel before their own lives; have utterly refused to have any Statues
erected in their memory: holding Virtue in her own pure unblemished essence,
to be a monument of more perpetuity, than all material structures, liable to
the period of time: yet did never any of them withdraw themselves from being
recorded in these books of Fame: accounting them Earthly Elisiums, for
memorizing their actions after death, which crowned their names with triumphall
honors during life. Hence it was, that Cicero moved Luceius (one of a
dext'rous pen, and confirmed fame) to record his acts in his writings: and
Plinius Junior wished nothing more than to be mentioned in the Histories of
Cornelius Tacitus, because he did foresee their succeeding memory.

Now, to insist a little upon that rich and unvaluable Traffic, which these
our late-declining times have had with their predecessors: we shall find, that
as former States received much improvement by the relation and recollection of
foreign Laws, which being made, by a discreet use and reduction of them, more
proper and peculiar, highly advanced those Municipall States where they became
established: So even our own times, though refined, and by collection and
collation of many Laws, with election of the best, breathing nothing else than
an absolute state of government, need not to be ashamed to make use of some
especial Laws enacted and duly executed by Ethnicks, both in meat, drink,
and attire.

For the first, the Spartans held it no derogation nor dishonor to them, to
conform themselves to the Laconian Order, strict, but healthful;
proportioning such a measure both for meat and drink, as Lessius himself, had
he lived in those times, might have seen his own physical directions so
punctually observed, that nothing could be to life better portrayed, than to
behold so temperate-abstemious a course generally practiced. And to deter
others from too loose and luxurious feeding; it was their care to erect sundry
Statues or Images, to represent the fatall-fearefull ends of such, who exposed
themselves to riot.

As the feature of Heliogabalus, the effeminate Sardanapalus, the unbounded
Ericthous, the insatiat Cambletes, whose infamous life closed itself with as
ignominious a death: for this gluttonous Lydian King having in a Dream
devoured his wife, while she lay sleeping with him together in the same bed;
and finding her hand between his teeth, when he awaked, he slew himself,
fearing dishonor. Which Modells portrayed not only to life, but explained by
proper Impresses, wrought wonderful effects in the taking Spectator. For as
that Rhetorical Improver of his Country, and Reviver of her Language, Cicero.
was wont to say; There is naught that can be taught without example: whence
it came to be a custom amongst the ancient Lacedemonian Fathers, to present
their Eliotes, (...):
or slaves in solemn Festivalls before their children, to act all their
Obscenities by action, gesture, and every unseemely or undecent posture, to
deter them from Drunkenness, and other bestiall qualities incident to that
vice.

For the second, so cautious were former times of their Honor, and so
fearful lest they should darken that divine luster of the intellect with that
broad-spreading Tetter or Deluge of liquor: Plato reports, that Kinswomen used
to kiss their Kinswomen, to know whether they drunk Wine or no, and if they
had, they were to be punished by death, or banished into some Island. Plutarch
says, that if the Matrons had any necessity to drink Wine, either because
they were sick or weak, the Senate was to give them license, and that
privilege might not be admitted in Rome neither, but out of the City.
Macrobius affirms, that there were two Senators in Rome chiding; and the one
called the others Wife an Adulteress, and the other his Wife a Drunkard; and
it was judged that to be a Drunkard was more infamy.

Such strong impression had their Laws, and the life of those Laws, which is
Execution, wrought upon them, as nothing became more dishonorable than this
odious vice; and Heavens grant, (...). Eccles^ 31.
that it may be no less disrelished by us, who wear a far more glorious and
honorable Cognizance than these Ethni^ks ever attained to.

For the third, they hated nothing more than light-phantasticke habits: They
were constant in their attire; their Traffic was not to engage their Country
to foreign fashions; nor fool the State with Fowls feathers. It was not one
of their least cares to prevent all occasions of too sumptuous apparel in
persons of all conditions: but by all means, to retain a seemly distinction
or difference betwixt men of quality, and those o^ obscurer rank. Yea,
Histories will deliver to us what especial observances were used in all these,
with the penalties inflicted upon such delinquents as were refractory in any of
these.

Now, a reflexe upon these, should induce us not only to conceive all gorgeous
attire to be the attire of sin, but to observe that decent form, or rule of
distinction in our habit, that we may become exemplarie unto others, by making
use of what we have read: never holding it any derogation to receive any life
of Instruction from others direction, though their Transcripts were only
Ethick, and showed not in them that fullness of beauty, which now so clearly
shines upon us.

THese Ages have been, and are to this day, Use of Transcriptories.
much indebted to Transcriptions. Inventions are oft-times slow, where the
application of things invented to the present State seems more facile and
easy: Hereto then should the Scope of Histories tend; not only to personate
the Acts of men upon the Theater of this world, but likewise to cull out such
Laws, Orders, and Precepts, as well Moral as Divine, which may benefit their
present estate. A memorable Caveat for all corrupters of Justice.
Sysambris skin was a good caveate for succeeding Judges: Justice before went
on crutches, and more were troubled with Demosthenes disease than with
Phoycions bluntness. The Historian must not sow pillows to the elbowes of
Magistrates, nor sooth corruption with an humor of shadowing vice: He shows
what was done: and commends the one to reprehend the other. Virtue never wants
her Character, nor vice her reproof: For such Historical Relations as induce
to virtue, and deter from vice, comprehend in them the true use of such
subjects, being Apologeticall and Moral to reform, not Mylesian or profane,
to deforme or disfigure the exact Symmetrie of a virtuous Idiome. What honor
the Worlds Monarch did to Homer.
No marvel if Alexander laid the works of Homer under his head, being such as
directed him to be a Head, how to govern Provinces, how to sway his inordinate
affections; so as Cleanthes Table (Virtues best elucidary) had her Liberal
Sciences never better portrayed, than the differences 'twixt true Fortitude,
and a foole-hardy boldness were by Homer deblazoned. Here a Hector, badge of
true valor; there an Antenor, whose gravity purchased him honor; there a
Diomedes, The Method Poets retained in their Heroical measures, Historical
relations.
no less wise than resolved; here a Troilus, stout enough, but unadvised; here
wars well managed abroad, but less successive at home, exemplified in
Agamemnon; there a subtle sconse, no less fraighted with policy than
success, in Synon. All these are expressed by that Heroic Historian.

Qui quid sit pulchrum, quid turpe, quid utile, quid non,
Before as melius Chrysippo and Crantore dicit.
These acts could not but minister sufficient matter of admiration to such
Judicious Readers, as apprehended each circumstance in the subject; making that
apt connection of all, that the body might seem more excellent, by the
proportioning of every member.

Several fruits of History.
HIstories in themselves are diverse, producing several fruits to the perusers,
according to every man's affection: which made that Modern Historian compare
them to a Banquet, wherein were to be served several dishes; some to provoke
appetite, others to satiate; more delightful subjects penned for relishing
more serious studies; graver discourses to ripen the understanding, by applying
the instructions of foreign States to our own judgments: where we may make
use of the best part of man (in his reasonable power) and that is Election:
approving of what is good, or may in it self be beneficial to the State: and
slightly observing discourses of indifferency, as accomplements, ceremonies,
circumstances, and the like, resembling fair frontispices which are made
rather for ornament than use.

IT is necessary for a good Historian to have maturity of judgment, to
apprehend what is fittest for his discourse, and to be as little complementall
as may be, lest the varnish mar the work; for the words of an History in my
opinion jumpe with Mirandula: -- Vt non sint lecta, ita nec neglecta: Profit of
History.
the one implies a kind of dejection, the other a mind too curious to profit
any, desiring only to please himself. Caesar in his Commentaries, shows no
less discipline in the Art of History, than in the discipline of Arms: using
a style as well fitting a Soldier, as curiosity the smooth tongue of an Orator.
It is true which was observed of him: Si acta eius penitus ignorasses, per
lingua^ tamen militem esse diceres: Si nescirem Caesarem, dicerem te militem.
Having neither his phrases too selected (as to show a singularity) or too
neglected, to express a carelessness in his writing.


Now, to propose a form of Style, and what may best suite with the quality of
an Historian; I will not arrogate so much to my self: only let me in a word
explode that which in the opinion of all such as have writ touching the Style,
carriage, or office of an Historian, deserves reproof.

For an Historian than to use too polished or terse a Style, or to play the
Orator, when he should perform the office of a Relator, would not relish of
discretion. Or to spinne out the web of his discourse in fruitless
diversions, which rather perplexe the immazed Reader, than enlighten his
understanding, implies either want of matter, or want of order. To go on in a
free and unaffected Style; beseemes his person: proposing things done, as if
they were ocularly presented: and albeit, it be not the happy fate of all
Historians with the Princely Caesar and sincere Comines, to be personally
present at those Conquests or Discomfits whereof they write; yet by collections
or intelligence many have composed, at least compiled excellent works meriting
no less improvement than if they had been there in person present. And no
doubt, though information cannot be so firm a ground to build upon, as a
personal presentation of what is done: yet, being seriously intentive and
sollicitous from whose relations they receive intelligence; using likewise a
seasonable deliberation to try the issue or event thereof, before he commit to
public, what was delivered unto him in private: he may by his own diligence,
with other accommodations, perfect what he intends, and incur few
obliquities.

I have known indeed, diverse, who only breathed their own Country air: and
never walked farther than their own Pastures; to have writ with much
confidence of foreign Seats, Historians by Intelligence and perusal of
others Labors
the government of their State, the barrenness or fertility of their ground;
the disposition of their inhabitants; their commerce with other nations. Their
Laws, Edicts, and Constitutions: all which by their industrious collection
they have so laboriously reduced, so properly compiled, and and methodically
digested, as not only the maine Basis or foundation whereon the whole Frame or
Fabric of their History subsisted, but the very circumstances, inferences,
and illustrations confirmed them Travelers in those Countries whereof they
discoursed.

This I confess is a great felicity in an Author, and deserves a just guerdon
for his labor. Albeit, should any one unawares converse with any of these
touching the Site, Degrees, or Temperature of any such Province they have
described: how miserably would they wander, and commit more errors in one
hours space with their tongue, than a whole year could rectify with their
pen? Relations of this nature are so got by the Book, as their Remembrancer
fails, when he is removed from his book. Nevertheless, it is not to be
doubted, but that most of our ancient Historians whether Greek or Latin, have
received their best helps from others Labors: which may appear by this, in
that they wrote of such Persons and memorable actions as were many ages before
their times. So as, not only this distinct study of History, but generally all
learning has been highly beholden to Transcriptions (as I formerly observed)
for otherwise had the most eminent'st Labors in all ages perished.

It is to be admired, by what Divine providence the ancient Records of
long-preceding times have been preserved; The last chapter of the History of
the Kingdom of China, printed in Macao, the first Latin Book that ever was
printed in China, makes mention of the Island St. Laurence under the name of
Madagascar: expressing in a proper phrase (the more to be admired in so
illiterate a time) the Si^e, Distance, and Commodities of that place.
especially, wanting those improving helps of Printing; which, with what
facility of Art, and felicity of Invention, have been of late years to all
Christendom recommended, I leave to the judicious to conceive, and conceiving
to admire that peculiar benefit.

The people of China, indeed retained as a memorable appropriate to their
antiquity, a certain form of Cyphering, whereof their impolish'd Art
expressed some notions by stamps and impressions: but these were only of use
unto themselves, being so intricate and obscure, as it had been a fruitless
labor to have communicated them to any other, save only to their own
Natives, without a knowing Interpreter.

No doubt, but many excellent works formerly composed by ancient Authors, with
no less industry than felicity, Diverse memorable works amongst the Ancient
have perished, through want of Transcribing to posterity.
both for Invention and Style, have perished: which might be no less probably
than authentically collected by diverse memorable pieces lost both amongst the
Grecians and Romans. We make no question of Hortensius Eloquence, and that
diverse works of his by the injury of time, have received that too common fate
to Learning, extinction.

Cordus, an impartial and incorrupt Historian; one who suffered for the
Integrity he professed: reteining ever that honest resolution, that though the
general corruption of that time might truly conclude with Martial: Qui velit
ingenio cedere, rarus erit.

He ever scorned to comply with Time, or feed the humor of an imperial
Libertine, or licentious Governor. This man, I say, or man of men, expressed
his courage most, when those vicious and depraved times appeared worst. Yet, no
doubt, many of those select and approved Labors which he had so seriously
compiled, and to an Historical Method reduced, remain now obscured. Many
inimitable works not only in their Embrio, but brought to their full height
and accretion, were written by that matchless Caesar, whereof we have now
scarce any semblance remaining. And whence proceeded this Tetter to Learning,
but from the want of that which we in so accurate manner enjoy, the benefit of
Printing? The tediousness of Transcribing occasioned this injury; whereas, if
the knowledge of the Press had arrived there, all these inconveniences had
been prevented, those ancient Monuments of Learning, Martial Experience, nay,
of all Liberal Sciences had been better preserved. Those poor Arcadian
Shepherds, when they had no other means to continue the memory of their
actions, or perpetuate their Loves, or recommend to posterity their Rural
Rapsodies, used to indorse their passionate Expressions in Rindes of Trees;
which seems pleasantly shadowed at by the Poet: Nomina pas^o^es inscribunt
cortice ^agi; Cortice quaelaesa, non peritu^a manent.
In barks of Trees Shepherds their loves ingrav'd,
Which in the bole remained, when the rind was shaved.
So sollicitous were poor Swainlins to have the memory of their Pastoralls
continued, as they used the best means they could to have them preserved.

Now, to us is a far greater privilege granted: our works may be kept to
posterity without any fear of so menacing an injury. As we have the b nefit
of P^int, so are those works to produce some benefit, which we intend to
Print.
Stamped they may be with a firmer Impression, to continue their names to a
succeeding generation. It rests, that as this benefit is conferred on us, we
bestow our Oil on such Labors as may conduce to the public: reteining ever a
virtuous scorn, to close in ought that may detract from goodness, or to
smother vice in the visage of greatness.

It was a religious Fathers continuate occasion of grief, Aug. Med c. 4
which he expressed in many devout aspirations and pious tears, to recall to
mind those lighter and less consequent Studies, which his youth had affected,
concluding with this passionate confession: Those studies which I once loved,
now condemn me; those which I sometimes praised, now disparrage me.

Let us reflect on this: and become discreetly cautious what we write; what
peculiar study we address our selves to; that our years of age may not blush
when they peruse those Follies in Folio which our youth published.

True is that constant Maxim: Iuventus inventioni, Senectus castigationi
aptior: How pregnant soever our wits be to invent; how rich soever our fancies
be to conceit; how elegant soever our style to illustrate our discourse; if the
Subject tend not to the practice of Piety; but only suite with the quality of
the time, exposing our Lamps to lucre, or to procure unmerited honor; our
riper hours will bring us to a censure, and discover our follies in their own
naked and native feature. As then, we value our honor, or shall labor to
preserve our memory to a succeeding age: let nothing pass under our Pen, nor
receive life from our Conceit, but what with a discreet confidence we are
assured of, that it may afford much benefit to that private or public state to
which it is addressed: and by a propagating power beget much profit in a
conceiving Reader.

It is an observable note, which one experienced in assayes of this kind,
sometimes said, and to our present purpose properly applied: It is hard when
the world shall show mine infirmities under mine own hand, said that knowing
Roman. The way to free us from occasional censure, is to conceal our selves
from the world, who is many times a Lynceus to the lightest error. Lateat haec
una salus, was wise Ithacus his counsel to perplexed Andromache; and mine shall
be the same to every Author, in this censorious Maze of opinionate frenzy.
Now to the election of our Style.

The Records of things done, commended to posterity, should not be enrolled, as
the Chaldees did their Hieroglyphics in Ciphers and intricate conclusions; but
in words most significant, phrases modestly elegant, and discourse most
pertinent. Here, by way of digression, let me touch the ridiculous labors, and
unfruitful travailes of such who pass the Alps, trace uncoth places,
Deserts, Promontories; for what end Heaven knows, save only to wrest out a
fantastic behavior of superfluous wit, or to comment on others Travailes by
way of dirision: These are such as upon their return, publish what they have
seen; some more than they have seen, which I term Commenting Travelers:
others less than they have seen, (or at least the most impertinent) which I
term fantastic Travailers. Such as lie on their Travail, either do it for
admiration, or having run upon the adverse shelvs of a deplored fortune, are
enforced to invent strange things for the relief of their dejected estate.
Such as publish less than they have seen, (omitting things of the greatest
consequence, to satisfy our humors with trifles) do it to gain pregnancy, or
singularity rather of conceit: they talk not of the Acts of Princes, nor the
Sites of Regions, the temperature of such Clymates, or any material discourse,
but to show an exquisite strain of wit, purchased by a little fruitless
travel: they insert frivolous occurrents, borrowed, or (it may be) invented by
their own phantasticke brains. These miss the mark a good Traveller should
aim at: they should observe Laws in foreign places, like a good Lycurgus,
to transpose so glorious a freight to their own Country. They should not
(like our fashion-inventers, our Italianated Albionacts) so much observe what
is worn on the body, as what habit best beseemes the nature and condition of
their mind. Since flourishing Commonweals are then the highest, when in
external habilliments the lowest: for Sparta never flourished more, than when
she conformed her State to the imitation of the Laconians. Many Realms have we
known to be miraculously protected, by means of experienced men: which
experience they either received by Travel or Example: yea, Use of travel and
example.
many Empires (and those of amplest circumference) have been reduced from a
kind of servitude within themselves, by experiments derived from a far. For
Travel, the excellent designs of Sertorius, Eumenes, Marius, and Antonius,
may sufficiently confirm the profit to be reaped thereby. For Example: We
shall read in all the Roman Annals, a certain vehement desire in all the
worthy Patritians of imitating whatsoever they perceived to be worthy
imitation in their predecessors; Imitation in virtue.
marking the events of their intendments, and collecting the goodness of the
means by the prosperous success in the end. These were worthy monumentall
honors, that could not only imitate the virtues so transparant in others, but
even exemplify their memorable actions in themselves.

We are placed in the following Ages, but we scorn to follow the precedent
times in their virtues, though expert enough in contriving politic designs:
the fabric of our invention can dispose or transpose it self to any shape,
any impression, for private gain or advantage: but public affairs may be
Advocates for themselves; they are a Merchandise too far estranged from our
affections; none will travail to purchase their Countries peace: Solons we
have few, that go mad for their Country; but Tarpeia's we have too many, that
are mad with desire to betray their Country: Few Law-inacters, many
Law-infringers: making wholesome Laws, like Tarandulas webs; wickets for great
ones to come through, but snarles for little ones to hold.

Those ancient Emblemes stood professed Antipodes to these injurious Spiders;
whose desire is, that Justice may still hold her comparison with the Celedonie
stone, which retains her virtue no longer, than it is rubbed with gold. There
were certain Images of Judges, by report confirmed, and to their full
proportions, with proper Motto's annexed, anciently rendered; which were set up
at Athens, (at that time the select Seat of the Muses) having neither hands nor
eyes: implying, that Rulers and Magistrates, to whom the civil sword of
justice was recommended, should neither be infected with bribes, nor any other
way drawn from that which was lawful and right.

Astraea, the goddess of Justice, was portrayed before them; her balance
hanging in an equal scale. The least deviation from what was just, engaged the
purple delinquent to an heavy censure. And this confirmed by the just and
irrevocable decree of highest Emperors. Severus would have smoked such
sellers of smooke. Zerxes would have pulled their skin over their ears. This
brought that flourishing-glorious estate to that spreading Empire in those
happy days wherein Basil the Emperor of Constantinople lived; of whom it is
reported, that whenever he came to his Judgment seat, he found neither party
to accuse, nor defendant to answer.

I remember a certain Model of antic form, Excellent Emblemes for
deblazor^ng corrupt justice.
wherein were presented in Punick habits six grave personages, personating the
office of Judges; each of them portrayed to the full body, and discovered by
their distinct Posture and Impresse: The first, as one made up of
impertinences, intending more the hour how it passed, than how business were
dispatched, sat winding up his Watch; and above him these words writ in golden
Letters: Quota est hora? The next to him, as one rocked a^^eepe, sat a grave
Endymion, careless how the world went, or how causes proceeded: his only
reside on a bench, was to take a nappe, and with all indifferency to recommend
the carriage of all businesses unto another, so he might without disturbance,
enjoy his slumber; his Impresse, to answer the former: Omnibus dormio. The
third, an imperious surly Saturnist, whose will was his Law; one, who scorned
to veil to another judgment, though his opinion were more just: preferring
his own voice before the equity of the cause: which he makes good with as
confident an impresse: Sic volo, sic iubeo. The fourth, a conceiving Sage, who
hears all, but says nothing: appearing as one won by affection; or
over-awed by command: or as one constantly resolved to comply with time, he
approves with silence, what his own knowledge dictates to him for unjust; and
this he seconds in these words: Video, sed taceo. The fifth, one of a strong
working pulse, more apt to receive than a common Shore. His Nerves were
described ever extended; his Eyes fixed upon a visible object of approaching
profit; and his Lungs nearely consumed with a close infatigable whispering of,
Quid dabis? The last, in a scornful eying and dis-esteeming of their irregular
courses; as one declining from their injurious carriage, which he conceits
unworthy the embrace of any sincere professant, who should make his life the
line, by which others actions are to be directed, others affections measured,
concludes, Video and rideo. Truth is, Emblemes of this sort are held a kind of
representative Histories: and by so much more moving, in regard their features
imply a more native and free expression, than if they were discovered only by
the pen without any other liniment.

With pieces of this quality, many eminent and illustrious personages have been
infinitely taken: instances hereof are each-where to be found without seeking,
and incomparably useful in their applying. Prot^genes his Table, wherein
Bacchus was painted, (and with no less excellence was the Emblem contrived)
moved King Demetrius lying siedge at the City Rhodes, to use such intermissions
and prejudicial delays in the pursuit of his design, that where he might
have consumed the City with fire, spared it for the preciousnesse and accurate
workmanship of that Table: so as, staying to bide them battle, he won not the
City at all.

We shall see in the draught of ancient Histories, not only the actions and
events of wars set down; but likewise the Purprise of Forts, the Site of
Cities; the manner of their defeats, in Pictures and other impressive
Sculptures; which add a great beauty and living resemblance to the History.
This we may see in those time-surviving Commentaries of Caesar, and other
Modern Annals expressed, to which these digressive observations may be
properly referred.

BUt to return to our former argument: by the right use of History, we see
virtue revived when her defender is dead: and to say the truth, I may use
Thales sentence in this discourse: without History, Nil mortem a vita differ:
Since the life of the dead depends upon the memory of the living: for without
some memorial of actions prosecuted, what difference betwixt the valiant acts
of Ithacus, and the shameful retiredness of Aegystus? betwixt Aeneas piety,
and Pigmalions cruelty? they are dead, and their poor Vrne can speak no more
for them, The great man's mo^to.
than Pompey's Sepulcher spoke for him: Hic situs est magnus! here he lies that
was once great: powerful in popular command, generally succesfull, before this
Pharsalian discomfite: hoar he lies that was styled his Countries Patron, Romes
best Centinell: yet failing in the close of his fortunes, drooping in the
upshot of his victories: Time can erect no other monument in his remembrance:
Vixi, and vici: only once I lived, and was once Conqueror. It is recorded,
that when Alexander came to the Tomb of Achylles, and beheld the Mirror of
Greece, shut up in so small a scantling of earth, (a parcel of that wh^ lo
which could hardly contain him living) he wept bitterly, adding: Haeccine sunt
Trophaea? Be these all the Monuments, all the Trophies this world could afford
thee? Is greatness so soon extinguished, and the lamp of honor so soon put
out? A good motive for Alexander, to caution him of his mortality, and might
make up this conclusion: Alexander thou art not (...), but (...): not the son
of Jupiter, but the son of earth.

The like we read related by Quintus Curtius: that when this great Prince of
Macedon came into Persia, an object of no less pity, than example of humane
frailty, represented it self unto him: to wit, the poor Sepulcher of that
victorious Cyrus, on which he found no other Inscription than this: O man!
whosoever thou be, or from what place soever thou shall come (for I know thou will come) know, that I am Cyrus, who translated the Empire from the Medes to
the Persians: pray thee do not envy me for this little handful of earth that
does cover me. This Epitaph could not choose but fix an impression of remorse
and commiseration (as indeed it did) in that great Conquerours heart: seeing
whereto all his victories tended: So as Nero's affecting command and
sovereignty was well answered by Seneca: Pulchrum est regnare, (said Nero:)
Nihil est, si nihil quaeras, replied Seneca: Certainly (if I be not blinded
with the love of Historical discourse) there is no means better to deter
from vice, nor more effectual inducements unto virtue, than these moral
relations. By them we see the lives of Princes, and their employments (Prima
specie laeta) in their first entrance or passage pleasant, and delightful,
promising no less than success, and in success, continuance: and afterward
(Tractu dura) more difficulties attending, as if the Wheel of Fortune we
removed to a place subjected to more occurrents; yet not so dangerous, as to be
attended by ruin: nor so secure, as to promise an undoubted issue. Eventu
tristia; a strange Catastrophe of so fair beginnings! where, in the first,
there was security grounded upon more than hope: in the second, hope, though
not secure: in the third, neither hope nor security, but deprivall of both. Yet
even in these conversions, if it please the Reader to cast his eye upon the
admirable moderation of some Princes affections, he shall see verily a
Christian resolution in a Pagan. True fortitude.
Furius Camillus could not be daunted, (though unjustly censured) his exile
neither made him dejected, nor his Dictator-ship proud. Phocion, that honest
Senator (to satisfy an unsatiate appetite of revenge) renders up his life
willingly, and when he could not dye without paying for his death, so
indifferent was life to him, as he confirmed his resolution by this
Epiphonema: Itaque nisi empta nece, mori mihi Athenis non licuit?


To recount the virtuous lives and resolute deaths of the Cannij, Senecae,
Aruntij, Sorani, etc. men of admirable tempers in so corrupt a government: what
excellent divine precepts they proposed: what indifferency not only toward
Fortune but Life it self they showed; how integriously they bare themselves in
place of honor; with what constancy they suffered themselves to be deprived of
it; would strike amazement in any understanding man. Especially, having had no
other helps but the light of Nature to guide them; nothing but an imaginary
Conceit of fame to eternize them. Light veiles for so high designs.

In those blind times, when States and Empires grounded their success on
Oracles; giving more credit to their doubtful Delphian Resolves than any other
praesage: with what preparedness would their Generals and Leaders grapple
with the extremest oppositions of death and danger? No safety, nor hope of
Victory either to State or Army, concludes the Oracle, if the General live:
and rather than the State should suffer prejudice by his life, with open breast
and cheerful embrace he meets death. Curtius leapes into the Lake; Cocles
into the Sea. This suffers exile, and rejoices in his misfortune; that
degraded, bears the same countenance in his disgrace.

Again, observe those constant amicable contracts of friendship one made with
another: how no peril could divide their affections: no interposed Cloud
darken those rays of Amity mutually reflecting: Histories are stored with
instances of this kind, which deserve our memory, with an admiration of their
immutability. Two especial examples, amongst many others, Stories afford us,
which are here inserted by us; briefly related, but to perpetuity memorised.
The former is of Pelopidas that noble Grecian, who skirmishing with the
Lacedaemonians against the Arcadians, until such time as being hurt in seven
places, he fell down at last for dead. Then presently Epaminondas (a mirror of
constant Amity, in an hazard of such extremity) out of a princely resolution,
stepping forth bestrid him, and fought to defend his body, he alone against
many, till being sore cut on his arm with a Sword, and thrust into the breast
with a Pike, he was even ready to give over. But at that very instant,
Agesipolis, King of the Lacedaemonians, came with the other point of the
Battle, in an happy hour, Plutarch. in Pelopida. anitio.
and saved both their lives, when they were past all hope.

Marcus Servilius, a valiant Roman, may supply the place of the latter; who had
fought three and twenty Combats of life and death in his own person, and had
always slain as many of his Enemies as chaleng'd him man to man; when as the
people of Rome, upon some private discontent, resisted Paulus Aemilius triumph,
stood up and made an Oration in his behalf. In the midst whereof he cast open
his gown, and showed before them the infinite skarres and cuts he had
received upon his breast. The sight whereof so prevailed with the people, Plut.
in Paulo Aemilio. fine.
that they all agreed in one, and granted Aemilius Triumph.

Should we observe likewise what intestine and inveterate hate one Nation bare
to another; where a new succession ever retained that proposed revennge of
their Ancestor, it would give us no little occasion of wonder: that small
beginnings rising to greater heates, neither by continuance of time, which
wears out greatest displeasures, nor mediation of interceeding States, could
possibly be attoned. Variety of these, History will likewise afford us.

When Annibal was a Child, and at his Fathers commandment, he was brought into
the place, where he made sacrifice; and laying his hand upon the Altar, swear
that so soon as he bore any sway in the Commonwealth, he would be a
professed enemy to the Romans. And that this grounded National hate was not to
be extinguished by death, may appear by many eminent and pregnant Instances,
not only anciently but even of later times occurring.

Scipio appointed his Sepulcher to be so placed, as his Image standing upon it,
might look directly toward Africa; that being dead, he might still be a
terror to the Carthaginians.

Zisca, that valiant Captain of the Bohemians, who had borne himself so
victoriously successive in many set Battles of incomparable consequence,
commanded that after his decease his skin should be slay'd from his body to
make a Drum, which they should use in their battles, affirming that as soon
as the Hungarians, or any other their enemies, should hear the sound of that
Drum, they would not abide, but take their flight. This was the reason that
the body of Cadwallo, an ancient King of Britains, (to draw nearer our own
borders) being embalmed and dressed with sweet confections, was put into a
brazen Image, Hollinshea l.
and set upon a brazen Horse over Ludgate for a terror to the Saxons.

These in a private Arbor, secluded from the cares or turmoyles of the world,
to peruse, cannot but beget a delight and admiration in the Reader. While he
collects the rare temper of some, whose alteration of fortune could not so much
as occasion one sigh, or produce a tear. The Reason might be this, they were
not so much enamoured on what they enjoyed, and consequently could forgo
whatsoever they enjoyed with lesser grief. Servile tears become slavish
minds: whereas a truly ennobled disposition scorns to be restrained by such
gyves. This benefit of Nature they enjoyed, and in such freedom, as loss of
fortunes could not amate them; being seated on an higher Mount than the braves
of so light a Soveraignesse could ascend to.

These rightly conceived, and usefully applied that Philosophical Axiom: As
the Moon does never eclypse, but when she is at the full: so the Mind is
never so much obscured, as it is with the superfluity of Riches. And again, as
the Moon is the furthest off from the Sun, which gives it light, when it is
at the full; so a Man, when he is fullest of Riches, is furthest off from that
Equity and Justice which ought to give him light. Herein therefore (to free
them from a more dangerous shelfe) they thought to imitate the Fly, which
puts not her feet into the great mass of Honey, but only takes or
tastes with her tongue so much thereof as serves her turn and no more, lest
by doing otherwise, she might remain taken and drowned therein. Bern. de
Advent. Sermon. 1.
For true is that sentence in every worldlings experience Qui mundum
amplectuntur similes sunt illis, qui submerguntur in aquis. This, through a
constant moderation of their desires, moved Anacharses to refuse the Treasure
sent him by Croesus: Anacreon the Treasure sent him by Policrates: And Albionus
the Treasure sent him by Antigonus.

That Zeno proved himself a Philosopher indeed by his contempt of the World;
who hearing that all his estate was exposed to shipwreck, with a pleasing
smile, and a composed temper, far above the braves of fortune, concluded:
Sen. de tranq. an.
Fortune bids me now the sooner play the Philosopher. And as their Spirits
were elevated above the Orb of Fortune; so could they with no less noble
resolution suffer the misery of Exile, ever closing with that divine Moral: Si
sapiens est, non peregrinatur; si stultus est, exulat. Sen. de remed. fort.
Howsoever then the State, upon some immerited Ground might pronounce their
Proscriptions against them: their Country was wisdom; their true repose, a
quiet, composed mind, ready to suffer in defense of honor, and to hold it a
prerogative of honor so to suffer.

What should I speak of Publius Valerius Publicola, whose moderation in the
ebb of fortune, and surplusage of miseries, made him more admired, than hated?
The equal temper of Rutillius, the exceeding modesty of L. Quintius, the grave
and serious respect of Fabius Maximus, the temperate deliberation of Marcellus,
and the admirable government of Tiberius Gracchus; the wise s^aidnesse of
Metellus, and the discreet patience of Marcus Bibulus. We use to be more
excited to goodness by Examples than Precepts; and such instances in Histories
are not a little persuasive, representing to our eyes the diverse objects of
Piety in Coriolanus, of Justice in Aristides, of Prudence in Cleobulus: and to
be brief, of all virtues so well practiced by Pagans, as they may well deserve
an imitation by Christians.

TO proceed now to the Discourse it self; I allow of a copious phrase in
History: For contrac^ion of sentences does oft-times contract the sense, or at
least makes the Subject less intelligible: Cornelius Tacitus seemed to affect
an ^^tri^^te kind^ of writing, yet his Argum^nt in i^ self for copious might
modestly Apologize his succ^nctnesse, approving Tullies opinion, where he
propounds, what errors are most subject to Taxing in such Discourses: Vitiosum
etiam est si nimium apparatis verbis compositum, aut nimium longum est: Taxing
in the one Singularity, commending in the other Brevity: Yet he seems to
oppose himself in it by plain contradiction, making relation of the same
Discourse: Non parum fructus habet in se copia dicendi, What Style best serv^^
an History.
and commoditas orationis: But these tend rather to Rhetorical Narrations,
than Historical Descriptions. Tacitus is to be preferred before the most,
being a dilated compendiary of many declined States, dis-united Provinces:
showing the vices of the time, where it was dangerous to be Virtuous, and where
Innocence tasted the sharpest censure: what garb best suited with the state of
that time, describing the Orators Tongue- Facundam inimicitijs, more partial
than Time-observers. Where Amici Curiae, were Parasiti Curiae: The Courts
friends, the Courts Popingayes. Here he shows a great Man rising, and his fall
as sudden as his erection: the immeritorious, in election for greatest
honors; and the virtuous depressed, because they will not mount by sinister
means. There a Prince that showed great testimonies of his approved virtues,
so long as he was subject, but raised to an unexpected height he seconded this
Conclusion: An ill Prince spoiled a good Subject: so was Galba: Omnium consensu
capax Imperij, nisi imperaesset: O what singular fruits may be gathered out of
that one History, to teach men in high estates how to moderate their
Greatness; and others of inferior rank, rather to live retired, than to
purchase eminence in place by servile means? But of all, Diversity of
affections.
the diverse affections of Princes, either well or ill disposed, minister no
little delight to the Judicious Reader: Here one so popularly affected, as he
had the trick to bind his Subjects to allegiance by a native insinuation;
such was Augustus, Antonius Pius, Septimus Severus; one whereof seemed rather
to affect popular satisfaction than his own, subjecting (as he himself
professed) his entirest thoughts to propagate his Countries glory: Antonius
Clemency, was the chain that united and combined (in a knot inviolable) the
hearts of the Romans to him, publicly protesting: He had rather save one
Citizen, than destroy a thousand enemies. But Severus was loved (which seems
no less admirable) for that which engenders, for most part, greatest occasion
of offense, and that was Severity; Being no less exact in punishing his
friends than enemies. But to read over the life of Sylla, we shall see an
opposition in his nature. None that ere did more good to his friends, or more
harm to his enemies: Nay, even in Brothers (derived from one Stem)
discrepant natures; Hinc Scissitanti, Quinam in ^^alatio? per^epide responsum
fuit, Ne Musca qu them.
Titus, the love and darling of Mankind; Domitian a professed foe to all
Mankind; the one banishing Parasites his Palace; the other a persecutor of
flies.


Those different dispositions of Romulus and Remus, Numitor and Amulius, how
from one and the same stem, branches of various natures proceeded. Again, to
observe with what a Religious Ethicke care, many eminent Princes erected
Temples for their Gods; how serious they were in observing those Ceremonies,
which were Nationally used by them. How superstitious they were in their
Oscines and Auguries; what constant performers of their words, were it either
in private Contracts, or public Conditions of Peace. Breach of promise held a
great dishonor amongst the Ancients.
What a lasting brand, or surviving blemish was it to any Nation, that should
be found guilty in this kind? What a Theta it was to the Carthaginians, to be
stamped with that inglorious Title of Foedifragi? How devoted and
affectionately engaged, those honest-morall Pagans were to Loyalty? Nothing
more hateful to them than Treachery. This caused Mithridates to take Manius
Acilius, Memorable Examples in revenging of Disloyalty.
one of the chiefest Ambassadors of the Romans, and set him contemptuously
upon an Ass, till he was come to Pergamo, where he put molten Gold in his
mouth: reproving the Romans for taking gifts: or to betray the confidence of
their Country for rewards.

The like is reported of Tarpeia, that disloyal Maid, who betraying the gates
of the Capitol to the Enemy, only upon promise, that they should throw her the
Bracelets which they wore on their left arm, which they accordingly performed,
but with other proper gages to recompense her disloyalty, throwing also their
Targets, with which she was pressed to death.

Neither were they less strict in punishing such, who in private and
Oeconomick affairs showed themselves disloyal. This appeared in that
nobly-disposed Enemy of Scaurus Domitius, who, when a certain servant
retaining to Domitius, came before the Judicial Seat to accuse his Master,
he sent him home to his Master with the Tenure of his accusation. These
ancient Sages and Heroic Spirits closed not altogether with that Maxim Of
loving the Treason, but hating the Traitor: For they hated to stoop to such
baseness, as to perfect what they intended, or dispatch ought that they
designed by such odious and indirect means. Nor was a loyall-noble spirit ever
seen unrewarded: perchance, indeed, the iniquity of time might be such, as
those who merited a gracious aspect from their Country, might sometimes fall
into disgrace by undeserving Offices, suggesting to the State what so useful
an Agent never thought: but this proceeded not so much from the ingratitude as
the easy credulity of the State, in inclining to such groundless suggestions.

This might be instanced in that unhappy Asdrubal, Deserving men punished by
the suggestions of ill offices.
who to prevent the fury and malice of the people, incensed against him by
unjust Offices, fled to his Fathers Sepulcher, and dispatched himself with
poison: nor found their fury here a period: for from that vast structure of
mortality, they dragged out his Carcass, and cutting off his Head, put it upon
a Spears point, and bare it about the City. No end of popular hate.
But this inhumanity must be imputed to that Democratick Government or
headless Monster, where all things are usually acted by a blind precipitate
will, without deliberation or advice. Whereas a knowing Prince, who measures
the value of men's actions by the promptness or alacrity of those spirits with
which they are done; eyes both the quality of the person and action: Nor can
any design proceeding from a loyal spirit, who stands ready to engage his
state, fame, and all for the honor of his Prince or Country, loose his
deserving Guerdon; besides that high opinion or estimate of the Prince, whose
Countenance is his honor; whose Smile the reward of his labor.

King Darius upon a time, by chance opening a great Pomegranate, and being
demanded of what he would wish to have, as many as there were grains in that
Pomegranate? answered in one word, of Zopyrusses. Plut. initio Apotheg. Regum.
Now this Zopyrus was a right noble and valiant Knight, who, to reduce Babylon
to the subjection of his Lord and Master, Just^^. lib. 1. in fine.
and defeat the traiterous Assyrians, suffered his body to be rent and
mangled: and being thus disfigured, fled straight-wayes to Babylon, where the
Assyrians were entrenched: whom he made believe that Darius had misused him in
this sort, because he had spoken in their behalf, counselling him to break up
his Siege, and remove his Army from assaulting their City: They hearing this
Tale, and the rather induced to think it true, because they saw him so
shamefully disfigured in his body, were persuaded to make him their chief
Captain. By which means he betrayed them all, and surrendered both them and
their City into his Masters hands. Such an Adamantine tie to his Princes heart
was a loyal Subject, who little cared how he were brought to the stake, so
he might advance the honor of the public State.

What more delightful Subject can be imagined, than to converse (and that
without peril) of the dangerous events of War? of the diverse dispositions of
Princes; raisings and razings of Empires: Some shaken by the vitiousnesse of
the people which inhabit them, Security the ruin of Sovereignty.
being so long secure, till ruin impose a period to their security: Some by
(civil and intestine Factions) making their dearest Country the sad Spectator
of their Funerals; Civil Wars leave in a distracted State the deepest
wounds.
their entirest friends, their professed foes; and the argument of love and
amity, the ground of civil dissentions: The cause whereof (for the most part)
proceeds from a continued peace; for retiredness from foreign affairs, make
us bent to prosecute Managements domestic; and the overflow of success
(purchased by peace) makes men more capable of injuries, even to their best
friends. This was the reason moved Athens to erect places of Martial
Exercises, (even in peace) that so the Youths being daily inured to such
Exercises, might employ their strengths in them, and not in civil Commotions.
This we have by relation of Histories; which so manageth affairs of State, as
I am of that Sages opinion, How studious the Romans were of Histories.
who averred: That no man could be an experienced Statist, that was not
initiated in the reading of Histories; which he confirms with reasons no
less Authentic, calling them the aptest and exquisitest directions that can
attend man, either in public or private affairs, at home or abroad. Diverse
therefore of our famous Senators in Rome, have employed their times in these
Studies; as Salust, whose wel-couch'd Style, succinct Sentences, and pureness
of Writing, may arrogate, it not the chiefest place; yet to be inserted amongst
the chiefest: Varro one of reputed esteem, and of ample possessions, took in
hand the like task, to illustrate his Native Tongue, not only with apt and
accommodate phrases, but likewise to compile the memorable acts of the Romans,
and to reduce them into an exact order; to excite his Countrymen, by perusing
the valiant attempts of their Ancestors: Eorum gloria inflammari ad eandem
virtutis exercitationem suscipiendam: To be inflamed and provoked, by their
renown and glory achieved, to imitate them in the like. And there is nothing
certainly that leaves more deep impression in a resolved mind, than the
report of former exploits; Hearing this man by his industry and vigilant
respect, to contemn all difficulties, oppose himself to all dangers, whereby
he might perform something worthy memory: Another (sustaining Herculean
Labors) to purchase himself but a little glory. This man subjected to
Sea-wracks, exposed to the mercy of the Winds, environed and hemmed in by
imminent dangers; yet moderating his passions, arms himself against the
perils of Sea, adverse Winds, the menaces of ruin, with resolution to endure
the worst of Fates, ever meditating of that motive to patience: Noscere hoc
primum decet,
Quid facere Victor debet, Victus pati.



It was the answer of an unamated Captive, who slighting the insulting braves of
him who took him: Thou hold'st thy conquest great in over-comming me; but mine
is far greater in over-comming my self. Here was a conquest indeed, and such
as deserve trophies of glory, to crown him with perpetuity.

The Scythes used to erect Obelisks or Square-stones upon the hearse of the
deceased, answering in number so many as he had slain of his enemies: Whereas,
he that had not slain an enemy, was not only deprived of those Monuments of
glory, but not so much as admitted to drink of that goblet (spiced with his
Ancestors Ashes) and used for an Health cup in solemn Feasts and banquets. O
what memorable Signals of true fortitude deserves that undaunted Spirit, who
can triumph in his own discomfit: and fortify himself with a prepared mind
against all oppositions!

The Unicorns Horn being dipped in water, is said to clear and purify it.
This will patience do in all those troubled Waters which enclose a composed
mind. The excellency a composed mind.
These find no grief of so extensive a quality, which either time will not
allay, or Death end. Though they be led in triumph, and exposed to all the
miseries which a domineering Foe can put upon them; they can slight the braves
and contemptible slavery of a proud Conqueror, and with a cheerful smile
entertain the mutability of Fortune. Such as these, are S^veraignes in
Captivity; and merit most applause in their embracing of adversity. Besides
this, they reflect with a discreet eye, upon what they formerly read: now
their confinement affords them leisure to peruse what they have observed in the
circuit of their time: and now in their new change or ebb of fortune they
find no new thing happened. Those, whose Victories were numerous; Sovereignty
boundless; could not so cut the wings of Victoria, as to make her their
permanent Guest. They hear Antiochus at one time saluted both (...), and
(...), a glorious Prince, and a furious Tyrant. They hear Pompey combred with
honor, exclaim to see Sylla's cruelty; and being ignorant after what sort to
behave himself in the dignity he had then attained, they hear him cry out: O
peril and danger never like to have end!

They see a Philotas aspiring, and falling; a Perennius conspiring, and
perishing. They note Dionysius that Syracusan Tyrant to be so suspicious of his
fall, so jealous of his Fate, as he will not trust any Barber to shave him,
but injoynes his own daughters to learn that Trade, purposely to be employed
about him. They hear the very same Dionysius asking the Wise men of his Court,
which Copper they held the best; and they hear Antiphons ready answer to his
question, that in his opinion, that was the most excellent, whereof Armodius
and Aristogiton made the Picture of Pisistratus. Holding that Metal the best,
which kept a Tyrant at rest. These hear the Lydian King exclaiming against
himself, and disclaiming of his own Opinion, that felicity should possibly
retain any subsistence from mortality.

These have found the best and principall'st bl^ssing confirmed by the
authority of Herodotus in Cleobulus and Biton, Trophonius and Agamedes, and
that pithy conclusion of Silenus, who being taken prisoner by King Midas, paid
this ransom; teaching the King, The best thing that might chance any man, was
never to be borne, Tusc. Quaest. lib. 1.
the next to dye as soon as might be.

A rich ransom, surely! had that worldly deluded King made right use of it;
for so had he prevented misery before it fell upon him: and made that an
occasion of his happiness, which unthought of, brought him to a more sensible
conceit of his own ruin. Those whom the Gods do love (says Menander) dye
young: yea, those they esteem of most, whom they take from hence the first.

To present these more impressive Motives of Worldly contempt, dis-esteeme of
Life, Honor, or whatsoever this Sabble Thea^re of humane vanity could afford,
sundry Imperial Princes endowed with spirits no less imperious, have
contrived many Emblemes, with other Remembrances, purposely, no doubt, to avert
their affections from so much idolatrising Earthly Majesty. Amongst which, you
shall find in these rich Treasures of Time, Historical Records, an
Agathocles, though a Tyrant, Emblematizing his own frail and mutable
condition in the invention of his own Statue: A princely Emblem of Mortality.
commanding the Head to be made of pure Gold, implying his Regal Dignity; the
Arms of Ivory, signifying how Justice from Execution receives her beauty; the
other liniments of Brass, inferring their s^^^nuity; but the Feet of Earth,
displaying their frailty.

An excellent Memorial, and well deserving to be engraven in purest and
perpetuall'st Mettalls. This Simonides sung to Pausanias; this a Page every
Morning to Philip of Macedon: (...).
Respice post te, hominem memento te. Cineas, that excellent Orator, and solid
Philosoper, dissuading Pyrrhus from his expedition against the Romans, demanded
of him, what he would do, when he had conquered them? To whom the King
answered; I will overrun all Italy, Greece, and Barbary; and what shall we do
next* I will forage Cicilia. And what remains to be done then? O then, says
the covetous Prince, we will live at ease, Eat, drink, and be ioviall
together every day. And why, (said Cineas) may we not eat, drink, and be merry
with less, enjoy what we have with comfort; and eschew those inevitable
labors and perils, whereto our ambition and insatiable desire of honor
engage us?

But this was too hard a question; Ambition can admit of no Reason. He only
h'as absolute power to confine his desires, who sees nothing without him,
which he conceives worthy of him. Such an one h'as measured Man's life, and he
finds it to be a span; A narrow spanne.
which he shall neither fall short of, nor exceed, no not one title or point
of it, not the breadth of the smallest hair, or Atome; no, not the rare-spun
Gothsimere; the subtilest link of the Spider; or any other extenuated or
imaginary thinness whatsoever. (...). Pindar.
He calls Death and Sleep two Sisters; and Night the Mother of them both. He
holds the Locust or the Grasshopper (though Creatures of emptiness and fear)
no greater slaves of the wind than Man: yea, to set him out in his colors,
and discover to the world, that his vanity ranks him with the lightest of Gods
Creatures: He finds him tossed to and fro as the Grasshopper, and driven away
as the Locust. He observes, how the Sun, when it is in the Meridian, and the
beams of it perpendicular to our bodies, shadows change not suddenly: but when
it begins to decline to the fall, every moment, almost, they vary. And such he
concludes, is Man; who, though in his strength and maturity of Nature, he find
no such changes or alterations in the state of his body, as may seem to menace
to his declining house an approaching ruin: yet, that curious and delicious
structure, that earthly contexture of man, when it shall begin once to decay,
and loose his former strength, every day brings forth a change. One infirmity
or other hourly invades him; and at last, so weakens his poor splitted
vessel, as no truce will be admitted, no respit granted, he must of necessity
return to those first materials, from whence he first proceeded.

We see the Crown of Honor set with great solemnity upon the head, but we
feel not the weight of it; which makes him sweat and shake hands with Rest
that wears it. We behold the golden Pantofle, but feel not how grievously it
pincheth the foot. We eye and admire the reflecting beauty of a massie-guilt
Target, or imbossed Armor, but partake not of his burden, who is the wearer.

The greatest Worldling ever carries the heaviest weight; the
ambitious-aspiring mind ever harbors the most care: the enjoyer of Honor,
the most fear. The scourge of Envy from below, and Ambition from above, do
hunt Honor to death. He enjoyes sufficiently, that h'as learned to be a
Sovereign over his own passions: and to restrain the surging billows of an
overflowing will, to the command of Reason. No Principality like this: for it
brings man to an higher Imperial State, than all the deluding promises of this
spongie world can possibly afford him.

These Observations are Receipts, or Cordials against the maladies of Fortune:
A man thus resolved, cannot be less than a Prince; for he governes a Dominion
more domineering, an Empire more imperious, A Diarchy, or Monarchy rather:
having disconsorting affections; overlaying Siege and Battery to the Palace of
the Soul, which moved Plutarch in his Morals definitively to conclude: That he
who moderated his affections, was half virtuous; but he that never past the
bounds and limits of temperate motives, nor felt the deluding enforcements of
vanity assaulting him, was wholly virtuous. But the Morals proposition was
better than his conclusion: For no mortal (since the stain of his Original
Purity) could ever subsist so secure, or remain so unmovable, as never to be
engaged to perturbations, the natural attendants of Mortality.

IN this first entrance to my discourse, having spoken something in general,
of the use and fruit of History: having by an (equal Diameter) determined the
proper place and Center at which such Historical Relations ought to tend:
Division of Histories; Divine, Discursive, Moral, Physic, or mixed.
I will descend to the division of Histories, which may properly branch
themselves into Divine, Discursive, Moral, Physic, or Mixed.

FOr Divine, I will not comprehend them in my Discourse, being such as depend
on their own Arches, drained from the pure Spring of Celestial Wisdom, and
therefore impossible to err either in Action or Relation: yet necessarily (now
and then) immixed with Moral Histories, because their weight may better p^ise
in the Scale of every Judicious Reader, when he sees Moral Discourse so well
fortified, as by the Pillar of Truth. Albeit I approve of Hesiods words: In
Noct and Die
Fabulous Relations should not, nor ought they to be authorized by Holy
Writings: Such as corrupt the Text, and rack the Sacred Sense with their
enforced Allegories.
It was a Pagans observation, and worthy ours: So should our profane
Pamphleters, restrain their libidinous writings more, and either write that
which should propagate themselves a general reputation, without derogation to
the sacred Writings of the Almighty, or silence their works; Not to mix Sacred
with profane. Vid. Lypsium in praescript. in lib. de constable.
lest they should deprave many, for a private reward, or pedling gain. More I
insist upon this, because too many have I known steeped in this promiscuous
Subject, well read in Scripture, to wrest them, otherwise Babes and Sucklings;
for they could not reach to the depth of such Mysteries, but only touch them
to corrupt them. But their Cimmerian Cloud, Corrupters of Scripture.
when it shall be dispersed, and the Rays of a reasonable understanding to
them exhibited: They will repent them, I fear it not, (and heavens grant that
repentance be not like the after rain, out of season) of their prophaner
mixtures. O let them turn their eye of consideration (whosoever they be) to
the miserable end of Lucian, Cleander, Metrodorus, whose disastrous falls
answered their blasphemous risings; contemning the Sacred Writ of Heaven, and
prostituting their labors to the merited censure of confusion: But too much of
them. Times are not so easy to be wained from their habit of error, or
induced to a course of more Sanctimony: Lamps and Oily Studies were made
fruitless at Epictetus death; his Lantern hung up (as a monument of his
virtues) made a deeper impression in his Scholars, than all our Motives,
Precepts, or Examples can do in ours: that Age was more apprehensive of Good,
this of Ill.

NOw to our Discursive Histories. Discursive Histories.
Many discourse without matter, only descanting upon idle Theames: more
observed for their idleness, than for any subject whereon they entreat: Such
be foolish Phantasticks that spend their Oil upon unnecessary Subjects. I have
apprehended many of this vain, but they shall be namelesse, talking of strange
Horse-races, such as their barren Muse never conceived: others of Fabulous
Histories, never found out by that Arch-Artist Nature, whence they derived
their foundation; for such, I pass untouched, being such as they hardly
conceive their own writings.

Discursive Histories are either true or feigned: If true, Division of
Discursive Histories.
they comprehend in them a certain ground, not only fortified by a reasonable
production, but also by the authority of such, whose Authentiqu'st Labors
claim to themselves, a kind of Authority without further proof: Such we
read to be the Labors of Cornelius Tacitus, Titus Livius, Trogus Pompeius, and
many others, whose Subjects confirm their authority: being such as represent
the diverse events of things done, by Historical Relation, and Ocular
Presentation. For diverse of those worthy Historiographers have been
interrested even in such probable, and generally-allowed discourses by
personal presence, Faithful Historians.
in the management of such affairs: as Commines, of all Histories (amongst our
Modern) most approveable, being an eyewitness of what he writ.

And herein me thinks,
I should take occasion, to recommend an imploymnet no less delightful than
consequently useful to such of our Gentry as are adidcted to Travail, or
Martial Discipline; An employment of especial consequence recommended to our
Gentry.
to have ever with them a Diary or Ephemerides of whatsoever they have at any
time seen presented worthy memory, or acted in the time of their service or
agency there. I should hold it convenient likewise for them to become their
own Amanuenses: by compiling and methodically disposing such memorable
Observances, as occur either at home or abroad. Labor tenuis est, tenuis non
gloria.
This course will recompense their few hours labor, to their great
improvement; and in arguments of Discourse minister no small delight to an
understanding Hearer. For admit the memory were never so retentive; yea, that
it might vye with that of Cyrus, who could call every Soldier in his Army by
name; yet to make it a Storehouse or Repository of whatsoever we have seen or
heard, would argue too much confidence in such a fraile-decaying ornament: for
of all faculties in man, Memory is the weakest, first waxes old, and decaies
sooner than strength or beauty. Prima sumus obliti, postrema non intelleximus,
quia prima non meminimus. An excellent Moral Caveat, and well-deserving our
learning in these times.

I could instance diverse noble Personages even in this Kingdom, who have risen
to an extraordinary pitch of Wisdom, Knowledge, and Elegancy of Discourse by
this means. These in their foreign interesses, would admit no day without a
line. Privately they recorded whatsoever they had seen publicly achieved.
They sifted the dispositions of men; and reduced the benefit hereof, by
complying with them, unto themselves. These Notions fit and enable them for
State affairs; and in employments of Embassy. An office of especial
improvement to the State, being discreetly and wisely managed: For the Person
so employed, presents in his own, the very Face or Image of the Commonweal.
For the better discharge whereof, that he may come off fair, and return his
Prince a grateful account of what he has done, it is necessary for him to
retain ever in memory those Speeches of a grave and judicious Statesman, by
way of direction in his moderation of Speech.

He that knows how to speak well, knows also where he must hold his peace.
Wisely concluding: Think an hour before you speak, and a day before you
promise.

Many, and peculiar be those prerogatives granted him; which, as they are
exercised by him to the honor of the State from whence he came, so is he to
neglect no opportunity for dispatch of those affairs for which he came. To
retain a seemely-modest State without affectation, will infinitely become him,
for that suits worst with his person of all others. He is privileged from
suffering abuse or dishonor; in the same line of relation is he to bear
himself toward another. For in this is the Law of Nations exhibited, that he
neither harm, nor receive harm from others. Albeit, he may still enjoy the
benefit of this privilege, till such time as he recede from his place or
Office; that he may use in his own family the Sword of Justice to any such as
shall utter words of disgrace against the Prince, or shall defile any man's
Wife: neither is the Legate himself exempted from like punishment, being found
in any of these a personal delinquent. For howsoever that Maxim of State be,
That none is to handle the Sword, but he who holds the Scepter; yet a
Deputative power has been ever granted, which rather improves than detracts
from his Majesty by whom it is granted. Now, to insist a little more upon their
Dignity; they are neither properly sent by Subjects, nor to Subjects. Their
Commission is from the Prince or State directed, not by any lower Power
addressed: where, though the Commonweal seem absent, yet is the
Commonweals cause argued in presence. And that a more absolute power or
Sovereignty may appear in him by whom these Agents are sent, than in the
persons herein interessed and sent, to speak in one word what duly and
properly concerns them; They are upon Return home, to render an account of
their whole passage: wherein should they complain, that the Prince or State to
whom they were sent, had rejected, abused, or any way injured them, by the
Julian Law, A Law of the Digests.
such an one was accused to have done contrary to the Law of Arms.

These, by help of History, find likewise what resolution is required in one
so interessed; and in what manner he is to behave himself upon affronts done
either upon himself, or to him whom he does personate. Amongst many other
Instances, he conceives no spirit more appropriate to one in that place, than
of that Ambassador of Athens, who answered King Philip of Macedon, threatening
that he would cause his Head to be cut off: If thou take this Head from me,
Statuam pro Capite, pro Morte Immortalitatem.
my Country will give me another that shall be immortal: for my Head, a
Statue; for Death, Immortality.

Memorable Examples of this kind are every where to be found, in this
unvaluable Storehouse or Treasury of Time, History.

But in ample terms to explain what the condition of an Historian is, let me
in brief, yet material words, express what he means: Not such as inveigh
against States, Satyricall Historian, and the Sycophant Historian.
or politic Governments, for such are rather Satyrists, than Historians; nor
such as personate the entire acts of a Martialist, by assentative terms;
which are such as insinuate themselves by a glosing Style to win the
affection of their Patron. Less to be borne with be these, than the other,
subjecting the free use of History to a Parasite and oily tongue: which moved
Alexander so exceedingly against Aristobulus, as that on a time hearing his
own Acts deblazoned far above truth, he commanded his Labors should be
thrown over Board: saying, He was almost induced to throw Aristobulus after: A
caveat very necessary for all clawing Parasites that make their Pen Mercenary,
and therefore, as may be inferred upon their works, dare not unrip the
vitiousnesse of times; lest by unbosoming Truth, they should incur the
offense of some person, to whom their labors are engaged, their fortunes
subjected, and their endeavors partially devoted.

Plato banished all Poets Athens: but a favorable Gloss would restrain that
Ostracisme only to peculiar wits, (petulant I mean) such as the Prince of
Sparta proscribed his well-governed City, H ero and Leena.
for presenting some obsceene Verses to his Queen. But I wonder why Plato
excluded not these Historians, since their Labors were prostitute (like the
public Strumpet) for gain, making their Writings to the opinion and imitation
of that Scarabee of History, who being demanded why he wrote not truth of such
a Prince; replied: Vivit, quis vera dicet? His life kept him in awe, he durst
not express his vices to the quick, lest he should bite too much.

This that experienced, Sr. W. R.
but unfortunate Knight well observed, as may appear by his own words:
Whosoever in writing a Modern History, shall follow Truth too near the
heels, it may happily strike out his teeth.

Wherein I commend the incomparable Theano, who is so cautious in his
Historical Notions of what he writes, as he will commit nothing to public,
which has not been first confirmed both by strong Intelligence and
Subsignation under the hands of the eminent'st persons there residing, where
any such action past. Nor is he spare in the relation of what he hears; so it
import the Subject whereof he writes: Though Princes should solicit him by
rewards, hope of higher preferment; he cannot endure to have his Pen sold, nor
to comply with the humor or current of Time for any unworthy aim.

It was the excellent saying of an impartial Historian, who being demanded by
One who had reduced his Empire to a mere Tyranny; why he remembered not him in
his Writings? Because (quoth he) I read nothing in you worth remembering. Why
do thou not then (replied he) record my Vices? Lest others (said he) should
err by your Example, and so imitate them. It is the highest honor of an
Historian, to be accounted sincere. As hope of Honor should not transport him,
hope of Reward corrupt him, nor aim to any outward comply divert him from
speaking Truth: so should no commanding power over-aw him, to betray his
knowledge, or to sow pillows to the Elbowes of Greatness. This endangers his
Credit for ever, and throws a contempt on his Labor.

Many there are, who describe things rather as they should be done, than as
they were done. This is not to make a discovery of truth, but to propose a
form or Method of what should be done according to truth. The lives of
Princes, and their actions were ever held Modells of imitation for Inferiors.
Their very behavior, A rule how to rectify imitation of Errors; by
Historical directions.
were it in some gesture never so uncomely, h'as ever begot Followers in
persons of meaner quality. To rectify these, nothing more powerful, than to
produce more clear and imitable Examples; that in them, as in living Mirrors,
they might discover their own Errors.

It was the saying of Antisthenes, that those that would live free from vice,
had need either of most unfeigned friends, or of most bitter enemies; because,
the one by his admonition, or the other by his reproach might withdraw him from
vice. Whence Diogenes being asked, how one should be revenged of his enemy?
answered, by being a virtuous and honest man; for his integrity would beget him
such a common conceit of extraordinary virtue, as he who maligned him, would
hardly endure to frequent any place, where he feared to hear his Enemies
praise.

Nasica, when the Roman Commonweal was supposed to be in most secure estate,
because freed of their enemies, affirmed, that though the Achaians and
Carthaginians were both brought under the yoke of bondage, yet they were in
most danger, because none were left whom they might either fear for danger,
States, when seeming most secure from their enemies, ought to be least secure
in their own confidence!
or who should keep them in awe. This caused Oenomademus in a Faction in the
Isle of Chios to counsel his fellows, that they should not expulse all their
Enemies, but still leave some in the City; Lest (quoth he) being freed of all
our Enemies, we should begin to quarrel with our friends.

Most certain it is, that very few in all our preceding Ages, unless they
were such Philosophical Kings, as Plato wished them to be, could in the
height of their fortunes, endure reproof; especially in such public manner,
as to be recorded by an Historical pen. For one Alexander, who could not
endure Aristobulus praising him above truth, we might produce ten
Alcibiades, who could not abide Eupolus for taxing him according to truth. But
to deliver our Opinion freely of discourses in this kind: Actions are so to be
laid open, as the Agent may either receive honor, or suffer in them. For if in
our private Accounts, we will be cautious enough, lest any thing be omitted or
inserted more than should be: much more in these Accounts or Registers of Time.
They then, that interesse themselves in Labors of this nature, are not in
their Compilations, to eye any man's person: August. Epist. 9. ad Hieron.
More incomparably-beautifull is the Truth of Christians, than that imparalel'd
Helen of the Grecians. Those that write less than the state of their History
requires, may be properly called the Moaths of Epitomes, as Epitomes of
Histories. Those that write more, make their fictitious Comments, rather
Glosses than Glasses of Time: containing in them an Ocean of words, but a drop
of Truth. Nor are precious Hours to be so mis-spended, their Oil so wasted,
when every Line shoud survive the vading period of Life, and reserve to
posterity a continuate Story of their Predecessors Actions.

Man's life may be most properly compared to a Lamp: for as a Lamp may be
three ways extinguished; First, by outward violence, as when it is blown out:
Secondly, by pouring in much water, whereby the good liquor of the Oil is
drowned and corrupted: and thirdly, by the wast and spending of the Oil it
self: So likewise a Man's life (which in truth resembles much the nature of a
Lamp) is extinguished by three ways and means; to second her resemblance
both in the appearing and extinguishing; first, by external force, to wit, of
the Sword, fire, strangling, pressing, poisoning, and the like: Secondly,
through the abundance of ill humors, or the malignant quality of them,
whereby the Radical humor is oppressed and overthrown: Thirdly, when the
Radical humor is in long space of Time quite consumed by the Natural heat,
and blown out into the Air; Lessius in Hygiafticon.
which is done after the same manner, that boiling water or Oil is wasted by
the heat of the fire.

Now, as Radicalis humor is in Corpore, An apt resemblance of the humors in
the body, to the qualities of the mind.
so is Veritatis amor in Cord: Which divine vigor, when it is corrupted or
impaired by any vicious or malignant humor, it loses her light. Now, what is
this humor which so darkens this divine vigor or truth of an Historian; but
partiality? which streams either from the weak and shallow Channels of
Pusillanimity; or the muddy Inlet of base commodity. For the former sort, their
Spirits are too weak for such a Task: for such as will suppress Truth, or
obscure the light of their History, by suffering themselves to be overawed by
Authority, are fitter to be employed in discoursing of the Pigmeis wars, or
of the battle of the Frogs and Mice, than any eminent action. For the latter,
their dispositions are so unworthy, as they are never to be admitted within the
List of an History: for these prefer trash before truth, and so far
under-value that useful employment whereto they stand engaged, as they lose
themselves by deriving gain from that, which should be from all servile
fetters freed. Let the first consider, how unfit they are to converse with
Princes precedent, which in their readings they daily do; who are so overawed
by the Countenance of times present, as overcome with fear, they silence that
which should have bin the activest Scene in all their Subject. This many times
makes a lame discourse: when to supply actions of higher consequence, they impe
in needless trifles: such as neither require an Historians labor, nor
recompense the lost time of the Reader. THAT conceited Treatise composed by an
Italian, entit'led A Supplication to Candlelight; discovering the abuses
committed and curtained by the silent and secret shade of night, deserved high
approvement in comparison of these. He lighted his Lamp purposely to discover
vice; these put out their lights, lest they should suffer for their discovery
of vice. O! that these would but apply that divine sentence sometimes uttered
with no less courage than comfort by a devout father: In such a cause, wherein
my desire is to please God, Ambros. in Indict.
I little fear the power of man. So they in a business of such consequence as
imports the benefit of State, the advancement of truth, are not to be
pusillanimous, but discreetly resolute; that neither too much boldness may
deservingly tax them of indiscretion: nor remissness, of too much want of
spirit nor irresolution. Let the latter, likewise, privately converse with his
own thoughts: and weigh with himself, what a base or sordid gain it is, to
purchase to himself honor or preferment by untruths. A Lie is held a word of
dishonor, only spoke by the mouth: what a deep taint or impression will it
retain, standing on record? Now to prevent the means of publishing Subjects
of this kind, for profit sake, as many of our unauthorized Novells have of late
times been published; Ample pensions allowed in former times to Historians.
those fore-running ages allowed ample Pensions for their Authors; such as
might in a good measure, without a necessitated beholdingnes to any, maintain
the^: lest want of means might corrupt their pen, by making that mercenary,
which stood ever priviledg'd, and retained in it self a native liberty. For
should private rewards soil the purity of an History, what might become free?
The Acts of his Benefactor, were they never so obscure or ignoble, should
receive a graceful immerited expression: Mean time, the Actions of whomsoever
he maligned, were sure to have their brand, were they never so deservingly
approved or eminent.

This is no square dealing; and in all times much hated; yea, and highly
censured, as may appear by sundry Ancient-Historicall Records, which for
brevity sake I here omit, referring them to the Roman Annals, where they may be
stored with variety of Instances in this kind.

Now, as Plato in his Dialogue entitled Symposium by way of Fiction describes
the difference betwixt two kinds of Venus: whereof, the first was more ancient,
brought forth by the Heavens, whom virtuous men do follow: the second much
younger, begotten between Jupiter and Dione, whom wicked men do serve: So say
I of these, whom wicked men do serve, or rather serve wicked men, by complying
with their humors, either for fear of censure, or ambitious hope of honor;
let them withdraw, they are not to be entered here in Checkroule: while with a
free and affectionate embrace, these only are to be entertained, who scorn to
humor time, either for hope of immerited honor, or servile profit.

Indeed, I must acknowledge there should be a reverend and modest concealing of
such Personages in criminal causes, so the bounds of the History can admit it.
And sometimes a Native pusillanimity restraines us to speak that which we
know, A modest caution for all Historians.
because silence (as the wise Sage said) never occasioned so great offense as
Speech. And Veritas odium parit, Quam-plures vidi incidisse peccatum loquendo,
vix autem quenqua tacerdo. Ambros. in lib. de Offic.
is a Motto for these days too probable, too well authorized; where sins go
with impunity, adorning their growth with a fair outside, to second that
Tyrant of Syracusas proposition: Et quis corriget? quis audet prodere, si
crimen audiat? Sure such tyrannizing Subjects, or Objects rather of fear, must
needs be terrible to the poor Historian: He cannot show Iulus Canius spirit,
spit in the face of Tyranny: Hating by a modest silence to pamper Vice, though
reprehension cost him a gage, he could redeem with nothing save life: Such
was that Cordus (the Roman Historian) who for speaking truth was censured
unworthily.

But if Princes or Potentates should exactly observe the courses and
revolutions of times, The Commendation of a sincere Historian.
the subsequent degrees of ruin and deposition (vices Apologized) they would
commend such an Historian (and no less desertfully) who employeth his Time,
wastes his Oil, and macerates himself in the scrutinie of true Relations, by
conferring Histories together; and with a Judicious approbation, or electing
power, extract whatsoever may seem most probable and authentic.

Many worthy Statists have desired, and in themselves no less deserved (though
perhaps some little spark of vainglory may seem to appear in them) to have
their memorable Acts recorded: as Cicero his withstanding Cateline, Cato his
opposing Caesar, Solon his Pisistratus, and Demosthenes his Philip: their acts
recounted, and committed to memory, induce others to the like attempts: and
like a cool Arbor to a wearied passenger, yields no less delight to
themselves; which Persius seems covertly to shadow in his first Satyr: Et
pulchrum est digito monstrari and dicier hic est. This finger is History, which
truly demonstrates the life of the person, characters his virtues, or vices;
disposing every particular member and branch of his discourse in such exact
method, that it resembles a fair beautiful building, which yet deserves more
commendations for the contrivement, than the outward and garish Garnishment.
Aedes opera sunt, quae si culte extruantur, minus restat, si minus sumptuose.
True; Books Historical have no better beauty (nor indeed can they) than an
apt and methodicall disposition: other accomplements are superfluous,
resembling some of our works now and then published, with fair and beautiful
Frontispieces, as if some worthy conveyances (rare buildings of Art and Nature)
were within so comely portalls. But alas! look inward, naught but rubbish and
refuse of some old building, unhandsomely repaired; or some frothy invention,
not worth half so much cost: These should fear (as the Philosopher told the
Mindians) lest their whole Labors should fly out at their gate, Fruitless
labors.
having their gate so promising, their Labor so immeriting. But such as go ad
praelum tanquam ad praelium (for so indeed they do) furnish themselves
aforehand with exactest Labors, to stand in defiance against the spirit of
detraction: for we cannot fortify our works against all Assailants: some
being addicted to carpe, because long custom has confirmed in them a desire
of reprehension.

Aelianus in his Natural History reports, how the Vipers issue is the bane and
death of the Parent: Certainly as Libri are our Liberi, our children, which we
should be as careful and provident in bringing up, as the Father over his
child: so oftentimes they play the Vipers with us, they murder us in our name
and reputation, much disparraging their Parents, being prizelesse, and
therefore unfit for press: nay, they do more, they oftentimes asperse an
imputation upon Her that should be no less dear (if not more) unto us, than
our selves, our Country: Licentious LIbells.
making her flowery bosom a nourisher of fruitless labors, a stale to
licentious Libells, or Brothell rather of lascivious measures. And how shall we
make answer for so many motives to lust, so diverse inforcements to inordinate
affections, and so temporizing subjects in humouring great ones, and soothing
Vice in her Majesty? Debemur morti nos nostraque: where our works must abide
scanning, and that by a Judicious censurer; one that can unrip the secretest of
imagination, and knows the Bent of our purposes.

It was an excellent saying of Judicious Casmerus: Parum est legere aut
colligere, sed intelligere,
and in formam redigere; hoc artis, hoc laboris est. Would Authors make use of
this, they would not in so impolish'd nor uncompos'd a form send forth their
Cubbs before they be lick't: nor set their fruitless brains a work in
publishing such useless Labors, as have no proper Object whereto they may
seem to aim, but an itching desire of being in Print: to have a Name amongst
Authors; albeit, many times that Name redound to their dishonor. These may be
compared to those unclean beasts, who never chew their Cud. It is a Divine
Position: He that goes to meditate, before he be prepared, that man takes in
hand to build an house before stones be gathered. What shall we judge of him, A
calamo magis quam cerebro, scrinio quam genio istae eliciendae sunt telae, ib.
who without study or premeditation sets hand to paper: as if Works of that
nature were only Manual, and no braine-labour? How miserably are their
judgments darkened, or rather how pitifully are such deluded, who hope to
receive life, or retain esteem from such Spider-caules? Wherein our
pregnant'st and refinedst Wits are many times most conscious.

We observe, how some of our Women are so taken with their straight and
well-shap't bodies, as they would not for a world have Children, lest they
should spoil their feature: nor will these Mushrome wits, who are ever
teeming, never suffering, betake themselves to any pains, lest that burdenous
labor might detract from the beauty of Nature. These hold Study an unnecessary
accoutrement for good wits: present and pregnant must be their Fancy, out of
some Poetical rapture or fury: wherein by that individual spirit of Sack,
they stretch and strain their enforced Genius to such high lines, as if
Prometheus-like, they had stolen Fire from Heaven, drunk Hippocrene dry, or
broke open the Muses Cabbinet, and soakt those poor Girls of all their
influence. Where, some in perusal of these Ebrious Lines, will usually be so
far transported with them, or more properly, besotted by them; as they will
vow, nothing could be composed by any Wit, were it never so fluent, upon a
fasting or abstemious stomach, like those Conceits. Nay, that no
praemeditation could mend them: being so enlivened and full of Spirit, as they
were far more easily admired than imitated.

This I must confess, is a great happiness of Wit; but it confirms withal
that Maxim of the wise Stagyrian; There was never any great wit without some
mixture of folly: which may appear by their disesteeme of study or
praemeditation, as if it were a rub or Remora to invention.

It was Eucherius saying; Nihil est magnum re, quod breve tempore: But these
spritely Wits are of another Opinion. They hold no work nor composure worth
approvement: which, like an unnatural Birth, appears not in his full shape
upon the instant: And of those, none deserving more admiration than their own.
It was the saying of a famous Orator: I never knew any Poet (yet was I well
acquainted with Aquinius, and many others) who did not think his own doings
better than all others. Nor is this speech of his to be only restrained to
such as profess Poetry, but even generally to every distinct study: which he
quickly discovered, who concluded: Delyrant plerunque Scriptores in libris suis.

Now, to contract my Sails in the prosecution of this Argument; I should hold
it no less convenient than mainely necessary; that such, who address
themselves to employments of this sort, do use a cautious deliberation both in
the election of their Subject, as also in their Style and Method of handling
it. A pretty passage betwixt a Scriviner and a trifling Author.
Lest, what sometimes the Scriviner by way of derision spoke unto an
impertinent Author, be applied unto them. This Scriviner being on a time in
company with a Scholar, who professed himself to have Writ much; and having
heard a large Catalogue of his obscured Labors: the Scriviner seemed to
challenge an affinity to his profession. No, that were absurd, answered the
Scholar; why, replied the Scriviner? I am a Writer. Yea, but said the
Scholar, I am an Author. No, excuse me, quoth the Scriviner, I make no doubt
of that; There are more Writers, than Authors; and the Catalogue of your
Labors enroule you in that number.

In one word, those Works only deserve Approvement, who derive their life and
light from Judgment. Such only merit the Title of Records; because they live
to posterity: and represent to the Successor whatsoever was imitable or
despicable in their Ancestor.

These are Works to be engraven in Cedar, and well-deserving their Caesar. So
that, as Alexander had his Homer in Reverence for his Poesy; his Aristotle for
speculation and Philosophy; Alcibiades the Instructions of Socrates to ground
him in Piety; Caesar the continual practice of his own Commentaries to
improve his glory; and Affrican the works of Zenophon to enable him for
occasions Domestic or Military: So these memorable Labors, which are thus
penned by judicious and industrious Authors, merit no less honor, in what
State or Province soever they shall receive harbor.

For others, as corruption of manners is their Scope, or vain glory their
aim, or some other by-respect the object of their Pen, they deserve a due
censure from the State, for seeking so odiously to poison that breast, which
nursed them.

Thus much I have writ briefly (by way of inference) to caution such as by
their Labors erect a Throne for Impiety to sit in: these Humour-mongers, that
can with Caesar the Dictator, Atros dies albos facere, make black white, and
mask Vice with a veil better suiting with Virtue: Now will I descend to their
Opposite, and that is, the Satyricall Writer, or Historiomastix.

Some of these are very dangerous to a State, laying it open too much: The
Satyricall Historian.
and though acts should be related, as they were done: yet, if the
circumstances may seem any way detractive to some person, or state, they are
better silenced (if it may stand with the body of the History) than discovered.
I have known some too precise in this vein: and one especially I remember,
who speaking of the great Sultan, could not be content to describe his Palace,
managements domesticke and public, person, and the like; but of his piked
Beard, the color of his stockings: and in the end coming near him, (said he)
and indeed nearer than need was, his breath was noisome. These, and such like
impertinent circumstances are so frivolous, that they imply a defect of
Judgment in the Author, to insert such idle, and immateriall Ambages in an
History of consequence. But these are far from those Historiomastixes of our
Time; Observe this humor in the seditious and factious Writers of our time.
some whereof personate the wrongs of a Noble Ancestor to his lineall
Successor, moving him to revenge. This is one of the Furies Brands: for you
shall never see one of this kind, but a tergo Nemesis, he has vengeance at
his back; a spleenefull disposition disgorged upon the best of deserts. And
thus he inserts the injuries: Such a family (well meriting of Prince and
Country, and ever found loyal to the State) was undeservedly censured by the
malevolent suggestions of such, and such; whose suggestions are (as yet)
unrevenged, but the Heavens are just. What Motives more enforcing to civil
commotion? Injuries ripped up, have oftentimes hazarded States: and there was
never any People, A true Aphorism.
Nation, or Government, which have not from time to time had one of these.
Thersites, as deformed in mind as body, (for so Homer characters him) was ever
kindling the flame of civil combustion betwixt Achylles and Agamemnon at the
Siege of Troy, about the rape of Briseis; ever harping upon that string to set
them together by the ears.

Why Achylles, should you sustain so great reproach, that have engaged your
self for Agamemnon, and his Brothers glory? Be all your hopeful Services,
your valiant Exploits, your incomparable Achievements so rewarded? Has
Agamemnon no place for valor? no regard to honor? Why then desist Achylles,
embarke your self for Greece, and leave this brave Champion to himself and
his fortunes; your merits (being gone) will be better esteemed. You had but one
prize, (and that prize unworthy too of your valor) and must that prize, got
with much sweat, many difficulties, imminent dangers, multitude of occurrents,
now be taken from you? But one Briseis, one dear one, and yet Achylles must
loose her. Alas poor resolution! Why, it is better to be Aegystus, a Coward, a
Recreant, one that retires himself from Arms, fighting close under
Clytemnestra's Target. Such a Carpet-Knight is better than a Martiall-Knight.
Then would he presently move Agamemnon in like sort, in no case to moderate
his desires: Why should Achylles have so fair a Paramour, and the Prince of
Greece want one?

Such Agents of mischief as these, are ever of a neutrall Faction: they hover
like the Batte,
uncertain in adhering to any: they more admire the Sun when it is rising
than setting. They measure the worth or merit of every action by the success
of it. And when the day is closed; the actions of that day finished; they
admire nothing more than those Booties which the Conqueror h'as gained. Their
Historical Relation must become a Panegyric Oration. No Compositions too
elaborate; no Lines too Elegant, to give life to his conquest. Mean time,
though the worser cause fared the best, as it was with unfortunate Pompey:
whose memory had, no doubt, many Ages survived Caesar's, had his fortune been
parallel with Caesar's; they have the Art to magnify the equity of the
Conquerours side: and with palpable assentation to insinuate into the affection
of so commanding a spirit. Many glorious Attributes of greatness are these
ready to devise, to honor him that h'as won the day. But bitter are their
Pens in disvaluing the Actions of the conquered: in lying aspersions upon his
person; disgracing his Alies: and inventing by all means how to advance the
Fame of the one, by derogating from the other. This it was (as I formerly
observed) that induced Alexander to conceive such great distaste against
Aristobulus, as he was almost ready to send both him and his Works together
inot the River Hydaspis. For there is no noble nor princely disposition, who
can endure to hear his conquered Foe dishonored: or to see any one lead him
in Triumph but himself.

When Caesar had commanded those demolished Monuments of Pompey (Statues reared
in his former affluence of Fortune) to be set up again, Cicero told him, that
in erecting Pompeys Trophies, he established his own. So praiseworthy is the
compassion of a Conqueror, that in this he deserves more praise, than his
victorious prize. Nor is it less noble in him to contemn those servile earthy
Spirits, who mold their Pens to the inclination of the day: holding him only
worthy honor who got it; and the vanquished all dishonor, because his Fortune
was more sinister. Whereas the goodness or equity of the Cause is not to be
measured by the Cloze: Many pressed quarrels have produced strange effects: yea,
such incroaching powers, whose only ground of Hostility, was enlarging of
their own Dominions, or enriching their coffers by others fortunes, have
received wonderful success; albeit, some Cloud or other in the end eclyps'd
their greatness, and returned them a just and proportionable revenge according
to the measure of those injuries, which by invasion, oppression, or usurpation
they had done unto othets; as the Lyrick sometimes sung: Quicquid a vobis minor
extimescet, Horace.

Mayor hoc vobis Dominus minatur.
As the Great deals with the low,
God will use the Great ones so.


But to return to our Discourse: As those who are interessed in these Military
affairs, are to aim at nothing more than the justness of their quarrel;
which reteines still in it self a quickening power to the most declining
spirits: so are those who undertake the recommending of those actions done,
with a competible Pen, to relate the grounds and occasions of their coming on;
of passages during the war; with the event or issue thereof; without siding
or complying with either part; either for Country, or any other private
engagement. As for those, who (as Optatus speaks in another sense) are all for
Time, nothing for Truth: or, as Themistius sometimes spoke of the Acacians, who
by complying with the Emperor, and applying themselves to his pleasure, justly
gained the name of Iovinians, Assentatores non Deum sed Purpuram coluisse, etc.
ascribe more reverence to the Purple than Person; Their works may receive
breath for a time, but cannot promise any continued fame.

It was a Speech worthy the Mouth of Traian: Hoc pro me utere, si iusta
impetravera, contra me, si injusta. His desire was no longer to reign than he
reigned well. The hearts of his people he sought not to win by any
soveraignizing way: for he found those paths full of peril. Nor by pretending
goodness, or shrowding cloudy designs with fair pretenses, for those he
shunned, because unsoundly grounded. And as the Fish Sepia is bewrayed by a
black color, which she casts our to cover her: so this dusky vapor of
dissembling being once dispersed, would bring him to a discovery, and by
degrees to ruin. This had he read in the Tragical Catastrophe of Tiberius,
who gloried in nothing so much as in cunningly cloaking his private purposes
with gilded glozes, fair pretenses, going invisible, and deluding his
Subjects resolutions with a seeming good.

Fair semblances poized with their incommodities, prove oftentimes fruitless,
tedious, or noxious, as the Italian Proverb implies: Chi habianco Cavallo, et
bella moglie
No vive may Sansa doglie.


This he discovered in others misery, which sufficiently informed him to shun
such Pres^dents of impiety. Nor sought this brave Prince to ingratiate himself
in the affections of his people, by an indiscreete bounty: for the fatal
effects of such indisposed Sowers of their Fortunes, he read deeply charactred
in the loose and lavish reigns of Vitellius, Commodus, etc. For these,
howsoever they might seem to have free hearts, they had weak and shallow
Conceits: in distinguishing the merit of the person to whom they showed, or
rather showered down their bounty. He, who could time it most, was ever sure to
be rewarded best: which begot in persons of desert and quality such discontent,
to see others of base condition advanced, themselves contemned: as this their
inconsiderate bounty became the only pulley to hale them to calamity.

Nor could this absolute Prince (for he was Sovereign over himself) endure
to force an obedience in his Subjects, by a tyrannick fear: for though Nero's
Position was this: Fortuna nostra cuncta permittit mihi: Yet had this President
of Princes, factious and stirring Spirits both in Camp and Court.
He held that Maxim far more princely: Quo quisque potentior, patientius
mala ferat. Either to plant in blood, or beget a more awful command and
Sovereignty by practicing in himself or Officers, effusion of blood, he found
that course no means to secure him, nor to settle him in an Imperial State.
He had received from that Learned Moral, Plutarch.
how, in the mind or conscience of a Murderer, there shall always remain a
plague of Blood; his Eyes shall behold no other color but sanguine, as if the
Air were dyed into it; the Visions of his Head in the Nightime shall cast a
Bowl of blood in his face.

Howsoever, most certain it is, that diverse factious Incendiaries have shown
themselves in most Pavillions; where, by private suggestions they ever sought
to sow differences amongst Eminent'st persons: purposely by a parasiticall way,
to creep into favor with one or other. Which ever redounded to the Authors
dishonor; as might be instanced in sundry Examples both Ancient and Modern.
For whence came those fatall-fraternall discords betwixt Polynices and
Eteocles? Those continued Wars betwixt the Romans and Carthaginians; Sabines
and Samnites; but from these Spirits in the Vault, who were impatient of
nothing more than peace: nor Fautors of ought more than Division? In troubled
waters is their best fishing: Halcyon days are their Canicular-dayes. A
calamitous Cannae, or fatal Pharsalie, Camps where they hang their Trophies of
glory. In which, they hold it impossible but to find some, on whom they may
practice.

Hecuba's Dream of bringing forth a Burning Torch, may be in these verified:
Their stirrings would bring all to cinders, were they not seasonably quenched.
Public safety, private Amity, all correspondence meeting mutually, would by
these be soon dissolved, were they left alone to act their own parts: which
would in short time burst out into such combustion, as the Stage where they
acted, should present nothing but Enmity and Division.

Some of this Stamp, our late Gracious Sovereign of famous Memory, King
JAMES, took especial notice of: who, howsoever they were for other humane
Learning deservingly approved, yet for their indiscreet passages in this kind,
(as may appear more fully in their Historical Relations) they utterly lost
his esteem.

These are poisonous and virulent heads, that suggest into the ears of
Princes, Arguments of revenge, causes of distrust, motives of suspicion and
jealousy: not to profit themselves, En pallor gentis, generis, genij que
potentis Has iras stimulando graves, inflare superbos! A memorable Christian,
and royal expedition.
but to satisfy the depravednesse of their own natures, intended to nothing
but the subversion of States, the setting at discord united Princes: En pallor!
etc. -- It was thought, that in that glorious and Christian-like expedition of
those memorable Heroes, Princes recorded in the eternal book of fame, against
the Turks, whose hostility had lain waste those blessed and fruitful coasts,
where the remnant of Israel was once planted: that the greatest cause of the
ill success of that War proceeded from some factious heads, setting (that
unfortunate, yet never sufficiently praised Hero) the Duke of Normandy, and
the King of France, at variance: an impious and disasterous enmity, being a
maine impediment for the hindering a war, no less glorious to Heaven, than
generally beneficial to all the world. Some have imputed the cause to certain
expostulations betwixt the two Princes, which grew afterward to words of
public reproach and infamy; upbraiding each other with diverse insolences
offered by their Countries, one to another. What ere the Motive of this
dissension was, A mischievous plot.
(how varied soever the opinions of Writers be herein) the brain that
contrived it, was sure the forge of great impiety, and an irreparable detriment
to the Christians, exposing them to ruin, slaughter, and desolation.

Factious Historians amongst the Aucient.
The like we may read of those two renowned Cities, Sparta and Athens: which two
flourishing Commonweals long time lived in unity, without the least motion of
war: but in fine, reading the works of a mutinous Historian: mutinous
indeed; for his factions before, had been sufficient, without further
inducements by writing: such bloody and cruel wars ensued, as the fire of
those intestine combustions was not extinguished with less than an universal
effusion of blood. Many more I could produce, even near at home, but I must
not insist upon one Argument too long, since I have entered a spacious and
intricate Maze, that promises entrance enough, if I can (with Ariadnes thread)
find a passage to my precipitate adventure.

THus much have I spoken of State-snarling Historians, that make their Works
like pricks or goads to the public State. I will now proceed with my former
division of History, and find in these two extremes ( Assentation, and
State-invection) a mean to direct us in the perfect and exact use of
Historical Narrations: Medio tutissimus ibis; neither too depressed, An
excellent mean for an Historian to observe.
as if thy Labors expressed their Masters poverty: nor too erected, to intimate
thy states security. Thou art too depressed, when with lagging wings thou
stoopest to every base lure, or object of affection, making thy Invention a
stale to others pleasure, writing nothing less than truth, because truth
cannot teach thee how to live. Thou art too erected, when like an eminent
Censor, thou taxest the acts of Princes, with such an austere brow, as if thou
had forgot the discipline of History, and were transformed to a professed
Satyrist; mixing thy Ink with far more gall than discretion: yet transported
with imaginary motives of self-conceit; cares not who be galled, so thou (with
Ctesiphon) kick against the Moiles heels. For the latter, there is no
profession more easy, nor subject more frequent, nor Argument more general:
and as Iuvenal says: Lib. 1. Satyr. 1
Difficile est Satyram non scribere: nam quis iniquae
Tam patiens urbis, tam ferreus ut teneat se?


For the first, I never knew any Discourse worth reading, A flattering
Historian.
proceed from so base and ignoble Merchants: They sell their Works by retaile;
and hope of a gainefull Dedicatory, makes them contemn Method, Truth, Subject,
and all. Irus skrippe is open; relieve but the needy Artist, he will imitate
the Bohemian Curre, fawn on a good suite: show the project of his intendments
to him; deague but thy protection, and he will second it with an indeared
protestation; to insert Monumentall Characters of Honor to grace thee; only
bestow thy bounty, and show not thy self unworthy of so fabulous an Attendant.
His Invention is tied to his Benefactors: then dryes the source of his fancy,
when they restrain the Spring of their Bounty.


It is the misery indeed, of the Age, not always to fix upon Merit: seeing
many rare and exquisite Wits, and those singularly improved by continuate
study, and conference, sleep many times in silence, unregarded, at least
unrewarded: while more sterile Conceits receive advancement. Yet should not
these respects make a Scholar forgetful of so generous a Title, as the
best-discerning Heralds of Antiquity have bestowed on him. For if we will
credit Authority, or the testimony of such, whose precious-spent Oil has
deservingly purchased them a memorable esteem, we shall find the Style of a
Scholar deeply stamped with the Print of honor. Whence it is, that Citraeus
writes, In Itincrario page 444.
that in Prage, an University of Bohemia, where John Hus and Hierom of Prage
professed, that they that have continued Professors for the space of Twenty
years together, by a constant residence, are created Earls and Dukes both
together. And therefore to dignifie their persons the more, their Style is to
be called Illustres; whereas they which are singly and simply but only either
Earls or Dukes, a recalled Spectabiles. Neither makes it any matter, that
they have no revenues to maintain Earledomes or Dukedomes: for they have the
Title notwithstanding, even as Suffragans have of Bishops.

Reflect on these, Learning of too precious a memory, to become mercenary.
ye free-bred Children of the Muses, and you will scorn to expose your
deserving Labors to the Mercenary Trade of our impertinent Pamphletters: who
write before they read; and discover their follies to the world, not to gain
praise but price.

Observe but what surviving Fame the laborious Works of knowing Authors have
formerly acquired: Quorum effigies si vere scire cupias, non saxa sed scripta
legas. Admit, they received not that acceptance, while they lived, which their
elaborate composures deserved: Let Scholars leave this deserving Motto of
Solons to their Country; and if she reward them not, let it redound to her
ignominy: " O Patria tibi dictis and factis opitulatus sum!
yet though a Mecaenas sleep, the whole Judgment of an Age cannot. There will
be ever some, who can both read and judge. So precious are these Monuments of
Learning, and have been ever, that should Fortune play still her blind part,
and reserve the smallest portion for Minerva's Followers: They shall live more
honored in the eye of judgment, because had in disgrace by a painted parcel
of foot-cloath State, which never yet aspired to a discerning knowledge of
Merit.

Didicist is Philosophiam, and Philosophiae flo^em, nempe Poesem; and nondum
sprevist is Sirenem Mundi, nempe Fortunam?
For tell me, ye happy despicable ones, are you any thing the worse, because
despised, where only Fashion, Complement, or affected ignorance is in request?
No; as it is the good man's glory to be disvalued by the evil: so it is your
happiness to receive a disesteeme from these, who pride themselves in nothing
but silken ignorance.

Niobe, in the affluence of her Fortune, could say: " Greater am I than Fortune
can subdue. Much more you, who are enriched with far more precious substance:
you have in you what may truly fortify you: No matter, though your outward
house decline, so your inward house retain her beauty. Let your Works then
confirm your worth: Let them not palliat an untruth: nor for any hope of an
immerited reward, insinuate your selves into the favor of vicious Greatness.
Make choice of such a Patron, whom you may justly commend: let his Virtues
rather than his Fortunes bind you to him.

Many have perished in opinion of the world; by addressing their Labors to
undeserving Personages: Direction in the Election of Subjects.
or by writing in way of Commendation, upon unworthy Subjects. Good Wits should
be better employed: and if weak, the Better have writ enough for them to
admire.

These two sorts (as not worthy an Historical Title) have I proscribed the
bounds of my discourse: if betwixt such two dangerous shelves, I can find a
retired harbor for the truly named Historian to breath himself in, I have
attained my wished expectance. The mean betwixt these two, gives us
observation of noting causes and effects, how produced, and how ended:
Counsels and successes, how intended, how administered. Then he proceeds
further, making resemblance betwixt Nature and Nature, State and State, the
government of this Province and of that: then differences of Actions and
Events: some wisely carried, bearing themselves fair, and promising a complete
satisfaction to the undertaker: yet what opposition betwixt the end and
beginning, ruin being the period, or extreme of his hopes? Many such opposite
Conversions, or Catastrophes rather, may we daily see in the managements of
Wars. Who more happy in his Countries protection, and who more successive in
his prosecution, than Pompey the great in his first entrance to Martial
exploits? Yea, (as Caesar acknowledged himself) he had conquered, if he had
known when he had conquered: Vicisses, si te vicisse cognovisses.
yet in event, whose designs more unhappy? Not only deprived of the bent of
his hopes, proscribed (as it were) his native Country, and enforced to beg a
poor Sepulcher in a foreign Country: but even most oppressed by their
cruelty, whose service under his own Banner, had been rewarded royally. Such
discourses often move in men a commiseration, Moving Historians.
in seeing Virtue so ill guerdoned, and Vice (under a counterfeit garb) of
Innocence, receive an immerited reward. And this certainly have most Historians
ever observed in their Writings: so lively to express the disasters of
deserving men, that their Relations might move a kind of sensible pity and
remorse in the peruser, which is best exemplified by circumstances: for the
time, place, cause, and person, with other necessary. Adjuncts, do (for the
most part) lay a more open and smooth Tract to the inforcement of passion.
Lucan, that Heroic Historian, brings forth Cornelia sitting upon the shore,
where her Husband took his last farewell of her: where (like another Niobe)
she makes a Limbeck of her eyes, and descants her own calamity, often wishing
his return; and when deprived of his sight, yet the eye of her imagination
represents a new object of sorrow. Here, in such royal compositions, and
funeral conclusions, he describes the diversity of Nature, in two contrary
subjects: a servant faithful, sitting over the headless trunk of his unhappy
Master: How to move passion and by what circumstances.
a slave as ungrateful, haling his once well-esteemed Lord and General to the
fatal shore: where (without taste of remorse, remembrance of former merits,
or regard of Countries love) he deprives him of life.

When Marc. Antonie was to present the cruelty committed upon Caesar in that
fatal surprise he received in the Capitol: that he might move more compassion
in his Hearers; who, as they were for most part Plebeians, so ocular
Presentiments usually work deepest impression with them: showed in his Funeral
Oration the thirty three wounds wherewith Caesar was deprived of life by his
Conspirators. Which baring of his body, and discovery of his wounds, with an
aggravation of the odiousness of the fact, being acted by his own pretended
friends, begot in them an universal sorrow. Nothing but revenge could relish
well with them, after this so doleful a Spectacle.

This that excellent Historian, (Appian. Alexand. An excellent Art in moving
passion, instanced in Appian. Alexandrinus.
) expresses in such a passionate manner, as his Lines can hardly produce any
less effe^^ from an attentive Reader. For you shall ever observe, that the
Imagination works more to life than the Line: So as, when such a Discourse is
laid open to us, we begin to recollect the Circumstances: as the place where
such a Tragic Scene was acted; the persons interessed; the quality of the
person suffering: all which are so enlivened by the imagination, as it makes
the Reader a Spectator so strong and sinewy is the conceit of him who
understands what he reads.

Choranius, who had been Praetor, being condemned and now attached by the
Soldiers, during those Factions of the Trium-viri, entreated them to forbear
from offering violence, till he might send his son to speak with Antonie;
imagining, good Old man, that his son out of a natural affection and
reverence to his gray hairs, would interceed for him; but they laughed at his
suite, answering him, that his son had spoken, A memorable story of an
unnatural Son, and his miserable end.
but it was to the contrary: When the old man heard this, he desired them to
tarry till he had seen his Daughter; whom when he saw, he commanded she
should abstain from his goods, lest her Brother should sue for her Death unto
Antonie. But observe the fatal issue of Disobedience! This unnatural Son,
having consumed prodigally all his goods, the unhappy remainder of his Fathers
fortunes, became afterward attached of Felony, and saved himself by flight:
where living in a tedious Exile, he closed his days as miserably, as his
former course was unnatural.

A plenteous Storehouse of Examples for all conditions is History in it self.
Which conduce much to the regulating of our life; and preparing our selves for
death. For if we shall but consider the resolution of such, who for popular
honor, Countries esteem, or safety of State, have with all readiness
encountered Death: yea, who rather than they would endure to see any Tyrannick
Sovereignty introduced; or the ancient Laws and Customs of their Nation
disannulled, would suffer the worst of all extremes: much more we, who fight
for a better Country: and whose hopes extend the period of time, in the
pursuit of our Victory.

There is an Epigramme of Callimachus upon Cleombrotus the Ambrocian, whom he
says (to express the force of humane reading) after that he had perused
Plato's book of the Immortality of the Soul, forthwith, Tusc. Quaest. lib. 1.
without any other apparent cause, cast himself headlong down from a Wall.

What effects Historical Readings have begot, all Times can bear sufficient
Record: where some, whose remiss spirits durst never enter lists with any
common danger, by being frequently versed in Relations of this kind, became
valiant Commanders. Others, in the Survey of Acts done in defense of Ladies
honors, as if those Historical Narrations solely aimed at them, betook them
to the same Enterprise. No Task too difficult, no design so impaled with
danger, which with a cheerful smile they would not encounter; so they might
vindicate any wronged Ladies honor. Others, hearing those ancient distractions
betwixt their own native Soil, with some other Nation: and the injuries their
Country suffered; have revived those wounds already cicatris'd, and vowed a
revenge for indignities nearely worn out by time. Such lively Presentiments are
Histories, as they have power to beget spirit in the pusillanimous, constancy
in the courageous, modesty in the magnanimous, with a sweet attemperature of
all virtues (whereof Clemency is the prime flower) in the Victorious.

Such as defiled their native purity with impiety, by giving themselves over
unto pleasure; and had stained the Nobility and splendor of their Souls
through w^l^owing in Vice, or otherwise fraudulently by usurpation or base
insinuation, had crept into Sovereignty, or unjustly governing the
Commonwealth; such thought Socrates, that they went a by-path separated from
the council of the Gods: But such as, while they lived in their bodies,
imitated the life of the Gods, Tusc. Quaest. Lib. 1.
such he thought had an easy return to the place from whence they first came.

Of which Subject Egesias the Cyrenian resolved so amply, and discoursed so
powerfully, that he was forbidden of King Ptolomeus to teach the same in
Schools, for that many after his Doctrine willingly killed themselves.

These Disputations in those times free from the shock of war, and
inconveniences ever attending Hostility, were usually professed and practiced.
But when the Gown and Laurel gave way to the Lance, such arguments ceased:
Philosophy became out of request: Martial Discipline the sole determiner of
causes. Fields became Theaters, where such Scenes of sorrow were Acted; as the
Conqueror could not say that those booties were clear gaynes which he had
purchased. This moved that princely compassionate Caesar, sometimes to compare
his own Imperial game with a Democraticall loss. To comfort that disconsolate
Cornelia, An excellent Discourse of Imperial frailty.
whose eyes were ever flowing in the remembrance of her injuried Lord. To
recall to mind those many eminent Statists, whose glory it was to embrace
Death willingly, rather than become Subjects of his Victory. To recount (if
Figures could find place for such a number) those many beds made Widows; those
many Infant-orphans by his Pharsalia. He finds the Senate dissolved; all
those Orders and Officialls conducing to a Political State (while popular
command bore sway) rooted. The tongue of Eloquence he finds charmed: and to
his innovated State solely chained. He finds Iaenus Temple open, and he is
conscious to himself, why it was opened: and now he shuts it, but not without
a sigh, for he knows not how soon it may be opened. He viewes with a serious
Ceremony the Statues of his once living, but now interred friends: and in a
more passionate recollection of his own affairs, he considers, how his
ambition brought many of them to ruin. He looks when those livelesse Shrines
of his loving Allies should tender him a re-greet, at least an enforced smile,
as a congratulating testimony of his Victory. But he finds them Emblemes of
himself; mere shadows of empty greatness; a place they hold, and that is all.

Having now taken a full view of his Princely Praetorian, his fatal Capitol,
and all those memorable Beauties which either Art or State could bring to their
full height; he takes measure of himself: No Empire can confine the heart of
her Emperor.
and he finds his heart as unconfined as it was before. Triangular it is,
which, should it possess the world, can no more by the Circumference of the
world be consined, than a Triangle by a Circle is to be filled. He eyes his
own Composition; and he neither finds his body more strengthened, nor the
line of his life probably lengthned; nor the stays of his Empire better
settled. And now he feels in his own breast, what he never felt before;
numerous cares, nocturnall fears: So as, should he be so secured from all
outward foes, as nothing could occasionally trouble him without; he finds such
a Battalion within, as he ingenuously acknowledges Liberty to be far more
precious than Sovereignty; all which he finds the experimental fruits of his
Victory. And now he would converse a little with Mortality; which that it may
take more impressive Prints upon the face of Majesty, he goes to the Monument
of his vanquished Foe; One sometimes equal to himself for greatness; and
transcendent (if the general Vote and Voice of Rome deserve credit) to him in
goodness. And what finds he engraven on that mouldred shrine, but the
Effigies of an headless Trunk, distinguished by this impresse: " Hic situs
est Magnus! Every where he finds Fortune his professed foe: and the want of
knowledge how to manage a Victory, the occasion of his own fall.

He sees the dislaughter'd Corpse both of his Friends and Foes equally
bleeding: for his Triumph, he conceives it short in measure of those numerous
wounds by him occasioned; those profuse Rivolets of blood his hand h'as
effused; those Oceans of distreaming tears his Conquests have procured.

Such Tragic occurrents require their Emphasis, and a kind of un-usuall
working passion: that the History may present to our eyes, the very acts how
they were done; making her Discourse (as it is) a Theater of humane Actions. I
know pitiful stories have strange effects, Lively impressions of remorse,
drawn from the Son toward the Father.
if amply described: For Warriers themselves in the report of their own
misfortunes (of all men most pitiless) have hardly contained themselves from
tears. Aeneas wept to see the ruins of his Country so lively depictured in
Dido's Hall: But when he beheld his poor Father Anchises hanging on his own
shoulders, (having no other refuge in so imminent disasters) Suspiria mittit,
he could weep no longer: for tears mitigate grief; but with a passionate
silencing of his miseries, treasured his un-utterable woes in the balefull
Center of his heart.

Xerxes, when of a populous Army, as ever passed out of Asia, he had but so
many left as might attend him in a poor Cock-boat, to accompany him in his
distressed expedition, the History mentions, that he wept bitterly; enstiling
himself, The ruin of his Country, the slaughter of many resolute Soldiers.
Nay, Titus himself, the Flower of all the Roman Emperors, in the sack and
subversion of that once glorious City Jerusalem, is said to weep exceedingly,
beholding so many lamentable Objects of pity (dead carcasses lying in open
ditches) so as not able to contain himself, he cried out, I call Heaven to
witness, I am not the cause of this peoples slaughter. Many such
representments we have very usual in Histories, motive for their passion, and
memorable for their end; proceeding from the just Judgment of God, to caution
others by their miserable falls.

Comparing of Histories very necessary.
There is another propriety in a History, which should be observed: and that is
a Judicious collation, or comparing of Histories one with another. The defect
and want hereof, is the principal cause why so maine discordancies and mere
oppositions in Histories arise: and that not in circumstances alone, but in
material points, as original foundations of Cities, succession of Princes
miscited, the sites of Countries (an observance more Geographicall)
ill-disposed; with many other errors, which are grounded upon no other reason,
than the want of conferring such Histories together, as tend to the present
Subject we have in hand. Nay, were it not much think you, now to prove
directly, that the very Computation of years which they derived from their
ancient Calendar; A difference among the Pagans in their Computation of years.
and which they observed as Ceremonially and Religiously (in their kind) as we
the years from CHRIST'S Incarnation, was very defective among themselves?


Yea, to show you, how Chronologers differ concerning those years from the
Worlds Creation, to Christ's Birth: some affirming, there be 3929, as Beroaldus:
some 3952, as Hierome and Bid: some 3960, as Luther and Johannes Lucidus: some
3963, as Melancthon in his Chronicle, and Functius: some 3970, as Bullinger and
Tremellius: some toward 4000, as Buntingus.

Sundry probable opinions every one of these alleged; yet in Computation
constantly different. No doubt, but Transcriptions these men had to confirm
their Opinions: how then came these to be so defective, or different one from
another? Diverse have no less diversely labored to resolve this Objection; then
they have with impertinency of Reasons entangled the understanding with new
doubts. Much was proposed by them Argumentatively, nothing Positively
concluded; being by Opponents no less probable in their Arguments, than
confident of their Judgments, opposed. Howbeit, touching this our Computation,
we rest sufficiently grounded. This only is the occasion of our inference in
this particular: purposely to deliver unto you the diversity, and consequently
the maine deficiency of such Transcripts, as former times have recommended to
Posterity.

Neither need we wonder that in our own Kingdom, those who have for many
years preceeded us, should afford no great light or direction to their
Successors; seeing, Saint Hierome in the end of his Dialogue against the
Pelagians, Hieron. in Dialog. cont. Pelag.
(a book of excellent Learning and divine Discourse) writes thus: The
Province of Britain, which has been oftentimes governed (note the
deplorable estate of this Island in those days) by Tyrants and other Hostile
people; Nations bounding or bordering upon the Ocean Sea, were utterly ignorant
of Moses and the Prophets: So that then, by the testimony of Saint Hierome, all
our Religion was Heathenish superstition: all our Church Service was Idolatry:
all our Priests were Panims: all our Gods were Idols. And to appropriate to
every Nation their peculiar God, there was then in Scotland, the Temple of
Mars: in Cornwall, the Temple of Mercury: in Bangor in Wales, the Temple of
Minerva: in Stow in Annal. in vit. Morgani.
Malden in Essex, the Temple of Cambdeni Britan. in Esse^ia.
Victoria: in Bath, the Temple of Apollo: in Leicester, the Temple of Ianus: in
York, where St Peter's is now, the Temple of Stow Annal. in vlta Bladud and
Leire Regum, and Severi Imperatoris.
Bellona: in London, where Paul's is now, (and now to more than her pristine
beauty restored) the Temple of Juellius in Tractat. de sacris Scripturis. page
129. Act. 19.28.
Diana: Therefore it is very likely, by comparing those Times with preceding
Antiquity, that they esteemed as highly then of the Goddess Diana in London,
as they did in Ephesus: and that as they cried there, Great is Diana of the
Ephesians; so they cried here, being deluded with the same spirit, and
transported with the same pursuit of profit, Great is Diana of the Londoners.
Nay, even no more than 53. years before the Incarnation of Christ, when Julius
Caesar came out of France into England, so absurd, senseless, and stupid were
the people of this Land, that instead of the true and ever-living Lord, they
served those Heathenish and abominable Idols, Mars, Mercury, Minerva,
Victoria, Apollo, Ianus, Bellona, Diana, and such like. No great marvel then,
that people so wholly illiterate and ignorant in the Law of Moses, should be
unknown to the Computation of years descending from Moses. But for the Pagans
themselves to be ignorant in their Annual Accounts with such superstitious
solemnity observed; with such constant Feasts solemnized: and every year, in
their personal visits (especially for their Olympic and Isthmian Games)
memorized: it may seem strange to affirm, but a task of more difficulty to
confirm.

And yet this is easily done; for their opinions about their Olympiads in
Greece, for the time of their Erection are diverse: Vid. Aul. Gel. and Laert.
The foundation of Rome as uncertain, since the Founder himself is not as yet
generally agreed of; for the diverse Relations of Numitor and Amulius, Romulus
and Remus, with their Mother Rhea, or Ilia, (as some will have it) make up a
Labyrinth of themselves without further confusion. But to infer the strange
conveyance (or Apotheosis) of Romulus, suddenly vanished forth of their sight,
and by the testimony of Julius Proculus, transplanted to some other place of
more eminence; hardly deserves the credit of an Historian: Yet some there be
which show more favor to this famous Founder of Rome, daigning to bestow a
Monument of him, which is erected for him in the Temple Quirinus. Indeed it
were little enough to memorize so renowned an Establisher with a Tomb, and to
consecrate the place of his Burial; as Achylles Tomb, or Monument in Sygeum,
Theseus in Athens, Ajax in the Rhetian shore, and Alcides Relics in Oeta:
Read but over the Roman Annals, and you shall find the discordancies of
Historians in these Computations of times to be great: As especially the
destruction of Troy, confounding the several times of Troyes sacking, missing
their Account from Laomedon to the succession of Priam. But I have touched the
error enough, let us now descend to the prevention of it.

Transcriptions oft-times uncertain and defective.
Before we take in hand any Discourse, we must always meditate of the means,
ere we can attain the end: Which end is soonest achieved, when we address
our selves for such Subjects (as have been in our time) wherein we may receive
Instruction, by some that have been inter-rested in those Affairs, of far
more certainty than any Transcription. But intending our Studies to any
Foreign Relation (whereof it may be we have some one Record) I would not
depend upon the Antiquity of the Record (for we have many ancient Fables) but
recollect my self and examine the probability, whether such particulars are
like to bear resemblance of truth or no. And herein we imitate the Ancientest
and best Authorized Historians that ever wrote.

Valerius Maximus had recourse, not only to Roman Annals, (which were kept
with great care) but he used to confer with such as had any Breviats of the
Roman Lives in their hands: Comparing them together, that he might cull and
choose out from the best Authors (as himself witnesses) such documents, as not
only propagated the glory and pristine height of his Country, but might move
succeeding ages to emulate their Uertues.

The like of that true Moral Historian Plutarch, whose Style so modestly
garnished, and so sententiously concluding, has (and not without cause)
purchased him the name of the Father of Histories.

Laertius, a worthy recorder of those famous Sages of Greece; describes his
Countries happiness with great modesty: Whose Sentences may beseem the
gravest Understanding to extract, and upon occasion to accommodate to his own
purpose. The variety of discourse in Laertius.
Here he shows Spirit in a Philosophers Pen, one opposing himself against a
Tyrant; There a Moralist, making young men fit Sociates for the maturest times:
Here a Cynicke, contemning the glory of the World, though offered him; There a
merry Greek, laughing at the Vanities of men wholly besotted and subjected to
mundane slavery. O what Christian-like Maxims, what Divine conclusions, what
solid Arguments, what enforcing reasons be there included, only to move men to
the embrace of virtue? With Discourse plentiful enough in oppositions betwixt
Ethnicke and Ethnicke; outstripping Nature (if it were possible) in reasoning,
and drawing an argument, near to Divine approbation, and ready to confirm it,
if the general blindness of the Time, and their want of further Revelation
would admit of their assertion.

Thus much for the former branch of my Division, of Histories True and
Authenticke: Now I will entreat of Relations Feigned; yet such as Moralized
include an excellent meaning, drained from the uncorrupted Springs of Helicon.

Feigned Relations or Poetical Histories.
ALL Relations feigned are not to be excluded: for many Poetical Narrations
there be which comprehend in them a wonderful sharpness of judgment,
pregnancy of Invention, and a great measure of Discretion; of which sort, none
more excellent then the Works of Homer, weaving many pretty conceits in the
web of his History, Homer an Excellent and Heroicke Port; shadowed only at,
because my Judicious Friend Master Tho. Heywood, has taken in hand (by his
great industry) to make a General (though Summary) description o^ all the
Poets lives; and with far more felicity, I hope, than his mysterious
^iscourse of Angels.
to make the Subject it self more pleasant. The more I commend him to the
reading of the iudiciously Generous, because I could never find in his Works
any scurrulous Affectation, but prosecuting his Discourse with a modest
gravity, as if Nature, that had deprived him of his corporal sight, had done
it, to make the eye of his understanding more piercing. For who so reads the
Majesty of his Style, the wel-coucht Fables immixt in his War betwixt the
Greeks and Trojans, may as in a Storehouse, imagine the Treasures of all Wits
to be locked up in him. Many excellent Histories have been derived from him,
as well in Prose as contracted Measures; for his pleasing variety relisheth
more then others, because through all his Works, he uses less digression
then others: and pity it is, that every impolish'd hand should have to do
with the Transcription of his Labors: grieving the poor Blind-man with their
blindness: For who so blind as Bajard? And if Stesycorus was worthily struck
blind for Commenting on Venus beauty, and discommending Hellens form: Much
more deserve they an exacter punishment, that dare with an unprepared
sleightnesse, Labors disparraged by Translators.
Comment on his eternized Labors, who detected Venus lust, and portraied
Hellens Inconstancy.

To prescribe in what Tongue Histories are to be read, I know their own
garment is most native. But such have bin the disparraging Labors of our
English Translators, that Romes Tongue, and Greeces Characters, grow as vulgar
and common with us, as the Italian Garb: so as we seem beholding to others,
both for Speech and Raiment. I do know some Works are necessary to be
Translated, Many illiterat of the exactest Judgment.
being such as express the politic states of Realms; which imparted to the
illiterate, oftentimes confer no little benefit to our Country. But other
Works there be, which Modesty would have concealed, being Records of the
Vitiousnesse of former times; as the Obscene and sensual convents, or
prostitutions rather, of those mirrors of Impiety, the Roman Emperors; the
Relation whereof acquaints the depraved too well with such Impudence.

To admit of such Works, or to give Patronage to such, not only fruitless but
dishonest Labors, has been in all times a great occasion of corrupting
youth, The free passage of wanton works, the maine source of corrupting Youth.
nourishing Vice, and introducing a sensual liberty amongst such, who in
regard of their eminence of place, should have bin Patrons and patterns of
piety. For if anciently all occasions of looseness were so much prevented, as
even outward Habits or other external gestures made them censured: How much
more should Authors, whose oil should be so employed, as a benefit to some, a
prejudice to none ought to be occasioned; labor to compose such Works, or
faithfully Translate such Labors, as may confer a succeeding profit to the
State, to which they stand more particularly interessed. Lascivious lines
produce vicious lives: seeing men for most part, are more Apishly addicted to
the imitation of any vice, then seriously affected to the attention of Virtue.
Scandal is a dangerous shelfe: neither is there any Tetter more noxiously
spreading over the face; then foments and occasional motives of inordinate
lightness is to our life.

Lacides, that Argive King, was accounted lascivious only for his sleek looks,
and mincing gate. Unless occasions be prevented, the most integrious may be
impeached.
So Pompey, a professed Champion of valor and honor, because he used to scratch
his head with one finger; albeit very continent and modest. So Crassus, only
because he would have bought a Farm of a Vestall Virgin, for which intent
only, he used to converse with her, was suspected to have abused her.
Posthumia, because out of a natural inclination, given to laughter, and
something forward to talk with men, was suspected of her honesty; whereof
being openly accused, she was acquitted by Spurius Minutius with this Caveat,
to use words suitable to her life.

Now, if Habit, Gesture, or Discourse begot such a suspicion amongst Pagans;
what should public Works, whereto Authority gives improvement, do amongst
Christians? In our readings, as we should be Bees and no Spiders: brouzing and
sucking the fragrant'st and wholesom'st herbs, and no less seasonably
converting them to the best substance: So should those, who intend to publish
ought; no less sincerely then seriously ponder thus with themselves, before
they impart themselves to the World: whereto tends this passage? will not the
ambiguity of it probably beget a mis-construction, and consequently some
occasion of corruption? Have our lines their full weight? do they bear that
proportion, which may sort with the quality of that Subject whereof they treat?
do they neither fall short of the Time, by contracting or injuriously
concealing, what should be discovered: Or above the time, by dilating too
amply, and annexing a Comment, where the Text it self would have served? Is
there naught that may offend a modest care, or deprave an unsettled thought? May
the State receive it, and be not prejudiced by it: Or the most censorious
Critic peruse it, and without just ground disrellish it?

Princely Augustus, who ever retained in him a Moral piety, as well as an
Imperial Majesty; for lesser had the latter beseem'd him, had not the former
accompanied him; would not permit his Livia to read light works: no question,
light labors make many of our Livia's light. For as the Lover is ever blinded
with affection toward his beloved: Plato.
so it fares with these, who affected to light passages, in the end so fix
their deluded conceits upon them, as they admire nothing with more constancy,
then such Subjects as wrought those love-sicke passions on their besotted fancy.

But to recede to our Discourse of Histories of this nature; A just reproof of
indiscreet Translations.
I find many unprofitable passages in the Translation of our Histories; which
the discretion of a temperate and well-composed Interpreter might have well
omitted: neither should he in this have prejudiced his Author, but acquired
more honor to himself by his Labor. I could instance many passages in sundry
Roman Historians, which might discreetly have been omitted without any defect
or maime at all to their History: and by omitting those lighter digressions,
ministered less offense to a modest Reader.

Truth is, we are apt enough to become depraved by our own illimited
affections; and little need to have a plat-forme drawn to us, to beget in us a
new brood of vicious inventions. Many particulars, no doubt, might suit well
the History in his Original, in respect of the time, place, and persons,
wherein and to whom it was addressed: which, attired in another Dialect, and
published in these our latter times, would not relish so well to a clear
Judgment.

That conspicuous Light of the Eastern Church, Aug.
whose Devotion and Learning have contracted themselves in so unanimous a
manner, as no succeeding Age but shall reap benefit by the perusal of his
holy Labors, says, that anciently the Romans worshipped Virtue and Honor for
Gods. Whence it was, that they built two Temples, which were so seated, as none
could enter the Temple of HONOR, unless he first passed through the Temple of
VERTVE: to signify, that none was to be honored, unless by some Virtue he
had first deserved it. The Moral admits no other ingenuous Exposition, than
its own genuine expression: For Honor, none should be so daring-bold, or
presumptuously confident upon a credulous conceit of their own worth, as to
woo her, much less to win her, till by passing through Virtues Temple, he
get free admittance unto her.

Now tell me, what Honor shall accrue to those goodly Labors, beautified with
glorious Frontispieces, garnished with all the Ornaments and Embellishments of
Art, countenanced by a powerful Patron, and accommodated with all those Helps
which the extensive Labors of an Author can require: when it shall appear to
the World, that those Lines of his never received approvement from the Temple
of Virtue? Oh, how many sickly Judgments have I known of this sort, who by
neglecting their choice of Arguments tending to the advancement of goodness,
and bestowing their Oil on such as least deserved their employment, have
perished in the esteem of honest Wits, and disparraged themselves most, ^uijs
misere ^esecerunt, de quibus maxim praesumpserunt, Vid. Ca^al. Hist.
where they expected to have been honored most! But as this may be properly
construed an error of life; where the affection of an Author, either in
respect of the general inordinacy of the Time, chooses rather to sit his Pen
to the corruption of the Age, by delivering to her what she most affects: or
out of a weakness and deficiency of Judgment, preferres a light or lascivious
Subject, solely apt to deprave many, improve none; before such as are serious,
and might tend to the benefit of the Public, being methodically disposed, and
faithfully rendered, as Transcripts of that nature, are to be published. So
there is another error commonly arising from ignorance of the Language,
wherein such a Subject was writ. As the Greek, so is the Latin copious and
fluent: in both which it is very easy to offend, either by too childish
rendering, or erroneous mistaking of the Original expression.

But the Latin Tongue being of most use, because of generall'st Notion through
the World; as also for that most of the Greek Histories were rendered by
faithful Interpretors in that Tongue, received most acceptance: and that not
only in the Latian confines, but in more remote places where other Tongues
were in request.

We read in Dion Cassius, of a principal man in Greece, that by Claudius was
put from the order of Judges, for being ignorant of the Latin Tongue.

That in all the regions of Pannonia it was known: Velleius will afford you
sufficient authority. Vellei. lib. c. Strabo. lib. 3. and 4. Apulcius in
Floridis.


Secondly, that it was spoken in a free and native Idiome, in France and Spain.

Thirdly, in Affricke.

And (to reflect upon more Divine authorities) it seems that the Sermons of
Cyprian and Augustine yet extant (of Augustine it is manifest) that they
preached to the people in Latin. But in the East parts of the Empire, as in
Greece and Asia, and so likewise in Affricke, from the greater Syrtis
Eastward, it appears not in our reading nor collection from others, that the
Roman Tongue ever grew into any common use. And the reason of it seems to be,
for that in those parts of the Empire it became most frequent, where the most
and greatest Colonies were planted.

Now, what absurdities are and have bin usually committed upon ignorance of the
Tongue, which they labored to Translate, I leave to the judicious censures of
such, who are frequently versed in such Subjects: where they shall find whole
pages mis-construed, whole periods omitted, whereby the Author becomes
miserably mangled.

Now, to return a true level unto both; as the Original expressed acts done in
that time unto life; and, perchance, glanced at some egregious abuses of that
Time, or rather displayed them in their deepest colors: So is his Translator
in an apt and proper phrase to render him: and if any impertinent, or (which is
worse) vicious passages occur, with a modest silence to pass over them';
rather then by an unnecessary inserting of them, inform the present age in
knowledge of them.

In observing this, their Labors shall deserve to be inchained in our
eminent'st Libraries, and retain in them a confirmed fame; while lighter
subjects, which receive their beauty from the complies of Time, or adorn
themselves with the quicke-vading flourishes of vanity, shall incline to the
period of an easy Fate.

But because I have entered into a Catalogue of Poetical Histories, I will
proceed further into the memorable, and no less ingenious Works of Hesiod:
Much I cannot Write of Hystoricall matter in Hesiod; yet what he writ of that
Subject, comprehended in it more height and true proportion, then any Poet that
ever writ. With what hazarding danger does he there delineate the rare Combat
between Ceix and Cycnus? Now equally poizing their valors (as if nature had
made them of that equal power) to the end to leave the conflict uncertain.
Presently (upon occasioned advantage) he shows a better and a worse: yet so,
as without the least imputation, or disparrage to either of their spirits
(making them as imparalell as equal) but applies the event to some auspitious
Genius, or Divine Power, favoring one more then another. Straight, with a new
passage, he proceeds to the resolved exploits of Hercules; Hercules Labors.
and with an admirable facility describes his Labors. He it was, that by the
assisting hand of Jupiter, of whom he descended, flew the Cleonian Lion, the
Erimanthian Boar, the Bull of Marathon, the Lernaean Hydra, and the winged
Heart: He who purchased no less memorable Trophies in Hell, than on Earth;
haling the three-necked Cerberus, and rescuing Proserpina (if the Supreme
Powers had not inhibited) from the tyrannick hands of infernal Pluto:
Discomfiting the Centaures, vanquishing Achelous (being his corrivall in the
love of fair Deianira) the Stymphalides, the Cremona Giants, the traiterous
Nessus, Antaeus, Augeas Stables, Apples of Hesperides, Cacus, Busyris, hurling
Diomedes to his Horses (to quit his own tyranny) freeing Hesyone from the
Whale, sacking Troy in revenge of the perfidious Laomedon, subduing those
invincible Giants, Dericlus and Albion, redeeming Orcalia, and Betricia from
the captivity of Gerion: and wearing the Amazon Baldrick, to intimate his
victories in those warlicke Provinces.

These, and the like, does Hesiod set down with that probable coherence, that
if the matter it self did not imply an impossibility, one would be certainly
induced to believe so concordant an History. Presently he descends to the
Generation of the Gods, making up a Genealogy in that distinct order, as the
Pagan Gods (for so one has observed) were much indebted to him for so well
deserving their pedigree, which without his invention (perhaps) had lain
obscure.


Now, howsoever these Inventions may seem improper for the state or structure
of an History; How Invention may stand with the contexture of an History.
because it behooves an Historian to relate with probability whatsoever has
happened either in his own Time or any former Age: Yet are these, imbellishments
to History; being writ rather to beautify than confirm; and to cheer the
conceit, than to enforce it to an improbable belief. No doubt, but many of
those Eminent Heroes, whom Time either flattered, or Oracles deluded, or some
other selfe-opinionate Conceit transported, were encouraged to designs of
infinite difficulty, to prove themselves descended from a Deity. Besides this,
they imagined, being so descended, they were invulnerate. This it was, which
put them on Actions above conceit, to disperse their Fame, and preserve that
Opinion which the Age retained of their descent. Howsoever, Excellent Emblemes
shadowed under Poetical fictions.
excellent Emblemes were shrouded under those Poetical Fictions. Hirsutae
nuces optimes praebent nucleos. The shell may seem mean, but the kernel
sweet.

When Achylles, that glory of the Grecians, had exposed himself to all
dangers, that Hostility or the force and fury of an Enemy could press upon
him; in the end, he was wounded in the heel; for there only, as the Poets
feign, he was mortal, and consequently vulnerable. This includes a dark but
dainty Moral. Many, howsoever they come on bravely, and can endure not only
the first brunt, but express a wondrous height of resolution, during all or
most part of the heat of the day, yet in the heel are they wounded. They
crown not the Day of their Actions with a glorious Evening, but fail most
when the Merit of their Actions should be most shining. For in this should
every Heroeck Spirit imitate the Sun; whose property it is to show most
beauty in the Setting: so they, more in their Close than their Beginning.

Yet, were these Historical Inventions of the Poets, touching the Generation
of the Gods; in many respects defective, and in some absurd. Especially, in
portraying of them aged, or addicted to some vicious quality or other: wherein
they seemed to confound Mortality with Immortality: a pure integrious estate
with impiety.

For the first, it was an excellent Saying of Theocritus, who observing that
popular stupidity of such as reposed their sole confidence in Idols, with the
vanity of them: seeing, how even those Gods, whose Modells they retained, and
to whose memories they were erected, were translated or removed none knew
whither; encouraged those who suffered for their Contempt toward those Pagan
Deities in this manner: Bono estote animo, quando Dij moriuntur ante homines.
Theocritus in Cle. Alex. Protrep.
Be of good courage, when Gods dye before Men. Again, speaking of a Mute
Deity: Quid praestare colenti potest, quae loqui non potest? Lactant. de falsa
Relig. lib. 1. Cap. Dea Mutae,
Wherein can that Goddess avail him that worships her, who cannot speak to
him that worships her?

So as Tullus Hostilius putting Pavorem Palloremque.
FEAR and PALENESSE in the number of his Gods: It is pity (says Lactantius)
that ever his Gods should go from him.

Notwithstanding all this, in the relation of their actions and such
intervening Occurrents as happened in their Oppositions, they deserve applause,
though no credible approvement. And the more to be admired were their
descriptions, in regard they fixed on no other Story either Transcribed, or any
other way delivered, then what invention had first molded and recommended to
posterity. Yet observe what congruity these held, both in describing them what
they were, from whence they came, what exploits they did, with the several
Offices to which they were designed, or rather Originally interessed: and those
distinct passages of their life's, with the concurrency of opinions touching
their birth, continuance and increase, cannot choose but beget wonder.

You shall not find in any one of these, peculiar Offices confounded: Liber
must not intermeddle with the care of the Vines; nor Neptune play the
Mercurist. Distinct Offices were recommended to several supposed Deities: and
this the ancient Ethnicks held with such ceremonious reverence, as nothing
could be with more solemnity observed.

For the latter, absurdity; wherein the Pagans made their Gods addicted to all
vice and impiety: This might have declined them from such adoration; when those
Persons whom they so highly honored, deserved in their actions so little
imitation. But to take Survey of those contests or civil Wars amongst
themselves, either arising from precedence; or grounded upon jealousy, or some
other occasional distaste, would be^et a deserving admiration in any judicious
Reader: observing, what Historical Art derived her light from invention; and
in what excellent order disposed, though restrained by rules of dimension.

Lucian deserves his place, whose otherwise ill-deserving parts, being a
professed see to all divine adoration, purchased him an end as miserable as his
prophanations merited; being devoured by Dogs: yet in this regard we have
propounded our Opinion about Historical fictions, I will give him his due
place: one of an excellent Wit, ripe Understanding, and laborious withal, to
find out the ancient Manuscripts, and records of authorized Histories: yet,
forasmuch as his writings are interlarded now and then with invective speeches
against the Celestial Powers, arguing too much of Natures power, too little
of the Sovereign of Nature: I would have the Generous Reader to prepare
himself in the perusal of such Discourses, as Calipso instructed Ulysses
against the Sirens Enchantments, thus inviting him:

Huc ades o ingens Graecorum gloria Ulysses, Homerin Iliad, Lib. 2.

Siste Ratem, etc. -- Thus Englished.
Come hither Noble Ithacus, of valiant Greeks the choice,
Take harbor here, incline thine ear unto the Sirens voice:
For there nere was any did pass, since we arrived here,
This liquid way, but wished to stay, our warbling notes to hear.
Hence pregnant wits, and ripe conceits much knowledge have conceived:
As for the acts you did at Troy, we news long since received.
And how the Gods pursued the Greeks, the Trojans Greeks pursue,
The Grecians hate in sacking Troy, Heavens hate in wracking you.
Of these Enchantments did Calypso fore-warn Ulysses with this preparation,
that he should command his Associates in his ship, to bind him, when he
approached near those fatal Harmonists, and to stop their ears, least they
should be made a prey to their cruelty. So must every one prepare himself in
such Siren-discourses. The liberty of these times, persuades some too easily to
Lucians arguments: and those which (in fear of divine power) dare not deny the
Omnipotency of the Immortal power in word, yet their profane conversation
implies an absolute Apostasy in them in their works. I wish these digressions
were not needful: for then I might more directly proceed in my discourse,
which the depravednesse of times will in no case suffer.

Feigned Histories approved, tending to instruction.
But in these feigned Histories I wholly exclude all ribaldry; times themselves
have instruction sufficient for obscene subjects, without any further
excitements: nor can I admit, that those unprofitable Stories of Primalion,
Palmerin de Oliva, The Knight of the Sun, Gerilion, with many other fictive
Discourses, should be entertained by Youth. Many of these Relations have
strangely transported diverse well-promising Wits into strange amazements;
especially such as conceive more delight in them, than more serious studies.
Some we have heard, that in reading the strange adventures of Orlando Furioso,
and conveying the very impression of his amorous passion to themselves, would
presently imitate his distraction, run stark naked, make Love-songs
incommendation of their Angelica, put themselves to intolerable torments to
gain the affection of their supposed Mistresses. Others, in imitation of some
valiant Knights, have frequented Deserts, and uninhabited Provinces, ecchoing
in every place their own vanities, endorsing their Names in barks of Trees,
wholly turned savage and untractable, to personate that Knight more lively.

Such Histories I only allow of (whether in Prose, or Verse, Such Histories
only merit that name, which yield profit with delight.
for Epicks may be writ in either) as yield profit with delight; not subjecting
their discourse to observe some indiscreet Humor of the Time, for application,
but prevention. Many read, and (in the loosnesse of their own lives) make
application of the worst unto themselves; hoping with Herostratus, to be
memorable for villainy: These are like Spiders, that turn the sweetest and most
wholesome flowers to rank poison; the discredit of an History, and a great
strengthener of vice.

He falls upon a just reproof of useless Readers of Histories: with such as
cull only grounds for themselves, to comply with their own desires. The
Ambitious man's Object in his Read ng.
And here might I take occasion, to fall upon a just reproof of useless
Readers of Histories; with such, as cull only grounds for themselves, to
comply with their own desires: As the Ambitious; who reflects only upon high
aerie Spirits: but never makes any use of their fall. An aspiring Philotas is
the Object he eyes, and his designs, the Copy after which he moulds his
Actions. Oh, how highly is he transported, when he sees Ambition mounted:
looking ever after Hamons Honor, but seldom or never on his Ladder?
Indirectest paths are the ways he most affects: and like a youthful
Ascanius, scorns to walk in common tracks, or to converse with ought less
than Empires. He holds Opinion with that Universal Monarch, that Kingdoms
got by descent, derive to their possessors no personal merit. He had rather
win than inherit; atchieve by the Sword, than enjoy by succession. Such as
these say with Tiridates in Tacitus; To retain their own, Sua retin^re
privatae domus, d^ alienis certa^e ^egia laus est. Tacit.
is in the power of every private State; but to aim at that which is another,
is a Princely praise. This it was (as I have elsewhere observed) that caused
Themistocles to walk in the Nightime in the open street,
because he could not sleep; the Reason whereof when some men enquired, who
were to him more intimately endeered, Tus^. lib. 4.
he answered, that the Triumph of Miltiades would not suffer him to take his
rest. So impatient of rest is Ambition, as it cannot endure either Competitor
or Equal; but a reflexe had to them infinitely distracts him: so as, he cannot
possibly enjoy himself, because he envies their greatness, whom general
Opinion holds either equal or transcendent to himself.

It is no less to be wondered at, with what serious attention these ambitious
Fire flies, who ever singe their wings in the flames of their own aspiring,
read, and discuss every circumstance tending this way; with a personal
application to themselves; as if they were the men which the History aimed at:
and whose Actions, they hope, e're long, will beget an Iliad to succeeding
times, to admire their valor; and to erect surviving Trophies to their
surviving honor. Thus do they catch at shadows, leaving the substance to such
judicious and competible Readers; who make use of those ancient Records to
their benefit: in collecting what is most useful, and with a discreet aversion
sleighting whatsoever might be occasionally hurtful.

Nor be these High-flyers, who seldom go gray headed to their Graves, only
reproveable in the abuse of their Readings; The Voluptuous man's Object in his
Reading.
but the voluptuous too: who, when they fall upon any passage that complies
with the lightness of their fancy, so highly affect it, as nothing more
delights them, than to discourse of such ayry pleasures, as present themselves
in a cursorie manner to their deluded conceits. These are altogether for
Stories of Love; where every Line works such moving impressions in their
unsteady fancies: as they reduce every period of Loves discourse, to a Scene
of Action; wherein they wish themselves Prime-actors, to close in a personal
re-greet, with so light and sensual a Relation.

Ganimedes Rape; Lais loose Love; white teeth, rolling Eyes, displayed Breasts;
a winning Look, a Cerusse Cheek; a beautiful complexion (an exterior good,
and if corrupted, an interior evil) being that which Euryala so much praised,
when she washed the feet of Ulysses, namely, Gentle speech and tender flesh:
these are proper Subjects for these light-fancied Amorists.

I must confess, that no History can be so serious, but it must upon occasion
relate some lighter passages, which equally poised according to the time,
should not breed these effects; but rather beget in a Continent and
well-composed Reader, a detestation of whatsoever he shall find vicious: and
an ardent desire after that which shall appear truly generous and virtuous.

Alcaeus, a man of good reputation, and general observance in the
Commonwealth, what toies wrote he of the love of yong-men; immixing sometimes
those lighter fancies in his seriousest Subjects? All the Writings of Anacreon
(as if those Discourses had got highest place in his Invention) were only of
love. But most of all others, Rheginus even burned with Love, as appears by
his Writings; being continued passages of winning delight: and intrancing the
unwary peruser of his amorous Conceits, with deceiving shadows. Yea, even
Philosophers, (and that by the Council and Authority of Plato, whom therefore
Dicearchus did worthily reprehend) became the Commenders and Honourers of Love.
For Dicearchus, a Silician Philosopher, and Aristotle's Scholar, Writing a
Book of the SPARTAN Commonwealth, distasted highly the opinion of such, who
bearing the style of grave and reverend Men, gave way in their Works, that any
liberty should be introduced into a civil state: or authorized any Labors,
were they Historical, Poetical or Mixed, to have freedom in corrupting youth,
or depraving the prime seeds of easy and pliable dispositions. These, who
stand thus affected, and whose Readings are soly fixed upon sensual delights;
it were fitting for them to weane their affections, at least, to divert their
eyes from those sensible Objects, which engage reason to the servile Obedience
of appetite; and to re-collect their Diviner parts, to patterns of continence:
such as may inform them what to do; how to remove occasions: and consequently,
free their inward Mansions or Receptacles from these corruptions. An excellent
Pattern or incomparable Mirror in the command or Sovereignty of his
affections, did that young man Spurina in Valerius Maximus, Val. Max. lib. 4
cap. 5.
show himself; whose beauty did so infinitely become him, as it occasioned
many Women to lust after him: which this noble youth no sooner perceived (note
this admirable act in a Pagan) then he wounded his face, that by the skar he
sustained, his beauty might become more blemished, and consequently, all
occasion of lusting after it, clearly removed. Diverse instances, though not
altogether so impressive, might be here inserted, tending to like use; but
brevity, as it is the help of Memory, so my desire is to accommodate the
Reader with instances useful and commodious, rather then unnecessarily
numerous.

The Covetous man's Object in his Reading.
Nor be the Covetous, (if their desire of gathering may admit so much time as to
peruse an History in a whole age) less reprooveable in this kind. For these,
if they find one Worldly wise; no matter though he not only grounded but
improved his estate by Extortion, and raised his posterity to an unknown Title
of Gentry by deceit and collusion: yet must his life and actions be the line of
their directions.

They look not on Midas fate, but his golden state. Tagus they desire, nor
care they much (so they may purchase it) to be drowned in it. These hold no
substance to be purely good, unless it be gilded with gold. These never
remember the saying of that wise Simonides; who being asked once, whether
Virtue or Riches were of more reputation; made answer, That the virtuous did
more frequent the doors of the Rich, then the Rich of the virtuous. Implying,
that piety was for the most part attended on by poverty; but seldom was virtue
accompanied by prosperity.

Now to apply an antidote to this infection, and cure in them this distempered
affection; as the Unicorns Horn is of such sovereign virtue, as being dipped
in water, it cleares and purifies it:
so must their earthy depressed minds be purified by some powerful infusion,
or they will never endure to alter their disposition. To remove then those
scales which darken their intellectual part; their only safe course is to
withdraw themselves a little from talking with Earth: and to fix the eye of
their Contemplation on a diviner Object, the Storehouse of Heaven. The vanity,
frailty and mutability of the one, will inhance the quality and dignity of the
other. The mere mental observance of these, without any further experience,
(wherein Historical examples will afford no small light) cannot choose but
qualify their Temper, and enforce them to cry out with that Divine father: O
how miserable is the World, O quam mise^rimus est mundus, and mis^ri qui cum
sequantur! Sem per enim homines Mundi opera excluse^unt a vita. Chrysostom. sup. Mat.
and how miserable they who follow the World! seeing, that men of this World
have always excluded their works from partaking of life in the World to come.

Thus have we traced over the various paths of three vicious Readers; all
others may be in these included, who make not that benefit of History, to which
it was primarily addressed; but by fruitless and unnecessary observations,
dispa^rage their own judgments, in preferring those before passages of more
high and useful consequence. So as, I may properly resemble them to He
resembl^s fruitless Readers to useless Travelers, who ^ake notice of such
things as are most fr^^olou^* or which i^ wo^se, vicious.
Vselesse Travailers, who take notice of such things as are most frivolous, or
what is worse, vicious.

Others there be, that transported only with the delight and present variety
of the History, make History only (as our Gallants do their Tobacco) a spender
of Time: They apply not the fruit or use of Histories, but as in some pleasant
or delightful dream, satisfied for the present time; but past, quite razed
out of Memory. In stories of this nature, (such I mean as be feigned) I
approve of those best that resemble Truth the nearest, according to Flaccus
opinion: Ficta voluptatis causa sint proxima veris. For the impossibility of
the Relation oftentimes makes the Subject more ridiculous: whereas the
concordancy, or apt connection of the History (though the maine plot be false)
enforces more attention.

And thus much of Poetical Histories: I will come to the second Branch of my
Division of Histories (to wit) Moral.

Moral Histories Moral Histories.
be such, as conduce to a Civil and Moral institution of Life or Manners;
Teaching what is to be done, and what avoided. Xenophon in his Instruction of
Cyrus, propounds what reasons should especially induce a Moral Historian to
speak more of examplary Motives to Virtue, then any thing else; Because (says
he) if Cyrus had not bin elected King amongst Shepherds, it may be, he had
never reigned over the Persians: but the very Title, which was given him by
Rural Swains, enforced him to attempt further.

Moral Histories teach Men to behave themselves in all affairs: If employed
in Embassages, Commerce, or any Negotiation whatsoever, it directs them how to
hazard fairly, bear themselves discreetly, and support the burden imposed on
them stoutly. These kind of stories are the best Nurses, they weane us from
childish effeminacy, and Train us in more virile and Man-like actions: so as
Education is called by the Philosopher, A second Nature, habituating us to the
kind of our breeding: Morality likewise is called, the Soveraignesse of
Education, The square of humane Actions, the best Schoole-mistresse for
unbridled youth, that restraines affections raging, erects our passions too
much asswaging, tempers our spirits, and Reduces us to that perfect Symmetry,
Vt ex pede Herculem, you may know Hercules by his foot, the inward habit by
external appearance.

Hence was it that Alexander gloried so much of his Stagyrian Moralist:
Achylles of his Phoenix: of whom he had received so much good, as he
ingeniously acknowledged; by Phoenix he could both, Been dicere, and been agere.

To be brief, there is no exorbitancy in Nature, which by Moral Narrations
has not bin reformed: Seneca was naturally covetous: which disposition, or
malady rather, he shrowds covertly in that sentence of his, inserted in his
Book, De Tranquillitate Animae. Nec aegroto, nec valeo. Yet by daily conference
with Moral Histories, and precepts of civil Institution, he could moderate
his desire of having, esteeming the Treasure of his mind only worth
possessing. Qui cuncta habet, nec tamen habetur: as Salust observes.

The like we read of Stilpho, a Roman, whom (as Cicero speaks) was of all
other most libidinous; yet by reading of Moral Precepts, amplified with grave
Examples, became most conti^ent.


Whence it is, that Moral Histories, or Narrations in such Histories, are and
were ever highly commended, by reason of their effects: Moral Histories, or
Narrations in such Histories, highly commended; with their ^ff^^ts.
especially in Youth, whose disposition being aptly compared to a clear or
pure Table, which, as yet had never taken any impression, receives her first
infusions with most retention. For the first Seeds take the deepest root; the
first Liquors strongest taste; the first Colors truest dye. These, by certain
innate sprinklings of goodness, confer the Lives and Actions of such, as
they read of, in an equal Diameter. Here they observe, how prudently such
persons managed their affairs; how discreetly they moderated their affections:
and with what facility and felicity they attained their proposed ends. By which
they collect, that deliberation promises success to every action. Amongst
these, they find a Fabius more prosperous by delaying; than heady Cethegus is
by attempting.

This teaches them wisely and cautiously to prevent danger before it approach,
lest a too late had I wist beget in them a Repentance without help; a
desperate repulse without hope.

It is written that the Emperor Titus (that dainty Darling of Mankind) used to
have borne before him a Dolphine wreathed about an Anchor, with this Impresse:
Festina lent. Which elegant Emblem they make excellent use of: They conceive
by this, how nothing can be done happily, that is done hastily: and that
nothing of high importance can possibly be achieved, Eucher.
being to any strict limit or compass of time confined.

The consideration of these Motives holds them from rashness; an error to
which unbounded Youth is commonly most subject: by which means they avoid
those many dangers, whereto the follies of Youth stand too frequently engaged.

Nor do they only find Instances worthy their Imitation in Subjects of
prevention and cautious providence: (a Lesson of necessary consequence for
Yong-men;) but in actions of Justice; where that which is right and just,
should be fairly and freely rendered to every man. Of this, they find sundry
singular Examples in Ethnicke Authors. Phocion, that Honor of Greece, will not
speak for Charilus, though he be his Son in Law, but in just Causes only.
Nor that Worlds Commander, the invincible Alexander, incline to his Mother, if
her Request tend to the shedding of innocent blood, or imbruing his imperial
hands in Murder. Nor that unhappy Mithridates suffer (in his respect of
Justice) the corruption of Acilius to pass unpunished: lest his Impunity might
become a Privilege to others, to challenge the like benefit. In these they
observe of what esteem the profession of Justice was in all Ages: and how a
native Instinct wrought such incredible effects on Barbarous people; as their
very Actions merited both imitation and admiration in their Successors.
Neither could the Philosophers of those times, wherein they flourished, be more
exact in defining what Justice was, than these were in performing what Justice
required.

For our Life, as it is a Globe of Examples; so by collecting whatsoever we
see imitable in others; if we tender our own well-being, or her breast from
whence we had our nursing and first being; we will take especial care to
express to life, whatsoever we have at any time read commendable in others.

In Arguments likewise of Temperance, they cull out many dainty Historical
Flowers; apt to sweeten the Seed-plot of their Youth with a select variety of
Examples. Yea, even in those Encounters, wherein the Conquest appears to be of
most difficulty; to wit, restraint of our desires in sensual Objects: wherein
the Victory is so much more glorious, as the opportunity and motive of their
fancy attractive or precious.

They read how Scipio, being a young man of Twenty four years of Age, in the
surprizall of a City in Spain, repressed his flames of lust, and confined his
desires to the Rule of Reason, when a beautiful Maid was brought him;
restoring her untoucht with a great Reward to young Allantius, to whom she was
espoused.

The like in Alexanders Continency to Darius Wife and Daughters; whose Princely
moderation and command over his affections, made his Memory no less glorious
than his Victories.

The like in Zenocrates, a right Philosopher, because of himself an absolute
Commander; who remains immovable in his resolution to Continence, amidst all
those voluptuous inducements, sensual provocations and enticements, lascivious
dalliance and embracings of a light-licentious Lais. From the perusal of these
they conclude, There is nothing comparably precious to a continent Soul.

Lastly, to (exemplify in each of our Cardinal Virtues, what rare effects may
be derived to Youth in these Historical Readings) they observe the Constancy
and Resolution of foreign Commanders; they admire their Fortitude, and
bravenesse of spirit. Neither can Pyrrhus Gold corrupt, nor his hideous
Elephant amate a Noble Fabius.

Though an Imperious Philip threaten an Athenian Legate, that he will cause his
Head to be cut off; he has an Answer in store to vye with the mounting
Sovereignty of his State:
If thou take this Head from me, my Country will give me another that shall be
immortal.

And they find how grateful some Princes were in the memory of their Subjects
Loyalty; holding their fidelity and trust to be the incomparablest Treasure
that any Prince could enjoy upon Earth. This they conceive by the estimate
which Darius made of his Zophyrus Cyrus of his Cambyses; Alexander of his
Parmenio, Athens of her Draco; Epaminondas of his Pelopidas, Sparta of her
Brasidas.

In these, they exactly prize the value of true worth. Nor is it to be
expressed with what eagerness they pursue those actions, which have purchased
such deserving fame to their persons.

It is reported, that Aristides (that memorable Mirror of Justice) dying of the
bite of a Weazle, exceedingly lamented that it was not a Lion. Noble spirits
embrace nothing with more easy acceptance then an Honorable fate. To die for
ones Country; or to be engaged to the very worst of extremes for the purchase
of her liberty, deserved no solemnization in tears: This when youth seriously
surveies, he no less affectionately admires; and desires nothing more then to
go on successively in a glorious emulation of their actions.

The infirmities of this time are great, and need the hand of an expert
Physician; no Medicine, nor Antidote, more sovereign to cure these contagious
Ulcers, then Moral Physic, if the Disease be green, (I mean the diseases
of the Mind:) We have here Lenitives to mittigate, if it be old, and grown to
a (...), a very Gangrene, griefs insensible, being most incurable. We have
Corrasives to eat away all those corrupt Tetters that hinder the Cure. The
praise of Moral History.
This is a singular Art; and far surpassing Galens, Aesculapius, or
Hypocrates: Their cures were but external, these internal: and so much more
worthy is the cure of the Mind then the Body, by how much the one is more
precious then the other. O Divine Art! O secret Mystery! The Greeks called this
Discourse, The life of Man: for without it, he would degenerate from Man, and
loose the best ornaments of Humane nature: The light of Reason, The Eye of
Election. (...)! great indeed, in comparison of the small esteem this World
makes of it: laboring of a great burden of impiety, an huge freight of sin,
an insupportable carriage; and feeling her own strength unfit for such a
weight, yet refuses to entertain a companion that would willingly and readily
lighten her burden.

Distempered Age, that labors of Minds frenzy, captivated to unworthy
bondage: how long will thy intellectual eye be shut? How long hood winckt? If
thou fall with open eyes, thy Misery is greater, seeing thy fall, yet would not
prevent it, falling with blinded eyes: no marvel, that sees thine own
infirmity, and scorns the direction of others eyes to conduct thee. Alas! here
be many intricate Mazes, unfrequented Labyrinths, places of imminent peril,
and thou art blind: no suspect of any Stratagem or Ambush does possess thee;
thou promisest thy self most security, when most beleagured with peril.

It was no marvel if miserable Oedipus run into Brakes and Briers, when his
erring feet were guided by two blind eyes? Here be many seducements: and as in
the Pagan time, there were more Temples erected in honor to Bacchus and Venus,
than to Jupiter and Apollo: So for one Example of Piety and Religion, we have
ten of Vice and Licentiousness. Here the bait of Ambition, hung out and
swallowed, and like enough by a Gudgion; there the painted Flagge of
vainglory, -- Summa plebis deducta est gloria plumis. A Caution for your
Silken Gallant. -- Misceri sanguine Regum Nobile --
leading a Troop of Vices in a Ring-dance: Here a Silken Fool well-esteemed
-- for Nasci a Principibus fortuitum est -- He was borne rich: There a ragged
Sage descanting on Moral Precepts, but neither guarded nor regarded. Here Rosa
Mundi, the Rose of Worlds vanity, set on a splay-foote, making Art a cover for
Natures deformity: There a plume of Feathers dangling on a Head more light than
Feathers, to make Plato's naked Definition Plato's Definition.
of Man true: Homo est Animal bipes, implume: proving himself by his plume to
be none. No matter for Reason: They would be loath to be endued with more than
is needful for a phantasticke head: An ordinary portion of Reason will serve
an Ordinary. Oh that these poiselesse Brains would but employ their ^ime in
Moral Discourses, what excellent matter might they find out worthy the
judicious approbation of refined Wits!

It is observed that in Athens, and in Rome also, young Gentlemen were to be
employed in preferring some Law in behalf of the people: or Patronizing such
as were poor, and destitute of succor in themselves: Patronizing such, and
protecting them in public defense of their cause, or the like.

This was the first step of preserment unto Cicero, defending Roscius against
Scylla: and that with such vehemence, as generally he was approved for his
seriousness in a poor Actors cause. And sure, generous minds cannot be
better expressed than in actions of this nature, whereby they may not only
secure themselves and their entirest affections from the frivolous assaults of
irregular perturbations; but also purchase unto them the general love and
favor of such as observe their disposition, and admire it.

By Moral reading we use to be most excited to these compassionate effects:
The fruit of Moral reading.
exampled in them whom we deservedly think of, and earnestly covet to
imitate: Not taxing them unworthily, nor commenting otherwise of their Virtues,
than as we receive by Transcription from others. Former Ages (in this kind)
have been more charitable, but the apprehension of our own defects makes us
suspectfull of others. As in Rome, if the Pisoes be frugall, they are censured
Parcimonious; if the Metelli Religious, they are taxed Superstitious; if the
Appij Popular, they are termed Ambitious; if the Manlij Austere, they are
styled Tyrannous; if the Lelij Wise, they are Curious; the Publicolae Aspiring,
if Courteous. Many such Mamothrepts we have, that censure others actions to the
worst, making their own depraved Judgments Censors of others Virtues. But
Moral Precepts would remedy this Obliquity, and will us first be Masters of
our Affections, e're we fish in the troubled waters of other men's errors: But
this Age confirms the Assertion of a wise Roman Senator: Suam cuiusque culpam
Authors ad causam transferunt: Or, which Seneca writes in his Epistle to his
friend Lucil. Many (says he) my friend Lucilius commit faults in Rome, but
will in no case hear that they committed them: the Aedile lays blame upon the
Questor, the Questor on the Praetor, the Praetor on the Consul, the Consul on
the Censor, the Censor on the Dictator.

Apologizing and defending Errors, the greatest cherisher of them: For how is
it possible we should amend them, that will not confess we did commit them?
But Acknowledgment is a precedent Directresse to Reformation, according to the
Traged: Seneca.
words: Quem poenitet peccasse, pene est innooens.


It is an infallible Theorem; Humility is the way to Glory. Which can be
expressed in nothing better, than in a free and genuine submission of our own
Judgments to others. Too much confidence begets strength of Error: and he is
the wisest, who in his own conceit appears humblest. Great Approbation is
then to be given to such, who tender an acknowledgment of their errors,
whether it be in their Dialect and form of speaking, or manner of living: with
an ingenuous submitting of their Labors to the free censure of others: which
argues a great measure of Sobriety and Discretion in any: Whereas Self-conceit
is a blemish to the exactest Labors: Neither shall such Authors free
themselves from malicious Censures. Acknowledgment of our Errors, whether it
be in our Dialect and form of speaking, or manner of living: with an ingenuous
submitting of our Labors to the free Censure of others, argues a great measure
of Sobriety and Discretion in us. Self-conceit a blemish to the exactest
Labors: Neither shall such Authors free themselves from malicious Censures.


Rhemnius Palaemon that arrogant Grammarian, or rather Grammatist,
vaine-gloriously boasted, that good Literature had first life by him, and
should after dye with him (as having the first beginning, and should have a
final end with him:) or like Gorgias the Orator, who ever pressed himself
forward to the first Encounter.

But what do'es this vainglory beget them, but contempt and derision in such
as observe them? The Age is subject enough to Error, and apt enough to
Apologize Vice, to give more liberty to the Offender. The way to break this
Chain, is to lay aside our selves, and impartially to judge our selves and
actions, as if they were not Ours, but Others.

For this Self-love makes us admire, what in others we abhor. A retired
privacy, many times, promises to the unwary delinquent, more freedom in
offending: but vain and fruitless are these promises. Is there any darkness
so thick and palpable, that the piercing Eye of Heaven, which takes a full and
perfect view of the whole Earth at once, measures the very least drop of the
Ocean, and numbers the least portion of Sand upon the shore, cannot look
through it? Oh, if thou hope by sinning secretly to sin securely, this thy
ungrounded security shall bring thee to misery. It was a pretty saying of
Epicurus in Seneca; How can Sin be safe when it cannot be secure? Or to what
purpose is it to labor to lie hid, when that we do cannot be hid? And
therefore Prudentius in one of his Hymns, gives this good Memorandum: "What
e're it be thou do by Day or Night,
"Think with thy selfeth art always in Gods sight.


It was Seneca's Counsel to his friend Lucilius; that whenever he went about
to do any thing, he should imagine Cato or Scipio, or some other worthy Roman
to be in presence. Bern. de vita solitaria.
And it was the saying of St. Bernard, That we are ever to set some good man
before us, that we may live as if he looked over us.

The way then to cure sin, is not to shroud it, nor with fair pretenses to
guild it, or by imputing the Cause to others, to mince it; but by a free and
ingenuous discovery of it, to acknowledge the ground to proceed from our
selves: Which acknowledgment will bring us to rectify what is amiss: and
bring that which we have so rectified, by a proficiency in goodness, to more
perfection.

For what is it, with Alcibiades, that beauty of Athens, to be skillful in all
Arts and Exercises; to win the Palm in what enterprise we take in hand; to
be popularly affected; with Trophies and Triumphs honored; and to have the
Wheel of Fortune so fixed, and the Wings of Victory so clipped; as the former may
never have power to discard us, nor the latter to fly from us: When our Inward
beauty, far surpassing all these light Embellishments of Art, becomes
blemished by that stain, which holds so deep a dye, as Time cannot raze it,
nor ought but Infamy attend it?

The way then to cure Error, is to submit our Judgments to others censure: and
in a wise and cautelous distrust of our selves, to admit the advice and
assistance of others in any matter of ambiguity; lest we deceive our selves by
being too confident of our own strength.

That saying is true: He that seeks to be more wise than he can be, shall be
found less wise than he should be.

The best Doctrine then to initiate us how to be wise, is not to be selfe-wise;
but with an humble acknowledgment of our own deficiencies, to ascribe all
praise unto Him who is solely wise.

In Moral Studies, much excellent matter may be chosen out of that Mirror of
Morals, Plutarch; not only to instruct Youth, in the Rudiments and Precepts of
Virtue: As how to bear himself in all occasions; how to conceal and smother
his passions, with a wise over-mastring of his Affections; and how to redress
the multiplicity of injuries by taking opportunity by the Fore-top. But even
old men likewise, such as have seen many changes and alterations in their
Times, and were well nigh persuaded, that all the Volumes of the World could
not show them more, than they in the revolution of their Times had seen: But
seeing Instructions rare to them, and unaccustomed Precepts fit for the
maturest Head to plod on, they then confess that their old Age has been a
Dotage, verifying, Addiscendo, se semper senescere: Reaping more profit by one
Moral precept, then a whole years Experience in Worldly affairs.

Many old men we have (that can discourse of the change of Princes) whose
Gray-haires be as so many records of what they have seen. But alas, These
Times old in years, but young in hours.
confer with them of true Moral experience, and you shall find them as
young in hours, as old in years: Their knowledge in the Infancy, though their
one foot in the grave, ready to bid adieu to the world, when they are scarce
half erudiated in the preventive sleights of this world. A simple age! when we
have no other Testimony that we have lived long, save only our Gray-haires;
and yet the general ignorance pleads pardon: none so generous as those which
know the least; none of a ranked spirit, that will cast the eye of a judicious
applause, upon the meriting Labors of any man.

A reproof of the Age, in her disesteeming Authors: and sleighting their
Labors.
Wherein, should I fall upon reproof of the Age, in her dis-esteeming Authors:
and sleighting their Labors; mine Oil might seem to taste of too much
Criticisme: for the Professors of Learning, they must not expect all Times nor
all Eminent persons to have Scales in readiness to weigh their Merits.

For the Rich, whose thriving ways will afford him scarce time to converse
either with Wit or Learning, lest his providence in the mean time should be a
wanting to himself, which he preferres before all the World; so he find
grains enough to weigh his long-unseene Gold; he little cares how lightly
Learning weigh in the estimate of men. For, good man, he makes no other use of
Books, than Nurses do of Cradles, to rock Babes in till they fall asleep.

And for our Amorous Gallant, whose Cinnamon Rind is worth all the body
beside; he is so continually practicing in the School of Complement; First,
for accommodating himself in an handsome dress, then how to wear it when he
has crept into it; how to ruffle his boot, and make a gingling with his Heel,
as if all his patrimony were behind him; how to powder his locks, and sweeten
those constant Creatures which familiarly attend him; how to besprinkle his
effeminate face with Lady-like Love-spots, which cannot choose but be as so many
Lures to draw the eyes of his lightest Livia to look on him. These, I say,
being his daily exercise, will not admit him so much time as to talk with an
Author: Till his long training in the School of vanity has taught him so
much, as he needs no other Tutor then his own misspent time to admonish him
of his irregular course.

Nay, he leaves for most part, so small a portion of fortune to himself, as
the surplusage would scarce purchase his Author so much oil as might supply
his Lamp, in the composure of the most illaborate or compendious Labor.

But if at any time, his hand chance to dive into his pocket, to express his
bounty to the Muses; it may be properly said of him, what was sometimes spoken
by an other in the same sense: "Optimas ga^as infimis servavit chartis: Making
only choice of such for Objects of his bounty, whose light unstudied Lines
detract from the Muses beauty.

Nor are they to expect, that our High-mounting Cedars; whose Object is Honor;
which rather than they will not purchase, they lose themselves for ever: can
deigne to reflect on such Low shrubs. For of all others, Subjects of Learning
receive hardest digestion from Ambition. Lectures of Morality or Mortality can
work weak Impressions upon a restless aspiring fancy.

Composed minds, settled thoughts, retired Mansions are Receptacles for the
Muses.

Melius latcham procul ab Invidiae malis remotus inter Corfici rupes Maris etc.
Sen. in Oct.
Safe lay I hid, and free from Envies spite,
While Corsick Rocks were my retired site.
So spoke Seneca for a Seneca. Yea, I have known some of these, never truly
happy, till they became unhappy: receiving their most liberty from restraint;
and the best knowledge of themselves from a Grate. Then, and never till then,
did these begin to read Man; nor to conceive the frail condition of Man; nor
to converse with those Dead Counselors, which know best how to prepare and
accomplish Man. Seclusus a Mundo, Sacro teneor Silentio.
Then, and never till then, came Learning to be of Request, or in their Books.
So lightly is Learning favored, so meanly countenanced by such as Idolatrize
the World, or are affected to pleasure, or have in eager pursuit the shade of
Honor. But Learning is not hereby to be discouraged, because slighted or
desertlesly disvalued: This has long before these present Times, bin her fate,
and in all ages a common fault.

We read in our own Chronicles, how one year all the Laurel Trees within
our Island withered, and afterward contrary to all expectation, revived and
flourished again: Let Learning apply this to Herself; though her blossoms
seem dead, she retains still life in the Root: Which, by propagation of her
flowers and fruits, shall revive to her Honor; while ignorance buried in her
own ashes, and incapable of light or life, shall never recover.

It is Recorded, that Licinius, The cause why Learning is contemned.
Coleague in the Empire with Constantine the Great (being incapable of learning
himself) by reason of the slownesse or barrenness of his understanding, was
wont to call Learning the very poison and public plague, that infected the
Realm: The Roman Historians, have applied this vanity of his, rather to his
want of judgment, then any thing else, being not able to comprehend the
benefit of Arts.

The like of Maximilian, who was desirous to attain some extraordinary height
in Eloquence; Qui tegumento Herculeus, ferus natura, ardens libidinis,
consilijs stolidus. in vit. Aurel. Maxim.
which when he could not (by reason of his natural dullness) attain unto, he
envied and maligned others. Many have we that second the^e, glorying in their
own ignorance, and making a ridiculous spectacle of Learning: as a
superficial ornament to accommodate more the threed-bare Sophister, than the
Generous Gallant.

I recall to mind the ancient presage upon all Arts, and the prediction
concurres well with this time: Three-halfe pence for a Philosopher, and smoke
for a Counselor. It was spoken in the declining Age of the Roman Empire, when
Vice rode in his foot-cloath, and Virtue (like a poor Irish Lacky) ran at his
Stirrup. But Moral Learning illumines the intellectual power with a better
and clearer foresight; showing the difference between goodness and
appearance: for true Morals love not to garnish their portraitures with shadows.

Mitte ambos nudes ad ignetos, and videbis.
The best means to distinguish betwixt the ignorant and morally instructed, is
to put them into their habilliments of Nature; send them both forth naked into
the world, and their distinct Characters will appear more manifest. Alas, the
Moralist cannot discourse of what the World most affects; he sees the
ambitious man roving at unsettled ends, meaning to ingrosse the whole World to
himself; he smiles at his illimited desires, and wonders whereto his fond
purposes tend: he considers the event, ere he take in hand the means; and
hates desire of popular praise, or ostentation, lest he should grow proud by
foreign observances: he entertaines death with a cheerful brow. To whom
death is not terrible.
Terror of death is not terrible to one prepared for her ere she come; always
taking her, as one of the necessities of Nature, and inevitable, meditating of
her, as one -- Qui finem vitae extremum inter munera ponit naturae. These
considerations ever fortify a good Moral against the violence of all assaults
inward and outward; apprehending his substance, and composition, to be such as
cannot barracadoe it self against the encounter of Nature.

Agathoeles, that Tyrant of Syracusa, An excellent observation by 1 Tyrant.
in all his tyranny, had a good Moral Statue to represent to him the Idiome of
his Mortality; having the upper part of his Image made of Marble, Gold, and
Ivory, but the feet of Earth; This Emblem is portrai'd to life, page 61.
to intimate of how weak and infirm ground, he and his goodly promising
person stood. O! if we should but read the choice variety of divinely-composed
Sentences, comprised in those elaborate Works of the ancient Moral Historians:
they would move us to no less apprehension of our own weakness, than if some
expert or curious Painter, ( Apelles-like) should portray to us every part and
lineament of this little man we carry about us. Morality, Man's Anatomy.
Morality (says a good Moral) is Man's Anatomy; it shows every part of his
body, how composed, how disposed: and prescribes how this excellent composure
may be best preserved: It deals not by predominancy of Planets, (as our
ponderous burdens of Nature calculate) but by an even Symmetry of Virtues
governing the inferior Spheres, the bodies lineaments. Nor deals it is like
your Fantastic Musician, that bestows more charges on the Cover of his
Instrument, than the Instrument it self: but by the Covers debasement,
augments the Excellency of the Instrument, the divine faculties of the soul.

But I may seem to run too far in this Subject, confounding Moral History
with Philosophy: which though I might defend; for Moral Philosophy is nothing
else than a Globe of Moral Precepts drawn from Historical grounds; yet to
make mine own passage more smooth, I will descend to the next branch of
History, entitled Physical.

HIstories Physical, be especially conversant in the search of the Natures of
things: approving that Opinion of the Philosopher: Ea Physica sunt, quae
Naturas rerum explorare solent: whether things animate or inanimate; in living
Creatures, as in the search of Beasts, Birds, Serpents, and the like; and of
vegetive Bodies, as Plants: In creatures inanimate, as in the scrutiny of
Metals, the distinct natures of Stones, etc. With which Discourses the
greatest Emperors have been delighted. The several kinds of Physical
observations.
Those admirable Works of Pliny, Aristotle, and Aelian, with many others, are
sufficient to erudiate the most incap^ble in these Relations: where they do
Abdita rerum rimari. Here describing the very intimate natures of Beasts, the
rare and incredible virtues of Plants, and Herbs, the virulent natures of
Serpents, and the attractive powers of Stones, These two Beasts, in Nature and
Feature different, by one peculiar Nation, (Egypt) equally reverenced. He
continues the Description of the Natures of diverse Serpents; extracted from the
Historical Description of Afric.
Metals, and the like. The Crocodile, a most dangerous Beast, (frequenting the
River Nylus) and a professed foe to Man: The Ichneumon, a little creature, yet
powerful in her self, and in her power a professed foe to the Crocodile.

To take a more full Survey of the Natures of these, whosoever shall be pleased
to peruse the History of the West Indies; may find store of Relations of all
sorts in this kind. As Worms of strange qualities; Serpents of wonderful
proportions and features; venomous Vipers; of which whosoever are bitten, dye
in short space: for few live to the fourth day, except present Remedy be
applied; The Region of Congo, by the Testimony of Signor Odoardo, as it is in
Vipers numerous, so are they so venomous, that such as are bitten by them do
dye within the space of 24. Hours: But the Negroes are acquainted with
certain herbs that will heal their wounds.
which according to the strength and constituti^n of the party wounded,
receives effect sooner or later: but not without danger of death to the
Patient, though the Soveraignst Receipts that the secrecy of Art may find out,
be used.

Of other sorts likewise, there may be found some of that humane and sociable
Nature, as they affect nothing more than the Feature of Man: eying him with
such a loving and friendly admiration, as nothing seemingly delights them more
than to behold him.

Others, as if they retained the memory of that ancient Serpentine malice
betwixt them, and the Seed of the Woman, no sooner come in the presence of that
Sex, than they redouble their fury; and in their wounding so venomous and
incurable, that One of them chancing to bite an Indian Maid, which served the
Relator, during his abode in those parts; after such time as he had caused the
Surgians to Minister their ordinary cure, being not by all the Art and
experiments they could use, able to do her any good, nor yet get one drop of
blood out of her, De Natura Chershydri, vid. Nar. Imperij de Congo.
but only a yellow water, dyed the third day for lack of remedy, as the like
had chanced to diverse others. During the time of her languishing, she
reported how the Viper which bit her on the foot, was two spannes long or
little less: and that she lept in the air for the space of more then six
paces (note the virulency of her nature) that she might with more violence
assail her.

The relation is strange of the Tarandula, a kind of Spider bred in Pulia; The
various venomous qualities of Spiders cured by Music.
which being of a diverse nature, causes diverse effects: causing some to
dance, some to sing, or weep, or watch, or sweat: The cure of it is by Music:
while the patient by dancing or some vehement exercise of that sort repels the
poison.

Excellent Moralls.
Which effects may imply excellent Morals: we are all subject not only to be
surprised but empoysoned by this Tarandula, this Tetter of our flesh; unless
by sweet Melody of the Divine spirit she be charmed: yea, we are sure to be
discomfitted by Sloth, if we retire our selves from action, or give way to her
effeminacy, whose only aim it is to bring us to inevitable Misery. Exercise
then must be used, lest our baine be procured.

The like Moral, without much enforcing, may be drawn from other creatures;
and that with much propriety, in the Survey of Natures History.

The Crab-fish, when as the Oyster does open her self, casts a stone into
her shell; so as, being not able to shut herself again, she becomes a prey
unto the Crabbe. The Fathers apply this unto the Devil; when he finds men
gaping and idle, he casts into them some stone of Temptation, whereby he
works their overthrow. For the Sloathful man is the Devils shop; there he
works, ever busy when men are lazy.

Many such singular Motives may the piercing Eye of the Soul extract from the
natures of these inferior creatures: So as, though the very Locust, The
meanest Creatures retain in them many secret qualities.
or Grasshopper be but creatures of emptiness, they retain in them many
wonderful occult qualities. Nay, the very Hedgehog, being a creature (to use
the words of a Divine Father) not excluded from Gods providence, presents
herself a singular Emblem of policy and prevention, in her privacy and
retiredness. For this provident Creature has two holes in his siege, one
toward the South, an other toward the North. Now when the Southern wind
blows, he stops up that hole, and turns him Northward. Again, when the
Northern wind blows, he stoppes up that hole likewise, and turns him again
Southward. Such Vrchins, strict Criticisme may term Temporizers; who are only
for complying with Time, seldom or never closing with Truth; but equally
affected Naturalists have rather ascribed this to a provident Oeconomicall
policy, than glozing flattery.

To sat down the several properties of all, or of most sorts of Beasts, would
crave an ample Volume of it self: I will only (as in my former discourse)
express the use of Natural Histories, and to what persons most accommodate.

We read of diverse most famous Princes and Monarchs to have applied their
minds to the search of these Studies: What Princes best affected these Studies.
Alexander (otherwise most potent in Arms, and sole Commander of the World)
addicted his mind to the scrutiny of these Rarities: as may appear most
manifestly by his Letter (at this day extant) to his Master Aristotle,
containing the strange proportions of Beasts with their Natures; which during
his Indian War, he had observed: describing the strange and unheard of
qualities of the Indian Aspicks, Cerasts, and many other kinds of Serpents,
continually infesting his Army; professing (as he himself writes) he found
more difficulty in discomfiting Beasts, than subduing Men: for the one sort
assaulted him, when his Troops were well disposed, cheerful, and full of
alacrity: but the other invaded him by Night. Ita ut ne in Castris quidem
minimum ocij detur. Always was this puissant Prince much given to see the
natural qualities of Beasts, so as no Present could be more grateful, or
acceptable to him, than some strangely-natured savage, making excellent use of
this Theory, appropriated to the natures of Men: which upon all occasions,
(with singular delight) he used to apply unto his Nobles disposition, which
attended him.

Those noble and courageous Dogs, Courageous Dogg^s.
which were sent him by the Kings of Albany, much contented him: They would not
stir at small beasts, disdaining them (as it were) in the overflow of their
courage, contemning any encounter but with Lions, and Elephants. This
Magnanimity could the valiant Emperor apply well enough to himself: he saw
his own nature delineated, or charactred (as it were) in their courage,
Scorning to Triumph on the conquered, solacing him ever with this extreme, yet
cheerful comfort: Superest sperare salutem.

The like desire of exploring the natural properties of Beasts, possessed
Sertorius: One no less provident, to shelter himself in adversity, then in
all his actions continent, amidst his prosperity; who, after his Regiment in
Spain, erected many places for the taming of wild Beasts, delighting
exceedingly to see the aptness of some joined with a certain natural
flexibility, and the backwardness of others, retaining over a certain
semblance of their first Nature, Natures of Beasts.
so deeply imprinted, as difficulty removed. Nay, what Stratagems used he (by
his White Heart) to support and govern the whole Fabric of his declining
Estate: Implying that by his Hind, or Heart, ^lha Cerva. Plutarch.
he received instructions from Diana, which the people (with such superstition)
believed, that by his glory he conquered Envy, enlarging the bounds of his
Jurisdic^ion, and making his exile the Symbol of his renown, till by the
bloody conspiracy of Perpenna and Antonius, he was deprived both of Crown and
Life.

Demetrius a worthy Soldier, and one well meriting of his Country, was much
inclined to this Study: So as at home, if at any time sequestered from his more
serious Affairs, he conceived exceeding pleasure and delight in the portraying
of those Beasts he had seen: Excellent he was in the frame of any Similitude,
but more divine in his own; being of that exact form, elegant constitution,
and sweetly-mixt Complexion, Vt a pictoribus, sculptoribusque ei similis non
potuerit effingi: A rare Model of Nature, when (by Nature) he was imparraleld.

Alcibyades, no less deserving, yet worse censured, was well experimented in
the Natures of Beasts, but more in Plants: Natures of Plants.
having an Herb, even to this day (amongst our Apothecaries) called after his
Name, Alcybiadon, or the Wild Buglosse.

Natures of Mines. Plutarch and Suet.
And for Metals, Minerals, or the like. None more accommodated to such Studies
than that Sovereign of Roman Hearts, Augustus, hearing his Lapidary
Dioscorides with especial delight: So as in time he was not only able to
distinguish of any Stone, but to describe their Natures: Using likewise the Art
of Alchemy, more expert in their recalcinations (says the Roman Historian)
than the best Professors of that Time; and consequently I may conclude than
the gross Quacke-salvers of our Time.

You see it is no disparagement for the Generous or Heroic Spirit to be
Studied in these Notions: Expedient, not necessary.
since the peerless for Valor and true Resolution, have dedicated themselves
unto them: yet would I not have them so besotted, or be wedded to these
studies, as to forget more important intendments: I confess these are rather
to make a man complete, than exactly necessary, and a superficial knowledge is
sufficient for Learning of this Nature: And well do I approve of that Ornament
of Learning (the best Luster to the School of Arts) where he would rat^er
have a Gentleman superficially seen in all, Sr. F. B.
than profoundly learned in one: Too much retyring to these Studies, accord not
with Gravity or State, but to discourse (by way of Reason) without Sophistical
argumenting, well beseemes the most Generous minds.

It is an happy thing to keep a mean in Wisdom; not to strive (in an
overflow of Understanding) to outstrip Nature in the investigation or search
of Natural things: A little will serve us in indifferent things, and more it
relisheth of Discretion, to know when we have enough; than, with an unbounded
will of affecting knowledge, superstitiously to know more than Nature has
prescribed.

This excess in desire of knowing, has been a contagion, that has infected
and poisoned the maturest Studies: especially in things so impertinent, as when
the pitch of that they expected was attained; Their knowledge conduced no more
to the profit of the Repub. than if with Endymion, they had slept their time,
and passed their life over in a fruitless silence. It pleases the Orator to
term such a Study -- Inutilis mentis agitatio: Sailing in the troubled
stream, where a more clear and calm passage does show her self. Thus I
approve in these Natural Discourses, a superficial Discursive Knowledge, to
exclude Ignorance, but no such affective height, lest in so exquisite a search
of Nature, we should show our selves Naturals. We say, the Generous should be
but Mediocriter doctus: I need not insist upon the persuasion; we have too
many of Iuvenals painted blocks in the way of Learning, that never mean to
come nearer. So as I may answer, -- Hinc i^clyta nomine truncus exhibuit --
as an Athenian reasoned, what the cause should be why there was such an ebb
of good Wits in Athens? Because (says he) they run into the Sub-urbs, and
dwell with Lai^.

The best and ripest Wits are most subject to corrupting, concording well with
the native depravation of these Times, where Medaea's Rule is made an Axiom,
every one with Lincius seeing the best, but with blind Baiard, deprived of the
Eye of their Election.

Too much of them; our Treatise requires a better Subject, than such stains to
their Countries fame, and pristine honor, making her complain, Eone mate^na
cura se provexit!
as Rome did in time of old: Eone vos produxi? etc. Is this the fruit of my
long Labor, the freight of my race, and the reward of my Motherly love, to
bring you up, and then (like Vipers) to sting me that has nourished you? Well
then, my blessings must be turned of necessity unto execrations: and that
Breast, which first nourished you with the Milk of comfort, must be the very
Sepulcher to interre you that buried my honor.

Thus did Rome hollow out her complaint against her ill-nurtured issue; and no
less cause Albion against her undisciplined race, that seem as if they were,
-- Fruges consumere nati.

And here I might prefer a just complaint against such, who consume the Oil
of their Life, A just complaint against such, who consume the Oil of their
Life, in frequenting Loose places: how to rectify this, that their own^
^amilies may become private Academies.
in frequenting Loose places: and apply some choice sovereign Receipts, to
rectify this; to the end (than which no end more glorious) their own Families
may become private Academies. Which I shall the rather labor, in regard, that
the regulating of our selves to that form, may highly conduce both to our own
and Gods honor.

How careful the Romans were in their cessation from arms, to educate their
youth in action, lest too much remissness might beget in them an effeminacy
of manners; and so in time disable them for personal employments either at
home or abroad, may sufficiently appear by all those ancient Annals
recommended from age to age, even to these our times. Whence it came, (^s I
have else where noted upon like occasion) that there was published an ancient
Edict amongst the Romans, as is recorded by Cic^ro in his Book of Laws, that
no Roman should go through the street of the City, unless he carried with him
the badge ^r cognizance of that Trade whereby he lived: Insomuch as, that good
Emperor Marc. Aurelius speaking of the diligence of the Romans, writes, That
all of them followed their labor. An excellent commendation in a civil State;
to banish that, by which the best States through a long continued peace, or
affluence of wealth, have not only bin impeached and impaired, but rooted out
and utterly razed.

Idleness makes of Men women, of women beasts, of beasts Monsters. I would
have then these Patrons of Idleness (who consume the precious lamp of their
life in a licentious liberty) used, as Zeno used his servant Bruson; who being
taken with Theft, and alleging for himself, that it was his destiny to
steal; his Master answered, and thy destiny to be beaten.

It is the depraved nature of Man, to mould himself ever after Medaeas rule;
to see the best, but to follow the worst; nay, to make the worst use of that
which in its own nature is the best. For what more precious then the palms of
Peace? Yet, what is it that sooner corrupts the freest State? A tempestuous
Progeny in a calm time.
For what is the progeny that a Calm time brings forth (all which implies the
viciousness of our nature) but a Prodigal and an Usurer? Where the one
ingageth his state for back and belly; the other quite contrary, stands
indebted both to back and belly. The one plays at Ducks and Drakes with
pieces, till he must fish for more when all his estate is fallen in pieces; The
other hoords up for his seldom thriving Heir; who means, as his father was
the first, to make himself the last of his House.

That Maxim is true; Health comes not from the Clouds without seeking, nor
Wealth from the clods without digging: yet, as there is required a providence
in the one; so should there be a conscience in the other. Foenus pecuniae,
Funus animae. Qui te prohibet foenorari, ipse te jubet foe^orari.
Lycurgus banished this Usury (the canker-worme of all civil Society) out of
Sparta; Amasis punished it severely in Egypt; Cato banished it out of Sicilia:
and Solon in Athens. How much more should it be holden in detestation amongst
Christians? And for the other, who so he may be styled a Young Master, will
not stick to impawne the Long Acre, till he become like a Snake who h'as
casten his slough; a squeazed swad without either Means, Manners, or Manor: I
could wish that he took his Sponge by the hand, and took leave of this Island
together, till air had changed their condition, or Grace the quality of their
Temper. As sometimes that worlds Monarch used two of his Court Parasites,
injoyning the one to fly, and the other to follow him with a whip, till thoy
were both got out of his Kingdom, and so his Court was rid of both.

And to make up a lease in this vicious trace; it were not far amiss for the
State, that such, who by petitionary ways work their own ends; and, Hear
this ye Pattenters, and petitionary Projectors.
as if they were presenters of petitions by Pattent, make it their most
commodious Trade, to delude the poor Supplicants trust: and to maintain their
profuse course, feed their languishing Clyents with unprofitable delays,
tasted of the whip as well as these. So that, as Alex. Severus (a great enemy to
such Impostors) caused his corrupt Courtier Turinus in the open Market to be
fastened to a stake and stifled with smoke; while the Crier thus cried to the
people, Fumo pereat, qui fumum vendidit.
" Let him perish by smoke, who sold smoke. I could wish that such as these
be (if any such there be) might receive the like censure, according to the
height or measure of their distemper. For these, like Brokers of old-stuffe, or
Barterers of contemptible ware, make sale of that which is not vendible. Or
like those Asian Knights, make breach of credit to discharge their credit: who,
though they have no other vocation but boldness and insinuation, yet by these
injurious ways, bear themselves in the World as if they were persons of
quality and fashion.

But to proceed in our Discourse: Histories of this Nature, are very needful
for professors of Physic: for how should they conceive the true Art of
composition, if the simples whereof the compounds are made, and their virtues,
be not perfectly known unto them? Brasevolus, de examine herbarum, exemplifies
this Discourse more fully; I will refer them to that place, not entertayning
that Subject which is but superficially traduced to me; and I have always made
that observance (in way of Axiom) to all my Readings, which Silvius in his
Book, De Simplicib. Medicament, injoyneth himself: What Art soever a Man
knows, let him only exercise and use it: For otherwise he shall but descry
his own Ignorance, as I have noted in some: Quos cum nescire piguit, mentiri
non pigebat. An odious scandal to a generous-minded Scholar, to write that
which he is ignorant of himself; Less ashamed to lie, then to be defective in
Knowledge. But especially, some we have of this sort, that lie upon their
Knowledge: Some (as in Traians fabling Age) write Arts of Horsemanship, that
never rode otherwise then Agesilaus with his Children on Cocke-horse. Others
can exactly prescribe Times for Planting, Sowing, Reaping, and the like;
playing the good Husbandman (I pray you mark him) that never read Virgils
Bucolicks: These are usurping wits, presuming on the affable censures of these
depraved times. Ignorance can Apologize herself: for what Writer now a days
wears not that Livery?

To our History: These natural Discourses of the qualities of Beasts, Birds,
Serpents, and other Creatures, be likewise especially needful for Divines:
They may amply dilate upon the admirable Works of their Creator, by the Survey
of his Creatures. Emblemes of Birds. The contemplation of the Creature
ministers admiration in us toward our Creator.
For even all Birds and Beasts (if exactly considered) show the infinite power
of the Almighty; not only in Creating, but in^using such diversly-affected
natures and dispositions in them. The witty Emblematist also draines his pretty
inventions from these resemblances; portraying the Creature, and annexing his
device to the Portray.

Nay, they are very motive persuasions to the acknowledging of our own
weakness and infirmity: spurs to thankfulness, as that excellent E^bleme,
where a Lark was pearched, with these Verses: Vid. Sambucum and Aletat.
Cantat Alauda Deo lauds gratissima summo,
Hinc nos ingratos grata latescitavis.
Englished thus. The early Lark her grateful mind displayes,
Descanting Morn by Morn her Makers praise:
Whence she does tax such as unthankful be,
That have more cause, yet give less thanks than she.


We have many such witty Emblemes, well befitting the most Christian
understanding to contemplate; drawing the inscrutable Wisdom of God from the
Excellency of his Creatures: the diverse forms whereof generally varying, their
different Natures in few things concurring, and their continuance so mainly
discording, may minister to the greatest Atheist, no less cause of Admiration,
than cause of Execration of his irreligious and damnable Opinion.


Nor can there be any Arguments more forcing than these, to bring a mis-beleever
to the acknowledgment of his Maker. So as, the very Atheist, if he would suffer
himself to be evinced by Reason, could not choose but veil, and ingenuously
hold himself condemned by Birds oth' Air: Whose melody is ever mounting with
airy Wings to that Supreme Majesty. The very Atheist condemned by Bi^ds oth'
Air: and how their Melody is ever mounting with aerie wings to that Supreme
Majesty.
Upon which consideration, would he but reflect on himself, he should soon
find, how miserable it is for man to be silent in Gods praise, when Birds
become heavenly Quiristers in sending forth sweet airs. How miserable it is,
for man to be silent in Gods pra^se, when Birds become heavenly Quiristers in
sendi^g forth sweet Airs.


I cannot choose but wonder at Democritus, who was of such various, nay,
Omnifarious reading, as there was nothing in the whole frame or Workmanship of
Nihil in toto Op^ficio Naturae, de quo non scripsit.
Nature, wherein he did not show himself a Writer. That He, who knew the
Natures, differences of all Beasts, Plants, Fishes, Birds; and as some say,
could understand the Tunes and Voices of them, should so miserably err in
that, which he should principally know. For if these Visible Creatures be
Laymens Books; wherein they may find matter enough to magnify the Power,
Wisdom and Providence of God; much more those, who are Versed in Books, and
are enabled to confer Contemplation with Reading, merit high reproof: who
seeing what they may worthily admire; and that the Maker of them is He, to
whom they are only to adhere; are neither won by the One nor Other, to
acknowledge the sole Omnipotency of their Creator.

It is said of the Quail, being the very same Bird which was the Israelites
Meat in the Wilderness, that as he flies over the Sea, feeling himself to
begin to be weary, he lights by the way into the Sea. Then lying at one side,
he lays down one Wing upon the Water, and holds up the other Wing toward
Heaven. Lest he should presume to take too long a flight at the first, he wets
one wing. Lest he should despair of taking a new flight afterward, he keeps
the other wing dry.

The Moral is divine, though the Story be natural and humane. Oculis ad
Coelum, manus ad Clavum. The Course of our perilous Navigation in this our
Sea-fare, touches upon two dangerous Shelves; such as threaten more inevitable
ruin to the unwary Navigator, than those two Sicilian Gulfes, Scylla and
Charybdi^. Where Presumption, upon the confidence of her own strength, falls
by a precipitate Course into the depth of all misery: and despair, through too
much diffidence, lies miserably grovelling, neither seeking nor hoping for
Remedy. The flight of the former is either short, or none at all; because
Presumption makes her think it needless to fly for that of which she is
already seaz'd: and Despair, like heavy chesses, retardates her flight;
suggesting to her that it is needless to fly for that whereof she can never
possibly be seas'd.

Oris Apollo writes, that the Egyptians (amongst many other profound
Hieroglyphics) when they would describe the Heart, paint that Bird, which they
call Ibis: because they think no Creature, for proportion of the body, has so
great an Heart as the Ibis has. If the Pagans made such singular use in their
dissection of Birds; as they ever reduced whatsoever they read, or had seen in
that kind, to some excellent end: Much more we, who know better the use of
these Creatures, and to what proper end they were first ordained; not in
Wantonness to abuse them, as those loose Imperiallists did, who affected
nothing more then Rarity; nor desired ought more, then to surfeit in their
Excess and superfluity. Neither in a Superstitious use of them; as the Pagans
did, who attributed their good or bad fortune to such Birds, Creatures ordained
to Sobriety and useful Morality.
as were either Auspicious or Ominous: promising themselves success according
to their flight; or inspection of their Intrals after death.

In the time of Augustus, an Eagle hovering over the Heads of such Patricians,
as were then i^ Consultation; at last settled upon the name of Agrippa, and just
upon the first Letter of that name A -- A Lightning likewise descending down
from Heaven, stroke the first Letter of his own name out, -- C -- Whence
South-sayers, by conjecturall Arguments, or Revelations from their Oracles,
gathered, that He should but live an hundred days after, and be afterward
Cannonized for a God: because Aesar, the residue of that Name in the Tuscane
Language signified God.

Albeit, some even amongst themselves, slighted their Auguries, as might be
instanced in Claudius Pulcher; who, when in taking his Auspicia, or the
predictions of his success by the inspections of Birds, before Sicilie, the
Pullets would not feed, he commanded they should be plunged in the Sea, that
they might drink, seeing they would not eat. The like did Crassus, who being
willed by the Arabian Guides, at such time as he was Marching within the
Persian Frontiers, to make haste before the Moon was in Scorpio; but I (said
he) fear more Sagittary, meaning the Archers of Persia.

But there is nothing in my Opinion, that should work more powerful effects,
or beget in men more virile shame, than to see them out-stript by Creatures of
this kind, even in arguments of Natural Affection and Humanity.

Basil. Homil. 8. and 9.
It is a notable Observation, which a Divine Father sometimes culled from a
Natural Historian: When the old Storke through Age becomes naked of Feathers,
she is fed by her Brood, and carried by them from place to place upon their
Wings.

This might worthily strike a glowing shame in the breasts of all such
unnatural Children, who neglect their duties to their aged Parents; bringing
their grey-haires with sorrow to their Graves. Quamvis plurima illis
reddidimus, rursus tamen eos generare non possumus. Cyril.
For how should these in an equal proportion requite them from whom they had
their being and breeding; admit they should for their relief, confer all
their Fortunes and livelihood upon them?

What should I say likewise of unnatural Mothers; who scorn to impart their
own Breasts to their own Babes? Can these see the Curuca with her attendants
following, and nursing care hatching the Cuckowes eggs, and not blush at
themselves? Have they naked breasts to bestow on the air, or allure a wandering
eye, and must their own be deprived of that liberty?

Many such Moral Motives as these, speak to us in the natures of Birds: but I
must not dwell on these; but hasten in this my Historical Survey, to the native
discovery of other Creatures.

Here the Hyene (as Pliny relates) can imitate the voice of any Man, and that
so nearly, The dist^nct Natures of Beasts expressed.
as his voice can hardly be distinguished from the voice of him he imitateth;
taking his denomination from the Greeks, according to his natural rapine.

There the Fiber, or Bever (by what instinct, Humane wisdom could never reach
to) to satisfy his covetous pursuer, bites off his own stones, being the prize
(he knows) for which he is pursued.

Here see the dissembling Sphinx, able to personate any passion, either of joy
or sorrow. There the wonderful nature of the Rhynoceros: The Lion so naturally
valiant, as not to be daunted; yet behold the silly Cock can make him tremble!
Then represent to your generous reading, the natural enmity betwixt the Horse
and the Bear, the Wolf and the Lion, the Fox and the Badger; such a native
disagreeing remains among these Beasts, as their hatred is implacable; ever
pursuing their enemy with an inveterate hate: for an enmity ingrafted by
nature, cannot be suppressed by less then nature.

Many conflicts were instituted in Rome (at solemnization of any Festival, or
in remembrance of some memorable Exploit achieved) betwixt Beasts: whence the
Romans gathered great knowledge, seeing the remissness of some Natures, and the
eagerness of others. Some of an unquailed spirit, yet in strength unable to
maintain their spirit: others (like our unweldy Epicures) sinewy and fleshy
enough, have strength at will, but defect of courage so curbes them, as the
overflow of ability waines in the rising; not daring to encounter with one of
less strength, but more vivacity.

Vide Lucium Flor. in 1. lib. de Sab. Bell and postea de bello Tarent. Cap. 18.
When Fabius Maximus went in Embassage to Pyrrhus, Prince of Epyre, with whom
(at that time) the Romans had War: he denounced open Hostility against him
and his Territories, for not performing some conditions included in the League.
Pyrrhus, to terrify Fabius, commanded his Guard to place an Elephant behind
the Arras, that at their next parley, Fabius seeing so terrible a Beast, Those
Times were not known to that unfrier-like Inventio^ of murdering Ordnance: "The
Crane, the Grasping-hooke and butting Ram "Were their sole Engines when first
wars began.
might of his own accord solicit Peace. But Fabius (though one at that time
unacquainted with such sights, for never were any Elephants then seen in Rome)
hearing him send out his hollow voice, replied: The sound of a Roman Ram will
be more terrible than the voice of an Epyrian Elephant. But these grew
afterward to public Spectacles: so as in any Triumph of some victorious, or
puissant Captain, there were many Elephants, Ounces, Panthers, Tigers, and
other savage Beasts slain, offering them (in Triumphant manner) to the Temple
of the Goddess Victoria.

Varro, a Roman Peer, one to whom the Roman Tongue was much indebted, Si
multo sanguine victoriam obti^uissent, Gallum: si absque sa^guine, Bovem Marti
immol^rent. etc.
did illustrate the Annals of Rome with their Ceremonial Triumphs; showing
also what Beasts were wont to be sacrificed to the Gods, and for what cause
that Institution was observed; If the Victory (says he) was purchased with the
loss of blood, they used to sacrifice to Mars, a Cock; but if without blood,
they offered an Ox.

These natural Descriptions of Beasts are very delightful to the generous
Reader; they are very fit for illustrating any Subject; making comparison
betwixt the Natures of Beasts, Birds, or Plants, and other material subjects
of our Discourse; comparing Lust, Incest, and such lascivious exorbitances to
the Lapwing, represented by Tereus, the Ravisher of Philomel: Inferring by the
Spider, Arrogance, or Pride, that durst compare with Pallas for preeminency. By
the Cormorant, grating Oppression, senseless and remorcelesse of others
Miseries. Progne (in a Swallows habit) implying the swiftness of revenge to
Murder.

That chaste Bird Porphyrio, who,
as he is constant in his choice, so if he see his love abused, his nest
defiled, he dies through grief; as one impatient of such disgrace. He is said
likewise to bite the Water, implying, that as he is pure of himself, so he
cannot endure to partake of those streams, which are troubled or soyled with
any brackish distemper.

He proceeds in applying the Natures of several other Birds, to the sundry
different qualities, or corruptions rather, in man.
We read how Phineus that impious Arcadian Prince, having by the persuasion of
his second wife Idaea, put out his Childrens eyes, which he had by his first
wife Cleopatra, was for this unnatural fact plagued of the Harpyes: three
monstrous and ravenous Birds, Aelo, Ocypete, and Celano, having Maiden
visages. Long time was this unhappy King annoyed, what way soever he Travailed:
Sea could not secure him, nor Land privilege him. At his repast, his stomach
was made queasie by their stench: and on the night time, by reason of their
noise, was he reft of rest: In which story, sundry excellent Morals are
daintily couched. First, how the very Ethnicke Poets could invent punishments
for heinous delinquents. O quam merito divina occurrit ultio cuiusque peccati
proprio obiecto! A commanding Prince, if conscious of blood, cannot find
himself a shroud. No shelter against Murder. Fly he to the Sea, the very
waves raised by the fury of the winds, will be his remembrancers, retire he to
the Land, the very Creatures will have him in pursuit, till they become his
Surprizers. From his House he flies unto the field, but Furies dog him still:
no Covert in field can rescue him from his Fate.

By the Harpyes, may be understood, that there is no Creature, but the Supreme
power, if He please, can make it his Avenger. But these kind of Birds were by
the Poets most properly devised to be pursuers of this bloody Prince. Their
ravenous Nature agreed best with his temper. For as their Condition is to prey
upon their own; so did he in his cruelty seize upon his own: And as the Eye
is the first part which any ravenous Bird uses to pick at: so it was the Eyes
of these Orphan-children which their Step-dame Idaea aimed at. Now, whereas
these Birds are portrayed with Maiden-visages, we may by that safely conclude,
Frontis nulla fides --: Amiable Features may have savage Natures. Those Sirens
had beautiful Faces, cheerful Voices, but dangerous Greetings. There is more
belonging to a sincere heart than a promising presence. As the stillest Waters
are the deepest; so fairest Faces wound the deadliest. They are apt to allure;
and happy is that wise Ithacus, that can stop his Eye and Ear.

These came to Phineus Table like beauteous Guests, but pursued him like
hideous Ghosts. Beauty is a taking bait, 'it can cover Treason with a smile;
but being swallowed, it becomes the Takers baine. But now see how this
calamitous Prince receives relief, when his miseries crowded thickest: and how
these intrusive Guests are expulsed, when his hopes were in despair, and from
expectance of relief remotest!

Calais, that valiant Son of Boreas by Orithia, who with Zethes having Wings,
to accelerate their journey, flew to Colchis to help the Argonauts: and being
in that voyage courteously used of King Phineus, they in recompense drove out
of his Country those ravening Birds called Harpyes.

Nor wants this Comicall passage his Moral: for hence may we gather, what
benefit redounds to such as are hospitable. How those, whom they sometimes
harbored for Strangers, become in time of danger their deliverers. This might
be confirmed by Holy Writ; where Angels were received in habit of Strangers:
and what succor they ministered to their Harbourers.

Such as these usefully applied, will afford infinite profit to the Reader: so
as, he may delightfully enlarge himself by way of Discourse to any
intelligible Hearer.

There be other Birds, who retain in them an ancient natural hatred to
Beasts, from whom they conceive themselves to have received wrong; and this
their hatred is implacable even to death.

Pleasant Poetical Fictions of the Enmity of Birds.
The Cowshot or Stock-dove cannot endure the Heyfer for that old injury she
suffered before she changed her Nest: so as now with an insulting jeere, which
she still redoubles in her Note, she seemingly challenges her to come unto
her: being confident that her Seat is mounted far above her hate; so as,
she may now securely domineere, when her airy Nest pleads privilege against
all fear.

Aegithus, in proportion a little Bird, yet of a strong and stout spirit; being
at deadly hatred with the Ass; for that he destroys her Nest, which for the
most part she builds among the Thistles: in revenge whereof, she continually
vexes him (so apprehensive is the least Creature of an injury, and so
quicke-sighted in conceiving where she may requite her injury) by pecking him
on galled places of his body.

This Moral may seem to glance at such ignoble spirits, who, so they may
revenge, or express the heat of their fury; will not stick to exercise it
upon the poorest and contemptiblest Creatures: yea, they will pick an offense
before it be offered: and play upon their simplicity, by whom they were never
much injuried. These will ever leap over the hedge where it is lowest, and
make such the prey of their fury, whom they find most incapable of revenge, or
unable to second what their reputation injoynes them to attempt. The like may
be said of the Apiaster or Mudwall; a Bird that bears inveterate hate to the
painful Be and her Labors. In whose Nature the quality of such persons is
covertly shadowed: who, Margites-like, do no good themselves, but in a profuse
Riot consume their fruitless Days, feeding their Surfeits with others
employments.

In many Frontier-bordering Towns we shall see this made good by woeful
experience. While such industrious people, who, to use the words of Sententious
Salust, Sedem Animae in extremis digitis habent; placing their Souls in their
Fingers ends, become a booty to the violence and incursion of their
Neighboring Drones; who seize with strong hand (under pretense of an unsettled
peace or expired League) upon whatsoever their industrious course of living had
for diverse years deservingly gained and gathered.

There is another sweet-sented Bird, called the Cinnamolge; one who will build
her Nest in no other Wood than Cinnamon. Her only ambition is a dainty Seat;
very singular in her consort with other Birds; pleasing to few but to herself:
and if at any time she deagne the Forest that grace as to partake of her
melody, Nightingal-like Dat sine mente sonum --

A sweet-sented Courtier properly resembled.
A near Resemblance (as if sprung from one Stem) may this sweet-breathed Bird
seem to have to our Court-Popinjay; whose sense most commonly consists in
sent. His Action or Gesture is nothing but Cringes; his Breath an Ayry
Complement; his Rind (to make this Cinnamon-Similitude more full) worth all
his body beside.

When Jupiter and Juno's Wedding was solemnized of old, to make the Solemnity
more complete; the Gods were all invited to the Feast, and many Noblemen
besides. Amongst the rest came Crysalus a Persian Prince, bravely attended,
rarely accoutred, rich in Golden Attires, in gay Robes, with a Majesticall
Presence, a formal posture, a portly Encounter, but otherwise an Ass. The
Gods seeing him come in such pomp and state, rose up to give him place, Ex
habitu hominem metientes; But Jupiter perceiving what he was, a light,
fantastic, idle fellow, turned him and his proud followers into Butterflies:
And so they continue still (for ought I know to the contrary, if the Fiction
hold with Verity) roving about in pied Coats, and are called Chrysalides by the
wiser sort of men; that is, Golden outsides, Drones, Flies, and things of no
worth. What the Poets intended by these Transformations.
For the truth of the Fable, we will not stand much on it; but what the Poets
intended by these Transformations, may be easily gathered.

These Silken Gulls, who are only to be valued by what they wear, not what
they are, in this very Moral receive their Censure, They prease into the
highest places; converse with Eminent'st persons; thrust themselves upon
greatest business: but fall off still with some palpable disgrace to
themselves.

They are not intus fimbriati, and therefore must be Deorum consilijs ablegati.
Those who had no Sage in their Pates, were not held fit to be at Councell-Table
with the Gods.

There is another Moral too which arises naturally from that Cinnamon-nested
Bird; A Countrey-seated Citizen properly Resembled.
and without much Criticisme might be applied to a Pen-feathred Citizen; who
having now (as he thinks) sufficient wealth, h'as shut up Shop, and bid a due
to his Trade. And as one who had taken a surfeit of the City, h'as built
himself a new Fishers folly in the Country. Nothing but Perspective Glass,
Porphyrite Pillars, Thracian Touch, and Arabian perfumes in every room.
Nothing but Beauty reflects in every corner, except the face of the Owner. Oh,
how he is taken with the delight of his Seat! The exquisite device of his
Building! His Nonesuch must be admired by such as see it, or he holds
himself infinitely wronged. So he may have his Dwelling House neatly trimmed,
and the house of his Body curiously cockred, he thinks nothing can go amiss,
all things are well ordered.

Petrarch. de Remed. utriusque fort.
Meane-time, he little remembers Petrarchs Counsel; who advises him not to be
afraid, though the House of his Body be shaken, so his Soul, the Guest of his
Body, fare well.

Many other excellent Moralls might be from this only Bird extracted, but
brevity, the best help to memory, makes me omit them.

The constant Love, and amicable League of Birds amongst themselves.
I could here enlarge my Discourse in relating the wonderful Concord of diverse
Birds among themselves; as the constant League or Amity of Crows, who are ever
observed to take one part; the natural love of Stares: and generally, how
Birds of one feather flock together, and are ready to do mutual offices one
to another. But our Natural Historians, who have amply writ of this Subject,
can sufficiently supply the Reader in this way; to whom I refer them. I will
only here resolve one question which may be demanded, and it is this: What
should the reason be, why all Birds by an inbred hate pursue the Hawke; and
though they cannot annoy him, yet will they flicker about him; Why Birds of
Rapine are most hated.
desiring nothing more, if their powers were to their wills, than to surprise
him? But the Poet h'as a reply ready in the persons of those Birds, which may
fully assoile this question: We hate the Hawk, Odimus Accipitrem, quia semper
vivit in armis.
because of all that are
Exposed to prey, he ever lives in war.


For the Owl or Batte, or all such Night-birds, Why Night-Birds are had in
pursuit.
why they are so had in pursuit, if it chance they come abroad upon daytime,
this reason may be given. As they are unsociable and estrange themselves from
their company, having only the privilege of night, and the Ivy or some other
retired shroud for their Sanctuary; so they are hooted at by other Birds for
their singularity, or for their neglect of civil Society.

In the Beasts of the Forest this may likewise be observed: the Lion (a fierce
beast) of an Heroicke Nature, contemning the dejected ones, nor caring to feed
on Carrion. He is of a Majesticke disposition, and hates to be ungrateful for
the least benefits received: If the Mouse rid him of base servitude, he will
find time to requite her love one way or other. This may represent the person
of a King (for indeed he is the King of Beasts) who scorns to triumph over
the subjected, but to tyrannise over the proud.

The Elephant resembles a man pressed down with honor; Resemblances in Beasts.
being once down, he cannot rise: he is like some great man, who puffed up
with the prosperous gales of his fortunes, can find no knees of allegiance, or
submission to either Prince or State; his joints are inflexible, and the load
of his honor insupportable: once down, impossible to rise, but by some
un-usuall occurrent.

What strange effects of Nature this creature reteineth, may be instanced in
this notable story. It is reported by Philippo Pigafetta, a Traveller of
approved credit, that he had seen with his own eyes a very strange and
admirable thing in Coanza, namely, that a young Elephant following his Damme,
fell down by chance into one of those Pit-falls, purposely made by Hunters, to
surprise them: and after she could not with all her skill and strength draw him
out of it, she buried him therein, and covered him with earth, with branches,
and with bows, insomuch as she filled the Pit up to the top, to the end that
the Hunters should not enjoy her Calfe; choosing rather to kill it her self
(with this affectionate kind of interment) than to leave it to the mercy of the
cruel Hunts-men.

The Wolf (a State-gormandizer) preyes upon the innocent, suckes the blood of
the Orphane, impaires others means to enlarge his own: cruelty is the
habiliment he best likes, making the State a wild Forest for every Savage to
live in, but a Shambles for the poor silly Lambkin to suffer in.

The Goat, your wanton and sensual Amorist, that skips here and there, in
every brake of vanity, till so entwined, as the sale of his reputation makes
him beg for a good name: but the eyes of General Observance are not so
dazelled, they have seen his heart, and registered his follies.

The Bear, one that portends by his Birth, Vrsus tanquam Orsus.
what he will be: an unhandsome piece of flesh, one that needs licking before
he be brought to fashion: Here Is Natures deformity, charactring by the
foulness of the body, the filthiness of his disposition. Tyrants we have had
of this Resemblance, who came the wrong way into the world, to intimate what
wrongs they would do unto the world. But now of tamer Creatures.

The Lamb cannot drink of a troubled Spring, Several proprieties resembling
several persons.
no more can Innocence.

The Hare ever sleeps with open eyes: so does good Providence.

The Coney is fruitful and fearful: So is Nuptial Chastity.

The Emmet is in Summer ever foreseeing a Winter: Such is good Husbandry.

Shall we proceed in Birds likewise, and examine their Natures?

The Turtle for Constancy: The Crane for Vigilance: The Robin expresses his
love to Man: the Nightingall to Women. None more industrious than the Lark,
More laborious than the Wren: more odious to her self, and others, than the
Cuckoo: More Heroic than the Eagle: More base than the Buzzard.

Then observe what secret instincts given to certain Birds, to prognosticate
the events of things.

The Crow, a fore-teller of what Weather will come to pass. The Halcyon or
Seamaw, remarkable in prediction of Storms: and the Swallow, Crane, Vid. Aur.
Vict.
and many others, exact observers of Seasons.


It is strange, what is observed by the natural Historian, of the Eagle and
Raven; the one, says he, knows when the Carcass or Carrion shall fall, the
other where. Which conceit, howsoever it may be many times erring, yet we shall
ever find the Raven first seized on his prey, He recounts sundry other Birds,
which retain in them naturally, infallible Notions of the change and various
disposition of Weathers.
whenever any such shall casually fall.

We may observe likewise, diverse Birds who change their note or voice
according to the disposition of the weather. Sometimes by their bathing,
billing, or such like signs, may be naturally gathered infallible notions of
the change and various disposition of weathers.

It is said of the Bird Icterus, or as Pliny calls her Galgulus, Temporis ad
vultum mutat Cornicula vocem.

Temporis ad morem varlat Mustela colorem.


if any man that is sick of the yellow Jandise shall see her, the man shall
wax whole, recover his strength and color, and by degrees regaine his former
vigor, but the Bird shall dye. Some have holden this Bird to be one of the
certainest diviners of Weathers, of all others; whence the Poet: Frondator
nimbum, praenuntiat Icterus imbrem.
Birds of the Air their prophesies retain,
The Pick'tre^ boads a storm, the Icterus rain.


Diverse of our Navigators likewise observe, when they are on Sea, sundry
incident alterations by the noise of Sea-fowles: and are cautioned by them to
make speed for Land, lest a tempest endanger their passage. Of which sort,
there are Some, who leave the Sea against a storm, and fly to Firm Land;
remaining there till an Halcyon calm invite them to return.

There are incredible things reported of the Spinturnix; a Bird that wont to
come to the Altars, where they were sacrificing, and carry away a burning coal
as a token of ill luck, or burning to the house where it alighted.

But these Relations are with more strength of Opinion, then probability or
reason confirmed. Howsoever, no doubt but diverse Birds by a secret instinct of
nature (the reason whereof to us is occult) can prenuntiate the Seasons and
dispositions of weathers; which may appear by Holy Writ; that Lydian-stone
which can best try the verity of all Humane assertions.

The Swallow and Crane know their seasons. So as, even that Prophet, who
sometimes admonished the people, Ierem. 10.2^
not to be afraid for the signs of Heaven, has admitted these conjectural
tokens. For the creatures of Heaven and Earth, as they were first ordained for
our use; so by our right use of them, we may improve our own Knowledge; by
making every Creature, a judicial Epitome of Nature: ever closing with a free
and humble acknowledgement of his uncircumscribed Power, by whom they were
created; and of whose goodness it is that they may in their several natures
redound to our benefit, being well imployd.

When a certain religious Brother, who had bestowed much precious time on
Contemplation; Ai divine Contemplation upon Survey had to the lowest of Gods
Creatures.
and by means of a retired life, to the end secular cares might less entangle
him, had attained to such a measure of perfection that way, as he eyed nothing
whereof he made not some Divine use; professed one day to One of the same
Convent; That he could never see any Thing, the sight whereof did not in some
manner edify him. Oh, said the other, spare a little, good brother; pray you
tell me, wherein can the sight of a Toade edify you? Oh very much, quoth he;
for what have I deserved that God should make me a Man and not a Toade? So
that, as often as I see a Toade, so often do I recall this benefit to mind:
rendering all due thanks to him, who according to my desert has not formed me
like any such detestable Creature, but has bestowed on me the most beautiful
and royal image of my Maker.

Surely, as I have formerly observed, if our hearts were rightly disposed, by
making good use of whatsoever in this inferior Orb we see here created, and
as proper Objects to our eyes presented; we should easily confess, that there
is no Creature so small, vile or despicable, which might not be reduced to some
image or Emblem of our Life; seeing, there is none, be it never so poor nor
contemptible, which presents not in it self the goodness of God. And so by
consideration had of these Temporal and External benefits (to use the words of
a Divine Father) to gather the greatness and immensity of the heavenly
counsel. Aug.


Neither are these Moral applications of Birds and the like, whereon, upon
occasion, Scripturae sunt Promptuanum bonorum Documentorum. Basil. Mag. in
Psalm. 1.
we have so amply insisted, to be conceived as useless. We shall find the
Storehouse of all Divine learning, that Sacred untroubled Fountain of
heavenly Knowledge, furnished with Moral similitudes and illustrations of this
kind. As the Partrich, Ier. 17.2.
(says the Prophet) gathers the young, which she has not brought forth: so
he that gets Riches, and not by Right, shall leave them in the midst of his
days, and at his end shall be a fool.

Sometimes we shall find the tenderhearted Pelican named; the Turtle, and her
affection described; the obsequious Storke commended; the Sparrow upon the
housetop expressed. Sometimes Fowls addicted to prey, displayed. From which,
we may gather excellent matter, not only of magnifying Him by whom they were
created, and to their several offices designed: but even in Humane discourse,
we shall find many occasions of enlarging our selves; by application of the
nature and disposition of them. So as, whosoever shall make an useful
observation of these feathred Fowls in the air, may find much more dainty
Philosophy in them; than in these tame Fools who pride themselves in their
feathred vanities on earth.

Other Birds there be that have more humane feeling: Pliny reports, that there
be certain Birds which howl exceedingly at the Eclypse of the Sun; as if
naturally moved by some miraculous influence or instinct from heaven, to suffer
with a Divine body, so extremely suffering: Let us descend to Worms, Serpents,
and Creeping things, we shall see in them distinct qualities also.

Natures of Serpents, and of Pagan Adorations.
The Serpent Pareas creeps on his Tail, and with the sharpness of his Belly
makes a furrow upon the ground where he crawleth.

Strange things be reported of the Serpent Seraphis, See the Discourse of Asia,
and Affricke, entitled: The Fardell of Fashions

In Aulular.


adored by the Egyptians as a God: Others there be no less different in
nature, form, nourishment, and feature: Some feeding upon raw flesh,
intimating their ravenous Natures: Others on fish (as diverse Serpents) living
upon the Bank of the River Nilus: Others on plants, and the fruit of Trees,
which Plautus expresses by the Vine-fretter: Matura Vitis folia Involvolus
carpit.

Stell. de Contempt. Mundi.
But other creeping creatures there be very beneficial to Humane society. The
Silkeworme, whose labors make our silken Gallants. To that excess are we
come, as our bravery must be maintained by the diligence of the simplest
creatures, clothing our selves with the very bowels of Worms: Wonderful is
their Generation.

Singula solatia singulis malis obviantia preparavit Deus. August.
The Adder in her self obnoxious and hurtful, yet she casts her skin (to
express her good meaning to man) an excellent cure to many diseases.

The poor Worm, of her self, neither greatly harmefull nor profitable, only
(by a Synonomy betwixt Man and Her) she is the best Mirror of humane Glory, an
Emblem of our Mortality: and an importunate Guest that will come to banquet on
our bodies, though not invited: She is called Vermis (quasi inermis) she can
but turn again, that is all the defensive, or offensive weapon she has ready.

These silly contemptible cr^atures be especial Motives to a good man, of
Thankfulness: The Worm a Motive of Thankfulness, and the best Character of
humane frailty.
the example we read in that devout Father Anselme; who walking one day in his
garden, and seeing a poor Worm crawling under his feet, presently applied
this Christian-like use to himself.

O Lord, Diversities of Natures in Fishes.
thou might have made me like this Worm, contemptible and base, to live in
the holes and cavernes of the earth; But such was thy mercy, as thou would
not: bestowing on me thine own Image, What rare properties are in the
Ambizeamatare, or the Fish of the Rock, and what commodious use the people of
Congo make of it, may appear in that Discourse entitled, A R^port of the
Kingdom of Congo. fol. 24.
that thy similitude might be glorified in me. A comfortable meditation of a
zealous Father, and worthy our observation.

We will now discourse of the skaly Fishes in their kind, that the Majesty and
power of God (by giving such diversity of Natures to Fishes) may appear in the
Depths, as before it was manifestly expressed upon the earth, and all dry
places. Here is a Tyrannicke power even in the Ocean, and an absolute
government without restraint of power: Here is a Musical concordancy likewise;
a Diapason of Sea-inhabitants. The Dolphin playing a soft strain, resembling a
Mean: Iulis; vide Plinium; quam tenacem piscem appellat, etc.
the Sturgeon (swimming against the Stream) sharpens her Note, more near a
Treble: the Iulis a smooth Counter-tenor, and the rolling Porpoise the Base.

Contention amongst Fishes.
Here is great enmity (likewise) for predominancy: And that amongst the
greatest, the Orcke with the Whale: The Cuttell with the Thorne-backe; the
Seahorse with the Sea-vrchin: Many rare virtues in little creatures: with what
strangeness the Remora (a fish of small bigness) holds a Ship, when in her
full Sail? How wonderfully the Torpedo delivers her-selfe, being taken by the
unhappy Fisher? disgorging her own bowels, to stupefie the Taker with an
uncoth amazement.


Again, to observe the ravenous disposition of the Pike; The different natures
of Fishes; and wherein properly they allude to Man.
the sociable condition of the Trout; the various discoloring of the Polypus;
the strong digestion of the Porpoise: would beget in these curious Surveyors of
nature, much admiration. And then to compare the natures of these
water-inhabitants with our selves, who follow, for most part, the bent of our
desires, as if we were estranged from that beauty which incomparably most
adornes us; and drenched in the leas of our own corruptions, which makes man
most unlike himself; by idolatrizing that which gives the greatest blemish to
his Excellence.

Emblemes are devices no less useful then delightful, to present Man best to
himself: and to tax him too by way of shadowing, what (perchance) he would be
loath to endure in a freer manner of expression.

For tell me, how should any of our Grand-oppressours, who make their
Inferiors their sponges: fatning themselves with violence; and spinning to
themselves an estate out of others bowels: how should these, I say, read of the
ravenous disposition of the Pike, and not reflect upon themselves? They find
his nature to be such, that all is fish that comes to his net. He admits no
dispensation; if his power may surprise him; he becomes his prey. Affinity,
Consanguinity, all respects of civil Society must be excluded: his will is his
Law; and he must suffer that dare oppose it.

This might strike a glowing blush in our hunting Nimrods; who, so they may
seize on their prey, and make innocence the object of their fury; neither care
for Heaven nor Hell. Judgments cannot startle them; because they are yet
insensible of them. Compassion cannot supple them; for that is such a stranger,
as of all other Pilgrims they never gave her harbor. Nay, humanity bears so
little sway with them; as they scorn to incline to ought that may civilize
them.

It is said, that Pictures convey deepest impressures; and that many have
blushed in the perusal of some Emblemes, by eying in them their own natures.
I could wish that these, who have engaged themselves to oppression, and made
injury their Darling, to look upon the Lucius: who takes his name from his
quick-discerning sight; but imployes it to an indirect end. They shall find
themselves charactred in his Life: and read such qualities in him, as Humanity
cannot choose but loath. That cautious Impresse about his Emblem may serve too
for an useful direction: "Id facere laus est, quod decet, no quod licet.

Then to note that sociable Affability of the Trout, cannot but beget singular
effects in sweet and well-tempered dispositions. This may be an Emblem to all
such who affect nothing more than Concord: Litigious Suitors, who cramme Seats
of Judicature with fat fees: who will do no right, nor take wrong; who feed
themselves with Contention; and have ever an Oar in that Boat which is
embarked in Waters of Division; are all Antipodes to this Emblem.

Marcus Caelius was said to have a good right hand, but an ill left hand,
because he could plead against a man better than for him. But these are no such
Agents: These will either do good, or do nothing. As they affect peace; so
every particular action of theirs merits praise. These desire not to swell
great, by the Consumption of Others: nor disperse their well-grounded Fame on a
disadvantageous War: They ever retain their place, and impale it with this
Impresse of Peace: " Pax una Triumphis innumeris potior --

Then go to your Machiavell Statist, that changeable-colour'd Polypus. One,
who can walk in a Cloud; and disguise dangerous plots with virtuous pretenses.
Here you shall find nothing unliker a man's self than himself. He flies with
the Lapwing, far from his Nest, that he might be more ^ecure: and more easy
it were to find that incredible Stone in the Lapwings Nest, than to retrive
the secrecy of his Aims. Though the Polypefish be various in Colors; and in
nothing more mutable than her own Feature: This politic Masker can vye with
him in various projects: being such a faithful Secretary to himself, as he
scorns to have any his Intelligencer: or to discover himself otherwise to the
World, than by pretending what is the least of his meaning. And now he is come
to that height of perfection, (if we may safely bestow such a Title on
dissembling) as he is jealous of Others trust: nor dare scarcely believe
himself, while he conferres privately with his own Breast. In a word, so
unequally paraleld is his outward disguise, and inward conceit, as his
Dissembling h'as begot in him, and derived to us this impressive Caution: --
"Quod non es, ne videare cave.

Now, for the strong-digesting Porpoise: that natural Description (for it
shadows not only the outward Constitution) implies the quality of such
persons; as can connive at injuries received: can suffer with an equal temper,
whatsoever the iniquity of Time, or inclemency of Fate shall or may inflict.
Others, while they exclaim against Destiny, and tear the Clouds with no less
fruitless than godless Imprecations: These with a resolved silence, and
habituate patience, can digest all indignities: laugh at the Braves of Fortune:
and with a composed spirit crown their Sufferings with this expression: "
Patior potiorque vicissim.

The Acipenser, or which Pliny calls, Sacer piscis, feeds on nothing but Man's
flesh, implying a caveat to Man: that having so many Enemies even on Earth, and
not free from them in the Depth, should not spend his time in security, but
prevent the enmity of all creatures by a diligent and vigilant care to
himself. Long could I protract this discourse, but two material parts of this
Relation withold me from insisting longer: The first whereof first offering
themselves, be Plants and Vegetative Bodies.

The wisest of all Kings was much conversant in these Studies, The Study of
Kings in Plants, Herbs and Fruits, etc.
knowing every Tree, every Herb, and every flower: a Cedro Libanon, usque ad
Hysopum supra parietem: An excellent Commendation in a King; not addicting his
mind to other things than the purchase of Knowledge, even in inferior things:
that a generality of knowing, might make him worthy of governing.

Probus the Roman Emperor, who succeeded Florianus in the Empire, was much
addicted to Planting, and distinguishing the Natures of Flowers, the virtues of
Plants, with proper observances accommodated for the knowledge of all Seasons,
apt for Grafting, Stilling, and the like: Planting the Mountain Almus sited
near Syrmius, and the Mount Aureus in Maesia the Higher, with Vines.

The like we read of Galerius Maximinus, Surnamed Armentarius; and many others
of the Romans, whose diligence was much employed in such pleasant affairs.

Resemblances in these vegetative Bodies, To what especial Resemblances these
Trees be acco^modate.
require observance; to see the Vine like a fruitful Mother of many fair
Children, sending out her ripened clusters, fair blossoming Sprigs, and
infinite store of pretty Slippes, imitating their Mothers fruitfulness, and
bending with her own Burden, as not able to support her self without some
stay or upholder: The pitiful Elm stretches her arms out to bear her up,
in pure compassion moved to help her, that in her self and fruitful Issue,
was so helpful unto others. Whence, some have resembled the Vine and the Elm
to the Church and Commonweal; whose office it is to support the Church when
distressed, as the Elm succors the Vine when surcharged.

The Vine seems sometime to weep (for tears indeed she sheds) as if in
Throws and pain of her Labor: These tears distilling from the Vine cure the
Leprosy: Plinius.
So as she seems both Fruitful and Sovereign, yielding no less comfort in
her tears, than verdure in her sprayes.

Many of these teare-shedding Trees there be, Teare-shedding Trees.
as the Myrrh-dropping Amber, and the Rosined Fyrrh: These by allusion may
seem to commiserate our unhappy states, subjected to myriads of anxieties, by
the taste of one Tree, whose dismal fruit made us wretched.

Some Trees we have for harbor and shadow only, resembling our dissembling
professors; whose external appearance makes great show of a fruitful inside,
when nothing, save a mere naked pretense of Piety, remains in them.

Others for fruit, without any store of blossoms; and such be they as desire
rather to be good, than so accounted.

Buxus amatori languere simillima visa est, pallor in est illi, pallet and
omnis amans. Alciat.
Some Trees pine away, as if surprised with an amorous passion, exemplified in
the Box: Others show by their freshness, to whom they are consecrate, as the
Myrtle.

Some lose not their color in Winter, like the patient man, who beleagred with
the worst of fortunes oppositions, never changes countenance for the matter;
but like that Venetian Motto writ in Triumph: Nec fluctu nec flatu movetur.
Others not subject to any hurt by thunder, A resemblance of Odours, Flowers,
and other Beauties to the inward Graces and Ornaments of the mind.
as the Bays: resemble the sincere conscience, not discomfitted with any
assault, or dismayed with any terror.

Sweet Odours, Flowers, and all other Beauties strowed upon this artificial
Carpet, garnish the earth, as the internal virtues inhabiting the mind, do the
Soul: This discourse more concerning the Herbist, than Historian, makes me
more brief in the handling hereof.


He amplifies this Discourse of Plants, Herbs, and Fruits.
Yet in regard of that precious resemblance which they retain (as all our
Moralists have well observed) to our inward beauty, I choose the rather to
insist a little ampler of them, by an apt comparison or parallel betwixt them
and such dispositions as they resemble. For the greatest benefit that may any
way redound to man, is seriously to read man: That Palm Tree in Congo is
useful in both: nay, plenteous in affording al commodities, as if it contested
in quality with the Melt of Mexico: For it yields Oil, Wine, Vinegar, Fruit
and b^ead. The oil is made of the shale of the fruit. The Bread is made of
the stone of the fruit. The Wire is drawn from the top of the tree, by making a
hole therein, from whence distilleth a lyquor like milk, which at the first is
sweet, but afterward sower, and in process of time becomes very vinegar,
to serve for Sallets.
and in the Survey of inferior Creatures, to collect wherein any of these may
seem to read a Lecture to Man; wherein soever he comes either short or over of
what is required of him. This that wise Democritus observed in the dissection
of his Anatomies: and this should we in our very Walks and Recreations abroad
usually practice: so may the application of them to our selves, infinitely
improve us.

In our tracing and traversing the Forest; we shall there find some Trees
for shade, but barren of fruit: Others less useful for shade, but plenteous
in fruit.

Our Sanctimonious-seeming Non-Conformatist reteines an apparent resemblance of
the one: our Sincere Professor of the other.

A goodly beauteous Shadow to delude vulgar eyes, suffices the former: but
shadows are reduced to substantial fruits by the latter.

These Historical Relations may (likewise) point at painted friendship.
Where many, in their Airy professions will not stick to promise golden
Mountains: but their performance (the essential fruit or effect of promise)
dies always in the Socket; the snuff of that vaporous Complement expires and
dies.

Friendship (says the Stagyrian) is one soul which rules two hearts; and one
heart which dwells in two bodies. Hearts then must not be ruled by shadows.
Congies, Cringes, Curtsies and Formalities may delude, and imparadize an
unexperienced Novice: These, I say, may transport our youngling, who never knew
what dissembling meant: nor could ever yet distinguish betwixt fruit and
shade, Essence and Semblance: but those, who are experimentally versed in the
World, easily decline from such Snares. For Circumspection has taught them
such a Lesson, as they have learned to season Amity with Salt: and introduce
acquaintance by experience; least their too easy intimacy beget repentance.

Plutarch reports that Plato came forth of Asia into Cilicia for no other
cause but only to see his dear friend Phocion the Philosopher.

Such a visit begot an amicable benefit, a Philosophical improvement. These
enterviewes were not like that of Alcmaeons to Craesus: his regreet was to
receive gold: a sordid aim! when Virtue is the prize which should only be in
chase. Gilded shadows merit approvement, but by whom? By Fools of the Time.
But no true amity can be derived from these; no more then fruits from shadows.
This resemblance then holds to life, both in flower and fruit.

A Juniper tree makes the hotest coal, and the coolest shadow of any Tree.
The coal is so hot, Fabiolae Man's. 15.
that if it be raked up in ashes of the same, it continues unextinguished by
the space of a whole year.

Here is the Emblem of an incomparable disposition; Comment. in 1. Reg: c. 1.
here is both he^te to refresh an afflicted friend, when with adversity
benumbed: and shadow to solace him, when with the grandeur of business
surcharged. Here is warmth to allay cold: and coolness too, to attemper heat.

Peter Martyr shows, that clothing does keep the body warm two ways: by
keeping in the natural heat of the body: and by keeping out the accidental
cold of the air.

Sure I am such a friendship as is here described, and by the sweet-sented
Emblem of the Juniper, shadowed, may be for all seasons equally accommodated:
an excellent garment, being fitted both for Cover and Ornament.

Now the Sycamore is of an other nature: though it afford a spreading shade, it
reteines no such native heat: it delights the eye, but relisheth not the taste.
And this discovers our large professing friends in Folio; who are ample enough
in protests: but all they bestow upon us in the end, are but scattred Leafes:
they are rich in shade, but rare in fruit.

Who can pass by the Winter-flourishing Cypress, but must parallel that Tree
with an Heroicke resemblance?

Cupressus nobilis Emblema militis. Fates nor Furies cannot amate him: no enemy
so powerful, nor danger so mortal, as can detract from his Spirit; or weaken
his courage. He hates no Fury more then fear: nor entertaines ought with a
more resolved temper, then the extremest oppositions of fortune; holding it
the highest degree of happiness to expire with honor.

I could here enlarge this Discourse with sundry instances of this kind: but I
must leap from this branch, and descend to a subject lower in respect of site:
but nothing inferior in delight: being commodiously applied, it is
compendiously compiled.

Of precious Stones.
For Stones, and all kinds of Minerals, it is a knowledge worthy Gentlemen:
wherein I may likewise comprehend the ancient knowledge of Coins, in what
Emperors time, and their several inscriptions.

Julius Caesarem spe Margaritarum, Britanniam pet^ysse.
We read how Julius Caesar came into Brittany in hope to find Pearls; though
Caligula's traffic seemed less worthy, commanding his Soldiers to gather
Cockle-shels.

It is a very generous quality (and sometimes he shall be put to his judgment)
to distinguish rightly and exactly of Saphires, Emeralds, Diamonds, etc. This
requires exact judgment, lustres may be given to Glass, as well as Diamonds:
Adulterate Gemmes pass current with our Novice: The Silver-Smiths of Ephesus
have instructed this Age sufficiently, and fraud must be incorporate to every
Profession.

If these Gems, I talk of, were ornaments of the Mind; I should desire longer
to insist upon them: but being (as these times use them) rather foments to
ensnare and entrappe, than attractive motives to affect; according to their
Native properties, being ordained as resemblances of virtues; I will not dilate
of their values, but only of their power, more pertinent to my Discourse, and
better according with my knowledge; who Aeschylus-like, have long time drawn
Water out of another Cesterne, but never filled mine own Bucket.

Many excellent virtues of Stones, The virtues of Stones described.
does Pliny in his Natural History set down unto us: As some have power to
frustrate the effect of poison: Others very powerful against the operations of
Magic Spells, Witchcraft, and the like. But as a Judicious Commentary writes
of him: Multa scribit, quae mehercule vera non existimanda sunt: Yet to stand
in suspense with us (for the reverence of such a learned Author) because their
effects have not been as yet tried of us.

Many things (I confess) seem by all probability like the Amalga, to have
more Moon than Sun in them: But the experiments which we have in some,
makes us more credulous in others.

The Diamond (whose Character is not to be razed) resembles the pure
impressions of virtue we have received, The patient man like the Stone Golasia;
Hard as the Diamond, cold like Ice, not to be fired.

Or the Stone A^^zantus, once on fire will never go out.


and which is traduced to us, by the intellectual eye of the soul, which in
no case should be razed or abolished in us, but to be augmented with a greater
increase of virtues: It resembles also the truly Charitable man, that to do
good to others, impaires his own fortunes: For the best Motto that ever was
made of the Diamond, was this: Dum formo, minuo.

Strange effects in stones.
The stone Mithax (says Pliny) is of a perfect color, till opposed to the
Sun, and then it loses his color: It allude^h to many of our painted
Sepulchers, ^u^ She-puppets: none more clear, or amiably-coloured then they,
till the Sun glitter on them, and their slightly-laid-on varnish, presently
then dissolveth: Quantum mutatur ab illa? True Sodoms Apples, no sooner
touched, then to dust and corruption turned.

Topaz, her opposite (in Native virtue) shines most in the thickest darkness:
The very Idaea of Virtue her self: The Clouds cannot interpose themselves
betwixt her, Allusions of certain stones to internal Gra^es.
and her Native luster: The Glo-worme glisters not more by night, then it does
in obscurity: A precious stone fittest for these times, and an or^ament
wel-beseeming the greatest Person^ge: for the cloud of Error should not be
able to obscure their thoughts, ever bending their course to the mark of
honor.


The precious stone Diocletes, Resemblances of precious stones to those choice
virtues which should appear in man: with their distinct properties or effects.
though it have many rare and excellent soveraignties in it, yet it loses
them all, if it be put in a dead Man's mouth. Wherein One makes a proper
resemblance to Prayer; which is the only Pearl and Jewel of a Christian:
though it have many rare and exquisite virtues in it, yet it loses them every
one, if it be put into a Man's mouth, or into a Man's heart either, that is dead
in sin, and does not knock with a pure hand.

What sovereign power the Echites is said to retain in repelling the poison
and rebaiting the sting of the Viper! What secret virtue lies hid in the
Dionysias in staying blood; as in others of effusing blood!

Our natural Historians make mention of a certain stone found in the Lapwings
nest; Lapillum varlegati coloris in nido vpubae invenies, cuius occulta
virtute, mulli visus omnia videas, nulli notus omnia detegas.
the incredible occult virtue whereof is such, that the Party who bears it
about him, shall by the power thereof make all things visible to him, yet he
visible to none; discovering all things without discovery: disclosing others
with a personal secrecy.

No doubt but Gyges Ring had some relation to this stone; to whom Candaules,
that doting King, showed his wife naked: which indiscreete part rest him of
Kingdom, Wife, and Life. For the Queen being grieved thereat, to have any
strange Eye so familiarly known to the secrecy of her beauty; which even in
n^tive Modesty, exacted a veil to privilege it from such an open discovery,
caused Gyges, upon the tender of her Princely affection, to slay the King; to
take upon him the Kingdom, and to take her t^ his wife. This Gyges had a Ring
(as Divine Plato reports) that had virtue to make him go invisible.

They that looked upon Sylla's Ring, Plut. in vit. Syl.
could not choose but take notice both of Sylla's Seal and the Treason of
Iugurth, because that was graven on the Seal. Excellent Morals are shadowed in
these: and such as usefully applied, may redound highly to the appliers benefit.

Strange effects are reported of the Calazia (by the Testimony of Hesych.) a
stone of precious virtue, having in it spotslike unto Hail. Sovereign, as may
be collected by what our Historians have writ of it, to cure any burn or
inflammation. So as, this might well retain that divine Hieroglyphick of one
Cardinal Virtue, Temperance. If heat of affection transport us; any unbounded
passion surprise us; the spirit of vainglory inflame us, that we cannot take
our natural rest with Themistocles, for his ambitious emulation after
Miltiades: or find that ravenous appetite ever raging, ranging and reigning in
us, which sometimes accompanied that gluttonous Cambletes: or to satisfy our
unconfined desires with the Delicacies of Earth, as if it were on Earth to
satisfy Man, with licentious Lucullus: or to plot new devices how to innovate
in a distempered State with Sertorius: or to enrich our Coffers by others
ruins, and milch the State with our Oppressions, like another Acilius. If
these, or any of these distempers seize upon us, that Calazia of Temperance
(for so is that Stone properly resembled) will moderate them in us: by reducing
us to that Resemblance we had lost; and moulding in us that Effigies which we
are above all others to love. For as nothing can be happily achieved, or
gracefully performed, unless it be seasonably acted: so no Virtue may properly
retain that Style, unless it be by Temperance seasoned.

The Pyropus, what beauty and virtue it holds; all our Naturalists have amply
discoursed. No Subject, be it never of so cold nor freezing a nature, can alter
his temper. This Stone ever reteines his heat; so as, it may be properly
compared to the temper of such a composed mind; who stands resolved against
all the affronts or insults of Fortune. No palsey-feare can amate him; no
distemper alter him. With the heat of his own Nature he knows how to thaw
all those icy congelations, which proceed from a weak or pusillanimous spirit.
Such an Ones blood flies not from his heart to his face; but from his face to
his heart. For though his outward visible part express a pallid fear; his
heart scorns to give harbor to such a Traitor.

He finds nothing so weak as that despicable mind; who Protheus-like,
changes his heart with the habit of the Time; and desires to comply with
Greatness, and to fawn on silken Vice; vowing it, as one struck amazed with
the splendour of it, to be all virtuous. Much otherwise affected is his spirit,
who like the unquenchable Pyropus, smiles at nothing more than the indignities
of Fortune: and esteems nothing less, than vicious Greatness. And if it
chance at any time (as such Occurrents are every where obvious) that a
base-creeping spirit, who relied more on the shelter of Greatness, than Honor
of Goodness, perish in his hopes, and dye in the straw: This tickles his
honest Lungs with laughing Democritus; closing his Observation with this
Poetical Air: This it is to build upon a Great man's word,
And fool himself with following of a Lord.
The Parius lapis or Touchstone, Some, and that not improperly, have compared
to affliction: It is this that tries Man whether he be true-Touch or no. This
confirms that golden Sentence of a devout Man: We are unknown to our selves,
till affliction lie us open to our selves.

We shall observe many, whose outward tincture promises nothing-lesse then the
purest color of Heraldry, prove Copper in the touch. All is not gold that
glisters.

Outward apparances are shady fallacies. The habit displayes not the Heart; nor
the outward Semblance the inward disposition of the Mind.

Cicero said of Galba's leaden and lumpish body: His wit had an ill lodging;
which may be truly applied to all these dissembling pretenders: such promising
Leafes are ill bestowed on such barren Trees. Shadows, though they hold a
concomitance with Substance; yet are they never really the same. That man only
deserves so noble a style, who imbraceth faith and fealty, intertaineth love
and loyalty, improveth his courage and constancy amidst all encounters: yea,
when the extremest beleaguers and assaults of Fortune have done their worst,
remains ever true-touch. How Mahomet the first deluded his credulous
posterity, with an opinion of miraculous Sanctity, in that very Monument which
he had caused to be erected in his Memory.


In the discourse of the Ceremonies of Mecha, we shall find a rare device there
recommended to our view, in the perpendicular placing of that Sepulcher of
Mahomet: Merely contrived by that cunning Projector to delude the Mahometans,
by making them believe that to be a miraculous Object, which to more approoved
and refined judgments appeared only a native experiment. Those that write of
that Subject, describe it thus: There is an Adamant placed in the Roof above,
and a Magnet fixed in the pavement by an equal or direct line below; now, the
Sepulcher of Mahomet made of solid iron, hangs in a Diametrall manner betwixt
these two: without stay or supportance of either. This begot in those bewitched
people a wonderful amazement, honoring that Monument with their yearly
Processionall visits; offering rich presents to that Mohammedan shrine: never
understanding those occult virtues of the two Stones fixed above and below;
who, by their natural opposition and enmity (as one maligning the others
attractive quality) would not suffer that heavy ponderous body either to ascend
or descend; but to retain an equal site or location betwixt them both. This
it was that confirmed these Mahometans in the strength of a deluded opinion,
that their Mahomet was a great and powerful Prophet, showing such high proofs
and demonstrances of his extraordinary abilities living; and leaving such a
Miracle for all posterity to admire in his departing.

But to leave their effects, and return to their Emblemes: The Adamant is
compared to One that is truely-affectionate; ever bearing this peculiar
Impresse: " Si me amas, mihi Adamas.

Rare Experiments have our ancient Professants made of the Aspilates; a Stone,
according to the Testimony of Democritus, of a fiery color, got in Arabia, and
found in a certain kind of Birds Nest. He reports, that this Stone being
tied with a Camels hair to any one troubled with the Spleen, it will cure him.

Diodorus relates of a kind of Salt, called Ammonick, and found in Afric
under Sand; when the Moon grows toward the full; it is like Stone-allumne,
and is medicinable in dissolving and purging of Fleagme.

Pliny likewise reports strange things of the Ammonis Cornu; being a precious
Stone of the color of Gold, representing the shape of a Rams Horn; of a
powerful quality in causing true Dreams.
But many of these, I must freely confess, like the Amalga, have far more
Moon than Sun in them; being many times related, rather to beget admiration,
than gain credit: Albeit, we are not altogether to distrust them, unless our
own Experience had found the contrary to evince them. Howsoever, sure I am,
their Resemblances give an excellent grace and beauty to any discourse, whether
Moral or Divine.

There is a Crown, (says St. Peter) that is undefiled, which never fades
away. The Greek words, (...), which St. Peter uses, are Latin words also:
and they are not only Appellatives, being Epithetes of this Crown, but also
Propers; the one the proper name of a Stone, the other of a Flower. Isidorus
^temoleg. li. 16. ca. 4.
For Isidore writes, there is a precious Stone called Amiantus; which, though
it be never so much soyled, yet it can never at all be blemished: and being
cast into the Fire, it is taken out still more bright and clean.

Also Clement writes, Clemens Alexandr. Pedagog. li. 1. ca. 8.
that there is a Flower called Amarantus, which being of a long time hung up in
the House, yet it is still fresh and green. To both which, the Stone and the
Flower, the Apostle, as I am persuaded, alludeth in that place.

To recount the virtues of all, were a superfluous Task; for so should I make
a Collection merely of what has been written before, I only set down with
my self, to extract the speciallest, Vid. Isidor. Disescorid. Martian.
and to make resemblances of them with the Native proportions of such things as
are most usual objects to our outward senses. I will briefly touch the
admirable devices of Minerals, and so proceed to my intended Discourse.

Mines the lower laid, the better: O. Minerals.
in them we disbowell (as it were) Nature of her hidden treasures; yet the
Earth, like a kind and bountiful Mother, willingly unrips her own breast, to
enrich her Children; the diverse veins, and cordons which we find there, like
hidden or concealed streams, having filled up their Treasure-channels (because
so long time unemptied) minister store of all Metals unto their Digger.

Caesar in his Commentaries, seems greatly to have delighted herein, having so
quickly found out with what sorts of Metals, these Britain coasts most
abounded: Some we have of these Mineralists that by the superficies of the
Earth, can judge, what kind of Metal best agre^s with that Soil; and
without piercing the ground (can prettily well) presage the event of their
labor: Their Studies deserve cherishing, being grounded on honest foundations,
and such as have much benefited their Country by their industry.

The North-part famous for Copper-worke, by their labor and industry yielding
no small benefit to their Country. Which works, though of late years
discontinued, are now with much improvement and honor to the under-takers,
revived.
The North-part in their Copper-workes most laborious, merit their share of
Commendations; both profiting themselves, and yielding an ample gain to the
Kings Revenewes out of their Labors. The most precious Mines have been ever
found out in Regions least inhabited, and where the Inhabitants could make
little or no use of so large a bounty of Nature, as to this day among the
Indians; men that would exchange their preciousest things for trifles: like
Aesops Cock, preferring a Barley-corne before a Pearl.

Yet in these labors (in themselves prayse-worthy) I altogether disallow such
(of which our reading ministers too many examples) that have dug the
Sepulchers of the dead, to find some hidden Treasure buried with them. A sharp
Law was enacted (for this end) amongst the Egyptians, (which Nation used to
interre their chief Jewels with the dead party) that whosoever should violate
the sacred rites of the dead, by digging up their Treasures inchested with
them, should be buried quick.

A pretty Caution for a Miser.
A pretty story to this purpose is recorded of Semyramis, that valiant Queen of
Assyria; who before her death, commanded that a fair Monument should be
erected over her, upon which should be engraven this Inscription: Whosoever
shall dig up this stone, let him but look under it, and he shall find an
infinite mass of treasure. Cyrus having conquered that people, chanced to come
where that curious monument was erected; and seeing this Inscription upon it,
presently commanded the Stone to be taken up; which being done accordingly, he
found no Treasure, but this caution of better value then all Treasures: None
but Fools and Misers would dig up the bones of the dead. A reward well
fitting the miserable desire of an insatiate Mind.

I might annexe to this Discourse, the excellent study of Antiquities, and
speak in part of them; But our coast is freighted with such elaborate
Antiquaries, as the digression might seem less necessary. Through all the
body of this Discourse (including Physical Relations) I have but shadowed the
chiefest, without entention to entreat of every particular, using Valerius
Maximus words: Quis omnis aevi gesta modico voluminum numero comprehenderit? I
will descend to Mixed Histories, which was the last branch of my division.

Mixed Histories Mixed Histories.
are composed, or compounded of all those thre^, of which we have sufficiently
entreated before. Variety of subjects best agree with the frame of these
Writings: They express to the quick, not only what was done Discursively, but
what should have been done Morally, Mixed Histories composed of all kinds.
and deriving the event from probable causes, arising from nature, they
conclude their Discourse, making it Universal. Some have styled these
Miscellanea, because a commixture of all affairs; they playing the Moral
Philosopher as well as Historian; comprehend all which the other could any way
seem to entreat of; being the abridgement of all Relations, and in themselves
sufficient to produce incredible effects: they require especial Reading, ripe
Judgment, and an apt Disposition withal to make their members, so diversely
hanging, unite in one maine body.

And to descend now to a commendation of Mixed Histories; with instances of
sundry Historians both Ancient and Modern, who have bin usefully versed
therein. The Commendation of Mixed Histories; with Instances of sundry
Historians both Ancient and Modern, who have been usefully versed therein.
There be none in my opinion, who better deserve the Palm in Subjects of this
nature, then those ever-living Labors of Thuano's, Surius, with that
excellently composed History of Paulus Iovius. And for a continued Allegory,
never Relation deserved more approbation, both for Style and State, then
Barclei's Argenes. An History, which puts on the face of things really done;
yet merely shadowing Persons of State, under borrowed names: Expressing his
own aims in such an implicit, but pleasing manner, that this Isle (since such
Assayes must of necessity be attempted) might have esteemed herself highly
happy, in affording him a deserving Translator; or according to his own
thoughts, a faithful Interpretor.

Histories of this nature (as I have else where observed) do not only make
relation of what is actually done; but insert such personal applications, as
may benefit the understanding Reader; by making use of exploits done, and
applying the use of what was formerly done, to succeeding times. Others harms
make us beware of incurring the like. Where Reading of men, and taking a
punctual Survey or Examen of their actions, we become many times wiser, than
if we had been wholly versed in reading of Books. It was a witty saying of an
outwardly-contemplative man, Relegentur libri, relegantur viri. Lay aside
Books, and take your selves to reading of Men. So long as the World is a
Theater, Man must needs be an Actor. The Booke-holder stands in the
Tyring-house; but the Action must be presented on the Stage. This, those
excellent Historians, singularly expressed, and to life portrayed; when they
made not only mention of what was done, but the natures of those persons
interessed in what was done.

Here they describe fiery-furious Spirits, more ready to attempt than advise:
Action in these ever goes before resolution. Contrariwise, others of a slower
but safer temper, consider of the end and issue, before they will attempt. No
glowing spirit of ambition; no transportancy of vainglory can lessen their
discretion. Their actions are rightly measured, because advise and deliberation
are their Counselors of State. This might be instanced in a fore-slowing
Fabius, and a forward Cethegus; a precipitate Cleon, and a prepared Bracidas.

Now, in Discourses of this kind, there is a singular observation which I must
necessarily recommend to all our Gentlemen who affect the reading of History; A
singular observation recommended to Gentlemen in their reading of History.
and this I have culled from that Father of all Historians, Plutarch himself.
Plutarchs paraleling of Princes, highly commended.
Who, as he describes the Lives of such Princes or eminent Personages as he
takes occasion to treat of; so he likewise paralels or compares their actions
and dispositions one with another. Here he shows what exploits such a person
did; how he bore himself in the passage of them; how he came off with honor;
how he moderated his affections in the achievement of a victory; how he
behaved himself to those he conquered; how he spared most, where he might most
have spoiled. Here he instanceth some more able to get a victory, than
skillful to use it: others wise enough in making use of it, having once
obtained it. Some made happy by suffering misery: others miserable in never
partaking infelicity. Some constant friends, but inconstant foes: others
constant foes, but uncertain friends. Some apter to persuade, than personally
to perform: Others had all their Rhetoric placed in action: Their Oratory was
a Martial Summons: yet what they wanted in discourse to bring on their
Soldiers; they supplied in boldness of adventures: exposing their persons to
all dangers. Some stout enough of spirit, while their bodies were weak; but
weak in spirit when their bodies grew strong. To confirm this, he reports
that Antigonus had in his army a valiant Soldier; but of a sickly body:
Antigonus observing his valor; and grieving that so stout a resolution should
be seconded by so weak a constitution, procured his Physicians to take him in
hand; and he was healed. Now being sound, he began to fight in some fear; to
keep himself a good distance from danger, no more venturing into the vanne or
forlorn place of the battle. Antigonus noting, and wondering at this
alteration, asked him the cause of this new cowardice. He answers, O Antigonus,
thou art the cause. Before I ventured nothing but a diseased Corpse, and then I
choose rather to dye quickly, then to live sickly: I invited death to do me a
kindness. Now it is otherwise with me, for I have somewhat to lose.

Such delightful passages as these, shall we every where find interveined in
these mixed Discourses.

I approve of Salusts opinion: Ex ijs Negotijs quae ingenio exercentur, in
primis magno usu est memoria rerum gestarum. Yet of all those Records, none in
themselves more eminent, because none more elaborate than mixed Histories: they
contract in one leaf (as it were) what a whole Volume could scarcely
comprehend. These require a general kn^wledge, and extend further than all the
rest.
There must be a general knowledge in these discourses, making a wel^-composed
body of many scattered limbs, gathered from the Relickes, or ashes of their
deceased Authors. For as a good Limner will not see any blemish in his
portraiture; but (ere he hang it out) will desire to make every part and
proportion in a kind of correspondency, to move a more deep impression in the
beholder: So should there be an equal correspondency in these kind of
Histories, letting no discourse pass (if of consequence) without a mixture of
both Moral, and Physical reasons; lest one little blemish (one omission of
either) should be a disparage to the whole. Here Antomedon-like, he should set
out virtues Table, making his life a Globe of Precepts: There, like an
excellent Naturallist, he should dilate upon the natures of things, or probable
reasons (as as I said before) derived from Nature. The masterpiece (like the
warpe in the web) is Discourse: for these Butteresses, without a maine
foundation, would soon decay.

Wits compared to Soiles: some naturally fruitful, without forcing: others,
without continual labor and tillage, will bring forth nothing but tares (or
the Husband-mans tears.) Some fit for Barley, others for Wheat, Oats, or the
like: and some most apt for Missellane. A judicious distinguishing of wits.
So in wits, some naturally ripe and forward; others require a more deliberate
dispatch: the one more present, the other more solid. Pregnant and ripe wits
are not so good; they are like a Rasor keen and sharp, but his edge is soon
rebated. One compared them, and not unfitly, to soft wood, ready to receive any
impression from the Limner; but for warping, is unable to keep; and therefore
not fit for any worthy or curious portraiture. Such wits are these, which be
rather apt for invention, than judicious scanning of any Authors: they can
invent, better than extract; and consequently unfit for these mixed Discourses
whereof we now entreat.

Exquisite Labor is the producer of these Histories; which (for the most part)
is intolerable to your sharpest wits; being rather for the present, than any
serious deliberation.

Salust in his Iugurthine War, Example of mixed Histories
includes a pretty commixture of Histories; as if he had intended to make a
President for Relations of this kind, where he brings in Micipsa upon his
deathbed, speaking to his sons: Equidem ego regnum vobis trado firmum: Si
boni eritis, sin mali, imbecillum. Wherein he so lively characters the state
of Princes, and the moral instruction of a Father dying, to his Children, with
the several Natures and Dispositions of them; that it seems he purposed to
instance this kind of writing in so excellent a Subject. Here he shows
Dissimulation in a Prince, even at his end: there an unworthy plot of an
adopted Son, seeking to reign by indirect means. Here Micipsa exhorts them;
with, Colite talem hunc virum, imitamini virtutem. Yet he intimates withal,
his fear of aspiring, seeing his Nature so boundless. There he describes the
jealous doubts, and perplexed windings of Adherball; there the drooping spirit
of Hyempsall, and the royal disposition of Iugurth: so as by reading their
diverse natures, one might conjecture for whom the government of Numidia was
reserved.

These Histories are most fruitful, Mixed Histories most fruitful.
they draw both Attention, and they comprehend in them great plenty of
Instruction. Attention by their Variety, Instruction by their Morality;
including a persuasive kind of writing in the one, and a delightful
proceeding, or continuance in the other.

Some Historians in this kind, and not unfitly, lay open the causes of decays
in Cities, Empires, and Governments: as Romes fall proceeding from her
imperial Pride, Babylons from her Riot, the Medes from their Security, the
Tyrians from their sumptuousness in Apparel; the Christians (in Eastern
parts) more to their shame, and our grief, from their civil dissension among
themselves.


Occasion might be here taken of laying open those especial grounds, from
whence our Historians have probably drawn their Reasons of enfeebling the
greatest and flourishingst States; taking breath, as they conceived, from these
three particulars: Innovation in Government, Manners, Habit.

GOVERNMENT.
For the first; no Instance more to life, than when the Roman Monarchy became
rint and divided to the Triumviri; The Empire begun to feel strange Scepters.

The former state of Government, which had made it self so fearful to her
Neighbour-kingdomes, as they feared nothing more than to offend their
Mistress; (for so might Rome at that time be properly styled) became more
slighted. Those sinews of War, which before showed strength in her public
Treasury, became exhausted; Those Laws, which either the necessity of the
present time had enacted, or the fullness of their State required, through the
difference of Commanders, neglected.

The saying is, Plants transplanted seldom thrive; No more, Empires, when
their state of Government is altered; their ancient Laws annulled; the rule by
which they were formerly directed, wholly relinquished. New Lords will always
have new Laws: and to their Examples are their Followers ever molded. There
is nothing that beseemes our natural complexion better than her own color;
whatsoever it borrows of Art, rather blemisheth than bestows any beauty on
her.

I must confess indeed, that in the dress or fashion of our Attire, many
devices there are (presupposing ever that they be not apish nor garish) which
give a good grace to the Wearer, and do better become him, in respect of the
time wherein they are used, than if the Old Wardrobes of our Ancestors were
ransacked, and those ancient Wears brought again in request. But Antiquity
ever holds best correspondency in Mannagements of State: the more the manner of
their Government is altered; the more their Manners are for most part corrupted.

This it was, that so much afflicted Solon; after such time as he had labored
to settle the State; revive her useful Laws; and lay down all grounds that
might any way improve their Government. After all this, I say, to see the
people given to Innovation; rejecting with much sleightnesse and contempt, what
he had both by travail and counsel endeavored to establish and enact. This
grieved him more than his own Banishment, or whatsoever that unthankful Age
could possibly inflict.

Secondly, for Manners; MANNERS.
Those are best-beseeming, which are most Native. Always provided, that those
places or Countries be Civil, where those Manners are used, or Laws observed.
The Scythians were not to conform themselves to the Manners nor Discipline of
the Egyptians; nor these to the Scythians. The Laconians, whose strict
Discipline both for Meat, Drink, and Apparel, made them imitable Presidents
to their Neighbors; could not endure that the proud Babylonian should commerce
with them; nor the dis-passionate Theban to converse with him; nor the covetous
Tyrian to trucke or traffic with him; nor the riotous Sydonian to take repast
with him; nor the sorcerous Egyptian (who was no less black in superstition
than he was of complexion) to consort with him.

Their ancient Manners they retained; which not observed, they ever feared,
that their State (as they had exemplarily seen in others) might be enfeebled.

Thirdly and lastly, touching Habit, HABIT.
(a small thing may some suppose to dissolve the maine Fabric of a mighty
State) we shall find what care and sedulity some States have used in reteining
the ancient Habit, recommended to them by their Ancestors.

Darius having altered the fashion of his blade, which used to be Persian, into
the form of the Macedonian; in the year before he fought with Alexander, the
Chaldees or Soothsayers prophesied, that into what fashion as Darius had
altered his Sword, it would become Ruler of Persia. And the issue or conclusion
seconded this prediction.

Scmyramis commanded all to wear Tyars upon their heads, and to put upon them
Woman's apparel, to cover their effeminate parts. But this new effeminacy of
Habit brought a speedy subversion to that State: For upon the death of their
Queen, whose imperial mind affected nothing more then command, this their
Womanish Habit brought them into contempt.

Thus have the flourishingest Commonweals fallen to desolation and
dissolution, Innovation in Government, manners, habit, occasions of enfeebling
a State. Causes precedent directors to the events.
their highest Spires ruinate, their Temples, with their Places of profane
adoration, defaced; nothing remaining to boast of, save that they once were
happy, once victorious. Yea, Iugurth himself seems to express the cause of
Romes ruin; showing how subject they were (even the purple Fathers, the
reverent Benchers) to take bribes, and receive ointments, which would close their
mouths for speaking in the Commonweals behalf. For when he was complained of
unto the Senate, for the murder of Hyempsall: and the Senate having then
government over Numidia in chief; which Realm (as others) was tributary to
them, commanded Iugurth to appear before them upon such a day; fully resolved
to punish his insolences. He so wrought by rewards, as their censure was not
only mittigated, but (as the Historian records) Tanta commutatio incessit, vt
ex maxima invidia in gratiam and favorem nobilitatis Iugurtha veniret. A
strange Metamorphosis, when states were so soon changed, which portended a
sudden change of their government, falling from so great glory, and eminence,
to eternal obscurity.

Many Histories of these natures there be, which depend upon apt allusions,
Distinct proprieties in all Histories.
equally mixed with Discursiue, Moral, and Physical: Discursiue to delight and
trick on the appetite, by a sweet variety; seeing the change of great states
in a few Leaves; being a speech merely documentall, to better our Lives, teach
us what should be done, as well in private as public. Physical, in the
character of several natures, aptly accommodated to the Subject whereof we
entreat. With what delight do we read the diverse inclinations of Princes?
Inclinations different in Princes.
Here a Catiline, doing little, and speaking much: There a Iugurth, doing much,
and speaking little. Here a Philip drunk, and in his drunkenness raging
against his foes: there an Alexander, drunk too; but in his passion raging
against his best friends. Here a Caesar, then whom, none ever did more good to
his followers: there a Nero, then whom, none more desertlesse to his followers.
Here a working crafty wit, stirring up trifling rewards, to contain him in
suspense; instanced in Tiberius: there an affable mind, set out in threed-bare
words, one that could never fl^tter; specified in Titus.

These several natures we may see, and mark what success they had: Some, the
more thinking, the more not knowing what to think: yet to observe the work of
Heaven, seldom or never have these suspicious heads cause to rest; but the
more they suspect, the more motives they have to suspect: for this craft is
always hateful, and procures enemies: Subtle councels being odious unto the
world, and so dis-favoured of God, that they are always waited on, and
attended with most unprosperous ends. An observation worthy our note. Subtle
Councels ever produce unprosperous ends: And to their Counselors popular
hate. Virtue ever attended with a prosperous end.
We shall see in profane stories a maine diversity, even in the simplest and
shallowest understandings; the subtillest sconses the means of their own
decay; as in Sejanus, who in the opinion of his own worth grew in time, Ferox
sceleris: Policy her ^wne ruin, x^mplified:
Such aspiring spirits be (for the most part) used like Sponges, wet with their
spoils and extortions, with which being a long time soaked, they are at last
crushed and condemned, that their long-gathered wealth might return to the
Princes Coff^^s. Trajan used to call the Treasury or Exchequer (by way of
comparison) the Spleen, because it increasing, brings to all the other parts a
pining.


What Various Occurrents, nay fearful and unexpected Disasters have ever been
the attending fears of ambitious Spirits; The misery of Ambition.
No History but can bear witness. How safe and secure have many lived; Free
from fears within, and Foes without; Retired from the Concourse of litigious
Plaintiffs; Clamor of Courts; Heat of Corrivals: Nay, whatsoever else might
breed their disquiet? Yet see the misery of Ambition! On they must, be it to
their ruin. Examples they find store to caution them; precepts both divine and
moral to inform them. Yet neither can the former work any impression on
them; nor the latter by more easy persuasions waine them.

Commines reports, how Charles the third, under whom he so long time served,
communicating himself so freely both in matters of advice and action for the
advancing of his service; was ever casting in his mind after business of
greatest difficulty; Yea such, perhaps, says he, as exceeded the abilities of
man.

This was a strange disposition; And yet we shall meet with many of this
nature, both in the course of our Reading and Living. We shall observe some,
who, though they have a faire-bet path to walk in, yet will they leave the
tracke, and make the Wall or some other high Mount their Walk. So fates it
with these, who had rather fish in Troubl^d Waters, then when they are Calm.
No Night so dark; no peril so fatally imminent: But with cheerfulness they
will attempt, what their inconsiderate boldness pompts them to. Nor is this
their forwardness forced out of want; For many of these abound in all
fullness; rich in fortunes; Strong in followers: Yet miserable in both these.
For as their fortunes feed their followers: So do their followers feed on
them. These Faunes are they, who make Fools of their Masters; And by throwing
out strange lures, miserably seize on them. The daring D' Ambois, and that
brave Byroun were Spirits of this temper. Great enough in Princes favor;
laden sufficiently with honor; only unhappy in this, in that they knew not
their own happiness: Miserable, in that they had never tasted misery.

It is well observed by one, in his Discourse of this Subject; that of all
frenzies, there is none that madds man more then Ambition. It makes him think
he walks altogether invisible; Ixion was never more deceived with a Cloud, then
he is with his disguise.

There is one thing more in it; this madding fancy, or raving frenzy is of that
nature, as no friend can be secure, so his fall may purchase their aim. Clitus
Constancy cannot secure him, when Ambitious heat mixed with Wine, eggs on his
Master to an indeliberate revenge.

Yet see the just doom of these! Who, as they build their plottes upon unsure
Grounds; Or, which is of all others hatefull'st, because to themselves in their
passage hence the heaviest, on blood; Which is never shed in vain: So are they
to receive, what their deluded greatness made them believe they could never
suffer.

Then, and never till then, are they brought to acknowledge, that a greatness
can be no Subterfuge to guiltiness. Greatness can be no Subterfuge to
guiltiness.
Then must that veil, which had so long shrouded them from the sight of men,
be removed; their princely persons with their unprincely actions discovered and
paralel'd. So poor a Support is painted Clay to build upon.

Nor be these Ambitious Spirits only here to be taxed; who, though they fall,
they fly fair: But such, who abuse that place to which their Princes favor
has raised them; by base mercenary ways. These are they who play the Sharkes
under the hatches. Not a petition must be presented, but it must be gilded. As
for their own Suites, they little care how they work upon the Spirit of the
State; how they discourage the peoples just endeavors; how they increase the
Widows tears, aggravate the Orphans wrongs, and multiply their abuses to
maintain their Surfets. Or if parcimonious, Unconscionable Prollers should be
made Sponges of, for example of others.
how they enrich their own Coffers with others Curses. For these, I would have
them made Spunges of; that as they sucked and milkt the Lowest, so they might be
soakt and mulc't by the Highest.

The simple (or innocently-imagining Statist) comes ever to an expected end in
his hopes; as they are not great, so not subject to so great an Eclypse: yea,
the hopes of these men attain sometimes ends above expectance: Such was
Helvius Pertinax his success, who (never aiming at the Title of Emperor) was
crowned when he was from thoughts of Titulary honor most sequestered:
Repugnansque suscipiens, using a kind; of withstanding ere he would entertain
so great a weight. And in all Histories, if we observe the diverse occurrents
which befell men in great and eminent places, we shall see ever the honestest
purposes seconded with the happiest events; and the disproportion of the end
ever sorting with the discordance of the mind: for the intention is discussed
by Him that lays the foundation of all Empires in dust at his pleasure:
breathing ever upon the sincere purposes of the good, and confounding the deep
designs (upon what pretense soever grounded) of the evil.

In Mixed Histories (as the Scope whereat they aim) is mixed part with profit,
What Subject best concords with mixed Histories.
and part with delight, to make the Discourse more complete: So should the
seriousness of the Subject attract a kind of Majesty to it; for impossible it
is, either with trimnesse of words, propriety of aptly-annexed, and
duly-applied sentences, or any other elegancy whatsoever, to make a Subject (of
it self light and frivolous) bear the portray of State: For words (if well
applied) illustrate and add a beauty, but not any way better the weight of the
matter.

There be three things which be especially required in Histories of this
nature, Three things necessarily required in Histories of the nature.
to make them perfect: first Truth, in sincerely relating, without having any
thing (as Tacitus observes) haustum ex vano, foysted in by our own invention,
to smooth the passage of our story.

Secondly, an Explanation in discovering, not only the sequels of things, but
also the causes and reasons drawing to the conclusions.

Thirdly, Judgment in distinguishing things by approving the best, and
disallowing the contrary.

For the first, Stories should be true, Histories should be true
or at least resemble truth, because by so much, they are more pleasing, by how
much they resemble truth the nearer; and so much more graceful, by how much
more probable and less doubtful. We have many Histories (even of this kind)
mixed, that comprehend in them nothing less then truth: yet by their smooth
carriage, and their proper circumstances with such aptness drained and
disposed, they have been taken for truth, and registered amongst Works of more
serious consequence.

Such were those Apologae Fabulae (whereof we have in part spoken before) which
contained in them many pitthy and grave sentences,
and worthy observation in the excellent'st Moral: these are fitly called by
Tully, Mirrors of Man's life, Patterns of Manners, and Images of truth. Their
near resemblance of truth, made the Reader more attentive, subjecting his ear
to Discourses probable, more then to things surpassing the bounds and limits of
belief; as producing unheard of miracles (mere conceptions of the brain)
phanaticke Chymeras: A Giant immured in a Rock, yet able to pierce it through;
win a whole Monarchy with his own single hands; lead a multitude of Kings
captives, and return home without a wound. Here strange Inchaunted Castles,
Ladies and Knights detained in most base servitude by an Airy Monster: there
admirable victories purchased upon incredible odds: and the rather to be
believed, because it pleases the Painter so to delineate their virtues.

These relations, Improbabilities in all Historical passages, highly condemned.
as they proceed for most part from a conceit, whose wits are long since gone
a Wool-gathering; so to any serious judgment they become so merely
ridiculous, as they are hissed at by the peruser, howsoever they seem to
receive entertainment by the vulgar. For I have formerly observed, to describe
the winning of a Fort, before the approach of a Foe; Or the razing of a City,
without discovery of any apparent Enmity, perplexeth the understanding; and
leaves the Conceit entangled. An orderly proceeding in arguments of this
nature, deserve best approvement: For the ignorancr or want of observance of
Order distracts the Conceit, and makes whatsoever is read, tedious to the
Reader.

In this, Vitruvius merits high praise. His writings are fair and formal; He
first lies Siedge; then he proceeds to Occasional Treaties: next, he lies
down the reasons either of accepting or rejecting what is propounded. Not an
improbability will he admit of, least it should impair the credit of his
History.

In those Wars betwixt old Astiages and his Grandchild Cyrus; wherein much
Civil blood was shed, before the Empire of the Medes was reduced to a Persian
State; Such principal Allies as came on in defense of Astiages, after their
defeat, became engaged to the like hazard. Astiages did not only suffer, but
those also who came to his succor. He then, that should in any weak
historical relation, aver, that the sole ground of Cyrus his incursion into
Lydia, Not Craesus treasure, but a precedent displeasure caused victorious
Cyrus to invade Lydia.
was the desire he had to seize upon Croesus treasure, rather then any
preceding displeasure, should fail much in the trust of a Relater.

For our ancient Historians describing the first occasional grounds of all
those fatal differences; report, how that Lydian King, upon a long league of
amity continued betwixt them, or some other propositions of reward for so
necessitated a curt'sie, addressed himself with a strong Army for his defense.
Yet, by the martial and experienced power of the Persians, who were expert
Slingers, and of strong tempers, able to endure any labor; Cyrus became
victorious; his Enemies, Subjects of his Triumph. Which exploit he had no
sooner achieved, then he turned his Sword upon such as had been Assistants to
the adverse part. Wherein, as Croesus had shown himself most forward, so he
was one of the first that he assaulted. Then, and never till then, and for no
other was this acted then; came the treasures of that rich Prince to be
surprised; his princely Palace to be ransacked; his sumptuous Wardroabe
disroabed: and he himself exposed to the extremest Censure of a commanding
Conqueror. Though Cyrus Clemency, upon that serious consideration of humane
inconstancy, pardoned him his life, and made him his Homager in his own
Kingdom.

The like might be instanced in those Civil Wars betwixt Caesar and Pompey.
Though the victorious Caesar had got the day, and made himself happy in the
acquisition of a doubtful victory; his ambition became not so confined; nor
his hate so attemper'd; as to stay there. Such, who had used their best
endeavors in defense of his Enemy, must feel the heavy hand of his
Sovereignty. Though some, who were nearely allied to his discomfitted Foe, or
held integrious Members of the Roman State, were received with a graceful
Countenance: Yea, and advanced to unexpected honors, upon their submission to
his innovated Government.

Great was the delight which that Universal Monarch of the World conceived in
the Brachmans: highly, likewise, was he taken with the answers of those Indian
Oracles; the strangeness whereof might beget an Improbability, were not the
Surveyor his own Relator: but discoursing of every Circumstance that might any
way enliven the Survey of those parts: He expresses in a modest Majestic
Style what he had seen or heard: not deriving these from others report, but
from his own personal knowledge.

This may appear in those discoveries which he so freely communicates in a
Letter to Aristotle his Master: where, amongst other memorable Sights, he tells
him how he had seen those two Trees consecrated to the Sun and Moon, with
their Oracular discourse to him.

The first Report of the strangeness of these, no doubt, made him retire a
little from Martial affairs; and to take breath a while, that he might more
fully observe their occult natures and effects. For at such time, as this
Spreading Commander came into those parts, the Inhabitants there related to him
the incredible power of those Trees in this manner. Thou shall see (said they)
what King soever thou be, two Trees of the Sun and Moon, speaking both the
Indian and Greek tongues; The one whereof being a Masculine Oak, is
consecrated to the Sun: The other Feminine, is dedicated to the Moon: and by
these shall thou know what good or evil soever shall befall thee. This said,
the Priest, to whom, any one that intended to enter that Sacred Cave, as they
esteemed it, were to repair, told him; That if he were free from the Use or
knowledge of Women, he might enter that holy place. And says Alexander, I
obeyed the man in all things, as was fitting to conform my self to a
religious Observation. Which done, the Priest expected when the Sun would
set. In which attendance, I carried along with me my three faithful friends,
Perdiccas, Clitus, and Philotas.

Now in this Historical Progression, you shall hear what Alexander, by way of
consultation demands of the Oracle. "I thought in my mind (says he) to inquire
whether having conquered the whole World, I might in triumph return into my
Country, to my Mother Olympia and my loving Sisters? Then suddenly in the
Indian Tongue, and in a small voice the Tree answered: Invincible in War
shall thou be, Alexander; according to thy demand, the Sole Lord of the whole
world, but return alive thou shall not into thine own Country. So have the
Destinies decreed touching thy life.

After this, Alexander descends to speak of the Tree sacred to the Moon.
Which (says he) at the very first rising of the Moon being summoned by an
horn, having received her full light, answered in the Greek tongue after this
sort. Alexander (said it) as yet thou have not approached the full end of thine
age, but the next year in the Month of May thou shall dye in Babylon. By him
shall thou be deceived, whom thou least suspected.

After all this (though little beseeming so virile a Spirit) he speaks of
those tears he shed, after these Oracular Trees had divined these things.

Then I wept (says he) and my friends who stood about me; wept with me,
without guile or subtilty, being ready to dye for my safety. But little moved
these gentle tears, those Gentile Gods: for the Priest (says he) advised us
to depart thence, because (quoth he) you offend these Holy Trees with your
weeping and howling.

These relations have we inserted, that it may appear how those things which
of themselves may otherwise seem improbable, being only reported from the
mouth of others; receive sufficient authority by so princely a Testimony; being
confirmed by his own Eyes and Ears, and committed to memory for authentic
and undoubted truth.

Whereas, others there be of a different nature; who make the whole body of
their discourse an indisposed heap of rubbish, or immateriall matter: with a
purpose to vend such vnauthoriz'd stuff to delude a weak conceit; who
usually reads what is done, but never deliberately collects how this may be
probably or possibly done.

We read of a people called Acephaloi, and these have no heads: and of this
rank are all these improbable Relaters. Who, as they are Acephalists, and
without a founder: So are they Apodes, and without a Supporter.

These are not much unlike to indiscreet Actors, who no less unseasonably then
improperly, make choice both at that time and of that place to present their
merriments, when and where Tragic passages should be personated. Or like our
too secure Architectists, who contriving how to make their house most for
strength, to bar all hope of entrance to their Foes, build on still, but
forget to make a door to give admittance to their friends.

But of these erroneous stories there be some observe no method, planting an
Arcadie in a Brittanie. as if by some super-naturall accident there were a
transplantatio^ of Regions, Absurdities in Historians of our time.
or some Earth quake in the Authors brain, whence this immane Colosse of an
irregular Discourse proceeded. Which strange representatio^s be not unlike to
your Lanskip; where upon the sea, whatsoever we see by land, seems in our
sail to go with us: Even so do these vain Historians make strange objects unto
us of places impossible, transiting whole Countries to make an impolished
strain of pastoral music (one good Bell-weather in his Pasture would make as
perfect harmo^y) sound well in a Clownes care.

To be short, my opinion positiuely is this: That Historian which can join
profit with a modest delight together in one body or frame of one united
discourse, grounding his story upon an essential truth, deserves the first and
principal place: and he who (upon a feigned discourse) can proportion it to a
likeness of truth, merits ye next. As for him that (like one of Duke
Humphreyes Knights) observes neither mean nor measure, but gorge their own
insatiate appetites with full messes of untruths (without probability) should
be dealt withal, as that wandering Italian Squire was used, for his monstrous
lying: ost in a Blanket, till his erring spirit by suffumigations, or some such
like means, we canvased out of him.

Great blemishes these be to so reputed a Profession, aiming neither at profit
nor modest delight, but imitating your Mercenary Actors, spurt out some
obscaene jest to make a profane Rogue applaud him: and sure, if the strict
doom and censure of banishment, were to be inflicted upon any kind of
learning, rather should it be pronounced against such as these then any. The
Pagans have abhorred them, and much more odious should they be in a Christian
Commonwealth, where virtue should be the scope of all our actions.

They are like some Comoedies we read now a days; The first Act whereof is in
Asia, the next in Africa, the third in Europa, the fourth in America: and if
Ptolomaeus or Marcus Paulus had found out a fifth part of the world, no
question but it had been represented on their universal Stage. Such as these
ought to have some distinct language, Vtopian, or some other grunting tongue
engrossed to themselves: For they should profit more, by being less
understood. Much they speak of valor, and many imaginary Heroes are pitching
their Pavillions; But I will take my leave of them with my French Proverb:
Beaucoup de bruit, e peu de fruict: Much bruit, but little fruit: Battles more
fierce (by report) then Alcazors: That was but Kings, their's Giants: and one
of those Giants as able to vanquish all those Kings, as for Milo to carry his
Bull on his shoulders.

For the second: There should be an explanation in discovery of the causes,
Explanation in discovery of causes.
with a direct and graduall proceeding to the sequels: As thus, in description
of a solemn Just, or Tournament, it is necessary for the Historian to show the
cause why such Solemnities were instituted. I do know many things there be in
Discourses, which may be as well employed as inserted; But in Festivals, solemn
Games, events of Duello's, or public Trials: The causes forcing should and
ought to be as well decyphered, as the ends succeeding. How should we have
known of the uniting of the Sabines with the Romans, or the occasion of their
Marrying together, but by those dissembled Feasts ordained by Romulus, to bring
his purpose to effect: The circumstances of which feast (are with a certain
concordancy) amongst most of the Roman Writers agreed on; standing (though
with too nice preciseness, I confess) upon the place, occasion, and hour of
the day, with such a lively Transcription, as if the Sabine Rape had been
committed in their time.

The like we read of the destruction and utter subversion of the Gabians, Vid.
Tract. entitled, the Gabian Overthrow.
in the time of Tarquin Superbus: The general union of Historians, about the
time, place, and occasion, so concordantly jumping, as if all those proceedings
(as well in the Stratagems by Tarquins youngest Son, A concord in
circumstances amongst Historians.
as the very Contents of that Letter writ by the Father to his Son, for the
management of this exploit) had been set down by one pen.

The like harmony of Historians in their Relations,
though writ in several ages; The harmony of Historians in their Relations;
though writ in several ages.
may be gathered from the Annals both of ancient and our more modern Authors.

Those long continued Wars betwixt the Athenians and Lacedaemonians, with what
agreement and concordancy even in every Circumstance, are they delivered? No
Land-exploit but expressed to life as it was acted; and so fully presented, as
Succeeding times received them for infallible Records.

That ten years Siege of Troy; where so many designs were attempted; so
many bloody Stratagems devised; where strength and policy equally contended:
while nothing was unassayed, whereby so deep a blemish or stain of dishonor
done to a warlike Nation might be revenged: what joint union or harmony holds
it amongst most Authors, who have enlarged themselves upon that Subject?

This might be instanced in Dares Phrygius himself; one personally employed in
that Service, and writ afterward whatsoever had happened during that heavy
fatal Siege.

Nor was it held sufficient to these, only to describe the fearful Events of
those calamitous Wars; but the Grounds and Origenes of them. How their first
hate begun; how increased; and by what Offices made implacable. Here is Paris
portrayed; how he became enamoured; how in his wanton suite entertained; how
after Helens consent to a licentious assault, her conveyance is practiced; the
voyage accommodated; and the very Ship, wherein these two lustful Lovers were
embarked, described. Where you shall find Phereclus, that curious Carpenter of
Troy, preparing that fatal Ship, wherein Helen was stolen away by Paris.

Then, you shall hear what entertainment old Priam gives to these two
youthful Sailors after their arrival. What Feasts are solemnized; what
Sumptuous Triumphs prepared; and to what a woeful Catastrophe all these goodly
Solemnities are converted. Then, what Embassies are sent (before ever War was
proclaimed) to re-demand Helen. Their peremptory answer to so just a demand.

Then, those fearful predictions of Troyes destruction. Yet behold the
inevitable Fate of a declining State!

Neither could the justness of their request; nor those Ominous forerunners
of their irreparable fall, divert them from an unexpected ruin. Unexpected
indeed, for glorying in their own strength, and inclining to the importunacy
of a Lascivious youth; they denied to restore a light commodity, to save their
State from an ensuing misery.

Yet in these, shall you find the City divided in opinion. Some held it
fitting to restore, what they in Justice did require. Others, and those of the
inconsideratest rank, side with Paris: persuading him to enjoy his stolen
Fruit: to keep her in despite of Greece: and to triumph in such a booty, as
surpassed nature in attractiue beauty.

Then, their recourse to the Oracle; the answers they received: Yet must Helen
be still detained; that lust may be revenged: and a perishing beauty with the
loss of a perishing City, unwillingly restored.

All these are with so harmonious a consent seconded, as if they had writ in
one time; or one had dictated to another, whatsoever in that Theater of sorrow
had been Acted.

The like in that Combat, or bloody Banquet, rather, of Thomyris her eldest
son, and the Persian Cyrus, with such native descriptions of every
circumstance; the River Araxis, the place of their passage, the reasons which
moved Thomyris to suffer their passage, and the very plot where their Tents
were pitched, their dainty viands left for the Scythian surfeit, in what sort
prepared, and how insatiably desired by the Scythian Army, coming rather to
feast then to fight: And then their defeat, being there vanquished, where they
were most confident of victory.

In these explanations, the Reader should not be delayed, or frustrated too
much in his hopes, by unnecessary ambages: We should not trifle out the time in
vain and impertinent repetitions, it cloies and satiates the appetite too
much: not unlike to your great feasts, reserving the choysest dainties for the
end, when the appetites of the Guests are satisfied before they come: It is a
good frugall course, and includes an Oeconomicke policy, their best dishes may
be preserved for another time. He that discovers events and sequels without
their preceedent causes, is as one that would draw a River dry, without knowing
whence the Spring is derived: applying the conclusions of things, as it pleased
the Ethnickes in ancient time, to refer them to the arbiterment of Fortune;
making ever this womanish argument: The event was so, because it was so; and it
was so, because Fate would have it so: answering Titus opinion, Potestates fato
dari. But these which thus apply the course of all conclusions to Fortune, be
as blind as Fortune: Nay, far more; for though Fortune be blind, yet she is
not invisible: But these men are not only blind in the eye of common sense,
Fortune is blind, how much more blind is he that will be t'^ne by one that
cannot see.
but invisible in the composure of their own Arguments; their Conclusions
being as blind as themselves.

In making likewise our judgment of Histories, and considerately applying it
to our present interests, we must specially regard the dispositions of the
Agents, and diligently remarke how they are affected in mind; this is the least
deceiving ground of forming opinion. By the nature of the Agent, conjecturall
events or reasons of events may be drawn: As if an ambitious man be employed
in Embassage twixt Prince and Prince, he is to be suspected that his Treaty
will be less happy, in that his illimited passions oft-times, rather aggravate
then allay causes of civil discord. Men of moderate dispositions, purchase
peace with less ado, and more successful; For Princes (ballancing their
own wrongs, to their apprehension insupportable) cannot endure braving, The
event gathered by foregoing causes.
but will rather try the extremest of Fortune, then be unworthy of themselves,
by hearing and bearing affronts with patience.

The like we have observed in the success of War; a wise and experienced
Leader, to have accomplished great matters with a handful of men; Tanti esse
exercitum quanti imperatorem. Luc. Flor. 2 lib.
and that Aphorism to be very true: Better is an Army of Hearts, with a Lion to
their Leader, then an Army of Lions, having an Heart to their Leader: And
contrariwise, the unhappy events of most flourishing Empires, the miserable
slaughters of most puissant Armies, by the unadvised government of their
Agents, or tyranny of their Regents, whose improvidence made much people
unfortunate: To see Hanniball once a Conqueror, because his hopes were not
seated on in direct means; and afterward by his own truculent disposition,
to become a prey to the conquered, makes this Assertion good.

No doubt, but the indiscretion of Commanders, becomes the utter subversion of
their designs. The indiscretion of Commanders, the utter subversion of their
designs.
Where, we shall find some more apt for command, then to be commanded; Others
fitter to be commanded, then command. There may be alleged diverse reasons for
this. Such, whose unbounded Spirits are ever taken with high exploits, many
times more boldly then wisely, will not stick to expose their persons to all
perils; so they may have the honor of the day; and beget a reverence in their
Soldiers. Such as these, as I conceive, are fitter to receive command from
another, then to be Commanders of others. For a discreet Commander (as I have
formerly observed) is not to engage his person in too desperate attempts.

That commanding Regent of the World, was sometimes highly censured for this:
when in scaling of a City, he would be so venterously bold as to mount first
the Walls; but rather to have the passage prepared, before he ascended.

Besides all this, diverse Commanders there have been, who eying their own
power, and transported with their success; from Commanders of an Army, have
struck at a Monarchy. Sylla's perpetual Dictatorship employed no less
ambition: nor Sertorius his keeping himself aloof from the State, less
aspiring. High Spirits, puffed up with the glory of their victories, are for
most part so inclined. Those ties, wherein they stand engaged to their Prince
and Country, are slighted; the baseness of ingratitude they have no mind to
think on. Ever are they expostulating with themselves, what it is to be seized
of an absolute Sovereignty, to be subject to none; to command all; to have
their Will their Law. To infranchise friends; confine Foes; To bestow a new
face on the State. These are the flourishes, which so delude them, as neither
the obedience they owe the State, nor the safety of their own persons may
prevail with them. Such as these are unhappy agents for themselves: for
howsoever they seem to gather head; and with factious Malcontents to fuel
their unprosperous strength; they ever come home rewarded according to their
deserts. Fair pretenses, as vindicating either public or private wrongs,
freeing the oppressed State from exactions, easing the injuried, and punishing
the insolent, receive at first an easy impression; but no sooner shall their
Complyes observe the indirectnesse of their ends, then they fall from them,
least by cleaving too long to them, their greatness fail them.

These shows pretended that haire-brain'd Catiline; who the better to bring
them on, whom he sought to join to him, by dividing them from the State, and
ranking them with his own; tills them on with fair promises of New Tables,
proscriptions of the rich, Salust in Conjur. Catilin.
magistracies, priest hoods, rapines, and rich booties, with all other things,
that either War or the will of a Conqueror may any way tender. Brave offers,
if they were his to give; but how soon did that Sun which so fairly seemed
to shine, set in a Cloud to his shame?

There is another Error too incident to a Commander; and that is in making
himself too familiar with his Soldier. The Jews, during Titus his abode in
Iudaea, Clementiam Imperatoris pro inertia ducebant.
in perfitting that design which his Father had begun, held that Princes
mildness to be slothfulness; his clemency, a remiss security. Whereas he,
out of his princely humanity, pitied their present misery. But this conceit
they retained of Titus, (as may be probably gathered) by reason of the
famiaritie he used to his Soldiers. Truth is, Affability begets in
Commanders a Reverence, but Flamiliaritie Contempt: The rare impression of a
compassionate disposition.
for an affable compassion leaves many times a deeper impression in a Soldiers
heart, then any other booty or benefit.

Alexander, when he had his Headpiece of water ministered unto him, would not
drink himself, but offered it to his Soldiers; which could not choose but
work a strange effect in them; when thirst (held the extremest Suffering in
Nature) could not so annoy him, but that the affection he bare to his
Soldiers wrought such compassionate Effects in him, as he neglected himself
to refresh them.

Cowardice likewise in a Commander clips his wings, Semper in praelio maximum
est periculum, qui maxim timet. Audacia pro muto habetur. Neque locus, neque
amicus quisquam teget, quem Armae non texerint. Salust. in Conjur. Cat.
that he can never mount to a Conqueror. There is ever (says sententious
Salust) most danger accompanying his fight, whose heart is most surpised with
fear. Whereas, Courage is a Countermure against all Assailants. Neither Place
nor Friend can afford a Shroud, where Arms cannot present a Shield.

Lastly (to run over all these cursorily) that pernicious baine to all humane
brood, filthy Avarice, many times no less prejudiceth the Regiment he
commands, then it ruins himself, and brings a shameful Defeat to his
Designs: This felt Manius Acilius from the hand of Mithridates; when by
receiving Bribes, he lay a dishonor on his Country, death to himself, and
to his dying Name a living Infamy.

Many Examples we have of the like, where the nature of the Agent ill
affected, crossed not only the success of hopeful designs, but buried their
Names in oblivion; of such I speak, as have been interested in the like
adventures.

Contempt of Religion, the cause of Realms subversion.
As sometimes where the Agents have been neglectfull of Religion; depending
more upon their own proper resolutions, then the power of Heaven directing all
humane affairs to their appointed ends: As we may read in that memorable
disaster of the Romans at Cannae, This even the very Heathens have observed.
where the Consul Varro, with a populous Army of experienced Soldiers, was
utterly discomfited; and that (as the Roman Historians have observed) because
of Iunoes wrath conceived against Varro, for erecting (in derision of Jupiters
Temple) a Mimick-boy to keep watch, as the solemn order was.

The like of Potitius, detracting from the honor of Hercules: The like revenge
inflicted on Virilius by Aesculapius: Quia lauream ^reteram Delphos perferendam
curasset. Valor. Max. Minutius in Octavio.
By Juno Lacinian, on Q. Fulv: By Proserpine, on Plenimius: By Jupiter, on that
sacriligious Tyrant Dionysius: On Alexander, by Ceres: But wisely prevented
with the presenting of a golden Goblet to Apollo, by the Pirate-Prince
Thymasithius.

Sometimes by the libidinous disposition of the Governor, other sometimes by
his Avarice: now and then by his Impatience, and most of all by his
recklesnesse, have the sequels of things proved less fortunate, because the
precedent motives, or instruments directing to the end, had no better
likely-hoods in them.

We wonder not at all, to see troubled water come from an uncleere Spring: Nor
at tares growing in the sluggards field; but we admire successive ends, drawn
from improbable causes. Many times there be (I confess) intrinsecall motives,
which like, as that Beauty is the best which cannot be expressed by the
Painter, so arrogates it the chiefest place (that inwardly moving cause, I
mean) because, the efficient cause of causes, more sure, more infallible then
the evidentest demonstration: And I have (for my part) ever superstitiously
feared to bring such causes in Question: Such things as be above us, be not to
be argued of us.
since such Arguments have ministered no small occasion to the prophaner wits,
both of Ancient and Modern times, to boulster their insufficient opinions: As
to argue thus: Here we see a flourishing Commonweal, supporting her self by
no other means then Justice; reaching to as high a perfection in every degree,
of as exact Government, as the blindness of the time would permit: Yet this
State (so flourishing) laid wast by a people exposed to all Impieties: Here
the end can hardly be collected by the foregoing Cause. Equity was in the
conquered, Tyranny in the Conqueror: Here is a maine discrepancy in the
beginning, and conclusion; and the active causes ordinarily moving seem
(Cardine Verso) to oppose themselves. It is true; But tell me (whosoever thou
art) that Lucian-like composest this Argument: Is he that sets, and confounds,
what Empires as best pleases him, tied to means, or secondary causes? There
is no Realm which for some abuse or other, has not deserved to loose her
glory; and herein does the Majestic power of Heaven show abundant mercy, to
some Kingdoms in chastising them before they come to the height of sin,
that there eclypse of glory, might be an increase unto them of virtue; their
ebb of Honor, an occasion of acknowledgement of their Creator.

Kingdoms brought to acknowledgement by the taste of miseries.
For even in the best Commonweals, we read, that the experiment of some
external misery or disaster, has reduced them to more ripe consideration of
themselves, and an exact search in themselves, discussing the causes of the
Gods indignation against them. Present extremities are of that force to Humane
bodies, that the present apprehension of their woe, seems in some sort to
extenuate their pride, inflameth Religion, exciteth men to undertake a labor
for the benefit of their Country (with the loss of themselves) to appease the
wrath of the Gods. This was the cause why the Romans used to have the gate of
the Temple Ianus open in War, but shut in Peace: For Necessity (as well in
these times as in Pagan times) uses to be the motive of devotion.

To enlarge which point, we may safely avouch, because it agrees with the
doctrine of the time; that Sanctuaries are never well frequented, but when
danger approaches. Sanctuaries never well frequented, but when dangers
approached.
Calm Seas beget in the Mariner quiet sleeps, stiff knees, deep healths.
The Husbandman flies to devotion in a drought; that he may receive Showers.
Again, after too much rain he prays for drought. But where is his Oblation,
after he h'as received the benefit of his petition? He feeds on the Acorne,
but never looks to that Tree from whence it falls.

In a great Plague or Mortality, what divine Lectures, devout Prayers,
religious Fasts are every where commanded, and with what seemly obedience
observed? But when the rain is past, the plague ceas't, God appeas't; we close
the Blessing with a prayer or two of Thanksgiving, and then return to our
former course of Living.

Sanctuaries are not to be so frequented; we are not only to offer up our
prayers in the time of danger, that we may be delivered; but continue our
Thanksgivings after our delivery, that we may be hereafter preserved.

Fear will supple the most insensible Atheist, and enforce him to prayer. If
Festus hear but of judgment, Fear will supple the most insensible Atheist,
and enforce him to prayer.
he will tremble; if Callgula hear but the noise of Thunder, he will shudder:
Or creep under his bed (poor imperial dust) to find a shelter.

Wherein are we better, if only fear of Gods judgments force us to prayer?

When Delinquents are had in pursuit, they fly (if opportunity be offered
them) to the Temple; not to pray, but least they should become a prey to their
pursuers: So it fares with most of us, when these Pursivants of The Great Kings
(I mean his Judgments) follow us at the heels; how gladly would we have the
Temple open to receive us; to avoid those judgments that pursue us? But that
Delinquent is never truly penitent, who takes Sanctuary only for fear of
punishment.

The Ancients had their Asyla; their places of refuge to fly to in their
distress. Sanctuaries (as they styled them) these had; while one flies to
Naxos, another to Lemnos, this to Paphos, that to Lesbos. And high impiety was
it held to hale any with violent hand from those Sacred places. Though these
Sanctuaries by the policy of aftertimes, were held fitting to be suppressed,
that the abuse of those immunities might be removed. Now to requite their Gods
for their supposed delivery; there was no Temple to which they retired, but
they offered some Present or other to that God, whereto that Temple was
dedicated. Nay, the very high-way-man, who made Pillage his vocation, Rapine
his calling, Lavernae atrium Latronum prospexit in untrum.
would not be behind with his Offering. Laverna must have his Sacrifice;
hoping, if his actions should come to the tesh, that those thankful Presents
would not be forgotten, but render him succor in the time of danger.

These may seem to outstrip us, though in divine knowledge Sphear'd below us.
These prayed and offered before they needed; We never till then when danger is
visibly imminent. Be it our constant resolve, when the doors of our material
Temples are shut, to have the doors of our Spiritual Temples open. Be it our
highest prize to offer up unto him the Sacrifice of a contrite heart, and
distreaming Eyes; To whom both before and after our delivery, is to be ascribed
all praise.

Explanation of Causes, is an elucidary or exemplifying, as it were, of the
matter whereon we entreat: Happy (says the Poet) is he, that has known, or
does know, Causes directories of events.
the principal causes of things, as well preceedent as subsequent: Events may
be known (I confess) without their causes, but so defective is that
knowledge, as the Country Shep-heards prediction is of weather: His
observances are Causeless, because Artlesse; judging of the Cloud (by usual
approbation) and making experiment his ground, without recourse had to Natural
causes: To show the destruction of Troy by Alcydes, without explaining the
perfidious dealing of Laomedon: or of Troyes second subversion, without the
rape of Hellen: or of Romes translated Aristocracy, without relation made of
those civil Wars, planting Caesar in his Monarchy; or of that ample and
potent Empire of Media translated to the Persians, without the preceedent
causes arising from the glory, and eternal renown, of Cyrus; would make a
confused History, as if the former Chaos were reduced to her first indigestion:
A diposition, yet not limited, an order yet not coacted, a means yet not
enforced: Qui enim (Si voluit) omnia sine medijs creare potuit, ea etiam sine
Medijs (Si voluit) servare potuit.
Causes are the Springs of Events.

If we should read the diverse effects of glory, the sundry moving causes of
perpetual honor, amongst the Romans, we would admire them: Some having
raised themselves to an exceeding eminent pitch of greatness, and that by as
unaccustomed means, Selfe-affiance, or Confidence of their own valor,
instanced in One Scipio: publicly proclaiming: That, Nothing was more
generous then this Confidence, more infallible then Prediction, more powerful
then celerity in dispatch, or more eminent then the dignity of the Person: Many
Kingdoms much renowned, by that means, which makes them most debased:
Self-conceit.
The like of Scipio Aemilianus, Scipio Nasica, Furius Phylus, Luc. Crassus, M.
Scaurus. And many others, whose greatest fame was purchased by that mean,
which uses to be the greatest error in humane society; Self-conceit of a
man's own deservings: Which, likewise, has been ruin to many populous and
most puissant Empires. Then to divert our eye to an opposite of Conceit, and
that is Modesty, or a silent shadowing of their own demerits: Excellent and
memorable Examples whereof may be produced out of Valerius Maximus in his 4th
Book, entreating of Modesty: Where he observes (by way of explanation) the
meriting parts of many, whose resolutions shadowed, made the luster of their
Country more eminent. These were such, who cared little for divulging their
own fame, so they might by their Actions gain their country renown.

Likewise to describe, the strange, and unexpected rising of some, Qui posteris
fuere Nobilitatis initium, virtutis exemplum: Borne of nothing; yet by some
private endowments, either of insinuating, as the ignoble wits: or of
State-observing, as those elated Natures, grieved (as it were) with the
obscurity of their Birth, in seeing others less (it may be) meritorious,
ascend the Throne of highest honors; possess the eminentest places; Honor
the best, when it is derived from our selves.
in contempt and despite of Fortune, and humbleness of Birth, crowde in the
press of the Honored, if but for enobling their Country by their peculiar
deserts. This was objected against Cicero, which he as sufficiently answered:
Satius est me meis rebus gestis flo^ere, quam majorum opinioni niti. Dependence
of Ancestors confer small or no glory to us, if our succeeding worth show not
a correspondency to our Predecessors glory. Tullus Hostilius, Tarquinius
Priscus, Tullius Servius, Perpenna, and Terentius Varro, and that mirror of
Countries love, M. Pontius Cato: Their Births ignoble, yet they made their
Cradles noble by their many deserving parts; Characters of proper Nobili^y, not
derived from their fathers greatness, but from their own eminence. Nor have
there wanted others who degenerated from their Ancestors well-deserved Lives:
Scipio Affrican, his Countries honor, leaves a Scipio the Monument of his
own dishonor: Fabius Maximus, a Son, for worthless respect, deserving the
name of Fabius Minimus: Claudius Pulcher beautified with ornaments of mind, as
well as body, makes his Country no less hopeless by his birth, Degeneration.
then renowned by himself. The like of Hortensius his Nephew, one least
equalling so many deserved parts of his thrice glorious Ancestour: The one a
professed prostitute to all licentious places, an arch-protector of Sensuality,
having no other Clients, but noted Strumpets: The other a supporter of Equity,
a resister of indirect proceedings, a mirror of continence in his time; and
one, second to none, save Cicero, in promptness of Speech, and a present
modestly-composed Eloquence. The like of Choranius a Roman Praetor, one of
confirmed gravity and approved conversation; yet left he a Son exposed to a
prodigal course, and of an unnatural disposition.

For Excellencies in this kind, as many, no question, have been by the
injury of time obscured, The praise of such, who raise a Family by their own
demerits.
whose Names deserved much honor: So some have been so highly beholden to the
Commendation of time, as they received as much honor to the full, as they
deserved. For it were a rare and unexemplary Age, to find all men's demerits
equally balanced.

Some have found fame breathing from those Actions, which never expressed worth:
whilst others, from exploits of higher worth, never received fame.

But to descend to the praise of such who raise a Family by their own
demerits: M. Cicero.
The Ground of this advancement arises generally from these three degrees: The
Gown, GOWN
the Sword, or some Mechanic Art. For the first, because that Prince of
Oratory gives it priority, we will speak of Gown: And of such, as have
raised their Houses from nothing, by excelling in Elegancy of Speech, mannaging
of judicial Causes, and steering State-affaires; being h^ld fit for their
known abilities to be employed that way.

Of this sort, amongst the Athenians we find Demosthenes, Aeschines, Isocrates
and Lysias.

Amongst the Romans, Carbo, Laetus, Emulation amongst men of note.
Scipio Affricanus, Galba, Servius, Sulpitius, Cotta, Gracchus, M. Antonius,
Crassus, Cicero, Salustius.

Amongst which there was ever some private Emulation: For Fame can endure no
Corrivals. So as, their very public pleadings were not freed from their
Chidings. Demosthenes a plausive and powerful Orator, having been twitted and
bitterly reproved by Aeschines for delivering in his Orations certain unusual
words, answered him; The fortunes of Greece depended not upon them. One taxed
another of Effeminacy; an other, his Opposite of too much Singularity; The
third, his Corrivall of Popularity. Sive praesentia^ ejus timens, seu ira
commotus.
Immoderate was the hate, unextinguishible the heat betwixt Cicero and Salust:
So as, the one could not come into the presence of the other without passion.
For as they were unequal in their descents, so were they equally addressed to
entertain all occasions of distaste.

Whence we may conclude, that Wits bearing one level, do seldom agree in the
maine building. So as, that may serve for a Maxim, what the merry Critic
sometimes spoke in jest: A Cat with a Mouse, Two Cocks together in one house,
and two Sister-inlawes together dwelling, can never live without dissension. No
more, two Eminent wits in one place; but they must show their Spirits either
upon the By or Maine. But to our former proposition; if we shall but peruse the
Lives of many of those eminent Orators, Athenian and Roman pleaders; we shall
find their beginnings obscure; their Means of rising small; and for their
outward parts weakly promising: yet, by their inward abilities they became a
glory to their Country; a renown to themselves and their surviving posterity.
This it was, that made Aristotle, that honor of Stagyra, so graceful in the
sight of Alexander: who, as he had Homer in all reverence for his heroical
Compositions; So had he this Stagyrian for Philosophical Speculation. This it
was, Some of these, though they were not Coe taneans with these Princes, in
living with them: yet were their works, after their decease, highly endeared
and honored by them.
that made Socrates so dear to Alcibiades. This it was, that made the works
of Zenophon so familiar to Affrican, Athenodorus his Annals to Octavian.
Josephus his incomparable Relations to Constantine.

But to add one attribute more to the glory of those famous Orators before
expressed: their strength and deserving height of Spirit merited no less
approvement; when, in their Opposition to the greatest Enemies of State, they
stood constant for the liberty of their Country, and suppressing all such
(were they never so powerful) as fished in troubled Waters, or inclined to
mutiny. So ready were their Tongues to defend by pleading; So stout were their
Spirits to repress Commotion: that as they delivered their minds by the one,
So they were resolved to Sacrifice their Lives, to manifest to the World that
they were not defective in the other. An Exemplary Lesson for all Ambi-dexters.
In these times pleaded Merit in the Court of Justice. Corruption was a
stranger to the hand or heart of a Counselor. He would not be seen in a
Cause that would not bear weight; Nor interesse himself in ought that might
not conduce to the benefit of the State. Their just designs aimed neither at
public fame, nor private safety; directing the whole bent of their Councels
to the improvement and security of their Country.

In that Epitome of L. Florus collected from Titus Livius, we shall read what
native Enmity was ever conceived against such as corrupted justice, by people
of all qualities: and this we shall find exemplifi'd in an Act of a Tragical
nature.

Bloody (says the Epitomizer of that noble History) was the slaughter which
was made by the Germans upon their revolt from the Roman Empire, through the
shady Woods and plashy marshes; nothing more intolerable then the insultings
of the Barbarous, specially against the pleaders at the Bar, plucking out the
eyes of some, and lopping off the hands of other some; One had his mouth
stitcht up, after his tongue was first cut out, L Florus, l 4. C. Xij.
which the Savage Actor grasping in his hand, said to it: Thou viper, at last
give over hissing. So did M. Antonies wife use Tullies tongue after his death,
for pleading so boldly, and inveying so freely against her Husband in his life.

But these cruelties may be properly referred to the Savage disposition of an
insulting people: Which, having got an usurped Authority into their own hand,
run in a licentious liberty, to commit all Barbarism: punishing the
Offender, before they ever examined the quality of his offense.

But to discourse of the Civil government of the Romans, during their
Democracy, as they were then Commanders of all neighboring Nations: So they
delighted in nothing more then advancing such, who employed their tongues or
penns in defense of the public liberty: bestowing not only Titles on them,
well suting their demerits; but preferments too, to recompense their Service.
This might be instanced in the Eminentst families that flourished amongst them
in those times. For so thankful was that victorious State to deserving men, as
they held it not sufficient to bestow on them graceful trophies and triumphs
to honor them, living: but to erect Monuments in their Statuaries and
Pulvinars, to their memory, dying.

The like honor conferred the Athenians upon their Consuls, Orators and
Philosophers.

So the Ephori among the Spartans (being the same that the Tribunes were among
the Romans) were elected not in respect of their descent but of their desert:
which made a flourishing State; seeing, there was none, were he never so
ignoble by birth, but he received grace, if his inward abilities deserved such
respect.

Nor were these means of advancement only conferred on the Gown; SWORD.
The Martiallist had his place as well as the Mercurist. Were he never so
mean a Plebeian, if he deserved honor; he was sure to have it. If he were
the first that mounted the Wall, he had a Coronet reserved for him. Were he the
first that presented himself in the Siege; or in a single Combat disarmed, and
so surprised any Enemy; or entered first the Enemies Tent; or in any Sea Fight
entered his Ship; he was sure to receive his Guerdon. And if the honor of his
Actions deserved any such eminent reward, he was to come home in Triumph, for
the reputation he had done unto his Country. Where it was usual for those
Persons, who were most eminent in the eye of the State to meet him in the way,
and in all solemn and triumphant manner to conduct him to the City, with an
ample relation of his fame, to beget a glorious envy or emulation in his
postert y.

Many of meanest rank, by the nobleness of their Spirits attained this
honor. The State made no inquiry after their descents. Those they held
worthiest of honor, who acquired it by Learning or Valor.

Memorable is the resolution of those Mysian Captains, who stepping out before
the Roman Army, prayed silence, and said; Who are ye? Answer was made; We
are Lords of the World. They r^plide, Ye may well say so, if you Conquer us.
What rewards were bestowed on these for their approved Valor, we read not in
the History; but no doubt such deserving Spirits could not in a Civil State
live ungratifi'de, nor dye unrecorded.

Hence it was, that Hiero that stout Syracusan, would have dyed in the ashes of
his Country: so well deserved he of it; it so well of him. Death was accounted
a light suffering, to improve her her honor, from whom they had their being.
They conceited of what weak Supporters, poor man stood; his breath, how soon
vading; his glory, how soon declining: The whole Fabric of his Fortunes, how
soon shaking and shrinking. But Fame gained by glorious actions, they found to
be of more perpetuity. Nor could they esteem any action more truly
deserving, than that which requited her love, from whom themselves and
predecessors had received life. Yea, they considered what advancement they had
received from an obscure Family; how should they then do less than embarke
themselves for all extremes, to requite the love of so endeared a Country?

Lastly, many Families have raised their beginnings from Mechanic MECHANICS.
Arts, Sciences, and Mysteries. This may be quickly gathered by the names of
some Romans as well as other Nations; who retain to this day their appellations
from their former Manual professions. As the Family of the Pictors, from
Painters; of the Pistors, from Bakers; of the Figuli, from Potters: with many
others. And these in continuance of time, came to be eminent Families; drowning
their first beginnings in the depth of their greatness.

Yet in all those Liberal, with these Mechanical Sciences; as there were
thriving dispositions to advance Families forth of dust; So there were others,
who even to dust reduced their advanced Families. Some apt to improve
themselves forth of nothing; others no less ready to bring their Fathers
improvements to nothing.

In the inscriptions of their Natures we include the causes of their ends;
virtue being (as we said before) ever seconded with event answerable to her
intent, either in the beginning, middle, or end. And certainly, whosoever
should but read the desolations of the mightiest Empires, or their rising,
shall see some appearance of causes proceeding from their government, occasions
of their glory, or ruin. Nor can we (without cause) admire the erection and
establishing of the Turkish Empire, The wonderful establishing of the Turkish
Empire.
her many dilated Provinces, extended Confines; and almost Sovereign command
in the Eastern parts. Let us but consider their politic government,
subjecting all Laws of Conscience, or Religion, to the furthering of their
designs, planting their seat (maugre the fury of all opponents) in those
floury and spacious territories, where once the sanctified feet of the sacred
Apostles used to tread. Yet in their policies (because not proportionate to
virtue) shall they be subverted. They have erected themselves to an exceeding
height, (with the Giants menacing the fabric of heaven;) but their fall will
be more miserable, by how much they be of miseries more incapable. For that
Kingdom which is not established in peace, Arguments of the approaching
Subversion of the Turkish State.
shall be ruined by war; and where virtue had not her predominance, there
shall the illimited rage of vice take her residence: and where she is an
inhabitant, there is imminent desolation menaced. To make explanation of causes
in this, were needless, because the Seat of such a government is the occasion
of her fall; For ruin and extirpation have ever followed Impious Governors at
the heels. Yet in making use of this especial Branch of History: Explanation
of the discovery of causes, I will limit and restrain it to an assertaine
bound. We must not search causes above their Natures; there be many hidden and
concealed reasons, which to enquire after were unlawful; Concealed reasons not
to be searched.
much less to wade into the secret conventions of that sacred Power, from whom
all visible and apparent causes borrow their light.

What we may gather by authentic relation, or probable imagination, may
without prejudice, or error, be produced. As for supernatural causes, the
more we sound them, the more we sound into the shallowness of our own
judgments; never further from apprehending them, than when we seem to
apprehend them.

This inscrutable depth He well observed, We are not to pay too curiously into
the sealed Cabinet of Gods Counsel.
who being demanded what God was, required some time to resolve that question.
And still the longer he thought of it, the farther he was from it. So as, in
the end he assoiled this demand with a new question. Friend, you have imposed
me a task, and I have studied how to resolve it: And my desire is to injoyne
you an other, I pray you assoile it. Apud Poetas Deorum Pharetrae Operculum
habuere, humanae non item. G. H. in Orat.
What is it, said he? how long would it be ere you should draine the Ocean dry
with a Sive? Why? never, (said he.) Nor shall I ever (replied he) return an
answer to your question. I demanded of you some time, but an Eternity of time
will never resolve it: being farther of at this time, then when I first
required time.

Our usefullst and best knowledge in these Divine Secrecies, consists in the
acknowledgment of our own weakness. That Sacred-Secret Consistory is not to
be searched (because sealed) with too much curiosity.
We have many of our Artists something too familiar with these privacies:
prying too curiously into the Sealed Cabinet of Gods Council. Sublunary things
are too low Objects for their knowledge. They must shine in an higher Sphere.

These can positively speak (as if inspired with some extraordinary
illumination) when the World shall be dissolved. Nor ground they their
assertions on conjectures (if you may believe them) all is apparent to them, as
if they were presented in a perspective glass.

Geometricians and Astrologers affirm, as those who have measured Hell, Earth,
and Heaven with their Dimensions, Proportions, Poizes, and Astrolabes; that
Hell contains in Compass seven thousand, eight hundred and sixty five
thousand Miles: In depth or Latitude, two thousand, five hundred and five
Miles: In distance from us, three thousand, six hundred and fifty eight miles.
But the World, which we inhabit, that is, the whole Earth, they say it
contains in greatness thirty thousand, and a thousand five hundred Miles: and
in Latitude or profundity, that is, from the Antipodes unto us, ten thousand
and twenty two Miles. Then, that the Empyrean Heaven, which is the place of the
Blessed, they say it contains in compass (o immensity!) ten thousand, three
hundred and fourteen Millions, eighty five thousand, and six hundred ten
miles: in depth or latitude, three thousand six hundred Millions of Miles. And
betwixt us and this Heaven, in distance one thousand six hundred ninty
Millions, nine hundred twenty five thousand, and five hundred Miles.

But this may be supposed far above the compass of their Iacobs-staffe Their
eyes, I conceive, Non est fam^liaritus h^minibus cum Coe^^s. Plin.
to be too weak to pierce into the Mansions of Heaven

Lower Dimensions are fitter for the strait circumference of their
understanding.

The way to measure Heaven, is to decline from Earth; and to elevate our
thoughts to that Caelestiall Sphere, where we may gloriously shine and
Eternally rest.

He is the best Astrologer, who converseth more with Heaven in Spiritual
affections, then isntrumental dimensions: who becomes more familiar with
Heaven, by his elevation of piercing thoughts, then prying eyes. This that
learned Euclid well observed, when being asked a saucy question touching the
Divine Presence, by too curious or inquisitive a Questionist, modestly
answered: For other things I know but little, thus much I know, that the Gods
hate those that are curious.

Aug.
This that Divine Father (the glory of the Eastern Church) with much spiritual
zeal expressed, when being on a time asked; What God did before he made the
world, answered him home: "He was preparing Hell for such as He, who too
curiously pried into his Secrets.

The only way to rectify this Error, is for man to descend into himself. An
excellent receipt for all such as labor of too much singularity.
For then upon acknowledgement of his own vileness, he will let fall his
Train: humble himself in the consideration of his own wants: and close his
resolves with this conclusion: Thus much I know, that I know nothing: how then
should I dare to aspire with too curious an eye, to look into his Secrets, who
made all things of nothing?

Now to the third, that is, judgment in distinguishing things, by approving
the best, and disallowing the contrary.

Dijudication of Histories, Dijudication of Histories.
or judgment in distinguishing the approvedest, proceeds from a mature
understanding.

In this Historical Scale we must banish all lacivious and petulant wits,
conversant about froathy and licentious obscenities. The Works of an Historian
should be Monuments of Antiquity, true Heralds of Acts; either prosperously, or
insuccessively achieved: and not foments to lust, inducements to sensuality.
Two sorts there be which eclypse an Historians glory: Two sorts of Discourses
eclipsing the glory of an Historian. 1. Sensuality.
from the one we reap the harvest of shame, where characters of Myrrah, and
Venus (the wantons votaries) are deblazoned in their colors: yet in their
descriptions more pernicious to easily-inclined youth, than ever Archilochus
was to the Spartan dames. Poor Albion has labored too long of this
impostume; such Historians must either be exiled, or the Commonwealth must of
necessity be depraved. Vice has too many supporters, without the furtherance
of Authors. From the other, 2. Impertinency.
there redounds no other benefi^, than impertinent inquisitions of
strangely-sought out Antiquities; so precise in description, so curious in
foundation, and so selfe-opinionate of their own writings, as they oft-times
do only (Haerere in verbis) omitting the Substance to set out (with Phydias)
the shadow: search of a fruitless Antiquity, occasioning a contempt in the
body of the History. As in the foundation of a City, neglecting the
materiallest parts of the discourse; as upon what occasion the City was rather
erected there, than in another place; by what means it was augmented, how
continued; and other necessary circumstances omitted; they insist upon affairs
of less consequence; finding out where the first stone was laid, when the
foundation of such a City was dug. This causes oftentimes great Volumes,
with small benefit to the Reader; and indeed rather implies an
affecting-opinion in the Author, of pleasing himself, than others.

Ancient Records are necessarily inserted in Histories; but such are to be
supported by truth, including a necessary relation to the Subject whereof he
entreats. Otherwise, such Antiquities (as for selfe-pleasing) are produced,
express nothing. Prater plebeium and inutilem quendam opinionis succum. These
be rather opinionists than Historians.

These two kinds (like Ianus face) stand contrary-waies: the one sort (to wit
the first) are Charons best Factors, they traffic for a Ladies bonvoyage to
hell; there is not a line in all their writings, that tastes of modesty, or
relish of virtue: If Pluto and his Angels had not one she-Prophet, nor
State-moppet within all his dominions, to make his Empire Noble: yet these
Brothell-Authors (for better I cannot name them) would by their Lime-twigges,
furnish his (Malasperanza) with a full sail. My Lady here sits and reads
wonders at the ingenuity of the man, (a pregnant youth doubtless,) and will
make her pregnant too, if she have any moving faculty in her; his best
character is the Schoolmasters of folly, the introducer of sensual liberty,
extinguisher of pure love, experienced instructor to lust, harbourer of
illimited desires; and consequently harbenger to the Devil. As the Martin will
not build, but in fair houses, so this man will not live, but in the ruins of
honor: he is too conversant in the Court, too familiar in the City, and
sometimes too willingly entertained in the Country. His Pen, as it is
mercinary, so his labors pernicious; his state labors of penury (and he would
raise it) his soul of a Lethargy, but seeks not to redeem it. To be brief
(for such a Subject is not worthy dilating on;) As Augustus banished Naso to
Naxos, and his depraved works to the darkest corner of his study: so should
these petulant Wits be expulsed every well-governed, Commonweal, and their
prostitute Labors sustain Eupolis censure.

How highly other States have suffered in giving too much liberty to these
unseasoned wits, Light and wanton works are to be exiled in every Civil State.
might be amply enlarged, if our present discourse required it. No doubt but
Rome, even in her highest glory, when nothing but Success breathed on her
attempts abroad, and private affairs at home: Then, and never more than at
that time, were light and wanton works, which a civil Estate should have
proscribed, highly honored, the Authors of those Motives to effeminacy
advanced; whereas, if their Censors had duly intended their charge, they would
have held them fitting to have been exiled, their works to fire committed. So
might that corruption of manners, which proceeds oftimes from such vicious
Pamphletters, have been prevented: and Morality better observed.

But why should we look so far back, when we labor of the like malady at
home? what high Patrons have present ages found for lightest Labors? where
such as corrupted youth, received more approvement, then those who corrected
the looseness of affections.

It was a good Custom, when such Authors as published any Works, had them not
only censoriously perused and scanned; but if it appeared, that they contained
in them more occasions of prejudice to the State then benefit; those Works
were not only to be suppressed, but the Composers of them duly censured.

Their manner of proceeding was thus: Such passages as were useful, or any way
beneficial, were in papers piece-meale, laid upon one pile: Those which were
noxious or malignant, bestowed on an other pile: and both these put in two
Scales: where if those of the right handpile (which ever conduced to the
improvement of the State) weighed down those papers which were on the
left hand pile, their Labors were permitted to pass, and their Authors,
according to the quality of that Subject, whereof they wrote, amply rewarded:
If otherwise, their Works were suppressed, and their Authors chastised. In
which Scrutine, no question, but many Authors had Batillus fate; they received
more fillups then Crowns; more censures then rewards.

The opinion of a serious and discreet judgment ever closes in this:
Learning never but then deserves the Laurel, when it is virtuously fruitful.
Learning never but then deserves the Laurel, when it is virtuously fruitful.
A light Dress, be it never so neatly suited, carries ever lightness with it.
And the more it takes a deluded eye, though it please it self, the more it
detracts from it self. The like we may say of these Venders, or bold
adventurers of loose Labors. Be they never so trimly decked, nor artfully
polished; Lais will be Lais still.
The trimming will not alter the property of the stuff. Nor can lightness,
be it never so smoothly carried; neatly varnished; nor cunningly palliated;
keep her Vizard still on. There will be some piercing judgment or other to
bring to discovery a shrouded error. Nor deserve those Works only reproof,
who treat of light love; (though they be dangerous Familiars to haunt Ladies)
but such who are tuned to an higher key, and either unprofitably, or which is
worse, profanely abuse their captived Hearers. Amongst these, may be numbered
our Chymick Professors: Chymick Opinionists.
who hold it not sufficient (by strange Elixirs) to reduce their own fortunes
to nothing; unless they with their miserable conclusions, perplexe their
simple admirers. Where, if a cleare-discerning judgment should take a more
exact view of their ungrounded reasons, they would soon conclude, that those
arguments which they offer, not unlike their adulterate Metals, are soulder'd
with Amalga,
and have more Moon than Sun in them. These have got a trick to slight all
miracles of Divine Writ: holding with Albumazar, that Moses his leading the
Children of Israel over the Red Sea, was no more but observing the influence of
the Stars, and waining season of the Moon that withdraws the Tides.

These are Subjects so incapable of privilege, as they deserve the highest
censure. I spare to speak of our Statizing Pamphletters, who shadowingly (to
free themselves from State-scandall) deblazon some eminent Families by their
Arms, Coat, or Fields: for which, some both Ancient and Modern Historians
have been highly taxed. As likewise of such, who under borrowed names have
struck at high Personages: which might be aptly compared to cowardly Curres,
who use to bite Passengers by the heels, whom they dare not look upon in the
face.

State Stigmatists.
As such who delight to ungorge their passionate spleen upon Recreations of
indifferency, for no other cause, but because they are countenanced by Majesty.
The last, being not the least, Factious Questionists. Non habet charitatem, qui
non amat unitatem.
I account such, who spend much precious Oil to enwreath and enwarpe the time
in their Fopperies. These are Controversiall Men, who rather than they will
suffer the Church to be at Peace; will study new doubts to disturb her quiet.
Aug.
These will rather stir than stay quarrels: for, howsoever they seem to
pretend Unity; their affection tends to dissension: being of the slimy nature
of such Fishes, as cannot live but in muddy and troubled waters.

That word Nisi in this sentence, nisi manducaveritis carnem, set all the
Counsel of Basil in an uprore. That word Donec, as Joseph non agnovit Vxorem
suam Donec, caused the Antidicomaritans and Elusians to deny the perpetual
Virginity of the Virgin Mary.

Thus quicke-fiery wits, carried away with the spirit of Contradiction,
preferring Singularity before Conscience, Error before Truth, so they may
find Shadows to follow them, will find cumbustible matter enough to the
havocke both of Church and Commonweal: Not only our Humane but
Ecclesiastical Histories are stored with various instances of this kind. The
Scope we aim at, is this: that such Works, whether they be Historical,
Moral or Divine, are only, upon Censure to be approved, by which the State
may be usefully improved: all others to be rejected, because they are either by
Scurrilous or Factious Braine-wormes hatched.

For the other, as none yield or afford more benefit to their Country, than
laborious and judicious Antiquaries: so trifling and opinionately-conceited
Historians may benefit themselves, but hardly can communicate the best of their
knowledge unto others. Opinion is a maine Opponent to Judgment: the one guided
(or rather drawn) by a precipitate will, the other disposed by the directing
eye of Reason. Opinion ( Lesbian-like) frames their Line by their work, and
not their work by their line: but Judgment has ever ( Cleanthes-like) a Table
equally mixed or furnished with services of Arete and Pomona, Vid. Hesiod. in
Noct. and Dic.
Virtue and Pleasure: the one to profit, the other to delight: Which
equally-mixed Judgment should be especially conversant in Censurers of
Histories; they must not do, as it is reported of Valerius Maximus, inhibite
many things in the Evening, which he would approve of in the Morning, and
command that to be enacted one hour, which he would be ashamed to confirm the
next hour. A settled and wel-seasoned judgment will with Circumspection, not so
much censure a modest digression in a History, as the use which may be made of
that digression; nor tax any thing in a faithful Historian, though he shadow
at the corruptions of the Age with bitterness: for oily and temporizing
tongues, are nourishers of these vicious and irregular times; Sicut Best ^e in
Eremo, ita Gentiles in mundo. Greg. in Moral. 29 Cap. 18.
where, as Beasts in the Desert, so men live in the World: nor be Censurers to
tax such things for impossibilities, because they have not heard of the like;
nor such Relations as false, which have not occurred to their readings. For how
should we give credit to those incredible attempts of former times, where
Victories were achieved with less ado, than May-games in these times? To see
Anthaeus renewing his strength, and doubling his force by falling: those
magnanimous Romans erecting their spirits most when they were nearest
declining. I have ever observed these times, as they second the first in
gradation, so they stand inferior to the first in exploits and managements of
resolution. Censures should be balances equally and evenly disposed; neither
inclining to partial affectation of person or state; but ready to give
approbation where the verity of Discourse, and sincerity of the Author gives
his Pen free scope to curb Error, and attribute to Virtue her merited Titles.
Alas, that Censurers should be either so engaged to the servile command of
popular glory, or tied to great men's sleeves, that the Historians Labors must
be razed, which Truth would have raised! Virtue has in her self a sovereign
end, to which all Liberal Arts and Sciences (in themselves truly noble, and
meriting honor) have their aim and recourse.

This occasions Learning to be neglected, and the exact scrutinie of ancient
Records (than the which nothing more beneficial) to be suppressed, or at
least, not a little darkened: when a Rhadamanth, or Critic Censurer must have
the corrections of our industrious Labors, and judicious Volumes: which (to
feed his own indigested humor) must be subject to many frivolous
interlacings. Comes Victoriae, fomes injuriae; famula famae, fama familiae.
But Patience (which is Comes sapientiae, non famula concupiscentiae) must be
the poor Historians supporter, making use oftimes abuse, and applying this
salve to his misery, which the Poet inferred, as cause of Romes subversion and
calamity: Virg. in Aene ad.
Prima peregrinos obscaena pecunia mores intulit --

That Critic Menippus, who was ever so definite in his own opinion, as the
whole course of his discourse relished nothing better then opposition. And to
affront the Time wherein he lived, with more boldness, scorning to comply
either with Time or Person for his own advantage, wished, like an indiscreet
Malecontent, that his Pen were a Needle, and his Paper a Nettle; yea, and his
Ink Aconitum, that he might throw more poison on the face of immerited
honor: and consequently, leave to posterity surviving stamps of his invective
nature: would sometimes use, amongst other subjects of his discontent, to take
occasion to fall upon a free reproof of rigid Censurers: whose judgment (as
his mis-guided opinion suggested) only consisted in razing Labors, and
disheartning Authors: while their innocentst lines were often mis-construed,
their sense corrupted. Menippus his reproof of rigid Censurers; whose
judgment only consists in razing Labors, and disheartening Authors: while
their innoce^tst Lines are often misconstrued; their sense corrupted


But this waspish Author by using his too much freedom of censure to his
Censurer, who had authority to peruse and suppress, where he found cause,
perceiving himself traduced, deservingly restrained what else might have been
published: with silencing only, chastising his Error, to beget in him a more
temperate censure. Truth is, it were prepostrous for an Author to assume to
himself so much boldness, as to take upon him the place of a Moderator to his
Censurer. The assumption of less liberty will suite better with his Discretion
and Modesty: and purchase him a demerited esteem with such grave and
censorious Authority: whose place is so much more to be honored, in regard
they are deputed by the State as Surveyers and Discussers of our Labors:
Perusing with a judicious eye, and correcting with a discreet Pen; to the
end, no exception might be taken by the State, no prejudice redound to the
Author, no corruption of manners to the Reader, nor opinion of neglect to the
Censor.

Which course, were it not duly and exactly observed, what inconvenience might
probably follow, there is none of a clear and equal judgment but may easily
perceive. For if freedom were given to wanton and luxurious Wits to write
what they would, Aretines Tables would receive from every light eye more
admiration for true attractive beauty, than the most Serious Piece that ever
was writ either in Philosophy, Oecononicall policy, or History. No; we should
have our Stationers stalls covered with Libells: where the most integrious
Spirit might become no less subject to a Calumnious Pen, than He, whose
rising growth has expressed it self in nothing more from his infancy, than in
the increase of vice, and practice of villainy.

It is the Authority then of a Censurer, that many times deterres a wandering
Pen from his freedom of error. So as, by being regulated by such License,
he becomes less licentious in the course and current of his Writing.

Nay, there is one thing more, which I shall only glance at, purposely to
induce the ingenuous Author, as he values the estimate of his own honor, to
submit himself to the candid censure of his Licencer. And it is this; no
doubt, but the too opinionate conceit of every Author complies with the
positive judgment of the Orator: " Writers do ever doat most of their own.
How needful then is it, for them to have more indifferent eyes than their
own, lest they delude themselves most, by being too affectionately taken with
their own? The Bear is as much enamoured of her Cubbe, though of all others,
the roughest; as the Bever is of his, being of all others, the smoothest. And
thus much in the vindication of the honor of a just Censor. And how an
impartial eye may save the Author from much dishonor. Yet to speak a word or
two, so it trench not too much upon their power, I hold it not amiss. The
benefit may redound no doubt, being received as it is intended, both to the
Writer and Censurer.

Many (which I have formerly touched and taxed) like some of our German
Authors, set forth huge Colosian Bulkes, fadomelesse volumes (and if
fatherless too, more credit to their fathers) but they have Bodies without
Spirits, Videntur Libri donec inspexeris. They bear the Cover and Semblance of
Books on them, till you look in them. Then, and never till then, they show
what metal they are made of. Lean Labors, from fat Authors.

It is commonly said, that Law, Logic and the Switzers may be hired to fight
for any one. Whatsoever they may be, apparent it is, by their numerous
fruitless Editions, that these will enter lists with any Antagonist, upon the
least occasion. No Subject but must have their pains and Pens bestowed on
it. Huge intricate Commentaries, to make the Text more difficult. With some of
these I have encountered, and for ought I could perceive by the Genuine Sense
of their interpretation, they were so far from the understanding of the
Author they wrote on, as they might be sent to school again, to learn to
conster him, before they commented on him.

The like exuberance is many times shown by many of these, in their lighter
composures: wherein, for most part, they offend least. For weak wits bestowed
on weighty Subjects, err most. I have heard of a trifling Pamphletter of this
kind, who after such time, as he had spent much waste Paper inventing some
weak vapors of his own; wherein he was ever no less constant in the choice
of his Patron to whom he Dedicated them, than he was in compiling those corky
Subjects which he addressed to him: presenting one day another light toy; his
Patron having perused the Title, and diverse passages in it, requited his
Dedication with this witty Jeere: Truly friend, quoth he, you have writ many
foolish toys in your time, but of all that ere you yet writ, this passes them
all. The poor Author highly taken with this commendation, not without great
joy, reported the worthy entertainment he received from his Patron: and how
highly to his honor, he had commended his Labor.

Now to our Censurer; as his place inferres a priority of judgment, so I would
have him to distinguish of the utility of Labors. These, who spend time, oil
and paper to purchase them the Title of Authors: let them be privately reproved,
in daring to present such poor stuff before the face of a public State. The
common English Proverb is; " Better it is to sit idle, than work idle. This
may be properly applied to them. Their fruitless expense of Time and Paper
makes them far more useless to the State, than if they wholly retired
themselves from Labor. Truth is, these deserve no censure; they are placed in
too low a Siege. A mild reprofe will better beseem them; telling them, how by
all likelihood, if any such should be suffered to go abroad, or receive
privilege by authority, the next time that either he or any of his family
should go to the Grocer for their spicery, little doubt but some of his shaken
leaves would be returned him, with sweeter contents than ever he bestowed on
them.

Whereas SUCH, whose early and late Studies have highly improved their
knowledge, and whose discretion (a small grain whereof would be very useful
to many of our Scholars) has sufficiently informed them what is fit or
accommodate for the time; be the Subjects they treat of History, Antiquity, or
other Diviner Elements: these, I say, well deserve the encouragement of a
judicious Censor. For to use the words of our Modern Democritus: I think all
the Anticyrae will not restore them to their Wits, if these men now, that have
Zenodotus Heart, Crates Liver, Epictetus Lantern, be so sottish, and have no
more brains than so many Beetles, what shall we think of the Commonalty? what
of the rest? you may give that Censure of them in general, which Sr. Thomas
Moore once did of Germanus Brexius Poems in particular: -- Vehuntur
In rate stultitiae, Sylvam habitant Furiae.


If Learning and Discretion be not sufficient to make up an Author; what may
we expect from him that has neither?

Some of our Censurers have heretofore been not unlike to some of our active
Lawyers; who in perusing of their Clients pleadings, usually razed out what was
most pertinent: but afterward upon a more settled judgment, wrote STET in the
Margent, to all that which they had formerly razed.

Multi dum castigant, castrant; dum mutant, mutilant. Many, too many, while
they seem to correct, they distract; while they alter, they torture.

But approved Censors are of another nature (of which we were never better
furnished in a competent number:) for these are of that true touch, as neither
gain may corrupt them, nor the Authors person work upon them, but the worth
of the work: this only has power to procure a privilege from them.

But let me stay a little, that I may make an end the sooner; ere I proceed to
the true distinguisher of Histories, I must caution two sorts of Men, which (in
their Reading) pervert the use and scope of History, Two sorts of sinister
Readers of History. 1. Curious.
by a malevolent disposition, either bred in them by nature, or engendered by
custom, a second nature: the one foolishly precise, whose behavior (as one
observes) are like a verse, wherein every syllable is measured; or like your
Spaniards aspect, who will not smile beyond a point, for fear to unstarch his
look.

These cannot taste any thing well, that is not absolute; yet for their
judgment a Venetian Ass may outstrip them: Superbire est supra regulam ire.
He is (unmeasurably proud) wise in his own conceit, has an Orb in his
brain, An Opinionate Reader, an incompetible Censor of an others Labor.
which ever turning round, makes his judgment braine-sicke.

The other, far more intolerable, because more troubled with the rising of
Spleen: he detracteth from the best, and finds Scruples in infallible truths;
2. Calumnious.
his own judgment, as it is defective, so it envies others, maturer in the
height of understanding, and more exact in the ancient Surveies of Truth. But
as Fortitude of body derives her Essence from the imbecility of the Mind, and
the ability of the Mind from the debility of the body: So the Authors glory is
oft-times revived, and augmented by the sting of Detraction, as the Detractors
infamy by the Authors glory: Virtue alone is crowned, Virtue in her self, Haec
est quae f^cit hominem Deum, etc. Seneca.
is of all possessed: She it is alone by which Man is Eternized. This is She
that steeres the poor Historians Bark against all oppositions. In this
Harbor therefore may I repose, leaving the depraved Reader to the
distemprature of his own humor, and betaking my self to my propounded Task.

We must walk in a more modest path for judgment in the relation of every act
that is done; Deliberation needful in Histories of maine consequence.
we ought to use a kind of deliberation, consulting with our own intimate
understandings, and ask them whether such an Act is worthy memory, or no: for
many things we see and read, which Discretion would rather have omitted, than
to Writing committed; we have occasion sometimes to unrip the tyrannick lives
of Princes, and their illimited affections, of dissolute governments, and to
what peculiar vices most engaged; yet in the summary rehearsal of these vice,
we do oft-times (as an excellent Historian has well observed) Instruere
malos, teach men to be evil, instructing them in the exercise of those
impieties, with which before they were scarce acquainted.

Vice is of that spreading and propagating nature, Discovery of Vices abroad,
many times instruct us in the very same at home.
as no infection can more dangerously or fatally rage in any populous City,
than her contagion in the flourishing City of the Soul. And so proclive is our
Nature to the worst; as we receive it with far more easy impression, than
that which relisheth of the best.

That Italian Lover, who found his Mistress so mutable, could in the extremity
of his passion (as what passion more violent or more permanent) cry out: Our
Italian Dames had never been acquainted with such disdain, nor entertained
their Servants with such contempt, nor rejected them with such Selfe-content,
had they not been instructed by inconstant Cassandra to love in jest and
loath in earnest.

Which implied thus much: That nothing could more prejudice either public or
private Estates, then to be fraughted with Foreign vices.

Many men of maturest experience, have and do give way to sensual obedi nce.
Many States are best secured by intelligence; but by the knowledge of others
Vices, few or none. Youth is a dangerous taking thing, and apt to be nibling at
any bait that is thrown out: yea, and many of maturest judgments, whose long
experience in the World, might have sufficiently informed them, that the hopes
of Earth are failing; the Honors of Earth fading; all the faire-flourishing
promises of this empty World deceiving: Yet, hearing such an Eminent Statist in
an other Country advanced, they cannot so moderate their affections, but they
must expostulate with their own overweening Spirits; and on the silent night,
when more composed minds can enjoy their freedom of rest; and allay the
labors of a preceding day with the untroubled sleeps of a succeeding night;
These feel an Aetna within them; others Triumphs become their Tortures; others
Honors their Furies.


Pompey, that loyal but unfortunate Roman, being combred with his honor, and
wearied with too glorious a Servitude, exclaimed to see Sylla's cruelty, being
ignorant after what sort to behave himself in the dignity he had; he cries
out amain, forth of the consideration he had to an usurped Tyranny, with a
serious reflexe had to humane misery: O peril and danger never like to have
end!

But unconfined spirits, whose thoughts are solely fixed on aerie structures;
will not suffer their aspirings to be so bounded: nor the voluptuous his
sensual affections to be so couped: nor the poor Groundling to have his
Earthy-tasting appetite so sated. These, as they peruse the Map of the World;
they cull out what may please them best; though the issue afflict them most. As
to instance in each of these; The high-minded Man loves to inform himself in
the Progress of such Men's actions; I hold him for stupid, who for fear of
Death, dies all his life-long: And him for wicked, who lives without fear of
it, as if there were none at all.
whose aims have been no lower then Empires. They conceive their supportance
to be as great; their Means as direct; their ways as smooth. Flattering and
deceiving hopes lull them a sleep; they will not so much as suffer their
thoughts to converse with Fear, or labor prevention of a fall, before their
practice fail. Then, and never till then, they exercise the true knowledge of
Man. Then they lament, what they cannot recall; so precipitate is that cliffy
tracke, where unbounded height walks.

Now observe a little, whence the Occasion springs, which with winged speed
brings on these inevitable miseries! I confess, though many dispositions be
naturally inclined to these indiscreete aims: yet are they quickened much with
Examples of others.

This moved a neighboring Prince; (one, whose personal prowess has worthily
enrolled him in the Book of Fame) sometime to send a Noble and Eminent
Personage hither; whose many arguments of Valor had gained him esteem enough
with his Prince (had his loyal thoughts so well deserved it) only to see and
observe the censure and cloze of an high Spirit. Hoping, that such ocular
objects would work strongly upon his deluded thoughts: and bring him to a
consideration of himself by presentiments of fear, what his illimited height
would not suffer him to think upon, with all those ample gratifications of
love.

Most certain it is, that the Survey of others actions produce wonderful
effects, according to the disposition of the Peruser or Spectator. For, as
ill-affected spirits, who always plant their hopes on unjust grounds; and
bring their indirect aims to unhappy ends: are ever dreaming of stirring
heads, whose constantst endeavor it was ever to disquiet the peace of the
State: and craving no better Medal's about them, then those of Bessus and
Nabarzanes, mold their designs by such pernicious Patterns. So well-affected
dispositions never eye ought with more attention, nor retain ought with more
constancy than the Loialty of such as preferred their Countries Fame before
their own Life: desiring rather to dye than it should perish. A constant
Curtius; a resolute Horatius; an affectionate Zopyrus; a courageous Codrus are
these men's Objects. Their Virtues they unfainedly wish may be their Patterns.
These cry out with the Tragedian: Nulla vis major Pietate vera est. Sen. in
Thiest.
"No power so pure, as steadfast Piety.

Again, to a youthful affection, there can be no sight, in the perusal of
all Plutarch, like Alcibiades wantoning in Timandra's lap. Nor in all
Suetonius, like those uncomely lascivious presentiments before Nero: a thought
whereof could not choose but beget a Vermillion-blush, a glowing shame in any
modest ear. Which, to omit the rest, in my Judgment, were not sitting to be
suffered to pass in any free state. Passages there are (as I have elsewhere
noted) full of Obscoenity: and lies open an entrance for unstay'd Youth to feed
too liberally upon such inhibited delights. Such therefore, were much better to
be shadowed, than so freely discovered: Seeing, Foreign vices become
nat'ralized, and made ours by imitation.
Discovery of Vices abroad, many times instruct us in the very same at home.

Should two Ambassadors come hither; one from Sidon, another from Tire (as one
wittily observes) and should vye in Vanity, as they sometimes envied one
another glory; we should collect, that no State-affaires drew them hither, but
rather to show the vanity of one Country to the other: Which if we our selves
should admire, in very truth we were madder than either.

True it is, there is nothing either in matter of Discourse, Employment,
Reading; or what Recreation soever, but that soly works upon us, which suits
with our humor, or delights us.

Alexander being much in love with Apelles, as one highly rapt with the
exquisiteness of his Art, proposed him that Model for a Task, which he of
all others affected most; commanding him on a time to paint Campaspe, a
beautiful Woman, naked: Which Apelles having done, such impression wrought the
Picture (an inimitable Piece in so nearly tracing Nature) on the affection of
the Artist, as Apelles fell in love with her, which Alexander perceiving, gave
him her.

There is nothing which we intentively eye, and by the Crany of the eye convey
to our heart, but our Fancy like another Apelles, easily finds a Table for
that Portraiture. Let Virtue then be our Campaspe; otherwise, that Table which
should be reserved for the purest Deity, will be taken up with the impression
of some lighter Fancy.

Lastly, the Earth-taken Soul, who constantly holds Avicens Aphorism, that
Gold is the best Restorative; admires Achans Wedge; Alcmaeons Store; huggs them
in the happy fruition of their state: mean time, holds Anacharses Temperance;
Anacreons Moderation fitter for the Wilderness than the World. These read
nothing in this kind, but they make use of it: but the use is ever perverted.
Examples they find to authorize their baseness: these they retain; but
little care take they how to cure them, by applying useful Receipts to remove
those spreading evils.

A Masters vice corrupts his Family. Corrumpunt vttorum exempla domestica --
Hor.
So says the Poet. No vice more retentive than vicious Writing: it corrupts
the Judgment by Apologizing Vice with a foreign President.

That was an excellent Rule of Direction to regulate our form of Speech: Quo
taces, modo proficias? Quo non taces, si minus pr^ficias?
If thy Speech may improve others, why art thou silent? If it neither behove
thy self nor others, why art thou not silent? The same course is to be
observed in our form of writing: Hoc rempe ab homine exigitur, ut prosit
hominibus si fieri potest, multis; si minus, paucis; si minus proximis; si
minus, sibi. Senec. de vita beata.
"If by our Pen we may profit our selves, it is well; if some few others as
well as our selves, it is better; if all, it is the best; if none, Silence
enjoynes the Workman to take his rest. In one word, as some things are
necessarily to be remembered, so others no less necessarily to be omitted. And
with far more Discretion may they in their Embrio be silenced by the Author;
then after such time as they are published, to be suppressed by Censure.

That memorable Lawgiver being demanded what punishment was to be inflicted on
him, who should chance to slay his Father or Mother: he answered them with,
Haud equidem puto, etc. I do not think there can be any (...) so unnatural
disposition.

Acts silenced sometimes do better than if expressed: for the Curtain of
vices drawn, moves Imitation rather than Evitation.

In distinguishing also of things good and necessary from their contraries, we
should not mix trivial Discourses in our maine Relation: they much impair
and disparage the weight of an History, Strange novelties draw attentio^, move
approbation, if probability be mixed in the Discourse.
distracting the Readers mind with impertinencies, where the Subject might of
it self be better prosecuted; nor can any thing show more indiscretion in an
Author, than these vagaries, where attention can no way be moved, the
expectances of men satisfied, or a real delight with profit apprehended.
Attention (as that eloquent Orator notes) is there the quickest, where we
promise to speak of things, great, new, un-usuall; or such affairs as may
conduce to the benefit of the Commonweal, to the establishing of Religion,
Piety, or the like.

Now such serious Discourses (in themselves grave and ponderous) are not to be
mixed with every frivolous digression; the Body of the History being solid,
should not depend of weak and infirm members: which might seem to resemble
the Roman Colosse, of an huge proportion in body, but feeble feet; so as one
day the frame of the whole was demolished by the debility of one part. Yet in
this grace and firm Composition, there must be one necessary Caveat inserted:
that whenever we draine the approbation of our Discourse (as from many, and
those to our Judgment of the selected Authors) we reconcile their Opinions, and
make one united Body of so many dispersed parts. This I thought to caution (as
well the Histories perusers, as the generallest Collectors of) because I have
observed this foul error (and that in both Ancient and Modern Relations)
where diverse Authors were cited, Opinions drawn from diverse Auth rs should be
reconciled.
and their several Opinions marshalled on a row: but as in a battle, when the
wings be broken, there ensues naught but an universal confusion; so without
reconcilement in the conclusion, he leaves the Reader in suspense, whose
opinion to entertain; because not directed by the Author. A double defect,
Obstinate and Ignorant.


This implies a double defect; either from stupidity, not able to distinguish;
or from a pertinacy, not willing to communicate his Judgment to others. The
latter is more intolerable than the first; for the one includes a native
defect, (which he would remedy if his Apprehension could better it.) The other
a malicious desire of engrossing knowledge to himself; though both unworthy of
an Historical place: for Ignorance deserves small entertainment in so
judicious an Argument: and a perverse disposition much less, concealing his
knowledge from his Country, which by his Subject (it seems) he intended to
benefit. In distinguishing likewise, we should ever observe to cull out such
perspicuous Sentences as comprehend most, yet least in affectation: for such
taste ever of singularity. Vid. Aul. Gel. in Noct. Attic.
Hortensius was called by Pythias (for his too much gesturing) a professed
Mimick, a Dionysian: Words should be accommodate to the matter, not the matter
to the words.
the same Title may be given our curious Relators: they bind their Subject to
their words, esteeming no discourse in it self worth judicious observation,
but what is replenished and full fraughted with polite sentences, making the
matter indebted to the superficial Art of the Composer.

What dress, both for choice of Words, and disposition of Phraze, best becomes
an History.
You shall read in many Historians a singular kind of state, the form and
order of their Relations, observed: Neither shall you find in that Style any
such affected State, as with large Parentheses to entangle the understanding,
or too much enlarge the Subject, by challenging too near affinity with Art.
The self same form which sometimes that richly-enobled Mirandula commended to
his, I should best approve of in these. As I do not (says he) require from you
a form of Speech to trim,
so I would not have it trash; as I would not have it too neat, so I would not
have it too rough; as not too choice, so not too course.

Whatsoever tastes of affetactio^, digresseth from this Disposition.
That unkemb'd and incompt Antiquity, he could not endure. He would have Lines
so taste of the Lamp, as to have a stronger relish of labor, than affectation
from any other. As first, for the choice of Words, No man, unless he have
already vowed to converse only with Air, can be of so distempered a
judgment, as to prefer a superficial dress of Words, before the maine
Subject whereof he means to entreat. This were like one, that should
address himself for some far journey, and accommodate himself with all
necessaries fitting for such a journall: but neglects wholly, or knows not the
bent of his Travail whereto he goes, nor for what end. And foolish were he,
who, upon perusal of such an Airy Author, that decks his Works merely with
an outward luster, should fall into a vein of applauding or commending him:
Nor could he well have less reason to approve such Encomions (but rather hold
them for Paradoxes) than such, who have been sometimes pleased to bestow their
derisory praises upon the very worst or contemptiblest Subjects. After this
sort, was Polycrates that famous Athenian Rhetorician pleased to fall into the
praise of the Tyrant Busyris, Seneca of Claudius, Favorinus of Thersites, Maro
of his Gnat, Lucianus of his Fly, Apuleius of his Ass: Again, Favorinus of a
Quartane Fever, Glaucus of Injustice, Synesius of Baldness, Lucianus of
Parasiticall Flattery, Erasmus of Folly. But truth is, Tu quem commendes etiam
atque etiam aspice: Nemox incutiant altena tibi commissa pudorem. Horat.
praise may reflect upon the Subject that is unworthy of such praise, by way of
disgrace. To commend a parcimonious man for his bounty or liberality, or a
severe Judge for his clemency, lays him open to the World; which makes his
Commender a Satyricall Displayer: in extolling him in that respect only, which
has begot him, to such as truly know him, a mark of ignominy. Flattery,
says one, is not always to praise in presence, for engage our selves we may
to that hateful brand, by praising in absence; that is, when either the
virtue, for which he is praised, is absent, or the occasion: as for Virtue, as
she is her own praise, her own Princely Precident; so is her own prize her
own praise, far above the oily Rhetoric of any affective Parasite.

Such Words then beseem an Historian best, which are proper and native. Such
as were obsolete or out of use were much distasted of our Historians of ancient
time: so as, howsoever some abstruse words may fall out now and then in the
Relations of Tranquillus, which tasted too much of Calepine: no doubt, but they
were in those times received for Native. Howbeit, sometimes they mainly obscure
the mind of the Au hor. Some Arguments likewise cannot be expressed in usual
Words: unless the Word by which such a thing should be rendered, were dilated
to a whole sentence. In such case, the Historian is to be excused; because the
easiness of this error, is rather to the Subject than Author to be imputed.
In brief, I will conclude this with that sententious saying of the Poet: Words
follow matter of their own accord,
Matter gives life and essence to the Word.


Now, for the Phraze; as I have formerly proposed the best direction, that
such, who have already writ of that Subject, have recommended; all the better,
to imprint this in your memory; it is to be understood, that no Phraze of
Speech better becomes these Relations, than such as are brief and sententious.
I have known some, in their Additions to certain pleasing Inventions of our
own; by laboring to surpass their Copy (left imperfect, and falling into
their nice hands to make complete) through an affected Elegancy of phraze,
to have darkened the meaning of the Author: by furnishing the Story with an
Ocean of Words, but scarce one drop of Reason. The Phraze then must be so
disposed, that the matter whereof we treat, must not through affectation
become entangled, nor any way obscured. Wherein a great measure of discretion
is required: Yea, and in one and the same History, the form of the Phraze may
be changed. Light Subjects are ever properly suited with light Lines. But when
we address our Discourse to describe the Subversion of a State; the
depopulation of any flourishing City: still from the Tragic ashes of such a
Story, may our Penns be taught to drop Tears. There is no representment of
Sorrow that suites well in the same Habit or Colors, that Subjects of delight
are to be attired in. When that Nation, our Historian has occasion to write
of, shall be clothed in mourning garments; when fire and fury attend them
without, fear and famine within: When their weak VValls are so enclosed about,
That fear gets in, but nothing can get out.


Then must his Phraze of Speech put on an heavy dress. Elegancy never less
beseemes him than at that time. Passionate Enter-breathes; Treaties of Sorrow;
Eare-moving expostulations from those disconsolate Agents of misery, are
sitting Dishes for such a bloody banquet.

This might be amply illustrated by those inhumane cruelties lately committed
by the Groats and Curlings in Germany.
Benzo in his Indian Story expresses a singular Art in his discovery of
Passion in this kind; who relating the cruelty of the Spanish Nation practiced
upon the West Indies (if the History hold concurrence with truth) collects a
Summary of all in this one presidentall report: In one of their Islands called
Hispaniola, of twenty hundred thousands, when the people stood untoucht (which
had they remained so still, might have redounded more to the honor of that
Nation) the Author was verily persuaded at the penning of his History, that
there were scarce a hundred and fifty souls left; whence he exclaimed, Benzo
in Hist. Ind.
O quot Nerones, quot Domitiani, quot Commodi, quot Bassiani, quot immites
Dionisij eas terras peragravere?

He has in store a Catalogue of unexemplary Tyrants, for such unexemplary
mischiefs. Passion in Discourses of this nature (which is far better expressed
in abrupt sighs, than polished speech;) will become well the pen of an
Historian. Another Style is to be used in peaceable Treaties, Nuptial
Solemnities, or Orations by way of Embassy and the like.

In the distinguishing then of these, as I have formerly noted; is much
discretion required. For to use any Style that may not suite with the Subject
whereof he treates, argues a want of disposition in the Author: resembling such
ridiculous Actors; who, whether they speak of Heaven or Earth, fix their eyes
always on one place: or whether they speak of war or peace, ever retain
one tune in their ill-disposed voice. Shall we then a little longer insist upon
such particulars, for matter of Style, as either impaires or improves the
beauty of an History? Hear what my opinion, derived in part from others, is in
this.

These beseem not a History; dilated circumstances, instances too much stood
upon, an ambiguous leaving of something undetermined: They leave the
understanding in doubt what to resolve, the judgment what to think, the
thoughts what to deliberate: So as our reading conferres no other profit, save
an intricate winding or wreathing of many anxieties up together: Giving the
Mind free scope to imagine the event, being employed by the Author.

An Historian in his writing should have a kind of seeming security for his
Style and Order of Speech: yet not so, Non ubi vanitati festivitas proprie
cedit.
(as to omit an exact or wittily composed jest) to relish the Readers distaste:
Such was Tacitus use, by enterlacing the seriousness of his Tale, with some
judicial (but strangely brief) sentences: annexing some pleasant strain,
either of mere purpose invented, or from the occasion of his Subject derived,
to sweeten the heavier part of his discourse: which should not be too long
insisted on, for that were trifling; but shadowingly touched, for that implies
plenty of Subject: not flying to trivial relations, to make up a greater
Volume, but for the delight of the judiciously affected: Miscendo utile dulci.

But alas, where this distinguishment of judgment of Histories requires great
labor, it ofttimes obtaines as little favor: The present age cannot admit of
such discourses, they be too serious: So that whosoever should compile a Volume
of Judicial extractions, or approved Observances, should hardly have as many
Readers, as Persius conjectured for his Labors; Vel duo, vel nemo: Nomina,
Mecaenas, Charitum scribuntur arenis, Pieridu^ gelidis inclyta Scripta rogis.
ib.
O ill disposed Times! when judgment goes a Wool-gathering. Augustus had two
which he especially respected above the rest of his Nobles, and the one of them
was a Mecaenas, a Patron of learning, and a grace to the sacred influence of
Poesy: But where should we find an Atlas for Parnassus in these days? where
Noble (yet degenerate Spirits) esteem him that will be Pandor to his Punke,
above him that will be Patron to a Poem? It seems strange that in best
experienced times, where knowledge should be hightned, the foggy vapors of
ignorance dispelled: Nay, where these times have respite from warlike Alarums,
and therefore may securely feed at Minerva's Table, should be so delighted
with superficial shadows, contemning the perfect essence and luster of Man,
(to wit) how to know himself. Worlds Anatomy.
Here the Miser digges (and with the Dormouse) sleeps out his time in a
fruitless scraping; There the Prodigal (careless of times expense)
bastardizeth his Fathers providence, leaving no more to himself, than that he
could not take from himself, a poor Grave: Here the Ambitious man, displaying
his pie-coloured flags of vanity (in the elation of his Spirit) contemnes the
inferior rank of men, ever aiming at an higher Sphere than popular press,
till his aspiring produce his falling, and the honor which he purchased
without merit, forsakes him not without shame: But which of these will take
pains to see himself represented in Exemplary Histories? If the Picture of
old Menedemus were hung up in eye of the Miser (he would I doubt it not) gaze
with his four eyes on the Picture, but make little or no use on the Pattern:
The Ambitious man, if he saw the Character of himself in that vast and
undetermined mind of Catiline, in that ambitiously insinuating spirit of
Seian, I fear me he would rather make use of the means of his rising, than
caution himself by his untimely declining: The Prodigal (expressing his own
Mirror, by Theotimus error) who preferred lust before his eyes, would (much I
fear it) rather darken the eye of his Soul, to satisfy the eye of his Body,
than moderate his passions on Earth, to reap the fruit of his Moderation in
Heaven. O that these Times would so distinguish of their abuses, as being
discovered, they may be censured; for where abuses are concealed, they seem
afresh to be renewed, and (with Authority) confirmed, but being openly ripped,
they may be whipped and stripped: first displayed to the eye of the World, then
summoned before the Throne of Justice!

It was a constant Custom, as has been observed,
for the Roman State, and that when she was in her prime Monarchiall beauty,
for all Artificers to carry about them the badges of their Trades, the Signals
of their Conditions. And this every Mechanic willingly obeyed; so as, it was
not permitted them to wal^e abroad through the Streets of the City, without
this Cognizance of their quality. While one more precise than wise, standing
one day forth in the press of the people; Sirs, quoth he, we are enjoined to
go with the several Badges of our poor professions, and as meet is, we
observe the Custom. Mean time, how shall we know what Trade our perfumed
Silken Courtiers are of; our purple Consuls, or our Scarlet Citizens? Where be
the Arms they bear? The Cognizants they carry?

The Speech of this Critic Artizan came straight to the Emperors ear; who
liking well of his blunt question, enjoined all such as retained to his Court,
or boar Magisteriall places in his Courts of Justice, or bore high Offices in
the City, to observe the like course which those inferior Mechanics observed.
This was enjoined, and their observance expected. Many Devices and Impressa's
were contrived, but few or none pleased. It was thought fit by the Emperor,
that such devices and no other should accommodate them, as that very Artist
should invent, who first proposed this Observation to them. He ready to embrace
such a Task; and obey so just a command, A witty conceit of a bold Artizan.
sets his Invention forthwith on work, which he discovers in this sort.

For the Courtier, he gave him a Sweet Glove with this Impresse: Eius ero, quam
gero.

For the Consul, a Wedge of Gold with this Mott: Illi haereo, quod fero.

To the City-Officiall, a Lamp in the snuff, with these words: Ferveo, at
faeteo.

Howsoever the device might seem bitter, this invention was not only
approved, but rewarded by the Emperor.

It is a true saying, "There is nothing that gives more nourishment to Vice
than want of employment: by doing nothing, we shall soon learn to do worse
than nothing.

Action is the life of Man; and when the Fancy is not well employed, it will
assay something that may witness to the World, it had better far been
restrained.

For my part, A modest discovery of the abuses of the time: how they are to be
searched; how cured.
I cannot choose but wonder (with that Divine Cynick) how Man bred amongst Men
should so soon forget the prime beauty of Man; as to suffer it to be drenched
in the Lees of loose affections. How a living Substance, and that Substance
endowed with Reason, should so faune on a Shadow. Or hold himself imparadized
with the poor conceit of a smile from one lighter than Vanity. What an
incomparable Favor is one ravished Feather from her Fan, whose very levity
is the Emblem of that Favor? Are these manly motions? What a tricking,
trimming, poudring and purfling this poor Rind must have? what a varnish must
Art bestow on it? Mean time, what Diogenes sometimes said to a youth too
curiously and effeminately dressed, may be truly said to this painted piece: If
thou go to Men, all this is but in vain, if unto women, it is wicked. Now,
as the Lure of a light Curtezan is Lucre; her aim must consequently be the
ruin of her Lover. So as, her speech to her poor Suitor is the very same,
which that old Strumpet used to a worneout Customer of hers, who asked days of
payment for his pleasure, Oculatae nostrae sunt manus, credunt quod vident. If
unguided youth would have his delights sensible, her receipts must be palpable.

Vid. Marian: in Arcad. Princ.
Less occasion of grief it cannot be to any one who affects Piety, or suffers
with a just man in his wrongs: To see an honest and integrious cause fall light
in the Scale, because his gold wants weight. To see justice weighed by grains:
Or Scarlet attended by vices in the same Livery.

Or a rich Chuffe, whose ill-thriving providence his posterity tastes of; to
squeaze the weak ones with his unconscionable bargains; to treasure to
himself what will stick by him, when poor dust (the remainder of all his
care) shall receive him: Many a dry eye attend him: and his hungry Executors
(as Ravens greedy after prey, and impatient of too long delay) shall imbrue his
corpse with their blood before they bury him.

Let these reflect upon themselves and their own follies; and see themselves
personated in diverse instances in all our Histories: and when they have taken a
full view of their own enormities; which cannot be of such small proportion,
but they will appear visible enough to their recollected fancies, let me ask
them in the same terms that the young Gallant in Erasmus, asked his wanton
Mistress: Are ye not ashamed to do that in the sight of God and testimony of
his Angels, which ye are ashamed to do in the sight of Men, inferior to
Angels? Sores cannot be cured, till they be discovered and searched: a Moral
Story h'as in readiness a Probat to search them, and Balm enough, if usefully
applide, to heal them.

O let Histories, as they be Records of what were done, whether good or evil;
excite us to be good, and deter us from being evil: Stories are replenished
with examples of both sorts, for they be Storehouses of precedent events, and
consequently so to be observed and digested, as the Judicious Reader may better
dispose of his events. I have noted in Discourses of this kind, the observance
of that Generally Judicious Gentleman, Sir F. B.
and the best advancer of depressed Learning, where he says: A Threefold
Discourse branched into a threefold Observance.
Some Books are to be tasted, some to be swallowed, few to be chewed and
digested. Such as are to be tasted I comprehend, in Stories of modest
accomplement, superficial flourishes, garnishing our Discourse modestly
without vain ostentation or bravery: Such are to be swallowed, as those
Amorous, and fruitless labors of braine-sicke Authors, freighted with
continual Hyperbolees comely in nothing but love: Such are to be chewed and
digested, as include discourse tending both to instruction and delight, etc.

So then, here we may come to our judicial point; we see and read Histories,
some only to be tasted, others swallowed, some few chewed, as Beasts were in
the old Law. Histories being ruminated and chewed, yield a continual profit,
and the more meditated, the more beneficial; Three Observances worthy our
consideration in Reading.
which seemed well approved (and no less worthy our observance) by his
institution, that wished every Reader to take these three remembrances in his
way to read: Libenter, Diligenter, and Intelligenter; The first yields a
present delight, because it includes a willingness; the next a diligent
Attention, implying a seriousness; Use of those three Observances.
the last an use of both, enfolding an understandingnesse: These three attend a
judicious distinguishing of Histories, Judgment in discerning what is best,
and these to apprehend the best: These four commixed resemble twins at two
burdens, all directours one to another: for without judgment, we may choose
the worst as soon as best, taking our aim only at delight, without recourse
to profit, best agreeing with the outward sense; here is a want in the
Election: without willingness, our reading breeds a loathing; without
diligence, our discourse is fruitless; and without understanding, our minds be
erring. And thus much for dijudicating of Histories, an essential part of this
Book: I have but summarily set down my Opinion (grounded on the collections of
others) herein, that I might prosecute the former parts of my Division in the
Method of this History, contracting much into a little Body.

THe Method which I propounded to my self in the beginning, was first to
describe the Scope of Histories: Secondly, the use, The Method prosecuted.
fruit, and effect of Histories in general: and the third extracted from the
second, that the particular Profit which redounded either to a Family in
private, or administration of States in public by these Histories. For the
first, being the original whence the two others are drained, I have spoken
sufficiently: Longer (I confess) was I enforced to insist upon them, then my
Volume (which I prescribed my self) would admit: But the many Uses,
Subdivisions, and grounds naturally arising from them, enforced me to prosecute
the Argument more fully: I intend now to handle the second part, to wit, the
Fruit and Use of History, the speciall'st Motive inducing reading.

THe greatest and movingst argument of persuasion to the undertaking of this or
that, Use of History
is the benefit we expect redounding from our enterprise: I will succinctly
express the severally-moving effects of profit (the worldly man's Adamant) from
History, Naturally and Essentially derived: which being laid open, I hope the
Miser (who as Seneca notes, is good to none, but worst to himself) will be
profitable both to himself and others: My Exordium shall be drawn from him,
because I take him to be one of the divils chiefest Factors, and more benefit
should I yield my Country in bringing such an one, than in taking an
Arch-pirate: From him descending to every vicious professor (binding my self
ever to my tackling) the fruit of History, in it self able to reclaim the
depraved'st from their habituated enormities.

The true Characterall Portraiture of a Miser.
A Miser and Misery were ever held Correlatives. And he is that true Miser, who,
like the blind Mole, receives al his nutriment from Mold. It is strange that
any Creature endued with Reason, should so much slave the freedom of so right a
Soveraignesse to the thraldom of Sense. When the Prince or Princess falls
sick, Languente Principe, tota in lachrymas resoluta est Curia: Succumbente
anima; cuncta familiae patiuntur Organa.
the whole Court mournes, says that incomparable Moral. Apply this to thy
own Condition, miserable Wormeling; thy Princess is mortally sick; thy Soul
who languisheth irrecoverably; how can all her faculties do less than suffer?

She ever hated conversing with Earth: her Contemplation was in an higher
Sphere. And as a Plant removed from that Soil where it liked, and brought to
a plotte of ground from her Nature estranged; she h'as of late quite lost her
Verdure and Vigor. Thus have thou suffered thy Divine part to be drowned and
drenched in the contemptiblest refuse and rubbish on Earth.

Oh that thou knew'st but what a small scantling or portion of this Earth which
thou so much affectest, must serve thy turn: and what a small measure in the
Interim (if thy desires would rest so satisfide) will afford thee a Competence!
These thy unbounded and Hydropick affections would confine themselves to a
straiter Circumference.

Truth is, there is nothing which this Earthworme enjoyes, that he can
properly entitle his own. For as those Temporary Blessings which he h'as
received, are estranged from his use: so the very thoughts of his heart are not
his own, because they are ever fixing on another Farm. He sees nothing
flourish in another Pasture, but the Object of it begets his distemper. Others
fatness makes him lean. Corpus exteruat, ut lucrum extendat.
To gain him an estate, he cares not how he macerate his Body. It fares with
such men as these, as it does with the Sea-Eagle, who, Cum far quod caepit,
nequeat, in gurgitem demergitur.
when he cannot seize upon his prey, he throws himself headlong into the
Gulf.

Now, whereto extends this immoderate Care? he will tell you, for himself and
his posterity. Let us then divide these parcells of his Care, and collect what
use he makes of it either in respect of himself, or his Scapethrift Heir.

It is good providence (for so he guilds his Avarice) which has brought him
to this macerating Care. He cannot endure to see the Creatures of God, so
lavishly nor carelessly scattered. He h'as resolved to hold an hanke: Though it
be now Summer with him, he knows not how soon Winter may come. He h'as
resolved therefore to play the provident Ant; to have his Granars full;
Vine-presses flow; to have a Friend in a corner to revenge him of his Foe, and
do his Friend a pleasure.

His insatiate desire of increasing his State; his useless ends in disposing
his Store.
These are fair flourishes; but look what precious fruits these glorious
Resolves produce! What benefit brings all this hoording to himself? Or what
utility to the public State? To himself, I dare say, neither living or dying.
For observe him while he is living; and you shall find him the poorest and
leanest Soul in all his Meniey. Some of these we have here lately had; who as
they abridged Nature of her due, and dyed in her debt; so they could not
perform the Office of Nature long before their Death.


Yea, he could be well contented, of all Sects, to be a Pythagorean; wishing
with all his heart (so it might stand with the conservation of Nature) neither
to eat nor drink all his lifetime: but he intends not this abstinence to
increase his Knowledge, but to improve his Fortunes by an abstemious
providence. So as, that Cynick took not his mark amiss, when resolving one
day to distinguish a Land-buyer from a Seller; a miserable Chuffe from a
sociable Good Fellow; took his aim by their Physnomies. If he saw one
plumpe-fac'd, ruddy-complexion'd, cheerfully countenanced, quick-ey'd, he
would accoast him with this Salute: "Sir, are not you a Seller? But when he saw
one of a lean meagre Countnance, chop-falne, earthy complexion'd, he would
presently alter his conjecture upon sight of his Feature, and greet him thus:
In good sadness, grave Sir, are not you a purchaser? Whence we may safely
conclude: Optimam partem in mundo habet, qui minimam habet.
That he has the best part in the World, that has least part in it.

Nor can this unprofitable care of a wretched Worlding, become any way useful
to him in his dying. His Testament is made; and he leaves in it what he is
unwilling to leave. And to whom he leaves it, he knows not; but enjoy must
others, what he could not. A Gravestone, perchance, may distinguish him from
the poor ones of the Parish. But for an Inscription, either his memory merits
none, or his mindlesse Executor bestows none; or the dis-esteeme of his
Survivers will not deagne him one.

Nor can this penurious providence of his, afford much good to his succeeding
Scatter-good. Who cries out with that short-mourning Gallant; so soon as he
h'as eathed the Fox.

Away with Sable, Bugle, Cypresse-black, Ite procul vestes pullae, vitaeque
Cupressi, Expediet maesto fata levare mero.

For now mine humor is to mourn in Sack.
Thus have you pencel'd out the Portrature of a Miser. His insatiate desire of
increasing his State; his useless end in disposing his Store: all which by a
right use of Historical Observations, may receive a speedy cure.

The Misers profit by History.
The Miser, that is indebted to both back and belly, so engaged to the World,
as he must have his houshold-God of the World, ever harbored in his bosom, or
made his pillow to sleep on, the key of his rust: He that never fed Nature in
all his days with competency; or durst recreate himself, for fear least his
recreation should play cheater, and cosen him of his providence: being the
moath of the virtuous, the harbor of the vicious: carrying a conscience more
infectious than Rats-bane ever about him; if ever he have grace to cast his eye
into an Historical Discourse (next to the Sacred Writ) he shall find as
Sovereign Antidotes for his malady, as in any place. I will Anatomise the
Misers corruptions, and like an artificial practitioner first open his wounds,
and then infuse Balm into them; which Unction if it will not serve, I shall
then apply more rough and sharp plasters.

Now Master Miser, that is, mere wretched man; thou have sufficient, and more
than is competent for nature, yet thou art not satisfied: A very, very little
will serve thee for thy use, for thou never had the Grace to know what an
honest expense meant: Thou Tantalizest thy self; amid'st of plenty, famished;
Thou have a good mind to be rich, A Miser cannot be rich.
but that is impossible: Semper avarus eget; There is a greedy worm that is
ever consuming and gnawing on thee: Thou art at liberty, yet imprisoned, and in
more intolerable servitude, than the misarablest Captive upon earth; yet thy
chains are of gold, S^^ te omnia, quae extra te. Omnia infra te, quae extra
te. Terram supra es, si te superes. ib.
thou art a gorgeous prisoner; Thou art subjected to more hazards than a
Merchant Venturer; to more nightly oppressing, and sur-charching cares, than an
Emperor; to more hourly distractions, and terrible apparitions, than a
Murderer: Thou would sleep if thou could, but thy disturbed thoughts
deprive thee of that comfort: To be brief, A miser his own Hangman.
as thou art in Image the best, so in disposition the worst of all creatures,
being thine own Tymon, thine own hangman, that macerates thy self, and makes
thy appetite ever insatiate.

I will lead thee into a spacious field of Histories, where thou shall see thy
immerited mind deblazoned in her colors; not a memorable instruction for
Liberality (thy absolute Opponent) but shall be produced for thy use: that
seeing the eminence of thy Adversary, thou may hate thy self, and be
reconciled at last to thy Foe.

The Liberall-hearted man is as much Master to himself, as thou art thine own
Slave: A contrariety in two different dispositions.
he surpasses thee in use of his own, and can direct himself by an equal
proportion, limited ever to a generally approved end. He hates to draw in the
Sails of his Bounty, in the presence of desert; and makes no more account of
his own, than to distribute to others wants a share of his fortunes; nor
esteems he that his own, of which he has not power, and in his power can
freely give: he verefies the Verse (approving a liberal mind: Quod nanquam
dederit, non habuisse putat: He never was so far engaged, or enthraled, to
any earthy substance, as to make it chiefetane over his intellectual part: he
makes this his Position, and scorns it should be controuled by any inferior
subject: The Liberal man's Aphorism.
To give, and to delight in giving: And that day wherein (to the moity of his
fortunes) he has not demonstrated the rare Character of his Bounty, he cries
out with Titus, Amici, perdidimus diem: This day has been an abridgement of
my generous intentions, a restraint to my extended mind; I did never show my
self, less to be my self, than in this days exigent: This is he who
measures Virtue for his mere peace and contentment, and not according to
success; he shows not his liberality for observance, but peculiar
satisfaction; for he imagines no greater infelicity, than to be miserable; his
promises are ever relatives with his performances: The Character of a Liberal
man.
He scorns to dissemble with the World; he never anointed his tongue to
enrich his fortunes: The perfect Idiome and Character of his Native Properties
is already depictured: I will illustrate this Mirror of Virtues with Exemplary
Mirrours, Professors of this Virtue: Read but the ancient Roman Annals you
shall see many renowned for Liberality, and in Syracusa too, for her Eminence
and exquisite Government no less glorious: In Rome a Fabius Maximus: Examples
of Liberality.
who willingly forgoes his Patrimony, to preserve his Countries reputation: Se
enim Patrimonij, quam patriam fidei inopem essemaluit. Busa no less renowned,
and in this more to be observed, because a Woman, whose sex implies a
parsimony, relieving the poor distressed Romans (coupt up in the Walls of
Cannae) making her self poor, to add power (by her bounty) to the afflicted.

In these examples and expressions of Liberality,
let this our Work for that Pious Office which we desire to perform, return
to her former Method; addressing it self to a commemoration of so fair a
Subject: with which Princely and Noble Dispositions are most taken, and by
which those who depend on others bounty, are seasonably relieved.

Now, this excellent Virtue, or if you will, The bounteous dispositions of many
noble Personages Historically amplifide.
Ornament of Majesty, derives her Original (as may be probably gathered) from
two especial Fountains: true Judgment in discerning; and charitable
benevolence in commiserating. For whenever it springs from these, Bounty may
ever give a reason of what it gives, and to whom it imparts it self. For
though the greatness of the gift win grace and love to the giver; yet the
season or opportunity of giving makes it more effectual to the receiver.

That Fabius, whom we formerly remembered, Examples of opportunate bounty,
extracted from the Storehouse of History.
showed singular arguments of this bounty, whose example we the rather press
afresh, because the Opportunity of his bounty added to the estimate of it: The
gift bestowed was but small, but the season made it great. A little sum of
money enlarged the continuance of his memory. For having redeemed at Hannibals
hand, the liberty of such prisoners as had been taken by him, in those Wars.
When the City of Rome would not discharge that sum, for which he had
articulated: he sent his own Son to Rome, purposely to set at sale the whole
Farm he had from his Ancestors. He valued little his own Patrimony, in regard
of the redemption of a Prisoners liberty; and so free his Country, whose fame
he prized above Life, from breach of promise, and so deep a brand of infamy.

Now, if we should account the price of what he gave, it was but small. This
Hereditary Farm consisted but of seven Acres, and those lying in Papinia: but
when we consider the mind of the Giver, we shall find no mass of money so
great, but it appears greater. The Inheritance of his Predecessors must be
set at sale, rather than his indeared Country suffer the least stain. He had
rather lose his Farm, than she should lose her Fame. Wherein he seems by his
noble endeavors to deserve greater commendation, showing himself so willing
to extend his bounty (in an act of such necessity) even to the utmost of his
ability; far out-stripping such, who give far within their power, or from
their superfluity: for whereas the One bestows what he may, the Other more
than he may.

No Lines, were they never so full of Life and Memory, can sufficiently advance
that aspiring Spirit of Roman Liberality; when after the overthrow of Philip
King of Macedon, all Greece assembled together to bewitnesses of such a
Spectacle; Quintus Flaminius (of whom I shall occasionally speak hereafter)
commanding silence by the sound of a Trumpet, commanded these words to be
published by the Crier: The Senate, People, Questors of Rome, and Quintus
Flaminius her General, command that all those Cities of Greece, which were
under the late dominion of Philip shall enjoy all freedom and infranchisement.
Which words were no sooner heard, then those people taken with a great and
unexpected joy, at first, as if they had not believed their own ears, they
kept silence. But when the same words were re-delivered by the Crier, to
enforce more credit in the Hearer, they deafned the Air with such a shrill
shout, as for certain the very Birds which flew above them, amazed and
ravished with the sound, fell from the Air.

Surely, it was an argument of a nobly-disposed mind to free so many Captives
from restraint, and to bestow the same liberty upon them, which the people of
Rome, glorious by her many victories, had sometimes bestowed on their richest
Cities. And to add a greater luster or majesty to that work of bounty, it
conduces much to commemorate not only the liberality of the Giver, but the
free assent or approbation of the people to that Gift: for as there is a
Commendation due to the act recorded, so likewise to the praise it self
deservingly rendered.

But while Rome sends forth such noble Branches, who in so flourishing and
fruitful a Mother bestowed all honor, her own Munificence should not be
buried in silence. And redound it will highly to her praise, to recount what a
brave bounteous mind she showed to Kings, Cities and Countries: seeing, the
honor of every deserving action, the more it is revived, the more it spreads
in beauty.

When Rome had taken all Asia, she bestowed it as a gift upon King Attalus, to
possess; imagining that the Sovereignty of her Imperial City would appear so
much more glorious and specious, if she bestowed the richest and pleasantst
part of the World for a benefit to another, rather than keep it as a
storehouse for her self. Especially, where the victory it self is the
happiest gift? because, as to possess much begets envy, so to give of that
we possess, cannot want glory. It closes with more Majesty to make Kings,
than to be a King. Val. Max. lib. 4. cap. 8.


That bounteous and royal expression of victorious Cyrus to his successive
Allies, deserves a due memory. Who, at such a time as he was to try Masteries
for a Kingdom with his Grandsire Astiages; exhorted such as were his
Assistants in that War, that they should with all alacrity go on in that
Service: for if he prosperously succeeded in that fight, as the justness of
his cause, the equity of the quarrel, and hopeful predictions by knowing
Augurs assured nothing less: he would make foote-men horsemen; and of
Horsemen Charrioters. Great minds are not for small gifts. Eminent Personages
must ever second their quality with rich Presents.

The like disposition showed Lucullus in his Princely entertainment to all such
Persons of quality as repaired to him. Beautiful walks he had to receive
them; bountiful Tables to Feast them; choicest Consorts to converse with them;
Melodious airs to delight them; curious Pictures to entertain them. Nothing
so much disrelish'd him as to see his Hospitality want a Subject; or his desire
to extend his bounty, an occasion to express it. Strangers could not there
want for repose. A free welcome they received without being ever questioned
from whence they came, or when they would go. This differed far from that
Adage: Vnius noctis peramicus Hospes, Proximae gratus minus est Amicis, Tertiae
vultus patietur hostis Dira minantis.
Guests of one Night stay may be kindly welcome,
Guests of a next night are not held so toothsome,
Guests of a third night are reputed noisome
To the Receiver.


This was that L. Lucullus, of whom Cicero reports, that when he went from
Rome to make War upon Mithridates, he was altogether unskilful of Military
affairs: yet in the time of his Navigation he so experienced himself, as by
the confession of the King, he was preferred above all others for judgment in
Martial service.

That bounteous mind of Eutrapelus, Hor.
of whom that incomparable Lyrick makes such a free and genuine mention;
deserves all esteem. Those things, which our Age most fools herself in, he
with much sleightnesse gave away to his foes. A curi us neat dress could not
so take him: nor the fashions of the time so delude him, but he could with all
indifferency forgo them: stripping himself of all occasion of being proud, to
infatuate his professed foes with his pride.

But no bounty ever powered it self forth more freely, nor bestowed it self
more deservingly, than of that brave Millanoise; who professing himself ever a
constant Patron to the Muses; and falling casually into discourse with a
Stranger, whose rich expressions (as he conceived) discovered him to be a
Scholar: he desired much to hear the course of his Travail: Who, to satisfy
so just a demand, related to him, amongst other passages, what cold
entertainment he had received, amongst many who professed themselves Favorites
of Learning: but of one Grande above all the rest, where he no sooner repaired,
then he was unhospitably dismissed. Leave he took of him, and leave he
quickly gave him: which, to set forth the better to life he returned a brief
of his entertainmant in these Stanza's: Good leave I had, for none did me
importune
To take my late repose, so as I found
Men shaped their looks according to my fortune,
Which forced me to traversing my ground
To find some place with my condition sorting,
Where to retire but not to seek relief,
I thought it fitt'st to descant on my grief.
And cause I had to grieve to see the time
So much depraved, as I perceived than
None could to Greatness but by Fortune clime,
And that it was the means that made the man,
Which I applide unto that Fate of mine;
Devising how to pass the night away,
Till th'Morning Star should guide the approaching day.


These Lines wrought so strongly upon that bounteously-disposed Millanoise, as
commiserating the Condition of a contemned Scholar, he returned him this
Regreet. It is true, Sir, Desert receives not always entertainment; for as you
shall encounter with some whom cannot distinguish of worth; so you shall meet
with others who will not acknowledge Worth, purposely to spare their wealth.
You shall not find all hearts so affected, nor all men's Judgments so filmed.
Remain with me, Sir, and welcome; Be a Commander, while you are here a
Sojourner. I have a Wardroabe here for the Muses, if they be naked; and a
Place richly endowed too, if for retirement they be disposed. Nothing shall be
awanting to them, so they be not awanting to themselves. It has been and ever
shall be held mine highest Honor, to be esteemed worthy the entertainment of a
Scholar.

But we proceed in this Branch of our History, to other remarkable Instances
for Liberality.

Quintus Considius (of all most memorable) an Usurer and Bountiful; An Usurer
never found his Countries Friend.
a black Swan was never rarer: the Pagan Usurer (it seems) had a conscience,
which our Christian Usurer wants: for in that bloody, and inhumane Conspiracy
of Catiline, second to none, our Modern Counterbuffe, our Powder Treason
excepted: he remitted all his Debtors, laying his Bills and Bonds upon one
pile, making a Bone-fire with them: where I make no question, but the Usurers
continual Customers, the Poet Archias, and his Echo, the Actor Roscius had
reason to swear: Quod nunquam ignem vidissent clariorem: That they never saw a
clearer or more comfortable fire in all their days. An Usurer bountiful
against his will.
It may be Considius did this, because he saw the disability of his Debtors
(for those Civil Commotions had much impoverished all Estates) and therefore
in policy, once to express his bounty, thought it fittest to forgive them
that, which they were not able to give. More worthy is the memory of Quintius
Flaminius, who in an Istmian Triumph, in the presence of his Countries foe, the
daring Philip of Macedon, redeemed such as were Philips Captives at his own
charge: Worthy our observation it is, willing to answer so public Solemnity,
with an universall-concording harmony, making such free Spectators, that were
before in servitude.

Examples of Bounty amongst the Syracusans.
The modest Prince Hiero of Syracusa, who in mere compassion of the slaughter
of the Romans, at the Lake Thrasimenus, sent to the afflicted remnant of that
woeful Army, three hundred Thousand Bushels of Wheat, two hundred of Barley,
and two hundred and forty pound weight of Gold to relieve their wants, and
manifest his royal bounty. Planted is this City Agrigentum, on that flowery
Mountain Agragas.
I may annexe the memorable example of Gillia of Agrigentum, who was rich in
Mines, but much more rich in mind, always rather inclined to distribute than
scrape: so as his house (and that not undeservedly) was called Officina
Munificentiae, a Warehouse of Bounty; erecting Monuments for public use, that
the eyes of the people might be delighted with so grateful spectacles: Here
were prepared sumptuous Feasts, yielding and ministering food, and all other
necessaries for the sustaining Nature, to all wayfaring men, bestowing dowers
upon Maids, and relief to the poor, ministering plenty of comfort (out of his
Royal Exchequer) to such as had sustained any detriment, or damage. A
Memorable Instance of Hospitality.
To be brief, he kept open Hospitality, receiving five hundred Celensian
Gentlemen at one time, by occasion of Tempest driven upon his Coast, which he
fed at his own Table; and at their departure royally adorned them with
sumptuous Garments. To be short, thou would not (says our History) have
taken him for any Mortal, for he was too liberal, but the very
Bounties-bosome of propitious Fortune.

Thou have seen these Examples of Liberality; I will now unrip thy own
Casket, and see what worthy Pictures thou have locked up in it. I see many
bags of mould, but not one ragge of Conscience: great Chests ramm'd up with
inexorable bars, crammed with Avarice, Famine, and Oppression. Lucifer is thy
Treasurer, proving a faithful servant: for he will not cheat thee for a
World, lest he should lose his part of thee in the World to come. Thou
committest to him the Keys of thy Conscience; which opens and shuts upon all
occasions: He being one of thy Family, how can thou choose but be prosperous?
Yet believe me (thy end will be poor and miserable) not one of those many
Angels thou possessest, like a good Angel, will guard, or give these so much
as the least taste of Comfort. I come not to instruct thee, like a Divine, but
to illustrate my Assertions by Historical Examples, which I have here placed
before thee, to deter thee from their life, that thou may avoid their
death.

Avarice, or (which is extended further) Misery, was best exemplified in
Hermon; who to deceive his own friends, and deprive them of that which he made
his God; at his Death, made himself his own Executor: This man would be loath
to lose so precious a Friend; Death must not part him and his Riches. No
question but his Opinion was, he might purchase himself a Tabernacle of rest
with his rust: Miserable ends of Misers.
and translated from the vale of Earth, might erect himself a Mansion of pure
Gold, for he carried the stuff with him. I could here produce infinite other
Examples, which, to avoid tediousness, I omit, and return to our Discourse.

History may yield no less profit to the Prodigal, who makes himself the
last of his name; who no sooner (yea oft-times sooner) than he has shut his
Fathers eyes, opens his Fathers Chest, and wipes away the remembrance of his
Fathers Death, with the Evidence and Broad Seal of his Fathers love: he had
need of some direction.

Many of these are no sooner come to their Lands, than they run out of their
Wits.
They were sick of a Father while he lived; and now they live to become a
prey to others, The Prodigals humor displayed.
by whom they are more usually jeered than loved. Now, to display this brave
Prodigalls humor, and render him in his true Colors; I shall not need to
bestow much pains upon him, seeing the Satyr h'as already so exactly done it
for him: Tristis adit tumulum, rediturus laetior Haeres, Suscipit ut loculos
aere micante suos.
Sad goes he to his Fathers Grave,
But glad do'es he return,
For why! his baggs crammed with re'd Ladds
Do bid him cease to mourn.


These easy Obsequies once done; he must of necessity fall into acquaintance
with all those Officious Creatures, whose abilities conduce much to the making
up of a Gentleman. He, who now stands resolved never to measure his own
expense, must be measured by his Tailor; accommodated by his sweet-sented
Milliner; Bever'd by his Haberdasher; stand nearely indeared to his amorous
Sempster. Having thus thrown away his Sable dress, and suited himself Cap a
pe to the fashion of the Time: His Faunes or Followers, his Spunges.
He must have Faunes or Followers to sponge him. Such, in one word, as never
knew what reputation meant; nor were ever acquainted with what credit meant,
farther than running on score. And these must be the Carvers out of his estate.
Excellent Stewards to manage a fortune!

Now, if this Gentele Gallant set his rest for the City; the height of his
ambition is to receive instruction from Corranto's and Play-bills. These
Notions must regulate the whole course of his Living. Acquaintance he h'as got
him; and such as mean to gull him and gueld him of that wherewith his Father
did guild him. For such is the misery of man, as he cannot endure to be seen
in that place, where he is not best himself. Associates he h'as from all
quarters of the World, and of all qualities, save good. Some Bilbow Blades he
meets withal, and those either for fear of an affront; or purposely to make
them his Champions upon occasions of quarrel, he makes Guard le Corpse. And
these can humor him to an hair; call him their Annibal: and that Title pays
for all. If he fall into acquaintance with a decayed Artist; whose prodigal
course h'as brought him to partake of Cheat. He will not stick upon the very
first Salute to become his Ingle. And this Honeysuckle must broake for him
(being that wherewith he h'as been from his Infancy versed) in conterfeit
Jewels: and these must be returned to him for rich ones. For the grains of
his discerning judgment were long since scattered: so as, he may rest secure
for discovery.

To satisfy his Senses one Night, it must cost him as much as his Fathers care
gathered in a whole year. But now after many unrighteous Bills discharged; the
Moon begins to be in the waine with him. His Exchequer in the Country, affords
him no such fresh nor frequent supply for his Port, sport and support in the
City, as it used to do. For want then of other profits and emolluments, he
must be forced to take up Commodities. Dainty trash to maintain his train!
But nothing violent can be permanent: that Conduit is soon dried up. In a
word, he never takes up with himself, till he be taken up by others. He was
drunk all this time, and now restraint h'as brought him to himself, and made
him suffer.

But if the Prodigalls humor be such, as it confines him to the Country,
without any farther aspiring either to Court or City; because he is no Letterd
man, he h'as chosen to bestow his means upon the pleasures of H which is no
Letter. His only Discourse is in commendation of his Hound; from whom he
differs only in Sent; for coupled they might be well together for Sense. His
Horse cannot gallop faster in Chase, than he out of his estate. His Hawk
flies so high, as she lessens her self; which may serve for his Emblem:
having flowne so long a flight, as he has lessened himself both in credit and
fortune: both which after a long mouting, scatter abroad like Feathers in the
Air. His Courtezan (to close his illiterate Alphabet in one) h'as left him;
and vows she cannot love him, because he h'as lost his wits: but indeed, the
loss of his estate is the reason. She bids him for want of better
maintenance, go to an Hospital; and she at leisure will follow after: and no
sooner than need requires; for as he stands in need of relief, so she of a
Plaster.

Whence we may collect (though there be no necessary inference of any such
Collection; arising rather from the corruption of a youthful vicious
disposition) that a Fathers injurious doing, His Fathers injurious doings, his
undoing: his raising, his ruin.
becomes oftimes his Heirs undoing; the Fathers raising, the Sons ruin.

Oh let these young Lapwings, who leave their nest before they can find wing,
and make their pleasure a Labyrinth of Labor, look homeward!

The young man's maze.
There be many mazes for the young man: I have known many exposed to all
delights, and (as it were) sold under the gage of prostitution, who by
Historical observations have not only reclaimed their former error, but grew
singular mirrours of purity. No question, if Catiline, whose mind was ever
subjected to illimited affections, had but perused the excellent relations of
his noble Predecessors, Our predecessors virtues, motives of imitati^n.
he had not been only able to extinguish that common and universal
cumbustion, which his aspiring spirit raised to consume his whole Country; but
had been memorable for his own attchievements: for the best of Roman
Historians (that I may use the Words of the best Commenter upon Quem
proprietatis servantissimum, vocat Gellius.
Crispus Salustus) saw thus much into his disposition, that so long as he
retired himself from those factious and mutinous spirits, Cethegus, Lentulus,
with others of that hateful consort, none showed himself a more profitable
member to the Commonweal, or more ready to endanger himself for her avail;
employing his time in serious discourses; which not only moderated his
affections, but poised him to the equal balance of a virtuous Discourse:
which afterward perverted by the depraved suggestions of those Ruffins,
reduced those fair beginnings to nothing, and him to a miserable death, and
perpetual infamy.

The very same effect we see in all other Vices (which would be well
extenuated) if vicious minds would apply themselves to these, Histories best
discoverers of errors.
and the like Discourses: we should have our drunkards see into their own
shame, deblazoned by the Epirotes; our Epicures by the ravenous Vitellij;
spending their fortunes in pampering their worst household servant; our carnal
Brothelists, by those impudent prostitutes in Neroes time, who were never weary
of their shame, till their public filthiness engendered a loathing in the
professors themselves: look to these men's ends! Oh, how long might I
prosecute this argument without want of copious Discourse! Instances of famous
delinquents.
Here producing an Heliogabilus, generally hated for his insatiate Lust, and
least pitied in that ebb of his frailty (his miserable death) when men use
most to be pitied, being attended at his funerals with Military reproaches:
Here go we to bury a Dog of distempered lusts: there, a wanton Messalina,
rewarded with a death beseeming her. Here, an aspiring Sejanus; shaken with an
unexpected end, and made miserable in his best fortunes, interred with dry
eyes: For who will pity the fall of Ambition? There an Herostratus (memorable
for nothing but villainy) purchasing by his fame an infamous end. Here, a bloody
Perillus, expert in the invention of cruel Projects, punished with the Torture
of his own Invention: There, a fleering Parasite, who circumvents himself
with his own policy.

Such exemplary motives be frequent in Histories, and able in themselves (if
duly pondered) to enforce Nature from her self, and reduce Man, primarily
addicted to this or that Vice, to a consideration of his own estate, wisely
foreseeing his own danger by others misery; wisely; Cautioning the young man
to level his affections at another scope, than the depraved intendments of the
time wherein he lives; making difference betwixt sense and reason: History the
best Touchstone to dijudicate 'twixt what is good and ill.
the one common to Beasts with men: the other a dis-junct propriety only to
man from beasts: For reason, the directresse of our understanding, the limiter
of our affections within honest bounds, the Touchstone to dijudicate what is
good, from what is ill, the intellectual Notion of the soul, should be ever
the conducter of our fancies; How to be Masters over our selves.
which is best shown, when ( Antomedon-like) we can delineate Virtue in no
better shadow, than the Tablet of our own Hearts; expressing our selves the
best by that, which makes our selves the best, to wit, in prosecuting Virtue
with an earnestness, that in the end we may become Masters of our selves,
governors of our affections, and right Siegniors over our in-disposed Fancies.

What admirable Effects have bin and may be drawn from History, Admirable
effects drawn from History, in subduing our affections.
to subdue and regulate our affections, who is he knows not, presupposing him
conversant in such generous studies? This may be easily gathered by that very
heat or virtuous emulation we shall find even in our selves, upon perusal of
others commendable actions. For as we are allured by the beauty of goodness,
to desire nothing more then to be possessed of it: knowing, no outward beauty
comparable to it; so are we deterred from showing any affection to vice, for
the deformity of it: and those odious fruits which burgen from it.

Lais, though of all Greek Curtezans, none more comely, came far short of
virtue for true beauty: and Nais, though none more ougly, came nothing near
vice for her deformity.

When the Carthage Queen heard the sad Relation of that amorous Trojan,
touching all those Tragic passages during the siege and destruction of Troy,
she could not take a Survey of such a discourse without the attendance of some
Princely compassionate tears. Such strong impressions bear others actions in
the Theatrall Act of this Life. No Malady but may find a receipt to cure her,
or allay her distemper by the help of History.


But to apply receipts to every distinct malady; and by Historical helps
minister to every several sore a sovereign remedy; tell me, you Judicious
Readers of History, is there any distemper whereof you labor, which you shall
not find chaced and chasticed by some Historical Example! Yea, answer me in
all or any of these, if at any time you find your selves pestred with any of
these, if Receipts (according to the quality of those distempers) may not be
found out for a seasonable cure of these!

Does vainglory transport you; that Spirit of Pride which makes man
forgetful of himself? you shall find in History, many Examples to deter you
from it. You shall there, as in a transparent Mirror, behold the Lydian Craesus
sitting in his chair of State, beautified with the exquisitest accomplements
that the Majesty of a King could put on; and Him you shall hear thus
Enthroned, thus adorned, asking a wise Sage (to discover his folly the more) if
ever he beheld a more beautefull or graceful Spectacle? And you shall hear
this vain piece of Princely Pomp jeered to his face. Diog. Laert.
Yes, says he, Dunghill Cocks, Phesants, Peacockes: for these are clothed
with a native beauty, whereas your is but a borrowed glory. Whence, you shall
find that Sentence of Menander rightly verified: Menand.
Every fool is carried away with arrogance and applause.

You shall likewise hear Antiochus (to illustrate more fully the misery of
vainglory) at one time saluted a glorious Prince,
and a furious Tyrant.

Again, are you naturally addicted to that Groundling vice of Avarice? you
shall find what brave contempt of riches appeared in Ethnic Breasts. This you
may find portraide to life in a Phocion, Solon, Crates, Anacharses, Cimon,
Timon, Fabritius. Nothing held These to be more contemptible, then what true
wisdom most contemned.

Or stand you enthralled to Passion, which makes the wisest man a Bedlamer for
the instant? You shall find excellent means to attemper this commotion.
Lessons given by Pagans unto Pagans, and worthy to be left for golden Legacies
by Christians unto Christians.

That wise Athenodorus, departing from Augustus, and taking his leave, to
express a Philosophers love, left this Lesson with him, deserving well to be
imprinted by him: That when he was angry, or intended to pronounce any sentence
upon a delinquent, he should repeat the four and twenty Greek letters. Which
lesson Caesar received as an ornament in value more precious then a Diadem.

You shall likewise find an Architas no less commended; hearing him least
express it, when most incensed. If he find his Hind idling, he can keep his
patience, and discreetly admonish him: O how would I have beaten thee, had I
not bin angry with thee!

Or does that rankling vice, Envy, eating up the heart and marrow of her
Master, seize on you? you shall hear what a brave Platonicke Commonweal
sometimes flourished, when that Law of Nature, holding possession of all things
in common, was in request.

Before Carthage was destroyed, Rome both quietly and modestly governed her
affairs. There was no contending not contesting for glory nor command amongst
her Citizens; they guided all things peaceably, and succeeded in all things
prosperously. That ancient Kings-evill, desire of reigning and invading had not
as then infected them. Whence you may truly collect, by application had to
these present times, what that glorious Divine out of his own Experience
sometimes observed, Si duo ista Pronomina Meum and Tuum cessarent, non essent
tot discordiae in mundo. Stell. de Contempt. Mund.
"If these two Pronouns MINE and THINE would but cease, there would not arise
such differences in the world.

Or if a Liquorish appetite captivate reason; you shall read in a Laconian,
what moderation would suite well with a Christian. Here you may find a whole
Pythagorean state nothing more affected then Moderation; nothing less
relishing then licentious surfeiting.

Or if unbounded Sensuality wanton in you: you shall find what you want,
exemplifide in a Zeno, a Zenocrates; and not only in Philosophers, but
victorious Princes. Where you shall see brave Cleopatra (one who sometimes bare
a Majesticall Sovereignty in her eye; and could insult over a Prince with a
scornful look, and make him her slave with a smile) kneeling at the feet of
Caesar, laying baits for his eyes; but in vain: her beauties were beneath that
Princes chastity.

Or desire you to be retired, or to feed your remiss Spirits with Sloth? Oh
what spurs you shall find to quicken your dulled and rebaited courage? what
animosity in those who were mannagers of Martial affairs? what industry in
all Arts and Sciences? what deliberation in undertaking, what resolution in
executing?

Lucullus cannot enjoy himself in his own Tent. A noble Spirit ever finds it
self active for employment.

Thus shall you find presented before you, whatsoever may in the homely habit
of Virtue allure you: or whatsoever clothed with the odious visage of vice may
deter you. Nor is it possible to find out any Moral way better to regulate
or marshall your affections, than by a serious Survey had, and useful
application made of these Historical relations.

But to come more near thee in this second part of my Division, we must
distinguish of the several fruits and effects of History, directed to peculiar
ends: As first, art thou a Lover, and desire to complement with thy beloved?
Thou art in a dangerous way, and if thou wisely select not such Histories, as
may (like sovereigns) rather allay and moderate thy braine-sick passion, than
kindle the fire of thy senseless reason, be lulled with nightly apparitions of
thy beloved fair one, to what exorbitances shall thou be made subject? But I
know the Nature of thy sickness: thou art like one who has taken poison; and
though Drink be mortal to him, yet he longs out of all measure for it.
There is no Subject so fitting thy humor, as amorous Sonnets, Historical
Relations, carolling out the discontents of unsatisfied love.

Leander swimming over Hellespont, to crop a blossom already cropped. Passions
proceeding from braine-sicke Lovers, etc.
Achylles retiring discontented for the loss of his Briseis, Agamemnon for his
Chryseis: these are Subjects for thy Lovesick Fancy; whereas opposites to
Love, (Moral Relations, instructing thee in a more equal and reasonable path)
would better cure thy disease, and bring thee to an understanding of thy self.
Absence (we say) from our Mistress, makes us most forgetful of her; and
least we think of her when we discourse of Arguments least concerning her;
whilst reading Idle Pamphlets, the very bane and canker of Youth, and Age too:
for Age is as subject to Dotage, as Youth to Fancy; putting us in mind of our
former distracting passions, A Lovers Ecphonesis.
crying: Nec me minor urget Amor: with hard-hearted Mistress, inconstant Dame,
sickle in affection, inconstant in thy Resolution! shedding as many tears as
would drown his Mistress, if she were not so light, as she is able to bear
herself above water. Alas poor Lover! and whereto so many fruitless wishes,
so discomfortable laments, so discordant Eccho's of redoubled sighs, Aye me
unhappy? Thou know not how these reasonlesse perturbations make thee more
loathed than loved, more intranced than fancied; and more beleagred with
passions anew, than to salve those passions wherewith thou were tormented of
old.

Read the continent Life of Zenocrates, dedicated wholly to Chastity; not a
Lais (though never so motive) can induce him to gage his reputation to a
Harlot. Read me the noble disposition of Scipio Affrican, who scorned to make
himself a Slave to his fancy: Look upon the History of Antony and Cleopatra.
the royal mind of that potent Alexander, who would not captive his affection
to his Captive: the undestained Resolution of the Matron Antonia, Wife to
Drusus: that chaste Tragedian Sophocles, Vid. Val. Max. lib. 4. cap. 30.
who being demanded, whether he ever applied his mind to sensual affections,
replied; Dij meliora: Heaven forefend, a Strumpet should put on a Tragic
Buskin. These continent Relations will reduce thy straggling motions to a more
settled and retired harbor.

And surely,
did we but know what Honor takes her repose in so sweet an Harbor; Here he
shows what honor is to be ascribed to Continence.
we would soon strike Anchor. First then, we will here show to you what
Honor is to be ascribed to Continence. How much the very Pagans (whose desires
only closed in Moral Honesty) valued this precious Jemme. How votive Virgins
chused rather to be deprived of Life, than of their Honor. And how those who
violated that religious Vow, suffered the very extremest kind of Censure:
Whereof Campus Martius was ever made the Tragic Theater, Vid. Var. Val. Max.
Gell. Strab. etc.
I leave to those who have writ amply of that Subject.

Memorable is the Story of that noble Lady Armenia; who being bidden to King
Cyrus Wedding, went thither with her Husband: at Night when they were returned
home, her Husband asked her, how she liked the Bridegroom; whether she thought
him to be a fair and beautiful Prince or no? In truth, said she, I know not:
for all the while I was forth, I cast mine eyes upon none other but upon thy
self.

One of Hiero's Enemies reproaching him with a stinking breath, went home and
questioned his Wife why she told him nothing thereof: but what was her Reply?
I though, quoth she, all men had the same savor.

To continue the Memory of their Conjugall Constancy and Nuptial Continence,
you shall ever in these Creatures of the weaker Sex, find admirable Motives
both for Instruction and Imitation.

Cannia, Wife to Synattus, whom one Synoris, a man of greater Authority than
he, loved; and making no small means by prayer, price, and power to obtain
her love, yet all in vain; supposed the readiest way for the effecting his
desires to be the murdering of her Husband: which he performed: and no sooner
executed, than he renewed his Suite, to which she seemed to assent. But being
solemnly come into the Temple of Diana for the celebrating those Nuptial
Rites, she had a sweet potion ready which she drunk to Synoris: wherewith they
both were poisoned; to revenge her Husbands death.

The like admirable Constancy showed Theogena Wife to Agathocles, in her
Husbands greatest misery; approving her self most his own, when he was
relinquish't and forsaken of his own: promising him, that she would not
partake with him only in prosperity, but in what fortune soever should befall
him.

That constant Loialty, and royal Continency of the incomparable Zenobia to
her Husband Odonatus (though a Barbarian Queen) cannot be too much admired;
her Zeal she expressed not only to him living, but dying. No Monument she held
fit to contain his Corpse but her own body; that carrying his shrine still
about her (being what she could not remove from her) she might ever retain
him in her memory. But no question, her princely affection to History had
highly increased in her this Loialty.
For by her reading of others what appeared in others so truly commendable,
with a pious ambition she aspired to an imitation thereof in her self.

The Women of India (whether won with strength of Custom, or Conjugall
Devotion) when any of their Husbands dies, are wont to fall into Contention
through the vehemence of their affection, which of them (for they are permitted
to have many Wives) he loved best in his life: She that wins, being very
joyful (a great Company of her Friends and Kinsfolk following her, to
celebrate her funeral honor) is cast into the fire with her dead Husband.

But every Crates must not look to be Polycrates: such Cognizants must not be
for every man's sleeve. That Sentence ever deserves approvement: As there is a
pleasure in loving those to whom we are espoused, living; so it is an office of
piety to honor them dying. Their life injoynes us to be true to their Bed,
their Death exacts no less to their memory.

Nor is this Continence held only in esteem with those who partake of Reason:
for even such Creatures as are led by Sense, are no less jealous of their
Love, nor less speedy in revenging Lust: which may be confirmed by this
Example.

The History calls him Crathis, from the River (as may be supposed) near which
he inhabited.
A certain libidinous Citizen dwelling in the Town of Sybaris, bounding upon
the River Crathis, so monstruously and unnaturally raged in the heat of
immoderate Lust, as on a time, neglecting all humanity, to extinguish the
violent flames of his bestiall affection, came to a Shee-goat and coupled with
her; which the High-goat, as one seeing, yet reserving revenge for a fitter
time, he found this Sybarite one day fast asleep; wherefore to redress the
injury of his corrupted Love, and revenge the horror of his detested Lust, he
presently set upon him, and mall'd him to death with his horns.

But to close all in one; what Honor the Ancient Romans with other Ethnicks,
ascribed to Continence: and how much they scorned that the least blemish should
be aspersed on their House in that kind, may be made as clear as light by that
memorable Example of Virginius. The Story is thus. Virginius, one of a Plebeian
descent, but of a Patritian spirit, lest his House should be dishonored,
spared not his own blood. For when Appius Claudius, one of the Decem-viri,
sought with strong hand to deflower his Daughter, being a Virgin, Virginius
brought her into the Marketplace, and there killed her, choosing rather to be
her Murderer, undefiled, Val. Max. lib. 6 cap. 1.
than her Father, deflowred.

Now, having shown you the Honor due to Continence; I would have you in the
second place to consider, how soon a precious Name is lost: How soon a
precious name is lost; with what difficulty re-gain'd.
and with what difficulty regained. It is not sufficient for you to refrain
only from doing ill, but from doing ought that may be supected for ill.
Variety of Examples you shall find every where in this kind. A Name highly
prized, and quickly lost: and being lost, not the wealth of the Indies could
redeem.

Thirdly, The pleasure short; the purchase shame.
reflect upon the pleasure how short it is: and of the purchase, what shame it
is. Demosthenes could answer Lais dear demmand for so short a pleasure, I will
not buy Repentance at so dear a rate. And a far more precious gage he had to
lose, if an Ethnic light could have mounted so high. With the like Answer
slight every light Courtezans proffer; ascribing to that inestimable Jewel of
Continence all due Honor.

But yet I must proceed farther; art thou Ambitious, and have both wings and
will to fly? Thou art soaring with Icarus; and thy waxen wings (no question)
must be dissolved with Icarus: he gave a Sea a name; but thou have a Sea in
thine own brain; thou art floting, and ( Camelion-like) feedest upon the air
of thine own fancy: Thou art now for building a second Pyramides in the air;
and no doubt but thou would perfect thy intentions, if death prevent thee not.

Thou art a vain Fool, thou see many worthy honoring, daily declining;
merits undeserving, raised to height above themselves: not a Senator, or sage
Purple Father, but subjected to an undeserving censure: and what is the cause?
Why, honor procures censure; and yet thou art well; served well, safely
retired, not envied, nor maligned by the opposites of greatness; and yet thou
desire (like another Phoebus) to shine in the eye of the Court, to show thine
own admiration by a vain flourish, commenting on thine own perfections,
which need some Exposition: for they cannot demonstrate themselves. Alas, how
strangely art thou transported above thy self! not apprehending how the means
of rising oft-times procure an unexpected fall. Consider thy own unbridled
desires, and seek to repress them, I pray thee do; and take this observance
with thee: Never look into either modern Histories or Ancient, for the
projects, how they grounded the foundation of their plots; but aim at the end
and event of their designs, what issue they had: there thou shall see a Caesar
reign long, and attain the very height of his hopes; yet his continuance
abridged, and his new-established Monarchy (in himself) quite ruinate in a
stabbe. The fall of Parasites.
Here a Sejanus (who was Ferox sceleris) a great hunter after cruelty, become
the last of his aspiring desires, and the sponge (as Tacitus observes) who
being squized, only enriched his Emperors fortunes, and made himself
miserable by his own fall: for Ambitious men, who leap to greatness, for the
most part, hoppe without heads, and too late repent their madness.

TO run over ever Vice particularly, would require a Treatise ampler of
themselves, then I have allotted my self. Third Branch; Particular profit
drawn from History to particular persons.
Proceed I must to my third branch, The particul^r profit which redounds to
every private state or family, from discourses of this nature. I know that the
natural depravation of Man is such, as that he sixeth his mind upon that, which
(for the most part) conferres least profit, and most delight: this is lively
exemplified even in Historical Discourses; where we shall see men (for the most
part) rather addicted to fabulous Travailes, the Survey of strange and
never-heard of Islands, prodigious sights, Monsters, Chymera's, and mere
imaginary fancies, then to such narrations as might minister instruction and
benefit to every particular Reader. What fabulous Histories more suffered than
approved.
Some we see delighted with the strange and incredible miracles of Mandevill:
others with the victorious combats of our Bevis of Southampton: others, more
conversant with the Tragic Histories of our time (prodigies in part merely
invented.) And last of all (which in my judgment is worst of all) others with
the fantastic writings of some supposed Knights, ( Don Quixotte Transformed
into a Knight with the Golden Pestle) with many other fruitless inventions, A
wit^y invention, but full of distraction.
molded only for delight without profit. These Histories I altogether exclude
my Economy, or private Family; I have culd out more beneficial Discourses for
youth to employ themselves withal; producing a subject from the pure Cabinet
of Truth: not from the brain of every Quack-salver, that runs out his
inventions by selling lies at grosse-sale.

TO express our Latin Authors I need not, so much is our Country benefited by
Translators, as the Neat-heard in his Hovell may discourse as well of Cornelius
Tacitus (if he know his mothers tongue) as our best Latinists. In my opinion no
Argument better for instruction then that Author: and if I should dwell upon
one, I had rather insist upon his phrases (though seemingly perplexed) then any
other Roman Author, Vid. in vit. Neron.
how perspicuous soever.

Tranquillus writes true, but he unrips the immodesties of the time with too
long discourse up n every particular vice. Nothing (says Quintilian) can be
esteemed more perfect, then the elegancy and brevity of Salusts speech
(Presertim apud vacuas and eruditas aures;) and I assent to his opinion; the
singularity of his phrase was (which may seem strange) without affectation:
Aul. Gel. in Noct. Attic.
so Aulius Gellius (a very Aristarchus for the search of Antiquities)
testifies of him. Neither Fabius afraid to entitle him, The chief of the
Roman Historians, as Thucidides the Prince of the Grecians. Yet in these
Histories there is an exactness of understanding required; and more do their
writings conduce to State-affaires, then private and Domestik employment.

Now, His Judgment of diverse approved Histori^ns; extracted from the best
Authors.
to deliver our judgment of diverse approved Historians: extracted from the
best Authors: Titus Livius, by the testimony of Phil. Commines, as he is to
this day had in great honor by the Italians, who retain still a form of the
Ancient Roman Government, and that in some points most exactly; describes in a
sweet and well-composed Style, how that flourishing Empire (which afterward
swallowed up many eminent States) sprung up at first, how it increased, what
was done commendably, what viciously, during the whole progress of her rising;
till laboring of her own weight, and press down with her own Grandeure, her
full light fell to be eclyps'd, her height to a declining. Of this Historian, I
have spoke in many places; yet me thinks there is still something omitted that
might be properly annexed for an additament to his praise.

Right well I know (to close in opinion with Erasmus) that there is no reading
more accommodate, no Discourse better suiting men of quality than that of
History; amongst which Titus Livius holds the prime place (I speak of Latin
Historians only) especially, Erasmus.
seeing nothing is extant of Salusts, but only two fragments.

In his judgment, then, as no Discourse is more requisitely familiar than with
Historians; so he holds Livie to be the Prince of all Latin Historians: and
fittest to be a Gentleman's acquaintance. Great, no question, was his modesty;
his own Works may confirm it: Whether (says he) I shall perform that Task
which may seem worthy my Labor, if I relate whatsoever has been done by the
people of Rome from the first foundation of that City, neither do I
sufficiently know, neither if I did know, durst I attempt such an enterprise.

And yet he proceeded in that Labor, and perfected it with great honor:
albeit, his pious fear expressed the sweetness of his temper. Neither fell he
short in Sincerity, though he seemingly pretended a fear, which implide his
modesty. For what is rare in Historians, (especially, writing of Princes and
their Actions, in their own times) he was never taxed of partiality, nor
mincing truth: were the Personages of whom he wrote never so great, nor
authority in office high.

A Subje^t, indeed, never worthy the pen of of so deserving an Historian;
none could possibly have: nor more variety of actions both in a calm and
troubled State. And though Authors in their arguments of Discourse and
Historical Relation find ever the largest fields to walk in, to be fields of
blood: where no day can pass without some notable action deserving the memory
of a succeeding age; yet in that time and state wherein he bestowed his pains,
the retiredst hours from employment afforded him an occasion of delivering
some Observation or other worthy the approvement of a judicious Eye.

For his Style (as I have elsewhere noted) it was nothing so dark nor concise
as that of Tacitus.
The former more dilated; the latter more contracted. Both serious; the latter
more sententious. These ground the first face or foundation of a State upon
Laws; and they show with what obedience those were observed in their infancy.
Romulus and Remus were both builders; the one material, the other mental.
Numa begot in His both love and loyalty, by bringing His to understand
themselves legally. Now, no sooner have they planted a State, then they begin
to strengthen it with Actions. Desire of Command calls them abroad. Their
Powers must be levied, Commanders elected, and those Wars made sinnewy and
strong, that some exploit worthy the name of such a Nation may be performed.

And having now presented the body of a State in her full growth, they show
what is done, not without due attributes to them, by whom those actions were
done. They run into commendation of those Agents of Valor, and they
conclude; Such as the Captain is, such is the Soldier. They bring in Scipio,
who used to have this Sentence in his mouth: That easy, favorable and affable
Captains were profitable to the enemy, which though they were beloved of their
Soldiers, yet they set little by them. This, so wise and experienst a
Commander could not choose but make good use of: for the obedience of Scipio's
Soldiers toward their General is confirmed by his own attestation: So
observant were mine of whatsoever I commanded them, Nullus est horum qui non
conscensa turri, semel in marc-praecipitat urus sit, Si iussero. Plut.
that if I bad them clime to the top of a Tower, and from thence throw
themselves headlong into the Sea, there was not one of them but would obey me.

There is no passage to enliven the Spirit of a Soldier, which these omit: and
all these couched in so Princely a Style, as without affectation, it
comprehends much State. In a word, time shall sooner cease to breath, than
posterity to breath their fame.

For the Epitomes of these, as Luc. Florus and others; me thinks they may be
compared to short Commons. They do well so far as they go; but they leave
the Reader still with a strong Appetite. Something is ever omitted, which
leaves the Stomach craving and unsatisfide.

It is true indeed, that such Collections are useful for memory: like brief
Notes or Diaries, which we carry about with us: And for ordinary Discourse,
will serve well enough. But a Scholars Historical Task is of more
difficulty, than to receive life and spirit from an Epitome.

The judiciousest and most compendious Epitomizer breathing, should he Analise
an entire History; and after many serious re-views and re-collections, contract
the whole body thereof into a brief Methodicall Compendiary: So far short
should he find himself fall from the mind of the Author: as upon the next
re-view, he would ingenuously confess, that he had rather run over him, than
conversed with him.

For Gellius, his Discourse rather falls upon Philosophical argumentation,
than any Historical relation. Winter Nights you shall find there well
bestowed. And he Styles them Athenian Nights, to express how those Studies
with which Athens most flourished, were there sociably debated, Scholastically
argued, and judiciously composed. Some Pieces of Natural History are here and
there interveined, which may minister occasion both of profit and delight to
such as shall seriously peruse them.

Touching Valerius Maximus, his writings stand more upon Apothegmes than
History. He takes Survey of such especial Virtues and Vices as pressed most
upon those times. Wherein, he recommends to posterity such memorable Persons as
were Mirrours for the practice of the One; and rigid Censors in punishing the
Other. He discovers nothing but by example; a moving kind of persuasion for
imitation of goodness; and aversion from whatsoever is evil.

Quintus Curtius, his Scene is single: his whole Discourse consists mainly
upon the actions of one Prince; yet many pleasant and remarkable passages shall
you find in the Princely progress of his life. A brave spirit displayed in
every action. One, who knew how to vanquish; and how to moderate his felicity.
One, who if he were not what he was, could choose with all his heart to be a
poor Philosopher. One, who amidst his Military affairs, and managements of
State, would deagne to talk with learning: purposely to improve himself as
well in Arts as Arms. Never Prince by his power could do more, and by a sweet
attemprature of his command, revengelesse.

Megabizes esteemed Alexander as a Prince whilst he stood in his School and
said nothing, but when he began to talk of things which he knew not: he said
unto him, that Even his little Children would, laugh him to scorn. This
affront could that great Commander bear with a Princely patience: and labor
by his own endeavor, and the instruction of an incomparable Master, to
redeem his ignorance.

Though a Cynick teach him mortality in an homely manner: and encounter him
with mouldred Sculls in his triumph to his Country; he will scarcely reprove
him for it, but usefully apply it, and benefit more by it, than by all those
Nations he had conquered.

Yet must his Errors be touched, that the sincerity of an Historian may become
approved. His easy inclining to Lais lay no small taint nor tincture on his
honor; that the counsel of a Wanton should get the Conquest of such a
Conqueror.

Velleius Patereulus, as he was no less elegant in his Style, than sinnowey
and substantial in that Subject whereof he treated; may be justly bemoaned,
that the injury of time should leave such maimes in his Works: as no mention
at all is made of all those glorious actions and memorable exploits of the
Romans, from the very prime foundation of the City, till the ruin of the
Macedonian Kingdom, by Aemilius, during the space of five hundred years or
more. So as, what now remains extant of him, shows him not so full, as to the
half Body: nor that neither in his own native luster and beauty. In a word,
unhappy was he in his mutilation, more unhappy in his Translation.

For Josephus, that sincere relater of the Jewish Wars, I shall take occasion
presently to speak of him; give me leave only to render him that
commendation which Constantine the Emperor was sometimes pleased to bestow on
so noble and faithful an Historian: As his life deserved perpetual praise, so
his death eternal honor.

Touching Appianus Alexandrinus in his Discourse of the Roman affairs, in my
judgment he shows both wit and strength in his Lines. Not a pleasant passage
but merits approvement from his Pen. None more serious, when he desires to be
weighty; none more delightful, when the Subject admits a freedom to be witty.

For our Greek Ethnic Historians (for of those Ecclesiastical Writers, we
shall speak of them in their due place;) none comparable to Plutarch for
Historical Morality; nor to Thucidides, for State and Majesty; nor to
Herodotus, for Method and Perspecuity; nor to Herodian, for a quick and active
Discovery; nor to Zenophon, for a rich Philosophical Delivery. Where every
Sentence works strongly on the Sense, and begets some new Principle of
Experience.

But these, as I observed, wrote only upon the Actions of those times, with
the quality of the Persons interessed in those Actions: being both for matter
of Discipline and service estranged from us, and consequently retain less
affinity with us. Yet of singular use (if discretion be had for severing the
chafe from the pure grain) both for instruction and exemplary direction to
these times.

I will retire my self to such as may yield the Reader no little profit by
consideration had to the judgments of God; modestly mixing Moral instructions
with a sweet variety of Divine discourse: a matter which may seem directly
opposite to my first intention, but is not so; for these Histories which I
mean to produce, are so grounded upon infallible truths, as in that respect
they may seem to merit a morally-Divine Title. Josephus commended.
Josephus works I especially entertain into my Family, as best describers of
the judgments of God, expressers to the life, of an obdurate and stiff-necked
generation. Here to behold the incomparable beauty of that glorious Temple (the
type of the Celestial Temple) founded by that wisest of men, and that peace
of Princes, Solomon, defaced, and that City which was once called, The City of
the great King, demolished, Circumstances in the Jewish War give an excellent
beauty to the Discourse Vespatian is said to have his Tents there first pitched
where our Savior was taken.
and laid level with the ground. Then to direct our Eye to the wonderful
judgments of God in raising civil discords, and mutinies amongst the Jews
themselves, the greatest means of their subversion, the maine predictions of
their ruin and utter destruction, before these wars came upon them; yet
their impieties not a whit lessened, their arm of sin shortened, nor remorse
of conscience excited: no refuge to the Religious, In Montem Olivarum Castra
metans, etc.
but defense to the wicked in every place of the City ministered. Then Survey
the pollution of that Sacred Temple, where Altars were once Erected,
Peace Offering sacrificed, and the Prayers of the holy Consecrated to God;
there naught but effussion of blood, slaughters among themselves (an Occurrent
remarkable) committing no less Massacres upon themselves in the ceasing of
War, then the Romans did in the heat of war: being wholly exposed to
Tyrannical Factions in the City; to expose themselves to Roman servitude more
easily. These examples of Gods Justice, are worthy our Observation, to admonish
us of our peculiar duties, The judgment of God in that History most remarkable.
careful how we offend, serious in the administration of Justice: For how
should we think he will spare the wild Vine, that has thus dealt with his
own natural Vine? When he has dealt thus with the Green Tree, what will he
do with the Dry Tree? That Vine was planted with his own Hand, watered with
the dew of his especiallest favors from Heaven, dressed and pruned, yet behold
the wild Boar has rooted it up: Et seges est ubi Troia fuit.

The truth of that History is so undoubted, as besides his own concordance in
relating, there is none that ever made question of the Truth and Verity
thereof, composing what he wrote, not by report of Others, who speak (for most
part) as they are affected, but by the approbation of his own Eyes, the best
outward directresses to inward knowledge.

To this Noble Historian (for he was Nobly Descended) I may add those
excellent Greek Writers, Divine Histories.
worthy and memorable: as Nicephorus, Evagoras, Socrates, etc. For their Divine
Examples plentiful, the success of the Christians amidst the tyrannies of the
cruellest Emperors wonderful: the diverse sorts of torments by those Tyrants
invented, pitiful; and the dismal and terrible end of those Blood-suckers,
fearful. Insolency punished.
Here thou shall see an Herod transported above himself, with the acclamation
of his people: Not the voice of Man, but of God: And presently behold his pomp
converted into loathsomeness, his preceedent joy to a subsequent pensiveness,
and the excellency of admiration to a sudden amazedness; he that seemed
before a God, and no Man, is now by God made the miserablest of Man, forlorn
and dejected: nay, if we would observe the whole current of their Histories, we
shall see in them that God ever used to recompense the Offendour with a
punishment of the like nature: Nicephorus reports, An excellent Example.
how Herodias daughter having begged the head of John Baptist, chanced on a
time to go over a main river, frozen over with Ice, Punishment alluding to the
condition of the fact.
where the Ice presently parting received her, and meeting again cut off her
head, a true and evident Testimony of Gods judgment.

The like of that blasphemous wretch Julian, a foul-mouthed detractor from the
glory of God: who on a time mocked a Christian for talking reverently of the
bowels of CHRIST'S compassions: But what end came of this miserable Atheist? His
bowels fell out of his belly, Blasphemy punished.
being thrust through with a Javeling, confessing the power of God with a
regreate, saying: Vicisti O Galilee! etc. yet vouchsafing to bestow no better
name on him, then Galilean, a fearful end of a most profane Blasphemer.

The like of Dioclesian that cruel Emperor (and a great persecutor of the
Christians) who, whilst he reigned seemed little or nothing to fear the Divine
power of Heaven; yet the History records, that Fear was the greatest occasion
of his death; no, that he died by a voluntary fear, very jealous of the Air,
lest it should pierce his Brain.

The like exemplary punishments inflicted on other Delinquents.
The like of Maximinus, who at that time raged in the East, as Maxentius did in
the West. Of whose Cruelties to return a full Catalogue, would require an
ampler Discourse than I have reserved for him. He, I say, who accumulated upon
himself these Titles: Emperor Caesar, Maximinus, puissant, magnificent,
Chief Lord, Lord of Thebais, Lord of Sarmatiae, five times Conqueror of
Persia, Lord of Germany, Lord of Egypt, twice Conqueror of the Carpians, six
times Conqueror of the Armenians, Lord of the Medes, Lord of the Adiabeni, Vid.
Eusebius. lib. 8. cap. 17, 18.
Twenty times Tribune, Nineteen times general Captain, Eight times Consul,
Father of the Country, Proconsul, etc.

This matchless Tyrant, thus swollen up with Titles, after such time as he had
plenteously rioted in the blood of the Saints, and slighted the power of
Heaven: feasted in nothing more than the bloody Bankets of dislaughter'd
Christians. Wherefore a Plague from above lighted on him, first taking root in
is flesh, and afterward proceeding even unto his Soul. For there arose
suddenly in the secret parts of his body (to chastise him for his licentious
impurity) an Imposthume or running Sore, afterward in the lower parts of his
privities a botchy corrupt Bile, with a Fistula; whence issued out corrupt
matter, eating up the inward bowels, and an unspeakable multitude of Lice
swarming out, and breathing a deadly stinch, The Corruption of his body seconds
the Tyrants Cruelty: dispatching such with his stinch, who^ he had reserved for
that Death in his healthful estate.
when as the Corpulency of the whole body through abundance of meat before the
disease came, was turned into superfluous grosnesse; and then being grown to
matter, yielded an intolerable and horrible Spectacle to the beholders.
Wherefore of the Physicians, some not able to digest that wonderful noisome
stinch, were slain: some other (when there remained no hope of Recovery, by
reason of the swelling throughout the whole body) being not able to help at
all with their Physic, were cruelly executed themselves.

But let us (if you please) take a Summary or brief Survey (the benefit will
answer the pursuit) how those Emperors which were Ethnicks and Panims,
maintainers of Idolatry and Paganism; and how of the contrary, such as cleaved
unto the Christian Faith, and held it there royall'st Prerogative to be
Defenders of it, ended their Reign.

Was not Caius Julius Caesar the first Emperor, slain by Conspiracy? Did not
certain Soldiers with naked Swords dispatch Caius the Nephew of Tiberius? Was
not Nero murdered by one of his familiar and dear Friends? Had not Galba the
like end, Otho and Vitellius who all three reigned only sixteen Months? What
shall I speak of Titus, whom Domitianus poisoned, although he was his own
Brother? What say you of Commodus, did not Narcissus dispatch him out of the
way? What shall I speak of Pertinax, and what of Julian, enjoyed not both they
one kind of Death? What, did not Antonius the Son of Severus murder his
Brother Geta? And did not Martialis requite him with the like? What shall I say
of Macrinus? did not the Soldiers use him like a Captive about Bizantium, and
cruelly put him to death? Was not Aurelius Antonius of Emessa murthred together
with his Mother? Was not Alexander immediately after him, together with his
Mother likewise put to death? What shall I say of Maximinus (whom we formerly
mentioned) whom his own Army dispatched? Or of Gordianus, who through the
Treason of Philip was in like sort by his own Soldiers put to death? Tell me,
I pray thee thy self O Zosimus, what happened unto Philip, and after unto
Decius, were they not slain by the Enemy? Take Callus and Volusianus with
them, were they not murdered by their own Armies? What of Aemilianus, had not
he the like miserable end? What Valerianus, was not he taken by the Persians in
Battle, and led about of them in Triumph? What Galienus? was he not slain
through Treason, and Carinus beheaded when Dioclesian came to be Emperor; whom
Dioclesian cut off lest they should Reign with him? After whom Herculius
Maximianus, his son Maxentius, and Licinius dyed with contumely and shame
enough.

But since the time most noble Emperor Constantine began to reign, since he
consecrated unto God the City he had built, and called it after his own name,
look about I pray you, and speak indifferently, was there any one Emperor in
that City ( Julian, whose Apostasy exposed him to an imperious Tyranny, only
excepted) that was murdered, either by his own Subject, or by the Enemy: or
any other Tyrant vanquished the Emperor. Basiliscus excepted: who, although he
thrust Zeno beside the Imperial Scepter, he was overcome of him again, and
lost his head.

These Examples extracted from infallible grounds, may seem the judicious
understanding of the Gravest, and fittest for Private Families, where order is
best attained by Examples: We use most to be moved, when we see the end of such
a Man, to caution us; Vid. Lud. vivem. de educ. virgin. 1. lib.
who having led his life securely, concludes the period of his days as
miserably: And some have I known even of the discreetest and most virtuous
parents, who, to deter their children from Drunkenness, used (like as the
Epirotes did with their children) to hang the picture of a Hog wallowing in a
filthy puddle, with this Inscription on it: An usual means of reclaiming
drunkards from their beastiall filthiness. Abite Symposia, distrabitis
negotia. ib. Iumentum bibit quantum sufficit; Homo bibet quantum sus^ocet. ib.
Nunc Ebrius astet,
Meque Suem sumpsisse suam formam --
Drunkard, if thou would see this form of thine,
Come here and see it depictur'd in a Swine.


The Lascivious and sensual worldling, decyphered with this Character: Myrrha
hanging in a chain of gold about her father Cyneras bed, Every vice briefly
decyphered.
with this Impressa.

Hinc Amor ut tenuit, suspendet. The miserable wretch that makes his gold his
God, best expressed by Menedemus, with his Spade, delving and digging for life,
with this Motto: Non tu sed tui f^nuntur tuis. Dum tu tuis dominaris, tui
dominantur tuis.
Sic mihi divitias Famulique pati.

Truest decyphering of all ices, proceeding from the exemplary events of
Delinquents, committing what they like, and at last feeling what they like not:
Oeconomicall Histories, teaching Private Families how to be disposed.
The best government in private, proceeds from Histories, and the serious
reading thereof: the virtuous Matron squaring her course, by that modestest of
Roman Dames Lucretia, making her ( colum her thorum) her Distasse, her best
companion in her bed, when her husband was absent: no vicious mind can deprave
her, she is fighting at home with her own passions, whilst Colatine her
husband fights in the field against his Countries enemy: But you shall see
Lentulus and Aruns, their wives rioting, and revelling in their husbands
absence. Necessary instructions for all Private Estates.


You shall find sundry Instructions highly conducing to all Private Estates,
in these Surveys of Histories. Directions for those are married; how to demean
themselves in their several ranks or conditions. How the Roman Dames, after
they had taken them to Husbands, were to bid adue to public concourse: by
breaking of the Axle-tree of their Wagons at their Bridegroomes door: and
putting off their shoes, (implying, that they were thenceforth to keep within
doors, and never to go abroad.) What Instructions likewise were given them,
to prepare them before they took themselves to a married state; which (to omit
others less pertinent) were digested in this sort:

Love all, but reserve your peculiar affection

Hate whatsoever deserves your pious neglect:

Hold him dearer than your life, who knows

Piety should be your Diary: Sanctity your

Earth your contempt: Elysium your content. this be your Object, that your
Subject: That your Inn, this your Mansion.

You are yet but one self, one Soul: if ever

The misery of an enforced Marriage, what

Portion is a Worldings Object: Beauty the amorous she never so poor, nor to
the outward eye never so mean; reteines in her what may truly enrich those
that shall have her: and express that beauty in Age, which far surpasses
all others in their Prime.

Art and Nature may make you such an absolute Creature, as whosoever eyes you,
may admire you: and draw one line from your accomplishment, whereby they may
imitate you.







others joy in that you never enjoyed.

But being so well read in Man, yet never

Let your Posterity make you a Mother; your tender Osiers twisted about you,
they may become melodious Instruments to those Superior Powers that made you.
To whose auspicious protection in the choice of your affection, that you may
never stand in need of Viri-plata's Mediation, we recommend you.

The like Directions you shall find for Virgins, and such as embraced a single
life: with sundry Moral Motives to exhort Widows to Continence. Instructions
likewise for Oeconomicall Discipline: Experimental grounds or Observations for
Husbandry; all which for Brevity sake I pass over, Val. Max. Strabo. M^crob.
Lud. viv. etc.
referring you to such who have copiously enlarged themselves in Subjects of
this nature.

If our Historians, now a days, would employ their Lamps and Oil in the
delivery of a profitable History, such as might rather tend to the cherishing
of the unripened blossoms of virtue, then the nipping of them: How happy
members were they? Yea, that I may use Salusts words, though they retired
themselves from public affairs, yet; Majus commodum ex eo otio, Historians
most profitable to the Commonweal.
quam ex aliorum negotijs Reipub. venturum: Yet such have bin the depraved
humors of former times, that the best Observors and Relators, have purchased
little, save Envy, for their Labors: no, the very chiefest Historians have
opposed themselves one against another. Enmity amongst Historians themselves.


Titus Livius was so violent against poor Salust (as Seneca observes) as he
objected that certain things, Transcribed by Salust out of Thucidides, though
elegantly applied, yet by him depraved and corrupted; which Aurelius Fuscus
also, notes to be done, as it were, of set purpose by Salust, to derogate from
the excellency of Thucidides writings: A mere detraction to such a worthy
Author: But what works meriting Emulation, have not ever had Envy for their
attendants? Hesiod. 1. lib.
I conceive the reason to proceed from that of Hesiod, who infers in
Professions, none to be more apt to envy one another, then such as be of one
Trade: Figulus figulum odit: True, for where either singularity is required, or
hope of gain, there Envy is ever shooting her impoisoned Arrows: And (for the
most part) Envy reigns there most, where our Labors deserve most: The low
Mushrome is seldom touched by the violence of any Tempest, but the peering
Cedar is ever exposed to all vehemencies.

For the particular use of Histories, and their fruit, Trog. Pomp.
I have gathered these Observances, extracted from a judicious Writer: Expert
he was in all Historiall Relations, as his apt similitudes more fully
demonstrate: what they are I have here set down, and as contractedly (as I
could imagine) for the benefit of every understanding Reader.

If History comprehend in it any certain documents for the instruction of Man's
life, A compendious discourse of the general profit of History.
I suppose it expedient for all men; as well to select and make use of it, as
to rush violently into such most plentiful and fruitful fields of History,
where all exemplary grounds are in ample sort propounded. For what can be more
pleasant, or more profitable, then in the Theater of Man's life; so, to be made
wary and wise by other men's harms (and that without harm) as to sit in
safety, and yet to be instructed in all parts without jeopardy: choosing out
Examples of all kind, which thou may apply unto thy own peculiar use, upon
all occasions? And whereas History, is conversant oftentimes in the secretest
counsels, importing the weightiest affairs of the greatest Persons: we that
are men do with greatest appetite covet them, as likewise to be interressed in
their events, because it is impossible (through the shortness of man's life)
otherwise to abridge the successions of times, by the limit of our forgetful
memory: or to see the prosperous Fortunes, Successes, and Ends of Empires, or
manifestly to conceive the Causes of evils, either private or public; or in
every hard and difficult assay, to have a president before our eyes, of such
things as were tried before us, or which were in hazard before they were
attempted by us: and that I may speak all in one word; to judge of things
present, by things past, which is the property of a wise man, and discreetly to
foresee of what is to come by all succeeding events. But it becomes us, to
come so much the better furnished, by how much our History is with all fruits
better fraught and replenished: And whereas there is the very same difficulty
in judging rightly, as well of our own, as another life; there is none that
can duly (how piercingey'd soever) judge of another life, that has not
measured his own: Of both sides it is to be employed, that not only a maine
difficulty is here placed, but also before we be to this History addressed, it
is required necessarily, that we be not only endued with a certain Civil
Wisdom and Moderation, but also to have our lives grounded on a settled
intention, unless we will be miserably, and that perpetually, deluded with the
vain illusions of this life.

An apt similitude.
For even as it fares in a most sumptuous and royal Banquet, replenished with
all sorts of dainties, one thing seems delightful to one which is distasteful
to another; few things are liked of all, every one being best pleased with his
own, though all dishes be alike to the Glutton: and as every one's appetite
is, so is he affected; yet there is a mean (which Nature has ordained) and a
certain kind of nourishment, which in it self is merely simple and
uncorrupted, and best agreeing with our bodies: From which, whosoever departs
so, as he crammeth himself above the bounds or determination of Nature, will
find more inconveniency then profit in it. So in this diversity of Man's life,
though there be a thousand forms, and a thousand purposes, and as every one is
resolved in mind and judgment, so he judges of his own and another life: yet
there is one only path of virtue, which whosoever keeps and observes wisely,
he only makes use of his life really. Others, as in a doubtful supper, when
they invite themselves to all pleasures, can neither find out in themselves or
others what might deserve imitation, or whereto they make might recourse: But
if there be any thing given to man by Nature, which is in his power to use well
or ill, it behooves him to use great circumspection in the use thereof: But
what is he I pray thee, that will use more exact consideration in all his words
and works (by the direct line of virtue) then in the use of such meats as are
set before him? And who thinks not himself sufficiently instructed herein? In
which how wonderfully are men deceived? Supposing that Discourse to be History,
which teaches the Reader, ministering to him matter of Learning (yet so) as a
Banquet ministers use and appetite to every one as he is affected.

This is the reason that we see some so delighted with the sweetness of
Reading, as obeying their own pleasure, they loose the inestimable fruits
thereof. Such have no other scope in all Histories, then with which our
Generous Musicians, use to pass time away, upon their Instruments: employed in
reading only, to spend their weary hours, which be presently encountered with
more wearisomnesse: For there is no pleasure in it, Nulla voluptas est, quae
non respicit virtute^.
which has no reference to Virtue. The glittering object of glory and ambition
exciteth others, and that which shows a flexibility of mind in all other
things, vainly transports them to every brave and eminent image, forgetful how
glorious and remarkable examples are produced by Writers; not only to follow
virtue, and contemn honor offered us; but if a Competitor were admitted us to
countermaund the authority of our honor, to endure him with patience; yet,
though none but fools will purpose to aspire to such merited excellence,
without the like meriting virtue: we see many men, by the very reading of
excellent things, to taste in themselves a certain kind of excellency,
arrogating much to themselves, and resembling those Tragedians, who imitate the
State of such persons they represented, after they have put off their Habits.

There be also (but of these there be but a few) whom new, and unaccustomed
things do delight (men of vulgar apprehension) who hearing the State of
Emperors, for the most part, more esteem the Purple then the Man, Qui stupet
in titulis and imaginibus.
the Picture then the Work: So effectual a force does History exercise, and
imprint in the Mind of the Reader.

Now it is the scope, and draught of all Histories to excite man's sloth, and
to arm him against all dangers; and whereas the force of examples (then which
nothing can be imagined more powerful to persuade) tend especially to that
end; it comes to pass that by the security of men (who think other men's
harms little or nothing to concern them) such things (as in themselves are
memorable and worthy observation) be read and heard with a deaf and careless
Ear.

To be brief, there be some also (which one would hardly think) offend in a
more severe, and Critic kind of reading: as if things should not be Writ as
they were done, but as they ought to have been done. Wherefore, partly by this
curiosity, partly by that security (the very surfeit of confused and rash
reading) it comes to pass (as in a body pestred with corrupt humors) that a
certain (...), or ill disposition of judgment and opinion, which ought
especially to be sound and sincere in the course of our life, and a (...), or
bad temperature, converting all food into ill humors, uses to be contracted
in us: and as meat avails such as be distempered, nothing, so no profit at
all by these means is ministered to our reading.

I suppose thou see how the very same reason is in reading History, and
disposing the course of thy life: but this is certainly the greatest difficulty
(to wit) the perverseness of our judgment, which is the speciall'st cause,
that we are not moved with examples as we ought, but what way as our minds are
inclined and affected most. And this difficulty is no less then the other:
forasmuch as Writers do describe things done, as they do not only carry favor,
but follow their own appetites (like some Builders) ever interposing their own
peculiar judgments, Artif^cium benevolentiae colligendae habentes.
(of their own accord) praising some things, (though not praiseworthy;) and
whatsoever likes them, they imagine it worthy approbation: which (surely) if
they did simply, it were easy to consent or dissent unto them. But even as
Cooks (for the most part) do more respect their Masters Palate then his
Profit: Gulam saepius quam commodu^ Heri spectant.
Even so an Historian (I could wish the most did not so) applies himself to
the appetite of the Reader. We are oft-times therefore deluded by these two
means, our own Judgment, and the prejudice of the Author, not laying things
open and naked, as they were done.

An Historian is the best interpreter of Acts achieved; whose judgment, if it
chance to be corrupt, it comes to pass, as when Wine (of it self neat and
generous) takes either some waft of the Caske, or is corrupted by some other
distaste, which either proceeds from an imposture, or folly great and
intolerable. We may see in one only example, the judgment of the Writer; The
profane Historian ascribes the events of serious and weighty affairs, to the
council and industry of men; al-be-it he has sufficiently tried, how fowly
those men were deceived in the events. Hence it is that men be drawn to great
folly; that they, whose knowledge was scarce sufficient for the consideration
of things subjected before their eyes; and whose force and strength not much
exceeded little Worms, should by one small success arrogate the government of
the whole world unto them. But a good Historian teaches thus: Things (says
he) are purposed by Man, but disposed, and moderated by God; whereby he riddeth
the scrupulous Reader both of folly and superstition (a mischief no less then
the other;) and in all other proprieties, good Historians (whose studies are
only consecrated to holiness) ought not to be ignorant of the Agent and
Instrument wherein they differ, and what be their several Effects: the one
moving, and the other moved. But especially I admonish thee to this end; that
whereas I observe many Authors of that kind, who for their exceeding force of
innumerable examples, deserve to be read; I could wish that the Novice-reader
discuss with himself as circumspectly and seriously as he can, by proposing
to himself both the fruits which might redound, and the dangers which might
occur him in his reading: for to one that runs over all Histories
cursorily, or who rashly and unadvisedly spends his time without any exact
observance of private or public duties, it comes to pass as to Country
Clownes, who in sacking of a neighbor City, take spoil of some Apothecaries
shop well furnished with all receipts; where, provoked with the sweetness of
some junkets or spices, being the first that came to their hands, and imagining
the rest to be of the same sort, they swallow, sup up, devour, and gormandize
all before them; whereby presently some are taken with a strange disease,
others with a Frenzy, most are bereft of life, none but strangely
distempered, which occasions laughter through all the Army: For as Man's life,
(so History the Image of Man's life) has her commodities and discommodities:
for the Government of Man's life consists only in the use of his life.

In these Collections, as in a most clear Mirror, may our young Gallant see
into his errour^: he shall be of necessity forced to distaste himself, till he
have relinquished his midnight revels, surceased from his licentious meetings,
and reduced his disconsorting Passions unto a calm and retired harbor; here
the public Magistrate shall be able to dispose of himself, and Office
deputed unto him; seeing matters worthy imitation, and Precepts worthy the
Gravest and Ripest Consideration: one to instruct, others to Correct, and all
to make perfect this whole module of Man.

A review of those former Collections, applying them to our present occasions.
Now, to take a review of those former Collections, and apply them to our
present occasions; Histories you have heard illustrated by diverse proper
Similitudes, to represent unto us the benefit thereof, both in respect of their
delight, being modestly and discreetly seasoned; as likewise, the occasional
profit we may make thereof; in the passages of this life.

First then, he compares History to a Feast or Banquet, where Dishes of all
sorts are provided and orderly disposed; implying, what Method is to be
observed in the form or digestion of an History. Nither, indeed, could any
Viands be more orderly disposed, nor decently dished, than has been observed
by our Historiographers in the comely disposition of their Writings: So well
has the Divine providence ordered, that whatsoever properly conduced either to
the knowledge or practice of this life, might to Posterity be successively
recommended.

For first, to descend to the Order and Continuance of times agreeable to the
Ecclesiastical History, we have at this day compendiously delivered unto us by
the Works of such famous Historiographers as have written the said History
unto the posterity following. For Eusebius Pamphilus has written from the
birth of Christ unto the reign of Constantinus Magnus: Socrates, Theodoret,
and Zozomen have continued the times from Constantine, unto Theodosius Junior,
of which Emperors doings Evagrius has somewhat discoursed. As for the Divine
and Profane Histories from the beginning of the World unto this day, they are
orderly continued by painful Writers. And first of all, Moses began to Write
(as is declared of them which compiled these things together) of the things
that were done from the Creation of the World, ^ven as he had truly learned of
God in Mount Sina. Again, other followed him; showed the ready way to our
Religion, and committed to Writing the Acts done since his time. Moreover (to
descend as in a build^ng from Story to Story) Josephus wrote a very large
Story, full of every kind of good matter.

What f^bulous things soever have been reported to have been done either by
the Grecians or Barbarians of old time, who either were at Civil Wars within
themselves, or waged battle with foreign enemies, or if any other thing can
be remembered since the first mould of man was cast, all I say, besides sundry
other Writers, is laid down by Characes, Theopompus and Ephorus. As for the
Roman History, comprizing in manner the Acts of the whole World, or if any
other thing fell out by reason of their Civil discord or of quarrels risen
between them and foreign Nations, it is exquisitely handled by Dionysius
Halicarnassoe^^, who begun his Story from the time of the People called
Aborigenes, and continued it to the reign of Pyrrhus King of Epirus. From
thence unto the overthrow of Carthage, Polybius Megapolitanus has excellently
discoursed: all which Treatises though occasioned at diverse and sundry times,
Appianus with grave judgment has contrived into Order, and compacted
together; adding thereunto of his own, such things as were worthy of memory
after their days unto his time. Diodorus Siculus wrote unto the time of Julius
Caesar, Dion Cassius likewise continued his Story unto the reign of Antonius
of Emesa. The like matter and order has Herodian in manner followed, ending
with the death of Maximus. Nicostratus also, a Rhetorician of Trapesus, began
with the reign of Philip the Successor of Gordianus, and wrote unto Odonatus
of Palmyra, and the ignominious expedition of Valerianus against the Persians.
Of the same thing entreated Dexippus at large, beginning with the reign of the
Macedonians, and ending with the Empire of Claudius, the Successor of Galienus.
The said Author laid down the Wars of the Carpians, and of other Barbarians
in Hellada, Thracia and Ionia. Eusebius continued his Story from Octavianus the
Emrours reign, unto the time of Traian, Marcus, and the death of Carus.
Arianus and Asinius Quadratus, wrote somewhat also of those times. The times
following, reaching unto the reign of Arcadius and Honorius the Emperors,
Zosimus has prosecuted: and of the things which happened since their times,
Priscus Rhetor with others has discoursed. All which Histories Eustathius of
Epiphania has briefly run over, but very excellently, and divided the whole
into two Volumes: The first contains the Acts from the beginning of the World
unto the destruction of Troy and the Palace of Priamus: the second continues
the Story from that time unto the twelfth year of Anastasius the Emperors
reign. There began Procopius Rhetor, and ended with the days of Justinian.
What happened since unto these our days (says Evagrius Scolasticus, a serious
Discourser and Discusser of Antiquities) although Agathius Rhetor, and John,
both my fellow Citizen and Kinsman, have orderly written of, unto the time when
Chosroes the younger both fled unto the Romans, and also was restored to his
Kingdom by Mauricius, (who went not therein faintly to work, but courageously
as it became an Emperor) and brought Chosroes into his Kingdom with great
Treasure and Armed Soldiers) yet have they not as yet published their
Histories. Vid. Evagr. lib. 5. cap. 24.


Whence you may collect how orderly Histories have been disposed, how
successively continued, and with what coherence suited, as has formerly been
observed. The chiefest of them, to retain them better in memory (and right
useful is such Historical retention) have been ingeniously closed in this
metricall Dimension.

Baronius, Iovius, Polydorus,
Dodonaeus, Diodorus,
Dorotheus and Eusebius,
Ptolomaeus and Polybius.
Annexing to these: Caelius, Lelius, and Valerius,
Cineas, Plinius, and Pererius.


Now, (to tie our selves to that propriety of that Similitude used in our
former Collections;) as in a Banquet there be several Dainties orderly dished,
so be there appetites as diversely affected. What one distasteth, another
relisheth; what one relisheth, another distasteth. So it fares with our
Readers of History. Some are for Solid meats; Serious Discourses, fit only
for strong Stomachs. Others are for meats of easy and light digestion. What
may relish with the Palate, though it affords less nourishment, delights them
best. Here a Comfit, there a Succot; only Kix-showes are for these lighter
Guests.

And many shall we encounter withal of this sort: who, should you question
them, what they have read in such an History, or what useful Observance fit
upon occasion, to be reduced to practice, they have gathered; it were to be
doubted, if they return not the same answer, which that youthful Reader of
Homers Works rendered (as one newly come out of an Euphuus golden slumber) to
one questioning him in the like manner. I find not a more pleasing Piece than
Helen, nor displeasing than Thersites. Many such there are, who take a
perfecter view of the Picture, than of the Substance. Poor mouldred earth,
which sometimes (if Histories enlarge not themselves too far) retained a
graceful presence; and wrought such strong impressions in strange eyes, as
they engaged both their own and Countries liberty, to become possessors of
such a beauty, are attractivest Objects of their eyes, the retentivest Subjects
for their memories. These come for company, amongst the more knowing and
deserving Guests, to partake of this Banquet; but they prefer such sweet
Meats, which corrupt rather than nourish, before those which may not only
close the Appetite, but supply for nourishment.

Others, more seriously affected, hold to that which may most nourish. These be
our judicious Readers, who collect what may profit them in private Discourse,
or affairs Domestic or Public.

To see an Eminent Personage bear himself to his rank, we commend him; we
say, he does not degenerate from those he came from: his d^sposition proves
his descent; his Education, the worthiness of those that bred him. Observe
this in your perusal of History; when you find a person nobly accomplished;
One, who values honor before any worldly tender: you collect, he was not
obscurely bred; his demerits plead for him. No Herald can find for him a
better Coat, than his own personal worth. Now, reflect, Gentlemen, upon your
selves. Do you show your selves abroad? Are you invited to public Feasts or
other re-greets of friends? Tell me then, is not the Vessel to be known by
the sound? Our vaporous Gallant, whose intimate acquaintance is his Tinder-boxe
and a Pipe, takes in snuff a serious Discourse. His entire Study is reduced
into a small Volume; closing his Impresse with, Pulvis and umbra sumus.

And these Emblemes of his Mortality though he carry still about him, he as
easily forgets what they signify, as if they had no rel^ti^n to Mortality.
Poor seered things! Can you see these, and not pity them? Pieces made up in
the shape of men, but so far estranged from so Princely style, as, their
feature excepted, they represent nothing less. Discourse, without that weak
manual instrument, their Pipe, they cannot: and when they utter what smoke
gives them power to deliver: they retain still that Emblem in their Dialect,
which they evaporated from their Pipe, Smoke. The Judicious, I am sure, blush
at this, and by a reflex of conceit (to use the Philosophers words) are more
ashamed of them, than they of themselves. For these conceive what a dishonor
it were to them to show themselves so childishly in a public Society.

It is true, all dispositions are not alike affected; Seeing, as Plato says,
running Wits are delighted with Poetry, as Aristotle writes, e^^eminate
persons are ravished with Music, and as Socrates tells us, Histories agree
best with stayed heads. This induced Alfonsus to have always in his bosom the
Commentaries of Caesar: being also so much delighted with the History of Titus
Livius, History to a discreet Ear the delightfulst harmony.
that on a time he commanded certain Musicians (though very exact in their
Art) to depart, saying: He heard a more pleasant harmony out of Livius.

When you come then to this Musical Feast; where you shall hear pleasing
Aires mixed with doleful Lachrymae's; bring discretion along with you to
rectify your distempered appetites. Leave light notes to persons of light
note. Stronger meats are prepared for your well-concocting Stomachs: such as
may nourish you, and beget those manly abilities, that may fit and accommodate
you for the knowing'st presence.

It was the saying of a learned States-ma^ in this Kingdom (whose Works
express him a serious reader of Men as well as Books) that he would have a
gentleman rather superficially seen in all Learnings, than exact in One. And
his reason is, that one who reteines the Elements of all Knowledges, though
they be but in a weak measure, yet he can deliver himself by way of Discourse
in what Subject soever shall be ministered: whereas He, who has confined
himself to an exact sight of one Knowledge, and no more, being out of that
Element, wherein he is solely exquisite, he must veil to other men's
Discourse, and keep consort with Silence.

Now, to enable you for all Companies, no study may better accommodate, nay
accomplish you, than the knowledge of History. So as Calisthenes said to
Alexander, that he had rather carouse old Grains with Diogenes in his Dish,
than new Grapes with Alexander in his Cup; "For of all the Gods (quoth he) I
love not Aesculapius: preferring conference with a Philosopher, before the
society of a Scepter: and embracing an abstemious course of moderation, before
Festival and Epicureall meetings. Even so should I in my choice of
acquaintance, desire more to enjoy his company; who has been usefully versed
on the Theater of History; An exact Historian, a select Companion.
than any other, whose affected dress, or airy complement gives only a sound
to the Ear, but leaves no impression in the Conceit.

In our election then of Company (as I have many times observed) let it be our
care ever to make choice of such, Eum eligas in Socium, de quo tibi spes est
aut meliorem reddendi, vel meliorem ab eo redeundi.
of whom we may be confident either to better them, or be bettered by them.
And to choose him for our Master (to use Seneca's counsel) whom we may more
admire when we see him, than when we hear him.

For the habit of the mind is best discovered by the Action, Station and
Disposition of the body. Eum eligas magistrum, quem magis admireris cum videas,
quam cum audias. Seneca.
So as, he deserves not the style of a Master, who seconds not that title in
his outward gesture.

Thus you have heard this Similitude explained, in this resemblance of an
History to a Feast: whereto if you come with tastes or appetites distempered;
those various dishes, be they never so delicious, can afford you small delight:
begetting rather in you a loathing than a longing. So, in this incomparable
Feast of History, where Dishes stored with all variety of discourse are served
up, if you come with distempered judgments, not distinguishing what is
wholesome from what is noisome, that which might have redounded to your
infinite profit, by inversion of the right use, returns to your detriment.
Great preparation than is to be had in the solemnizing of so Princely a Banquet.

Secondly, he compares it to a Field. Where we may preambulate and solace our
selves after more serious studies. Neither shall you find more variety of
flowers in the Field; than you may of excellent instructions, powerful
examples, with other persuasive Motives in our Histories. You shall find
Princes by taking their level from these directions, entertaining a facility
of access, Facilitas in accessu, benignitas in aspectu, affabilitas in affatu.

Optimi sunt socij, qui serio faceti.

Quid audisti, quo magis profuisti?

In quo melior discessisti, quam cum so cios petijsti?


a benignity in Count^nance, an affability in discourse. Others, though their
Education had highly enabled them, their assiduate conference with learned
Philosophers improved them: yet this their improvement extended but only to
knowledge: They were contemplatively Proficients, but practically Deficients.
The Wolf would not change his heart, though he had changed his hair.

Again, as in a Field, you shall encounter with many kinds of fruits, which,
howsoever they appear delightful to the eye, are dis-relishing to the taste.
So shall you in those spacious flourishing borders of History; observe some
Eminent Persons, whose fair Semblances promise nothing more than the pract^se
of every Virtue: Their Countenance cheerful, their Discourse delightful,
their Service to their Country seemingly faithful; yet shall you find them
true Tiberians, glorying in nothing so much as cunningly and covertly clothing
their purposes with fair pretenses, going invisible, and deluding their
professed'st friends expectations with a seeming good. Others, like low-growing
Plants, or earth-kissing Violets, though to the Eye of the World, they seem
contemptible; yet try them, and you shall find them sweet and comfortable
Consorts; though slightly observed, deservingly approved,

You shall find how those men, who, as Cosmo says, carry their heart in their
mouth, are more to be pitied than feared. But contrariwise, those who carry
their mouth in their heart, more to be feared than pitied. You shall hear
Scipio described by Cicero to be the most cunning Searcher of Men's Minds, and
Sylla by Salust. Thus may you store your selves with flowers and fruits of all
sorts in this Poly-carpian Field of History. And feel such fresh wholesome
air to cheer you, as no distemper (unless your own dispositions feed it)
can possibly surprise you.

Thirdly, He compares some of our Historians to Builders; interposing their
own particular judgments, and imping their own conceits, by which they many
times divert the Scope of their History. Teaching the General of whom they
write, what he should do: neglecting in the mean time his own Office, of
recording what was done. And this error falls many times upon a presuming
Reader, as well as the original Author. For many of our Critics, who hold
Minerva's Anvill to be in their Brain, cannot read a Line without a Censure:
and these for most part delight in nothing more than catching and carping at an
error. Ad reprehendenda al^ena facta atque dicta ardet omnis animus. Salust.
This confirms Salusts Position: To reprehend others Actions and Speeches each
man's mind is strongly affected.

But if you mean to build wisely upon these Stories, you must leave behind
you all prejudicate conceits. Read Actions as they were done; imitate
whatsoever you find commendably done: Eschew whatsoever you find
ignominiously done. Examples are useful for you in both kinds: These to
deter; those to allure.

Fourthly, he compares these glozing-sugred Historians to Cooks; who (for the
most part) use to prefer their Masters Palate before his profit. Such as these
delude their Guests with gilded Plates, and indented Pastes. But gilded
meats will never allay hunger. Profit and pleasure mixed together make the best
music. The smell of Meat can no more feed the belly; than the sound of money
fill the Purse. There be some wholesome things indeed (says that sinnowy
Seneca) which without either touch or taste, Sen. de Tranq. anim.
profit much with their smell. But by these, the Moral meant no material
Flowers: Those internal graces or beauties of the mind, which had received
sweetness from Philosophical instructions, were those sweet fragrant Odours
he meant by. But to press this Comparison a little farther: Our Historians
should not be such Cooks, as only to intend a pleasing of the Sense. There is
more in History, than delighting a youthful appetite. He then that desires to
have his Works live to posterity; or in after Ages to retain his Memory; must
disesteeme these pleasing humors of complying either with Time, or with any
One; high in favor with Time. It was the Poets resolution: As in my choice of
meats, so in my Book, -- Coenae sunt fercula nostrae, Mallem Convivis quam
placuisse Cocis.

I Would rather please my Guests, than please my Cook.


He Writes the best, who humors least. Nor can he express himself better,
than in composing his Style to the state of that Subject whereof he Writes:
Aiming more at public profit, than any man's private respect or favor: for
Partiality, of all others, lays the greatest aspersion upon an Historical
Labor.

Fifthly, He compares the judgment of an Historian, when it becomes corrupted,
to Wine; (which of it self neat and generous) takes either some waft or
unsavory taste from the Caske, or is corrupted by some other accident.
Mixtures of Histories may be not improperly resembled to our mixtures of
Wines. They make them lose their flavor and vi^^our. Unless they be so
discreetly mixed, that the strength of the History be not weakened; nor those
principal passages whereof he takes occasion to treat, disordered or omitted.
Wine muddy or troubled we cannot endure; it must be fined and cleared from the
Lees. And so must History. Purged and refined it should be from all Lees; or
incredible Lies. From all impertinences, useless digressions, artlesse
independencies. Otherwise it will taste flat; and beget a distaste to any
discerning judgment.

Lastly, He compares unadvised Read^rs of History to Country Clownes, who in
the spoil of a City, break into some Apothecaries shop, well furnished with
all receipts: but not distinguishing what is Sovereign from what is Poison;
offering to their Sense for for good whatsoever seems pleasing: They fall into
Phrensies, Plurisies, and all Distempers. Observe this Gentlemen, and make use
of it. The Dear, if he be wounded, can fly to Ditany, to cure him; The ^eare
when he feels himself sick, Ambros. in Ex^m.
seeks for Emmets, and eats them, and these recover him. The Be, if he be
distempered, hyes him to Balm mint, and that cheeres him.

Is it so, that these irrational Creatures know how to cure their griefs; and
will you neglect what may cheer your minds? You may find in History, as in a
Confectionary, sovereign Receipts, choice Electuaries to cure all maladies.
Whatsoever is defective in you, may be here supplied; and whatsoever is in
some small measure perfected, may be more fully accomplished.

Nothing, whether it conduce to Discourse or Action, War or Peace, Arts or
Arms, but may by Historical Helps be highly advanced.

The Philosophers Axiom is: Omne quod non ens est, malum est. And worse then
no being (have they) who measure out their lives without a due proportion
drawn from others, and applied to themselves. Instruction the light of
understa^ding.
Instruction is the light of Being, the directresse of Living, and the best
Schoole-mistresse that disciplines us dying: States public are managed by
her, Offices private administered by her, and the wisest men have desired to
possess her. No Beauty more permanent, Jemme more eminent, or Treasure more
Excellent; it beautifies it self; and no Phidias could ever portray any
picture so well as it portrayes it self. And what instruction better then that
which comes from History, where the true Image of our life is delineated,
Virtue in her best colors expressed, and Vice (without either shadow or
pretense) laid open and naked? The Prodigal reads, Histories, mirrors for all
States.
and sees himself represented in another Person; he sees the miserable end of
others, which (unless he will fall with open eyes) must needs caution
himself: he sees haire-brain'd courses, leave both Patrimony and reputation
behind them: Penelopees Woers, ever woing, never winning. The miserable wretch,
that pincheth himself to enrich his unthankful Posterity, may see the fruit
of gathering Perdition to himself, and oft-times occasion of ruin and speedy
desolation to his surfeiting Heir. Here the brave Soldier sees his own fame;
Acts duly and fully expressed: not a famous Exploit (deserving memory) must be
silenced, but the very name of the Agent, (to excite others the more) must be
Recorded. Here the effeminate Milke-sop, that fights best under his Ladies
flagge, first man that will come to a lascivious Banquet, but last that will
come to a pitched field: He (I say) must show himself, Histories must not
partiali^e.
though smally to his credit: yea, Alcybiades (though otherwise well deserving
of his Country) must be set out in his ignominious death; as well as his
memorable life; giving up the Ghost in the lap of his Concubine Tymandra.


He defined History to life, though confined to a short line, who called it: A
Theater of noble Actions, begetting in the Spectators a laudable Envy, a
glorious Emulation.

Nor shall we find in the whole passage of our life, History the best Herald
for deblazoning virtue or vice.
so true a Herald for deblazoning Virtue or Vice, as it is. We say, Letters
cannot blush: and though many unbeseeming Act be by her presented, with the
quality of the Person by whom it was acted: yet like a faithful undaun^ed
Record, it recommends with a composed and censorious countenance, how it was
done and by whom, without glozing with Person or Time. Such Registers cannot
perish: whereas others, who are won by Greatness, or corrupted with base
Lucre, (of all others the basest) or out of private discontent (an Error too
commonly taking amongst many Historians) asperse dishonor on any Person or
State (of all others the hatefullest) cannot promise any perpetuity, because
they fail in their foundation, being not grounded on Principles of Verity. Oh
what a graceful beauty bestows our Historian on Virtue, when expressed in any
Eminent Person! How it wooes Followers, and wins them to be Imitators of such
goodness! The Members cannot be distempered, when the Head is healthful. When
the Prince turns Philosopher, the whole Court becomes an Academy.

History then, as it may be properly styled, The Noble-mans Lecture: So their
Actions, Lectures to the inferior. Nothing commendable in the great, which
brings not with it an Additament, being clothed with greatness. For great
Persons, be their life's remarkable either for some eminent Virtues, or
egregious Vices, they become presidents to their shadows.

Three especial commendable qualities have bin thought ever fitting Consorts
to accompany Persons of quality; Three especial qualities suiting well with
the condition of any Eminent Person.
but these have bin ever observed most estranged from their society. 1.
Patience in suffering Adversity: 2. Moderation in bearing Prosperity: 3.
Humility in attempring Sovereignty.

That wise Chylo, when his brother took it distastfully, that he himself
should not be made Ephorus, when Chylo was; made him this answer to allay his
Choler: Content your self Brother, I know how to suffer injuries, so do not
you. Implying, that none was fit for place of Authority, but could patiently
endure affronts, or suffer an injury. This it was which so truly recorded
Camillus name in the Annals of Honor: whom neither his Dictatorship could too
much raise, nor his exile from his Country, too much deject.

This, those praiseworthy Romans bravely showed in their constant and
unamated resolution after their disaster at Cannae (as has been observed)
where at such time as hearing of nothing but utter ruin and desolation ringing
in every place, they did nothing unworthy themselves:
deserving no less honor in bearing their loss, then their enemies in
obtaining the prize. But for one president of patient-suffering in this kind;
we shall meet with many opposite examples, inclining to a contrary bent. Yea
such, who had bin sufficiently schooled in Philosophy, and had read what weak
trust was to be reposed in prosperity. Amongst these, you shall find some
overcome with grief^ upon innovation of government, to lay violent hands upon
themselves. Poniards and poisons their familiar receipts to cure all
discontents. These could not endure to see the face of a State altered, their
Consull-authority dis-valued; their ancient Laws dis-annulled; but they must
witness their grief with a fatal stabbe; though such a desperate act
confer no benefit to the State.

No less rare have our Historians held Moderation in bearing Prosperity, with
persons of Command and Sovereignty.

Alexander in the height of his success, was so far transported with the
suppositious title of a Deity, as he began to forget Mortality: yet one wound
received can make him retract that Error; and confess himself a mortal man,
though the worlds Commander. What would he have said, if he had seen himself
remain thirty days without burial; but Diogenes (poor contemptible
Diogenes) solemnized with a glorious Burial. Aelian. lib. ^2. Laert. in vit.
Di^g.


How far Pyrrhus, the victorious Caesar, experienst Hannibal, imperious, but
afterward calamitous Antiochus, Majestic Mithridates, Martial Miltiades fell
short of this Moderation, their own actions (deblazoned to life by our
Historical Heralds) will sufficiently demonstrate.

These wanted Simonides to sing unto them, as he did sometimes to Pausanias; or
as that Page every morning did to Philip of Macedon: Respice post te; hominem
memento te. Tertul. Apol. c. 33. (...). Prima sumus obliti, post rema non
intelleximus, quia prima non meminimus.
" Philip remember that thou art a Man. Or the Spartans speech to the Samnites:
We have forgot our beginning, we have not understood our ending, because we
have not remembered our beginning.

Whereas in others we shall find an absolute Moderation in the height of their
Prosperity; and such a Princely command of themselves, as their very minds
declared them worthy of nothing less then Sovereignty.

This appeared in the Moderation of noble Affrican, mild Marcellus, strict
Severus; who with an easy contempt slighted the honor they enjoyed, and could
Philosophically digest the loss of fortunes, if they perished: whence we
cloze, Honor can be no attractive Lure, to the composed spirit of a true
Heroic Lover.

Lastly, with what a Princely beauty Divine Humility shows herself in the
bosom of Nobility, may appear in that modest reply of that victorious
Godfrey, to such, as after his glorious Conquest of Jerusalem, to the honor
of Christendom, offered to set a Crown of gold upon his head, but he refused
it, saying, God forbid that the Servants head should be with Gold crowned,
where his Masters head was with Thorns pierced.

Now, the rarity of this Virtue (or rather the repository of all virtues) is
recommended to us by Venerable Bede in this memorable story: Aidan a religious
Bishop, weeping for King Osuinus, and demanded by the Kings Chaplain why he
wept? I know, said he, that the King shall not live long: for never before this
time have I seen an humble King. Which happened accordingly, for he was cruelly
murdered by Oswin. Howsoever, if in any of these, such Personages as the
Historian makes mention of, fall short, thr^ugh corruption of discipline, he
should not be sparing in his modest discovery, so it import the subject of his
History: where it is expected all things should be delivered impartially.

Absolute Histories will not admit of the least concealment; but representing
every Act, Person, and Event, use to illustrate what is worth insisting upon,
omitting (or at least cursorily passing over) more fruitless Subjects: and how
delightful may it seem to every judicious man, when in reading of ancient
Records, he conferres the Stratagems of War then used, with the present
observance of this Time: sees (and seeing) notes the sundry dispositions of
men, how noble in themselves, and how generally esteemed invincible, by a
sudden conversion laid low, beneath the stirrup of Fortune, and made a
spectacle of Fate! Then to observe States, better governed in their decline
than in their height; and far more able in power, when in the eye of the
World least powerful. The Romans, when they had attained the very height of
Felicity, that all Governments were their Tributaries, then they began to stoop
most under their burden; and pressed with their own grandeure, seemed to
imitate the Phoenix, who weary of her self, desired to have her ashes renewed,
but her self extinguished. Rome in her decay, compared to the Phoenix.
What ambitious Tyrants proud of their own strength, and secure of Divine
power, are laid flat in the height of their expectancies: so as where they
planted the foundation of their hopes, there they were most defeated; to
express the providence, and all-working Majesty of God, who disposes of all
governments, A Christian consideration of the power and Majesty of God.
pulling down the tyrannical Empires, and setting wise and discreet Princes in
their place! And no motive (of profane writings) more effectual then
Histories, to draw us to a consideration of our selves, and the Majesty of God,
whose excellency beautifies this Universe, teaching us to admire, and (in our
admiration) to tremble and fear, having recourse to the incomprehensible
judgments, and secret counsels of the Almighty.

Every private Family may draine hence un^peakable profit, Profit derived from
Histories to private Families.
observing the diverse casualties, and mutabilities subject to every one that is
interessed especially in matters of state; preferring their own private and
free Life, before popular admiration, so entangled with continual
incertainties. Here may the poor Husbandman, at his leisure, receive tidings
from Foreign Courts: here he may learn what difference there is betwixt the
Coulter and the Scepter, the Share and the Shield. Here may the Merchants wife
pity her poor husband, Merces domestica in conjugio, longinqua in navigio
sita est.
tossed with so many adverse winds, environed with so sundry dangers, and
exposed to so miserable adventures; she cannot choose but play true at home,
that has a husband so faithful abroad, who endangers himself to make her
secure: why should any come into his hazard, that like a Tenis-ball casts
himself into every hazard? Here the wife of the valiant Soldier may see what
difficulties her distressed husband is exposed unto, heat, cold, watching,
hunger, thirst, all inconveniences, to propagate the glory of his Country, and
purchase himself a name eternally memorable. His poor family has reason to
power out their prayers for his deliverance, and thankfully ascribe all glory
to the power of Heaven for his safe return. To be brief, what particular
estate not engaged to Relations of this nature? The description of a Mariners
danger.
The Mariner sees his dangers; and seeing them, observes the influence of the
Stars, and Planets, the Orion and the Pleiades; yet in all these observances,
he gathers there is a Power above, whom the Sea and winds obey (...) to him
therefore, as (the expertest Pilote) he flies for succor, finding no harbor
more serure, no repose more safe. The Soldiers discipline by Histories.
The Soldier sees into the Discipline of Arms; and (by History) apprehends
how a small handful of Men have oft-times conquered an Army, to the judgment of
Man invincible: he sees into it, and admires the wonderful power of God, who
works oft-times directly against all means, to teach us thus much: that his
power is not limited to means; but can effect (without the least instruments)
what in his sacred Synod he has ordained. Here the Merchant fees into the
riches of the whole Earth, how it pleases God to subject all things to the
service of Man, to the end Man might only reserve himself for the service of
God: he observes the exceeding favors of Heaven shown upon Earth, and he
collects hence, that those joys,: whose comforts and exceeding treasures which
he keeps for the Elect in Heaven, must needs be great above all comparison.
Si tanta solatia in die lachrymarum, Aug. Soliloq. cap: xxi.
quanta conferet in die nuptiarum? These considerations must of necessity move
him to play the good Merchant, who finding one Jem of price, will sell all and
buy it.

Yet see the misery of Man! A Motive to thankfulness, derived from a
Commemoration of man's irreparable misery, without Gods ineffable mercy.
That he who has received all things from that insiccate Fountain of Divine
Bounty, should prefer the fruits of Misery, before the promises of Gods Mercy!

Those erring Philosophers, when they conceived those sweet-relishing comforts
they enjoyed by the Ministry of the four Elements, they could not (poor
deluded Souls!) ascribe less than the Title of a Deity to every distinct
Element. Zeno makes Fire; Zenophanes Earth; Four several Philosophers
ascribed distinct Deities to the four Elements.
Anaximenes Air; Hippeas Water, to be their Gods. Yet, when all these Elements
join in one voice and vote, crying, We are not your Gods, seek him above us:
H^e is your God, He is our God who made both you and us; We become less
thankful to our true God, than they to their false Gods.

A Motive, then, to Thankfulness, might be worthily hence derived from a
Commemoratioon of Man's irreparable Misery, without Gods ineffable Mercy.

Glorious is the Image he h'as imprinted in him; various and beauteous be
those graces he h'as bestowed on him; a more precious prize is reserved for
him: and are not all these of power to woo and win him? Again, should he
reflect upon himself, and consider how by sinful declining, he is daily
descending to a miserable condition, from which, without Gods great mercy there
is no redemption: he would turn, no doubt all Niobe: and with pious tears,
holy vows, religious purposes, virtuous actions, labor his freedom from
captivity, to re-possesse him of his primitave liberty. Histories are plenteous
in examples, relating the miseries of Eminent States; and how soon those, who
to the eye of the World, appeared most happy; closed so cheerful a Day with
an Evening Summons of irreparable misery. And the greatest ground of their
unhappiness, took life generally from their own selfe-confidence. It was the
Saying of that Noble Themistocles: "I had perished, had I not perished. And it
is the general condition of all Mankind: Men are never farther from
happiness, than when they seem to be in most happiness. For what is this
Theater of Tragic encounters, Where we act this calamitous Scene of our life,
but ever hung about with mourning? Troilus was held more happy than Primus,
because he dyed younger, and therefore his tears fewer than Priamus.
Mithridates had been more happy, if he had dyed sooner before he saw his
misery. Darius, while victorious, might have dyed gloriously; a few longer
days eclyp^'d his glory. He, who sometimes thirsted after Sovereignty, and
failed in that which he most sought, when in his flight he drunk muddy and
stinking water, said; That he never drunk a sweeter draught.

Contraries by opposition receive best illustration. Let us eye the condition
of those States which many years have preceeded us, and collect our own
happiness by their disquiets. Sweet is War to them that have not tryde it.
But such as rightly weigh it, with the inconveniences that accompany it, will
render all thanks to that Prince of Peace, by whose blessing they enjoy it.

These, by daily experience can distinguish of the Utilities betwixt Peace and
War. They observe, how in Peace, Sons bury their Fathers: but in War,
Fathers bury their Sons: how in Peace, the sick are healed: but in War,
the whole are wounded. Where it is doubtful, whether the Agent or Patient be
more miserable. It is an excellent Rule, which is commended to us, Bellum nec
timendum, nce provocandum. Plin. Panegyr. ^raj^^^.
in the use of War: Neither to provoke taking up of Arms, nor to lay them
down upon just occasion offered. But how happy we; when in this our Enclosed
Garden, our own Olive may feed us, our own Vine cheer us, our own
Fig Tree shadow us! This, other Neighbour-States are far from enjoying;
yea, such, as so nearely bound us, that, "Exigua prohibentur aqua -- A small cut
divides us, but a great difference of condition betwixt us. This, in the
remembrance of others unhappines, should induce us to thankfulness.

God has in store Judgment as well as Mercy; of the first Cup others, and
those our Neighbors, have deeply tasted, of the latter, our Cups have been
plenteously sweetened.

God has powered down the Viols of his Wrath upon other Nations, in sending
out those three fearful Messengers, and in shooting those three fatal
Arrows; Famine, Sword and Pestilence; We only who deserve least, have shared
in the last, and have for a season mourned, yet are not we converted: our
grief being for most part rather for decrease of our Trade, or Traffic, or
the decay of our Worldly estate in some measure, than hearty sorrow for
incurring Gods displeasure.

The only useful way for us in this Review of Gods Mercies to us, and his
Judgments upon others, is to retreeve our thoughts from earth; to fix our
affections where we have stored our divinest Treasures. Tunc vera requie ^or
afficitur, quando in Coelestibus unice figitur.
And as Heaven h'as shut her windows of Judgments to us, and has opened them
upon others: And h'as opened the windows of his Mercy to us, which he has
shut from others: let it be our especial care to ram up our windows, I
mean our outward Senses, that Death enter not in by them; and Tarpeia-like,
Intra cancellos tennere Sensus, Comprimant saeuos ut amoris aestus, integrae
mentis repetendo quaestus Limine pacis.
betray our chiefest Cittadell unto them.

The Poet in the person of some Virtuous Ones, expressed neatly the Sovereign
effect of this receipt in these Words: Within their Lodges they their eyes
restrained,
That Lures of light love might be still refrained,
Whence the rich prizes of pure minds they gained
With peace adorned.


Thus if our affections were erected, our actions directed, and our ways
corrected, we should soon (to use Seneca's words) Gather our Vessels in the
Haven safely, and after a long perilous voyage, arrive with Glory.

Every private household is a little Kingdom within it self, and needs
instructions (though not so consequently serious) as the greatest Palace, and
royallest Empire: order must be observed in the one, as well as in the other; a
Principality in both, and a subjection to both. What fitter for the householder
to train his children, servants, and attendants in (next Divine Writ) than
the reading of profitable Stories, such as excite to Virtue, and stir up
their minds to the undertaking of something worthy a resolved spirit? I know
the base minded Groom hearing the prosperous success of Lucius Quintius, All
Arts may be reduced to noble attempts and condign fortunes by their own
professions.
who was chosen one of the Patricij from his Plow stilt, and afterward by his
valor and magnanimity, reserveth the name to this day, of Triumphalis
Agricola: a poor Husbandman sitting in his Chair of Triumph, will desire by
all means to imitate so notable a president; scorning to rippe up the bosom
of the earth, when he may purchase himself more fame by the deblazing his
honor upon earth. The home-spunne Shepherd, hearing the renowned Acts of
Romulus, fed and brought up among Shepherds: and of Cirus, who bare himself a
Prince among Shepherds, will cast away Scrippe and Sheepe-crooke, and behave
himself a worthy successor in their profession. The Gardener has an Emperor
of his profession, to imitate, and an honest one too, as his name implies, to
wit, Probus. The Wood-man or Forrester, a Pompilius. The Diviner, a Zoroastres:
and the Philosopher, an Antonius. But many have we, that we may better imitate
than Princes: as their state was eminent, so were their natures depraved. Royal
Errors.
We shall read that many of them were as good Law-breakers, as Lawmakers; and
the greatest Vices appeared least, (though most approved) in greatest men. They
had ever virtuous pretenses to shadow vice: sin became clothed in Tissue. We
shall see impunity of offenses to be a great supportresse of them, presuming
still on the Kings mercy, and squaring their course to his Discipline: for
Subjects love to imitate their Prince, either in Vice or Virtue: but more are
there inclined to the worst than the best; making this conclusion, through long
and inveterate custom of sin; which Medaea in that cunning and quaint
Discourse seemed to compass, with this subtle preparation, laying this
grand-hold of proceeding: Fructus est scelerum, nullum tibi scelus putare: A
position of Machiavel: Wherein every judicious Reader may gather the admirable
and inscrutable wisdom of God, Machiavels Position.
frustrating their devices, annihilating their purposes, never bringing their
designs to effect: yea, which is more worthy our observation, making there the
most fools, where they thought themselves to be most wise. For their policies
either in governing, or establishing Empires; How far short have their
purposes ever come to effect: Examples I could produce many of this nature, as
well Divine as Moral.

It is a safe, because a Divine Conclusion;
No Estate secure without the protection of a Supreme Power. Take a Survey of
all conditions, and you shall find Frailty the Foundation they stand on. Cares
and Fears, Shadows they cannot fly from. No Guard so strong, as to secure from
Fear a Princes state: yea, he shall find his very Kingdom to be his Prison
while he is in it, Omne regnum suo principi carcer est, si ^^cat, alienum.
and to be another when he is removed from it. Yea, he shall find nothing to
be more profitable for a King, than sometimes not to play the King. Yea, were
there no Enemies to invade him; No disloyal hearts to undermine him, yet would
he encounter with jealous and suspicious fears within himself to surprise
him. This Potion wrought strongly with Dionysius, that Tyrant of Syracuse, who
(as upon the like occasion has been formerly observed) became so suspicious,
as he would not trust his Barber to shave him,
causing his Daughters to supply the Office of Barbers. Poor Majesty! What
pleasure could this Tyrant take in having a Kingdom; when his Crown could not
sit more close to his head, than those individual Cares to a Crown clung
near to his heart? This caused Seleuchus so accustomably to say, That if a Man
knew with what Cares a Diadem was clogged; how very few ^oures he were from
disquiets freed; he would not take it up, though it lay in the street.

Yea, should neither Enmity assail him, nor infirmity inv^de him, nor cares
seize on him, nor fears surprise him; yet would he find within him, though he
had no assailants without him, that would daily amate him, nightly awake him.
And now, when he h'as summed up all his cares; and summoned all his fears; he
finds all his seeming glory, that mighty mass of Majesty, confined to a very
strait period.

Though Zerxes march along with a populous Army, drinking dry whole Rivers as
they go. Though Alexander intend to reduce Mount Athos to the proportion of a
Man; a small Molehill in comparison of a Mountain will serve to cover him. It
is not in the power of a Monarchy to plead her prerogative against Mortality.

Let Aegistus shroud himself with shame under Clitemnistra's shelter; Let
Achylles expose himself with glory to all danger; an inevitable fate attends
on both: Though Fame solemnize the Funeral of the one; but Infamy the obits of
the other.

Continent Cornelia as well as Sensual Scriboni; virtuous Lelia as well as
vicious Semphronia; modest Flavia as well as wanton Faustina; constant Octavia
as well as incontinent Messalina must share stakes equally with Fate: only they
differ in the estimate of Fame: Inaequales nascimur, aequales morimur. Unequal
in Birth, equal in Death. An equality of condition exacts an equal necessity
of our dissolution. Neither be the Low wholly more secure then the High; which
is no less sententiously than truly verifide: Winds upon Cedars with most
fury blow,
Whose fall must ruin those that grow below.


O how dearly have many of our shady Followers of Greatness bought this
Experiment! when their dependence upon such as were addicted to Ambition,
brought them along with their unhappy Masters, to a speedy ruin. No Estate
then can be secured: so long as we are Pilgrims, we must be enclosed with
perils. For as Simple men are catched by others, so are Politicians caught
commonly by themselves.

For tell me, thou Leprous Timist, who infectest the Air by which thou
breathest, make the Earth barraine whereon thou treadest, make every
creature thy enemy which thou enjoyest; what will it avail thee to be a
professed Neuter, to make Religion a politic end, to be ever resolving, and
never resolved; ever doubtful, and never settled; to be a Top which always
runs round; or a Wheel ever holding a circular Motion without progression?
To have thy Religion ebbing and flowing; thy Profession like the Soul of
Hermotimus in Plutarch, Plutarch. de Socratis Genio. Hesych. de vita
Philosophorum. Live. Dec. 1. lib. 1
and of Epemenides in Hesychius, coming and going: little caring whether
Religion sink or swim, whether thy Profession stand or fall; or like to
Metius Suffetius in Livie, who would strike or speak for neither side, until
one side go down, and then join to that which is best for Commodity?

What will this avail thee, thou temporizing changeling! Thou can not
shrowde thy self, nor actions from his eyes, who sees all things, always, at
once. He, who h'as not God pleased, shall never escape his fury unappeased.
There was never since the beginning of the world so cautious a Delinquent, that
could find an Appeal from Gods judgment.

Let the Usurous wretch scrape never so carefully; contract never so
cautelously; hoord up never so plentuously; and gull the world never so
subtilely: all this will not secure him; he h'as Sergeants within him to attach
him; besides his prodigal child, whose forlorn hopes daily and nightly
startle him.

Gnipho the Usurer (as Lucian faigneth) lies in Hell lamenting his miserable
estate, that one R^dochares an incestuous prodigal did on earth consume his
goods wastfully, which he with care and unjust means had scraped and racked
together.

This Fiction begets a representave action: we shall find few scraping
Gnipho's, but they ever leave behind them their scattring Rodochares. Be it
every man's care so to regulate his providence: that his fortunes may appear to
be the Revenues of a good Conscience: and his Seed succeed in the possession of
their inheritance. In the enjoyment of which happiness, let none of us labor
of such an Atrophie, as to want an healthful and thankful digestion of Gods
gracious benefits.

The Highest Prince then, be he never so strongly guarded; nor with foreign
Allies powerfully friended; nor with Treasures, wars sinnews, enriched; nor
with Ammunition furnished; cannot promise himself to be secure, without the
protection and assistance of a Supreme power.

How safe thought Cirus himself established in his new Translated Monarchy?
when behold his security ends as miserably, as his beginnings had a flourish of
seeming happiness: Unfortunate he was for to be deprived of his hoped-for
Greatness, by a Sex so weakly effeminate: Soucing that Head (which was Head
to a powerful government) in a Tunnell of blood, with this bitter invection:
Satia te sanguine quem diu sitijsti, Just. 1. lib.
cujusque insatiabilis semper fuisti.

The like of his successor Cambyses, who hoping to plant himself in a royal
Throne by blood, miserably ended his own life by his own blood. Ipse enim
gladio spo^te sua evaginato, in femore graviter vulneratus, occubuit. ib.
An excellent and notable example of a sacrilegious and blood-thirsty Prince,
who sought to establish himself by indirect means* (to wit) by the murder of
his own Natural Brother Mergis. I insist longer upon examples, because I have
oft-times found that Sentence of Demosthenes to be most true: (...). Examples
best motives to piety, confirmed by the Orator Demosthenes.


These examples being best motives unto Piety, and, indeed, more forcible, in
that we have two occasions in exemplary Presidents of imitation; the one to
caution us not to do this or that, least we fall into the like punishment,
being attended on by the like means: The other (like a sweet lenitive)
inducing us by reasons drawn from profit, which we conceive may redound a-any
way by the like examples; which the Poet seems to illustrate when he says:
Exemplo alterius qui sapit, ille sapit.

The greatest benefit in private, I imagine to be drawn likewise, from the
right and exact use of History: which particular good I have ranked in the
second place, and that is this: In private to behold the sundry dispositions of
Princes and People: Reasons whereof cannot be given, but only from the
temperature of the Region wherein they live: Which reasons drawn from
conjecturall grounds, are oftentimes deceived in themselves; as in disposing or
ordering of States to the square of wisdom.

This benefit I have gathered, and placed in the Rereward: Last Observances (I
know) take greatest Impression, and none more needful than this: when we
shall have commerce with any people, than to call to mind their disposition,
lest we incur a greater mischief through our ignorance. Strangely jealous
are some Nations, they have Actaeons Eyes, perchance his Ears: We must show
our selves modestly bashful toward such; every lascivious look is as good as
a Comment for such men, taking our Eye to be the Directresse of our Heart:
Others more prodigal of their Wives reputation, seem respectlesse of their
shame, or the hostage of honor, so they may increase their Estate, and raise
their Fortunes out of Honors ruins. Other people we know to be of a surly,
proud, and intractable nature, living more by their own will (making it their
Law) than the square of Reason. Others seemingly humble, more dangerous far
than the other; under pretenses religiously honest, masking treacherous and
disloyal projects: Never less your Friend, than when seeming most so: Noli
obscurare faciem, qualis es, talis appare. Basilius.
He has a fleering look, smooth face, sleeke tongue; can observe times, and
for private advantage (like a second Sinon) unbosome himself unto you: There
be no windows in his heart, therefore believe him not; if by the transparancy
of thy eye thou could see into that rotten Sepulcher of his sugred-poisoned
heart, thou would admire so fair and beautiful an outside, to have so
loathsome and hideous an inside: Better charactred thou can not have him
than by History, it is the best Image of thy Life, and can best set out in
their own native colors such deformed Images.

No Image so near to Life, as the History of man's Life.
Nor is there any Model drawn so near to life, as History is to the Image of
Man's life. There is no affection so strongly predominant in any person now
living; which he may not find represented in lively colors, in the life's and
actions of others. And no doubt, but this affinity or resemblance of manners
begot in Pithagoras that opinion of his Metempsychosis or transmigration of
Souls: for so nearely ^ound he the disposition of One resembling an Other; as
he verily thought the Soul of that person endewed with such affections, passed
into an others body: for otherwise they could not poss^bly so nearely agree in
the temper or quality of their humors.

And should man take a due perusal of himself; what he is naturally most
affected too; what passion most rages or reigns in him; what hopes and
fears accompany him; upon what grounds those receive life in him. Again; what
receipts he finds most Sovereign to attemper those Motions in him: no doubt,
but he shall upon reading of History, meet with some One or Other, so nearely
resembling him, and inwardly like him; as he cannot choose but hug the Story
for the Statue sake. Seeing himself so nearely molded, as himself cannot be
more like himself, then he finds his mental part resembled. So as, he might
well avouch, upon the presentment of an other so like himself: Vel meipsum
nescio, vel in alio meipsum Sentio: I either know not my self, or in another I
see my self.

Might we assume that freedom which Plutarch enjoyed, in a Parallel of
preceding with succeeding times; the persons and actions present with those
that went before us; we should return as near a resemblance in ours, as ever
he did in the Symbolizing of his Princes.

Themistocles found Miltiades spirit in himself. Such like noble minded
Persons should we find in ours. Others, like Palinurus, or a love-sicke Paris,
more apt to encounter with love, then to engage themselves in any other List.
And near resemblances might we cull out as well for these as those: both for
Camp Honor and a Carpet Lover. Which might prove a singular motive to excite
Valor, even in those, whose remisser spirits stood before so rebaited, as they
might take a perfect draught of their own Physnomies by that white-liver'd
Captain, who looking himself in a Glass when he was angry, was affrighted
with his own countenance. Whereas, contrariwise, true Heroic Spirits, who
never took acquaintance of one unmanly fear, might find others so lively
resembling them, as if they lineally descended from them.

Such a Survey of Honor might rightly merit the Title of the Noble-mans
Lecture: Laying down such deserving grounds of Courtiers integrity, Martial
prowess and Christian policy, as might attract unto them an eagre desire of
imitation.

Nor in this NURSERY OF GENTRY should the quick-sighted Reader find only
discourse for Noble Personages to regulate themselves by; in the view of others
actions and dispositions, with the resemblance they find in themselves both of
their actions and dispositions: But even such, who have bestowed much precious
time in a Sedentary life, shall observe others no less affected that way, then
themselves. That near resemblance, no doubt, which Divine Plato gathered from
the report of Phocions disposition,
and his, (confirmed by intermissive Letters and other motives) drew him forth
of Asia into Cilicia, for no other cause but only to see Phocion, so much
endeared to him by the report of his virtues, and near resemblance in
conversation.

In this respect, our History may well deserve the Style of the Muses
Wardroabe. Or by reason of the Continuation of her Mixed Discourse, stored, for
the Readers more delight, with all variety, be properly entitled, The Scholars
Medley. But our care is not to insist on Style, but profit of the State: making
this our principal aim, that as in favor and feature you resemble others,
you may by a Divine emulation, retain likewise a resemblance of the virtues of
others.

Nor is it to be questioned, but as we see faces in their favor so nearely
resembling one another (though they have no relation to one an other in blood)
as they can hardly be discerned one from the other: So likewise, in the inward
favor or feature of the Mind, there is such an harmony or Divine Symmetry, as
there can be no nearer resemblance to the Eye, in those parts or lineaments of
the body.

How much then, Gentlemen, may History seem to deserve your Love; when you may
see in it as in a Mirror, the Image of your whole Life? This is no such
deceiving artificial Glass, that by the remoteness of your Object, makes
little things seem great, and great little: for this renders a true proportion
to the face of every action.

Besides this, History directs Man in the progress of this Life. History
direct man in the progress of his Life.
It never deblazons Honor in the field, but as a branch derived from the first
house. Whatsoever declines or degenerates from her, must bear no Arms without
a distinction; when Goodness suffers a deficience, it must carry no Coat
without a difference. And such Corrasives bring many times vicious habits both
to a feeling and a cure. No matter, though ill-affected minds account such
Monitors at the first for their Foes, they will hold them, when they have tried
them, for their truest friends.

Telephus, when he could find none amongst his Friends to cure his wound,
permitted his Enemy to do it. And he, who purposed to kill ^rometheus the
Thessalian, opened his Impostume with his Sword. Corrasives are ever held more
Sovereign than Cordials for old Sores. Nay, in these Treasuries of Time, you
shall find Directions from one State or Story to another, to prepare man both
for his present and future condition.

Mo^strar^ Regibus astra viam. Claud. Parad.
Stars are directing Emblemes unto Kings,
Kings to their Peers, Peers to inferior things.
History prepares man in his passage from life.
Nor stays our Historical Direction here: for it prepares Man as well in his
passage from life, as Pilgrimage of this life: showing, what diversity of
infirmities accompany us; how they are the Suburbs of Death: and how every
year, nay, every Moonth brings some one or new malady, as a Messenger of
Man's mortality.

Omnis Annus secum nova parit Mortis nuntia. Omnem Mensem secum novum pepe^isse
morbum sentiemus. Aphor. Aelius Adrianus. Animula, vagula, blandula, etc.
He will tell you too, how bitter Death is unto such, who never think of it
before they grapple with it: and this our Historian points out to life in that
sole-affectionate or Soule-passionate Dialogue of that expiring Emperor, in
his pittifully-perplexed farewell to his best-beloved, his dearest Darling.

Thus may you find in History, the Image and Life of Man, his Image after he
surceaseth to be Man. Directions for his Life; Provisions against Death:
effectual Considerations for both.

Upon a review of the Premises, we may safely draw up this Conclusion:
Historical relations, occasions of public Experiments.
Thy whole Life wrapped up in Experiments either at home or abroad, cannot teach
thee so much, as a serious discourse taking breath from one integrious History,
will teach thee in one year.

LUCIL. Scriptis aspiret meis, qui favet votis.

Laus ei soli tribuatur omnis,
Cujus afflatu Labor extat omnis,
Fructus ut vitae referantur omnes
Orbis in oras.
Imprimatur

THO. WYKES R. P. Episco. Land. Capell. Domest.
MARCH 26. 1638.
FINIS.
Errata's in the Survey.
PAge 8. lin. 1* for Scylla, read Sylla. p. ib. l. 9. for Pharmaces, r.
Pharnaces. p. 11. marg. for the Cities M^^ to tryumphant, r. The Cities
triumphant Motto. p. 14. l. 22. for whicn, r. which. p. 19. l. ult. for
guardon, r. guerdon. p. 22. l. 20. for anacted, r. enacted. p. 27. l. 18. for
Phocyon, r. Phocyons. p. 84. l. 22. dele no. p. 145. l. 2. for Scylla, r.
Sylla. p. 156. l. 1. dele is. p. 161. l. 24. for over, r. ever. ib. l. 26. for
difficulty, r. difficultly. p. 164. l. 24. for Lincius, r. Lynceus. p. 170. l.
8. for latescit, r. lacessit. p. 174. l. ult. for attendants, r. attendance. p.
194. l. 28. for l^as, r. lees. p. 205. marg. for Amazantus, r. Amiantus. p.
220. l. 9. for reasons, r. relations. * Quot folia, tot errorum fila, preli
foeda; Quot Chaleographi crimina, tot Autographi vulnera. Animadvers. p. 239.
l. ult. for we, r. were. p. 374. l. 25. for Scrutine, r. Scrutiny. p. 343. l.
16. for inventing, r. in venting. p. 347. l. 3. for Aulius, r. Aulus. p. 348.
l. 29. for never, r. never more. p. 461. marg. for beastiall, r. bestiall. p.
362. l. 9. for ices, r. vices. p. 369. l. 9. for make might, r. might make.


