AN EXPOSITION UPON THE CANTICLES, OR, SOLOMON'S Song of Songs.

Written by an unworthy Witness of the Truth of the most high God, JOHN BRAIN.

Orig. in Cant. Cant. Hom. 1. Quatuor mihi in his videor invenisse personas,
virum and sponsam, cum sponsa adolescentulas, cum sponso sodalium greges.

Idem Ibid. Audi Canticum Canticorum, and festina intelligere illud, and cum
sponsa dicere ea quae sponsa dicit, ut audias quae audivit sponsa; si autem non
potueris dicere cum sponsa quae dixit, ut audias ea quae dicta sunt sponsae,
festina vel cum sponsi sodalibus fieri; porro si and illis inferior es, esto
cum adolescentulis quae in sponsae deliciis commorantur.

Hom. 3. Intelligatur sponsus ut pote vir, non semper in domo, neque semper
assidere sponsae intra domum positae, sed exeat frequenter, and illa eum quasi
amore ejus sollicita requirat absentem, ut ipse interdum redeat ad illam.

LONDON, Printed by Robert Austin. 1651.

To my ever honored dear and faithful friend, (...). JOHN SADLER, Esquire.
Sir,
IT has been the way of the most gracious God in the Gospel, to make precious
the memory of his Saints (as in the woman that poured the box of Balm upon his
head Mar. 14.9.) by which they are said to die well reported of, Heb. 11.2. God
speaking well of them, Paul did the like by Onesyphorus, 2 Timothy 1.16.18. to
which may be added the Church Book, called the Book of Life, or of the living
believing souls, to which David alludes, Psalm. 87.6. by which their memory was
continued among the blessed when dead. Sir these ways cease, yet the Doctrine
contained therein remains, which is a thankful acknowledgement of the favors
we have received from God, by such God raised up to do us good in this world,
of which as Paul said, 2 Timoth. 1.18. in how many things you have ministered
unto me, (not Timoth.) but God knows very well, the Lord be be merciful to
you, and to your house, and so sanctify this unworthy Treatise, and brief
Exposition to your soul, that the sense of Christ, the savor of the Divine
Life, and the grace of God may be stirred up in you, and increased thereby to
eternal life, which instead of Silver and Gold I presume to present you with,
and remain,

Yours always to observe you, and seek God for you: John Brain.

THis Book of the Canticles is a Prophecy of the state of the Church, as under
Christ; and the rule of the world, as under Moises, to be restored according to
the pattern of the Judicial or Moral Law, and the pattern of the Gospel.

1. He begins his first Chapter with the call of the Gentiles, occasioned by
his marriage with the Egyptian Queen, a type of the call of the Gentiles, and
their marriage to Christ.

2. It appears that in this book Solomon's eye was altogether on the Gospel
estate, and not the time before, as Mr. Brightman has expounded, and applied
much of the same.

3. In that of the Jews estate, if in any part be would have spoken of the
Mosaicall rule, but he only passes it over with the Winter is past, Cap. 2.
Ver. 11. and then begins with the Voice of Christ, the Baptist, the Turtle,
Christ himself, the flowers, the Apostles, the pruning of the Vine, the call of
men from the Jewish old state in John's baptism, and the Apostles gathering
believers into the Church out of the world, (...) which is translated the
singing of Birds, but contrary to the scope of the Prophecy, which Gal. 4. is
admirably illustrated in the Allegory of Hagar and Ismaels abode in Abraham's
house a while, that is, until the time of the new Covenant, when the Vine is
cut, and they cast out of doors, so that this Song may be called the Song of
Songs, as the Gospel is the Wine of Wines, the Wisdom that excells all
Wisdom, so this being of the Gospel estate of the Church, it excelled his
Songs of the Law estate, or those that commended his wisdom and knowledge in
the discovery of the Nature of the Plants and trees, friend the things done
lately, with those now doing, and what else are to be done, are so set forth
herein, as in none of the Prophecies else where they are not to be found; let
not my brevity used herein be offensive, because I am necessitated thereunto
diversely, time may enlarge me and it, and gain me opportunity to present unto
thy view the other Key of Prophecy and Council, which I have long intended by
an Exposition on the Revelations, then which two Scriptures, I know none for
History, Mystery, Prophecy, and all other fulness of variety to exceed, by
understanding whereof thou may be abundantly made rich in knowledge, and
wise to understand the Salvation, Purposes and Council of God, whereunto thou
shall do well to give heed, as to a light shining in a dark place, that thou be
not comprehended by the now darkness, nor deceived in thy hopes and
happiness, which thou shall do well to beware that thou may be saved from
the now immediate burnings of the man of sin, and that thou may stand before
the Son of Man, who shortly will appear on the Clouds of the Truth, in the
glory of the Gospel, which is all and only that is sought for at thy hands, by
the Author hereof:

Who is an unworthy witness of this, and the other truth of the most high God,
JOHN BRAIN.

AN EXPOSITION UPON THE CANTICLES.
CAP. I.
IT has been the way of the Spirit, to shadow out under several Metaphors one
and the same thing, to illustrate and set forth his mind the more clear
thereby, as in the Revelations, and the Histories of the life of Christ, many
Parables diversely set forth the same Kingdom, and visions the same truth.

In this Book ye have the rise, the fall, and restoration of the Gospel
Church, as set up among both Jews and Gentiles, most excellently predicted and
shadowed out unto you.

1. The Prophet begins with the Gentile Church, Ver. 1. Kiss me, etc. Psalm 2.
Ver. 12. Servants were bound to their Master by a Kiss, in which she begins to
show her love to her Lord, in desiring love and sign of favor from him, which
is spiritually in Gods speaking, love to her, and lovely of her; as after he
calls her his Love, Dove and perfect one: as men show an inward love, by an
outward complement of a kiss, so God loves inwardly those whom he speaks well
of, and unto, it being the first of her acquaintance with sight of God.

2. The reason why she demands this favor is, because therein she apprehended
an excellency above other things, for says she, thy loves are better then
wine, wine is good, but the Church discernes an excellency in the loves of God,
it is beyond all compare, which shows that Christ wins the soul to himself, by
the inward excellency that appears to the creature to be in him. Ver. 3 Because
of the savor of thy good Ointments. Here by Ointments is meant the gifts of
God, the human nature of Christ was endowed withal, who was anointed with the
Oil of Gladness above his fellows.

2. These did breath forth a sweet savor from Christ, as from a Rose with
which the Church is greatly delighted to smell unto for refreshment.

3. The Excellency of Christ preached and revealed like precious balm powered
out, perfumed the persons hearts that heard it, as with divine odors.

4. Therefore because of the smell and savor of his Name and Gifts, the
Virgins, that is, such as are not yet united to Christ in the Gospel way of
marriage, both love and desire him, as a husband to be enjoyed by them. The
Catechumen^ Ver. 4. Draw me, we will run after thee.

1. In the words she finds in her self a backwardness, a slownesse toward
Christ, as the Lord reproved the Disciples for being slow of heart to believe,
so the Spirit manifests hers to her self, within her, and reproves her.

2. That it is the work of Christ to draw her violently to himself, from all,
and against all difficulties and allurements of the world by his heavenly call:

3. This was not in some, but the whole Church.

4. Christ easily frees from delays the delaying souls, and makes them find
their feet to run after him, who by their delays seem to fail them.

The King brought me into his Chambers.

1. Christ's word is now of command with her, who is now made subject to him,
and admitted by him ino the house of God.

2. He brings her into his Chambers, which are the distinct administrations of
the Gospel, under which before she never was, distinct from that. Cap. 8. ver.
2.

3. On this say the Infants, we will be glad in thee, not in our selves, or any
thing else besides thee.

4. We say the young men will rejoice, having an addition of joy in this second
administration added unto us, of what we had when in the first.

5. We Fathers will remember thy love to us before and after calling, when
Infants, and when in their youth, which thought on and remembered, is better
then wine, as natural men solace their souls with wine, so do we with the
thoughts of that love that is in thee to us, and has been showed us.

The righteous, that is, all Believers love thee from the Child to the Man,
grown up in thee.

Ver. 5. I am black, but comely, O Daughters of Jerusalem.

1. By Jerusalem is meant the Gospel Church, and not the state of the Jews
before Christ, as Brightman.

2. Nor is it meant the Jews Church under that state, but the Gentiles, who
thus speaks of her self to the Jews.

3. She not only speaks to Jerusalem the Mother, but the Daughter Churches of
the Jews, which the first state of the Jews Church did not produce, the Church
of that Nation then being one Church only at Jerusalem, until others after
were constituted.

4. She was black in her self, that is, in her own corruptions, but pure in
Jesus Christ.

5. In her self as the Tents of Kedar, or darkness, in Christ as the Curtains
of Solomon, in which Solomon's glory was described or set forth, as Christ's is
in the Justification of sinners, with which, as with a Vail he hid the sins of
the Elect from the sight of God.

Ver. 6. Look not on me because I am black for the Sun has shined on me.

1. The Jews at the conversion of the Gentiles questioned Peter for baptizing
them, others forbid the Apostles to teach to the Gentiles, Acts 11.3 1 These.
2.16.

2. She warns the Jews not to judge her, because long in sin and darkness, to
be incapable of grace and favor from Christ, now under the Gospel state.

The Sun, that is, Christ had now looked in mercy on her, and had passed by the
blackness in her, therefore they much more ought so to do, others understand
the Sun here set down as the cause of her blackness.

1. The children of my mother, Paul and Barnabas the Apostles, and the children
of the Church of Jerusalem, made the Gentile Church-keeper of the Vineyards,
the Jews Church being broken off.

2. They were angry with Galatian Churches with burning zeal, and moved against
the Corinthians for Apostasy and corruption. Gal. 3.1. 1 Cor. 4.21.

3. They made her keeper of the Vineyards, when they left the Jews, and turned
to the Gentiles, committing Law, Estate, and Gospel to the Gentiles.

4. She kept not her own Vineyard, but became Apostate after the way of
Antichrist, in which was the fall of the Church about four hundred years, the
new Covenant, which was that of the Church, was her now Vineyard.

Ver. 7. Make me know, O thou whom my soul loves, where thou feedest.

1. Now it was not known where Christ was taught, or had called men to teach,
if any had known, it had been the Church who knows not, but is to seek.

2. She desires to know of Christ, and be directed by him where the truth was
indeed taught, there was to be so much and so much glosing error taught, and
cried up for truth among men in this time.

3. Where thou make them lie down, giving rest to the Church in the scorching
time of Antichristian persecution, Tyranny, and delusion, she being in want of
satisfactory knowledge of her Lord and his mind.

4. The reasons.

1. There are at this time many Flocks besides Christ's.

2. Who are the flocks of Christ's companions, such as use Christ's Name,
Authority, and truth as their own.

3. And make the flocks theirs, and not Christ; Lutherans, and Calvinists,
Brownists, Socinians, Papists, Pelagians, Arians, Independents, Anabaptists,
Presbyters.

4. Without Christ shows her, yea makes her know where he now feeds, she is in
danger to turn from Christ to any of these, of which Christ Matthew 24.24.26.
has admonished us, that we be not turned to lies.

Ver. 8. Contains Christ Resp. or directions to this dubious case and Question.

1. If thou know not O thou fairest among women, notes to us, that the souls
that do not know where Christ feeds, and desire to know, are the true Believers
of this time, and shows a mighty darkness and loss of truth among them.

2. Go forth by the footsteps of the Flock: Mark, not of the Flocks of Christ's
companions, but the true Church Primitive, as of one.

3. The Flock was past away, but left it is steps in the way, that is, it is
practice for us to walk by in the Word.

4. Feed thy Kids by the tents of the Shepherd, or Apostles, under
Evangelists, Pastors, Teachers, the Tents set up by the Apostles, which until
the Church restoration, the Saints were to be fed by, not in these Tents.

Ver. 9. To the Troops in the Chariots of Pharaoh have I likened thee, my
Beloved.

1. The Saints as yet are in captivity under Antichristian power and authority.

2. They are in his Chariots, by which he wars, and in which he is carried to
war, upheld, and defended.

3. By Troops, they are fixed to him, and as horses fiercely and fearlesly they
carry on and serve that power, against the enemies thereof.

Ver. 10. On the checks of these horses are rows of stones, as it were set in
their bridles, to show the esteem that the Pharaonicall power should set on
these horses above others, having a gold chain, or a sweet obedience in them,
to the then Magistracy for conscience, as the horses of Zeba and Zalmuna,
Judges 8.26.

Whom the Magistrate then found to be of most excellent and necessary use, for
their then preservation; God miraculously by them, and for them, sending
salvation to those they serve, as that other thundering Legion, that sometimes
served the Roman Emperor in his wars, who gained by prayer, rain in their
necessity, and saved their whole Army from perishing.

Ver. 11. We will make thee, that is, I Christ and the Magistracy set out by
the then Pharaoh, we will make thee Borders of Gold, some external dignity is
here promised to the Church to be conferred on her, in which Christ as well as
Pharaoh will have a hand in the accomplishment thereof.

But I rather read the words Tryers of Gold, with Pastors of Silver, that is, I
Christ will enable some with judgment to try the truth, as Goldsmiths gold and
silver, and the Magistrate shall accordingly appoint them thereunto, after
which the true Ministry in the Pastors of Silver shall be restored, Amos 1.1.
The word for Studs is read Shepherds, or Pastors of Tekoah, alluding to that
Malach. Cap. 3. Ver. 3. which work is again to be done in this Age of ours,
Rev. 20.4.

Ver. 12. While the King was in his Crown, vid. cap. 3. ult.

By the King, is meant Jesus Christ in his Crown and signifies that (...) the
Saints like troops were in Pharoah's Chariots, until Christ upon the discovery
of the truth comes to be made King, and the Kingdom (...) be the Lords, Rev.
6.2.

Spiknard gave a good smell, that is, the Church became preciously to be
esteemed among the sons of men, and her estate to be accounted of as honorable,
and her actions before condemned to be now praised, and had in honor of such
as were round about her.

Ver. 13. My beloved is to me as a little box of Myrrh, Vid. Brightman, or bag
to put Myrrh; showing, that all sweetness and perfumes were placed and laid
up of God in Christ, as in their place.

I will place it between my breasts, it being the place whence the savor of
Christ most sweetly rises to the Saint, that being a place where women place
such things as they affect, and the place of her husband, that so the savor of
Christ may be ministered to all that suck of her breasts thereby. Myrrh was
that which was part of the perfume offered up to God, and signified that in hoc
loculo, in this little repository the divine nature of God came to dwell and to
inhabit in, and in it, with us, when found in our nature.

Verse 14. (...) Orbatus fui redemptoris I was deprived of the Reedmer, that
is, whilst I was under Antichrists bondage I was denied the knowledge of
Christ. But My Beloved came unto me in the vinyards of Enged^, that is, in the
dispensations of the Law and Gospel, being the Vineyards of the chief Princes:
So in Scripture sometime the Law estate is set out by a Vineyard, and sometime
the Gospel, but here both; when both again are restored to the Church, as at
first among the Saints and sons of men.

Verse 15. Christ, Behold thou art fair my Beloved, behold thou art fair, thine
eyes are Doves. Now that the Church ^ad both Vineyards, not one only, Christ
is delighted in her beauty, and shows she is approved in his sight very
highly: And above all commends the simplicity of her eyes, who were only
delighted with, and carried after the truth, in all things worshipping the true
God ni Spirit and truth: She was fair in Christ by Justification, and in her
self Sanctified.

Verse 16. Church, Behold thou art fair my Beloved, our bed is green. As Christ
beheld the Churches Beauty, so the Church beholds Christ's; and seeks to find
full content in him, and shows she was contented in him 2. She found sweetness
and pleasure in contemplating the Beauty and comeliness of her Lord, who was all
in all to her eyes and desires. 3 She says, Our bed is green; or rather
according to the Metaphorical interpretation of the word, it is new, that is,
of the new estate of the Gospel; or new, she having not yet brought forth any
other Churches or Daughters to Christ: A Bed, signifying the way of worship the
Church had by Christ to worship God in.

Verse 17, The Beams of our house, that is, the visible Church are Cedars, men
of great account, such need the Beams to be, and full of strength, and their
Rafters are of Fir. Men straight and upright, of green and flourishing life.

Cap. 2.1. I am the Rose of the Sharon, and Lilly of the Valleys. The Church
was as a Rose growing in a desolate field: Sharon was a field near Lebanon, and
desolate: And the Lilly of the Valleys. Man's estate is as a Valley, among whom
here is none desirable but this Lilly, in whom the world savoured sweetness,
and Saints saw a beauty and loveliness.

Verse 2. Christ, As the Lilly among the thorns, so is my love among the
daughters.

1. By daughters I understand false Churches, the Daughters of Babel.

2. The true shall be among the false.

3. The false Churches are Thorns, the effects of the fall of man Naturally,
and the Church Mystically. Gal. 4.29.

4. The true Church grows as a Lilly among them, far exceeding, and no way to
be compared with them: which will appear after the Churches Restoratio most
glorious.

Verse 3. Church, As the Apple Tree among the Trees of the Forest, so is my
Beloved among the sons.

1, Christ in taking our nature, is among the sons.

2. But more Excellent then they; they were fruitless, he fruitful to man*

3. The sons here were false Christ's or Teachers joined to the Daughters, or
false Churches; also by the Trees may be meant other Kings of Nations, which
are the sons of a people, and brought out by them.

1. I desired greatly to be in his shadow: The shadow of Kings was their
protection from violence of men; Christ's is from the violence of sin, Satan,
Death, Hell; and the Wrath of God, and curse of Law.

2. I sat down as desiring no other but this, and found Rest, and Peace, and
safety therein; which I could not find no where but here, Mat. 11. v. 28

3. His fruit was sweet to my taste, she would not be defended by, but fed of
Christ also, in which the Lord communicates himself in sweetness to her, with
as much delight as she received it from him.

4. The fruits of Christ's Death, Suffering, and Resurrection being very sweet
and saving, as the Tree of Li^e, Rev. 22.2. Christ giving the savor thereof in
the sweetness of Gods Divine love and mercy to her thereby.

verse 4. He brought me into the house of Wine

1. That is the society of men in Christ, where the Lords Supper was to be
administered, at which the whole Church met, partly celebrated by Wine, in which
the Churches estate was fully constituted 1 Cor. 11.20.

2. Called the House of Wine, because the wine of Gospel joy and peace is there
to that society, most Divinely published and applied.

3. Love was his Banner over me.

1. The Banner signifies Christ held out in the Gospel.

2. This Banner was his love.

3. This love as A Banner conserved her, and was spread over her, wrapping her
as it were up therein, as in a garment of love.

Verse 5. The Church being in this flourishing estate, once again declines* but
it is after a long time of prosperity; predicted Rev. 20.7. Satan is again let
loose, verse 8. He again by false Doctrine deceives the world, few are freed
from his delusions, when there will again open and secret Antichristian
enemies arise, and bring a very great persecution of the Saints, but not so
overcome them as before; v. 5. the Antichristian Ministry said to be dead at
the binding of Satan, or said again to live after the 1000 years, and the Devil
got his liberty, when the Church cries stay, or support me with Flaggons or
Vessels, in which the Wine or Gospel Grace was laid up in; which shows she was
much burdened and oppressed, and cries for support and help from the World, in
which it seems she had few left to comfort her. Comfort me with Apples. Christ
is compared to the Apple tree, and the works of Christ for the Church in his
Mediatourship are those Apples with which she would be comforted: I am sick
(says she) of love: That is, she loved Christ dearly, but the Priests were
false to her, and would not satisfy her, they kept both Flagons and Apples
from her also, leaving her to her fainting estate.

Verse 6. Christ supplies their lack, and he puts one hand under her head that
hangs down, and is very heavy, and the other embraces her, that is, holds her
up that she sink or faint not, which ends in sleeps and drowsiness.

Verse 7. Are the words of Christ, as (...) in the Femenine, clears
sufficiently again, he speaks them to the Daughters of Jerusalem that they wake
not his love; that is, the Gentiles Church, until she be made willing thereunto.

Now in this verse Christ concludes the first period of the Gentiles Church,
having in it, its rise, its fall, its restoration and decay after that again.

That in this Part is meant undeniably the Gentile Church.

1. She had never received a kiss from Christ; that is, Christ never owned her
as yet.

2. She is shaddow^d out by Pharaoh's daughter a Gentile.

3. She is made keeper of the Vinyards, the Jews being broken off.

4. She keeps not her own Vinyard, but turns Antichristian.

5. The Saints are employed in Pharaoh^s Chariots or Wars, in Reformations.

6, The fellowship intimated in the bed, Cap. 1. verse 16. which she had with
Christ now, was new, and of no long contiuance, before the Gospel estate she
being without God and Christ in the world. Ephesians. 2.12.

7. These things are so spoken of the Gentiles, that they cannot be rightly
applied to the Jews Church or State.

The Jewish Church begins Cap. 2. Verse 8.
1. The Voice of my Beloved The Baptist was that Voice in the Wilderness that
prepared the way of Christ, or gave notice of his coming.

2. John he came leaping upon the Mountains, as it were to beat them into a
Plain. This coming sets out the end of his Ministry, and what he was to do upon
the Hills also, Luke 3.5.

Verse 9. My Beloved; that is, Christ is like the Roe, or rather the Church
apprehends in Christ the likeness of glory, or appearance of glory in his
Divine Nature; and says my Beloved is to be assimulated to glory (or the young
of Rams) in his Humane Nature, being the Lamb slain from the beginning of the
World: Behold, he stands behind our Wall; the Humane Nature was as a Wall
behind which Christ stood; being among the Jews, his Humanity, and the meanness
of his Estate, was as a Wall which hindered them from the sight of him; (it may
be applied to the Ceremonial Law) he looks through the Windows; that is, the
Divine Nature did manifest it self through those out-lets, as by the Windows of
the Humane Nature, whereat he gives out the knowledge of his Godhead (as by
the hand) when he did any wonders, God came to manifest himself to those that
saw them; so when he taught, he manifested himself by that Teaching to men* God
as it were looking out at the Windows in his forgiving sins, etc. Thus Paul to
Timothy, God was seen of men; showing himself through the Lettice, by the many
ways God had to discover himself by Christ's Humane Nature to man: 1 Timothy 3.16.
manifested in Flesh.

Verse 10. The Church speaks of Christ as her Love; he answers her love, and
speaks in love to her again; it was both answer and speech also to the Churches
he now teaches, and the Church knows his voice from any other: He says to
her, Arise, that is, from thy earthly estate to a heavenly, from a servant to a
Queen, from beggarly Rudiments, to Royal Ornaments Again he calls her to come
away; the first shows how hardly the Jews were brought from their Ceremonies,
or that they were first brought in part from that way of worship by Christ, and
then fully afterward by his Apostles. The words in the Original signify come
from thy self, first as natural, and secondly, as a member of the Jews Church;
here Prophetically is hinted at Christ calling, the Apostles call, the
seventy's call at several seasons.

Verse 11. He uses reasons to persuade her hereunto, that she may not doubt to
Arise and come away upon his call; which shows men should not do any more then
they have warrant for in the Word from God to do, but sit still until they have
his Word to walk by, as Mat. 14.28. Peter did.

1. The winter is past, a time that is bad to travel in for a woman; in which
the Lord compares the law estate to winter, the Gospel to summer; in the winter
the days are short, and nights long, the Sun shaddowed, not shining with so
strong a heat, all things dead and cold; so were the Ceremonies and Service of
that time if compared with the sta^e of the Gospel.

2. The Reign or Ministry is now changed from Law to Gospel. Heb. 7.12.

3. It is now come to me, I am now thy Priest, and no more Aaron. and 26.28.

Verse 12. The flowers appear on earth; who are the Apostles, the first fruits;
and the voice of the Turtle, which is Christ proaching and preached
Evangelically in our land: which is applied in especial to the land of Judea,
in which the Lord only taught himself, and was first taught by such others as
he sent forth. The time of singing of birds is come; the seventy read it (...),
and indeed (...) I rather read according to the mystery, the time amputationis
arboris, of the cutting tree or vine, then singing of Birds; because then
unbelievers were cut off from believers; then Ismael was cast out of the house,
and not suffered to inherit with Isaac, Gal. 4. from verse 21, to 31. before
which the Gospel was not clearly and fully to be applied, until believers were
by themselves separated from the world into Societies or Churches.

Verse 13. The Fig Tree, that is, the Jewish first Church appeared in the
world, and began with the beginning of the summer, Matthew. 24.32. whose fruit
quickly falls. The Vine, which is the Gentile Church, had sent forth their
Grapes, and therewith a favor; as the Church of Rome, whose praise was spread
far abroad, and that of Macedonia. Again, he calls his Spouse to come away;
showing that the Jews did retain many ceremonies after they were a Church which
Christ would not have them do, and shows Christ would not allow of any.

Verse 14. My Dove, that is the Church, now the Spouse of Christ, Thou art in
the Castles of the Rock; that is the Saints were in their several Societies,
under their threefold Ministry, as in their Castles, or strengths of safety,
which is significantly called the holes of the Rock (Christ) they being
instituted by him. They are called the hid places, because none but the saints
come there. And then hid places of her measure, every one being measured by his
state in Christ, that comes into any of those holes; Ephesians. 4.16. Antichrists
Church is the strong hold of the false Religion, as this is of the true, Rev.
18.2.

Let me see thy countenance, or make me behold thy appearance, make me hear thy
voice, in which he stirs up the Church to prayer, and to an apprehension of the
happy estate she was in, though afflicted, and miserable in appearance to the
world, though dark, shaddowy, and corrupt in her own eyes; yet in this there
papears a desireableness in the one, and a sweetness (...) in the other,
through the variety of gifts she had bestowed upon her, and virtues that were
in her.

Verse 15. Take us the Foxes, which are false Teachers, who crept in wilily
into the Churches society to spy out their liberty; among which some are more
wily then others, but all are to be taken, and the words are

1. As it were spoken of Christ and the Church, to the Ministry, to whom the
rule of the Church and its oversight was committed, Acts 20.28.

2. The Vines are Gospel Churches only, the National Church Rule of Moses being
fallen.

3. These Foxes did destroy them, as in Galatia, Coloss, Corinth.

4. Our Vines, that is, Churches have tender grapes, that is Believers, weak in
faith, Infants in knowledge, and easily deceived by seducers, Gal 16. Ephesians.
4.14. Gal. 2.4. Acts 15.1. if things were thus in the times of the Apostles,
how were they after?

Verse 16. My Beloved is mine, and I am his: that is, as a man bestows himself
in marriage on the wife he marries, and the woman her self on the man; by
covenant tying themselves each to other: So the Church had done to the Lord
Jesus, and he to her; so that none else could say so but her self of Christ,
nor would Christ say so of any but her.

2. It shows the Church was not yet whorish, but kept her faith to her Lord
with much loyalty and love.

3. As a strange woman has nothing to do with another woman's husband, so has
no false Church to do with Christ the true church's spouse, nor Christ with them

4. He feeds among the Lillies; the Lillies are the Saints or Believers, or
rather, he feeds in them; Rev. 3.20. I will come into him, and sup with him.

Verse 17. Shows the Apostasy of the Jews Church and State they came unto in
their first defection.

1. A night comes on her, she is again troubled with Jewish ceremonies, which
yet she expect, should be driven away by the glorious light should arise again
unto her in the now restoration is to be.

2. Until when, she desires her love to appear himself as divine glory, in his
glorious nature, and as the young of Rams, being the Lamb of God that takes
away the sins of the world.

3. This she would have him, be on the mountains of Bether, that is, of
division, which the Antichristian estate, that destroyed the way of the Gospel
is eminently to be called, being Babel, and to be understood Rev. 6.14 and
16.20. whose mountains are removed and removing.

4. Though here the young of Rams be set down, to note the Humane nature, yet
you know Rev. 6. ult. that the wrath of God that sat on the Throne, and the
Lamb, was that tormented the Popish world which (...) sets out the one, and
(...) the other,

Cap. 3. Verse 1. By night on my bed I sought him.

1. This as before sets out the grand defection the Jews made, and darkness on
her, while she was shut up in that estate.

2. Her state then was, that she was asleep, insensible of this desolation, and
rested in her erroneous way, as on a bed; (called her bed) but none of Christ's.

3. In it she sought the Lord Jesus, whom her soul loved, (...) signifies her
diligent seeking Christ in her erroneous way or time of night.

4. He was not in her bed to be found, yea she sought him again and again in
her corrupt Iudaizing way of worship, but found him not.

Verse 2. I will arise now from my quondam bed, I will go about the City; that
is, she will examine Antichrist's way, having the visible show of a Church
left, but seeing the Idolatry and profaness of her in general, she will go into
the streets, that is, the meeting places of the Romish church, where things
were bought and sold, and in the broad ways of that city, which is the service
of people that lead to or from Rome, though separated from her, she seeks the
Lord in these, but finds him not, she loses her labor, and fails of her
expectation.

Note. A Prophecy showing that the Romish church would never be the means of
the conversion of the Jews* because they saw not Christ in her.

2. They sought after the Lord above all things else, a time of their desiring
Christ is coming.

Verse 3. The city here is Babel the Antichristian state; the watchmen, the
Ministers who walk about that city to preserve it in safety, and find out such
as would perturb the peace of it, and wrong the inhabitants; who quickly found
the poor Jews wandering in the dark, being raised from her bed in the dead of
the night of the Antichristian state.

Note. The Ministry of Antichrist are watchmen of the night, and the people
all under them asleep and quiet; the Ministry would not suffer any to wake or
trouble them at all out of that spiritual slumber they were over-taken with,
by the wine of fornication they drank out of Antichrists cup her false doctrine.

To whom I said (is not in the Hebrew) Saw ye him whom my soul loves?

The Jew seems to enquire of the Ministry of Antichrist concerning Christ.

1. She found him not.

2. They in the dark knew him not.

3. Or had they, they would have slain him sooner than her, who walked in the
dark with them, neither of them knowing where they went, they wanting Christ
the light to show them.

4. They give her no answer, and show their ignorance of Christ, or were not
willing to talk much of him, for fear of an Inquisition, and said nothing worth
remembrance; or were dumb dogs and could not bark.

Verse. 4. She passed from them: She saw no good to come from them, nor no
furtherance in the matter she desired of them; and therefore leaves them for
Antichristian as they were, and their city also. Sure the name of the city, the
esteem of a church, drew the Jew to look for Christ in Babel, but was deceived:
Sure where Christ is, that city suffers no night, as Babel does and did do, as
Rev. 21.23 and 25.

2. It was but a little after that she had upon inquiry rejected the
Antichristian worrhip and church, but she found him whom her soul loved.

3. She took hold of him: that is, in his truth, by believing on, and receiving
of him for her Lord, John 1.12.

4. She would not let him go when she had him: Some of her Rabbis would take
him from her* The Greek (...), Antichrists Ministry it may be fall to
dissuading of her, or to persecuting her, or Christ to stir up her love the
more, seems willing to leave her, as those Luke 24.28, 29.

5. She brings him; that is, the restored Church of the Jews bring Christ into
her mothers house; that is, into the first estate of the church set up by the
Apostles, called Jerusalem from above; which shows the new Jerusalem to be,
differs not from that that the Apostles set up in their days, in form, or
ministry, or administrations.

6. Into the chamber of her that conceived me; by the chamber is here meant in
particular, the ministry of the Teacher, in which the soul was baptized and
made a member of the church, by the first minister God shall raise up to
restore her.

Verse 5. Is an admonition to the Jews of a general Apostasy after the thousand
year, as before to the Gentiles in their period, Cap. 2. verse 7.

That this second Part undeniably concerns the State of the Jews Church, is
very clear.

1. In that the voice of the Beloved began the church, or rather made way for
it, going before Christ, being the Baptist, who only taught among the Jews.

2. Christ the Turtle was only heard in Iewry.

3. The Vine of the Jews was only pruned, and was that into which the Gentiles
were grafted in.

4. Christ he calls, and then sends out the Apostles and calls again, and then
the seventy, and calls again, before the church constitution, which was not so
done among the Gentiles.

5. The Foxes were indeed the envious Iudaizing unsound Jews. Gal. 2.4.

6. The Jews indeed have gone about the city, wandering all over the Roman
Empire or Antichristian estate, in the night state thereof, as no Nation or
People have in like kind bin dispersed, as they have bin from the beginning.

7. All these so are spoken of the Gospel estate, and of the Jew, that they
cannot be spoken of the time before Christ, nor of the Gentile churches or
Nations.

3. General part prophetically shows the restoration of the Kingdom under
Christ, in the Judicial rule and Gospel.
Cap. 3. Verse 6.
Who is this? which shows the government of the Law should be a strange thing
when it should appear, and so should the Gospel also.

2. It comes out of the wilderness, the Antichristian estate.

3. It arises as pillars of smoke, dark like vapors, as having nothing in it
discerned to be substantial, but only a vanishing thing.

4. But perfumed, having a sweet savor of Myrrh and Frankincense; Gods wisdom
and goodness manifesting it self therein after a divine way.

5. With all the powders of the Merchant, that is, the practice of the Apostles
and the people of God should appear together in it, as in the churches.

Note. She begins with the Law rule first, and shows that that is first to be
restored in time and order.

Verse 7. Behold his bed, a bed in this Scripture is taken for a way of
worship, which is either true or false.

2. This bed is that which was Solomon's; which is, that Christ the true King
should reign over men in the way of the Law government, when such as were under
that Rule should worship God according to Moses, as under Solomon they did.

3. This being brought forth, threescore valiant men come to set it up, and to
defend it against the opposition of the many enemies it shall have, and they
are of Israel; that is, Men seeing God overcoming Esau.

4. They are called (...) being like Sampson, or David^s Worthies, in which it
appears, that but few will stand out in this work of the Reformation of the
Law-rule, especially of Magistrates and these are such as are full of virtue;
others fall off and faint in the way of the work. Sixty are numbered to do the
work.

5. They all hold Swords and will not let them go, must and will fight it out
against the opposers of this glorious and heavenly work of God.

6. They are expert in War, men that are of approved Valor and tried strength
in Battle, that know when and how to use their weapons being a time of war.

7. Every one has his Sword on his thigh; that is girt on for the Battle.

8. The reason is, because of the fears of the Night.

1. The Night here signifies the state of the world under Antichrist, it is the
state of night and darkness, as the state of Christ is the state of the day and
light.

2. In this Nightime arise many terrors and fears, through the treachery and
perfidiousness of the men of the Antichristian estate.

3. In all this it appears, that the Restoration of the worship and way of God
National, is to be by Gods appointment restored by the Sword; as Israel out of
Egypt was; when the Church estate is to be restored in the Spirit of meekness,
to which this serves and makes way for.

4. During the Night estate there is no safety nor security to be expected.

Verse 9. King Solomon, (Solomon speaks of another whilst he names himself) he
made himself (or for himself) a Throne. What is a King without a Throne? Christ
as yet is without the Throne, but now he is about to make one for himself;
which Throne shall be of the Wood of Lebanon: That is, the rule of Christ shall
be that in the world was in the time of the Temples estate; it is of the Wood
of Lebanon, and not a new Law to rule by.

1. The Pillars of it are silver: The Law was divided into two Tables, which as
Pillars hold up the Throne of Christ; for it is said, The Throne is established
by Justice, and then said to be silver; because as Silver is to Gold, so is the
Law to the Gospel.

2. Supporters: That is, those on which the Pillars stood were of Gold, it
being founded on the Will, and upheld by the Power of this Almightiness of God
and his Justice.

3. The seat thereof was Purple: Purple being a rich and Kingly color, did set
out the Authority Christ had received from God to rule by, and that others had
to rule under him.

4. The midst of it was a Coal of Love: To show, that that which was
comprehended within the Pillars of the Law, was Love; a Love like that of Fire,
much water could not quench it; and that Gods Throne of Justice was full of
Love to the Daughters of Jerusalem; or that God ruled in a way of Love over
Men, commanding love of men to himself and others.

1. The Law being holy, just, and good, not Tyrannous.

2. Commanding Love, condemning Envy, Oppression, Hate. etc.

3. In this it shows what manner of men they ought to be that ascend into this
Throne to judge, and what the judgment ought to be; and how to proceed, and
whose it ought to be.

It is very noteable that God sets down the Daughters of Jerusalem; that is,
those of the Gospel estate, who indeed have the coal of love in them which
kindled by Christ in them. But now in this verse

It is very noteable that God sets down the daughters of Jerusalem, that is,
the Gospel estate, who indeed have the coal of love in them, kindled by Christ
to God and man. But now in this verse,

Ver. 11. He calls on the Daughters of Sion, which I take to be those that
shall enjoy the Rule of the Law, as the Jews once had, and Gospel also; or it
may be the Jewish believers are meant in this place.

1. The Spirit calls on them to go forth from their captivity of darkness.

2. And to see king Solomon that they may approve of his rule, for all
authority is now given the Son, and shows, that though when Christ came in the
flesh they saw nothing in him, now that he comes to reign, they shall behold
another glory in him then before.

3. It may be applied to the people and present state of the Jews, that they on
the giving up of the Kingdom by the Gentiles to Christ, are called forth from
their Dens of darkness, to see and behold what honor was now done to Christ,
to whom Solomon their most Royal King could no ways compare.

4. Christ the true King of peace was now crowned with that crown that Solomon
his Vicegerent was crowned by the Jews, and so proved to be the Christ, of
which sales God against all the worlds great opposition, yet have I set my King
on my holy hill of Zion; in which it appears, that Zion was the place or
Representative of Monarchy, and the Rule of Christ to be as King in the world.

5. It was the crown of his Metropolis, for so (...) signifies a Metropolis,
which is some eminent place and people are to do for Christ, Rev. 6.2. a thing
not yet done, and that people do it, shall be as the Metropolis of the great
King, or his Mother.

6. This is done in the day of his Espousalls, that is, in that day Christ is
espoused as Lord to the people, the people as servants to the Lord: in that day
Christ contracts affinity with a people, that they which before were not a
people, do become the people of the living Lord, and those under other rule and
law are beasts.

7. It was the day of the joy of his heart.

1. Christ's heart longs for this day, it is the travail of his soul.

2. We are not more glad of Christ, then he is of us, for his delight are with
the sons of men. John 1.7.23.27. That the love wherewith thou have loved me may
be in them. Christ would have God love them as himself, and that the sense of
Gods loving him may be shed abroad in their hearts, as loving them with the
same love he loved him.

CAP. IV.
Ver 1. BEhold thou art fair my Love, behold thou art fair. The Gentiles having
set up the Mosaicall Rule, and made Christ their King, the Lord he commends her
beauty under that administration.

2. With her beauty she had simplicity, in her Doves eyes, not desiring any
other Lord, or Law but his.

3. These eyes are said to be within her Lock.

Note. She is not said to have any Head, for Christ is the Head of the Church
Estate, not the worlds; and therefore this here is spoke of the world.

4. Her Hair, that is, those of her constitution, were Goats, a Flock o Goats,
such as indeed the men of the world are, from (...) which signifies fear, they
being held thereunder as yet, Heb. 2.18.

5. These are as those appear from Mount Gilead; Mount Gilead was the place
where Jacob and Laban made their Covenant, and feasted and rolled a heap of
stones: See here by this the Nation as Goats, first appear in making Covenant
with God, in which is known who the people are God has chosen, Genesis 21.48.

Ver. 2. Thy teeth (that is, the Teachers of the Law) were as a Flock: Our
translation adds of Sheep, which is not in the Original, and omitted, because
not of the Church or Gospel fold, as yet it being not set up among men.

1. Again, these Teachers seem to differ from the goats in the hair and are
said to be shorn, being such as had in some measure put off their old
conversation, and were come up from the washing of repentance and regeneration.

2. Every one bears twins, and none is barren among them, they addicting
themselves to fruitfullnesse in good works, commanded by the Law and Gospel.

Ver. 3. As a thread are thy two lips: The Law is fitly here compared to a line
or thread, and the two tables to the two lips who were to be spoke by, as by a
line (thy speech is comely) showing that the Law taught now, should be a comely
a useful thing to the people that were under the same, to rule and govern them.

As a divided Pomgranat, or a Pomgranat broken (one half set on one side of the
face, and the other on the other) so are thy temples.

The Temples are the Magistracy, who ruled and governed under Christ in the
dispensations of the Law who were within the locks, the people choosing them,
maintaining and defending them, and shows that by divine authority, it should
come again to be set up among men, two Judges judging in every city, Esaias 1.26.

Ver. 4. Thy Neck is as the Tower David builded for an armory, the neck is that
the head rests on, and is fastened to, and is here compared to an armory, which
is the old Testament, wherein the Worthies of God have their arms hung up for
men to have at need, in which there are a hundred bucklers for defense from
Satan's temptations, and the old covenant made with God by many worthies, the
only preservative and safety of a nation.

Ver. 5. Thy Breasts, that is the (...) or the preparatory Ministry or doctrine
of the Law, like two young Roes, being the beginning-knowledge for children,
which twins are one Law, though two tables: Christ the glory of God and man is
called, (...) or Gloria, the Glory feeds among the Lillies, that is, the Saints
gathered into the the Church only, on which says Christ,

Ver. 6. I will go to my self, that is, I will be says Christ with the Father,
and leave the world without manifestations of my presence, until the day
appear, and the shadows are fled; for as yet the darkness of the Antichristian
estate, or state of nature, from which the shadows of that night were not fled,
until which be done in the soul Christ, is with himself, not with the soul, I
will go to the mountains of Myrrh, the three persons; and to the hill of
frankincense, as one God.

Note. In this estate, though Christ were King, yet his glory was not
manifested thereunder, until the other administration of the day, by which
unbelief and ignorance are expelled by the spirit, or none can enjoy Christ as
he is (...) the glory.

The Church Estate.

Ver. 7. Thou art all fair my beloved, there is not one spot in thee.

1. In this Christ speaks to believers, the Church.

2. He commends all in her, saying, Behold thou art all fair.

3. And her, in all, saying, there is no spot in thee.

Ver. 8. Come with me from Lebanon.

1. The Law estate is not to be continued in by the Elect.

2. Men continue in it, until called from it by Christ, being shut up under
the Law to the Faith that is after to be revealed, Gal. 3.23.

3. It is Christ calls men by the Gospel thence, and makes them free from it.

4. Christ is strength and help to bring men thence, they cannot come thence
alone, without him: thence he says, Come with me.

5. My Spouse is a word never given the Law estate, but the Church drawn from
Lebanon, and joined to Christ by the new covenant.

6. He calls her again and again from Lebanon to himself; which shows how hard
and how slow men are to believe, and to leave themselves and the Law estate,
Rev. 18.4.

Says the Lord, thou shall come with me and look, or sing with me, from the
head of Amana, Shiner, Hermon, hills about Judea.

1. By Hills, I understand the worldly powers, and greatness thereof, as under
Antichrist, and other Kings of the Nations.

2. The top of, or head of these hills, are the supreme powers thereof.

3. From these or their subjection, they shall be fully set free, after that
the first people have crowned Christ King.

4. When they come thence, they shall sing and go forth with joy, as Israel out
of Egypt. Hos. 2.15.

5. In these hills or Dens of Lions, Gods people have been kept all the time of
Antichrist, as Daniel in the Lions Den, Christ until the call having been
there with them, and kept them; but now if they stay after the call and he
leave them, there they are threatened with ruin, Rev. 18.6.

6. From the mountains of Leopards, that is, the false Church estate, which was
a filthy spotted Beast, quick and nimble for the pray, the Beast and Kings
ruling together. Rev. 13.2. the Papacy is compared to a Leopard.

Ver 9. Thou have ravished my heart, my sister, my Spouse.

1. The Church relates to Christ as his sister, being like us in all things,
sin excepted, and as a brother, Heb. 2.11.

2. As his Spouse, and he her husband, Ephesians. 5.31, 32^

3. He is much more delighted and taken up with her, then she with him.

4. This delight comes from one of the Churches eyes, that is, her eye of
Faith, or some person God raised up at that time to restore the Church, by whom
the Ministry of the Gospel which had been hid comes to be revealed; and thus
Moises said of Hobab, that he might be eyes to them in their journey through
the Wilderness, and who knows not that the Prophets were called Seers.

4. With a chain of thy neck, the body politic under Christ had a neck, so the
Church estate by which the head and body are united; here by the Neck I
understand the New Testament, and it is Covenant made therein, by which Christ
and the Church are one.

2. About this Neck there is a chain, which Chain are the promises and
profession of the Believer made before the Church, of denying himself,
forsaking all, and becoming Christ's, by which as with a Chain the Believers
come to have their neck adorned by the Lord, and shows, that in this his glory
was set forth, and was become an Ornament unto him of praise.

Ver. 10. Upon taking the covenant, and making this good promise and
profession; this good profession before many Witnesses, as Paul speaks, the
Lord cries out, How fair are thy Loves, in the plural, my Sister, my Spouse,
to show she loved him, in denying her self, and in forsaking all, and in
bearing her cross, and in following Christ. Christ takes no content in any
thing but this, nor no content in any man till then: when they are under the
Gospel Covenant, then the souls love to Christ is better then wine, to comfort
him, and refresh his soul after his suffering instead of the vinegar and gall
given him.

3. Note the gradation better, much better, how much better then Wine, which
shows how acceptable the Believers love, and service to Christ is, and without
love all service is nothing, and that he looks on it in the parts thereof, and
calls them Loves.

4. And the smell of thy Ointments then all spices.

1. The Lord gives in this estate abundance of his Spirit. Act. 2 17.

2. The graces hereof are called Ointments, and they his anointed ones. John
2.27.

3. These Ointments have a savor of the Spirit, and of the divine Nature.

4. All Spices are no way comparable hereunto.

Ver. 11. Thy lips, that is, her speech, or words, being Evangelicall, dropped
as a honey comb full of honey, and under her tongue, that is, she had in the
meditation of those things she spoke, both honey and milk; the believer
apprehended more then he could utter of Christ in his own soul* And the smell
of thy Garments in the plural.

1. The first Garment is that of Christ by Justification, Believers putting on,
and being clothed with Jesus Christ in the wedding garment of baptism.

2. Is of sanctification clothed with humility, their feet shod with the
Gospel, their heads covered with the helmet of Salvation, the girdle of Truth,
etc. Ephesians. 6.13.

4. These garments in their smell are said to be like Lebanon, that is the Law
righteousness, but more perfect and entire, and of a more divine Nature
through Christ.

Ver. 12. The Church is described to be.

1. A garden as differing from the wilderness or desert world.

2. It is enclosed from the world, that those in and of the world cannot come
unto her, or be of her, Rev. 2.12.27.

3. This enclosure is of the Spouse, or Church under the Gospel, from them
that are of the world under the Law.

4. A Spring, in which rises, life, comfort and content; which Spring also is
shut up, that none can come at the water thereof.

5. A Fountain sealed, so that no Unbelievers can come at the Fountain for that
Seal, nor at the Spring or garden for the Enclosure, but they must destroy the
Enclosure first, and then it cease to be the Spouse of Christ, Rev. 11.2.
Zach. 13.1.

1. The enclosing of the garden is Gods Ordinance set up in the Church for the
admitting of Members or Believers, and keeping or shutting out Unbelievers, by
which as by a fence it was hedged in, Esaias 5.2.

2. As a garden it had all pleasant plants planted in it, and when planted,
pruned and dressed, and dunged, as in the parable of the Fig tree, Luke 13.8.
whereas the trees of the Forest grew wild, or of the Wilderness were not
regarded.

3. It is a Spring shut up with a door, John 10, 1.3. I am the door to which
there is a Porter, even the Spirit, or as a stone must first be rolled away
before any taste the water ( Genesis 29.2.) of a well that is covered.

4. A sealed Fountain, and must be opened, Zach. 13.1. to which is not only a
cover, but the cover sealed.

1. Internally by the Spirit. John 3.5. 2. Externally by Baptism. John 3.5.
Ver 13. Thy Emissions are Paradise Pomgranats, with fruits of delight.

1. It is the use of the Spirit to distingui^h things by the place they grow
in, or are of, as the Grapes of one climate are far better then another, the
Vine of Sodom and Zion much differed in Gods eye, from one came sweet wine, the
other sour and bitter juice; one had life, and the other death in it, and was
of death: So here the Pomgranats are of Paradise, the delightful fruits of
Paradise, which was a place exceeded all other for the choicenesse of fruit,
and shows believers now should by far exceed any ordinary men of any other age,
such also was the cypress with the spikenard.

1. By Pomgranats Brightman understands the Ministry (then thus) that the
Ministry of this restored estate of the Church shall be from heaven, or have a
call from God, intimated in that they are of Paradise. Rev. 21.2.

2. But I rather understand by the Pomgranats the Apostles.

3. By the fruits of delight, the Prophets in their Prophecies, whose fruit is
of much delight to the Saints in all ages.

4. By Camphir, the Evangelist sending out, and evaporating it self into a most
sweet savor, being of the pure juice of a tree both bright and clear.

Ver. 14.5. By Spikenard the Pastor twice set down, because his Ministry was
exhortatory, and respected the Society of the Teacher that went before, and of
the Evangelist that came after to minister, persuading to exceed the infants,
and to attain perfection.

6. By Saffron, that is of a red and dying nature of things dipped in it, and
cordial, I understand the Teacher, by whose ministry men were dipped in the
blood of Christ, and called Christians.

7. By calamus is meant the Elders who had the Reed of Rule, or Government.

8. By Cynamon, the Deacons that were employed about the Bark of the Tree, to
provide for the poor, the Widow, and Orphans in their bodily estate.

1. With all the trees of Incense, that is, all those Belivers under the
ministry of the Evangelists, partakers eminently of the divine nature.

2. Trees of Myrrh, that is, those Believers under the Pastor made spiritual.

3. Trees of Aloes, that is, those under the Teachers Ministry, who as yet are
as it were carnal; With all the heads of Balsamum or choice balsome, which is,
that these all had the unction of the Spirit of grace upon them every one; and
therefore put in the last place, and without which none might be admitted,
therefore the Spirit was given to every one to profit withal, 1 Cor. 2.7.

Ver. 15. In this also was the Fountain of Gardens, which is Christ; as a
garden cannot thrive without it have a Well to water it in drought, so cannot
the Church be without Christ, from whence the river runs in the paradise of
God, Rev. 22.1.

2. A pit, that is, the Gospel, into which the living water conveies it self,
and out of which the Saints are to draw it for their uses and occasions. Esaias
12.3.

3. Streams from Lebanon, which is the Law.

Ver. 16. Awake North wind, and come O South wnd, and blow upon my garden.

1. The Garden is the Church.

2. Christ calls it his, he having redeemed it with his Blood.

He sees the wants of his Garden, he calls to the winds, the North Wind, and
the South Wind: some understand here by the differing operations of the Spirit,
others the teaching of the Word.

4, The end that the Balsome, that is, the graces of the Saints may be
exercised, quickened, stirred up, and brought forth in them, in which the use of
the Word is lively by Christ set forth*

Let my beloved come into his garden, and eat his pleasant fruit.

1. The Church longs to have Christ in her, and with her.

2. To have Christ eat his pleasant fruit in her, that is, that Christ should
see what his death had done, and Resurrection, in saving, sanctifying, and
redeeming so many precious souls from sin, and death, and hell, which was the
travail of his soul, God promised the Lord Jesus he should see, Esaias 53.10.11.
and now feeds thereon, as on the pleasant sweet, and delightful fruit of his
desires and Passion, which is that other meat he had to eat. I have another,
and how do I long until it be accomplished?

CAP. V Ver. 1.
I Am come into my Garden, my Sister, my Spouse, I have gathered my Myrrh.

1. That is Christ received that glory was given by the Church to him in his
Divine Nature, as Son of God, with his Balsom, that is, the content he found in
the graces of his Spirit appearing in the Saints, all which they acknowledged
to be from Christ, and Christ's, as Paul, Galat. 2. Not I, but Christ lives in
me.

2. I have eaten my honey comb with my honey. By the comb the sorrows, by the
honey the joys of Christ. Or The Body or humane Nature of Christ was the comb,
and the Divine Nature the honey in that comb; of which Christ says, He has
eaten, that is, he is satisfied in his sufferings for the Saints with great
content in beholding the effects thereof, both with God and men, Ephesians. 2.16.

3. I have drunk my Wine, Mark by Wine I understand the Gospel, and shows
Christ had his part in the Gospel comforts from the Father, as we have ours, I
delight to do thy will O God.

4. He had his milk to eat, as his honey comb to eat with his wine and honey.

5. Christ having eaten and drunk his part first, he distributes the rest to
the Saints, saying, Eat ye of the Comb, and honey that remains. The cross and
comforts of Christ.

6. Drink ye of the Milk, and drink ye of the Wine, drink abundantly of them
both, he having sanctified himself and the truth for them, Joh. 17.17.19.

7. Drink as my friends invited, and heartily entertained to be refreshed
therewith, as in the supper of the Lord, in which as here God and man feast,
eat and drink together with sweet content and comfort, John 15.11. Matthew. 26.27.

8. But it is to be observed, though Christ bids the Saints to eat and drink,
he bids them not to gather of Myrrh or Balsome, that being to be his only, the
rest are ours, he having by his first taking them to himself in our nature,
sanctified them to our use and comfort, who would they should have their fill
of comfort.

Note that these three general parts concern the Restoration of the Gentiles
after the grand Apostasy of Antichrist, as appears in these following
considerations.

1. It begins with the Restoration of the National Rule taken away from the
Jews by the Romans, and foretold of God to be bestowed on the Gentiles, Deuteronomy.
32.31. Matthew 21.43. Romans 10.19.20.

2. Cap. 3. Ver. The Gentiles invite the Jews to go forth and see Christ and
the Kingdom restored to him, which occasioned that jealousy of heirs, the
Scriptures do foretell, they in this apprehending themselves rejected, and
another people given in marriage to their Lord in their stead, Deuteronomy. 32.21.

3. Cap. 3. ver. 8. All these are to be done chiefly by sixty men in Authority
and Power, who subdue by the sword all such as gainsay the same, or do oppose
it.

4. Cap. 4. ver. 8. By these men and their means the Saints are freed from the
mountains or powers of the world, called the Dens of Lions, and mountains of
Leopards, which are set out by three parts or distinct members, Amana, Sheuir,
Hermon, the three parts of the city, Reu. 16.19.

3. The time is noted and the call thereof, Rev. 18.4.

6. When the ministry is restored and the Covenant, cap 4. ver. 9.

7. When the Church Evangelically is separated from the world, ver. 12.

8. When the Saints are disposed of under the differing Ministry and
administrations, in the way of the Gospel, ver. 13.14.

All which things are first to be accomplished in us of the Gentiles, before in
the Jews, and is by the Apostle called the fulness of the Gentiles, the
graces, and blessings, of God being the fullness of a people, until all which
be done on us, blindness continues on Israel or the Jew, Romans 11.25. and that
Genesis 9.27. where it is said, Japhet shall dwell in the Tents of Shem, is a
Scripture is not fulfilled to this day, the Gentiles having yet been under only
the dispensations of Christ, or the Gospel, which is but one Tabernacle, the
other is that of Moises, which as yet we Gentiles have not submitted to, but
must the Rule of Government thereof in the judicial according to form, or this
Scripture is never to be fullfilled.

9. As he began in Chap. 1. with the Gentile Church, so it is orderly to begin
with its restoration also.

10. God having decreed first to restore the Gentiles, the Spirit accordingly
by Prophecy begins, first with them and their restoration.

11. God has purposed to make use of the Gentiles restoration, to restore the
Jews thereby, that they may not be perfect without us.

PART IV. Contains a description of the restoration of the Gentile Church,
beginning with
CAP. V. VER. II.
Ver. 2. I Sleep, but my heart waketh, there was nothing awake but the Heart,
in the time of the Churches sleep.

2. Her sleep shows the neglect and carelessenesse she had of Antichrists
operations, as the man slept whilst the enemy sowed tares, so the Church slept
whilst Antichrist did delude and deceive her, Matthew. 13.25.

3. The sleep was of the generality of men in the external means of worship;
but the heart, the sincere man was awake, Believers being still kept to adhere
to Christ for Salvation, in that time of defection, who were as the then
Churches heart, which is primum, vivens, and ultimum moriens viro.

4. In this sleep of the Church, she had shut her self with Antichrist up from
the Lord Christ, Antichrist had more love and entertainment then Christ from
her.

5. Christ would before the extremity of Apostasy have her open unto him, as in
the admonition to the seven Church, Rev. Cap. 2 and 3. The last whereof, which
was the time of this knocking, and was the Church estate of Leodicea, Rev. 3.

1. When the sleep was eminently set forth in her saying, as men in a dream,
that she was rich, full, and wanted nothing, when she knew not that she was
naked, poor, and wanted all things.

3. When the Churches Apostasy was foretold, in that God said, he would spew
her out of his mouth, signifying the lothsomnesse of the false church estate to
God.

Christ would have awakned her, and have come in to her, and feasted with her,
and have reformed the corruptions come in upon her.

4. He yet calls her his Sister* his Spouse, his Dove, his undefiled one, there
being not yet Idolatry or confusion of world and Church admitted, though that,
that made way for it was already laid.

5. She yet knew his voice, which yet had his knock or call.

Note. The reason my head is filled with deaw.

1. My head, which is God, is full of the deaw of the night, to show the
indignity God suffered on the rejecting of Christ by her, for they that despise
Christ, despise him that sent him.

2. His locks, which were those believed on him in that corrupt age, were
troubled with the drops of the night, which the then Doctrine was but as the
drops of a cold Winter night to a man's head.

Spouse. Ver. 3. I have put off my coat, how shall I put it on? Note her coat.

1. This coat she had put on by Christ.

2. She her self puts it off without leave of Christ, and without much
inforcement of persecution.

3. When she had put it off, she knew not how to put it on again for shame.

4. The putting off and on of this coat, made her delay to entertain Christ.

5. She had washed her feet, and now she could not let Christ in, but she must
defile her feet again as she thought, she apprehending Christ would have
condemned her practice newly taken up, which she thought to be a pure and clean
way, in this, like the whore, she wiped her mouth, and said, she had not sinned
and thus Prove. 16.2.

Ver. 4. He put in his hand by the hole of the door, as it were to remove the
bolts that made it fast: or thus my beloved sent his hand from the white, that
is by his Spirit came to convince her conscience of her own unworthiness, by
the knowledge remaining in her, upon which her bowels were moved for him,
apprehending how unworthy she was any way to enjoy him.

Ver. 5. She arose: for when once Christ had touched her heart, she had no
rest, but she must arise to open to Christ, and so was taken from delays.

1. The white or open place Christ might look in at, and put his hand in, being
at the key hole: when the Spouse put her hand on the lock, her hands and
fingers dropped Myrrh, some divine favor she found upon opening the door.

2. This dropped on the handles of the lock.

Ver. 6. I opened to my beloved, she opened and expected Christ, but my beloved
had withdrawn himself, now she misseth Christ, who at first, she says, had but
withdrawn himself, and so expected him to be with her shortly, but after she
says he was gone, and here began the false church estate, and says she, my
soul failed (...) went forth; In this she found the miss of Christ, I sought
him but found him not, and that when use of the word did her no good, I called
him, but he gave me no answer.

Note here, she calls him, when he was gone to come again, or to know when he
would come, or why he was gone, but says the Text, he answered me not. She
being thus crying after Christ, the Watchmen, the Priests of Antichrists
estate, here called the city, or false Church, they found her, that is,
discerned her opposition of their errors and love to the truth: Indeed so
diligent and watchful were these watchmen of the night estate, though it were
dark, they would quickly epsy and find them out, as a light is easy discerned
in a dark place.

1. Having found her, that is, those Societies that desired to retain the true
knowledge and way of God. The watchmen smote me, or the Peripatericks made me
be smitten: that is, accused me to the Magistrate for a disturber of the peace,
a Schismatike, and therefore must be punished.

2. They also wounded her, destroying her authority, true Ministry, and
administration, forcing her into the Antichristian form, and corrupted her with
falls Doctrine.

3. The Keepers of the Walls, these were another kind of watchmen, who had a
greater charge then the rest, and these I take to be the Archbishops, Bishops,
etc. in the time of the Apostasy they took away her Vail (...) a word which
signified a garment in use in those times, the form whereof is not, I suppose,
scarce known of us in these days, (...): But I take it to signify, (...) by
which the Church privileges only had among the Saints, and not known to the
world, now came to be unvailed and made common among all the Saints, now being
not permitted to have any thing distinct from the world, when, and on which act
the Church was driven into the Wilderness, as in Rev. 12. all which time the
Spirit of God passes over in silence in this place unto the time of Luther, as
being a time of night in which was nothing done, but sleept away.

Ver. 8. I charge you O ye Daughters of Jerusalem, these words seem to prove
that this was the Gentile Estate thus calling to the Jews, who both had lost
Jesus Christ, and were become seekers.

2. It is employed that the Jews should find Christ and again become the
daughters of Jerusalem, according to that which was below, which was the Law
Estate, and that above, which was the Gospel Estate.

3. Here the invisible Church thus stripped of its Ornaments, calls Christ still
her beloved, and would acknowledge none but Christ.

4. That she would have the Jews Church, if restored before her, to tell the
Lord in prayer, that she was sick of Love.

Resp. Ver. 9. What is thy beloved more then another beloved, the word another
is added, and is not in the Text.

1. In this ye have the Jews ignorance of Christ.

2. Their contempt of Christ, which always accompanies ignorance.

3. Their desire to hear of Christ from her.

4. That the people seek Christ want him, and leave Antichrist, are the best
and the fairest among women, or rather, those which God calls his beloved.

5. When the Gentile is diligently inquiring for Christ, the Jew will then come
to do the like, and come to be stirred up by it.

6. That that moved her, was the charge laid on her, which was not usually done
for a small matter.

The description of Christ.

Ver. 10. My beloved is white and ruddy, in these words is a general
description of Christ, he is white, which has in it a signification of his
Divine nature; and ruddy, in it is a signification of his human nature: again,
he is the chief among ten thousand, the Hebrew is, that he is conspicuous among
many multitudes, that is, that he is easily known from any other, being above
all.

Ver. 11. His head is as the most fine gold of gold; now the Apostle tells us,
that the head of Christ is God, and Christ the head of the Church.

His locks are bushy and black as a Raven: In this place Christ's hair which
springs from his head, are not the members of the Church, as some would, the
hair of the Churches Head being compared to purple, signifies the Kingly
authority of Christ; but here the hid and unknownnesse of the Divine Nature and
glory which was in the gold of the head, covered over or shadowed with this
thick and dark cover of black hair, so the mercy seat was shadowed, and the
woman's hair was given her for a covering, and it is Gods glory to hide himself
from the world, so that he makes the light to hide him.

Ver. 12. His eyes are as Doves, not as Doves eyes, but as Doves by the rivers
of water, so Christ's eyes were on the teaching of the Word.

2. They are as washed with milk, and so have no evil remaining in them.

3. They are as set on fulness in the beholding of God, and the invisible
things of him who is blessed for ever, and this is the glory of Christ's eye,
being set on, that we cannot attain, nor see, and live.

4. Christ sees not as man sees, and therefore his eyes are not to be set out
by ours, as some on this Text endeavor.

Note. Some on this description made of Christ, endeavor to set forth his
beauty by ours, or that is, in us, when the Prophet apprehended in Christ his
Divine Nature, as well as human, in which his lovelynesse and beauty mainly did
consist, and of which no human figure can be any representative at all.

Says Giffard hereon; I do not hold it necessary to interpret every part, as
signifying somewhat, but only this, The Spouse describing Christ, makes her
description according to the parts of the natural Body of man: but observe
you, the names of the parts indeed are expressed, in which is his humanity, but
the Representatives differ, as gold from the head of man, Doves from the eyes,
rings from the hands, etc.

Brightman speaking of the person of Christ, and two Natures, says, Unum and
idem corpus amb^ constituum, unde non minus illius, quam hujus veuustas ad
totius pulchritudinem pertinet. Ac peritissimus artisex hac varietate satietati
occurrit, nec Sponsam indecore monstrosam proteam effingit.

Bernard ends his Exposition with the beginning of the Churches description of
Christ, saying, Obuixe adjurat, parate respondet, figurat ornate, distinct
partitur, (...) per^ranfit, sum ^uim stringit, and noscio an sufficienter,
exprimit scio quidem quod affectuose concludit, and after, O gratiosus Sponsus,
and amabilis valde, in quo Generatio Divina candet, and rubet humana.

Ver. 13. His cheeks are as a bed of Spices, or Balsom.

1. The Cheek is that part of man, by which he is usually known from others, so
Christ's discovery was in the spiritual residence of the divine grace, and
glory appeared to be in him.

^ If we read the word Spices, then in him and from him issued all calling and
authority of the Ministerial Officers and Offices, he being King, Priest,
Prophet, Apostle, Evangelist, Pastor, and Teacher of the Church, in which these
Offices as plants in a garden bed, had their rise, residence, and being.

3. Sweet Flowers, these sweet flowers were the tops of the Balsom, or Spices,
as the tops of the Towers thereof, which were the Apostles, who were the
flowers, and the other Ministry the stalks they stood upon, in whom the Lord
was especially made known, and in their Doctrine and Gifts of the Spirit
conferred on them, with their calling, in which the Kingly, Priestly, and
Prophetical Offices of Christ and Power, in an eminent way are set forth.

4. His lips like Lillies, there being no guile found in them, nor from them,
in which they exceeded Lillies: Myrrh dropped from them, that is, divine
wisdom and knowledge, he only bringing Life and Immortality to Light.

Ver. 14. His hands are as gold rings set with Berill, others read the words
thus, His hands are as rings of gold set with Chrysolit. Brightman manus ejus
orbs auri repleti Berillo Thalasio. I read them thus, his hands are globes of
gold, made full, or full set with Tarsis; for so the 70. render the word,
retaining the Hebrew (...), a word sometime rendered the Hyacinth, the Onix,
Berill, Chrysolite, Carbuncle, so that either the word should be retained, or
said to be set with every precious stone.

1. Christ's hands are as gold, because what he did, was done by a Divine Power
and Authority.

2. They are round, which shows the perfections of them, for forma rotunda est
capacissima.

3. The Works of Christ had all kind of Excellency in them, and were as
precious stones adorning his hands of all sorts and kinds.

4. If we read them Rings of Gold:

1. It shows the Authority Christ had from his Father, to execute all his
Offices, and do all his Works, for so the Ring in Scripture set down signifies
Authority.

2. It had not only power in the hand, and Authority in the Ring, but a
pretiousnesse of use for all men, that it did concern, in the precious Stone,
in which was no Tyranny and oppression, but Life and Salvation,

His belly is as bright Yvory overlaid with Saphyrs.

Ver. 14. His legs are as Pillars of Marble, set on sockets of fine gold.

1. In the Pillars of Marble is set out the strength Christ stood by, and the
sure standing of all such as stood on his strength.

2. They are set in sockets of Gold, the Divine Nature ministering thereto help
and strength.

3. By (...) I understand Leg and Foot, and shows that the affections of Christ
were of a Divine Nature, set out by the sockets of fine gold.

4. His countenance or appearance was as Lebanon, as the choice Cedars
overlooking all earthly and carnal things, and set on the top of the
mountains, or Powers of the world.

Ver. 15. His Pallat or Mouth is of most sweet things, that is, Christ reveals
and discovers most sweet things, for Grace and Truth came by Jesus Christ's
discovery, in which are the sweets of God and man.

2. All in him are desirable, as these are excellent before, so all else in
him are so, and nothing in him but is so, where as God or Man occasioning the
joy of all.

3. This is my beloved, Christ ye see is known of his Saints, which is the
cause they love him, for love cannot be sincere that is not grounded on
knowledge.

4. She knows him as her friend, supplying and supporting her in all her
extremities; by a long and daily experimental knowledge she had of his being
to her, so Hosea 2. I will return to my first husband, then was it better with
me, then now.

5. The application of this description is made to the daughters of Jerusalem,
who hereupon are greatly drawn to inquire after, and to know him.

CAP. VI.
Ver. 1. WHere is thy beloved gone: Christ is dearly mist, when mist, and he is
hardly found, when gone from men.

2. See she asks of them, they ask of her for Christ. they are as well troubled
for him as she, when they knew him, and what needs there were of him.

3. They inquire where he is turned aside, alluding to Cap. 5. Ver. 6.

4. They inquire that they might seek Christ with her, in which it seems that
the Lord will cause the Jews as well as the Gentiles to lay out for Christ
together, one provokes the other.

5. The Jew has the first discovery of Christ from the Gentile.

Ver. 2. A church is gathered, called the Garden, and his Garden the first
church.

2. He is found among the Gentiles first, who discover him to be gone down into
his garden, his church, not into Antichrists.

3. To the beds of Balsom, viz. the Administrators of the church in them,
Christ appears as the means by which he restores the Church.

4. Feeding in the gardens, not garden, signifying the several distinct
churches rising from that first. Vid. Cap. 1. Ver. 5.

5. And to gather Lillies, that is, call the Saints and unite them into
fellowship with himself in the way of the Gospel.

Ver. 3. Concludes with a now full possession of Christ, saying,

I am my beloveds, and my beloved is mine, that is, she was now possessed of
Christ, and Christ possessed of her.

2. He feeds amongst the Lillies, the Saints and he feed together, as it is
in Cap. 5. Ver. 1. in which the Spirit concludes, as in the full happiness of
the Saints on earth; it consisting in the fellowship of God and Christ, and so
ends this part as he did the former in Cap. 5. Ver. 1.

How eminently and evidently this sets out the invisible church estate under
Antichrist appears.

1. Her heart only wakes, that is, the Saints had fellowship with Christ
invisibly, though the way of the Gospel externally, in Ministry, Baptism,
etc. were destroyed, she was in the night deprived of light, and cast asleep
with the rest of the Antichristian estate, only her heart was awake, that is,
some were stirred up to believe, and love, and own Christ internally by the
spirit in that time of night was come upon her:

2. The Gentiles, they by the advice of the Ministry, and counsels of the
Bishops of the first true church, who were lead away by the actings of
Antichrist, and their own evil ends and hearts to fulfill the mind of God,
and make way for the man of sin by their Apostasy, in the first putting off of
her coat, though inwardly were checked by their consciences for what they had
done against the truth, yet cry, how shall I put it on, when they never were
troubled at the putting of it off at all.

3. Some remaining knowledge there was of Christ all the 1^60. days desolation
of the church among the believers, by which he stirs and rowseth up the
believers from the false and ertonious practices in the Lords worship practiced
among men.

4. On the first opening to Christ, she finds at first as it were but a
withdrawing of Christ, but after Christ being at a greater distance from her,
there is a calling for him.

5. In this departure of Christ, the Saints are in the city Babel, called the
Wilderness baptized by Antichrist, which the Jews were not, they refusing to
be baptized.

6. There they are discerned by the Priests, who by the help of the Pope
deprive the church of all her ornaments and privileges, which was done long
after the fall of the Jews, and their church estate.

About Luthers time a diligent and open inquiry is made for Christ, the
Gentiles, who retained the profession and knowledge of Christ, come to set
forth to the Jew the description of him, until which time Christ is hid to the
Jew, which occasions the Jew to turn seeker with the Gentile after him.

5. General part concerns the Jewish Nation.
Begins Cap. 6. Verse 4. with the National Rule, as before with the Gentiles.

Thou art beautiful, O my Love, as Tirzah.

That this concerns the Jewish estate, eminently appears in the following
description made of the National church estate, this here being the same with
Cap. 4.1.2.3.4. the one pertained to the Gentile State, the other the Jewish,
as in many other things after will appear.

1, Tirzah was a very beautiful city built by Solomon, but after proved
rebellious, which sets out the former state of the Jews, first to have been a
very delightful people to God, who after turned Rebels, and now again at
their restoration to their first estate of being Gods people, they should be as
beautiful as ever they had been in the eyes of their God.

2. Comely as Jerusalem, in this he alludes to the church estate, and proves
that herein God intends the restoration of both, and both are intended in this
Scripture.

3. Terrible as an army with banners, ready fitted to fight with their enemies,
which shows that the Church and state of the Jews will be resto^ed by a war, in
which they will become very terrible to their enemies.

V. 5. Turn away thine eyes from me, by eyes here are meant those first that call
the Jews, who are as their eyes, and who usually called their Prophets
Seersturning them to God.

2. They have overcome me, as Jacob prevailed with God, so will the Jews now
also, an eminent sign of their conquering all things else, having prevailed
with God, Genesis 32. ver. 26.28.

3. Turn away thine eyes, is no more then that of God to Moses, when he was in
most earnest wise seeking Gods face, for the people, who said to him, let me
alone that I may destroy them, Exodus 32.10, 11, 12. and Exodus 14.15. Why cryest
thou to me, speak to the children of Israel that they go forward.

4, The words after, in this and the next verse, are the same with Cap. 4. as
above, only for (...) in cap. 4. ver. 2. here in v. 6. is (...) which is indeed
a flock of sheep, when the other word comprehends other cattle, as well as
sheep, which shows that the Gospel estate among the Gentiles should be
restored before the call of the Jews, so those that teach them the Law shall be
sheep, men of the true Church, as the (...) ought to be by the Rule of the
Gospel.

5. That that is contained in cap. 4. ver. 4. of the Tower of David, and the
Neck, with the Shields, is not set down here, but in the former, signifying
that the Gentiles should he called first, and that consequently the Word and
Ministry should now go forth thence, as from the mother Church, as before it
had done from the Jews, that they without us might not be perfect.

6. This is an Argument, if that God restore the Gentile Church first, that
then what was set down before was of the Gentiles, this of the Jew, in which is
fullfilled that Gospel truth, the first shall be last, tho last first, Matthew
20.16.

Ver. 8. There are sixty Queens, that is Churches rightly constituted according
to the pattern of the Gospel.

2. Eighty Concubines, which are such as Hagar was, and signified the societies
under the Catechist, who yet have not been united to Christ by covenant, nor
are not made free by the Gospel.

3. Virgins without number, which are believers, willing and ready fitted to be
married to Christ in the way of the Gospel.

4 In this ye may see the spirit respects not only the Church, but those that
are friends of the Bridegroom, as John the Baptist said of himself, and his
society.

Mr. Brightman would understand by the Queens, the purest Churches and the
concubines dignantur thoro. Enjoy the bed, but have not the right or splendour
of the wifes, nor are they possessed of Dowry, nor are their children to
inherit the right of the estate being Hagars or the Law: Sons, the Virgins are
in the last place, who have food in the house, etc. when indeed* nor Virgins,
nor concubines, since the Gospel estate, have not been in nor of the house,
but are cast out under the new covenant, as Hagar was, which served as an
Allegory to show what was to be done with them under the Gospel, and so
applied at large by the Apostle, Gal. 4. from ver. 22. to the end.

Note. The only thing that seems to oppose this is in the next words, ver. 9.

Ver. 9. My Dove, my undefiled is one, then you may say, how are they sixty
Queens to be understood the Churches.

1. To which I answer, when the Churches are said to be sixty, it is to be
understood the Lord speaks of several Churches under particular Evangelists,
Pastors, Teachers, set up in several Cities, as in the first setting up of the
Churches in the Gospel.

2. When he speaks of the Church as one.

1. He speaks of the Elect, as they are immediately joined to Christ by the
Spirit, he the Head, they the Members, they all his wife, and he their husband.

2. They are said to be one, as having one Spirit, Faith, Baptism, Lord,
Discipline, and are not as the false Church, some Papists, Protestants,
Lutherians, etc.

3. It shows the Unity God will give in the world to all true Churches, at the
restoration thereof.

4. Having spoke briefly of all in this verse 8. he speaks mor particularly of
them, and begins with the Queens, or true Church estate.

1. She is the only one of her Mother, by her Mother is meant the first Church
at Jerusalem, which was the Mother Church of all, as the Apostle, Gal. 4.26.

2. No Church constituted by any will be more perfect, then the Church that is
to be of this estate: Hence she is said to be the only one, and the choice one
of her that bare her.

3. The Daughters here are set before the Queens, which I take to be

1. Either the Churches constituted in the Apostles time, whose writings will
commend her, and pronounce her blessed.

2. Because it is said they saw her, the Virgins here may be meant, who being
extremely affected with her, and filled with a desire of her, are said to
pronounce her blessed.

3. The Queens and Concubines praise her, that is, are satisfied, that that is
the true grace of God, in which the Church then stands.

Note. That this is meant of the Jews estate.

1. Appears in that the Law estate is set before, Cap. 4.1, 2, 3.

2. It being set down here without difference of the former, proves that though
it be the same thing, yet they were to be fullfilled not in the same people,
but one in the Gentiles, the other in the Jews.

3. The Gentiles appearance is set out by Galeed, Laban a Heathen covenanting
with Jacob there, the Jews in Tirzah, a City built by a King, who as the Jews
turned Rebels, and are again to be restored.

4. Here both are set down together, Tirzah and Jerusalem, but not in the
Gencile estate, to show that the Jews had both these administrations before,
and should have them again.

6. General is that of the Jews Church estate.
Cap. 6. Ver. 10.
Who is she that looks forth as the Morn.

1. The first appearance of the truth, is a strange thing to that people.

2. She peeps out at first among them, as the Morn out of a dark night, in
which is the beginning of light among them.

3. Fair as the Moon, truth in a more glorious way being manifested to them
then before, but yet not manifested as the truth is indeed, but as it were a
light of night, this is no less true in the coming forth of the Gentile, then
the Jews Church light.

4. Truth appears in its most glorious brightness, being as the Sun, which is
the day light, in which all things are clear, and the shadows are driven away
that are of the night.

5. It becomes with this spiritual blessing, honored with victory over the
enemies of the truth, and is terrible to them.

6. In this is showed, that the Jews are delivered by the sword, or war from
the enemies of her cause and liberty, and that they will be terrible to them as
Zachary has foretold, Cap. 12. from ver. 1. to the 9.

Ver. 11. Upon this Christ manifests his presence among them, saying, I went
down into the garden of Nuts, to see the fruits of the valley.

1. The Jews are indeed in the valley of distress and suffering, in a very low
and servile condition (...) the sorrows of the valley.

2. In this estate they now begin to seek God in Christ, as Hosea foretold,
Cap. 2. that they should have the valley of Achor or trouble given them for a
door of hope, and they should sing there, as in the day God brought them up out
of the Land of Egypt.

3. As in Egypt God came down to visit the Jews in their affliction, Exodus 3.7,
8. so now Christ says, I went down into the garden of Nuts, not of Spices, to
see the fruits of the valley.

4. To see where the Vine flourished: by the Vine, in this place I understand
the true knowledge of the Law and Justice; which is the flourishing of the Vine.

5. And the Pomgranats: by the Pomgranats I understand the writings of the
Apostles, or men having the spirit and Church Authority, as buds from the
Apostles to reveal the Gospel truth to men.

Ver. 12. Christ being among the Jews, his grace so wrought in and upon that
people, that before he was aware, the Hebrew reads, I knew not my soul, in
which Christ was, as it were in an ecstasy, and surprised with admiration of
what was done in them.

2. His soul placed him as on wheels to that honorable people by which he could
not retain his love from them, but must as the father to the prodigal son, run
to him, fall on them, weep over them, and kiss them, in which we may see
Christ loves not as man* loves, he loved them as an honorable people still,
God having honored them with many honors, above all the Nations of the earth.

Ver. 13. Return, return, O Shulamit, the Shulamit was a Virgin sought out for
David in his age, who is said to be very fair, 1 Kings 1.3.4. and that she
ministered to King David, or the beloved King.

1. Return, return, signifies a call ministered to them, to return to God and
his truth.

2. They are not yet fully informed nor called from the world, and their other
ways, therefore he calls again, return, return.

3. This may allude to the call of the Jews into their own Country, from the
Nations they are mixed among, when, and where they will only attain their
perfect glory.

4. That we, that is, that Christ and the Gentile Churches, thy sister may look
on thee, or contemplate thy beauty.

5. What will ye see in the Shulamite, as it were the company of two Armies.

1. It seems to me God holds forth in this Question and Answer some noteable
thing, stirring men up thereby to an inquiry after it.

2. Which I take to be applied to the two calls.

3. These two calls raise two Armies.

4. These Armies are raised on two grounds, one for the Law and its Rule, the
other for the Gospel and its Rule, which it is like will be done in two
several Nations in the world at two distinct times, though not one long
distant from the other in time.

5. This is more clear* if you apply what was said before, more generally in
ver. 4. Tirzah the one, Jerusalem the other, which are said to be terrible as
an Army with Banners: So ver. ^0. Fair as the Moon, the state Rule, Clear as
the Sun, the Church Rule, terrible as an Army of Banners.

6. Or if you take ver. 4. Tirzah and Jerusalem for the State, the Morn, Moon,
and Sun, ver. 10. for the Church, to which two there are two Armies said to be
terrible to their enemies; on which two, and the things done by them, the other
Gentile Churches look, and wonder at what they hear thereof reported.

CAP. VII.
Matthew. 3.11. John's Ministry is compared to an untying of the latchet of the
shoe, Christ's Ministry the shoe it self, who as the Apostle (2 Cor. 2.16.)
cries out of his unworthiness therefore.

Ver. 1. How beautiful are thy feet with shoes! For the understanding whereof
see Ephesians. 6.15. having your feet shod with the preparations of the Gospel of
peace: where note there is the Gospel, and the preparation of the Gospel: the
preparation of the Gospel, is that Scripture and obedience that is required of
men to believe and obey before admission to the Saints Society, which is their
repentance, leaving all, hearing the Cross, and following Christ, which
prepares for the Gospel to be taught, and applied to all such, and before men
are prepared thus, they cannot have the Gospel to be applied to them, which is
called the key of knowledge.

2. The church being thus prepared, are said to have shoes on their feet.

1. By which they obey God, and walk in his way comfortably without offense,
when those want these shoes in stony or thorny ground, cannot walk but be
offended at every command, and suffering, or loss.

2. If we take for the feet the affections it shows that those have, these
shoes on of the preparation of the Gospel, love God indeed, there is nothing
will be able to hinder their love from him.

3. The Preposition (...) signifies in, in shoes, and shows these shoes did
beautify her feet, that is, her obedience to God.

4. The Apostle and Prophet Esaias 52.7. and Romans 10.15. speak of the feet and
the beauty of them, when without shoes, and the Preparation is not mentioned
at all.

5. Here the church is called (...) that is excellent daughter.

6. The turning round of thy thighs are like the Ornaments made by the hands
of a faithful workman, it being a custom in those days, that the bride like
a girdle wore the work of some curious Artist: Gifford.

But here the Spirit rather alludes to a joint in the body, to which also the
Apostle speaking of the church does the same, Ephesians. 4.16. from whom the whole
body fitly joined together, and compacted by that which every joint supplieth,
and thus also our translation reads it, Col. 2.10. And not holding the head,
from which all the body by joints and ligaments having nourishment ministered
and knit together, etc.

Note, This Joint some way sets forth the Ministry in the feet, by which the
people were joined together in the body, 2 Cor. 8.4. Heb. 13.7.17. which is
here said to be as a precious Jewel, and effected, or set up, and restored to
the church by one that is faithful both to God and the people, doing according
to the will of God therein.

Now it is to be observed, that that joins the head, or Christ and the church
is the neck, which is the Gospel covenant, and that that joints the minister
ano people, who is the servant of the church, is this joint of the thigh.

Note. Farther the Spouse describing Christ begins at the head, but the Spirit
describing the church begins at the shoes, then the feee, and so upwards, to
the head upwards.

Ver. 2. Thy navell is as a round goblet that is not without mixture, the word
retunditas is taken from the full Moon, and signified an Ornament among women,
as in Esaias 3.

1. Note the navell of the church is, that whence the Saints have nutriment,
which is not without mixture, there being some that are hypocrites get in to be
among the believers, as Judas among the Apostles, Simon Magus among believers
of that Church.

2. As the church is not without mixture of men, so is not left without a
mixture of administrations, as well having a power to cast forth, as to receive
into the Church, all which was done in love, as proceeding from the womb of
affections.

3. These administrations are excellently set out by a cup, in which the
authority of Christ is designed, there being a cup of salvation, a cup of
death: Thus Christ, can you drink of the cup I shall drink of, Mark 10.39.

4. The word for the Navell is taken for the middle of a thing, which shows
that men were brought in, or cast out, by consent of all, 1 Cor. 5.4.5. Jude 4.
Gal. 2.4. the churches looseness in this work, brought the confusion that was
on the then churches.

Note. To this Navell he adds next the belly, in which the Saints as a heap of
wheat lie and are ministered unto.

2. They are hedged or compassed about with lillies, that is, some eminent men
who are entrusted with the care of rule and oversight over them, as Elders and
Deacons, who, as lillies, ought to be full of innocence and holiness, men for
wisdom, Justice, and knowledge, exceeding others, 1 Cor. 6.5.

Ver. 3. Thy two breasts. It is to be observed, her breasts are spoke of three
times in this description of her, which proves this only to be the condition of
the restored state thereof, and the threefold Ministry and adminstration
ministered to three distinct Societies in the church of Infants, young men,
Fathers, who here first speak of the Infants.

1. The churches breasts are as young Roes, yielding tender milk for Lambs, and
are the first mentioned.

2. They are the twins of Zebei, that is, the glory, signifying that the
Doctrine taught was of the Gospel, or Christ, being the glory of God and man,
and that which was not to be taught without the church.

Ver. 4. Thy neck is as a Tower of Ivory, the neck is that member that joins
the head and body together, which the covenant of the Gospel does do, Christ
and the church.

2. For the solidity and reality that there is in Christ to the church therein,
and that there ought to be in the church to Christ, it is compared to the tooth
of the Oliphant, in the substance whereof are not discernable, any pores or
hollownesse at all.

3. It is compared to a Tower, to show that the highest of all human happiness
in the Church, was in their being in Covenant with God by Jesus Christ, and
therefore was above all.

Note. Now the Spirit speaks of the head and the parts thereof, who had an
immediate representation of Christ, and intrustment by him in the church.

Thy eyes are as the fish pools of Heshbon by the gate of Bathrabim.

1. The eyes set forth the ministerial Authority and place which Christ gave
them, who as his Ambassadors represented him, 2 Cor. 5.20.

2. It shows how they were honored of and in Christ, so that he that despised
them, despised him, etc.

3. It shows that they should have especial light, and illumination from
Christ.

4. That they should see for the whole body and shadowed out his prophetical
Office.

5. That none of himself might be Minister, unless placed by God, and made
overseer by the Holy Ghost, Acts 20.28. in the constituted church.

6. In that they are said to be pools, it shows an especial part of their
watchmanship, to consist in a careful respect, whom they admitted in to the
church, by baptism.

7. In that they are said to be at the gate of Bathrabim, serves much to
illustrate and confirm the same, being the daughters of the multitude and
chosen of the church.

8. As this was the prime and first part, so in it was intended the whole, in
which one was not to act without the other, but together.

Thy Nose is as the Tower of Lebanon, which looks toward Damascus.

1. Which shows that the favor and sweetness of Christ was manifested in
the satisfaction of the Law, for man, signified by the Tower of Lebanon, and
shadows his Priesthood.

2. It is said to look to (...) a word compound of dam, which signifies blood,
and punishment, (...) which signifies sackcloth, and metaphorically sorrow, as
having respect to the blood and destruction, the misery and affliction of man
in his natural estate, and Christ undergoing all these for man, whence, as
from a most sweet perfume, arose a sweet favor of Christ to man, 2 Cor. 2.15.

Ver. 5 Thy head upon thee is like Carmel.

1. It is remarkably set forth in this, that the true constituted Church was
understood in this description, and not in that, Cap. 4.1. nor that Cap. 6.5.
there are hair and eyes expressed, but no head, as in this place. They
signified the State, this the Church.

2. The Head of the Church is Christ, Ephesians. 5.23. who is compared to Carmel.

1. As a Mount exceeding far all the rest of the body.

2. As carmell, which signifies a green ear of corn, which shows that the
Saints in Christ did flourish, or were fed, as corn in a green ear.

Note. The hair of thine head is as purple.

1. Here is not meant ordinary hair, but as Brightman observes, tenuior coma;
and after, hic veluti linum tenuissimum tinctum purpura quasi singulis tunc,
fideles tunc principes forent.

2. I cannot indeed assent to the hairs being set for the faithful, but by the
purple covered the head of Christ, I understand the regal Office of Christ,
which some particular men in the restoration of the church shall officiate
under the Lord Jesus.

3. All these Offices of King the last and highest, the Priest and Prophet are
in Christ the Head, fresh and green as carmell, and full of fruit as a green
ear of corn.

4 The eye of the spirit was on these things, the word after shows when he
says, the King, mark the King is held in the gallery.

The seventy read (...), ligatus in transcursibus.

Brightman and other look on this place, as one of the obscurest of all others,
and indeed it is become so, because the way of the Gospel has been of a long
time hid from us.

1. The word as Pagnin understands it, signifies aedificium quod sit in
domibus altis ad currendum de uno domo ad alterum, as a stair case from the
lower chamber to that of the second story above it, and to the third above
that; signifying the Saints going from the first Society of the Teacher, where
they were as children, to that of the Pastor as young men, to the Society of
the Evangelists, as fathers, 1 John 2.13.14. which is called a going from the
glory of one, to the glory of the other, unto the image of Christ the Lord, 2
Cor. 3.18. by David prophetically called a going, read but of these I have in
my book, of the smoke of the Temple cleared by the light of the Scriptures,
written more fully, and in my other Treatises which signify, that the
Christian growth was from Christ immediately.

Note. In these Christ is said to be shut up, his whole delight being in
beholding the Saints growing in grace, and increase of knowledge, which now is
not in use.

1. The Ministry, that is destroyed.

2. The differing administration.

3. And with these the precious way of knowledge and understanding.

4. In the beholding of this, with which the eyes and heart of Christ were
taken up, and held, he cries out.

Ver. 6. How fair, and how pleasant art thou, O love for delights, It is said
of Christ under the name of wisdom, that his delights were with the sons of
men, Proverbs 8.31.

2. Among the Saints he found much matter of delight for himself, yea, as being
made up of matter for delight unto him, so as that in a way of admiration, he
cries, how fair and lovely art thou, as if herein she excelled all praise and
commendations.

Ver. 7. This thy stature is like the palm tree, and thy breasts as clusters.

1. By breasts are meant the second Ministry, or Pastor, another from that in
ver. 3.

2. The spirit by a special foresight, only here says, clusters, but express
not grapes, to show that this yet was not the perfecting Ministry.

3. Under this Ministry the church is compared to the Palm for greenness and
stature.

Ver. 8. I, that is the Lord said, I will go up to the Palm tree, which I
rather read thus, I will ascend, that is, in the stair case, from the first to
the their Society.

2. I will ascend (...) in the Palm tree, that is, in her stair case, which is
meant of Christ mystical, and take hold of the branches which were as the
chambers of the house.

3. Now also shall thy breasts be as the clusters of grapes; here is the last
Ministry, the perfecting Ministry of the Evangelist, whose breasts were as
clusters of grapes, having in them abundance of most sweet wine, the peace and
joy of the spirit, and Kingdom of God being held forth among them.

4. The smell of thy Nose like apples, the intercession of Christ was as a most
sweet refreshment to the Saints, apprehended in the teaching thereof by those
that believe.

Ver. 9. The palate of thy mouth is like the best wine for my beloved.

1. Brightman non minus palati sua vitatem, quam uberum foecunditatem praedicat
nisi forsan discrimen sit infantiae and virilis aetatis quarum illa pascitur
uberibus haec institutis and monitis parentum informatur, in which ye may see
the man hinted something at the mind of God, but I rather take it thus, O
Church, thy tasting the sweetness of thy Savior in his love, as Priest, King
and Prophet to thee, becomes to Christ himself an unspeakable joy and delight,
and is to himself as the good wine is to thee.

2. Hence the pallat which is the churches, is placed in the head among the
Royal Offices of Christ, that it may dwell and be fed daily with the delights
and sweetness thereof, and that immediately it may be hers from God, before it
be mixed with a carnal matter, and called the joy of the Holy Ghost, and the
Kingdom of God.

3. The palate is for the beloved, that is, the church should savor, relish or
delight in no other but Christ, taste and see how good the Lord is, it should
be kept for him, 1 Pet. 2.3. if ye have tasted how good the Lord is.

4. It is said to go down to the heart and rejoice it, as well as please the
pallat.

5. Causing the lips of those that are asleep to speak, which I rather read
thus, rectifying the lips of those that are asleep to speak.

1. Brightman and others, would have those here said to be asleep, to be meant
the Jews; but without doubt this description is made of the Church, after the
call of the Jews, and of the Jews Church, who though she becalled after the
Gentiles to restore the Church, yet the pattern here spoke of will be eminently
seen to be among them.

2. By those asleep I rather understand some of the membe^s of the Church,
which like David after some sin are fallen asleep, and against which the
Apostle speaks, 1 These. 5.6.

3. That the Offices of Christ preached to these, makes their lips to speak the
praise of it.

4. Of this word here comes (...) infamia, or detractatio, which then shows
this, that men asleep and know not Christ, who therefore detract from him, do
no sooner come to taste the sweetness of it, but it rectifieth their tongues,
and brings them to commend and honor the excellency of the Lord, as Paul, etc.

Ver. 10. The Church concludes in these words, I am my beloveds, by Covenant,
and by Redemption, and none but his alone.

And his desire is toward me it is to be observed, that in the fall God said
to the woman, That her desire should be to her husband, and he should rule over
her, Genesis 3.16. the word for desire there and here are expressed by the same
word, and shows, that as the woman's desire after the fall was to be to the man,
so after the restoration, Christ's desire is to the Church.

The Church being heightened to this perfection, it is thoughts are to propagate
and to constitute Churches, either at home, or among other Nations abroad,
which is the seventh part.

The seventh general part,
Cap. 7. Ver. 11.
1. Come my beloved, in which there is a call or invitation to Christ, and
shows that there is no company like Christ's, nor no good to be done without him
in the work of God, For Paul may plant, and Apollo may water, but it is God
that gives the increase, 1 Cor. 3.7.

2. Let us (we of the Ministry) they going three together always to set up
Churches: as in my letters written to the Assembly, and printed I have set
forth at large.

3. We and thee, let us go forth, 2 Cor. 6.1. we as workers together with God;
we, that is, Paul, Silvanus, Timothy, 2 Cor 1.19. as workers together in one
Church, not dividedly in many, work with the beloved, and cannot work at all
without him.

4. Let us go forth of the Church into the field, the world, and shows the
care of the Jews to distribute and convay knowledge among men, that never heard
of it, which their dispersion now will notably help then, after their call,
through their knowledge of the languages and those country customs of the
world, that never heard of Christ: Brightman understands here by the field the
desire the Jews had to have the unconverted Jews to be converted, which I think
to be too narrow and further, that the Jews conversion will be admirable, even
in one year, as it were brought to pass in most part of the world, and those
are not then persuaded, perish among the Nations for their unbelief, Esaias 66.8.

5. They go forth into the fields, but lodge not there, but in the villages,
that is, with such as embrace the doctrine of repentance, and the preparation
of the Gospel.

Ver. 12. Let us be as the morning on the Vineyards, to show that men under the
Law had not that clear manifestation of grace to them, as the Church had, but
had a morning light, in which their own nature and darkness of estate was set
forth, and the love of the Lord Jesus in his call of them thence to his
mavelous light, for the call of men is from darkness in the state of nature,
to light in the state of grace, and is the first work of grace and Gospel
effect of the Ministry on man, and not baptism, 1 Pet. 2.9. and thus 2 Acts
38. repent and be baptized, so that repentance must go before baptism, and the
call before repentance, as in Mark 2.17. I came not to call the righteous, but
sinners to repentance, which is the key of the Kingdom now taken from the
people, that they enter not therein, and the preparation of the Gospel, both
which light and darkness is in that of John, and Christ saying, Repent, there
is the darkness, for the Kingdom of heaven is at hand.

2. Let us see if the Vine flourish, where it seems that the church shall have
under Christ the oversight of the world, and the government thereof as under
Moses, the flourishing whereof is the true and right administration of Justice.

3. Where the tender grapes appear, the word (...) signifies a tender grape,
that is, a grape that has lost his flower, that is, a poor soul that has lost
his own glory by the Law, whose flower is fallen from him, on whom Christ cast
his eyes, Esaias.

4. If the Pomgranats have sent out their buds, that is, the Apostles or men
raised up of God to teach; as the Apostles did, the truth of Christ called the
buds of them.

5. There will I give* says Christ, my loves unto thee, so that ver. 11. was
the churches call of Christ, ver. 12. Christ's call of the church, who says,
that where the Domgranats bud, there Christ will give his loves in the plural,
and no where else or not before.

Ver. 13. The Mandrakes give a smell, I do not conceive that the Mandrakes here
are those soporiferous herbs said to be like male and female, but some other
pleasant herbs of which Genesis 30.15. being of some choice nature, as seems by
the word, by reason whereof, it is not easy to apply the sense of the spirit
in this place: Mr. Brightman applies them to men newly ingrafted into the
church, it may be the catechists are meant here, who are men not awake, and
soporiferous field plants.

At our gates are all manner of pleasant fruits, the church has three gates
set out in the square form, of the new Jerusalem which had twelve gates, three
at each side, which showed that in all quarters of the world, the church should
be of the same constitution, the three gates were belonging to the threefold
ministry, at each of which the Angel thereof stood, either to let in, or keep
out.

1. The first whereof was the Teacher, and his gate, at which were old fruits,
that is, repentance required with self denial, etc.

2. Faith and obedience of the Gospel, which were the new fruits.

3. All these must be at the gates before entrance, which are said to be before
Christ, that is for his glory and praise, who called them his redeemed ones,
and delivered them by his power and virtue from Satan to God, and from
darkness to light with his Saints.

4. They are said to be laid up for him, the church receiving upon the
effectual call of any, a profession made by them, to leave the world and
himself, and to love Christ, and obey the Gospel, and to walk in all the
commands thereof, as appears, 1 Timoth. 6.12. which was rightly said to be laid
up for Christ also.

CAP. VIII.
Ver. 1. O That thou were as my brother, that sucked the breasts of my mother!
Christ is said not to be ashamed to call us brethren, Heb. 2.11. wherefore it
should seem the Church wishes that Christ were conversant with her in the
flesh, as before, and as those suck the breasts of her mother, though the
Apostle says that Christ is no more to he known after the flesh, 2 Cor. 6.18.
Malachy 3.1.

2. When I should find thee without, that is not admitted to the church, which
shows none is of the church until admitted, all are found without the church
at first.

3. This is altogether against Christ's personal reign on earth, for if ever he
should reign personally on earth, it were at this time of the churches
restoration.

4. I would kiss thee, a ceremony performed in the church by the brethren
only, and not as now among us men, kissing women, 2 Cor. 13.12. Salute. (...),
and so 1 Cor. 16.20. 1 These. 5.26. it is (...), not (...), thus Judas saluted
Christ, Absalon all the people, Abner kissed Hazael, nor do we read of any man's
kissing woman, but Isaac his wife Rebecca.

But because some have of late been about to revive the holy kiss in their
churches, note that the manner in the Primitive church was this, that when the
churches met together in one place, on the receiving of the Sacraments, or the
like, the brethren of the Evangelists Society kissed, all the brethren of the
Pastors and Teachers, to witness their inward love and affection to them, upon
their departure each from other.

Object. This is not the custom of our country.

Resp. The word says, that Believers must not be conformed to this evil
world, but be changed in therenewing of their mind, so that no custom but that
of the word is to be practiced by men in and of the Church.

5. Yet I should not be despised. 1. Doing that women use not to do 2. Doing
that the Saints use not to do, that is, kiss those that are without, men that
are not members of the church, a thing which ought not to be done.


1. In thy eyes.

2. In the Saints eyes.

3. The world did they know Christ, would not despise the church, for kissing
Christ.

4. It shows how Christ, though he be not of the world, yet were he, what
esteem she would give him.

5. And thence what esteem the Saints that are in the world shall have of the
church, if that Christ appear to be in them.

2. Ver. 2. I would lead thee and bring thee into my mothers house, which is
the church, being indeed the house of her mother, that is, the first church
constituted by the Apostles; so that those which think of a new church way, not
known in the word, are but in a dream.

2. Thou should teach me, in which it shows the desire it had above all of
Christ, teaching, who taught as one having authority.

3. I would cause thee to drink of spiced wine, the church would endeavor to
acquaint Christ with that comfort, they themselves came to find, and know to be
in that salvation they found within themselves to have received from him.

4. And the juice of the Pomgranat, that is, the sweetness and comfort of the
works, writings, and sufferings of the Apostles.

Ver. 3. His left hand should be under my head, and his right hand should
embrace me.

Ver. 4. I charge you, etc. in which two verses, as in the former periods, the
church shuts up this part also.

The eighth general part. Cap. 8. Ver. 5.
Ver. 5. Who is this comes up from the wilderness.

As I was slow writing these words, I find Mr. Brightman to hint hereon, that
on this coming up out of the wilderness, and in the other places of this book,
is meant the restoration of the church, whose words I thought good to insert,
to take away the reproach that some may cast upon the ground, and way I have
here laid down, and used in the expounding this book, as of novelty, fancy,
etc. as silly men are wont to do.

Haec enim sciscitandi forma semel atque iterum novam originem Ecclesiae
alicujus indictam vidimus.

And by who is this, cujus nominis est haec gens quae ascend it e deserto.

1. When rather I understand it thus, that the church having been in the
wilderness, and the state of the Law government lost above 1200. years, and
the form whereof being unknown to the world, on Gods discovery of it men stand
amazed, and cry out, who is this.

2. This is clearly proved, in that the body of the Song contains a discovery
of these estates, and of Christ their King, as of things hidden and unknown.

3^ By the wilderness is meant the state of the world, opposed to the garden
or church of God, which God in the Revelation calls the Antichristian estate,
Rev. 12.6. where the woman the church is driven into the wilderness, or world
estate, Antichrist baptism and church being no better then the rest of the
unbaptized world.

4. Out of this world of the Antichristian estate shall the Gentile church
first ascend, and the Jews church estate ascends out of the Mohammedan world
estate, being Gog and Magog.

5. The word signifies to ascend, as alluding to the 37 Ezekiel. 1.12. when God
brings the Jews out of their graves, and bone, and flesh, and skin, and breath,
by the ministry, in the four winds come on them and restore them.

6. God here understands not any particular Nations or Churches, nor is it
warrantable to apply them so, the Scripture of the Old Testament, comprehending
all under the two general terms of the Jews and Gentiles, it is true Prophecy
speaks of the states of the world in particular, as the four Empires, and the
ten Kingdoms, and their periods, but for the Church in Prophecy, the spirits
purpose is after the call of the Jews and Gentiles, before which they were
two, but after speaks of them as one, and for that that of Paul, and John's
writing of particular Churches, and naming them warrants, not us; where that
particular is not spoken of but general only, ver. 8. of this chap. has the
signification of some high matter, of which I shall say something when I come
to speak thereof.

8. Leaving on her belowed, that is, depending on the strength, help, and power
of Christ, to bring her thence against the power of her opposers.

8. I raised thee up under the apple tree, by the apple tree is meant Christ,
Cant. 2.3. the apple tree among the trees, Christ among other Kings, is as the
apple tree among the fruitless trees of the wood.

2. Under it, that is, Christ coming to take a people to himself in the way of
the old Covenant nationally, the Jew grows jealous, that God has put him
away, and taken another people to himself, to wife, which raises them up,
Deuteronomy. 32.21. Romans 10.19. Luke 15.28.29.

3. By I raised thee up, is meant Christ raised her up, who speaks here, and
the word is, I made thee to be raised up.

4. The word for leaning on, may be read sticks unto, or joined unto her
beloved, to show that the people sticking to, or joined to Christ at the
churches coming up from the desert, were not known to the world.

9. There thy mother brought thee forth in the old Covenant.

10. There (again) thy mother brought thee forth in the New Covenant.

11. She that bare thee which was the first Church, owned by Jesus Christ now,
that this concerned the Jews Church is clear; for as yet none but the Jews
have enjoyed both Covenants.

Verse 6. Set me as a seal upon thy heant; they are the words of Christ to the
Church after he had raised her up, signifying that he desired nothing of her
for all he had done for her, but her love.

2. That he should be the seal of her heart, whence she should let nothing go
without his leave to any, nor to worship, love, or fear any besides himself,
all being to be shut up to him, and for him.

3. Set me as a seal upon thy seed, our translation reads on thy arm, by the
seal here I understand Baptism, which all the seed of the Church were to be
sealed with, that is set apart from others to Jesus Christ; which time state
and work is foretold by John, Revel. 7.2. where the Man that God authorizeth in
his name to constitute the church, is said to be an Angel having the seal of
God, who sealed the Jews tribes, verse 4. to the 8.

Note. The Reasons why Christ requires the Church thus to set him as a seal on
her heart, and on her children, are set down in that that remains of this
verse, and in the seventh verse.

Reason 1. Love is strong as death, as death overcomes all men, so love
overcomes all things in man, crucifies and subdueth all things to Jesus Christ.

Reason 2. Or thus, as if Christ should say, my love to thee made me dye for
thee, and now, if thou should not love me, and set me as a seal upon thy
heart, it would prove again as strong as death was to me, when I dyed.

Reason 3. Jealousy is as the grave for cruelty, God is set forth to be a
jealous God over the Jews in the first Covenant, Christ in the second; but
Christ's jealousy is of the heart, that the Church loves not so singly,
cordially, spiritually, the Lord her husband as she ought.

Which as the grave, he would devour all that in heart adulterated the
Covenant, or Marriage Bed of Christ.

Reason 4. The coals thereof, are the coals that the fire Jah has kindled,
here some only use the word Jah as a Hebraisme to set forth the greatness or
vehemence of the flame of it, but I rather do thus understand them; the coals
of this jealousy are kindled by the fire or heat of zeal that is from Jah or
Jehovah my Godhead, to whom all is due, and with whom none is to be Corrival.

Verse 5. Many waters cannot quench love, in which Christ would again mitigate
the expression used before, in which his love as jealousy was as fire, or a
flame, coals, to consume, a consuming fire, and now shows that many or much
waters cannot quench his love, and whereas the Apostle says, love covers a
multitude of sins, so sin like water here, though it abound in the Saints, yet
it cannot quench the flame of Gods love, nor can the floods, that is, some
exceeding gluts of sin on some temptations, they neither cannot drown it, but
love will exceed them, and be above them.

6. If a man would give all the substance of his house, with a lover, it would
be utterly despised, Christ applies most sweetly in these words, to show the
effects of a faithful woman loving her husband, saying if a man would entice
her to adulterate her husbands bed, and to offer to give her the substance of
his house, she would in despising, despise it that is exceeding, contemn him
and them, now says Christ, if a woman will do this for her husband that loves
him, how can thou say thou love me, and not do the like, have not I
deserved more of thee then any man of any woman. Our ordinary Translation to me
seems strange, I know no right sense can be given of it, which says, if a man
would give all the substance of his house for love, it would utterly be
despised.

1. As if the Church could not obtain Christ's love, or as if she were to buy
it.

2. As if Christ could not, or had not purchased the Churches love.

But if ye take the words as I have read them before.

1. Ye have (...) a man offering then (...) with a lover in the feminine, with
a woman loving her husband, it would be despised, which show that the contempt
is said to be of the woman tempted by any to folly against her husband, that
she loves.

Part. 9. Cap. 8. Ver. 8.
We have a little sister, and she has no breasts.

Note. By the little sister cannot be meant the Gentiles.

1. They are called before the Jews, and the Jews have their Call and Ministry
from the Gentiles at their Restoration.

2. The Jews Church will be small in compare of the Gentiles.

3. Hence I suppose that by the little sister is meant part of the Jewish
Nation, which being dispersed in the most remote parts of the earth, some after
the call of the body of the Nation are not called, nor have no means thereunto
employed in this, she has no breasts.

4. Christ here with the Jews calls them his sister, with the Gentiles Churches.

5. What shall we do for our sister, she willingly would be doing for, and not
talking of her only, and is the same in effect as is expressed. Cap. 7.11, 12.

6. She has no breasts or true and lawful Ministry, which cannot be the Jews
speaking of the Gentiles who had Ministry before them, nor do I think it to be
the Gentiles speaking of the Jews, but the Jews speaking of some of their own
Tribes. It may be Dan not mentioned at the first sealing, Rev. 7. but after to
be called last of all.

7. In the day the word shall be made to be spoken to her, and does signify the
effectualness of the word, at the time God has appointed for her call, though
before she opposed the word, and did not obey the call as the rest had done.

Verse 9.1. If she be a wall let us build on her a silver Tower; the words are
the words of Christ, in answer to the Churches question before.

2. If she be a door, we will enclose her with boards of Cedar.

Ver. 10. I am a wall: the holy City or new Jerusalem is set out by its walls,
and gates, of which here the Jews church says, that she is a wall, the word
coms from (...) ^ocer, she and the Gentiles joined by the corner stone Christ,
now into one frame of building.

2. Her breasts are as Towers, being abundant in knowledge, and in the wisdom
of the Gospel, in which she was exalted very high.

3. Then says she, was I in his eyes, that is, Christ's, as one that found
favor, being beloved and esteemed of him.

Part 10. Cap. 8. Ver. 11.
1. There was a Vineyard to Solomon with the Lord of the multitudes, that is,
the National Church under the Rule of Moses, was National with that of the
world, called Satan's, the Lord of the multitude.

2, He let forth this Vineyard to keepers, that is, to the Judges of the Cities.

3. Every man brought with his fruit, that is, his own obedience of the Law a
thousand silverlings, that is, the grace of the Gospel which is in Christ to
be justified, or he could not be accepted in himself.

Ver. 12. The Vineyard that are to me (says Christ) are mine, which is the
Church estate under the Gospel.

2. They are said to be before Christ in Christ's presence, he himself watches
them, he walks in the midst of the seven golden candlesticks. Rev. 1.13. and is
always with them, and among them, and in them, being another way provided for
then that of Solomon's, and receives all the fruit of it himself.

3. He shows Solomon's Vineyard was divided in the fruit of it 1000. Solomon
had, and 200. the keepers for keeping the fruit.

Note. This is a key to this book, and shows, that the Vineyard sometimes is to
be understood by the National, sometime by the Gospel Church.

Ver. 13. Thou that dwell in the gardens, the companions hearken unto thy
voice.

This friends is a wonder, in which the fall and cestation of the false
Ministers and Ministry is foretold.

1. The companions are such as by their own authority set up Churches, and use
the authority, power, and word of Christ without his leave.

2. These a long time oppose the truth, and true way of Christ, and at last are
by the grace of God persuaded to obedience, deny their way, see their folly and
evil committed against the Gospel.

3. The Church which had heard it, cries, cause me to hear it, which shows none
can hear it, but those are made to hear.

Conclusion. Ver. 14.
1. Fly O my beloved, or hasten O my beloved; the fullfilling of these things
in us, the Jews and Gentiles, make us one in thee, and in thy faith, according
to thy word.

2. Assimilate thy self to the Tzebi, O take on thee the nature of poor man, as
thou have said, O thou that art the glory of the Father, as God, and of man, as
man.

3. Or be thou in thy celerity, as the young heart hunted on the mountains, so
haste in thy coming unto us, in which she ingeminates her desires to Christ.

4. Come unto us upon the mountains of spices.

1. He came filled with the Godhead, anointed with the spirit, possessed with
all authority of the Father, for to be King, Priest, and Prophet to his people.

2. He had all power in heaven and earth, to do what he would, give what, and
take what he would of life for man.

3. As man he was in all things tempted like unto us, and therefore knew how to
pity those that came to God by him.

Note. On these, and the other Mountains of God and grace did he come, as the
church desired him to come, that coming they might not find any emptiness in
him, for whom their souls longed, and in whom all fulness is to dvvell.

Who came from the Mountains of Spices, that are in God, into the gardens of
Spices that are in the church, or Saints of Gods election.

The things that are predicted in this prophetical Song, I verily believe
will most certainly in their appointed time be accomplished, of which with
the Prophet David, and the Apostle Paul, in their time, I cannot but to the
Generation present speak these things: for I believe, and therefore speak, that
the praise of God, this glory and vvisdome of Jesus Christ may be seen and
admired of us, and that we occasion not our ruin by crossing his purposes,
but use the means, and walk in the way appointed for the hastening our
happiness, and not come to be broken to powder by falling on the Stone in
Zion, or the stones falling on us, which I advise all the men on earth this
day to bevvare, in this great day of the visitations of the Lord God Almighty,
whose fire is now in Zion, and his furnace in Jerusalem; and he about to
accomplish his work, his strange work among the sons of men, and who shall
hinder the Almighty, who will both root up, and plant the Nations of the earth
again, and make Zion his (...) the praise of all the earth for evermore. Amen.

FINIS.
There are sundry errors on this Treatise, the Author being not present at the
printing of most of it, which he desires thee to pass by, and especially to
supply what is wanting in p. 18. l. ult. cap. 6. by reading, I have another
baptism, to be baptized with, and how, etc. In the Introduction to the
Exposition l. 11. for the Mosaicall Rule, read the Leveticall Ministry set up
by Moses.

THere are three books which have in them Brain for Brain, which concern my
self.

1. A Treatise written against Mr. John Duryes Notes, in defense (...) the
present Ministry.

2. A Treatise concerning the call of the now Ministry, dedicated (...) the
Honerable, the Parliament of England.

3. A Letter written by Dr. Chamberlain to me, in the defense of the authority
of such as now baptize believers.


