THE CHURCHES GOING IN, AND COMING OUT OF THE WILDERNESS, OPENED, By the
unworthiest of the Gospel Ministers, JOHN BRAYN.

Cant. 6. 10. Who is she looks forth as the Morn, fair as the Moon, clear as
the Sun, and terrible as an Army with banners? Zech. 4. 7. Zorobabel shall
bring forth the Head-stone thereof with shoutings, crying, Grace, grace unto
it. 1 Cor. 1. 20. Where is the wise? where is the Scribe? where is the Disputer
of this world? Has not God made foolish the wisdom of this world? London,
Printed for George Whittington, at the Blew-Anchor in Cornhil, near the
Royal Exchange. 1649.

TO my dear Uncle, Mr. Thomas Churchey, and his Wife Mrs Mary Churchey my
Aunt, of Wincaunton in Somerset.
GOd having taken, in taking from you the daughter of your hopes, the only
means of earth, to have perpetuated your Memorial, and to have kept your Name
in life among the living, when you had layen asleep among the dead. In whose
long and much deplored absence, I think it my duty, in what I may, to
contribute that means that may help to make sweet your Memory among the Saints;
as in another kind is was the duty of the younger, to raise up seed to the
elder Brother: Which service I desire may be accepted of you both, as done of
him, that (while he lives) shall gladly wait to do you any, or all the service
else he can; and rest, praising and praying to GOD daily for you, That ye may
be saved.

Your obliged Kinsman, JOHN BRAYN.

To the Reader.
MY prayer to God for thee is, That there may be given thee an honest and
humble heart to read, and understanding from the Lord to apprehend rightly what
thou read, that thou be not left to scorn the Matter, for the meanness of
the dress it is set out in, or the unworthiness worthiness of the Author, whose
aim herein is Gods glory, and thy edification; who desires thee to pass by the
many infirmities thou may easily find in the ensuing Treatise, and it will
be thankfully acknowledged by the Author to be a favor

To an unworthy Gospel-Minister, JOHN BRAYN.

Of the hiding the Church.
A Certain kind of strangeness may seem to seize on men that read the
prescribed Form of Church Discipline contained in the two former Treatises that
I have written thereof out of the Word, as being new and unheard of, and by
that means cause many to reject it, though indeed it be that which was first in
the Church, and long since turned out of doors by the Policy and Tyranny of
Antichrist. Now to the preventing of causless conjectures of novelty, and the
like, in the hearts of men, I have thought good to set forth the causes,

1. Why it came to be hid.

2. How it come to be hid.

3. How long it was to be hid, as foretold of God in the Scriptures; which will
serve much to take away those Objections which many make, 1. About the hiding
of the Church: 2. About the strange and unheard of way this seems to be to the
world; and is no other thing then was foretold of God to be done by the world,
when it should be brought to light, Cant. 6. 10. Who is she that looks forth
as the morn, fair as the Moon, clear as the Sun, terrible as an Army with
banners? These things set out the degrees the Church was to come out by;

1. As the morning out of the dark night, having light and darkness mixed with
it.

2. It came out as the Moon, having many spots in it, subject to an increasing
and decreasing light, or a night-light, or rather a changing light, not
permanent.

3. Is that of the Sun, Lord of the day, who by its light fully expels
darkness, and by his heat revives the pleasant plants of God from their seeming
deadness, their life lying hid in them.

4. Its time of thus coming forth and way is terrible as an Army with banners
indeed in a time of War.

5. Its coming out is wondered at, and enquired after, with a Who is this? a
great enquiry is in the world after it, as after an unknown, and an unusual
unheard of birth; and so much the more wonderful, because as another Sun it
will appear to all the world by a glorious heavenly light.

The cause of this admiration, is the long hiding of this Gospelmercy from the
world, who as the Sun is carried from us as it were into another world, that it
shined not to us; in the time of whose absence we are sat down in darkness,
which continues so long, that we know not the light when it comes forth, but
is wondered at, and hated; hence it must have an Army, and be terrible to bring
it forth.

Rev. 12. 6. 1. It is driven into the wilderness

2. It is hid, and so hid, as after from the face of the Dragon, v. 14. as that
the Dragon could not find her, nor make discovery of her.

3. Ye have the time, how long it is to be hid, expressed of God, v. 6. 1260
days; which days being set down prophetically, must be understood of so many
years, which are 1260 years.

1. This agrees with Antichrists time of Tyranny, as in Cap. 13. 5.
Antichrists time is forty two months, which accounting thirty days for every
month, as in some places they do, it makes just 1260 days, prophetically
years; which clearly shows the time of the Churches hiding, its obscure
condition, in which it should not be known to the world what her estate was,
which agrees with the time of Antichrists Reign. Its hiding begins with the
beginning of the time of Antichrists Reign, and ends with the dissolution of
him.

2. We may collect the time, we having set down in Scripture Antichrists end,
Rev. 13. 18. which is to be in the year 666. when Popes and Papacy have their
final, fatal and fearful end, for as in v. 5. it is to continue no longer then
the forty two months.

Obj. The number of the Beast 666, may be to be understood of the times of the
beginning of Antichrist.

R. 1. The 666 so could not be the number of the Beast, but of the time going
before the Beast, the number of years unto the Beast, but not of the Beast,
which is the number in the Text spoken of.

2. This number of the Beast must contain the beginning and the end of the
Beast, or that cannot be the number of him, which is to be limited only to his
beginning and end.

1. His number is much more then 666, being to be 1260 years, and so that could
not be its number possibly.

2. It could not be much of the first 666 years, because Antichrist could not
be revealed in most of that time, there was that did hinder which would hinder
until taken out of the way, 2 Thessalonians. 2. 7.

3. If the year 666 were to be understood of the time Antichrists beginning was
to be, it were no such wisdom as the Text holds it out to be, to account the
number, unless we say Antichrist is yet not come, but is to begin to be 1666;
for 666 comes not to be accounted by any account of numeration again until the
time, in the account of tim^ from Christ to this day.

4. As for Potters account drawn to prove the Antichrist of Rome from the
square Root of the number 666, being 25, there may be something of God in it;
and the number drawn from Names by others, from Irenaeus to this day, men
adding several significations and significators, as their fancy lead them to;
to which I leave them, and time to reveal the truth thereof.

Now that this may be more plain to us, it is added by the holy Spirit in the
Text, that the number is the number of a man, that is, Numerus numerans, then
the time of the Beast is the numerus numeratus, now in the number numbering it
is of man.

1. To show, That the number is ordinarily to be numbered, as among men is used
in their other ordinary accounts.

2. To satisfy us, and to take us off from any unusual kind of casting up
Antichrists accounts.

In that he says, (...), and not (...), he shows it was ordinary indeed with
some, but not with all men.

4. John being himself a Jew, borrows this custom, proper to the people, to
set out Antichrists number by, which is to set down in their numbering of years,
the figures containing the lesser number, but leaving out the Millenary number,
that so by this taking it from the custom of the Jews, it may be hid from the
Gentiles; which kind of computation is called (...) the lesser computation
among the Jews.

Now if you deduct out of 1666, the number of 1260, then the time of
Antichrists rise, and the Churches hiding, must be in the year 406.

1. About which time the Goths invaded Italy, and upon which the ten Kings,
signified by the ten Toes of Daniels Image, arose out of the Roman Empire,
divided in the two Iron Thighs before of Constantinople and Rome, by the Sons
of Constantine; after which Estate the Iron and Clay are mixed, the Popes and
Kings of the earth Reigh together. Now the History and Mystery being compared
together, meeing in one, agree as one in all things, as in the same oneness of
truth, proves it sufficiently unto us to be of God.

2. About this, or not long before, Hilary of Poictoyrs in France, who lived
about 380, says, The Church was not be found in his days in Houses, in
Temples, and in Cities, but in Prisons, Mountains, Dens, Deserts and Caves of
the earth. But in the 26 years after, there was a more exceeding increase of
darkness then in far more time before.

3. To these times* as to the Primitive and purest times, have the learned had
recourse to, to Reform the Church by in our days, and not to the times since.

4. The differences amongst us about Church Government, in that they are in a
manner undetermineable, abundantly prove the hiding of it in the Word to us,
which should determine all, and decide all Controversies for us.

5. About that time, or a little before, though many did retain the truth of
Doctrine, yet had lost the truth of Discipline, and few after the first 250
years, wrote any thing of it in a manner: Now as the Doctrine stayed last, so it
came by Luther first again; and after by degrees to reveal the Discipline: and
it is my opinion, That until 1666 the full and perfect discovery of
Church Discipline will not be so perfectly practiced in the Church, as shall be;
the time between this and that being to prepare for it: And at that time there
will all things that concern the Church Government, be revealed and erected in
the world amongst men; though I conceive, that according to Christ's promise,
these now last and most cruel days of Antichrist, for the Elects sake, shall be
shortened; and that God, before the end of this time, may give us by some means
a general knowledge of the Churches Form of Government, though not so plainly
and perfectly as in the time appointed.

6. That the Church now hid shall then come forth, is manifestly employed, in
that God sets down the express number of the days it is to remain hid, which
God would not have limited it to, if it had been his mind to have it hid for
ever from the sons of men.

7. The mighty opposition of the Spirits of godly men against all or any
Government yet exercised, carries much evidence with it, That the Governments
known are not of Divine Institution; The Spirits of Gods people will be subject
to Gods Government, as the Apostle in another case, 1 Cor. 14. 32.

8. When ever the whole Gospel platform of the Churches Discipline shall be set
up, man will not be necessitated to borrow pieces of Prudentials to patch it
up, Gods wisdom will sufficiently be revealed in the Word for the Government of
his Church.

1. Conclusion is not to cry down all those things which at present have with
them the appearance of Novelty.

2. Not to admire nor dote upon those things at present seem old, a thing
whereunto we see the world wonderfully carried after, when indeed were things
fully and plainly discovered to us, new things would be old, old things would
be new; which vanity John strikes at in his 1 Epist. Cap. 2. v. 7, 8. by which
means men can scarce be permitted to try things, whether they are truth or no,
but cast them away as new, though they were from the beginning: And we our
selves now, and our fathers in King Edwards days heretofore, have seen how hard
old Heresies, Superstitions, Traditions and Popish Vanities are to be cast
down, and how hardly the Truth comes to be set up among a people; and proves a
people are not easily taken off from their old ways in Religion, but as the
Philistims would set up Dagon again and again after its fall. The old (as we
account old) is pleasing more to Nature then the new; that of Popery was more
Natural and corrupt then that of Episcopacy; Episcopacy much more then that of
Presbytery; and that of Presbytery more then that of Independency, which the
world cannot bear, how then the way of the Lord Jesus, which will find more
opposition with the world, then ever any Government yet found in all the world,
or its divine, holy, pure nature and power would not be made appear.

3. The old will be a new Government, when ever brought forth to light, and the
new old.

4. Let us not be overstrict in suppressing all those Doctrines that suit not
with our judgment or practice in Church Discipline, whereby we should keep the
way of God which is hid, to be hid for ever unto us, Matthew. 11. 25. God hides
things from the wise and prudent, and reveals them to babes; he as a most free
Agent makes known himself and mysteries to whom he please, and commonly to the
most unlikely means, that none may glory in man, nor man in himself, but all in
God, 1 Cor. 1. 20.

5. In the spirit of humility I beseech all public persons to consider, how
sad a thing it would be, if the time of the Churches Revelation being at hand,
any thing of Power or Authority should be made use of to keep it from us, and
from the world, did not the Spirit of God stir up the Spirit of man within him
for the love of Christ and the Gospel, to undergo any thing, what means may
this be to bolt out the Kingdom of heaven from us, and to shut it up from us
for ever.

6. Conclusion hence is, that until the Kingdom estate be brought forth to the
world, the world will not see peace. It is good for Magistrates and Ministers
to help it forth, but not to hinder it; a woman in travel, though her throws
for a time cease, yet they leave her not, but come upon her, until she be
delivered of her child: the woman now travels in pain again to be delivered,
as heretofore Rev. 12. 2. Isa. 56. 8. Shall a Nation be born at once?

It is well observed of learned Broughton, That while Solomon's Temple lay
waste, all the world was in war, and in flames of fire, as it were; but when it
was restored, God blessed all the world with a sweet peace; which change of our
estate, observe it well* will be in some kind agreeable hereunto, as all shall
see who live to behold it, Psalm. 118. 22, 25. when the stone shall become the
head stone, laid for the building, God will send prosperity, and not before.

A third general ground to prove the Churches not being yet come forth, may be
from Rev. 12. 7. There was war in heaven, etc.

1. The holy Spirit having ended with the Churches time in the wilderness,
comes to show what should succeed it in her coming thence.

2. In her beginning visibility there is a war between those are of her visible
Members; in this war many Ministers are cast down, or Angels, v. 8. Their place
was found no more in heaven.

3. Ver. 10. A voice cried, saying, in heaven, Now is come salvation, and
strength, and the kingdom of our God, and the power of his Christ.

1. Here is a clear difference made betwixt heaven before the war, and the
kingdom after the war.

2. This diststinction is apparently clear in the Word (now) if now, then not
before, being the most certain note and distinction of time.

3. When this comes, comes Salvation, strength, and the power of his Christ,
and not before; showing, there would in this war be much weakness until then,
and then God would bless it with strength and power, by which the Church should
prove victorious in the world. But of these things I forbear to speak more of,
but refer it unto the Exposition I have intended to write, much more
particularly and at large, if the Lord give leave, as these things come to be
discussed of.

Obj. These are dubious Scriptures, and therefore the proof cannot be
sufficient; and again, many are the contrary Expositions made by the learned
against this of yours, which are rather to be assented unto, etc.

1. Friend, the hiding and time of the hiding of Church must be hence, or now
here.

2. The Scripture is dubious indeed before, but plain in the fulfilling.

3. The Scripture was given against doubts, not to occasion them; and to reveal
beforehand the purposes of God to his Church, near before the accomplishment
whereof God usually reveals them by the Word and Spirit to some of the Church,
as in Huss. Prediction of Luther, Brightman of the fall of Episcopacy.

Now for the contrary Expositions made of some of the most eminent that I have
read, I shall in brief insert.

1. Junius makes the 1260 days to be from the beginning of the rebellion, to
the end of the destruction and Temple, which was done before John wrote his
book of the Revelation, who says of the things in the book, they are things
shortly to come to pass; so that I think it is clear, he alludes to nothing
past in this book.

2. Others make this time agree with the wise men's coming to Christ, and end
with Herod's death, which is sufficiently answered in that made to the former.

3. Opinion is, That the 1260 days, and the time, times and half a time, are
one and the same, being three years and a half.

Resp. 1. These are not the same, they differ in manner of revelation, as in the
words themselves appear.

2. They differ in time, the one before the Churches coming forth, the other
after; many things came to be done between, as the War, and fall of the Dragon,
the fall of the Angels, the coming of Kingdom.

The one I think concerns the Jewish Church, who is the woman brought forth the
Male Child; the other the Gentiles: The Jews shall have their place appointed
them of God for safety, their time, times and half, as the Gentiles their 1260
days, whom infinite floods of persecution most certainly are to attend; from
all which God will most graciously save that people, and join them to himself.

1. This War is at the end of the 1260 days.

2. At the end of the two Witnesses Prophecy, when God will have the Church
ministered unto in another way then before, and all other ways of ministry
before extant, will cease and be put an end unto.

3. The same hour is an earthquake, a strange change of things In Church and
state, ver. 12.

1. If it be to come, we are warned of it as of the saddest time the Saints yet
saw, which we shall instantly know.

2. This sorrowful sad time ends in a heavenly happiness, the time of suffering
being to endure but three years and half.

3. It occasions the greatest change of things that ever was occasioned on
earth.

4. Herein the deliverance will be so wonderful, that the enemies will be
affrighted at it, and see God so in it, as to glorify God, when that of Isa.
11. will be fulfilled, God making the Lion to lie down with the Lamb, the Calf
and the Bear together, and shall not hurt nor destroy; so that the Church will
after this sad dying time, see God honoring her again, more then ever she was
honored in this present world.

1. Again, to return to the former purpose, this being one Vision, the two
numbers cannot be of the same time.

2. It is not to be thought, that this Book being so short, and containing in
it so much of History and Prophecy, as concerns the Church to the end; and
Antichrist rise and fall, withal, that in that there is a repetition of one and
the same thing, in one and the same Vision.

Object. You make the 42 Months, Rev. 13. 5. and the 1260 days the same, Rev.
12. 7. though these are set out by differing terms, as the other of a time,
times, and half a time, differs in terms from the 1260 days.

Resp. 1. This of the 42 Months and 1260 days, are spoken of in two Visions.

2. These are of the same thing meant, it is plain, which is, the one of
Antichrist, and her time of Tyranny; the other, of the Church, and her time of
suffering under this same Tyranny of Antichrist.

3. This sweetly sets out the wisdom of God, setting out one by the Moons
Government, the Governess of the night and sea on which she sits and rules; and
the other by the Sun, the Governor of the day, and Church, in which he reigns.

Illust. That as the Israelites in the time of their persecution had light in
their dwellings, when their persecutors were under darkness.

2. To show; That the worst of Saints estate was more comfortable then the best
of the enemies, Heb. 11. 25.

God would ever keep, and teach us to keep a difference between the godly and
ungodly, in this, as in the other divisions made of God betwixt them, set down
in the Scriptures; as Israel had the bright side, the Egyptians the dark side
of the Cloud toward them.

Mr. Fox, Constat enim sub Nerone, Domitiano, Trajano, Severo Commodo, Decio
Dioclesiano, Imperium draconis long supra triennium constitisse.

Wherefore he takes the second greater number from the Baptist to Constantine,
Quae persequutionum tempora si certe ex Historiis supputentur usq vnictum
Satanam sub Constantino, effluxerunt menses 42, Anni 294.

But the way of making up this account, I suppose is very unwarrantable, Vt
Daniel enumerat suas Hebdomadas, itidem and nos singulos menses in Septenarium
annorum numerum deducamus: a primo enim persecutionis initio hoc est
decollationis Johannis Baptistae, ad pacem ecclesiae sub Constantino restitutam
Anni 294.

1. These things square not, they must with this Exposition bring in the times
of Persecution, before the beginning of the Prophecy.

2. Nor was this the beginning of Persecution: The beginning of the Persecution
I suppose rather to have been in Herod's murdering the thousands of Infants of
Bethlehem, and the driving of Christ into Egypt, which was many years before.

3. There is an express direction for that way of account to Daniels Prophecy,
but none to this.

4. I suppose there is no way justly to account these months by, but these two:

1. By the years they make, which is three years and an half.

2. By reducing them to days, which are 1260.

Now Mr. Fox says, That the Churches persecution must be more then three years
and an half; and therefore not to be accounted by the years they make.

2. The Reason why God accounts Antichrists time, the persecutor, by months,
and the Saints time, the presecuted, by days, I have spoken of before.

Cooper Bishop of Galloway on the words says, The words are used of God as a
Riddle, in which he signifies a time unknown to us, but certainly known to him:
For shall we think the Church will be forced to flee into the wilderness but
three years and an half, from Christ's Resurrection to the end of the world?

Mr. Mead Apost. of last times, says, The days of this hiding of the Church,
begun at the healing of the deadly wound the Beast received, which was in the
destruction of Rome by the Goths about 410.

And if we consider, That the Church was set up in the Heathen world after
Christ's death, we have no cause to draw the beginning of the hiding of it from
the beginning, or any other part of time of his life; but rather thus, The
Church is visible in the ten persecution, the red or bloody Dragon, the
Emperors of Rome, persecute it, which were Antichrists Predecessors, belonging
all to the sixth Head of that seven headed beastly Monster, who could not by
all their open killing courses destroy the Christian Profession, though many
thousands were ofttimes slain in a day; but when that the seventh Antichristian
Head came up, who was worse then all: She has the Spots of the Leopard, the
Feet of the Bear, the Mouth of the Lion, the Power and Authority of the Dragon,
and that all written in the Vision, Cap. 13. from ver. 1. to the 10. appears,
because in this Vision the Horns have their Crowns on them, which was only
permitted under the Reign of the seventh Head, and not under the Reign of the
sixth, Revelations 12. 3. The Crowns are on his heads, he permitted not Kingly
power to any to Reign with him, as the Pope, unless to two or three only
extraordinarily, as in Herod and Lucius: When the severnth Head Reigns, she by
force.

1. Persecuting the sincere truth as bloodily as the Heathen Dragon before her,
or worse, and pulling down the building of Truth.

2. Setting up a counterfeit way of her own, carrying a false light with it, by
which she bewitched the Nations with her cup of abominations, deceiving silly
souls with the outward shows of Religion and Piety, by which she overthrew more
then by her cruelty, and did more against the Church, then by open rage of fire
and faggot.

3. By corrupting History, by false Expositions of Scriptures, by subtle
distinctions, by corrupt and false Traditions, by abominable Blasphemy,
speaking against God, his Tabernacle, his Saints, rendering them odious to the
world, a way too common in these days, which came from Rome. I wish some men in
time to consider who is meant by the Accuser of the Brethren, who are to be
cast down; without question it is not the Devil only, he was cast down a long
time since, they accuse them before God night and day; their day, who ever they
are, is near, yea next, and he or they must be cast down, upon which follows
much joy in heaven among them that dwell therein for their fall: See, God gives
them the Devils name, that do the Devils work.

4. As I suppose the truth appears plain, That the first ten verses do
appertain to the Reign of the last and seventh Head of beastly Antichrist; and
then it is more plain, That the 42 months is the time of that Heads
continuance, and that the Churches hiding began in her time, and ends with her
ending.

5. The persecution was grievous, without question, and tedious, before the
Church could be brought to such obscurity, as appears in the Heathen Dragon,
who was made red with her blood; and as ver. 4. With his tail he had cast down
the third part of Stars to the earth.

6. It was not given to the sixth Head, but this seventh Head, to overcome the
Saints; the other Head made War, but could not overcome them, this does; which
it could not have done, had it not been given him to do, Rev. 13. 7.

7. If we make the hiding of the Church to be the time before Constantine, then
there was never a time in which it was visible: Now if it were never visible,
how could it be said to be hid at all.

8. It has been the practice of the godly and learned, to judge her visibility
to be before Constantine, and not since, approving the practice of the first
and nearer times to the Apostles, as most pure, and the after times more
corrupt: Had not these first times the most famous Churches, godly faithful
Ministers, precious Christians, most sound and sincere Doctrine, and the only
Gospel-Discipline? which ever since has been persecuted, reviled, corrupted,
blasphemed by that sinful Man of Sin.

Pareus says, It began to be hid 606, and then its hid estate ends, and the
Church comes forth in the year 1866.

Moulin begins it Anno 755, then it ends 2035.

Brightman begins it 426, then it ends 1686. who comes nearest to Antichrists
end determined of God, and the just computation of the time of the Churches
obscurity, which ends 1666.

Now in that it was said, Then to be hid, there remains some thing to be done,
more remarkably eminent to the brining forch of the Church, then as yet has
been manifested to the world, is a thing I think not by any to be gainsayed.

But for the Elects sake these days, Christ foretelling the cruelty of
Antichrists time, who is indeed the Abomination of desolation spoken of by the
Holy Ghost; which prophecy of Daniel, computed and compared with this, clears
most excellently the truth: But this I leave to be spoken of in expounding the
Revelations.

It is not amiss to write a word more to manifest and make more plain the mind
of God, by the hiding of the Church.

1. Manifestation or Demonstration is to be taken from the Metaphorical
expressions used, and the History alluded to, by which Gods it out to us; so
sets that whiles the Wilderness hides the Church, yet it is ordained to show
the way how it came so to be hid.

2. The History alluded to is, either that of Isreal's coming out of Egypt, or
Elijah's flying unto the Wilderness, or both; but especially Elijah's estate
sets it out abundantly more clear, 1 Kings 17. and 18. and 19.

1. In his flight and hiding Rev. 12. 6.

2. In his feeding miraculously by the Ravens, Rev. 12. 6.

3. After many days he comes to Ahab again.

4. The godly are not hid only from the wicked, but godly Elijah thinks
himself above, 1. Kings 19. 14, 18. when God had seven thousand had not bowed
the knee to Baal.

5. In this time Baals Prophets are slain, 1 Kings, 18. 40. Rev. 12. 8.

6. Cap. 9. 2. Jezabel. threatens him with death, he flies again, and where,
but into the Wilderness, which is after his appearing to Ahab, and first
flight, Rev. 12. 14.

7. This flying into the Wilderness is after the rain, signifying the Ministry
after the long drought of the means of grace.

8. This wilderness estate is very fearful to him, and will be to the Saints,
cap. 19. ver. 4. Rev. 12. 15.

9. In this time the Lords Altars are cast down, and Groves to Baal set up, and
Altars, 1 Kings 19. ver. 26.

10. The Prophets are slain, 1 Kings 19, ver. 10. Rev. 11. 7.

11. Shows the strange effects this persecution brings on the world by an
earthquake, which is a change and removing of things that were, and setting up
things that cannot be shaken; Rocks and Mountains are rent before the Lord, and
a refining fire comes purging up the dross, then came the still voice in which
God was said to be.

Conclusion generally is this; hence in the hiding of the Church under
Antichrist, it is to be as that under Ahab (who as Antichrist made Israel to
sin, (...) the Word is of an active and passive signification) in which the
Prophets are to be slain, the Altars, that is, all public form of true worship
pulled down, Baalitical Altars set up, not a man left visible, that is known to
serve God, or that must not be forced to kiss Baal, and how to Baal, in which
time great inquiry and search is made after any man that shall worship the true
God in truth, to destroy him, 1 Kings 18. 10. and yet to meke it more evidently
plain in this persecution, not onley Ahab the King, but Jezabel the Queen has
hand in it, which show, that Antichrist hence was, to have the name one while
of a Woman, Whore, another while of the Man, Dragon, which makes the Agreement,
between the Type and Antitype remarkable; and then lasty, his first hiding was
for many days, one reason why God accounts the hiding of the Church by days,
Rev. 12.

Apply these to the Church estate, and it may be abundantly proved, yet that of
Elijah was but the type only, as the moddel to the building, his many days
being nothing to these, etc. in the Text.

2. The Churches hiding now, exceeds theirs abundantly, that was under the
Mosaical Ministry.

1. As it was hid in the word as well as in the practice, so that I know not
the Man this 1260 years past, can say he has found it.

2. Hid in the writings of those practiced it: God in judgment to the world,
permitting them to be adulterated, as that way by which he would accomplish his
own ends in the world, they but fulfilling his council therein.

Mr. Fulk on Rev. 12. ver. 6. Hic locus aperte demonstrat non semper fore
ecclesiam mundo conspicuam, quod maxim urgent Papistae, nam si semper omnium
visui exposita erit quomodo in desertum fugere dicatur?

Mr. Barnard on Rev. 12. 6. understands by the 1260 days, 1260 years, and on
the 14 Verse, says, Her flying into the wilderness, shows she was hid in the
wilderness, and by her flight, lost her visibility before her enemies.

Mr. Cooper Bishop of Galloway sets forth the hiding of the Church in his
Comment on Rev. 12. 6. by the hid estate of the Popish Synagogue in England,
Who are (says he) without public state of Regiment, or open free exercise of
holy Function.

Then this I think could be nothing chosen more fitly or fully, to clear the
thing intended for Antichrists rising; he rises by taking down the Gospel
frame of Gospel Government, makes that to be hid, that he may appear only;
when Christ sets up the Government of the true Church he shall pull down the
frame of the false again; Christ and Belial cannot agree.

Dr. Tailor in his Tract called, Christ's victory over the Dragon, being an
Exposition on Rev. 12. ver. 14 he speaks excellently and to purpose; says he,
The flight was not in respect of motion, but of state and condition; not a
change of place, but of condition and ornaments.

And after Antichrist sits still in the Temple of God, neither is the woman yet
got out of the Wilderness, page 789. indeed in this the man has said, in a
manner all; Who can say more to us alive then he, though dead, now speaks?

Conclusion is this, That all the 1260 days of the Churches hiding, or near to
the 1666 year of Christ, the Church frame will be hid, and the exercise of
Gospel Ministry and Government concealed, which God in mercy to the Elect,
will some few years, because of the bloody wars and destructive times shall
about the end of these times come on the world, by reason of Satan's rage (who
knows well, far better then we, his time is short of reigning on the earth,
and that Christ reign will immediately begin, in which Antichrist, Satan's first
born son, must down, and he himself be bound a 1000 years) so that few men
would be preserved alive: Did not the Lord shorten them, as few as they seem in
number to be, being in all but 18 years: If 18 years of war should continue in
this Kingdom more, what would become of us? we thought we should not endure
seven years war, but the famine would destroy us: Oh, if this be done in
Heaven, let the earth and sea take heed to it; as short as the time seems to
be, great will the destruction be on Antichristian Kings and Kingdoms, not
leaving a King, nor scarce a Kingdom among them, Dan. 7. 11, 12.

1. Pet. 4. 7. The time is come that judgment must begin at the house of God
If it first begin at us, what shall be the end of them that obey not the Gospel
of God?

Note here, it is plain judgment must begin at us, at the house of God.

2. The time prophesied of, it should begin at us, is come.

3. The end is unutterable, unconceiveable, God will make in Popish and Heathen
Kingdoms, the persecuted, the Church, they have the dregs of this next cup,
wrung out for them to drink, which in this 18 years succeeding, the whole world
cannot keep them from it, nor it from them; but as fuel for this fearful fire,
must be devoured, of which, who shall be happy, will be warned, as Noah to the
saving himself and family, Heb. 11. 7.

FINIS.

