TIMES TREASURY: OR, ACADEMY for GENTRY. Laying down excellent grounds both
Divine and Humane, in relation to Sexes of Both Kinds: For their
accomplishment in arguments of Discourse, Habit, Fashion: and happy progress
in their Spiritual Conversation.

Revised, Corrected, and Enlarged, with A LADIES LOVE-LECTVRE; And a
SUPPLEMENT, Entitled, THE TVRTLES TRIVMPH: Summing up all in an exquisite
Character of Honor.

By R I: Brathwait Esquire.

LONDON, Printed for Nath: Brook, at the Angel in Cornhill. 1652.

TO THE RIGHT HONORABLE, WILLIAM, EARL of STRAFFORD; Son and Heir to that
incomparable Masterpiece of Wit, Worth and Wisdom, THOMAS, Lord VVENTVVORTH,
Viscount WOODHOUSE. Late Lord Deputy of IRELAND, My Constantly memorized and
perpetually indeared MECENAS. All corresponding honor and happiness Suitable
to a Branch of such rising hopes; Lineally ennobled and enabled to all
proficience.
HIGHLY HONORED;
PIety, as it has the promise, so it renders the best deblazon to the House of
Honor. In which highest ascent of Heraldry, (for all other Titles or
Gradations appear irreall and shady;) Virtue the greatest Signal and Symboll
of Gentry, is rather expressed by goodness of Person, then greatness of Place.

For, howsoever the bleere-ey'd Vulgar honor the Purple more than the person,
descent more then desert, title then merit: that adulterate Gentility, N^e
levier tibi culpa fuit crevisse per Orbem; Grande Satis Genti Crimen boxore
frui. Sta.
which degenerates from the worth of her Ancestors, derogates likewise from the
birth of her Ancestors. It is true indeed, that Desert has at all times had
some sinister eye darting on it: especially, where Malignant spirits held it a
sufficient Crime, to grow great. For these, forth of a restless ambition, were
ever interposing a Cloud betwixt deserving men and the Sunrising. Altius
Surgentes, innocents licet, Comitatur Suspicio. Tacit.
But so strongly fenced were they with integrity: and so richly furnished in
principles of Theory, and Humane Philosophy, as they accounted it too light an
encounter to enter Lists with such Opponents; Majori invidas foveam parat; quam
ne devitet, una corruet. Minutius.
whom they held so far unworthy of their hate, as they pitied their weakness.
Their spite fell infinitely below their spirit; their spleen beneath their
Scorn. For such was their quickness and vivacity of Spirit, as they could
look Death in the face with more cheerfulness, then those Spungy Puffins could
brook Competition: or idolize their adulterate Greatness.

Now, for this attractive Object of Honor, as it has been Gods goodness,
lineall descendence, and your Princes especial Observance, in relation to your
incomparable Father, to advance you to it; So has it been hitherto your
happiness, in this your hopeful proficience and graceful initiation to
business, to entertain Humility and Integrity for your Reteiners, the better
to preserve you in it. This is the way, as your genuine Candor and noble
experience has found it, to make all good men, your Friends: and to admit none
to repine at your rising, but virtues Foes.

And such Censorious Pursuers of their eminentest actions, have our Heroick'st
Spirits in all ages patiently suffered: Making use of them as necessary
Monitors, to put them in mind how to compose and regulate the posture of their
greatness.

And these were such, whose infant Effeminacy, youthful Delicacy, or native
liberty had estranged them from the knowledge of Moral or Divine Mysteries: so
as, they might be well compared to the Ostrich, who (as the Natural Historian
reports) has the wings of an Eagle, but never mounts: So These had the
Eagle-wings of Contemplation, being endued with the intellectual faculties of
a reasonable Soul; yet either entangled with the light Chesses of vanity, or
trashed with the checkered po^zes of Selfe-conceipt and Singulari^y, they never
mounted above the verge of Sensual pleasure.

But I am here to tender unto your Honors judicious view, a Gentleman, quite
of an other garb: a Complete Academick, a Civilized Scholar, and a
Scholastic Courtier. One whose Education has made formal enough, without
apish formality: and conceiving enough, without self admiring arrogance. A
good Christian in devout practicing, no less than Zealous professing; yet none
of the forward'st in discoursing on Religion. For He observes (as long
experience and Select acquaintance have brought him to be a judicious Observer)
that Discourse of Religion has so occupied the World, as it has well-neere
driven the practice thereof out of the World. Where most men have more of
tongue than life: and more ready to dispute than live: Seeking rather to be
accounted. Eloquent Orators, then Sincere Christians: Scholists than Practists.

He esteems such only happy, who are of that number whom the World accounts
Fools, but God, Wise men. He understands, that whatsoever is sought besides
God, may so employ the Mind, as it may be occupied, but never satisfied. He
observes the whole Fabrike of humane power; and he concludes with the Preacher;
Ecquid tam vanum?

He notes how the Flesh becoming obedient, behaveth her self as a faithful
Servant to the Soul: This governs, the other is governed; This commands,
the other obeys. Finally, he sums up all his Observations with this: He
that Sigheth not while he is a Pilgrim, shall never rejoice when he is a
Citizen.

This is the Graduate in this Academy for Gentry, whom I have here again
presumed to recommend to your protection: and to you he makes recourse, not so
much for shelter, as honor; (having sole interest in it by right from your
Father:) For his Title, it exempts him from servile bashfulnesse, being a
Person so freely indenized, so completely endowed.

Neither can He do less then ingenuously collect, how by your Fathers
graceful Patronage; (whose obliged servant I was in his life; and faithful
Remembrancer in his death:) He has been cried up with a general suffrage:
attesting withal, that no prejudicate Critic, whose use it is never to judge
of the purity of a Lamp, till it expire in the Socket, durst assail him;
since his Honors improved Command, arched with so integrious a Protection, did
secure him. Nor is He changed from what he was, although improved by this new
Edition: Nor hopes he to fi^de you otherwise, then your prudent Fathers
reflections ever were; (whose imparalel'd parts and immerited favors to me,
Mancipia (...) lectionis cum fint.
shall retain a constant Anniversary in me;) to the Muses, and their refined
Fancies a professed Guardian.

Now, if any of those corky Censurers, Qui Mercurium in lingua non in Pectore
gerunt, shall chance to accoast my Gentleman: I resolve me, his Education has
made him so accomplished at all Assayes, and his conversing with the most
piercing'st judgments, has brought him to that pefection, as he can discern
of what mould or temper these Critics are; For my Dedication, in stead of all
unnecessary excuses of presumption; I will cloze briefly with this constant
Resolution: " Though to your Title there be Honor due, "It is Your Self that
makes me Honor you.
concluding, Voces sunt, praeterea nihil, as is said of the Nighting all. This
only rests; If I limne him to the life, in spite of Censure, he will merit
the Patronage of Honor: if I fail in my Art, (as I dare not presume of my
strength) it is in your Honor to impute the fault rather to the Pen than the
Man; whose intimate affection to your Lordship, will quickly sweeten and
attemper the rigidst Censure: and sign an easy indulgence to such an
obsequious error.

Your Honors in all Devotion, lineally obliged, R I: BRATHWAIT.

THE ENGLISH GENTLEMAN. Youth.
Argument.
The dangers that attend on Youth; The vanity of Youth, displayed in four
distinct Subjects; Three violent passions incident to Youth; Physic
prescribed, and receipts applied to cure these Maladies in Youth.

Youth.
HOwsoever some more curiously than needfully may seem to reason, Observa^. 1.
that there be diverse Climactericall or dangerous years in man's time; sure I
am, that in man's age there is a dangerous time, in respect of those
Sinne-spreading Sores which soil and blemish the glorious image of the Soul.
And this time is Youth, an affecter of all licentious liberty, The dangers that
attend on Youths
a Comicke introducer of all vanity, and the only (...) apparent to carnal
security. This it was which moved that princely Prophet to pray, Lord forgive
me the sins of my youth. Sins indeed; because the youthful sinner is ever
committing, but never repenting; usually provoking God, but rarely invoking
God. This is he who Snuffeth the wind, Vnum est instar bell^ae humiliari, aliud
est belluiros mores imitari.
with the wild Ass in the desert, being like the Horse or Mule which has no
understanding, by giving Sense preeminence above Reason: and walking in the
fatness of his heart, as one wholly forgetful of God. He may say with the
Psalmist, though in another sense, Vt jumentum factus sum apud te: upon
exposition of which sentence, it is laudable (says Euthymius) that in the
sight of God we take our selves as Beasts to show our humility, but not to
resemble beasts in ignorance or brutish sensuality. Many are the dangerous
shelfes which menace ruin and shipwreck to the inconsiderate and improvident
Soul, during her sojourning here in this Tabernacle of clay: but no time more
perilous than the heat of Vicina lapsibus adolescenti^. Hieron. Omniainb ac
aetate juvenescunt vitia. Eusebius. lib. 3.17
Youth, or more apt to give fuel to the fire of all inordinate desires; being
as ready to consent, as the Devil is to tempt, and most willing to enter
parley with her spiritual enemy upon the least assault. It is reported by
Eusebius, that S. John meeting a strong youngman, of good stature, amiable
feature, sweet countenance, and great spirit, straightway looking upon the
Bishop of that place, he said thus unto him: Christ being witness and before
the Church, I commend unto thee and thy care this young man, to be especially
regarded and educated in all spiritual discipline. Whom when the Bishop had
received into his tuition, and promised that he would perform whatsoever he
ought, Saint John again and again gives his charge, and contesteth his
fidelity: and afterward he returns to Ephesus. The Bishop takes the young man
home; brings him up as his own son, keeps him within the limits of his
duty, entreats him gently, and at last baptizeth him, and confirms him.
Afterward, upon remitting something of his care, and giving freer reins to
his liberty, the young man takes occasion to shake off the yoke of tuition, and
falls into bad company, who corrupt him: diverting his course from the path of
virtue by these means: First, they invite him to banquets, then they carry him
abroad in the Night, afterward to maintain their profuser expense, they draw
him to theevery, and so by degrees to greater wickedness, being now made
Captain in this theevish company. At last Saint John returns and says; Go
to Bishop, give me my depositum which I and Christ committed unto thee in the
Church which thou gouernest. This Bishop was astonished, thinking that he had
deceitfully demanded some money which he never received, and yet durst scarce
distrust the Apostle. But as soon as Saint John said, I demand the young man
and soul of my brother: the old man hanging down his head, Modo inveniaem,
non perditus est, etc. Eusebius. ibid;
sighing and weeping, said; Ille mortuus est, he is dead; How and with what
kind of death, said John? Deo mortuus est, he is dead unto God, answered the
Bishop: Nam nequam and perditus, and uno verbo Latro evasit: for he is wicked
and lost, and in a word a Thief.

Much matter might be collected from this Story, to enlarge the ground of our
Proposition, to wit, what imminent dangers are ever attending on Youth, and how
easy it is by the painted flag of vanity, and sensual pleasure, to draw him
to ruin. For doubtless, many excellent rules of instruction had this grave
Bishop delivered and imparted to his young Pupil: many devout taskes and holy
exercises had he commended to his practice: many prayers full of fervent zeal
had he offered for his conversion: many sighs had he sent, many tears had he
shed to reclaim him from his former conversation. Yet see, how soon this
youthful Libertine forgets those instructions which he had taught him, those
holy taskes which were enjoined him, those zealous prayers which were offered
for him, those unfeigned sighs and tears which were shed for him! He leaves
this aged Father, to become a Robber, he fl^es from the Temple to the
mountain; he puts off the robe of truth, and disguiseth himself with the
vizard of theft. And no small thief, but a Leader. Rachel was a thief, for
she stole idols from her father; Iosuah was a thief, seeing he stole grapes
from Canaan; David was a thief, seeing he stole the bottle of water from Saul;
Jonathan was a thief, since he stole honey from the hive; Iosaba was a thief,
since he stole the infant Ioash. But here was a thief of another nature; one,
whose vocation was injury, profession theevery, and practice cruelty: one,
whose ingratitude toward his reverend Foster-father, merited sharpest censure:
for Bysias the Grecian, Siingratum dixeris, Omnia dixeris.

Min. Publianus.


Osiges the Lacedemonian, Bracaras the Theban, and Scipio the Roman, esteemed
it less punishment to be exiled, than to remain at home with those that were
ungrateful for their service. So as, it is not only grief, but also a
perilous thing, to have to do with ungrateful men. And wherein might
ingratitude be more fully exemplified than in this Young Man, whose
disobedience to his Tutor, sleighting his advice that had fostered him,
deserved severest chastisement? But to observe the cause of his fall; we shall
find how soon those good impressions, which he had formerly received, were
quite razed and defaced in him, by reason of depraved company: Qui simus,
Quinam erimus, in Ephebio constitutum est.
whence we may gather, that Youth being indeed the Philosophers rasa tabula, is
apt to receive any good impressure, but spotted with the pitch of vice, it
hardly ever regaines her former purity. Whence we are taught, not to touch
pitch* lest we ^e defil^d^ for as that divine Father says, Occasiones faciunt
Latrones. Truth is, the sweetest Apples are the soonest corrupted, and the best
natures quickliest depraved. How necessary therefore, the care and respect
Youth ought to have in the choice and election of his Company, may appear by
this one example, which shows that Society is of such power, as by it Saints
are turned into Serpents, Doves into Devils: for, with the wise we shall learn
wisdom, and with the fool we shall learn foolishness. Dangerous therefore
it is, to leave illimited Youth to it self: Diog. Cyn.
yea, to suffer Youth so much as to converse with it self. So as, that Greek
Sage, seeing a Young man privately retired all alone, demanded of him what he
was doing? Lectum non citius relinquens, quam in Deum delinquens: non citius
surgens, quam insurgens.

The vanity of Youth displayed in four distinct Subjects.


who answered, he was talking to himself. Take heed, quoth he, thou talk not
with thine enemy. For the natural pronenesse of Youth to irregular liberty is
such, as it is ever suggesting matter of innovation to the Soveraingtie of
reason. Now to reduce these enormities incident to Youth, to certain
principal heads, we will display the Vanity of Youth in these four distinct
Subjects: Gate, Look, Speech, Habit: that by insisting and discoursing on each
particular, we may receive the feature of Lady Vanity portrayed to the life.

IT is strange to observe how the very Body expresses the secret fantasies of
the mind: GATE.
and how well the one sympathizeth with the other. I have seen even in this
one motion, the Gate, such especial arguments of a proud heart, as if the body
had been transparent, it could not have represented him more fully. And I have
wondered, how Man endued with reason, could be so far estranged from that
wherewith he was endued; as to strut so proudly with feet of earth, as if he
were never to return to earth. But especially, when Youth is employed in
ushering his Mistress, he walks in the street as if he were dancing a
measure. He verily imagines the eyes of the whole City are fixed on him, as
the very pattern which they esteem worthy imitation: how nearly then
concerns it him to stand upon his equipage. He walks, as if he were an upright
man, but his sincerity consist only in dimension. He fears nothing so much as
some rude encounter for the Wall, Audacia pro muro bebetur. Salust. in bell.
Caril.
and so be discredited in the sight of his Idol. Now I would be glad to weane
this Phantasticke from a vein of lightness, and habituate him to a more
generous form. First, he is to know, how that which is most native and least
affective, deserves choicest acceptance. We were not borne to glory in our
feet, the Bases of Mortality: but to walk as children of light, in holiness
and integrity. Safer it were for us, to observe and make use of that, which
the Swan is reported to use, when at any time she glories in the whiteness of
her color, to wit, she reflects her eye upon her black feet, which qualifies
her proud spirit: making her so much the more dejected, as joying before in her
own beauty, she was erected. Excellently was that Emblem of humane frailty
shadowed in the image of Agathocles the Syracusan tyrant, who commanded his
Statue to be composed after this fort: the Head to be of gold, signifying
pureness; the arms of ivory, intimating smoothness; the body of brass,
implying strongnesse; but the feet of earth, importing weakness. Be the
Head-peece never so pure; be it a Diadem of gold we wear, it cannot promise
to us perpetuity; we stand on earthen feet, how may we then stand long, Dan.
4.27.
relying on such weak supporters? Though Nebuchadnezzar strut never so proudly
upon the turrets of his princely Palace, 29.
saying, Is not this great Babel which I have builded? 30.
he knows not how soon he shall be deprived of his glory, and be enforced to
feed with the Beasts of the field, being as one estranged from his former
magnificence. Quid ergo ad nos consolatio mundi? Seneca.
Let us not glory in mundane vanity, nor repose too much confidence in these
feet of frailty. Si pes in terris, men's sit in coelis; Though our foot be on
earth, let our mind be in heaven: knowing, that (as Saint Augustine says)
Three cubits of earth do expect us; and how little or much so ere we
possess, this is all that shall be left us.

LOOK.
THe next Subject we are to treat of in this Display of youthful vanity, is
his Look: wherein he is ever noted to show a kind of contempt, expressing by
his eye, what he conceives in his heart. Here is oculatus testis, an
eyewitness to tax him of his pride; disdaining to fix his eye upon the lower
shrubs, as if a reflex on them should derogate from his glory. They that looked
upon Sylla's ring, could not choose but take notice both of Sylla's seal and
the treason of Iugurth; Plutarch. in vit. Syll.
so he, that should but eye a proud Look, could not choose but collect from
what heart so disdainful a Look proceeded. I have ever observed, the most
generous to be least affective in this kind: for it is, and has been ever
an inherent propriety in them, to express a generous affability as well in
Look as Speech. The eyes (says a good Father) are members of the flesh,
August.
but windows of the mind; which, Eagle-like, should be ever erected to the
beams of righteousness, and not depressed by any unworthy object of external
baseness. The only Sight of God is the true food and refection of our minds:
Gregor.
we look to be satisfied, but satisfaction we cannot find in any outward
object; much less in contempt of our poor brother, who many times exceeds us
more in worth, than we him in birth. But tell me Young Gallant, what it is that
moves thee to this contempt of others? Is it thy descent? alas, that is none
of thine; thou derivest that glory from thine Ancestors, whose honor by thy
ignoble life, dies. Yea, recall to mind how many glorious Houses now lie
buried in the grave of oblivion, by the vicious course of irregular
Successors: and again, how many Houses, whose Names formerly were not so much
as known, either raised from others ruin, or advanced by industrious merit,
usurp their glory. Is it thy Riches? Indeed, if the Philosophers Axiom be
true; Riches is a sign of eternal glory, there were some reason to glory in
them: but we shall find this glory merely imaginary, yea a great darkener
and blemisher of the internal glory and beauty of the mind. For as the Moon
does never eclypse, but when she is at the Full: so the Mind is never so much
obscured, as it is with the superfluity of Riches. And again, as the Moon is
farthest off from the Sun which gives it light, when it is at the Full; so a
Man, when he is the fullest of Riches, is farthest off from that equity and
justice, which ought to give him light in all his proceedings. And therefore,
he might do well herein to imitate the Fly, which puts not her feet in the
great mass of honey, but only takes and tastes with her tongue so much
thereof as serves her turn, and no more, lest by doing otherwise, she might
remain taken and drowned therein, Yea, if we should but reflect and take a
view of certain Ethnicks, whose admirable contempt of Riches eternized them,
we should observe what inimitable continency was in them, and what an
Hydropticke thirst of avarice remains as yet unquenched in us. And though we
must live according to Laws, and not to Examples, yet Cicero held that naught
could be taught without example; wherefore, to enforce this argument further,
we will here produce certain Heathens, who contemned Riches so much, as being
offered, yea obtruded, they would not accept them. Anacharses refused the
treasure sent him by Croesus: Anacreontes refused the treasure sent him by
Polycrates: and Albionus refused the treasure sent him by Antigonus. The like
moderation we read in Fabius Maximus, Crates, Mimus, and most of the Greek
Philosophers. This indifferency toward Fortune, De tran^. an.
is excellently described by the sententious Seneca concluding, Nihil eripit
fortuna, nisi quod ipsa dedit. To insist on more examples, were to enlarge this
branch too much; we will therefore shut them all up with that divine
observation of the wise Simonides; who being asked once, whether Virtue or
Riches were of more reputation, made answer, That the virtuous did more
frequent the doors of the rich, Quo ^ltior in diviti^s, eo copiofier in vitiis.
than the rich the virtuous: Thence inferring, that Wealth was a great
nourisher of Vice, and Poverty of Virtue; or rather implying, how those who
are richest are oft-times the retchlest, being ever with vices more infected,
who are to highest fortunes advanced. Wherefore I assure me, thou will not
glory in riches for they deprave the Soul, Ber. de inter. Dom.
which should be in the Body, like a Queen in her Palace. Whence then
proceeds this haughty Look? perchance thou will object, that thou art a man
of Place; admit thou be: is there nothing thou can find to express the
eminence or greatness of thy Place, to which thou art called, save a
disdainefull of surly Look, a neglectfull or scornful countenance,
contemptuously thrown upon thy inferior? Surely, if such an one thou be, how
great so-ere thou be, I will admire rather thy Seat than thy Self: and
conclude with Aristippus, A stone sits upon a stone. These are they, at whom
our Modern Poet glanced pleasantly, when he says; They dare not smile beyond
a point,
for fear t'unstarch their Look,
So punctual and formal they are, as besides a kind of formal and
phantasticke humor they are nothing: or to express them better; They think
it a derogation to honor, to converse with baseness; They show a great deal
of peremptory command in an awful Look, imagining it a sufficient argument of
greatness, for Midas Ass to have Minos countenance: For thus has Time drawn
out their forms to me,
They be and seem not, seem what least they be.
Since then neither Descent, for that is derived from others; nor riches,
aptest to deprave us of all others; nor place, being worst expressed in
glorifying our selves and contemning others; should move us to put on the
countenance of disdain to our inferiors: we are to conclude, that Humility,
as it opens the gate unto glory, so Affability, a virtue right worthy every
generous mind, cannot be better planted than in the eyes, those Sentinels
which guard us, those two Lights which direct us, those adamantine Orbs which
attract affection to us. Metam. 1.
A face erected, first to man was given,
T'erect his eyes unto the King of heaven.
Let not then any other object entertain it, at least, not retain it: if they
be to be employed in any worldly object, let them be employed in contemplating
his works who made the world; for all other objects are but mere vanity and
affliction of spirit.

SPEECH.
THe third Subject we are to discourse of, is Speech; a propriety wherein Man is
distinguished from other creatures: yea, the only means to preserve society
among humane creatures. Sine loquela non potest stare societas.

Arist.

Aug. de Magist.

Psalm. 141.3.


Quanto melius est docere quam loqui, tanto melior est quam verba locutio,
says S. Augustine: By how much better it is to teach than to speak, by so
much better is Speech than words. Here this learned Father makes a maine
difference betwixt Speech and Words: which distinction may be properly applied
to the argument whereof we now treat. The rash Young man, who uses no guard
to his mouth, nor no gate of circumstance unto his lips, inureth himself to
many words, but little Speech. Now to define Speech, it is nothing else than an
apt composing, Prove. 25.11.
and an opportunate uttering of words; whence it is said, Words spoken in
season or opportunity, are like apples of gold with pictures of silver. And
herein is Youth many times blameworthy, who will profess himself a Speaker,
before he know what to speak; yea putting his oar in every man's boat, admits
no conference, not treaty, no discourse, how transcendent soever, but he will
be a Speaker: though it oft-times moves some wise Phocion to say to this
jangling Pithias, Good God, will this fool never leave his babbling? In vit.
Phoc.
Aristotle debating of the convenience and propriety of discourse before
Alexander, maintained that none were to be admitted to Speak but either those
that managed his wars, or his Philosophers which governed his house. In lib.
desecr. secret.
Observe here what strictness was imposed even upon Heathens, to restrain them
from too much liberty of Speech, only such being admitted to speak, whose
approved judgment in military or philosophical discourse might worthily be
said to deserve attention. Diverse reasons of no small consequence might be
here produced, why Young men were not to give their opinions in any matter of
State in public places; Two reasons why Young men were not admitted to deliver
their opinions in public assemblies.
but we will reduce them to two. The first whereof may be imputed to their
rashness in resolving; the second to a passionate hotnesse in proceeding.

For the first, to wit rashness in resolving: it is the property of Youth
without premeditation to resolve, and without counsel to execute. Now is it
possible any good effect should succeed from such unsteady grounds? Yes, you
will say; some are of that present and pregnant conceit, as a matter is no
sooner imparted, than they apprehend it: and for Speech, diverse have had such
excellent gifts, as they would show more native eloquence in a Speech presently
composed, than upon longer preparation addressed. Did not Tiberius better in
any Oration ex tempore, than premeditate? Have not many in like sort, as if
secretly (...).
inspired, expressed and delivered abundance of profound learning upon the
present? It is true; yet are we not hence to collect that premeditation is
fruitless, that rash and inconsiderate resolves are to be admitted, or Young
men's advice, which is for most part grounded on opinionate arrogancy, (...),
not (...), secundum opinionem, non secundum veritatem, should be authenticke.
For admit Young men were eloquent, yet foolish eloquence (which must needs be
in unseasoned Youth) is as a sword in a mad-mans hand, Pi^^ Mirand. in epist.
ad Hermol.
it cannot but hurt much; being first, apt to persuade, and likewise by
delivering dangerous matter, no less prompt to deprave the ear that is
persuaded.

The second reason which we observed, why Youth was not to give his opinion in
any public place, was his hotnesse in proceeding. It is intolerable for these
Young-heads to be opposed: they are deaf to reason, as if opinion had possessed
them of purpose to oppose reason. Neque iocas, neque amicus quisquam teget,
quem arma non texerint. ^ Salust. in bell. Iugurth.

Ferociam animi, quam babebat vivus, in vultu retinuit Catilina. Salust. in
Conjur. Catil. Salust.


This appeared in those violent attempts of Catiline, Cethegus, Lentulus, and
their factious adherents; who, though privately cautioned and friendly advised
by such, whose long experienced love and fidelity assured them of their
unfeigned amity; yet rather than they would lose the opportunity of their aims,
all counsel must be rejected, and their own private opinions (without ground
of reason) embraced. But to come nearer them in our discourse: these
Young-blouds use rather, Catiline-like, to speak much and do little, than
Iugurth-like, to speak little and do much. Of all Innes, they love not that
of Harpocrates, with the sign of the finger on his mouth. They are
unmeasurably passionate in any argument; and so nailed to their own opinion,
as conceit transports them above reason, and leaves no place for contradiction.
It is commonly said, that Law, Logic, and the Switzers may be hired to fight
for any one; Law, Logic, and the Switzers may be hired to fight for any one.
and we have found out one that will match them. Now you have received the
character of his Speech, I would labor to reclaim him from his error; which
to effect the better, he must know, that being a Gentleman, (for to such an one
chiefly do I direct my discourse) he can asperse no greater imputation on
Gentry, than in exercising his tongue in fruitless and frivolous discourse, or
spending his breath in useless or needless contention. Blos.
The tongue (as one observes) is a small member; but very glibbery and prone to
ruin: apt it is to rebel, if not restrained; prompt to innovate, if not
confined. But of all the fallies or excursions which are made by the tongue,
none in my conceit less beseeming a Gentleman, than in giving reins to
passions, to slave himself to illimited fury: much more profit should he find
in expostulating with passion, recalling to mind that saying of Archytas so
much commended; who being angry with one of his hindes, said, O how would I
have beaten thee, had I not been angry with thee? Where two meek men meet
together, their conference (says Bernard) is sweet and profitable; where one
man is meek, it is profitable; where neither, it proves pernicious. May your
Speech, (Gentlemen) be so seasoned, as it may relish of discretion: (...).

Basil. Virtus maxima, in mole minima.


rather learn the art of silence, than to incur the opinion of rashness:
for the one seldom gives argument of offense, but the other ever. Speak, but
not with affectation, for that gives a better relish to the ear, than to the
conceit: Speak, but not in assentation, for that is mercenarie, and seems
better in the mouth of a slavish Sycophant, than a generous professant: Speak
freely, yet with reservation lest the Comedians phrase have some allusion to
your opennesse; being so full of chinkes, as secrecy can have no hope to find
harbor in your bosom. As to Speak all that we know* shows weakness: so to
impart nothing of that we know, inferres too much closeness: to observe a
mean in these extremes, choice respect is to be had with whom we converse.
If we find him apt to conceal we may more safely and freely deliver our
mind; Singular directions in arguments of discourse, and discovery of secrets.
but where suspicion of secrecy ministres argument of distrust, we are to be
more cautelous: for it is great folly to engage our thoughts to the secrecy of
him whom we know not. Worthy commendation was Augustus in this respect, who was
so choice in the election of a friend, to whom he might communicate his
privatest thoughts, as he would employ much time in searching and sifting him,
ere he would retain him. And hence I might take occasion to tax diverse, who
are too ready to open their bosoms unto all encounters; and yet I must freely
confess, that this credulity of theirs, merely proceeds from the goodness of
their nature: for they imagine (such is their easy simplicity) that others are
as secret, as they open. Such is the affability of unexperienced Youth, as they
cannot reserve the secret'st of their thoughts, but must discover them upon the
first view to their first acquaintance: whence Plautus, Benignitas eius vt
adolescentuli est; wherein he seems to instance Youth, as a pattern of
ingenuous affability: no less ready to utter his thoughts, than his subtle
applauder is to hear them. Much more fruit should he reap by observing that
divine precept of Ecclesiasticus: Thou that art young speak, if need be, and
yet scarcely when thou art twice asked. Eccl. 22.8, 9.
Comprehend much in few words; in many be as one that is ignorant: be as one
that understands, and yet hold thy tongue. Wherein he proposes an exact rule
to be observed by Youth, even in circumstance, as well as substance of Speech.
Now it may be expected, that I should propose a form for words, as I have
proposed a rule for discourse; but my reply to him, who expects this, shall be
the same which Demosthenes made to Aeschynes the Orator; who having found fault
with Demosthenes questioning him of certain words which he had pronounced
something rare and strange, was in this sort answered by him; That the fortunes
of Greece depended not upon them. Only thus much I will add, to reclaim him,
who more curiously than pertinently, insisteth rather on Words than Substance:
that as there is no man but would esteem him for an indiscreet builder, who
prefers the care of his frontispice before the maine foundation; or such an
one for a foolish Painter, who bestows more art upon the varnish than the
picture: so whosoever intends his care rather to find out words than matter,
may be holden for a verbal Rhetorician, but no serious Orator. To be short,
if you will have my opinion touching the use of words; I esteem such to be
most elegant, which are least affected; for there is a native propriety of
Speech which best becomes us; being adorned with such ornaments, as grace our
discourse better than adulterate art, which many times bestows so much time
upon beautifying her self, as she forgers whom she should serve.

We are now to descend briefly to the last, HABIT.
though not least vanity incident to Youth; and it is Habit or Attire. Wherein
I have not a little wondered, falling now and then into more serious meditation
with my self, how any man, having reflex, by the eye of his Soul, to his
first fall, should glory in these robes or rags of shame, being purposely
invented to cover his sin. Sin indeed; for had not man sinned, his shame had
never been discovered. Poor Fig-leaues were then the only shelter, to shroud
from shame this miserable sinner. Then was Adam his own Taylour, and stood not
much on fashion, so his nakedness might find a cover.

Come then and hear me, thou perfumed Gallant, whose sense chiefly consists
in sent; and observe how much thou derogat'st from thy own worth, the covering
a shell of corruption with such bravery. All gorgeous Attire is the attire of
sin; it declines from the use for which it was ordained, to wit, Necessity,
and dilates it self purposely to accomplish the desire of vanity. Foreign
Nations, on whose flowery borders the glorious Sunshine of the Gospel has not
as yet shined, though for their Silks and Sables, none more plenteous or
precious, yet with what indifferency do they use these riches? It may be you
will object, that Art has not as yet shown her cunning amongst them; so as
their neglect of fashion merely proceeds from want of skillful Artists, to
introduce the form or fashion of other Countries (by means of civil
government, more curious and exquisite) to their people. But I shall prove, and
that by impregnable arguments, how this contempt of pride is naturally planted
in them; yea, with what scorn and derision they look upon other Countries,
usually affected to this delicacie and effeminacie in apparel.

Such as have traveled, and upon exact survey of the Natures of foreign
Countries, have brought the rich fraught of knowledge stored with choicest
observations to their native home, have confirmed this: for they have found
such contempt in other Nations, touching these fruitless vanities, wherein we
idolatrize our own forms, as it struck admiration in them, as their Records,
to this day ext^nt, do apparently witness. To instance some whereof, as the
Ruffian, Muscovian, Ionian; yea even the barbarous Indian, it may appear with
what reservancie they continue their ancient Habit; loath, it seems, to
introduce any new custom, or to lose their antiquity for any vainglorious or
affected Novelty: with a joint uniformity (as it seems) resolved, Tam in cultu
Numiuis, quam apparatu corporis, moribus legibusque uti praesentibus, etiamsi
deteriores sint. But leaving them, because we will a while insist upon profane
authorities; let us reflect our dim eyes, bleared with the thick scales of
vanity, to those Divine Sages, whose excellent instructions no less imitable
than admirable, merit our approbation and observation. In vit. Solon.
It is reported by Laertius, that on a time Croesus, having adorned and
beautified himself with the most exquisite ornaments of all kinds, that either
Art or cost could devise; and sitting on a high Throne, to give more grace or
luster to his person, demanded of Solon if he ever saw a sight more beautiful?
Yes (quoth he) House-cockes, Phesants, and Peacokes; for they are clothed with
a natural splendor or beauty bestowed on them by Nature, without any borrowed
elegancie. The like contempt appeared in Eutrapelus; who valued the internal
beauty of his mind, more than the adulterate varnish of Art. Besides, he was
of this opinion, that he could not do his foe a greater injury, than bestow
on him the preciousest garments he had, to make him forgetful of himself and
his own frailty; whose nature the Poet excellently describes thus: Horat.
epist. l. 1. Ep. 18.
The Sage Eutrapelus right wisely bad
His foes should have the richest robes he had,
Thinking he did them harm, himself much good,
"For given, they made him humble, them more proud.
Amongst many profitable Laws enacted by Numa, the Law Vt in exequi is epulis
que celebrandis nimioque apparatu corporis, omnis inutilis sumptus prohibeatur.
Sumptuaria conferred no small benefit upon the State public. For by that Law
was prohibited, not only all profuse charge in Funeral expenses, but likewise
the excessive use of Apparel, whereby the Roman state grew in short time to
great wealth, laboring to suppress those vices, which usually effeminate men
the most, to wit, delicacie in fare, and sumptuousness in attire. Now there be
many, I know, who invent fashions merely to cover their deformities, as Julius
Caesar wore a garland of Laurel to cover his baldness withal; and these
seem excusable, but they are not: for did not he who made thee, bestow this
form on thee? Could not he have stamped thee to the most exquisite or absolute
feature, if it had so pleased thy Creator? And will thou now control thy
Maker, and by art supply the defects of Nature? Beware of this evil: I can
prescribe thee a better and safer course, how to rectify these deformities.
Have thou a crooked body? repair it with an upright soul. Art thou outwardly
deformed? with spiritual graces be thou inwardly beautified. Art thou blind,
or lame, or otherwise maimed? be not therewith dejected, for the Blind and
Lame were invited. It is not the outward proportion, but the inward
disposition; not the feature of the face, but the power of grace which works
to salvation. Alcibiades, Socrates scholar, Plut. in vit. Alcibiad.
was the best favored Boy in Athens; yet, (to use the Philosophers words)
look but inwardly into his body, you will find nothing more odious. So as one
compared them aptly (these fair ones I mean) to fair and beautiful
Sepulchers; Exterius nitida, interius faetida; outwardly hansome, inwardly
noisome. Notable was that observation of a learned Philosopher, Socrates.
who professing himself a Schoolmaster, to instruct Youth, in the principles
and grounds of Philosophy, used to hang a looking-glass in the School where
he taught; wherein he showed to every scholar he had, his distinct feature or
physnomy: which he thus applied. If any one were of a beautiful or amiable
countenance, he exhorted him to answer the beauty and comeliness of his face,
with the beauty of a well-disposed or tempered mind; if otherwise he were
deformed, or ill featured; he wished him so to adorn and beautify his mind,
that the excellency of the one, might supply the defects or deformities of the
other. But thou objectest; How should I express my descent, my place; or how
seem worthy the company of eminent persons, with whom I consort, if I should
slight or disvalue this general-affected vanity Fashion? I will tell thee:
thou can not more generously, I will not say generally, express thy
greatness of descent, place, or quality, nor seem better worthy the company
with whom thou consortest or frequentest, than by erecting the glorious beams
of thy mind, above these inferior things. For who are these with whom thou
consortest? mere triflers away of time, bastard slips, degenerate impes,
consumers of their patrimony, and in the end, (for what other end save misery
may attend them?) Heirs to shame and infamy. These (I say) who offer their
Morning prayers to the Glass, eying themselves so long, till Narcissus-like
they fall in love with their own shadows: And many times like that wrethed
Lady, if any deformity chance to blemish their beauty, they no sooner eye their
glass, than the discovery of their deformity brings them to a fearful frency.

O England, Mihi mirabile fit quod non enecentur, cum tantum onas bajulent.

Clem. Alex. 2, Paedagig.


what a height of pride art thou grown to? yea, how much art thou grown
unlike thy self? when, disvaluing thy own form, thou deformest thy self by
borrowing a plume of every Country, to display thy pie-coloured flag of vanity.
What painting, purfling, powdring and pargeting do you use, (ye Idols of
vanity) to lure and allure men to break their first faith, forsake their first
love, and, yield to your immodesty? How can you weep for your sins, Hier. ad
Fur. de vid. Sermon. Tom. 1.
(says Saint Hierome) when your tears will make furrows in your face? With
what confidence do you lift up that countenance to heaven, which your Maker
acknowledges not? Do not say that you have modest minds, when you have
immodest eyes. Aug. de Christ. fide.
Death has entered in at your windows; your eyes are those cranies, those
hateful portals, those fatal entrances, (which Tarpeia-like) by betraying the
glorious fortress or citadell of your souls, have given easy way to your
mortal enemy. Vtinam miserrimus ego, etc. I would I poor wretch (says
Tertulian) might see in that day of Christian exaltation, Tertul. de bab, Mul.
cap. 7
An cum cerussa, and purpurisso, and croco, and cum illo ambitu capitis
resurgatis: No, you stains to modesty, such a Picture shall not rise in glory
before her Maker. There is no place for you; but for such women as array
themselves in comely apparel, with shamefastness and modesty, not with
broided ha^re, 1 Tim^ 2.9.10.
or gold, or pearls, or costly apparel. But, as becomes women that profess
the fear of God. For even after this manner in time past did the holy women,
which trusted in God, tire themselves. Read, I say, read ye proud ones, 1
Pet. 3.5.
ye which are so haughty, and walk with stretched-out necks, the Prophet
Isaiah, and you shall find your selves described, and the judgment of
Desolation pronounced upon you. Because the Daughters of Sion are haughty, and
walk with stretched-out necks, and with wandering eyes, walking and minsing as
they go, and making a tinckling with their feet; therefore shall the Lord make
the heads of the daughters of Sion bald, and the Lord shall discover their
secret parts. And he proceeds: In that day shall the Lord take away the
ornament of the slippers, and the calls, and the round tyres. The sweet
balls, and the bracelets, and the bonnets* The tyres of the head, and the
sloppes, and the head-bands, and the tablets, and the eare-rings. The rings and
the mufflers. The costly apparel, and the veiles, and the wimples, and the
crisping-pins. And the glasses, and the fine linen, and the hoods and the
lawnes. Now hear your reward: And in stead of sweet savor, there shall be
stink, and in stead of a girdle, a rent, and in stead of dressing of the
hair, baldness, and in stead of a stomacher a girdling of sackcloth, and
burning in stead of beauty. Now attend your final destruction: Thy men shall
fall by the sword, and thy strength in the battle. Then shall her gates mourn
and lament, and she being desolate shall sit upon the ground. See how you are
described, and how you shall be rewarded! Enjoy then sin for a season, and
delight your selves in the vanities of Youth: be your eyes the Lures of Lust,
your ears the open receipts of shame, your hands the polluted instruments of
sin: to be short, be your Souls, which should be the Temples of the Holy
Ghost, cages of unclean birds; after all these things, what the Prophet has
threatened shall come upon you, and what shall then deliver you? not your
Beauty; for to use that divine Distich of Innocentius, Tell me thou earthen
vessel made of clay,
What Is Beauty worth, when thou must dye to day?
Nor Honor; for that shall lie in the dust, and sleep in the bed of earth.
Nor Riches; for they shall not deliver in the day of wrath. Perchance they may
bring you, when you are dead, in a comely funeral sort to your graves, or
bestow on you a few mourning garments, or erect in your memory some gorgeous
Monument, to show your vainglory in death, as well as life; but this is all:
Those Riches which you got with such care, kept with such fear, lost with such
grief, shall not afford you one comfortable hope in the hour of your passage
hence; afflict they may, releeve they cannot. Nor Friends; for all they can
do, is to attend you, and shed some friendly tears for you; but ere the
Rosemary lose her color, which stickt the Coarse, or one worm enter the
shroud, which covered the Corpse, you are many times forgotten, your former
glory extinguished, your eminent esteem obscured, your repute darkened, and
with infamous aspersions often impeached. If a man (says Seneca) find his
friend sad, and so leave him sick without ministering any comfort to him, and
poor without releeving him; we may think such an one goes to jest, rather
than visit or comfort: and such miserable comforters are these friends of
yours. What then may deliver you in such gusts of affliction which assail you?
Conscience; she it is that must either comfort you, or how miserable is your
condition? She is that continual feast which must refresh you; those thousand
witnesses that must answer for you; that light which must direct you; that
familiar friend that must ever attend you; that faithful Counselor that must
advise you; that Balm of Gilead, that must renew you; that Palm of peace,
which must crown you. Take heed therefore you wrong not this friend, for as
you use her, Prima est haec ultio, quod se judice, nemo nocens absolvitur.

Iuv. Sat. 13^


you shall find her. She is not to be corrupted, her sincerity scorns it;
She is not to be persuaded, for her resolution is grounded; She is not to
be threatened, for her spirit sleights it. She is aptly compared in one respect
to the Sea, she can endure no corruption to remain in her, but foames, and
frets, and chafes, till all filth be removed from her. By Ebbing and flowing
is she purged, nor is she at rest till she be rinsed. Fugit ab agro ad
ciuitatem, Aug. in ena^ sup. 45. Psalm.
a publico ad domum, a domo in cubiculum, etc. Discontentedly she flies from
the Field to the City, from public resort to her private house, from her
house to her chamber; She can rest in no place; Fury dogs her behind, Bern.
de inter. domo. cap. 1.
and Despair goes before. For Conscience being the inseparable glory or
confusion of every one, according to the quality, disposition or dispensation
of that Talent which is given him, for to whom much is given, much shall be
required: We are to make such fruitful use of our Talent that the Conscience
we profess may remain undefiled, the faith we have plighted may be
inviolably preserved, the measure or Omer of grace we have received, may be
increased, and God in all glorified. Which, the better to effect, we are to
think how God is ever present in all our actions; and that (to use the words
of Augustine) Whatsoever we do, Aug. Scliloq. cap. 14.

Sen. ad Lucil.


yea whatsoever it be that we do, he better knows it than we our selves
do. It was Seneca's counsel to his friend Lucilius, that whenever he went
about to do any thing, he should imagine Cato, or Scipio, or some other worthy
Roman to be in presence. In imitation of so divine a Moral, let us in every
action fix our eye upon our Maker, Whose eyes are upon the children of men; so
shall we in respect of his sacred presence, to which we owe all devout
reverence, Abstain from vill, do good, seek peace and ensue it. Such as
defiled themselves with sin, Tuscul. quaest. lib. 1.
by giving themselves over unto pleasure, staining the Nobility and splendor
of their Souls through wallowing in vice; or otherwise fraudulently, by
usurpation or base insinuation, creeping into Sovereignty, or unjustly
governing the commonweal; such thought Socrates, that they went a by-path
separated from the counsel of the gods: but such, as while they lived in their
bodies, imitated the life of the gods, such he thought had an easy return to
the place from whence they first came. If the Pagan had such a divine conceit
of those, whose approved life represented a certain similitude or resemblance
of God, as he imagined, no glory could be wanting to them, in regard of their
integrity: let us embrace the like opinion, and express such apparent
demonstrations of sanctity, that as we exceed the Pagan in regard of that
precious light we enjoy, so we may exceed him in the conversation of the life
we lead. But how should these painted Sepulchers, whose adulterate shape tastes
of the shop, glorying in a borrowed beauty, ever meditate of these things? How
should their care extend to heaven, whose Basiliske eyes are only fixed on the
vanities of earth? How should that painted blush (that Jewish confection) blush
for her sin, whose impudent face has out-faced shame? Two Loves (says that
learned Bishop of Hippo) make two Cities. August. sup. Psalm. 64.
Jerusalem is made by the love of God, but Babylon by the love of the world.
And these are they, who engaged to wordly love, have forsaken their true love;
they have divided their hearts, and estranged their affections from that
Supreme or Sovereign good. O then ( Young men) come not near the gate of this
strange woman, Prove. ^ 5.
whose feet go down to death, and whose steps take hold on hell. This is the
woman with an Harlots behavior, and subtle in heart. Prove. 7.
This is she, who has d^ckt her bed with ornaments, carpets and laces of
Aegypts and perfuming her Bed with myrrh, Aloes and Cynamon. Take heed thou
sing not Lysimachus song; (...). Arch. Tare^t.
The pleasure of fornication is short, but the punishment of the fornicator
eternal. But of this Subject we are more amply to treat hereafter; only my
exhortation is to Youth, whose illimited desires tend ever to his ruin, that
if at any time it be your fortune to encounter with these infectious ulcers,
these sin-soothing, and soule-soiling Lepers; and they like that whorish woman
in the Proverbs, invite you to their lothed daliance, Prove. 7.18.
saying, Come, let us take our fill of love until the morning: Come, let us
take our pleasure in daliance: that you shake off these vipers at the first
assault, and prevent the occasion when it first offers it self. For know, that
which a devout and learned. Father says concerning the dangerous Habit of
sin, is most true; Prima est quasi titillatio delectationis in cord secunda
consensio, Aug. Ser. 44.
tertium factum, quarta consuetudo. Sin begins with an ^ith, but ends with a
skar. The first degree begins with delight, the second with consent, the third
with act, and the fourth with custom. Thus sin by degrees in men of all
degrees, like a broad-spreading tetter, runs over the whole beauty of a
precious soul, exposing the fruits of the spirit to be corrupted by the
suggestion of the flesh. But too far (I fear me) have I digressed from this
last branch, whereof I was to discourse, to wit, of Habit, or Attire: albeit I
have enlarged my self in nothing which may seem altogether impertinent to our
present purpose. For discoursing of the vanity of women (whose phantasticke
Habits are daily Theames in public Theaters) I imagined it a necessary point
to insist upon: partly to dissuade those Shee-painters of this flourishing
Island from so base and prostitute practice. Base, for Festus Pompeius says,
that common and base whores, called Schaenicolae, used dawbing of themselves,
though with the vilest stuff. Partly to bring a loathing of them in the
conceit of all young Gentlemen, whose best promising parts use often to be
corrupted by their inchantmens. Nazian. contra mulieres immodice comptas.
(...) etc. there is one flower to be loved of women, a good red, which is
shamefastness. Saint Hierome to Marcella says, that those women are matter of
scandal to Christian eyes, Quae purpurisso and quibusdam fucis ora oculosque
depingunt. I might here likewise justly tax such effeminate Youths, Hier. de
exitu Lea.
whose womanish disposition has begot in them a love to this hateful
profession; but I will only use Diogenes speech, which he made to one that
had anointed his hairs; Laert. lib. 6.
Cave ne capitis suaveolentia vitae maleolentiam adducat. Or that saying he
used to a Youth too curiously and effeminately dressed: If thou go to men, all
this is but in vain; if unto women, it is wicked. So as being asked a question
of a Young man, very neatly and finely apparelled, Laert. ibid.
he said, he would not answer him till he put off his apparel to see whether
he were a man or a woman.

There is another Objection, which I imagine Youth will allege, to prove how
expedient it is for him to be choice or curious in respect of apparel. It
gains him more acceptance and esteem with men of eminent place. But hearken
how the Apostle opposes himself to this; reproving such whose judgment
consists in the eye rather than in the brain proceeding thus; James 2.2.
If there come into your company a man with a gold-ring, and in goodly
apparel, and there come in also a poor man in vile raiment, and ye have a
respect to him that wears the gay clothing, 3.
and say unto him, Sit thou here in a goodly place; 4.
and say unto the poor, Stand thou there, or sit here under my footstool:
Are ye not partial in your selves, and are become judges of evil thoughts?
Seneca
So as, howsoever these diffident wordlings, Annulo maegis credunt quam animo;
It is not the Habit, but the heart which God accepts: yet most acceptable is
that Habit which is not so sumptuous as seemly, not so costly as comely. True
indeed it is, that the popular eye, which cannot distinguish of the inward
beauty, but observes rather what we wear, than what we are, Act. 12.21, 22.
admires nothing more than the outward Habit; as we may read how much Herod,
being arrayed in royal apparel, was applauded by the people, (...).
who gave a shout, saying, The voice of God, and not of man. But that
All-seeing and All-scearching ear of the Divine Majesty sees not as man
sees. He prefers Lazarus rags before Dives robes. Though the one be clothed
in purple and ^ine linen, and the other seem despicable in the eye of the
world, Aug.
in respect of his Nakedness; yet, mortua necessitate, peribunt opera
necessitatis: the one is translated to glory boundless, the other to misery
endless; for this sorrow which he here felt, ended when he did end; but the
joy which he obtained, exceeded all end. Thus far have I labored to answer
all such objections as might be proposed in defense of this generall-approved
vanity, concluding; Quod peccata Sericea, teterrima sunt vitia; No sins like
to silken sins, for they ever crave impunity, the foster-mother of all
impiety. I intend yet to proceed in decyphering the lightness of Youth, Three
violent passions incident to Youth.
by expressing three grand Maladies incident to Youth; whereof I purpose to
dilate particularly, to move the Young man to be more cautelous of his ways,
in the mazie Labyrinth of this life. These three (for all the rest may be
reduced to them) are comprehended under Lust, Ambition, Revenge; of which
briefly, according to our former Method, we purpose here to entreat.

SO exposed is Youth to sense, and so much estranged from the government of
reason; LUST.
as it prosecutes with eagerness whatsoever is once entertained with
affection. This might appear in the ruins of Troy, occasioned by the
unlawful love of Paris; where the violent intrusion and usurpation of another
Bed, brought an irreparable fall to the Trojans. Some have given two reasons;
Two reasons why Youth is naturally subjected to illimited passion.
Why Youth is more subject to this illimited passion, than any other age. The
first is, that natural heat or vigor, which is most predominant in Youth,
provoking him to attempt the greatest of difficulties, rather than suffer the
repulse where he affects. The second is, want of employment: which begets this
distemperature; whence the Poet. Take away Idleness, and without doubt,
Cupids how breaks, and all his Lamps go out.
This want of employment was it, which moved Aegistus to show himself more
familiar with Clytemnestra, than stood well with his honor; for had he ranked
himself with those valiant Greeks, whose resolute adventures gained them
general esteem, he had prevented occasion and purchased himself equal
renown by his valor, as by vain expense of time he incurred dishonor. Witty
and proper was that elegant invention of Lucian, who faining Cupid. to invite
the gods to an amorous feast, prevailed with all of them to give way to Love,
till he came to Pallas; but she was found conversing with the Muses, and would
admit of no time to enter parley with Cupid. True it is, that exercise draws
the mind from effeminacie: and remissness feeds the desire, and adds fuel to
unlawful heat. And no less occasion gives wanton discourse, or Lascivious
Books to the enraged affections of distempered Youth: so as, much more blessed
were the State, if restraint were made of composing or publishing such
Subjects, where every leaf instructs Youth in a new lesson of folly. Alcaeus a
man of good reputation and general observance in the Commonwealth; what toys
wrote he of the love of young men? All the writings of Anacreon are only of
love. But most of all other, Rheginus even burned with love, as appears by
his writings. Yea, even Philosophers (and that by the counsel and authority of
Plato, whom therefore Dicearchus did worthily reprehend) became the commenders
and honourers of love. Such Discourses should, be thrown to the darkest
corner of our studies, as that of Ovids was by Augustus, which tend to corrupt
Youth, and divert his mind from the exercise of virtue. But alas! to what
height of licentious liberty are these corrupter times grown? When that Sex,
where Modesty should claim a native prerogative, gives way to foments of
exposed looseness; by not only attending to the wanton discourse of immodest
Lovers, but carrying about them (even in their naked Bosoms, where chastest
desires should only lodge) the amorous toys of Venus and Adonis: which Poem,
with others of like nature, they hear with such attention, peruse with such
devotion, and retain with such delectation, as no Subject can equally relish
their unseasoned palate, like those lighter discourses. Yea (which has struck
me to more admiration) I have known diverse, whose unriper years half assured
me, that their green Youth had never instructed them in the knowledge, nor
brought them to conceit of such vanities, excellently well read in those
immodest Measures; yea, and prompt enough to show proofs of their reading in
public places. I will not insist upon them, but leave them to have their names
registered amongst those infamous Ladies; Sempronia, Scribonia, Clytemnestra,
Cleopatra, Faustina, Messalina, whose memories purchased by odious Lust, shall
survive the course of time; as the memory of those famous Matrons, Octavia,
Porcia, Caecilia, Cornelia, shall transcend the period of time. To express
what especial motives tend most to increase of this passion, I think it not
amiss: because I hold it necessary to propose the cause, before we come to
cure the effect. For I think, according to the opinion of Socrates, that then
my instructions have brought forth good fruit, when by them any one shall be
provoked to apply his disposition to the knowledge and practice of virtue.
Which, the better to effect, you shall know, that there is no one Motive more
generally moving, An espiciall motive tending to the increase of this Passions
Venus in vinis.
or enforcing to an eager pursuit of our immoderate affections, than curious or
luscious fare, delicious liquors, which might appear (if we should have
recourse to History) in those prodigal feastings of Antonius and Cleopatra:
where no cost was spared to give more free course to lascivious desires. To
prevent this, (as may be probably gathered) Greece in her flourishing estate,
Nunquam ego ^brium putabo castum Hier.
restrained women both public and private access to Banquets: and kinsmen
kissed their kinswomen to know whether they drunk wine, or no, and if they
had, to be punished by death, Plato. Plutarch.
or banished into some Island. Plutarch says, that if the Matrons had any
necessity to drink wine, either because they were sick or weak, the Senate
was to give them license; and not then in Rome neither, Macrob.
but out of the City. Macrobius says, that there were two Senators in Rome
chiding, and the one called the others wife an Adulteress; and the other his
wife a Drunkard: and it was judged that to be a Drunkard was more infamy. Here
we may collect what strictness, even the Heathen used, to observe a moral
course, and to repress such inordinate motions, as most commonly invade the
eminent'st States, when long peace has rockt her people asleep, snorting in
the downe-bed of security. Sure I am, as there is nothing which brings eithera
public or private State to a remissness of government sooner than peace or
plenty; so nothing effatuates the understanding of man more than excess in
meat or drink, subjecting the intellective part to the bondage of Sense. For
what may be the discourse of Epicurists, but lascivious, begot on excess of
fare, curious and luscious? These are dilating ever on the rape of Ganimedes,
Lais in Euripides. Beauty is their object, and Vanity their subject. White
teeth, rolling eyes, a beautiful complexion (an exterior good) being that
which Euryala praised, when she washed the feet of Ulysses, namely, Gentle
speech, and tender flesh. Thus are their tongues tipped with vanity, their
desires aiming at sensuality, and their delights engaged to fleshly liberty.
Amongst the Romans; Venus or Cous was the best chance at dice: And no chance,
(till some heavy mischance over-take them) more happy in their opinion, than to
receive a loving smile or cheerful aspect from their terrestrial Venus.

Some Countries I have read of, whose natural baseness, being given to all
avarice, induced them to disesteeme all respects in this kind, and to make
merchandise of their women's honor. Such are the women of Sio reported to be,
who are reputed for the most beautiful Dames of all the Greeks in the world,
and greatly given to Venery. Their Husbands are their Pandors, and when they
see any stranger arrive, they will presently demand if he would have a
mistress: and so they make whores of their own wives, and are contented for a
little gain to wear horns: such are the base minds of ignominious Cuckolds.
Here is a dangerous I Will for our amorous Gallant, who makes his Travel (with
grief I speak it) too often the ruin of himself and his estate. Happy are
those (but too few are those) who with wise Ithacus stop their ears to these
Soule-tainting and Sinne-tempting Sirens. Yet some there are, and some there
have been ever (I persuade me) whose noble conquests over themselves and their
own desires, Q. Curt. lib. 3.
have seconded, if not surpassed those many conquests which they achieved in
foreign Nations. As the admirable continency of Alexander the Great, in
sparing Darius wife and his three daughters. The continency of Scipio during
the space of four and twenty years, wherein his prosperous exploits could
purchase him no more glory, than in the besieging and taking of a City in
Spain, he gained him renown, by repressing his flame of Lust, when a
beautiful Maid was brought him: restoring her with a great reward to
Allancius, a Celtiberian Lord, to whom she was espoused. No less worthy was
that part of Marius, who having Sylla's wife and sisters in his power, sent
them nobly, unattempted. An example of like continency might he instanced in
Mahomet the great, toward the fair Irene.
Greek; whom, albeit he entirely loved, yet to show unto his Peers, a
princely command of himself and his affections; as he had incensed them before
by loving her, so he regained their love by sleighting her; whence the Poet:
With that He drew his Turkish Symeter,
Which he did brandish ore the Damsels head;
Demanding of such Ianizers were there,
If It were not pity shee'sd be slaughtered?
Pity indeed; but I perforce must do
That which displeases me, to pleasure you.
Many such instances, ancient and modern Histories afford, but I must not
insist on each particular, lest I should enlarge my self too much in this
Branch. My exhortation shall be to such, whose unmellow years crave
instruction, that they would betake themselves to employment: for Idleness
makes of men, women; of women, beasts; of beasts, monsters. And amongst
employments, What rare effects the precepts of Moral Philosophy wrought in
Heathen men.
ever mix such Readings as may minister matter, either Divine, or Moral, to
allay the heat of this distempered passion. We read of the Roman Stilpho, that
albeit he was naturally addicted to all incontinency, yet by reading certain
precepts of Moral Philosophy, he became an absolute commander of his own
affections. Hate to consent to that, which so transformes man, as he wholly
loses the true title of man, and becomes merely bestiall. Nos qui accepimus
rationis lucem communem cum Angelis, non transeamus vitam in silentio cum
pecoribus. Thou art beautified with an Angelical feature; let it not
participate of any inferior creature. To be short, art thou a Gentleman? bear
that posture still: stain not a native glory with an infamous blemish. Etiam
feris ac Barbaris detestabile est. Ambr. lib. 1. de Abraham.
This vice of all others, derogates most from Honor: for we commonly say,
Such, whose lightness incurres scandal, to have lost their Honor. O let not
the Honor of a generous mind suffer eclipse, for a minutes pleasure! Lais
asking of Demosthenes so much for one Nights-lodging, he presently replied: I
will not buy repentance at so dear a rate. Vid. Aul. Gell. in Noct. Atticis.
Dearer is the rate of shame, than of Coin. Prize Honor at that estimate, as
the height of pleasure may never have power to surprise it. Canna, wife to
Synattus, whom one Synoris, of greater authority than Synattus, loved: making
no small means to obtain her love yet all in vain; supposed the readiest way
for effecting his desire to be the death of her Husband, which he performed.
This done, he renewed his suit* to which she seemingly consented. But being
solemnly come into the Temple of Diana for celebrating the Nuptials, she had a
sweet potion ready, which she drunk to Synoris, where with they both were
poisoned, to revenge her Husbands death. Here is a Pagan pattern of inimitable
continency; who rather than she would consent to contract Marriage with her
Husbands foe, dis-valued all future hope of preferment, yea embraced Death,
Seneca.
as a happy Agent of her intended revenge. The wise (says that sententious
Philosopher) may gather gold out of dung; which may be thus applied. The wise
Christian, may cull excellent flowers from an Ethnicke garden: for the Envious
man he is the Spider which sucks poison from the fragrant'st and freshest
Flowers. I will conclude this point; and entreat the generous affected, whose
glory should be Virtues Booty, and whose best beauty to be enriched by her
bounty; to make Virtue their Prize, being so praiseworthy of her self, as
she needs no outward praise. To purchase which incomparable blessing, I could
wish, Gentlemen, that your resort to eminent places be more spare, -- Rara est
concordia formae, Atque pudicitiae. Iuven. Sat. 10.
till you find in your selves an aptness to resist, if any unchaste motion
make assault. Yet good it were not to presume, upon one single trial* for the
disposition may be more temperate ar one time than another; and the assault
also more perilous. To court Beauty is an enterprise of danger: for some I
have known, who upon their access to Beauty, have been freemen, who upon
their return, became slaves.

But you will object; to vanquish where there is no assault made, is a weak
conquest; True, but to play with the candle till we suffer our wings to be
cing'd, is a greater folly. I would not hazard my honor upon those terms, as
by affronting temptation, to be caught.

To conclude this Branch, as the substance of the Soul is pure, so this mass
of flesh is corrupt: stain not the purity of the former, by conversing with
the latter: for to parley with so subtle an enemy, is to give way to his
policy. Observing these, you shall go to your graves with Honor* not to the
graves of Lust, Numb. 11.34.
the Sepulchers of shame, and receptacles of corrupted love. We will now
descend to the second Malady incident to Youth; that Eagle-soaring passion,
Ambition.

THose who are affected to this, use to say with Tiridates in Tacitus: Sua
retinere privatae domus, AMBITION
de alienis certare regia laus^ est. These can never confine themselves to
their own, Nullus enim magni sceleris labor -- Iuven. Sa^. 14.
raising their hopes above possibility: but are building airie castles, of
purpose to confront greatness. We shall never hear them talk of any subject
save sovereignty or dominion. One termed an Empire, a monstrous and untamed
beast; and so may this Passion be well defined: whose aim is only to purchase
glory, albeit her aims be planted on indirectest terms. We read how
Pausanias killed Philip of Macedon only for fame or vainglory: so did
Herostratus burn the Temple of Diana at Ephesus, with this resolution; because
he could not by any act of renown eternize his memory, he would gain him
fame, though by an act of infamy. How violent these Ambitious heads are, and
have been ever, there is scarce any State which has not felt: where civil
wars have menaced no less danger to the State, than foreign powers; private
factions, than open hostility. In some likewise, so deep impression has
Ambition wrought, as the Envy which they conceive at others greatness,
deprives them of all rest: This appeared in Themistocles, who walked in the
Nightime in the open street, because he could not sleep: The cause whereof,
when some men did enquire, he answered, that the triumph of Miltiades would
not suffer him to take his rest. The like height of Ambition showed Alexander,
Tuscul. Quaest lib. 4.
weeping bitterly to see his father win so fast before him, fearing nothing
should remain for him to conquer. Now, how naturally Youth is affected to this
illimited motion, may be observed even in usual games; where Youth, rather
than he will endure the foil, exposes himself to all encounters. It is
glory which he aims at, and before he lose it, he will hazard himself for it.
His Prize is his praise: he values nothing more than to get him a name, which
may brute his renown, and gain him respect with his Dearest. His disquiet
(for what is Ambition, but a Distraction of the mind?) is to affect that best,
which does afflict him most. Augustus had broken sleeps, and used to send for
some to pass the Night away, in telling tales, or holding him with talk. See
the misery of Ambitious spirits, whose ends are without end, limiting their
desires to no other period than sole soveraigntie. Their ayrie thoughts (like
Icarus wings) are ever mounting, till the Sun, which they threatened, dissolve
them. Inferior taskes they as much slight, as Eagles do Flies: tolluntur in
altum, Vt lapsu graviore ruant --
they love not to stoop to baseness, when many times lowest fortunes
entertain them with no less discontent, than despair can force them to. And
in their lowest ebb, when Hope forsakes them, and their nearest (like Tiberius
friends) shrink from them, and no comfort remains, save expectance and
sufferance of all extremities; you shall hear them upraid Prince or State,
relating (with much vainglory) what dangers they have undergone for them.
Instance whereof, even in these latter times, might be produced; as in that
Ambitious Frenchman, the brave Byron, who seeing no way but one, burst out
into these violent extremes; I have received three and thirty wounds of my
body, to preserve it for him, and for my reward, he takes my head from my
shoulders: He now quenches the torch in my blood after he has used it. This
is the condition of high spirits, whose aims were transcendent, to close up
their tragical Scene with a vainglorious boast of what they have done: little
considering, how their Country might lawfully exact and expect as much as was
in them to perform, and they still debrours to her, because they had their
being from her. Yet see (though sometimes they stand upon terms of resolution,
desiring to die standing;) when the sentence of death is pronounced, and all
future hope extinguished, they will be (as that great Frenchman was) Supple as
a glove: presenting their heads as willingly to the sword, as Agis did his unto
the halter. It is strange to note, how these men walk in clouds, imagining
themselves most secure, when imminencie of peril assures them nothing less.
The reason whereof may seem to be this; they flatter themselves in their
vanity, as Pygmalion with his Image, or Narcissus with his Shadow; reposing
more confidence in their own valor, and the aid, which ( Themistocles or
Pausanias-like) they contract abroad, linking and uniting themselves with
foreign powers, than on all the information of friends, or the persuasions of
a loyal and uncorrupted heart. Hen. the fourth whose Name deserves to be
enrouled among the ancient Worthies.
But these (as that Heroic Prince noted) must bow or break: be their persons
never so hopeful, or directions behovefull to the State, they must be curbed,
or the State endangered. Their properties is ever to swim in troubled waters:
nor can they endure to be mated. Though their aims be to perpetuate their
greatness, yet those Beasts, which are bred about the River Hypanis, and live
but one day, may oft-times compare with them for continuance: whence the Poet
says excellently, Aristot.
out of his own observation; Much have I seen, yet seldom seen I have,
Ambition go gray headed to his grave.
There is nothing which the Ambitious man hates so much as a corrivall; he
hopes to possess all, and without a sharer. But so indirect are his plots, and
so insuccessive their end, as he finds to his great grief, that the promise
of security had no firm foundation to ground on: nor his attempts that issue
they expected.

Now Gentlemen, you, whose better parts aim at more glorious ends, so consine
your desires to an equal mean, that mounting too high bring you not to an
irreparable fall. We are borne indeed (as that divine Father says) to be
Eagles, and not Iayes; to fly aloft, and not to seek our food on the ground:
Chrysostom. in 2. Corinthians.
but our Eagle-eyes are to be fixed on the Sun of righteousness, not on
temporal preferments. We are to soar to the Tower from whence comes our
help. For it is not lifting up a man's self God likes, but lifting up of the
spirit in prayer. Here are wings for flying, without fear of falling: for
other aims, they are but as feathers in the air; they delude us, howsoever
they seem to secure us.

But I hear some young Gentleman object, that it is a brave thing to be
observed in the eye of the world; to have our persons admired, our selves in
public resorts noted, yea our Names dispersed! Indeed I grant; He who consists
on nothing more than shows,
Thinks it is brave to hear, Lo there be goes!


But such, whose solid understandings have instructed them in higher studies,
as much disvalue popular opinion, or the Corckie conceits of the vulgar, as
true Nobility scorns to converse with any thing unworthy it self. Their
greatness has correspondence with goodness: for esteem of the world, as in
respect of their own worth they deserve it, so in contempt of all outward
glory they disvalue it.

Come then (ye nobly affected Gentlemen; Quantum-cunque te dejeceris, bumilior
non eris Christo. Hier.
) would ye be heirs of honor, and highly reputed by the Highest? Resemble
the Nature of the Highest: who humbled himself in the form of man, to restore
miserable man; vilifying himself, to make man like himself. It is not,
believe it, to shine in grace or esteem of the Court, which can innoble you:
this glory is like glass, Plutarch.
bright but brittle; and Courtiers (says one) are like Counters, which
sometime in account go for a thousand pound, and presently before the Count
be past, but for a single penny. It is more glory to be in the Courts of the
Lord, to purchase esteem with him, whose judgment never erres, and whose
countenance never alters.

It is reported by Comines in his French Annals, that Charles, whom he then
served, was of this disposition, that he would make assay of the greatest
matters, Semper hiat, semper tenuem qua vescitur auram reciprocavit Chamaeleon.
Et mutat fasiem varios sumit que colores, praeter rubrum and candidum. Alciat.
revolving in his mind how he might compass them: yea perchance (says he)
assayes far above the strength of man. See the picture of an Ambitious
spirit, loving ever to be interessed in affairs of greatest difficulty.
Caemelion-like on subtle air he feeds,
And vies in colors with the checkerd meeds.
Let no such conceits transport you, lest repentance find you. It is safer
choosing the Middle-path, than by walking or tracing uncouth ways, to stray in
your journey. More have fallen by presumption, than distrust of their own
strength. And reason good; for such who dare not rely on themselves, give way
to others direction; whereas too much confidence, or selfe-opinionate boldness
will rather choose to err, and consequently to fall, than submit themselves to
others judgment. Of this opinion seemed Velleius the Epicurean to be, Nil tam
metuens, quam ne dubitare aligua de re videretur.
of whom it is said; that in confidence of himself he was so far from fear,
as he seemed not to doubt of any thing. A modest or shamefast fear becomes
Youth better: which indeed ever attends the best or affablest natures. Such
will attempt nothing without advice, nor assay ought without direction: so as
their ways are secured from many perils, which attend on inconsiderate Youth.
My conclusion of this point shall be in a word; that neither the rich man is to
glory in his riches, the wise man in his wisdom, nor the strong man in his
strength: for should man consider the weakness and many infirmities whereto he
is hourly subject, he would find innumerable things to move him to
sorrowing, but few or none to glory in. Again, if he should reflect to the
consideration of his Dissolution, which, that it shall be, is most certain,
but when it shall be, most uncertain: he would be forced to stand upon his
guard with that continual fear, as there would be no empty place left in him
for pride. This day one proud, as prouder none,
May lie in earth ere day be gone.
What confidence is there to be reposed in so weak a foundation; where to
remain ever is impossible, Petrarch. de remed. utri^s. sort.
but quickly to remove, most probable? Then (to use Petrarchs words) be not
afraid though the house, the Body be shaken, so the Soul, the guest of the
Body, fare well: for weakening of the one adds for most part strength to the
other. And so I come to the last passion or perturbation incident to Youth.

REVENGE.
REvenge is an intended resolve, arising from a conceived distaste, either
justly or unjustly grounded. This Revenge is ever violent'st in hot bloods, who
stand so much upon terms of reputation, as rather than they will pocket up the
least indignity, they willingly oppose themselves to extremest hazard. Now
this unbounded fury may seem to have a twofold relation; either as it is
proper and personal, or popular and impersonall.

Revenge proper or personal, arises from a peculiar distaste or offense done
or offered to our own person; which indeed has ever the deepest impression:
Which may be instanced in Menelaus and Paris; where the honor of a Nuptial
bed, the Law of Hospitality, the prosessed league of Amity, were jointly
infringed: Or in Antonie and Octavius, whose intestine hate grew to that
height, as Antonies Angel was afraid of Octavius Angel. Appian. Alex.
Which hatred, as it was fed and increased by Fulvia, so was it allayed and
tempered by Octavia; though in the end it grew irreconciliable; ending in
blood, as it begun with lust.

Revenge popular or impersonall, proceeds extrinsecally, as from factions in
families, or some ancient grudge hereditarily descending, betwixt House and
House, or Nation and Nation. When Annibal was a child, and at his fathers
commandment, he was brought into the place where he made sacrifice; and laying
his hand upon the Altar, swore, that so soon as he had any rule in the
Commonwealth, he would be a prosessed enemy to the Romans. Whence may be
observed, how the conceit of an injury or offense received, works such
impression in that State or Kingdom where the injury is offered, as Hate
lives, and survives the life of many ages, crying out with those incensed
Greeks; Hom in Iliad. and Polyb. apud Curionem. lib. 3.
The time will come when mighty Troy must fall,
Where Priams race must be extinguished all.
But we are principally to discourse of the former Branch, to wit, of proper
or personal Revenge: wherein we shall observe sundry Occurrents right worthy
our serious consideration. Facile redimunt qui sanguine famam. Martial Epig.
That term (as I said before) usually called Reputation, has brought much
generous blood to effusion: especially amongst such, Qui magis sunt soliciti
vani nominis, quam propriae salutis: Prizing vainglory above safety, esteem
of valor above security of person. And amongst these, -- Impium est mortis
statum praecipere tempus.
may I truly rank our Martial Duellists, who many times upon a Tavern
quarrel are brought to shed their dearest blood, which might have been
employed better in defense of their Country, or resistance of proud Infidels.
And what is it which moves them to these extremes; but (as they seem to
pretend) their Reputation is engaged, their opinion in the eye of the world
called in question, if they should sit down with such apparent disgrace? But
shall I answer them? The opinion of their valor indeed is brought in question;
but by whom? not by men of equal temper, or maturer judgment, who measure
their censures, not by the Last of rash opinion, but just consideration. For
these cannot imagine how Reputation should be brought in question, by any
indiscreet crime uttered over a pot, whereof perchance the Speaker is ignorant,
at least what it meant: Galesti lepores. Pet. Mar.
But of these distempered Roisters, whose only judgment consists in taking
offense, and valor in making a flourish; of these I have seen One in the
folly of my Youth, but could not rightly observe till my riper age: whose
braving condition (having some young Gooselin to work on) would have made you
confident of his valor: instancing what dangerous exploits he had attempted
and achieved, what single fields he had pitched, and how bravely he came off:
yet on my conscience, the Battle of the Pyg^^ies might have equaled his, both
for truth and resolution. Yet I have noted such as these, to be the Bellows
which blow the fire of all uncivil quarrels; suggesting to young Gentlemen
(whose want of experience makes them too credolous) matter of Revenge: by
aggravating each circumstance to enrage their hot blood the more. Some others
there are of this band, which I have like wise observed: and they are taken for
grave Censors or Moderators, if any difference occur amongst Young Gentlemen.
And these have been Men in their time, (at least accounted so) but now their
fortunes falling to an ebb, having drawn out their time in expense above
their means, they are enforced (and well it were if Misery forced them not to
worse) to erect a Scence, whereto the Roarers make recourse, as to their
Rendevous: And hereto also resorts the raw and unseasoned Youth, whose
late-fallen patrimony makes him purchase acquaintance at what rate soever;
glorying much to be esteemed one of the fraternity. And he must now keep his
Quarter, maintain his prodigal rout with what his Parcimonious father long
carked for; The proper postures of a complete Roarer.
prepare his Rere-suppers, and all this, to get him a little knowledge in the
Art of roaring. And by this time, you may suppose him to have attained to some
degree, Est Venus in vinis, vinis Venus illita venis. Sint procula men^is vina
venus que meis.
so as he can look big, erect his Mouchatoes, stamp and stare, and call the
Drawer Rogue, drink to his Venus in a Venice-glasse, and to moralize her Sex,
throws it over his head and breaks it. But for all this, he has not fully
learned his postures: for upon discourse of valor, he has discovered his
Cowardice; and this gives occasion to one of his Cumrades to triumph ore his
weakness. Who entering upon terms of Reputation, and finding himself wronged,
he would gladly wipe off all aspersions, and gain him opinion in the eye of
the world: but recalling to mind, the dangers incident to Quarrels, he thinks
it best to repair to that Grand Moderator (whose long experience has made his
opinion authenticke) to receive satisfaction, whether he may put up the injury
offered him, without touch of disgrace. Now he must be fee'd for his opinion,
(as if he were some grave legal professor:) which done, his reply must tend
to the definition of a wrong, and what the law of valor holds for satisfaction
in actions of that nature. Again, (for still he works on this Young-gallants
weakness) how the world esteems his Opponent to be a brave spark; one whose
spirit cannot be daunted, nor fury appea^ed with less than blood: drawing him
in the end by some Rhetorical persuasion (as nothing more smooth than the oily
tongue of an insinuating foist) to some base composition, whereof he and his
accomplices are made equal sharers.

Now Gentlemen, I could likewise produce certain woeful occurrents, which have
befallen some of your rank and quality, and that within these few years, by
consorting with such Grand C^tt^rs: who pres^ing them to offense, could not
endure such affronts, but with resolution (which ever attends a generous
spirit) encountering them, have been utterly overthrown, either in doing or
suffering.

But you will ask me, how should this be prevented? Can any Gentleman suffer
with patience his Reputation to be brought in question? Can he endure to be
challenged in a public place, and by that means incur the opinion of
Coward? Can he put up disgrace without observance, or observing it, not revenge
it, when his very Honor (the vital blood of a Gentleman) is impeached?

Hear me, whosoever he be that frames these Objections! I am not ignorant how
many unjust and immerited aspersions shall be thrown upon men of eminent'st
desert, by such, whose tongues are ever steeped in calumny: But who are these,
save such as the glory of Greece (the everliving Homer) displayeth in the
contemptuous person of Thersites; Hom. in Odyss.
whose character was, More deformed in mind than body? Their infamous and
serpentine tongues inured to detraction, deserve no other Revenge, (next legal
punishment) save avoiding their company, and bruting their baseness in all
Societies, where their names are known, to caution others of them. I am spoken
evil of (says Seneca) but the evil speak it: Seneca ad Gaelion. de remed.
fortuit.
I should be moved, if M. Cato, if wise Lelius, or the two Scipio's should
speak this of me; but it is praise for me, to have the evil displeased with
me. It is true; for as no imputation can truly be said to stain a pure or
undefiled soul, whose inward sincerity (like a brazen Wall) beats back all
darts of envy or calumny; so it is not in the power of the evil to detract
from the glory of the good: for what then should remain secure from aspersion
of the vicious?

But I imagine, you will reply; it is not only the report or scandal of these
men of uncurbed tongues, (for so Pindarus terms them) but of such, whose
eminent esteem in the world, gives approbation to what they speak, which
awakes my Revenge.

If they be as you term them, Men of eminent esteem, and that esteem by
merit purchased, (for all other estimation I exclude it:) I need little doubt,
but the distaste which you conceive against them, has proceeded in some part
from your self; and that upon maturer consideration, you should find your own
bosom guilty to be the cause of these aspersions. If otherwise it happen, (as
I grant it may) that upon private surmises, or suggestions derived from some
factious heads, these men of more eminent note and esteem have brought your
name in question, because (as they were informed) you formerly aspersed a
blemish upon their Honor: I would not have you to err so far from your own
judgment, as without further discussing the cause, to fall into desperate
extremes: for were it not much better for you to sift the cause, how you both
are abused, whereby that base suggestour might be duly censured, and your
wrongs mutually redressed, than to vow Revenge ere an injury be offered? Yes
Sir, believe it, much better and safer, and in the opinion of discreet men,
wiser: howsoever our hare-brain'd Gallant, whose property is to act before he
resolve, esteem it a derogation to expostulate on terms of disgrace, but to
publish war ere the league be broken. We account him who can bear the most, to
be the strongest; yet esteem we him who can bear injuries most, to be the
weakest; so ill disposed is man's temper, as for an opinion of Reputation, he
will incur apparent error.

Now there is another Revenge, which proceeds from a nature far more
inglorious than the former. And that is, when for some little distaste
conceived against our inferior, (even in worldly respects) we labor his
undoing: yea many times, because he stands too resolutely for right, we
threaten his ruin: But true shall we find it: As the high do use the low,
Quicquid ^ vobis minor exti^escet, Major hoc vobis Dominas minatur, Horat.

1 King. 21.3, 11.



God will use the highest so.


And this might appear in poor Naboth, who because he would not give the
Inheritance of his Fathers, his Vineyard, he must be stoned. But of this
Revenge I am not to insist: for this is an evil more properly inherent to our
rich oppressors, who grind the face of the poor, and raise them an house to
their seldom thriving Heirs out of others ruin. Only my wish shall be, that
their dwelling may be with Owls and Ostridges in the wilderness, and not in
the flowery borders of this Island, lest she be forced to vie sighs for their
sins. I might now in this Subject of Revenge, enlarge my discourse by
speaking of Anger, from whence Revenge may seem to receive her original
being: which Anger the Poet terms a short fury: Anger is madness, and as
strong
In force, Horat. lib. 1. epist. 2.
but not in course so long.


For what differs an angry man from a madman, save only in this; his
violence of passion continues not so long: for the time it is as vehement and
as violent. Excellent therefore was that precept of Moderation given and
observed by that renowned Emperor Theodosius, drawn (as may appear in the
like example of Augustus) from a former pattern: of whom it is written, that
he would never in his anger proceed to Revenge, or so much as show any argument
of distaste, till he had repeated over the four and twenty Greek letters.

But to conclude this last Branch, my exhortation to all young Gentlemen shall
be, whose high spirits cannot endure affronts, that they would labor to
expostulate with passion; Basil. Homide Ira. Greg. Mor. l. 5. cap 32. Ephesians.
2.3. Romans 12.19. Iam. 1.20. Isay 57: 16. Nah. 1.2, 3. Numb. 14.18. Iam. 1.19.
Prove. 14.29. ^ Cor. 13.5. Prove. 22.24. Eccl. 8.15.16. Prove. 15.1.18. Ephesians.
4.26.27.
which if once protracted, will be sooner tempered, meditating also of these
divine places of Scripture: which receipts are indeed most powerful and
effectual to allay this Passion. We that are by nature children of wrath,
ought to give place unto wrath. For the wrath of man does not accomplish the
righteousness of God. Yea, we ought to imitate God, which if we will do, we
must not continue in wrath, knowing, God will not contend, nor be wroth for
ever. He is slow to anger. Yea, every man ought to be slow to wrath: For it
is wisdom. If we will join in the true Lovers knot, we must not be angry,
for, true Love is not provoked to anger. And if we will prevent the effect,
we are to avoid the occasion; therefore are we taught to have no familiarity,
neither strive with an angry man. Would we appease anger? we must do it by
meekness. Lastly, may we be angry? Yes, but how? Be angry, but sin not.
Let not the Sun go down upon your wrath. Neither give place to the Devil.

Thus have we run over all those predominant humors, which bear most sway
in distempered Youth. Physic precribed, and receipts applied to cure these
maladies in Youth.
Let us now, according to our former purpose proceed in applying certain
Receipts to cure these dangerous Maladies. Which briefly (to avoid all curious
divisions) may be reduced to these two: Active and Contemplative. The one in
exercising and performing the offices of our Calling: The other in practicing
works of piety, exercises of Devotion, Meditation, Contemplation.

For the former, to wit, Active, every action has two handles (to use the
Philosophers words; Omnis actio duas habet ansas.
) the one whereof consists in plotting or contriving; the other in effecting.
Without the former, the latter is precipitate; and without the latter, the
former is frustrate: both concurring, the Action becomes absolute. But to
speak generally of Action, as it is the represser, so Idleness is the
producer of all vice. Whence came that ancient Edict amongst the Romans,
mentioned by Cicero; that no Roman should go through the streets of the City,
In lib. de leg.
unless he carried with him the badge of that Trade whereby he lived. Insomuch
that Marcus Aurelius speaking of the diligence of the Romans writes; That all
of them followed their labor. Now Gentlemen, I persuade my self, you will
most of you object and say with the displaced Steward in the Gospel, Luke 16.
3.
We cannot dig: (and I could wish that many of our eminent ones, would add
unto it, and to beg we are ashamed.) It is true indeed; I know your Breeding
has been otherwise: but admit you cannot dig, do ye infer hence that
ye are exempted from all labor? In no case are you so to argue. There are
other Taskes, other employments besides Manual and Mechanicke labors, which
require your furtherance. And these are Foreign or Domestical: Foreign, as
to benefit your Country by rare Discoveries, re-conveying the rich freight of
knowledge (by conference with foreign Nations) to your Native soil: What
employments deserve entertainment from a Gentleman.
or by personal adventure, to stand resolutely in defense of the Faith,
against those professed enemies of Christendom, the Turks; whose fury and
hostile cruelty, the Eastern parts (to our great grief be it spoken) have
already woefully sustained. Domestical; as in studying the practice of Laws,
or other humane studies; in laboring to determine differences betwixt party
and party; in chastising and due censuring, (as far as their callings give
leave) of such factions or litigious Sectists, as either in Church or
Commonweal disturb the quiet of the Realm, and distract the State with
frivolous or fruitless ambiguities. Here are Labors fit to entertain
Gentlemen, and naught derogating from men of eminentest descent or quality. For
in Actions of this nature have the best and most renowned States and Princes in
Christ^ndome been trained and exercised: glorying no less in the happy and
successive management thereof, than in subduing the potent'st and
flourishing'st Kingdoms.

Secondly, for the Contemplative, which participates more of the mind: I could
wish all Gentlemen (as they claim a prerogative in height of blood) so to
erect their Contemplations above the Sphere of these lower and inferior
Mortals, whose cogitations pressed down with rubbish and refuse of earthly
preferments, cannot distinguish light from darkness: that they may imagine (as
in truth they ought) that whatsoever is fought besides God, Blos:
may possess the mind, but cannot satisfy it. Now, of all exercises of
Devotion, I must principally commend Prayer; being (as one excellently notes)
to be numbered amongst the chiefest and choicest works of Charity. For by
Prayer are dug forth those treasures, which faith beholds in the Gospel:
Christ. lib. de orand. Deo.
being Goas Sacrifice, Man's Solace, and the Devils scourge. For the time and
place of Prayer, I will not insist much of it; howsoever, diverse more curiously
than profitably, precisely than wisely, have quarrelled about the place:
excluding withal, some places as unfit for Prayer. But in a word, for the
place of Prayer or Devotion, this shall be my conclusion; as there is no place
exempted from tempting, so there is no place exempted from praying: and for the
time, as we are continually assaulted, so are we exhorted to pray
continually, Luke 21.36. Romans 12.11, 12. Ephesians. 6.18, 19. Col. 4.2, 3. Psalm.
25.7. Eccl. 12.1.
that we may be the better provided to resist those temptations which are
usually suggested. Amongst those many devout and divine Prayers commended to
Youth, none more needful or effectual than that of the Psalmist; Remember not
the sins of my youth. Nor any Memorial more powerful, than that of the
Preacher; Remember thy Creator in the days of thy youth. For by the Latter are
we put in mind of him, whose grace is to preserve us from sin; and by the
Former to call on him, whose mercy it is to forgive sin.

Now Gentlemen, have I composed and perfected what I purposed touching my first
Observance, entitled Youth. Wherein I have enlarged my self so much the more
for two principal respects: The One, lest by being unprovided you should fly
away naked (as the young man in the Gospel) wanting sufficient instruction to
inform your weaker understandings: which moved me to amplify each particular
Subject with variety of Moral reading; because I knew how such discourse would
relish more pleasantly to a Young-mans palate, than graver or more serious
matter. The other, lest wanting a convenient foundation to work on, the maine
building might shrink. Now, this I purposely framed for the Basis or
groundwork, the rest as Stories, which are made to beautify the foundation:
for in these Observances ensuing I intend brevity, yet with such perspicuity,
as the Gentleman to whom I write, may the better understand himself, and
direct his courses to that Bent of Honor whereto all generous actions are
directed.

THE ENGLISH GENTLEMAN.
Argument.
Of the diversity of Dispositions; The Disposition is not to be forced; What
Disposition is most generous.

DISPOSITION.
HOw different the Dispositions of men be, Observe. 2.
our usual converse and commerce with men may sufficiently instruct us. Yea
even in Youth, where the first Seeds of inclination are sown, we shall observe
such Diversity, as the grasse-piles of the earth may scarce vie with them for
variety, The diversity of Dispositions.
the stars or sands for multiplicity. Where you shall note some Youths of
such well-affected or tempered Dispositions, as they show undoubted arguments of
future good: and these are such, whose Natures are rather to be cherished than
chastised, cockered than curbed: for the least distaste which their guardian or
Tutor can show, works such impression in them, as they could willingly choose
rather to suffer his correction than his distaste. Others there be, whose
perverse and refractory Natures are not to be dealt with all upon equal
terms: and these are the very Antipodes to those well-tempered Dispositions
which we spoke of before: for they ever walk in a contrary path, directly
opposite to such, whose native Affability gains them love by an inbred
courtesy. These ( Diogenes-like) are ever entering the Temple, when others go
forth; Exeunti intro, miranti exeo. vid. Laert.
or repairing to the Market, when others come from it. And these must taste of
sharper censure* for Lenity will not prevail, therefore rigor must. The like
may be observed even in their Dispositions to Learning: where we shall find
Some apt enough to get, and as apt to forget: Others more solid; though for
the present ^low, yet more retentive. And these, as with hardness they get it,
so hardly will they lose it; for their difficulty in gaining, is supplied by a
facility in retaining. Likewise, as the principal works or faculties of our
understanding be three; first to Discourse; secondly, to Distinguish; thirdly,
to Choose: we shall also observe an admirbale difference in these, in respect
of their distinct Qualities. Where we shall find one as apt to discourse, as
unable to distinguish or choose; and such an one has all his judgment in his
tongue. Another of greater depth and maturer judgment than the former, more
able to distinguish or choose, than apt to discourse: for though he want
facility of utterance (which want is generally supplied by more excellent
gifts) yet so quick and subtle is the piercing eye of his judgment, as he is
no less prompt in conceiving, than slow in uttering.

Now to treat of the Dispositions of men's minds; it is strange to see what
difference appears in them, (even by natural and infusive motion.) Rome
brought forth the Pisoes for frugalitie, the Metelli for piety, the Appij for
austeritie, the Manlij for affability, the Lelij for wisdom, and the
Publicolae for courtesy. Which conditions appeared so lineally in their
Successors, as they seemed representers of their Ancestors natures, as well
as features. Yet what reason can be given touching these distinct affections,
save those prime seeds sown in them by Nature, which produce not only these
Dispositions in themselves, but dilate or propagate their effects in others, to
wit, those in whom they have stamped a likeness both of image and condition.

A probable judgment of our Dispositions, drawn from the delights we affect,
or company we frequent.
Now to collect or gather, how men are affected, there is no course more direct,
or in it self less erring, than to observe what delights they affect, or what
company they frequent. Augustus being at a combat, discerned the inclinations
of his two daughters, Iulia and Livia, by the company which frequented them:
for grave Senators talk with Livia, but riotous persons with Iulia. Truth is,
we shall ever see persons of like condition love to consort together; for their
quality or equality rather of Disposition moves a desire of familiarity one
with another. Likewise for delights, we shall ever observe such, whose lighter
Dispositions affect Liberty, to be frequenters of public meetings, Agents in
May-games, professed lovers of all sensual pleasures. That Roman Curtezan
Sempronia, was noted for her singing, Salust.
sporting and dancing, wherein she labored to show more art than became a
modest woman, Passion the best discoverer of our Disposition.
with other motives of Licentiousness. But in my opinion, there is no one
means to sift out the Disposition of man better, than by noting how he bears
himself in passion, which is of that violence, as many times it discovers him
though his purpose was to walk never so covertly from the eye of popular
observance. Should we have recourse to the lives of sundry Tyrants, whose
outward appearance or semblance promised much goodness: we might find
sufficient matter to confirm this argument. Some whereof (as Tiberius) so
commonly carried and covered their plots, as none could dive into their
thoughts, pretending ever most smoothness, Discovery of Dispositions in
distempers.
when they intended a tempest. Yet if at any time (as it befell many times)
their Spirits became netled or incensed; so far did passion transport them,
as they apparently expressed their Natures, without further Character. Other
discoveries may be made, and those are the manifestest of all, Non habet
ulterius quod nostris potibus addat Posteritas --
how men are affected or disposed when they are least themselves: and this is
(with grief I speak it, for too highly does Albion labor of it) when Man,
losing indeed that Name, at least his Nature, becomes estranged from the use of
reason, Habebitur a^iquando ^br^etatt ho^or, and platimum meri cepisse, virtus
erit. Sen. Non invenit ^rimen, etiam viri fortis accipit nomen, tanto nequior,
quanto sub po^^ulo invi^^^er Aug. de verb. Apost. Ser. 4.
by drowning his understanding with drunkenness. In high Germany, the parents
of such children as should be married, will see those which should be their
sons in law to be drunk before them, to see what Disposition they are of,
before they marry their children unto them. For they imagine, if they be
subject to any especial vice, they will then discover it, having no Lock to
keep it secret. Yet in this there are different humors which reign and rage
according to the Disposition of the person subject unto it: as we shall see one
lumpish without all conceit; another jocund and merry, apt for any conceit: one
weeping, as if some disastrous fortune had befallen him: another laughing, as
if some merry Scene were presented him. We read of two distinct conditions in
Philip and Alexander, when they were in drink, for the one showed his rage and
fury toward his foes, the other to his friends: the one whereof participaes
of more true generous spirit than the other. For as nothing can be imagined
more ignoble, than to triumph over our friend; so nothing relisheth of more
resolution, than to show our spirit (so it be upon equal terms, and without
braving) upon our Enemy. But would you indeed see the Disposition of Man truly
discovered, and the veil which kept him from sight, clear taken away? Then
come to him when he is advanced to place of honor or esteem; (for Pr^motions
declare what men be:) and there you shall find him pourtrayed to life.
Promotion held ever man's best Anatomy Lecture.
Galba was esteemed in the opinion of all, fit to govern till he did govern.
Many have an excellent gift of concealing and shadowing (which gives grace to
any picture) so long as they are obscure and private: but bring them to a place
of more eminent note, and give a luster to their obscurity, you shall view
them as perfectly, as if their Bodies were transparent, or windows were in
their bosoms. Here you shall see One unmeasurably haughty, scorning to
converse with these Groundlins (for so it pleases him to term his inferiors)
and bearing such a state, as if he were altered no less in person than place.
Another, not so proud as he is covetous: for no passion (as a learned
Schooleman affirms) is better known unto us than the coveting or desiring
passion, Thom. in 12. quaest. 26. c. 1.
which he calls Concupiscible: and such an one makes all his inferiors his
Sponges; and Ostridge-like can digest all metalls. Another sort there are,
whose well-tempered natures have brought them to that perfection, as the state
which they presently enjoy makes them no more proud than the loss of that they
possess would cast them down. Op^andaea est amissio honoris, quae facit nos
humilicres.
These ( Camillus-like) are neither with the opinion of Honor too highly
erected, nor with the conceit of Affliction too much dejected. As their
conceits are not heightened by possessing it, so they lose nothing of their own
proper height by forgoing it. These are so evenly poized, so nobly tempered, as
their opinion is not grounded on Title, nor their glory on popular esteem:
they are known to themselves, and that knowledge has instructed them so well
in the vanity of Earth, as their thoughts have taken flight, vowing not to
rest till they approach heaven. Pompey being cumbred with his Honor, exclaimed
to see Sylla's cruelty, being ignorant after what sort to behave himself in
the dignity he had; and cried out, O peril and danger never like to have end!
Such is the nature of Noble spirits, Nihil difficilius est quam been imperare.
Diocles. Dict.
as they admire not so much the dignity of the place to which they are
advanced, as they consider the burden which is on them imposed; laboring
rather how to behave themselves in their place, than arrogate glory to
themselves, by reason of their place. Neither are these sundry Dispositions
naturally ingraffed in men, merely produced from themselves, as the affections
or Dispositions of our minds do follow the temperature of our bodies; where
the Melancholy produces such, the Choleric, Phlegmatic, and Sanguine such
and such, according to Humors predominant in that body, whence these
affections are derived: but I say, these participate also of the Clime wherein
we are. For otherwise, how should our Observations appear good, which we
usually collect in the Survey of other Countries; noting certain vices to be
most entertained in some especial Provinces? L. Flor. lib. 3 cap. 6.
As Pride among the Babylonians, Envy among the Jews, Anger among the
Thebans, Covetousness among the Tyrians, Gluttony among the Sidonians,
Pyracie among the Cilicians, and Sorcerie among the Egyptians, to whom Caesar
gave great attention, as Alexander was delighted in the Brachmans. So as I say,
our Dispositions how different or consonant soever, do not only partake of us,
but even of the Air or temperature of Soil which bred us. Thus we see what
Diversity of Dispositions there is, and how diversely they are affected: Let us
now take a view of the Disposition it self, whether it may be forced or no,
from what it naturally affects.

The Disposition is not to be forced.
THe Philosopher says, that the Disposition may be removed, but hardly the
Habit. But I say those first Seeds of Disposition, as they are Primitives, can
hardly be made Privatives: being so inherent in the Subject, as they may be
moved, Objection.
but not removed. Not removed (objectest thou!) why? disposition can be of no
stronger reluctance than Nature; and we see how much she may be altered, yea,
clear removed from what she formerly appeared. For do we not (in the view of
humane frailty) observe how many excellent wits drained from the very
Quintessence of Nature, as apt in apprehending as expressing a conceit,
strangely darkened or dulled, as if they had been steeped in some Lethaean
slumber? Nay do we not (in this round Circumference of man) note diverse honest
and sincere Dispositions, whose gain seemed to be godliness, and whose glory
the profession of a good Conscience, wonderfully altered, becoming so corrupted
by the vain pomp or trifling trash of the world, as they prefer the puddle
before the pearl, forsaking Christ for the world? Do we not see how
uprightly some men have borne themselves all their time without stain or
blemish: Sancti Iuvenes, Satanici Senes.
being all their Youth virtuously affected, all their Middle-age charitably
disposed, yet in their Old Age miserably depraved? Again, do we not behold,
how many women, whose virgin-modesty and Nuptiall-continency promised much
glory to their age; even then, when the flower of Beauty seemed bloomelesse, so
as their very age might make them blameless, when their skin was seere, and
their flesh saplesse, their breath earthie, and their mouth toothlesse; then,
even then fell these unweldie Beldames to embrace folly, promising longer
continuance to Pleasure, than they could by all likelihood unto Nature? Now
tell me how happened this? Were not these at the first virtuously affected; if
Disposition then could not be forced, how came they altered? All these rivers
of Objections I can dry up with one beam, darting from the reflex of Nature.
Hieron. cont. Lucif.
Thou producest diverse instances to confirm this assertion, That Dispositions
are to be forced from what they were naturally affected unto. Resolution.
Whereto I answer, That Dispositions in some are resembled (and not improperly)
unto a Beam clothed or shadowed with a cloud; which (as we see) shows his
light sometimes sooner, sometimes later: Or (as by a more proper Allusion may
seem illustrated) may be resembled to the first Vt^a ^^^^nibus nascuntur
^^geni^a, ita ab exiguis (...) ingenia.

Quibus^um evenit, ut cum primis floribus arboru^a; Hi enim citi^^ acc^lerius,
illi autem felicius ac^uberius gemmare so^ent and germinare Suet. Tran. in vit.
Ner.


Flourish in trees, which according to the nature or quality of the internal
pith, from whence life is diffused to the Branches, send forth their bloomes
and blossoms sooner or later. True it is you object, that to the outward
appearance, such men showed arguments of good Dispositions, for they were
esteemed men of approved Sanctity, making Conscience of what they did, and
walking blameless and unreproveable before all men: but what collect you
hence? That their Dispositions were sincerely good or pure, if Society had not
depraved them! No, this induction will not hold: it is the Evening crowns the
day. What could be imagined better, or more royally promising, than Nero's
Quinquennium? What excellent tokens of future goodness? What apparent
testimonies of a virtuous government? What infallible grounds of princely
policy, mixed with notable precepts of piety? Yet who knows not, how all the
vices of his Ancestors put together, seemed by a lineall descent to be
transferred on him: being the Pattern and Patron of all cruelty, the Author
and Actor of all villainy, the plotter and practiser of all impiety: so as, if
all the titles of cruelty were lost, they might be found in this Tyrant. How
then do you say, that his Disposition was naturally good, but became
afterward depraved, and corrupted? No, rather join with me and say, that
howsoever his Disposition seemed good during those five years, wherein he
dissembled with virtue, and concealed those many vices which he professed and
possessed afterward: yet indeed he was the same though not in show, yet in
heart. Only now the Cloud being dispersed, his tyrannous and inhumane nature
became more discovered, acting that in public, which he had long before
plotted in private. For howsoever our Dispositions may seem forced, from what
they naturally or originally were; it is but a Deception, they remain still
the same, though advice and assistance may sometimes prevail so much with
them, as for the time they seem to surcease and discontinue from their former
bent; but returning afresh, they will Antaeus-like, redouble their strength and
become more furious. For resolve me, and show what may be the effectuallest or
powerfullest means to remove Disposition, or alter Man most from what he may
seem naturally inclined unto. Can Honor? No; for that man, whose inclination
is subject to change for any exterior Title, is not to be ranked amongst
these generous spirits, with whom I am only here to converse. For these admire
Titles, and assume a kind of affected Majesty, to make their persons more
observed. But tell me, what are these whom Honor has thus transported,
Stupent in ^itulis and imaginibus.
expressing state with winks and nods, as if the whole posture of State
consisted in gesture, but mere Popin-jayes, who glory more in the painting or
varnish of Honor, than the true substance of it? And to speak truth (as I had
never fortune to dote much on an immerited Title, nor gloze with counterfeit
greatness) their Dispositions howsoever they seem to the vulgar eye changed,
they are nothing so: for their inclinations were ever arrogantly affected, so
as they no sooner became great, Been est cui Deus obtulit, Par^a, quod satis
est manu. Hor. Od. lib. 3. cap. 24.

Eccles. 5.15.


than they deblazoned their own thoughts. Can Riches? neither; for such, whose
imaginations are erected above earth, scorn to entertain discourse with ought
that may make them worse: all in the world being either fumus or funus, a
vanity or vexation, as the Preacher says. These conclude, that no Object less
than Heaven, can satisfy their eye; no treasure less than eternity, can
answer their desire; no pleasure save what has concurrence with felicity, can
gain them true delight. Now for these earthly Moles, who are ever digging,
till their graves be dug; Nugae and delirtum:
their Dispositions are of baser temper: for they can taste nothing but earthly
things. They measure not estate by competence, desiring only so much as may
suffice Nature, Quanto magis capit, tanto magis cupit: Quanto magis cupit,
tanto minus sapit.
but by Abundance; which fares with them as liquor with an Hydropticke man,
who, the more he drinks, the more he thirsts: so the more they have, the more
they crave; making their desires as endless, as their aims effectlesse; their
hopes as boundless, as their helps fruitless. When their mouths shall be
filled with gravel, and corruption shall enter those houses of clay, for which
so much Provision was stored, and so small a share in the end contented. Can
Acquaintance? No; for if company better me (by an internal grace working
secretly, yet effectually in me) my Disposition consented, before such good
fruit was produced: if it makes me worse, my Disposition, by consenting to
suggestion, induced me that I should be thereto moved. Yea generally, whosoever
is wel-disposed, will keep no man company, but either in hope to better him,
or to be bettered by him: as he, whose inclination is vicious and corrupt,
leaves the company he frequents ever worse than when he found them. For as a
Plutarch. in Moral.
troubled fountain yields impure water, so an infected soul vicious actions.
Can Travel? No; for, give me a man that has seen Iudasses Lantern at S.
Deninis's; the Ephesian Diana in the Louvre; the great Vessel at Heydleberge;
the Amphitheatre at Vlysmos; the Stables of the great Mogol; or the solemnities
of Mecha; yea all the memorable Monuments which the world can afford; or places
of delight to content his view; or learned Academies, to instruct and enrich
his knowledge; yet are not all these of power to alter the state or quality of
his Disposition: whence the sententious Flaccus; Horat. lib. 1. Epist. 11.
To pass the Sea some are inclinde,
To change their air, but not their mind.
No; should thou change air, and soil, and all, it were not in thy power to
change thy self: yet as soon thy self as thy Disposition, which ever
accompanies and attends thee, moving in thee a like or dislike, just as she is
affected.

What Disposition is most generous.
HAving thus proved, that the Disposition is not to be forced; we are now to
descend to discourse of the Noblest and most genorous Disposition: which we
intend to make known by certain infallible marks, which seldom err in their
attendance, being vowed Servants to such as are virtuously affected. The first
is Mildness; the second Munificence; the third Fortitude or Stoutnesse.

Mildness.
Mildness is a quality so inherent, or more properly individuate to a
Gentleman, as his affability will express him, were there no other means to
know him. He is so far from contemning the meanest, as his Countenance is
not so cheerful, as his Heart compassionate: though the one be no less
gracious in promising, than the other generous in his performing. He poizeth
the wrongs of the weakest, as if they were his own; and vows their redress
as his own. He is none of these surly Sirs, whose aim is to be capp'd and
congied; for such Gentility tastes too much of the Mushrom. You shall never see
one new stepped into Honor, but he expects more observance than an Ancient: for
though he be but new come from Mint, he knows how to look big, and show a
storm in his Brow. This Meekness admits of Humility to keep her company; in
whose sweet familiarity she so much glories, as she cannot enjoy her self
without her. And in very deed, there is no Ornament which may add more beauty
or true luster to a Gentleman, than to be humbly minded; being as low in
conceit, as he is high in place; with which virtue (like two kind Turtles in
one yoke) is Compassion (as I noted before) linked and coupled: Blutrch. in
vit. Pomp.
which Compassion has many times appeared in the renownedst and most glorious
Princes. When Pompeyes head was offered to Caesar, as a most grateful and
acceptable Present, it is reported that he washed the Head with tears of
princely compassion, and inflicted due punishment upon his Murderers. The like
is written of Titus, that Love and Darling of Mankind, in his taking and
destroying of Jerusalem, using these words; Joseph. in Hist. Iud.
I take God witness, I am not the cause of the destruction of this people, but
their sins: mixing his words with tears, and tempering his victorious
success with royal moderation. The like is related of Marcus Marcellus, In
vit. Marcel.
who having won the most flourishing City of Syracusa, stood upon the walls,
shedding plenty of tears before he shed any blood. And this Compassion
attracts ever unto it a kind of princely Majesty, gaining more love than any
other affection. For as proud Spirits, whose boundless ambition keeps them
ever a-float, till they sink down for altogether, use to triumph in others
miseries, till misery in the end find them out: so these, in a discreet
moderation or noble temper, will never assume more glory to themselves for any
exploit, how successively or prosperously soever managed. Such is the native
Modesty, wherewith they are endued, as their victories are never so numerous or
glorious, as to transport them above themselves. Which Modesty surely becomes
men of all Degrees, Comin.
but especially men of eminent and noble rank, to the end they may understand
and acknowledge in every action that there is a God, from whom all things
proceed and are derived.

Now as there is no glory equal to the command or soveraingtie over our own
passions; the conquest whereof makes Man an absolute Commander: so there is no
ornament which confers more true or native grace to one ennobled by place or
birth, than to put on the Spirit of Meekness, being expressly commanded, and
so highly commended of God, as the goodness thereof is confirmed by a promise;
The meek shall inherit the earth. Matthew. 5*5. Dan. 10.11. 1 King 21.27, 29.
So Humility is said to purchase Gods favor; for by that one virtue we become
to have a resemblance of him, whose glory it was to disesteeme all glory to
fashion us like unto himself. Now how precious may that exquisite Treasure
appear unto us, which conferres so much light on us, Deuteronomy. 8.16.
as by it we are brought to know our selves: being strangers, as it were, and
aliens unto our selves, till Humility took off the veil, and showed man his
Anatomy. So rare was this divine virtue, and so few her professors in former
time, especially amongst such whose titles had advanced them above inferior
rank, as the place which they held made them forget the mould whereof they
were made. An excellent historical demonstration we have hereof, Bid.
as we receive it from venerable Bede, who reports it thus: Aidan a religious
Bishop, weeping for King Osvinus, and demanded by the Kings Chaplain why he
wept; I know (said he) that the King shall not live long: for never before this
time have I seen an humble King. Which happened accordingly, for he was cruelly
murdered by Oswin. But (thanks to him who became humble for us) we have in
these declining days, among so many proud Simeons, many humble Joseph's, whose
chiefest honor they make it to abase themselves on earth, to add to their
complement of glory in heaven; so much sleighting the popular applause of men,
as their only aim is to have a sincere and blameless conscience in them, to
witness in that judicial day for them. These have not (like those furies of
revenge) hearts full of wrath, but with all meekness and long-suffering will
rather endure an injury, than inflict too violent revenge, though they have
ready power to effect or perform it.

It is reported of Thomas Linacres, a learned Englishman, much commended for
his sanctity of life, that when he heard it read in the fifth Chapter of S.
Matt. Diligite inimicos; Bless them that curse you, etc. he brake forth into
these words, O amici, aut haec vera non sunt, aut nos Christiani non sumus! O
my friends, either these things are not true, or we are no Christians* True it
is indeed, that so strangely are some men affected, as they tender revenge
equally dear as their own life: their plots are how to circumvent, their
trains how to surprise, their whole consultations how to inflict due revenge,
where they have already conceived distaste. And these are those Bulls of
Basan, who rome and rore, and when the prey falls, they seize on it, and
tear it with their teeth. On these men may that of the Poet be truly verified;
Nec leges metuunt, sed cedit viribus aequum, Maestaque victrici jura sub ense
jacent.
They fear no Laws, their wrath gives way to might,
And what they plot they act, be it wrong or right.


But how far the Disposition of these men may seem removed from the meek
and humble affected, whose only glory is to redress wrong, and render right
judgment unto all, there is none but may at the first sight apparently
discern. For these humble and mildly-affected spirits, stand so firm and
irremoveable, Omnia adversa exercitationes putant Seneca.
as no adversity can depresse them, no prosperity raise them above
themselves. For adversities, they account them with that excellent Moral,
nothing else than exercises to try them, not to tire them. And for
Prosperities, they receive them as they come; not so much admiring them, as
making a profitable use of them; and with a thankful remembrance of divine
Bounty, Cyprian.
blessing God for them. These are those impregnable rocks (as one aptly
compared them) subject to no piercing; those greene^ Bays in midst of hoarie
Winter, never fading; those fresh Springs in the Sandy Desert, never drying.
Whose many eminent virtues, as they deserve your imitation, (Gentlemen) so
especially their Meekness, being the first mark I took to distinguish true
Gentilitie.

Munificence.
THe second was Munificence; that is, to be of a bountiful Disposition,
open-handed, yet with some necessary caution, as to know what we give, and the
worth of that person to whom we give. For without these considerations, Bounty
may incline to profuseness, and Liberality to indiscretion. This moved that
Mirror of Roman Princes, the Emperor Titus, to keep a Book of the Names of
such, whose deserts had purchased them esteem, but had not as yet tasted of
his Bounty. So as, it is observed of him, that no day came over his head,
wherein he expressed not his princely Munificence to such, whose names he had
recorded: which, if at any time through more urgent occasions he neglected, he
would use these words to such as were about him: Amici, perdidimus diem. Sext.
Aurel. Justin.
O my friends, I have lost this day! No less was the bounty which Cyrus
expressed, first in words, but afterward in deeds, to such Soldiers as took
his part against his grandfather Astyages; that such as were Footmen, he would
make them Horsemen, and such as were Horsemen, he would make them ride in
their Chariots. It is said of the House of the Agrigentine Gillia, Cujus domus
quasi quaedam munificentiae officina crederetur.

Val. Max. l. 5.


that it seemed as if it had been a certain Storehouse or repository of all
Bounty. Such indeed was the Hospitality (esteemed in this Island formerly, one
of the apparantest signals of Gentry) which was shown to all such as made
recourse to that Mansion. And because I have accidentally fallen into this
Discourse, let me speak a word or two touching this neglect of Hospitality,
which may be observed in most places throughout this Kingdom. What the reason
may seem to be I know not, unless riot and prodigality, the very Gulfes
which swallow up much Gentry: why so many sumptuous and goodly Buildings,
whose fair Frontispice promise much comfort to the wearied Traveller, should
want their Masters. But surely I think, as Diogenes jested upon the Mindians,
for ma^king their gates larger than their City; bidding them take heed, lest
the City run out at the gates: so their Storehouse being made so strait, and
their Gates so broad, I much fear me, that Provision (the life of
Hospitality) has run out at their gates, leaving vast penurious houses apt
enough to receive, but unprovided to releeve. But indeed, the reason why this
defect of noble Hospitality has so generally possessed this Realm, is their
love to the Court. This moved his Highness of late, to declare his gracious
pleasure to our Gentry: that all persons of rank and quality should retire
from the City, and return to their Country; where they might bestow that on
Hospitality, which the liberty of the time; too much besotted with fashion and
foreign imitation, Paucos heavit aula, plures perdidit^ Sed and hos quoque
ipsos, quos heavit, perdidit. Faern. in Emb.
uses to disgorge on vanity. Their ancient Predecessors, whose chiefest glory
it was to releeve the hungry, refresh the thirsty, and give quiet repose to
the weary, are but accounted by these sweet-sented Humorists, for men of
rusticke condition, mere homespun fellows, whose rural life might seem to
derogate from the true worth of a Gentleman, whose only humor is to be
phantastically humorous. O the misery of error! how far has vanity carried
you astray (ye generous spirits) that you should esteem noble bounty, which
consists not so much in Bravery as Hospitality, boorish Rusticitie? How much
are you deluded by apish formalitie, as if the only quality of a Gentleman
were novell complement? or as if there were no good in man besides some
outlandish congie or salute? Alas Gentlemen, is this all that can be expected
at your hands? Must your Country which bred you, your friends who love you,
the poor, whose prayers or curses will attend you, be all deprived of their
hopes in you? No; rather return to your Houses, where you may best express
your Bounty, by entertaining into your bosom, that which perchance has been
long time estranged from you, Charity. For believe it (as assuredly ye shall
find it) that your sumptuous Banqueting, your midnight revelling, your
unseasonable rioting, your phantasticke attiring, your formal courting shall
witness against you in the day of revenge. For behold the Lord commands, and
he will smite the great house with breache^, and the little house with clefts.
Amos 6.11.
Return therefore before the evil day come: distribute to the Necessity of
the Saints, become good Dispensers of what you have received, that ye may
gain your selves grace in the high Court of Heaven. But as for ye that put
far away the evil day, and approach to the Seat of iniquity; Amos 6.3, 5, 7.
Ye that sing to the sound of the Vi^ll, and invent your selves instruments of
Music, ye shall go captive with the first that go captive. O misery! that
Man with so beauteous an Image adorned, with such exquisite ornaments of Art
and Nature accomplished, to so high a rank above others advanced, should
delude himself so with the shade of vanity, as to become forgetful of his
chiefest glory! But experience (I doubt not) will unseale those eyes which
lightness and folly have blinded; till which happy discovery of Youthful
error, I leave them, and return to my former Discourse.

You may perceive now, how requisite Bounty is for a Gentleman, being an
especial mark (as I observed before) whereby we may discern him. Amongst
sundry other Blessings conferred by God on Solomon, this was not one of the
least, in that he gave him a large heart: Not only abundance of substance and
treasure to possess, but a large heart to dispose. Indeed this is a rare
virtue: worldlings there are, who possess much, but they enjoy little,
becoming subject to that which they should command. The difference betwixt the
poor wanting, Nihil liberale, quod non idem est justum Cic.
and rich not using, is by these two expressed; the one Carendo, the other Non
fruendo. Of which two, the greater misery is the latter; for he slaves himself
to the unworthiest Servitude, being a Servant to obey, where he should be a
Master to command. To conclude this point in a word; if we ought to show such
contempt to all earthly substance as hardly to entertain it, Calvin. Instit.
lib. 3. cap. 23.
much less affect it; let us make it a benefit, let us show humanity in it,
by making choice of the poor, on whom we may bestow it. This which we waste in
rioting, might save many from famishing: let us bestow therefore less of our
own backs, that we may cloth them; less of our own bellies, that we may feed
them; less of our own palats, that we may refresh them. For that is the best
and noblest bounty, when our Liberality is on such bestowed, by whom there is
no hope that it should be required.

Fortitude.
THe third and last mark whereby a true generous Disposition is distinguished,
is Fortitude or sloutnesse: being indeed the argument of a prepared or composed
mind, which is not to be dismayed or disturbed by any sharp or adverse thing,
how cross or contrary soever it come. Excellently is this Fortitude defined by
the Stoics, terming it a virtue which stands ever in defense of equity: not
doing, but repelling an injury. Those Heirs of true Honor, who are possessed
of this virtue, dare oppose themselves to all occurrents in defense of
reputation; preferring death before servitude and dishonor. If at any time (as
many times such immerited censures occur) they die for virtues cause, they
meet death with a cheerful countenance; they put not on a childish fear,
like that Bandite in Genoa, who, condemned to die, and carried to the place of
execution, trembled so exceedingly, that he had two men to support him all the
way, Maldon. in 26. Matt. cap. 1.
and yet he shivered extremely. Or (as Maldonatu^^ relates) how he heard of
those which saw a strongman at Paris condemned to death, Arist lib. 7. de Hist
animal c. 16. and l 3. de part. anim. c. 5.
to sweat blood for very fear: proving out of Aristotle, that this effect may
be natural. But these whose generous spirits scorn such baseness, never saw
that enterprise which they durst not attempt, nor that death which could amate
them; where Honor grounded on Virtue, without which there is no true Honor,
moved them either to attempt or suffer.

But now to wipe off certain aspersions laid on valor or fortitude: we are
not to admit of all daring Spirits to be men of this rank: For such, whose
Ambition excites them to attempt unlawful things; as to depose those whom they
ought to serve, or lay violent hand on those whom loyal fidelity bids them
obey; opposing themselves to all dangers to obtain their purpose, are not to
be termed valiant or resolute, but seditious and dissolute. For unless the
enterprise be honest which they take in hand, be their Spirits never so
resolute, Fort is non est qui in arenam descendendo, dimicare audet, sed qui
nocendi cansam secum discutis, priusquam auder. 1. Macchab. 24.
or their minds prepared, it is rashness, but not valor, having their actions
ever suited by dishonor. Sometimes likewise the enterprise may be good and
honest; the cause for which they encounter with danger, virtuous; the Agents in
their enterprise courageous; yet the issue taste more of despair than valor.
Example hereof we have in the Macchabees, in the death of Razis one of the
Elders of Jerusalem, a lover of the City, and a man of very good report; which
for his love was called a Father of the Jews. One, who did offer to spend his
body and life with all constancy for the religion of the Jews; yet being
ready to be taken on every side, through the fury of Nicanor, who so eagerly
assaulted and hotly pursued him, he fell on his Sword: yea, when his blood was
utterly gone, he took out his own bowels with both his hands, and threw them
upon the people, calling upon the Lord of life and spirit, that he would
restore them again unto him; And thus he died. Whence Augustine, that devout
Father and most excellent light of the Church, concludes, that this was done
magne, non been, more resolutely than rightly: for he was not to lay violent
hand upon himself, though there were no hope of safety, but imminent danger
in respect of the furious and bloody enemy.

Now this Fortitude, whereof we here discourse, as it is grounded upon a just
foundation, so it never ends in baseness or rashness: in Baseness, as in not
daring; in Rashness, as in too inconsiderately attempting. It is so far from
any act of Despair, as it hopes so long as it breathes; for to despair, is to
entertain the extremest act of fear, which is far from her condition. The
proper aim or end whereto the actions of true resolution are directed. Cicero.
Boet.
Now to discourse of the aim or end whereto all her actions are directed: it
is not any peculiar interest which moves true resolution so much as public
good. For such, whose aims are glorious, are ever conversant in redressing
wrongs, ministering comfort both by advice and assistance to such, whose
weakness has felt the power of greatness. For as in every good man there is
naturally implanted a desire of goodness; so in every valiant man there is a
native desire to gain honor by redressing injuries: yea, admit to honor were
to accrue unto him by endeavoring to right or releeve such as are distressed,
yet for virtues sake (which is a sufficient reward to her self) he undertakes
the task. In Lups. treatise of Charity.
For Charity, being a good and a gracious effect of the Soul, whereby man's
heart has no fancy to esteem, value or prize any thing in this wide world
beside or before the care and study of God, so inflameth a well-disposed man,
as his desire is only to do good, whereby he might in so doing glorify God,
the beginner and accomplisher of all good.

Now there are many motives to excite men to valor, as may be collected from
Histories properly and profitably tending to this purpose. But the usuallest
motive is Anger, being indeed the Whetstone of Fortitude: Or the Princes
presence; Cic. 4. lib. Tusc. quaest.
as we read of the Macedonians, who being once overcome in battle by their
enemies, thought the only remedy to animate their Soldiers, was to carry
Philip being then a child in a cradle to the field; thereby stirring up the
zeal of loyal and faithful Subjects to defend their innocent Prince: and
this Whetstone so sharpened their swords, that indeed they won the battle. Or
the renown of Ancestors; as the people of Tangia in America always in their
wars carried the bones and relics of their memorable predecessors, to
encourage their Soldiers with the memory of them, to avoid and eschew all
timiditie. So Tacitus reports how the Germans inflame their spirits to
resolution and valor, by singing the memorable acts of Hercules. Or the sound
of warlike alarmes; as the Nairians in India stir up their people to battle,
by hanging at the pummels of their swords certain plates to make a noise, to
animate and incense them to war. So Alexander the great hearing Antigenida
that excellent Trumpetter sound his trumpet to battle, was stirred up in such
sort to fight, that his very friends were not secure from blows which stood
about him. Or the passionate effects of Music; as S. Basil recounteth one
Timothy to be so excellent in Music, that if he used a sharp and severe
harmony, he stirred up men to anger, and presently by changing his note to a
more remiss and effeminate strain, he moved them to peace: both which effects
he once produced in Alexander the great at a banquet. Or Conceit of the
Generals discipline and magnanimity; As may appear by the victorious Swede,
his late prosperous attempts, and numerous conquests: whose martial
discipline, and personal valor, has (no doubt) begot in his Soldiers an
emulation of honor. Or opinion of the enemies cruelty; as in the year 1562.
appeared in Agria a City in Hungaria, engirt with long siege by Mahomet Bassa
with an Army of Turks amounting to threescore thousand, and battered with
sixty Cannons; in the City were only two thousand Hungarians, who with
incredible valor repelled thirteen most terrible assaults: resolved to endure
famine, or any extremity soever, rather than yield to their truculent and
insatiable desires. Wherefore they never came to parley of truce, but to answer
their Enemies fury with Cannons and Calivers. At last, when the Bassa had
offered them many favors, they hung over the wall a Coffin, covered with
black, betwixt two spears, signifying thereby, that in that City they would
be buried. So the Turks despaired of success, and the Hungarians, to their
eternal glory and renown, prevailed: preserving themselves and their City,
whose liberty they defended from the Turks slaverie.

And hence I might take occasion to advance with due deserved praise the
glorious memory of such, whose resolution has had no other aim, than defense
of the Truth against those professed foes of Christendom; who have already
taken possession of the Holy Land, The prudent observation of Cortugal, one of
the Turkish Princes, in his O^ation persuasive to his Lord to besi^ge Rhodes,
was this Christimus occasus discord^s intesti^^^ correboratur.
making the Keepers of that Sacred Sepulcher (the most blessed Monument that
ere was erected on Earth) to pay them tribute, whose high-swelling pride is
grown to that height, as their Empire seems to labor with her own
greatness. O what tender Christian eye can behold these woeful distractions in
Christendom, and abstain from tears? To see Christian armed against
Christian, while the common foe of Christians laughs at these divisions, taking
advantage of the time to enlarge his Dominions. O who can endure to see Pagans
and Infidels plant, where the blessed feet of our Savior once trod? To hear
Mahomet called upon, where Christ once taught? To have them usurp and profane
those Temples, where he once preached? To rear them Altars for their false
Prophets, where those true Prophets of God once prophesied? To see Mahomets
Oratorie erected, where the Jewish Temple was once seated? To behold his Palace
in the Cathedral Church of SAN SOPHIA, now become his Seraglia; where stood
once the High-Altar or Communion Table, and Patriarchall Throne, now made, and
so used as a Turkish Moschie, with unclean hands polluted, by unbeleeving
hearts possessed? alas for sorrow! that Soveraigntie should so much blind, or
desire of command bear so much sway, Sitting
that Christ (...).
Enemy should get advantage by our discord. O thrice happy (and may it be
soon so happy) were the state of Christendom, if all civil and unnatural
broiles (for unnatural it is for Christian to shed Christians blood) were
appeased and ended! that they with one consent might assail this common
Enemy, marching even to Constantinople (once the glorious seat of a victorious
Emperor) crying with one voice, Down with it, Down with it even to the
ground. And easily might this be achieved, if Christendom would join mind
with might, that this Uncircumcised Philistine might be discomfited, till
which time Christendom can never be secured.

But to conclude this Discourse, (for I fear I have enlarged my self too much
in my digression;) as Fortitude is that noble mark which gives a Gentleman
his true character, showing resolution as well in suffering, as acting: my
exhortation to our English Gentry shall be, that they so demean themselves,
that their Country may be honored by them, true worth expressed in them, and
their Predecessors virtues seconded, if not surpassed by them.

THE ENGLISH GENTLEMAN.
Argument.
What Education is; The effects of it. How a Gentleman may be best enabled by
it.

EDVCATION.
EDucation is the Seasoner or instructesse of Youth, Observe. 3. What Education
is. Knowledge.
in principles of Knowledge, Discourse, and Action. Of all inferior
knowledges, none more behoovefull than the knowledge of Mans-selfe; of all
superior, none more useful nor divinely fruitful than the knowledge of God,
who for Man gave himself. By view had of the One, Man shall have a sight of
his misery; by view had to the Other, Man shall find cause to admire Gods
Mercy. Hence that hony-tongued Father desired that his Knowledge might extend
it self only to these two: To know God; To know himself; Now as the beauty
and splendour of the Sun is best discerned by his Beams; Vt cognoscam te; ut
erg^^scam me. Bern. Knowledge of God.
so is the greatness of God best apprehended by his Works. Whereof I may say,
as Simonides did of God, that when he had required but one day to resolve what
God was: when the day was expired, he was more unable to answer, than at the
first. So as Hermes terms the Sunne-beames of God to be his Works and
Miracles; the Sunbeams of the World to be the variety of forms and features;
and the Sunne-beames of Man, diversity of Arts and Sciences.

TOuching Knowledge, it is in God to know all things; in Man to know some
things; in Beasts to know nothing. As we cannot extend to the distinct
knowledge of the Creator, so let us extend our Knowledge above the reach of the
inferiour'st of Gods creatures. It is written of Alcibiades, that he was
skillful in all things, in all exercises: so that he seemed in every Nation to
obtain the conquest, in what prize or mastery soever he took in hand. (...).
Luke. 10.42.
It is not for us to labor the attaining of such exactness: Vnum est
necessarium: One only Knowledge transcends all others, the attaining whereof
makes the knower happy; as the want of it makes Man, how Knowing soever in all
other Sciences, most unhappy. For what skills it to have knowledge in reasoning
of high and deep points concerning the blessed Trinity, and want Charity,
whereby we offend the Trinity? Let us therefore esteem it the Crown of our
Hope, to attain to the excellent and incomparable knowledge of him who made
us, whose blood did save us, Knowledge of Man's self.
and whose holy Spirit daily and hourly shields and shadows us. Next is to
know himself; an excellent knowledge grounded on true Humility: where Man
shall find how many things he is ignorant of; and of these things which he
knows, how far short he comes of that perfection which is required of him, it
was a saying of a grave Philosopher, By learning always something, (...).
Multum semper discens, senesco. Socrat.
I grow old. Now how fruitfully were our time from Infancy to Youth, from
Youth to Manhood, from Manhood to Old Age employed, if our aims were so to
direct our knowledge, that we might attain the understanding and knowledge of
our selves. Then would not self-conceit transport us, nor opinion of our own
knowledge entrance us, but we would divinely conclude; we have reaped more
spiritual profit by dis-esteeme, than selfe-esteeme. Alphonsus of Arragon
answered an Orator, Panorm. de reb. gest. Alphon. lib. 1.
who had recited a long Panegyricall Oration in his praise: If that thou have
said consent with truth, I thank God for it; If not, I pray God grant me grace
that I may do it. The like temper I could wish in each Gentleman, who in
respect of means more than merit, shall many times hear himself approved and
applauded by such Tame-beasts or glozing Sycophants, who feed on the Prodigalls
trencher. Let not applause so much transport, Prodigi praed^a, parasiti praeda.
or praise so far remove man from himself, as to become (by the vain blast
of others breath) forgetful of himself. Humbly esteemed he of his knowledge,
who concluded: This I only know, that I know nothing. Socrat.
Nothing in respect of that I should know; Nothing in respect of that which is
enjoined me to know; Nothing in respect of others who know far more than ere
I may know. For (says Bernard) how can thou possibly be a proficient,
Quomodo proficis, sitam tibi sufficis? Bern.
if thou think thy self already sufficient? But alas, how far has
selfe-opinion estranged Man from knowledge of himself; who rather than he will
be found ignorant in any thing, will assume upon him a supposed knowledge in
every thing? He will rather lie upon his knowledge, than seem defective in
any knowledge. Whence one speaking of the knowledge of Man's self, most
divinely concludes; Nosce teipsum first descended from Heaven to Earth, is now
ascended from Earth to Heaven, Aug. in S^liloq. cap. 29.
leaving miserable Man admiring his own feature, as if he were his own Maker.
And whence proceeds this, but because he has ascended unto that Mountain,
to which the first Angel ascended, and as a Devil descended? whereas, if he
duly considered those many imperfections whereto he is engaged; those many
debts and bills of errors, which, as yet, are undischarged; that natural or
original sin wherein he was conceived; and that actual sin wherewith he
is daily polluted; he would questionless conclude; What Is man whose first
conception's misery, Bern. Medit. cap. 3.

Birth baine, life pain, and death necessity?


Which divine Meditation is of power to subdue the whole Man of Sin,
Plutarch. in l. de virt. amor. Motus animae (says S. Aug.) quos Graeci (...)
appellant. Ex Lati^is quida^ ( ut Cic. 3. Tus.) Perturbationes dixerunt, alii
affectiones, alii affectus, alii expr^ssas passiones vocav^runt. Damascen
defines other affections of the mind.

Motio sensualis appetivae virtutis, ob boni vei mali imaginationem. l. 2. de
fid. orthodox. c. 22. Zeno ap. Cic. in 4. Tusc. ita definit: Perturbatio seu
(...) aversa recta ratione contra naturam animi commotio. In vit. Anselmi.


and bring him under the yoke of obedience, by an incessant consideration had
of Gods mercy, and man's misery; which may produce in him a more blessed effect,
by extenuating and humbling himself, both in respect of the Substance or
matter of his creation, and in respect of the irregenerate course of his
conversation: as also in contemplating the ineffable mercy of the Almighty;
whose grace it is, that directs miserable man, and reduces him from erring;
whose compassion it is, that raises him from falling; and whose tender mercy
it is, that supporteth him in his rising. But in my conceit, there is no one
motive more effectual, or divinely powerful, to bring us to a true and
perfect knowledge of our selves, than to observe with what passions or
perturbations we are encountered; especially when through immoderate excess,
we are in the cup of forgetfulness drowned. Which Saint Basil confirms,
saying: That passions rise up in a drunken man, like a Swarm of Bees buzzing
on every side. Which passions are not such as are prevented by reason, and
directed by virtue: for these are not altogether to be extinguished, as the
Stoics supposed, but to be provoked as movers of virtue, as Plutarch
teaches. But rather such distempered or indisposed affections as are suggested
to Man by his implacable Enemies: laboring to undermine and ruin the glorious
palace of his deare-bought soul. Upon which affections seriously to meditate,
were to expel all selfe-conceited or opinionate arrogance; to become humble in
our own thoughts: concluding, that our knowledge is ignornet, our strength
weakness, and our wisdom folishnesse. Being (as one well observes) like a
Spring-locke, ready of our selves to shut, but not to open; apter to shut grace
from us, than to receive grace into us: or like stones upon the top of a hill,
by reason of our heavy and earthy nature, ready enough to tumble down, but
without the help or motion of another, slow enough to mount up. Saint Anselme
walking abroad in the field, and beholding a Shepherds Boy, who had caught a
Bird, and tied a stone to her leg with a thread; and ever as the Bird mounted,
the stone haled her back again. The venerable old man moved with this sight,
fell a weeping pitifully, lamenting the miserable condition of Men, who
endeavoring to ascend up to heaven by Contemplation, are detained by the
passions of the flesh; which enforce the soul to lie there like a Beast, and
not soar to heaven by that proper motion, which was first gives her by her
Creator. Now to conclude this first point, (by making a fruitful use or
application of what has been already spoken) I could wish Young Gentlemen,
whose aims, perchance, are addressed to purchase rather the light freight of
foreign fashions, than the precious gemme of Selfe-knowledge, to be otherwise
minded, by conforming themselves to his Vt a Christo accepimus beneficium,
praesiemus Christiani officium. praebendomemoris Christi hospicium. Erige
oculum in humilitatis speculum, ejus enim exemplum, speciosii Deo praeparabit
templum. Quantumcum. que te ^cejeceris, humilior non eris Christo. Hieron. 1 Timothy 6.4.
pattern and example, who though he knew all things, boasted not of his
knowledge, but abased himself to make us rich in all spiritual knowledge. As
for such as are puffed up and know nothing, but dote about questions and strife
of words, whereof comes envy, strife, railings, evil surmisings, perverse
disputings of men of corrupt minds, and destitute of the truth; we are taught
to withdraw our selves from them, because their fellowship is not of Light, but
Darkness; their knowledge no perfect nor sincere knowledge, but palpable
ignorance; their wisdom no sound nor substantial wisdom, but mere
foolishness. Their ways are not by the flocks of the Shepherds, but ragged
and uneven ways, leading their deluded followers headlong to all perdition.

A right profitable exhortation to all such as are drawn away by strange
doctrine.
Dear Christians, though I know this point to have been gravely and exactly
handled by many solid and learned Divines, whose holy oil has been
fruitfully employed in unmasking and discovering these dangerous Separatists,
who have sown the seed of pernicious doctrine in the ears of their weak
Auditory: yet I think it not amiss to press this exhortation further, lest
your speedy ruin prevent you of all hope hereafter. Beware of these
Pharisaicall Doctors, Sacerdotes nominamur, non sumus. Gr. Humilium sumus
Doctores, superbiae duces. ibid.

Nemo ^am impius est, quem Haereticus impietate non vincat.

S Hieron l. 7. in Esaiam. Si enim Haeretici sunt, Christiani ^sse non possunt.
Tertul. de praesor. cap. 37. Cypr. de Vnitate. Et Hier contra Luciferianos.


whose purity only consists in semblance and outward appearance; whose
doctrine has ever a taste of pride; whose counsels ever tend to faction; and
wose ways are ever Antipodes to the truth. These are called Prophets, but they
are none: being humble Teachers, but proud Doctors. Outwardly specious, but
inwardly vicious: having fair rindes, but false hearts: having a show of
godliness, but denying the power thereof. Come from among them and leave them,
for their ways lead to death, and their paths to destruction. Saint John would
not come in the Bath where the Heretic Cerinthus was. Another holy Man
(though most innocent) could endure to be accounted a Whoremaster, an unclean
person, and the like; but when one called him Heretic, he could bear no
longer. We have here (thanks to our Maker) more pleasant and delightful
Springs to retire to, than these troubled and corrupted Puddles, which taste of
nothing but pollution. Leave these, and love those. Where can there be Unity,
where there is no Conformity, Where a holy zeal or compassionate fervor, when
nothing is spoke but by the sons of thunder? Be ye wise unto salvation; may
godliness be your best knowledge; that, dissolved from this Tabernacle of
earth, ye may keep consort with the Angels in a blessed Harmony, because ye
resembled them on earth in mutual love and unity. And let this suffice for the
first branch, to wit, Knowledge. Now we will descend to the second, to wit,
Discourse, with some necessary Cautions very profitable, if put in use, to
direct (or rather limit) such, whose too liberal and profuse Speech oft-times
brings them within the censure of indiscretion.

Discourse.
DEmocritus calls Speech (...), the image of life, because it represents to man
the occurrents and passages of his life. Now forasmuch as through the subtility
of time, men use to shroud and conceal their thoughts, by expressing least
what they intend most; Speech becomes a dark Image, Laert. lib. 6
representing man not as he is, but as he seems. Diogenes wondered that men
would not buy earthen pots before they proved by the sound whether they were
whole or broken: yet they would be contented to buy men by their Speech. The
old proverb used by Socrates, and approved by ancient Philosophers, was this:
Loquere ut te videam. Subtle purposes were not then shadowed or gilded with
fair pretenses; but so s^mple were their meanings, as they needed no words of
Art (merely invented to delude) nor the gaudy ornaments of persuasive Oratory
to color them. Two especial errors incident to subjects of Discourse;
But to propose some necessary cautions worthy observation of the Generous in
their Discourse; I would have Young Gentlemen to beware especially of two
errors, usually occurring in Subjects of this Nature; Affectation, Imitation:
whereof Gentlemen are seriously cautioned Affectation. S^^^ ser. 34.
Affectation, and Imitation: The one for the most part arising from our selves,
the other from too ardent a desire of imitating others.

The first sort generally, are so miserably enamoured of words, as they little
care for substance. These are ever drawing a Leaden sword out of a gilded
sheath; and will not lose a dram of Rhetoric for a pound of Reason: having,
as Theocritus said of Anaximenes, a flood of words, but a drop of reason. These
are ever talking, till their Mint of words fail them, and then of necessity
they turn silent. These will lay themselves open to their professed'st enemy,
so they may gain applause, and get the opinion of good speakers, being the
only mark they shoot at. And indeed, these seldom hurt others, but many
times themselves: for these are those fools, which carry their Hearts in their
Mouths; and far from those wise men, which carry their Mouths in their
Hearts. Though discretion of Speech be more than Eloquence, these prefer a
little unseasoned Eloquence before the best temper of discretion. And thus much
of Affectation.

Imitation tastes no less of barrenness, Imitation.
than the other of phantasticknesse: though I must confess, this draws
nearer true Humility, in that it dis-values it self, to become a serious
observer and imitator of others. But great men especially cannot want
imitators, be the occasion never so unworthy imitation. If Caesar have an use
to hold his neck aside in his discourse or pleading, he shall have one to
affect and imitate that deformity. If Vespasian draw in his face in a purse,
(as if it went hard with him) he shall have one to represent it, as it were
naturally. And, which is of all others most intolerable, so habitually are
these grounded on Imitation, as they are conceited that nothing can so well
beseem them, as this uncomely fashion which they have observed; and now
imitate in others. Whereas if they would consider, how nothing forced may
appear with that decency, as when it is naturally descended, they would
ingenuously confess, that this apish or servile imitation detracts much from
the worth of man, who should subsist on himself, and not rely on others
postures. In brief, that Discourse is most generous, which is most genuine:
Nature may beseem that, which Imitation cannot; but to address our selves to
imitation of others, in that which even appears ridiculous in the persons
themselves, this infers gross stupidity. It is an excellent Lesson which a
holy Father gives to all Discoursers, Vin^. de vit. spirit. Ibid^ Cicero.
That they should rather be given to hear, than speak: and in matters of
argument, to assoile a needless question with silence. So as Cicero prefers
wisdom attired with ignorance, before speech attended by folly. Now because
the best of Discourse tends to persuasion, which is the life and efficacy of
Speech; and this persuasion consists on three parts; Pic. Mi^^nd. ad Hermel.
Life of the Speaker; Truth of the Subject; and Sobriety of Speech; of
necessity these three must be observed, ere we can have our Audience
sufficiently persuaded.

First, for the Life of the Speaker: Life of the Speaker.
if Speech (as we have said) be the Image of Life, why should not we conform
our Life to our Speech? We would be loath to be taxed of indiscretion in our
Speech; let us labor likewise to appear blameless and unreproveable in our
Life. For he that forgets to conform or fashion his Life to his Speech, his
Speech to his Life is like unto a man beholding his natural face in a glass:
I^m. 1.24.
for he beholds himself, and goes his way, and straightway forgets what
manner of man he was. Wherefore Gentlemen, of all others, ought to be most
respective of their conversation; for a little soil is a great blemish in
them, whose Education promises more than inferior men. Such men, for most
part, gain best authority or approbation in Discourse, who having been ever
observed to speak probably, and not of Subjects above the reach or pitch of
humane conceit. Neither can any thing disparage or lay a deeper aspersion upon
the face of Gentry, than to be taxed for fabulous relations. Especially
therefore should they inure themselves to probable discourses, being such as
may gain them an opinion of reputation, and be a means to confer more
authority on their discourse.

Truth of the Subject.
The second is the truth of the Subject, which must needs import much authority:
for how should we persuade, where the Subject admits no probability of Truth?
Therefore were it meet, that we make choice of what we relate, not
mainetaining whatsoever we hear by report, for undoubted Truth: for so should
we be made Equites Asiam, Iuven.
Knights of post to all Newes-mongers, being no less ready to swear, than
they to report. I have casually fallen into the company of some, whose only
relation was novelty: these would entertain no Discourse but foreign,
speaking as familiarly of the states of Princes, and their aims, as if they
had new crept from their Bosoms. But alas, how ridiculous are these in the
sight of judicious men, whose eyes are not so sealed, but they may easily
discern the arrogance of these, who affect rather to be admired than believed?
Excellent and proper for our present purpose, is that Fable of the Fowler and
the Bird: A Fowler having taken a Bird in his snare, was humbly entreated by
the Bird, that he would free her and give her liberty, and she would requite
this courtesy with three good Lessons; which (if duly observed) would profit
him more than her small body. Upon these conditions, the Fowler was contented
to release the poor Bird, provided, that the Lessons were so profitable and
useful unto him, as she pretended. Which, in brief, were these: Not to lose
a certainty for an incertainety: Not to give credit to things beyond
probability: Nor to grieve for that which is past remedy. These lessons
received, the Bird was forth with released: who being now at liberty, and
mounting aloft in the air, and triumphing in so blessed a freedom, chanted out
this merry Madrigall; Had thou known the wealth I had,
Thou would nere have let me gone,
For it would have made thee glad
To enjoy so rich a one.
In my bladder there is a stone,
Than which, never earth brought forth
One of more unvalued worth.


This the discontented Fowler had no sooner heard, than presently he repented
himself of so rare and inestimable a loss; which the nimble Bird perceiving,
thus replied: How apt's man for to forget
What might give him most content?
Thou at Liberty me set,
When I taught thee to repent
Nothing how the world went;
Nor what cross ere fell on thee,
If past hope of remedy.
But thou griev'st thou can not have
What thou can not get again:
Thus thou make thy self a slave
To thy self, and mourn'st in vain:
And long may thou so complain.
For my Lessons I was free,
Yet thou keep'st not one of three.


The perplexed Fowler inquisitive of knowing further pressed the Bird again;
asking her in what particular he had broken any of her Lessons? To whom the
Bird, flickring a little with her wings, as one that gloried in her unexpected
Liberty, answered; The Lessons which I gave thou sleight'st,
And weig'st them but a rush,
Or else thou would not lose one Bird
In hand, for two in Bush.
The next was, things incredible
Nere credited should be,
Yet thou beleev'st a precious stone
Worth worlds is hid in me.
The last, for things remediless
Thou never should complain,
And now when I am flowne from thee,
Thou wishest me again.


Many excellent Morals are shadowed in these Fables, which may deserve
observation of the pregnant'st and maturest conceit; not only in the Subject
or substance of the admonition, but in the person which gives this admonition.
Where the Poets smoothly, but tartly, used to introduce Beasts, Birds, and such
like creatures; admonishing man, the noblest of all creatures, of his duty. Yea
of Beasts, they made choice sometimes of the grossest and contemptiblest, as
the Ass, to express the want of consideration in Man; whose diviner parts
drowned in the Lees of sensual corruption, or carnal security, become
forgetful of that, for which they were principally created. It were easy to
enlarge this Subject with much variety of examples; but my purpose is, in
digressions, rather to touch than treat. We have handled two particulars,
effectually moving to persuasion; The Life of the Speaker, that it be
unreprovable; The Nature of the Subject whereof he speaks, that it be
probable.

Now we are to descend to the Third, which is Sobriety of Speech: an especial
Motive to attention, Sobriety of Speech.
being that which Cicero much commends, and for which Hortensius was much
commended. Albeit, arguing in Syla's cause, he was taxed by L. Torquatus, and
called for his too much effeminacy in apparel, as also for his too much action
of body, not only a Common Actor, but even a Dionysia, who was famous for her
moving and wanton gesture. To whom Hortensius answered, Call thou me
Dionysia? Sure I had rather be a Dionysia than as thou art, Gell in Noct. Atti^.
Torquatus: (...): one without Learning, barbarous and uncivil. Now this
Sobriety consists not only in the pronunciation of Speech, but Sober carriage
or deportment of the Body, which indeed adds no little luster to Discourse. I
have observed in some, a kind of carelessness in their form of speaking;
which, though it gain approbation in men of eminent rank, it would seem
harsh and contemptible in men of inferior condition. Others there are, who can
never enter into any set or serious Discourse, but they must play with a
button; or like some of our clodded Elders, who for helps to Discourse, milch
their gloves, as if they drained their Subject from such trifling action: and
these, me thinks, resemble our Common-Fidlers, who cannot play a stroke, to
gain a world, without motion or wagging of their head, as if they had rare
Crochets in their brain: but this mimicke and apish action keeps small
concurrence with the Postures of a Gentleman, whose Speech as it should be
free, native and generous; so should the action of his body admit of no
phantasticke imitation or servile affectation, which expresses little, save a
degenerate quality or disposition. Others I have likewise noted, to conclude
their Set speeches with winkes and nods, as if the understanding of the whole
world were confined to the circumference of their brain: and these usually
express more soliditie of conceit in the action of their bodies, than the
motion of their tongues. For oft-times, through want of matter (being gravelled
with an affected gravity) they are forced to trifle time in impertinencies, and
leave that matter untouched for which they came. I could wish that Young
Gentlemen would principally observe this Lesson, to be sober in arguments of
Discourse, but especially in reasoning: for there is nothing that darkeneth or
obscureth the Light of reason, Immoderate passion, in arguments of Discourse
and reasoning, to be avoided.
more than the boundless effects of Passion, which makes a man forgetful of
that he should say, no less than indiscreet in that he does say. But
especially in public assemblies, where difference of judgments oft-times
rack our speeches to a higher pin, ought deliberation to be had: for there we
cannot recall so soon what we have spoke amiss, as in private, where less
premeditation may afford matter of satisfaction. I approve likewise of his
opinion, who would have such, whose pleasant conceits minister content to the
hearer, if they mean to jest publicly, and force their wits to stem the
stream of the worlds judgments, (which, I say, are different, and therefore
more observant) that they use Pericles custom, who determining to speak any
thing publicly, desired the immortal gods, that no improvident word, should
pass his mouth. Certainly, whosoever he be that speaks and never meditates,
may be compared to the unclean beast, who digests and never ruminates.
Neither is it hard to gather this, Plutarch. in vit. Phoc.
even by their Discourse, which consists merely on ventosity, digressive and
impertinent, spending much wind to small purpose* resembling Pytheas that
foolish Orator, who would never leave his babbling. He that meditates before
he be prepared (says one) builds his house before stones be gathered. But
sure I am, he that discourses before he be provided, serves up his dishes
before they be seasoned. Albeit Tiberius be said to do better in any Oration
ex tempore, than premeditate.

Two powerful motives or persuasion Vehemency of Passion: and Instancie of
Demonstration.
Now I could reduce these discursive motives of Persuasion, to two general
heads: to wit, vehemency of Passion; or instancie of Demonstration: and first
for vehemency of Passion, here may we produce an apt and proper example.
There came a man to Demosthenes, desiring his help to defend his cause, and
told him how one had beaten him: Demosthenes answered him again, saying, I do
not believe this to be true: the Plaintiff then thrusting out his voice aloud,
said, What, has he not beaten me? Yes indeed (quoth Demosthenes) I believe it
now, for I hear the voice of a man that was beaten indeed. Whence appears,
what effects vehemency of Passion produces, expressing her wrongs so well in
words, as they enforce belief to the Hearer. Likewise, because examples
illustrate, though they do not prove; touching instancie of Demonstration, we
have an excellent one in that of Cato: who determined to strike the Senate and
Romans in fear, discoursed at large of the Carthaginian wars, aggravating
the danger by proper circumstances, which threatened the public State; and
instancin^ the ruin of many eminent and flourishing States occasioned by the
security of their people. But they objecting again, that Carthage was far
from them; He showed them green figs, implying thereby that Carthage was not
far distant, for otherwise the figs would have been dried and withered.
These kinds of Discourses, seconded by instance, are very moving and
persuasive; for as Speech is called the object of the ear, so is such kind of
instance an object to the eye, which must needs be more persuading, because
visibly appearing. But we have enlarged this Subject too much; wherefore to
draw in our sails, and apply particularly, what in general has been
discoursed: I could wish Young Gentlemen considerate in what they speak, Qualis
Sermo o^tenditur, talis and animus comprebatur. Isid.
because Speech is termed the Index of the Mind, and can best express him,
whether he taste of rind or pith. Now because moderation of the tongue is such
an absolute virtue, as it displayeth the wisdom of him that has it; whence
the wisest of all Princes, He that bridleth his tongue is most wise: I must
needs prefer discreet Silence before loquacitie, Est enim fidelitut^ silentio
merces. Hor. carm. l. 3. ad 2.
for in much speech there shall want no sin (says Solomon:) whereas Silence
is exempted from all Censure, so it be mixed with discretion. It is said, that
Pythagoras would desire two things of God (if the possibility thereof could
stand with the conservation of humane society:) that he might not speak, that
he might not eat: for by the one, he should prevent offense in discourse; by
the other, avoid surfeit through excess Whence the Poet; Silence is such a
soule-entrauncing charm,
It may do good, but can do little harm.


Albeit, that Pythagorian silence I cannot approve of, being many times
prejudicial to the public state: Silentio culps crescit. Isidor.
for by silence (says the Orator) is error approved, the luster of virtue
darkened, good and wholesome precepts suppressed; whereby Youth might be
instructed, private families directed, all inordinate motions corrected, and
the whole structure of this little world, Man, rectified and repaired. But
especially in divine professors and dispencers of the sacred word, Neque
Imperiale est libertatem dicendi negare, neque Sacerdotale quod sentiat, non
dicere, Ambr. epist. 17. Gr^g
is Silence most hurtful: for these should be shrill Trumpets in sounding and
delivering the sweet tidings of salvation, the tidings of peace and spiritual
consolation. The Pastor (says a blessed Father) by holding his peace,
doubtlesly kills sinners: that is, when he will not tell the house of Jacob
his sins, nor Israel her transgressions; but cries, peace, peace, when there
can be no true peace: for what peace unto the wicked, says the Lord? So as the
word of the Lord which came unto the Prophet, rouzed him up with this fearful
caveat: If thou give not the ungodly warning, he shall perish but his blood
will I require at thy hand. Ezekiel. 3.18.
With whom the Apostle harmoniously joyneth; 1 Cor. 9.16.
Woe unto me if I preach not the Gospel. For in that cause wherein the
faithful and painful Pastor is to please God, he is to slight the pleasure
or displeasure of men.

Quic ^uid non licet, Pastoris est prohibere ne fiat. Aug.
Now Gentlemen, ye whose Education has engaged you far in the expectance and
opinion of others; ye whose more generous breeding promises more than others;
ye whose nobler parts should distinguish you from others; let not those innate
seeds of Gentilitie first sown in you, as in a hopeful Seed-plot, be nipped
in their rising: which, that ye may the better prevent, exercise your selves
in noble discourses, not wanton or petulant, for these breed a dangerous
corruption even in the life and conversation of man. Ludo v. Viv. instruct.
Christ. Mul. Adeoque ut errorem cum lacte Nutricis sugunt. Cic. Vberalactis and
lucis, alent vos milites Supremi Ducis.
Quintilian would not have Nurses to be of an immodest or uncomely Speech,
adding this cause; Lest (says he) such manners, precepts, and discourses as
young children learns in their unriper years, remain so deeply rooted, as
they shall scarce ever be relinquished. Sure I am, that the first impressions,
whether good or evil, are most continuate, and with least difficulty
preserved. How necessary then is it, that an especial care or respect be had
herein, that choice be made of such, whose modest and blameless conversation
may tender you their breasts in your infancy, and furnish you with grave and
serious precepts in your minority? that your Knowledge may be fruitful; your
Discourses useful; and your actions in the eyes of the Almighty grateful. Of
which Action, we are now to speak; being the third Branch which we observed in
our definition of Education.

Action.
THat Education is the seasoner of our actions, we shall easily prove, if we
observe the rare and incredible effects derived from it: which, that we may
the better do, (...).
you are to know, that every Action has two handles; the One whereof consists
in contriving, the other in performing.

Cic. Sen. de tranq. anim.
In the former, we are to observe deliberation: whence the Orator; before we
take any thing in hand, we are to use a diligent or serious preparation; that
we may effect what we intend, and more prosperously succeed in that we take in
hand.

In the Latter, is diligence required; for what is premeditation or preparation
worth, if it be not by diligence seconded? When Annibal was a child and at his
fathers commandment, Appian. Alex.
he was brought into the place where he made sacrifice, and laying his hand
upon the Altar, swore, that so soon as he had any rule in the Commonwealth,
he would be a professed enemy to the Romans: nor did he infringe the vow
which his infancy had professed, but expressed when he came to be a man, what
he had protested to perform being a child. No Device unassayed, no Stratagem
uncontrived, no Labor neglected, no Task unattempted, which might confer
honor on Carthage, or express his mortal and implacable hate to Rome.

The admirable effects of Education.
In this one example, we shall see the strength of Education: for though Annibal
had no cause personally given him, to vow all hostility rather on Rome than
any other place; yet in respect he received his breeding from such as were
professed foes to the Romans, he seconds their hate, resolving to live and die
Romes enemy. Educatio and doctrina efficient mores. Seneca.
The like may be observed in the demeanor and conversation of men: in which
respect also, Education discovers her absolute power. For shall we not see
some, whose fair outsides promise assured arguments of singular worth, for
want of breeding mere painted Trunks, glorious features, yet shallow
Creatures? and whence comes this, but through want of that which makes man
accomplished, seconding Nature with such exquisite ornaments, as they enabled
him for all managements public or private? Licurgus brought two dogs, the
one savage, wild, and cruel; the other trained; to let the people see the
difference betwixt men brought up well, and badly: and withal to let them
understand the great good of keeping laws. Now what are these savage and wild
dogs, but resemblances of such, whose untrained Youth never received the
first impressions of a generous Education? Without learning Hercules becomes a
Tyrant, Darius insolent, Achilles inordinate.
These, as they were bred in the Mountains, so their conversation is
mountainous, their behavior harsh and furious, their condition distempered and
odious. Yet see the misery of custom! what delight these will take in actions
of incivility! nothing relisheth with them, save what they themselves affect;
nor can they affect ought worthy of approbation, for Education (which one calls
an early custom) has so far wrought with them, as they approve of naught
freely, affect naught truly, nor intend ought purposely, save what the
rudeness of Education has inured them to. These men's aims are so far from
attaining honor, as they partake of nothing which may so much as have the
least share in the purchase of Honor. Their minds are depressed, and as it
were earth-turned: for they aspire to nothing which may have being above them;
neither can they stoop any lower, for nothing can be under them. Nor can their
actions be noble, when their dispositions by a malevolent custom are grown so
despicable. Hence it is, Part divinain homine mersa. Sen. Lips.
that the Philosopher says; The divine part in such m^n is drowned, because
not accommodated to what it was first ordained. For how is it possible that
their affections should mount above the verge of earth, whose breeding and
being has been ever in earth? They (says Phavorinus) who suck sowes milk,
Phavorinus.
will love wallowing in the mire: inferring that as our Education has formed
us, so will we address our selves in the passage and current of our life. For
as Nature is too strong to be forced, so Education (being a second Nature)
has kept too long possession to be removed. She it is, that in some sort
mouldeth our actions and affections, framing us to her own bent; as if we
received all our discipline from her, by whom we were first nourished, and
since tutored.

But you may object, if Education express such power, as her first native
impressions cannot be suppressed; how did those men appear educated, whose
first breeding was in mountains, and afterward advanced to no less glory
than a Diadem! Such were Romulus and Remus; that translator of the Median
Empire to the Persians, victorious Cyrus; and he who from the Plow-stiles was
elected Emperor, to wit, Gordius. Surely their Education came far short of
that which is expected in the majesty of a Prince; yet what inimitable
presidents of renown were these, showing much resolution in conquering, Vid.
Tit. Live. Luc. Flor. Plut. in vit. Rom

Among Wolves was his Education, by Vultures his Inauguration.


and no less policy in retaining what they had conquered.

To begin with the first, to wit, Romulus; truth is, he laid the first
foundation of a glorious and flourishing State; yet as his Nurse was a Wolf,
he played the Wolf to his brother. He planted his Kingdom in blood, as his
infancy received food from her, whose native disposition affects blood.
Neither can I be persuaded, that his carriage could be so civil, as that his
first breeding left no relic nor relish of Barbarism; especially, when I
read what injuries or indignities were offered the Sabines by him, what
cruelties were acted upon his own Uncle, what impieties were committed upon
the neighboring Heards-men: Hi pastores pecorum, magis quam reges gentium.
the multitude whereof expressed how cruelly he was naturally addicted, and
that the first seeds which his savage Education had sown in him, could hardly
be suppressed. Touching Cyrus, no question his breeding was not altogether in
the Mountains, for he had recourse or resort (though unknown) to Astyages
Court, Xenophon in Cyropaedia.
where he received no small bettering in the progress of his reign. Neither
(as it may probably be collected) would Harpagus permit so great hopes, as were
treasured in him, and by all Auguries and Predictions likely to be confirmed of
him, to be destitute of instructions fit and accommodate for so high a person.
For else, how should such excellent Laws have been devised; such exquisite
Cautions for state government provided; the Empire of the Medes, with whom it
had so long continued, to the Persians peaceably translated, and without
faction established? These (I say) might probably confirm, how well this
victorious Shepherd was furnished with all precepts apt to inform him; stored
with all princely habiliments fit to accomplish him; and exercised in all
regal discipline, the better to prepare him against all occurrents that should
assail him. For the last, as he was from obscurity raised, so did he little
in all his time that could be worthily praised, being more skilful in setting
of a Turnep, than settling of a state; more experienced in correcting the
luxurious growth of his Vine, than rectifying those abuses raging and reigning
in his time: so as, his small acquaintance in state-affaires, during his
Minority, made him less affected to those employments in his riper years.
Whereas, if we reflect upon the noble and inimitable exployts of Alexander the
great, whose same has given life to many Volumes, we shall see that his
princely Education, gave him such rare impressions of glorious emulation in his
father Philip, as it raised him to those hopes he afterward attained. For
where was that Enemy he encountered with, that he overcame not? Quint. Curt.
Plutarch. in vit. Alex.
that City he besieged and won not? that Nation he assailed and subdued not?
yet who more mildly affected, though a Soldier; or more humble-minded, though
a Conqueror? which may appear by that answer of this invincible Chieftaine to
his Mother; who desirous to execute an innocent harmless man, the better to
prevail with him, remembered him, that her self for the space of nine months
had carried him in her womb, and for that reason he must not say her nay. But
what replied he? Ask^ (says he) good mother some other gift of me: for the
life of a Man can be recompensed by no benefit. Hominis ^^im solus xullo
beneficio persotur.
Behold a princely disposition lively charactred, having an eye no less to
saving than subduing; to retain mercy than to gain a victory; to preserve the
conquered than become a conqueror; to get a friend than to win a field I
which, as it requires a noble and free disposition, not engaged to cruelty,
boundless ambition, desire of triumph without compassion; so questionless it
shows a composed, civil, and generous Education: for these exclaim not with
the Poet: Seneca.
Omnis in ferro est salus:
But esteem it the most glorious conquest to be subduers of their own wills,
preferring the saving of a life before the gayning of an Empire. Yet do I not
conclude these men to be exquisite, as if they were freed from all such
ins^lting affections as usually invade the breasts of these high aspirers: for
so should I renounce the credit and authority of all Histories. Themistocles
(as I have elsewhere noted) walked in the open street because he could not
sleep: the cause whereof when some did enquire, he answered, that the triumph
of Miltiades would not suffer him to take his rest: Tuse quaest. l^b. quart.
see the strength of Ambition, how powerfully it subdued a man of approved
resolution and exquisite temper! Pausanias killed Philip of Macedon only for
fame and vainglory: see the weakness of a high spirit, whom the least blast
of flickring fame could so transport, as to embrue his hands in blood to gain
him an infamous glory! No, my aim is rather to express the noble acts and
achievements of such whose breeding had shown them as well by Precept as
example, what might best become such eminent Personages.

Hippocrates recounteth of a certain sort of men, who to be different from the
vulgar (being men more nobly descended) chose for a token of their Nobility, to
have their head like a Sugar-loafe: and to shape his figure by Art, when the
child was borne, the Midwives took care to bind their heads with swathes and
bands, until they were fashioned to the form. And this artificialnesse grew
to such force, as it was converted into nature: for in process of time, all
the children that were borne of Nobility, had their heads sharp from their
mothers womb. Stil^ ^o. Al^^^iades. Affrican Marcellus.
For the truth of this Relation I will not argue much, but sure I am, if Art
have such power on the outward form, Education which is termed a second
Nature, can produce no less effect from the inward man. For have we not read,
how diverse naturally addicted to all licentious motions, by reading moral
Precepts, and conversing with Philosophers, became absolute commanders of their
own affections? Have they not (some I mean, and those of place and esteem)
even in the height of their desires, How a Gentleman may he best enabled by
Education.
when opportunity was offered, an occasion ministered, and all motives to a
sensual banquet mustered, restrained their desires, subjected sense to the
obedience of reason, and became Kings by not consenting, whereas they had
become despicable Slaves by yielding? Yes, and in that more remarkable, that
they were Heathens, who had no knowledge of God, but directed by the light of
Nature only.

What then may we imagine might be done by long Education and continual
practice, during the time of Infancy, which (as the Philosopher says) is that
smooth and unwritten Table, apt to receive any impression either of good or
evil? For which cause, as all times require instruction, so this time
especially, because subject to correction; which moved sundry Peers to send
for certain wise and discrect men to instruct their children during their
greener years. Achilles had his Phoenix, For Aristotle, howsoever termed his
master, is thought to have flourished when he came to riper years.

Vid. Ep Alex. ad Arist. con. scriptam, de sit. and stat Ind.

Three things moved Tiberius to send Drusus into Illyricum: the first was
senescere ^^lttiae: the second, studiae exercitus ^^. rare: the third, simul
^uvenem urbano luxu lascivientem melius in castris haberi re^batur Tiberius.
Tacit.


Alexander his For Aristotle, howsoever termed his master, is thought to have
flourished when he came to riper years.

Vid. Ep Alex. ad Arist. con. scriptam, de sit. and stat Ind.

Three things moved Tiberius to send Drusus into Illyricum: the first was
senescere ^^lttiae: the second, studiae exercitus ^^. rare: the third, simul
^uvenem urbano luxu lascivientem melius in castris haberi re^batur Tiberius.
Tacit.


Callisthenes; Alcibiades his Socrates; Cyrus his Xenophon; Epaminondas his
Lycias; Themistocles his Symmachus: to whom they ought more (as they themselves
confessed) than to their own natural parents: for, from them (their parents I
say) they received only living, but from these they received means of living
well. But me thinks we decline rather to Knowledge than Action; let us
therefore press this point a little further, and return to where we left.

During that prosperous and successive time of victorious Sylla, Pomp^y the
great then a young man and serving under him, received such seasoning from his
military discipline, as made him afterward chosen amongst so many brave
Spirits, to try the hazards of fortune with the victorious Caesar. Nor was his
judgment inferior (if we may build on the credit of History) to his potent
Adversary, though Fortune made him her Slave, tryumphing no less in the quest
of his death, than view of his conquest. Themistocles (whose name as we have
often repeated, so in all Records worthily renowned) having been trained from his
Infancy in the discipline of war, became so affected, and withal so
opinionate in himself of Martial affairs, as being moved on a time at a
public feast to play upon the Lute, answered; I cannot fiddle, but I can make
a small Town a great City. See what long use in experiments of war had
brought a Noble Soldier to! His actions were for the public state; his aims
not to delight himself or others with the effeminate sound of the Lute, but to
strike terror in his foe with his sharp pointed Lance. Milites ira non lyra,
sed turba sonat.

Nec telis est not a chelys.


Now what should we think of these, whose more erected minds are removed from
the refuse and rubbish of earth, (which our base Groundlins so much toil for)
but that their thoughts are sphered above the Orb of fear? Death cannot amate
them, imminent peril deter them, disadvantage of place or inequality of power
discourage them; this is their Canto, and they sing it cheerfully: The only
health (what is ever do befall)
That we expect, is for no health at all.


This might be confirmed by sundry Histories of serious consequence, especially
in those memorable Sieges of Rhodes, Belgrade, Vienna, and many other; where
the resolution of their Governors slighted the affronts of that grand Enemy
of Christendom, the Turk, and by their valor purchased to themselves both
safety and Honor.

Thus far have we proceeded in our discourse of Education, which we have
sufficiently proved to be a Seasoner of Action, as well as of Speech or
knowledge. Neither in actions military only, but in all Manual Arts practiced
in Rome, during her glorious and flourishing State; from which even many
ancient Families received their name, beginning and being. As the Figuli from
the Potters; the Vitrei from the Glaziars, the Ligulae from the Pointers; the
Pictores from the Painters; the Pistores from the Bakers. All which (as we may
read in most of the Roman Authors) had applied themselves, even in the first
grounds of their Education to these Arts, wherein they grew so excellent, as
they enriched their posterity by their careful industry. Cic. in Bruto.
But to speak truly of Action, as it is generally taken, neither Speech, nor
Knowledge, of which we have heretofore spoken, Isocrates.
can well want it. Wherefore Demosthenes defining the principal part of an
Oration, said it was Action: the second the Same: the third no other than
Action. Sext. Philosophus.
Isocrates for lack of a good voice, (otherwise called the father of Eloquence)
never pleaded publicly. And Cicero says, This may be confirmed by that
elegant distich: Virtus in^rtis habet, titulum sepeli^e the^aurum; ^irtus
amand^ parit cu^ta, sepulta perit.
some men are diserti viri, but for lack of Action, or rather untowardnesse,
habiti sunt infantes. Whence it is, that Sextus Philosophus says, our Body is,
Imago animi. For the Mind is ever in action; it rests not, but is ever
l^bouring, plotting or contriving, addressing it self ever to employment. The
like affinity has Action with knowledge which is not reduced to Action. Whence
it is, that many (too many, heaven knows) bury their knowledge in the grave of
obscurity, reaping content in being known to themselves without communicating
their Talent to others. But this is hiding of their Talent in a Napkin, putting
their Candle under a Bushel; resembling the envious spiteful man, who will not
open his mouth to direct the poor Passenger in his way, or suffer his
neighbor to light his candle at his: for both imply one thing, as the Poet
excellently sings; Who sets the trav'ller in his journey right,
Does with his candle give his neighbor light. Eunius.

Yet shines his candle still, and does bestow
Light on himself, and on his neighbor too.
For this burying or suppressing of knowledge, it may be aptly compared to the
rich Miser, whose best of having is only possessing; for that Communicative
good he knows not, but admires so much the Golden Number, as he preferres it
before the Numbering of this days. Yea, as it is much better not to have
possessed, than to mis-imploy that whereof we were possessed; so is he in a
happier case who never knew any thing, than such a Man who knew much, yet never
made a Communicative or edifying use of his Knowledge. As may appear by the
Parable of the Talents. The Contemplative part indeed affords infinite content
to the Spiritual man, whose more erected thoughts are not engaged to the
Meditations of earth, but are spheared in a higher Orb. This man's Mind, like
Archimedes aim, Plut. in vit^ Marcel.
should Enemies invade him, death and danger threaten him, inevitable ruin
surprise him, his desire is only to preforme his task, and that task the
highest pitch of a soule-solacing Contemplation. And this kind of Rapsodie, or
intrauncing of the Soul (as I may term it) ministers unspeakable delight to
the Mind of that man, who is usually affected to these divine aspirations, as
a godly Father terms them. Yet these contemplative persons, whose retiredness
of estate, immunitie, or vacation from public government have drawn their
affections wholly from the thought of earth or conversing with men; as they
relish more of the Cloister, than society of Nature; more of the Cell or
frocke, than Community which affords the most fruit; so they never extend
further than satisfying their own disconsorting humor. I confess indeed,
their contemplations far exceed the wordly man's, Habet ornatu^ satis illo
majorem; habet aliud spactaculum, ad iliud spectaculum te compone. Quod ergo
tibi est specta^ulum? Coelum, Angelorum innumera multitudo. Chrysostom. hom. 28.
in epist. 12. ad Hebraeos.
for his are to earth confined; or the voluptuous man's, for his are to
pleasures chained; or the ambitious, for his are to Honors gaged; or the
deluded Alchymist (whose knowledge is a palpable mist) for his are to
impossible hopes restrained; yet as profit and pleasure make the sweetest
Music: so Contemplation joined with Practice, make the fruitfullest knowledge.

To conclude our Discourse touching Education, on which as the principall'st
Seasoner of Youth, we have long insisted; may the first Seeds of your more
hopeful harvest (worthy Gentlemen) be so sown, as they may neither by
extremity of Winter, that is, by too awful rigor, be nipped; nor by the
scorching heat of Summer, that is, too much connivencie of your Tutor, parched.
So may your Country reap what she has with long hope expected, and receive
a plentiful croppe of that which she her self, by hopeful Education, has
long manured.

THE ENGLISH GENTLEMAN.
Argument.
Of the necessity of a Vocation; No man is exempted from it; of Vocation in
general; Of the Vocation of a Gentleman in particular; And how he is to employ
himself therein.

VOCATION.
VOcation is a peculiar calling allotted to every one according to his degree.
Observe. 4.
Wherein we are to consider; First, a Necessity of Vocation; Secondly, no
Exemption from that Vocation: and first of the first.

In that original or primitive purity of man's Nature, I say before his Fall,
there was no such command exhibited, as was afterward enjoined. For then He
was created pure, and deputed Sovereign over a pleasant and flourishing
Empire, a delightful Eden, receiving no inhibition after so large and ample a
commission, save this, That of the Tree of good and evil, he should not eat
of it. But when Adam had transgressed, this command was forthwith directed to
him and his sin-stained posterity: Genesis 2.19.
in the sweat of his face should he eat bread. Then, then, and not till then
began Adam to delve, Genesis 3.19.
Eve to spin; inferring that the Sweat of their brows should earne them a
Living. There where none that did gallant it in the works of Qui luxuriant in
vermiu^ operibas. Chris. tom. hom. 18. in Genes. Fueruntur quidam ex India
vermiculi, hujusmodi facere vestes. Idem. tom. 4. hom. 2, in ^ad Timoth.
Worms. There were none that pierced the bowels of the Imu^in viscera terrae,
and in sede manium opes quaerimus; eiusque penetrat luxuris, Plin. hist.
Natural. l. 33.
Earth for precious stones to adorn them; None that had mind of precious Quid
memorem pretiosoru^ aromatum, quae ex India, ex Arabia, and ex Perside
convebuntur. Sunt si vis unguenta pretiosa, quae non e^ Arabia, vel ex Perside,
sed ex ipso convehuntur coelo, quae emuntur, non auro sed fide non ficta. Chr.
c. 1. tom. 4 hom 2. in 1 ad Tim. Aug. tom. 10. Sermon. de Temp.
Odours and aromaticall sweets to perfume them. In brief, None held it then a
grace to have the outcast Animaliumque vento feruntur, delitiae. Cl. Alex.
Paea. l. 2. c. ^0.
Feathers of Birds to plume them; The very excrements of Et sua vestimenta and
vestes stragulas su^^umiga^t, and aspergunt: atque adeo ut ipsas propemodum
matulas, Clem. Alex, ^^aed. l. 2. c. 8.
Beasts to sent them; The bowels and intralls of Vermium texturae. Chrysostom. tom.
1. hom. 37. in Genesis
Worms to cloth them; The white excretions of Maximi autem pretii Margarita
mulierum conclave invasir: ea autem nascitur in quodii ostreo. Clem. Alex.
Paed. lib. 2. c. 12.
Shellfish to deck them. Those Leathern coats were provided to cover man's
shame, and to evince him of Quae peccatorem sactum convincerent. Aug. l. 11. de
Genesis ad lit. etc. 32.
Sin. They were provided likewise to repel the extremity of Di^o ergo
hominem, non alia de causa opus habere ve^^imentis, qu^m ut regatur corpus, ad
maxima frigora and ve^e^entes oestus propussandos: hic est vestis scopus. Clem
Alex. Paed l. 2 c. 10. Verbera ventorum vitare imbrosque coactos. ^ ucr l. 5.
Heat and Cold, to shelter him against the violence of all seasons. There were
other Vocations then intended and attended, other labors proposed and
sustained, other fashions used and observed than the vanities of this age,
where the Devil that (...), that imitating and apish thing, as Li^el de Imag
Hor. l 1. ep. 2. Ornamentum est quod ornat: ornat autem quod honestiorem
mulier^m facit. Plutarch. in Praecept. Connubial. Hoc ipsum, quod vos non
ornatis ornatus est. Ambros lib. 1. de Virg. Ambros. tom. 4. lib. 1. Offic.
cap. 18. Phil. 3.13, 14.
Damascen calls him, peccati fomenta succendit, kindles those foments of sin
to train wretched man to the Lake of perdition. Hence it is, that he sets up
that vexillum superbiae, to which all the sons and daughters of vanity
repair; affecting incivilitie before modesty, inquiring after the fashion,
not how neat it is, but how new it is. These imagine it a Labor sufficient, a
Vocation for their state and degree equivalent, to spend the whole Morn till
the Midday in tricking, trimming, painting and purfling, studying rather to
Die well, than L^ve well. These are they who beautify themselves for the
Stage, to become deluding Spectacles to the unbounded affections of Youth. They
make time only a Stale for their vanities, and so prostitute their hours
(those swift Coursers of man's pilgrimage) to all enormous Liberty. These are
Penelopes wooers, gilded gallants, whose best of discourse is complement, or
apish formalitie; whose best thoughts reach but to where they shall dine, or
the choice of an Ordinary; and whose best actions are but ravishing of favors
from the Idols of their fancy. But how far short come these of that
Necessity of Vocation enjoined them? They think it sufficient so to attire
themselves, as they may become gracious in the eye of their Mistress: whereas
that, wherein they seem to themselves most gracious, to the eye of a grave and
considerate man may seem most odious: as in apparel, we say that only to be
commendable which is comely, that laudable which is seemly: for it is an
ornament which adorneth. Now how deformed are many of our rayments drawn from
foreign Nations, and as ill seeming our Ilanders, as Cockle-chaines Agricola's
soldiers? Certainly, this attire becomes not a Christian, but such as are
prostitutes to the whore of Babylon. The garment of a true follower of Christ,
is innocence, which, because it cannot be simple or absolute, we should
endeavor to lessen our imperfections daily, becoming conformable to his Image,
who being free from sin, took upon him our sin, to free us from the guilt
of sin, and punishment due unto sin. Let us therefore endeavor our selves,
I say, to attain the reward of our high calling in Christ: which that we may
the better obtain and purchase at his hands, by whom we expect reward, we
are in the mean time to serve him in our Vocation here on earth, that we may
reign with him in heaven.

The necessity of a vocation.
NOw that there is a Necessity of Vocation injoined all, of what rank or
degree soever, we may prove by many pregnant places of Scripture, inveighing
against Idleness, and commending employment unto us. Amongst which, that of
the Prophet Ezechiel may be properly applied to our purpose. Ezekiel. 16.49.
Behold (says he, speaking of the sins of Jerusalem) this was the iniquity
of thy sister Sodom; pride, fullness of bread, and abundance of idleness was
in her, and in her daughters: neither did she strengthen the hand of the poor
and needy. Prove. 12.11.8.9.
Again, in that of the Proverbs: He that tilleth his land, shall be satisfied
with bread: but he that follows the idle, is destitute of understanding.
Again; He that is sloathfull in his work, is even the brother of him that is
a great waster. Again, that of the Son of Sirach: Ecclus. 33.^5* 27. 2 Thessalonians. 3.10.11.12.
If thou set thy servant to labor, thou shall find rest: but if thou let him
go idle, he shall seek liberty. Again; Send him to labor, that he go not
idle: for idleness brings much evil. This likewise the blessed Apostle
admonishes the Thessalonians of, saying, For even when we were with you, this
we warned you of, that if there were any which would not work, that he should
not eat. For we hear, that there are some which walk among you inordinately,
and work not at all, but are busybodies. Therefore them that are such, we
warn and exhort by our Lord Jesus Christ, that they work with quietness, and
eat their own bread. Again, that serious exhortation of the Apostle to
Timothy, describing the natures of such factious and busybodies as intend
themselves to no settled employment: 1 Timothy 5.13.
but being idle, they learn to go about from house to house: yea, they are
not only idle, 1 Cor. 7.20.
but also pratlers and busybodies, speaking things which are not comely.
Again, Health comes not from the clouds without seeking, nor wealth from the
clods without digging.

Vocation a peculiar labor or function, particularly allotted to any one
person.


that express charge given by the Apostle touching everyones distinct
profession or Vocation: Let every man abide in the same vocation wherein he was
called. See here how much Idleness is condemned, and labor commended: the
former being the mother of all vices; the latter a cheerer, cherisher, and
supporter of all virtues. For wherein may man better express himself than in
the display and dispatch of such offices, to the management and execution
whereof he was first created? Virtue, as it consists in action, time in
revolution, so the maze of man's life in perpetual motion: wherein non progredi
est regredi, non procedere recedere est. It is given to man to labor, for life
it self is a continuate labor. See then the Necessity of a Vocation, being a
peculiar labor allotted or deputed to any one person in particular. Whence
sprung up first the diversity of trades and occupations, which now by process
of time have aspired to the name of Companies, gained daily new prerogatives,
the better to encourage them in their several Offices. It is a saying of Cn.
Dentatus; That he had rather be dead, than live dead: meaning that vacancie
from affairs, and retiring from such actions as tend to the conservation of
humane society, was rather to dye than to live. For Life, that is compared to a
Alijs micans, consumer.
Lamp or burning Taper, so long as it is fed with oil, gives light; being an
Emblem of man's life, Aul. Gell. in Noct. Artic. Add quod ingenium long a
rubigine loesum Torpet, and est multo quam fuit ante, minus. Vita quanto magis
procedit, tanto propius ad mortem accedit. Aug. Soliloq. c. 2.
which should not be obscured or darkened, but ever sending forth her rays or
beams both to light it self, and others. Whence the Poet: Life is a Lamp
whose oil yields light enough:
But spent, it ends, and leaves a stinking snuff.


Gellius compares man's life to Iron: Iron (says he) if exercised, is in time
consumed; if not exercised, is with rust wasted. So as this rust; which indeed
is rest from employment, does no less consume the Light or Lamp of our Life,
than labor or exercise: for our life decays no less when we are eating,
drinking, or sleeping, than toyling or traveling about our worldly affairs.
So much of our life is shortened, as we are even in these things, which preserve
and sustain nature, employed: thus death creeps on us when we least think of
it, suprizing us when we least expect it. Some with Amnon carousing, others
with Haman persecuting, or with Senacherib blaspheming, 2 Samuel 13.29. Ester.
7.10. 2 King. 19.37 Dan. 5.4. 2 Samuel 17.23. 2 King. 2.24. Ibid. 3.17. Luke
12.20. Genesis 49.33. Act. 7, 60. 1 Cor. 15.57. Eccles. Hist. Deuteronomy. 28.30.
or with Belshazzar sacrilegiously profaning, Ahitophel plotting, the Children
mocking, that incredulous Prince of Israel distrusting, or that rich man in the
Gospel presuming. Few or none with Jacob exhorting, with Martyr-crowned Steven
blessing, with the Apostles rejoicing, or with all those glorious Martyrs,
whose garments were deep dyed in the blood of zeal, singing and tryumphing.
And a good reason may be here produced, why many dye so woefully dejected: for
how should they close their days cheerfully, who have spent all their days
idly? If they that disobey God, shall plant the vineyard, and others shall eat
the fruit; how may those expect to be partakers of the fruit of the vineyard,
who neither obey God nor plant vineyard? How long have many, whose exquisite
endowments were at first addressed for better employments, stood idling in the
marketplace, never making recourse to Gods vineyard, either to dung or water
it, refresh or cherish it; laboring rather to break down her branches, than
sustain it? How many be there, who will rather employ whole years in
contriving some curious Banqueting House, than one month in erecting one
poor Almes-house? How choice and singular will the most be in their
Tabernacles of clay, Xista potius quam Zenodochia, regia potius palatia, quam
tectain pauperum solatia, erigent. Horti delitiae, Horrei divitiae, elegantiae
aedificij, morientium oculis dolores inimicissimi. ib.

Three necessary considerations touching the conveniencie of a Vocation.

A divine consideration.


while the inward Temple goes to ruin? As Charles the Emperor said of the
Duke of Venice his building, when he had seen his princely Palace like a
Paradise on earth: Haec sunt, quae nos invitos faciunt mori. They draw us back
indeed, and hale us from meditation of a more glorious building, which needs
not from the inhabitant any repairing. How necessary is it for us then, to
address our selves to such employments, as may confer on the state public a
benefit? For as we have insisted on the Necessity of a Vocation, so are we to
observe the conveniences of a Vocation. Which that we may the better do, we
are to consider three especial things, which as Scales or Greeses may bring us
to the right use and exercise of our Vocation. The first Consideration is
Divine, or to Godward; the second Civil, or to Man-ward; the third Peculiar,
and to our selves-ward.

For the first, because indeed the rest have dependence on it, and could have
no subsistence but from it; we are to consider by whom we are deputed to such a
place or office, and for what end. The person by whom we are so deputed, is
God, who in his goodness as he has bestowed an Image more noble and glorious
on us than on any other creature, so has he enabled us to execute our place
under him with due fear and reverence to his name, ever observing the end for
which we were to such places deputed; which is, to honor him, and be helpefull
unto others who resemble him: which is the second Consideration we before
observed, A civil consideration.

Amore Dei amor vicinig ignitur, amore vicini amor Dei nutritur. Bern.

Oration inter maxima charitatis opera numerandae est.

The effect of prayer confirmed. Exodus 17.2.


and termed Civil, because in Civil society requisite to be performed.

By the love of God (says a good Father) is love to our Neighbor engendered,
by the love of our Neighbor is our love toward God increased. Now if we
should communicate all that we possess unto our Neighbors, and want this
Love, which only makes the work fruitful and effectual, we were but as
tinkling cymbals; we are therefore incessantly to crave of God by prayer, which
(as that godly Divine says) is to be numbered amongst the greatest works of
Charity; that he would infuse into us the fervor of his Love, by which only is
granted us to attain true Neighbourly Love, performing such works of Charity
in our vocation, as we may preserve that union and communion, which members of
one mystical body have one with another. And this Love thus planted, cannot
be so silenced or smothered, but it will be discovered, and that by such
effects as are usually derived from charity: for these will not grind the
face of the poor by extortion, or draw tears from the Orphans eyes by
oppression, or sow the seed of discord betwixt neighbor and neighbor by the
spirit of Contention. No, as they are placed in a vocation, they will show
themselves to all helpful, to none hurtful. They will be an eye to the blind
to direct them, a staff to the Lame to support them, a visitant to the Sick
to comfort them, a Samaritan to the wounded to heal them, a garment to the
naked to cover them, meat to the hungry to releeve them, drink to the thirsty
to refresh them* being all unto all, that by all means they might gain some.
These are the effects of this Love, which with adamantine ties becomes linked
to the love of God, and to man for God.

The third consideration is peculiar; A peculiar Consideration.
wherein we are principally to take heed of self-love, a vice no less fatal
than universal. Which self-love as it has many branches, or Siens,
according, to the disposition of the owner, so it produces no less variety of
effects. The Ambitious man being ever aiming, ever aspiring, thirsts after
honor, and never leaves hunting after it, till he fall with his own
grandeur. His pie-coloured flagge of vanity is displayed, and his thoughts (so
open hearted is he) as if he had windows in his breast, discovered. His
agents are weak and unsteady; his aims indirected and maligned by envy,
concluding his Comicke beginning with a Tragic Catastrophe. Yet see how
self-conceit transports him, Sycophancy deludes him, and an assured expectance
of an impossibility detaines him. Now see him uncased; He uses rather with
Catiline to speak much and do little, Vid. Salust. in bell. Iug.
than with Iugurth to speak little and do much. He entertaines all with
broad-spread arms, and proclaims Liberty, but none will believe him. For how
should he proclaim, or proclaiming confer that on others, which he enjoyes
not in himself? or how should he enjoy that inestimable Liberty, Nec enim
Libertas ^utier ulla est, qu^m domino servire ruo.

Prima est Libertas carere cri^inibus. Aug.


which the earthly-Sainted or contented only enjoy; when he is become a Slave
to his own unbounded desires, and through self-conceit, is made a prey to his
foes deceit, falling in that lowest, where his expectance raised him highest?
yet see whence these effects proceed ^ surely from no other spring than that
troubled wellspring of self-love, which leaves her distressed Master engaged
to sundry extremes. The like may be observed in the avaritious man; (for to
these two instances is my present discourse restrained:) whose misery it is to
admire rather than employ what he enjoyes. The difference betwixt the poor
wanting, and the rich not using, is by these two expressed; the one carendo,
the other non fruendo. Of these it may be truly said, that their gain is not
godliness, but their godliness is to reap gain. And though apparent Damnum
potius quam turpe lucrum eligendum est. Laaert.
loss be to be preferred before filthy gain: yet they wholly and only
embrace such Omnes complectuntur arts ex quibus lucrum consequi poterint.
Plat. de leg. Lucri bo^^m odor ex re qualibet. Iuvenal.
arts, trades, or sciences, from which a certain gain may be procured. They
know (and that knowledge makes them more culpable) that Lucrum sine damn^
alteriue ^ieri no^ potest. Sen. Epist. 95.
gain cannot accrue to one, without loss to another: yet they will rather
prejudice another in the greatest, than be an inconvenience to themselves in
the least. They have felt by experience, that wealth is a great nourisher of
vice, and poverty of virtue; yet will they erect an Idol to honor her by whom
vice is nourished, but disesteeme her from whom many virtuous motions and
affections are derived. True it is indeed, that when any Cum aliqua species
utilitatis objecta est, nos commov^ri necesse est Cic. de offic. 3.

Omnes appetimus utilitatem, and ad ed rapimur. ibid.


Object of profit is tendered us, necessarily are we induced to condescend to
the means of acquiring that profit. Again, we all seek profit, and are (as
it were) haled unto it: yet this is to be intended such profit, as holds
concurrence with honesty. They know, (and woeful it is that they make no better
use of their knowledge) how Lucrum facit homines deter^^res. Polit. 3. Nisi
lucru^ esset, nemo ^uisset improbus.
gain makes men worse: and but for gain no man had been evil. For this
filthy Nam tale turpe lucrum accusatio Naturae est. apud Stobaeum.
gain accuses nature, and reproves us that our life being so short, should
have desires so long, laboring to join land to land, when so small a
scantling will serve our turn at our departing. They know how truly that
sententious Poet sung; Recuniae studium, fidem, probitatem, caeterasque bonas
arts su^vertit. Hor.
Wealth disesteemes all Learning, and all arts,
Faith, honesty, and all our better parts.


There is a Voluntas firgendi, and mentiendi est eorum qui opes appetunt, and
luc^um desidera^t. Lact. (...).
native will or inclination to f^ining and lying in all such as seek after
wealth, and desire gain. See how servile and ignoble their Condition is, whose
affections, slaved to private profit, embrace any course how indirect soever,
for self-love, or selfe-gaine! That are ever harping upon that of the Poet;
Clar^^-ubique fuit, fortis, sapiens, etiam rex, and quicquid vole^. Horat.

Si for^una vole^, fies de Rhetore Consul; Si volet haec eadem, fus de Consule
Rhetor. Iuvenal. Sat. 7.


He shall be noble, valiant, wise, a Prince, or what he will,
That has but wealth, no matter how he got it, well or ill.
but how far short comes vulgar opinion of truth, whose judgment is in their
eyes or ears, not measuring man, nor his worth, by those nobler parts within
him, but by his wealth or habit, whose best of glory is without him? Little
know these earthworms how they shall be uncased, and with what misery then
enclosed. For if they did, they would prefer (right sure I am) the
inestimable purchase of virtue, before this rust or r^bbish, which leaves the
possessor as full charged with care, as his chest stored with c^ine. Virtue is
of that noble and unconfined nature, as she Virtus nihil quod extr^se est
quaerit. Pontan lib. de Prud.
seeks nothing that is without her; there is her glory. Again, there can be
no virtue which is not Nulla potest esse virtus nisi gratuita Cic in Tus.
free and voluntary; there is her Liberty. Again, she Domat omnia virtus.
Salust. Quicquid homines arant, navigant, aedifica^t, virtuti omnio ^a^ert.
ibid.
subdueth all things; there is her soveraingty. Again, Virtuit fortuna ^^dit.
Plut.
fortune gives place to her; there is her precedence. For Nihil eripit fortuna,
nisi quod ipsa dedit. Sen. de tranq. an.
fortune can take nothing away but what she her self gives. Again, they
only are Virtute qui praediti sunt, soli sunt divites. Cicero.
rich which are enriched with virtue; there is her felicity. So as howsoever
the Philosophers axiom be, that riches is a sign of eternal glory; sure I
am, that virtue directs man in this Maze of misery, to the true sight and
light of glory. This is that Morning-starre sent from that Sun of the Morning
to direct us; that Brazen wall reared by that Brazen Serpent to shield and
protect us; that fair Lily of the valley cropped by that fairest of ten thousand
to beautify and adorn us; that sweet oderiferous plant budding out of the
root of Iesse to sweeten and perfume us. What skils it then, if we be
deprived of all, possessing virtue that includes all? Deuteronomy. 10.9. Pauperes
eligit Deus ad haereditatem regni ^aelestis. 1. Cor. 16.18. Luke 6.20.24. O
mors, quam amara est memoria tuae, homini habenti pacem in substantiis suis^
The Levites who were chosen for the Altar and for Gods own service, were to
have no possessions: for the Lord was their inheritance. Again, God chooses
the poor for an inheritance of his heavenly Kingdom. Again, Blessed are you
that be poor, for yours is the kingdom of heaven. And again, Miserable are
you rich men, who in your riches have all your consolation. Again, O Death,
how bitter is the remembrance of thee to that man, whose peace is in his
substance! Hence we see the difference betwixt the state and condition of the
wordling, whose affections are wholly planted and placed upon earth, and his
whose desires transcend the pitch of earth, having his feet below, but his
faith above. The Poet very covertly and wittily in decision of such, whose
delights were wholly fixed on mould, Non s^lii virtus, sed etiam ^ama, decus;
divina humanaque pulchris divitiis p^rent. Hor^t. lib 2. Sat. 3.
Satyrically concludes; Not only Virtue, winged Fame, and Honor too I say;
But things divine and humane too, must Riches all obey,


But to return where we left, whence comes this so avaricious and illimited
desire, but only from a Self-love which these men have to their own private
and peculiar profit? Which that we may the beter prevent, being such a shelfe
as it endangers the ship that comes near it; we are daily to examine our
selves, and observe what especial affection we are most prone unto: which
found out, we are to apply such remedies, or receipts, as may best cure such
enormities, as arise from the vicious and corrupted source of our affections.

Now to come to the cure; because Medicines provided and not applied, are
fruitlesly employed. Are ye naturally subject to vainglory? Labor to
suppress those motions even in their rising, by becoming vile and
contemptible in your own sight. Are ye affected to wantonness and
effeminacie? Impose your selves a Task, inure your bodies to labor, reserve
some hours for reading, as well those exquisite Moral precepts of Heathen
Writers, as those blessed Patterns of continency recorded in sacred Writ. Are
ye slaved to the misery of a worldling? Wrestle with your affections,
entertain bounty, affect hospitality, so in time ye shall become weaned from
base and servile Parcimony. To be brief, as Vices are best cured by their
Contraries, We are to resist vices, by practicing and doing acts of the
contrary virtues.
ever oppose your selves to that which your Natures affect most; for this is
the way to make you, that were slaves before, commanders of your own
affections: which sovereignty surpasses all inferior command, for by this
means you command those, who have had the greatest Monarchs in subjection.

Thus have we proposed the Necessity of a Vocation, and what especial rules
were to be observed in the undertaking of that Vocation: which observed, ye
shall confer no less good on your Country, who expects much good from you;
than ye shall minister content unto your selves, finding all depraved or
distempered affections buried in you. And so we descend from the Necessity of
a Vocation, to inquire whether any from the highest to the lowest be exempted
from it.

NO less authenticke than ancient is that position, No man exempted from a
VOCATION.
The higher place the heavier charge. So as, howsoever that erring opinion
which vulgar weakness has introduced, seem approved, that Men whom Fortune
has made Great, may hold themselves exempted from all Vocations, because
either Nobleness of blood may seem too worthy to partake of them, or
greatness of Success (little subject to the fear of want) has made them too
high to stope unto them: I may safely aver, that of all other degrees, none
are less exempted from a Calling than great men, who set like high Peers or
Mounts, should so over-view others, as their lives may be lines of direction
unto others. He sins doubly, that sins exemplarily: whence is meant, that
such, whose very persons should be examples or patterns of vigilance,
providence and industry, must not sleep out their time under the fruitless
shadow of Security. Men in great place (says one) are thrice servants;
servants of the Sovereign, or state; servans of Fame; and servants of
Business. So as they have no freedom, neither in their persons, nor in their
actions, nor in their times. First, they, are Servants to their Sovereign or
State, for as they are by place set near his Person, so are they with due and
tender respect ever to observe him, in affairs tending to the safety of his
Person, and general good of the State. They are Servants (likewise) of Fame:
for howsoever the actions of inferior men may seem slighted with neglect, or
clouded with contempt, they are sure to have their deeds bruted by Fame, Non
vestrae magis irae, quom famae co^sulatis. Caes. in orat. pro Cat. de liberate
vindicanda. Vide Salust.
either to their glory or disgrace. Yea, these are also eager hunters after
Fame, preferring opinion before all other inferior respects, and wishing
rather themselves to dye, than it should die. Whence it was, that Anaxagoras
telling Alexander that there were many worlds; Alexander wept, replying, That
he had not won one: implying, that his Fame, being that which he principally
tendered, having scarce yet dispersed it self to the circumference of one
world; it would be long, ere it could diffuse or dilate it self to many
worlds. Lastly, they are Servants of Business; being placed near the Helm of
the State: and therefore like wise and vigilant Pilots, must be careful lest
the Rudder of the State be not shaken by their security.

Neither is their State so sure, that it should move them to be secure: for men
in high places are for most part pursued by many Enemies, whose eyes are ever
prying into their actions, which they invert, by laboring to bring the State
in distaste with their proceedings. Now what means better to frustrate their
practices, than by a serious and cautelous eye, to look into their own
actions? Diogenes being asked, how one should be revenged of his Enemy,
answered; By being a virtuous and honest man. Which badge (I mean honesty) as
it should be the Cognizance of every Christian; so should it show her full
luster or splendor in these persons whom Descent or Place has so ennobled.
Now these Enemies of Greatness, if right use be made of them, may confer no
small profit to such as they hate. NASICA, when the Roman Commonweal was
supposed to be in most secure estate, because freed of their enemies,
affirmed, that though the Achaians and Carthaginians were both brought under
the yoke of bondage, yet they were in most danger, because none were left, whom
they might either fear for danger, or who should keep them in awe. This we
shall find verified even in our selves: for tell me, are we not most
circumspect in all our actions, wherein we have to deal with our enemy? Are
we not fearful lest by some inconsiderate or prejudicate act, he take
advantage of us, and consequently circumvent us? So as our Enemies may be used
as Tutors or Monitors to instruct us, warning us to be advised what we
undertake, lest they take hold of us in our mistake.

There is also another benefit redounding to us, of which it were likely we
should be deprived, if we wanted Enemies, by whom this benefit is on us
conferred. And it is this; wanting Enemies, we many times make of our best
friends, Enemies. Whence Oenomademus in a faction in the I Will of Chios,
counseled his fellows that they should not expel all their Enemies, but
still leave some in the City, lest (quoth he) being void of all our Enemies we
should begin to quarrel with our friends.

Thus you see, how Men of Place are of all others least exempted from a
Vocation; for as Idleness would give them occasion to sin, so by their
Enemies should they be soon detected of shame: In maxima fortuna,
minimalicentia est. Salust. bear paupert^^ Humili tec^o contenta latet.
Qu^tiu^t altas^ aepepro^cila; Aut evertit fortuna demus. S^n. in Agam. Quiequid
excelsum est. cadat. in Octa^o.
being more subject to Detraction in those actions which are their best, than
likely to plead a protection for such as are their worst. We may well then
conclude this point, with that of a true and noble Historian; In the greatest
fortune, there is the least liberty; for by how much any man is higher placed,
by so much is he more generally noted. We say, that there is required the
greatest care, where there is the greatest danger: Now what danger more
presently imminent, or more powerfully violent, than highness of Place,
threatening ruin daily to the possessour? Where Honor feeds the fuel of
Envy, and enmity ever pursues in chase such as are advanced by fortune: whence
our modern Poet excellently concludes; Study thou virtue, Honor's Envies
bait,
So entering heaven thou shall be graduate.


How necessary then even in private respects to themselves is circumspection;
not only in laboring to prevent occasions of fear, Invident Honori meo, ergo
invideant labori, and innocentiae, periculis etiam meis, quoniam per haec illum
cepi. Salust. in bell. lug. Cic. in l. de leg.
but the final and fatal effects thereof? So may those, whom either Fortune
has raised, or Nobleness of birth advanced, say with majestike Marius: They
envy my Honor: Let them also envy my labor, innocence, yea, those admirable
dangers which I have passed, for by these was my Honor purchased. Now then,
how should such whose height of Place has raised them above the lower rank of
men, imagine that their Place may exempt them from their Task? Offices are
peculiarly assigned to all men, and Vocation to all ranks of men. Whence came
that ancient Edict amongst the Romaas, mentioned by Cicero in lib. de Leg. (as
we have elsewhere noted) that no Roman should go through the streets of the
City, unless he carried with him the Badge of that trade whereby he lived:
insomuch that Marcus Aurelius, speaking of the diligence of the Romans,
writes, That all of them followed their Labor. Agendo, audendeque res Romana
crevit. Salust.
So as, there was no difference betwixt the Patricians and Plebeians; inter
faecem and florem civitatis (as one well observes;) but an express task was
imposed and exacted on every Subject. Whence it grew that the Roman Empire
became absolute Soveraignesse of many other ample Dominious: whose flourishing
estate (as it was described to King Pyrrhus) appeared such; That the City
seemed a Temple, the Senate a Parliament of Kings. L* Flor. lib. 1. cap. 18.
Neither is it to be doubted, but even as God is no accepter of persons, so his
command was general, without exception of persons; Genesis 3.19.
In the sweat of thy face shall thou eat bread Albeit I do not hence
conclude, that all are to intend the Plough, or betake themselves to Manual
Trades: for so I might seem to press that exposition which a Friar once urged
against Latimer, touching reading of Scripture in a vulgar tongue: If the rude
people (objected he) should hear the Scripture read in English, the Plowman
when he hears, He that holds the Plough and looks back, is not apt for
the Kingdom of God; would there upon cease to plow any more: and the Baker,
when he hears it read, A little Leaven corrupts the whole lump; might be
moved not to use Leaven at all: and when the Scripture says, If thine eye
offend thee, pluck it out; the ignorant might be persuaded to pull out their
eyes; and therefore it was not good to have the Scripture in English. To which
objection Latimer vouchafed no other answer than this: He would wish the
Scriptures to be no longer in English, till thereby either the Plowman were
persuaded not to plow; In iis linguis quas no^ intelligimus, surdi sumus. Tusc.
lib. 5.

Hoc nempe ab homine exigitur, ut profit hominibus si fieri potest, multis; si
minus, paucis; si minus, proximis; si minus, sibi. Seneca de vita beat a.

A resemblance betwixt the offices in the Body of a State, and a Body natural.
Ocules ad caelum, manus ad clavum.


or the Baker not to bake. No, I am not so stupid, as not to apprehend how
several places or offices are deputed to sundry men: how some are appointed
for guiding and guarding the State; others for ranking and ranging Powers in
the Field; others for teaching and training of Youth in the School; others for
propounding and expounding of the Laws of our Realm at the Bar; others for
caring and curing of malad^es in the body; others for breaking the bread of
life, and breathing the spirit of comfort to the afflicted. Whence we gather,
that of all degrees none are exempted or excepted: a Vocation is proposed and
imposed, which, of necessity must be by one or other observed and intended. For
as in the mutual offices of our Body, every member intends that peculiar
function or office to which it is assigned or limited; so in the Body of the
State (being all members depending and subsisting of that State) we are all in
our mutual places or offices to discharge that Task which is enjoined us.
Wherein I should think it convenient, if we observed the selfsame rule,
which the members of our Body use in the due performance of their offices. For
we see not one of them incroach or intrude into another place or employment:
The Eye it sees, and handles not; the Hand it handles, and sees not; the Palate
it tastes, and smells not; the Nose it smells, and tastes not; the Ear it
hears, and walks not; the Foot it walks, and hears not. And so of the rest:
but contrariwise, how itching are men after such employments as least concern
them? How officious in business which least touch them? The Dray-man he will
play the Divine; a Dairy-woman the Physician; the Collier the Informer; the
Farmer the Lawyer. Wherein surely, I have observed in the small Progress of
this my Pilgrimage, no small inconvenience redounding to the public State. For
say, whence sprung all these Schisms in the Church, Experimenta per mortes
agunt. Hippocr.
these many rents in Christ's Seamelesse-coat, but from those, who of
Mechanickes became Divines, professing to teach, before they were taught?
Whence are so many men's days abridged, their easy maladies without hope of
being cured, but by means of these Horse-leaches, who gain experience by the
death of their Patients, professing themselves Artists, before they know the
definition of an Art? Whence are so many unjustly vexed, so injuriously
troubled, but by these base Informers, who become disturbers rather than
Reformers? whence arise these differences, betwixt party and party, but by
means of some factious and seditious Instruments, who like the Serpent Dipsas,
suck the moisture and verdure of every hopeful Plant, building their
foundation on the ruin of others? Surely, as we have Statutes enacted, of
purpose to have such turbulent members duly curbed and censured; so were it to
be wished that such Laws as are to this end provided, were likewise executed:
for by this means the flourie borders of our Realm should be stored with
grave Divines, and learned Professors, leading their flocks to the green
pastures of ghostly instruction, not to the bypath of error and confusion;
with judicious and expert Physicians, who are not to learn experience by the
death of their Patients; with sincere and uncorrupted officers whose aim is
not to gain, but to redress abuses; with upright and con^cionable Lawyers,
whose desire is to purchase their Clients peace, and not by frivolous delays
to cram their purses. O what a golden age were this ^ when each performing a
mutual office unto other, might so support one another, as what one wanted,
(...); and (...) ut Hier. ad Pat^. conquerum) scripturarum interpretationem
passim sibi vendica^t omn^s, benegat. ruia anus, hanc del^us Sen^x, hanc
Sophista verbesus, hanc vniversi praesumant, lucerant decent antequam discant.

See the first rising of all Novellisme and innovated doctrine, how and upon
what weak grounds planted, and how strangely by the bellows of singularity
increased. Exodus 28.^0.


might be supplied by another. Then should we have no Sectists or Separatists
divided from the unity of faith to disturb us; No artlesse Quack-salvers or
cheating Mountebanks to delude us; no factious Brands to set a fire of debate
amongst us; no currupt or unconscionable Lawyers, by practicing upon our
states, to make a prey of us. Then should we hear no ignorant Laics
familiarly disputing of the too high points of Predestination, rejecting the
ordinary means of attaining salvation: as may be seen in the Synodals or
Conventicles of many seduced souls, even in these days, where some Barbar is
made a Cathedral Doctor, to improve, rebuke, and exhort: but how is it
possible that ought should be hatched but error, where singularity grounded
on ignorance is made a Teacher? S. Basil talking with the Emperor Valens of
matters of religion, and the Cook coming in saucily and telling the holy man
his opinion, that it was but a small matter to yield to his master the Emperor
in a word or two; and that he needed not to stand so precisely in divine
matters which seemed indifferent, or of no moment. Yea, Sir Cook (quoth S.
Basil) it is your part to tend to your pottage, and not to boil and chop up
divine matters: and then with great gravity (turning to the Emperor) said,
that those that were conversant in divine matters with conscience, would rather
suffer death, than suffer one jot of holy Scripture, much less an article of
faith to be altered or corrupted. So careful have former times been of the
reverence which ought to be had in dispensing the heavenly Mysteries of Gods
word: admitting none to so holy and high a vocation, but such who had Vrim and
Thummim, knowledge and holiness: beautifying their knowledge, I say, with
holiness of conversation: being not only Speakers but Doers; for no word-men
but workmen are fit for the Lords Vineyard.

The like complaint might be made touching these Physicians of our Bodies:
where artlesse and ignorant Handicrafts-men, who perchance upon reading of some
old Herball, wherein were prescribed certain doubtful cures for certain
Maladies, will not stick to profess themselves Galenists the first hour:
setting out a painted Table of unknown cures to raise them credit. To whom in
my opinion, that Tale may be properly applied, which is related of one Alphonso
an Italian; who professing Physic, wherein his fortune was to kill oftener
than he did cure: one day as he and his man Nicolao rode on the way, he might
see a great multitude of people assembled upon a hill; whereof being desirous
to know the cause, he sent his man Nicolao to inquire further: who,
understanding that there was one to be executed for committing a murder, put
spurs to his horse, and running with all speed to his Master, wished him to
fly: wherewith Alphonso not a little astonished, demanded the cause: Why
Master (quoth Nicolao) yonder is a poor wretch adjudged to die for killing one
man, and you in your time have killed an hundred.

Neither are we less to grieve for the pressures which burden our State by
such, who sow the seed of discord betwixt neighbor, and neighbor supporting
Champertie and Embracerie in buying of Titles, maintaining suits out of a
contentious or turbulent disposition. Which enormities, as they are by apt and
necessary Laws thereto provided, duly censured; so were it to be wished,
West. 1 West. 2.28. ^d. 1.33. Ed. 1.8. H. 6.19. H. 7.32. H. 8, and 18. El.
that for example sake some one, whom the impunitie and indulgencie of this
time has made too presuming, were punished according to the extremity of the
Law thereto provided: for then should we enjoy those happy Halcyon days,
wherein Basil the Emperor of Constantinople lived: who, whenever he came to
his Judgment Seat, found neither party to accuse, nor defendant to answer.

To this end then and purpose tends our present discourse, that as a peculiar
Vocation is deputed to every one in this Pilgrimage of humane frailty; so he
should not intermix himself in affairs or offices of different nature. Mala
fama been parta d^lectat. Sen.

Nam vivos interdum fortuna, saepe invidia fatigat: ubi anima naturae cessit,
demptis obtrectatoribus, ipsa se virtus magis magisque extollit Salust.

Homines inertissimi quorum omnis vis virtusque in lingua sita est. Salust. in
2. orat. Virtus per se amara atque aspera est. Ad virturem una atque ardua via
est. Ibid.


A man may be excellent in one, who cannot be exquisite in many. Let us then so
address our selves, as we may be rather fruitful in one, than fruitless in
many. Do we fear by being excellent in one to purchase hate of many? Let us
slight that hate which is procured by good means; for so long as we live
here, sometimes adverse fortune will cross us, often times envy curb us: but
where the mind has given way to the infirmities of nature, and bears with a
prepared mind whatsoever may be inflicted on her, she makes no account of
detraction; for that virtuous resolution which is in her, does daily more and
more raise and advance her. Neither are we to be strong in tongue and weak in
act; as those, whose only valor is vaunting, and honor verbal glorying: for
of all others, such men are the slothfullest, whose force and power is wholly
seated in the tongue. No, rather let us know that virtue consists in action,
which by long habit becomes more pleasant than the habit of vice, whose vain
delights tender no less bitterness in the end, than they did promise
sweetness in the beginning. Agendo audendoque res Romana crevit. Let our ear,
as it is a sense of instruction, become a light of direction: for then we hear
with profit, when we reduce what we hear to practice.

Thus you have heard both of the Necessity of a Vocation, and how none is to be
exempted from a Vocation: wherein, Gentlemen, I could wish, that as birth and
breeding have advanced you above others, so you would show such arguments of
your birth and education, as may make you seem worthy of a glorious Vocation;
expressing such exemplary virtues in your life, as might gain you love even in
death. And so I descend to speak of Vocation in general; wherein I will be
more brief, because I have partly glanced at it in our former discourse.

Vocation in general.
VOcation may be taken equivocally or univocally; when we speak of Vocation in
general, it is equivocall; when of any special Vocation in particular it is
univocall. Without Vocations no civil state can subsist; because Idleness
makes of men women, of women beasts, of beasts monsters. It was one of the
sins of Sodom, as we may read in the Prophet Ezekiel. Ezekiel. 16.49 1 Samuel
11, 1. Prove. 6.6.
It was that which brought David the anointed of the Lord, nay the man after
Gods own heart, to commit adultery. It was this which moved Solomon to bid the
sluggard go to the pismire to learn good husbandry. To be short, J^rm. 34.2.
Zeph. 1.4. Mich. 1 6. Ion 3.4.
it was this which moved the Prophets to denounce judgment upon the
flourishing'st Cities, for their security. How necessary then is it for all
estates to be careful, lest they incur a heavy and fearful censure, to
address themselves to especial Vocations, beneficial to the state, and
pleasing to God, whose glory should be our aim, without any by-respect unto
our selves? We shall see in most places both at home and abroad, how such
trades or Vocations are most used, as may best suit with the nature and
condition of the place. As in our Port-townes traffic and commerce, conferring
no less benefit to the state by importance, than profit to other Countries by
exportance. Again, in our Towns lying further within Land, the inhabitants
use some especial Trade to keep their Youth in labor; whereby they become
not only beneficial to themselves, but useful and helpefull unto others.
Amongst which, I cannot be unmindfull of the diligence of the Town of Kendall,
and worthy care which they have to see their very young children put to work,
being a labor which requires no great strength, to wit, Woolworke. Wherein, so
approved has their care and industry been, as they have gained themselves no
small esteem in foreign places, who are made partakers of the fruit of their
labors. For I have known a family, consisting of seven or eight persons,
maintained by the work of two or three stones of wool, which amounted not
above thirty shillings: and with this they maintained credit, living in an
honest and decent manner. Whose labors as they were laudable, so have they
been no less furthered, favored, and encouraged by our late gracious
Sovereign of renowned memory; who of his princely clemency, has damned all
such impositions or heavy taxations as might any way impair or impeach the
free use of that Trade. Since which time, upon renuall of their Charter, his
Sacred Majesty has been lately pleased, not only to enlarge their Liberties,
but likewise to dignifie their magistracy with a title of more eminence: which
had it stood with his princely pleasure, might have received high improvement
by creation of a Burgess. Albeit now of late, the Town of Kendall, so famous
for Wool-work, by reason of a late decrease or decay of trade in those parts,
is grown no less penurious than populous: so as (with grief I speak it) such
inhabitants as formerly by their pain and industry were able to give an alms
at their door, are now forced to beg their alms from door to door. The
redress whereof, as it has been by the Prince and those prudent guides and
guardians of our State, the Lords of his Privy Council, duly intended; so no
doubt, but by their wise care it shall be accordingly effected, and those poor
people after so many miseries sustained, wholly releeved; to the advancement of
Gods glory, the supportance of many a needful family, and the succeeding
renown of his Majesty, to whom every subject owes his life, love and loyalty.
The like commendation I could give to the Copperworkes used in the North; more
especially about Keswicke, where diverse Dutchmen being planted, have for many
years expressed no less judgment than industry in sundry excellent and
choice experiments, which to their succeeding fame may perpetuate their memory.
For these, like cunning and experienced Artizans, have to do in the bowels of
the earth, whence they dig copper, Hinc alij aliis artib^s incumbunt; hi in
mari navigantes, hi in Mentes p^scantes et pastinantes, etc. Vis^e procedere in
Thessaliam? artem disces hortulanam; visne in Barbariam? arrem experieris
equesirem.
which with incredible pains they bring to the Hammer. For so steep, ragged
and cliffie are those mountains, whence their Copper is dug, as it might
seem a matter of impossibility to effect so intricate a work; but so
infatigable are the Laborers which they employ, as their patience in suffering
is no less to be commended, than their skill in contriving to be admired. But
to speak in general of all vocations, sciences, or Mysteries: we are ever to
observe the place and convenience, hereof, that we may the better appropriate
some especial vocation according to the necessity and convenience of the
place. As Ship-masters in places of traffic and Navigation; Shepherds,
Graziers, and Farmers, in places of plantation: according to that ancient
Proverb; Gardiners in Theffalie, Horse-coursers in Barbary.

Now if you should object touching the difference of vocations, that some are
more necessary than others: yea such as now seem most necessary, have formerly
(as may appear) been held Trades of indifferency: my answer is, I grant it;
yet not so altogether as some might object against the necessity of a Smiths
trade, by alleging that of the Prophet Samuel; 1 Samuel 13.19
There was no Smith found thorowout all the Land of Israel. For this did not
infer that Smiths were of least use or employment in Israel, but rather the
necessity of them made so few amongst them, as may appear in the latter part
of the verse: For the Philistines said, lest the Hebrews make them swords or
spears. Here see the cause why there were so few in Israel, because they would
have been most useful and behoofefull to the people of Israel. For this cause
were they banished, slaughtered and deprived of all means to assist their
distressed Country, 1 Samuel 13.6.
whose people hid themselves in caves, and in hold, and in rocks, and in
towers, and in pits.

For the first Invention of trades, arts or sciences, as they were in time and
by degrees brought to perfection, so had they proper and peculiar persons, from
whom they received their beginning and foundation. For example, tillage from
Cain, pasturage from Abel, vintage from Noah, navigation from Zebulun, Genesis
4.2. Genesis 9.20. Genesis 49.13. Genesis 4.22.
brazery or Smith-worke from Tubal-Cain, music from Iubal; which by succession
of time came to such perfection as they are now in. The Satyr at the first
sight of fire, would needs have kissed and embraced it, but Prometheus checked
him. So highly admired were things unknown, and so familiarly employed being
once known. The like we may imagine at the first rising of Trades, what
difficulties attended them, and what imperfections were incident to them; being
like the Bears whelpe, ever in licking, before they came to perfecting, ever
in renewing and furbushing, ere they came to such furnishing, as they now
express.

Yea, if we should make recourse to all such Scholastic sciences or vocations
(if I may so term them) as have the name of Liberal Sciences: we shall find
that in their infancy or minority, there were many defects and blemishes in
them, having not as then attained that height or growth, which they have
acquired at this day. For then we had not a Quintilian to play the Grammarian;
a subtle Scotus to play the Logician, an eloquent Cicero for a Rhetorician; a
learned Euclid for a Mathematician; a studious Archimedes for a Geometrician; a
famous Hippocrates to renown a Physician; a sense-ravishing Orpheus to
eternize the Musician. Many conclusions were then to be sought and explored,
ere such perfection as we now enjoy could be attained. For to instance
Grammar; how long may we imagine, Grammar.
and tedious might the task be, ere so many rules could be so aptly digested,
and disposed? how long before such rules could be by authority of so
innumerable Authors approved? how long being approved, before they could so
generally and without opposition be received? Logic. Sera cogitatis quae a
clave artis reseratur Arist. in poster.
The like may be spoke of Logic, which is rightly termed the Lock of
Knowledge, opened by the Key of Art: what subtle and intricate Sophismes? what
formal and effectual conclusions? what rules of art to direct them in the
maine current of their proceedings? Those four Questions produced by Arist. in
his posteriors, how fit are they to be observed in the managing of every
Subject: Quid nominis, quid rei, qualis sit, propter quid sit? likewise his
distinction or division of places; Topicall, or Rhetorical, called insita,
being intrinsecally ingraffed or inserted in the Nature of the thing: also
places derived ab antecedentibus and consequentibus; as the Sun has shown,
whence it follows, that day has appeared; the Sun is set, whence it
follows that Night is approached. Also places derived a comparatione majorum
minorum and aequalium. As if Christ washed his Disciples feet, much more ought
we to do the same one to another. Likewise in those Local circumstances,
very necessary for searching and discussing the truth of any matter; Who, what,
what time, and where,
How, why, what helps were there?


Why; Vid. Meleb. Can. in l. 12. de locis Theologicis.
as the offense was more blameworthy in Judas than if it had been done by any
other, being his Disciple; and so of the rest. All which, as they tend properly
to the office of an Orator; so minister they no little elegancy even to our
familiar discourse: wherein we most commonly (though we observe not so much)
use some one of these places, to aggravate or extennate the Subject whereof we
speak. The like also of Rhetoric; Rhetoric.
what persuasive inductions, what powerful arguments are there to be found?
The definition whereof, if we should express in one word, it is, To make
great things little, and little things great. After Aeschines being banished
Athens, was come to Rhodes, he declared in an Oration the cause of his exile,
the Rhodians no less satisfied with the pregnancie of his reasons, than
ravished with the elegancy of his phrase, wondered at the Athenians who had
banished him so undeservedly. O (quoth he) you heard not what Demosthenes
answered to my reasons! Eras. lib. 8. apotheg.
This moved Philip of Macedon in a treaty of league betwixt him and the
Olynthians, to demand of them their Orators: little doubting, but having once
deprived them of the Stays and supporters of their State, Quint. Curt.
by receiving them as Hostages, he might quickly receive the Province into his
subjection. It is above imagination to consider of the rare effects derived
from moving or persuasive Rhetoricians, resembling in some sort passionate
Actors; -- Si vis me flere, delendumest Primu^ ipst tibi, tunc tua me
infortunia laedunt. Hor. de art. poet. Cic. lib. 3. de Orat.
Who to move passion, such an order keep,
As they feign tears to make their hearers weep.


Now the difference betwixt Actors and Orators (says Cicero) is, that the one
intermixeth levity in their action, to make their hearers laugh; The other use
all gravity, authority, and serious arguments (with a graceful insinuation) to
persuade. Wherefore those are accounted ridiculous, these esteemed prudent.
Neither is this excellency of theirs only in passion or efficacy of
persuasion, but in a subject of more admiration: which is, they can make black
seem white, and cloth that which in the eye of the world seems most
deformed, in a beautiful habit Which Art Polycrates that Athenian Rhetorician
had, who praised the Tyrant Busyris; the like had Seneca, who praised the
dissembling Claudius; Favorinus, who commended the deformed Thersites; no less
elegant was Maro both a Poet and an excellent Orarator; who with Isocrates for
lack of a good voice (otherwise called the Father of Eloquence) never pleaded
publicly: therefore was it said of his Orations, that if Maro penned them, and
Cicero pronounced them, nothing could be more exquisite. Mathematics.
Maro in commending his Gnat; Lucian a Fly; Apuleius his Ass; also Favorinus
a Quartan Ague; Glauco, Injustice; Synesius, Baldness; Lucian, Flattery;
Erasmus, Folly. Which elegant Paradoxes they have so wittily and perswasively
handled, as they gained more approbation, than if they had been Themes commonly
received: for there is no discourse, of what nature soever, that can comparably
delight the Reader or Hearer, like these which seem opposite to opinion
generally received, yet by strong and effectual reasons use to be proved and
maintained. Neither was this Rhetorical Art less required in the Camp than
in the Court: for if we should peruse Histories both of ancient and succeeding
times, we should find what rare effects were brought to pass by this smooth
inducing Art of Rhetoric. How Soldiers became animated by hearing their
Leader play the Orator, in extenuating the Enemies power, in proposing assured
hopes of victory, and putting them in mind of their Ancestors glory; Again, in
showing them the benefit of a rich booty, promising them much honor if they
live, and no less memory of their valor if they should dye. The like (to
descend to all those Arts whereof we have formerly spoken) may be said of the
rare and admirable effects of the Mathematics: what singular Conclusions have
been drawn from thence by the Line of Art? What Secrecies above humane
conceit have been drained and derived from that mysterious knowledge? Wherein
many have offended rather by being too curious, than by being too little
solicitous. Libenter ignoro quod me scire. Deus noluit.

Caetera quidem nescio, hoc autem scio, quod dii oderint curies^s. Euclid
Compescat igitur se humana temeritas, and id quod non est, no^ quaerat, ne
illud quod est, non inveniat. Maxim. Sermon. 23. Geometry. Vid Plut. in vit.
Marcel. L. Flor l. 2 c. 6. Physic.


Whence it was, that Euclid being demanded by one too inquisitive in the
secrecies of Heaven, touching a question, which (as he thought) was more
profound than profitable, he answered; Surely, I know not this, but thus much
I know, that God hates such as are curious searchers after his secrets. I
might here produce the Basis on which the study of the Mathematics is
grounded, as also the exquisite and admirable effects or conclusions from
thence derived, but I hasten to the rest. The power of Geometry was shown
sufficiently in that studious Artist Archimedes, who by his own proper power
repelled the whole force of Marcellus and all his Army, laying siege to
Syracusa: so as it was imagined that this one man did more good in the defense
of the city by his Art, than all the rest of the inhabitants did by the force
of Arms. Neither had Marcellus (as it was generally thought) in long time
prevailed, although the City was in most places razed and ruined, if it had not
been by false and treacherous means privately yielded and betrayed. Where this
Mirror of his time, the famous Archimedes, was suddenly in his study surprised,
and by a common soldier (much against Marcellus will) cruelly murdered.
Touching Physike, what rare cures have been wrought by such excellent and
expert Artists as have professed this knowledge? It is wonderful to read, what
perfection Mithridates attained in this profession, being the first that found
and gave name to that known receipt against all poison, Mithridate: with which
he so inured his body, to repel the force of poison; Vid. App. Al.
as in his ebb and decrease of fortune, when he had lost in one hour what
he had in so many years gained, being deprived of all means to cure his
misery, he labored to find a way to end his misery, and that was to deprive
himself of life; which the better to effect, he drunk poison; but so strongly
had his former receipts fortified his body against such baneful effects, as it
would not work, nor as he expected, produce that tragical issue with him.
The rare cures of Dioscorides; the admirable experiments of Hippocrates,
Hippocrates.
to them that shall but peruse their Works, will confirm the excellency of
this Art: L. Flor. l. 3. c. 5.
where the One concludes, that Art is long, Life short, Experience deceiving:
implying, that so rare an Art could not be attained, but by much industry;
Life being so short, and a very Emblem of frailty, was to be used tenderly;
and Experience being so deceiving, was to be put in practice carefully. They
give us this precept; in sickness to respect health principally, and in
health action. Health, that we might might be made for action; Action, that
we might the better preserve our health. Music.
Lastly Music, the first beginning or invention whereof, as it merits
admiration; so the perfection of it, at this day deserves applause: Finding an
open Torteise on the ground,
From it the Art of Music first was found.


So observes Du Bartas; which indeed may rather be limited to one kind of
Instrument, whereto the Torteise may seem to have resemblance, that is, the
Lute. Pythagoras chanced once into a company of Drunkards, where a Musician
ruled their lascivious Banquet: he presently commanded him to change his
harmony with a Dorion, (or an heavier tone) and so with this tragic melody
moved them to cast off their garlands, ashamed of whatsoever they had done,
being brought by the accent of grave and solemn Music to sobriety. Whence it
was, that Aristotle forbids in his Commonwealth, certain lascivious
Music, and allows the Doricall, which is of another kind. The Arcadians by
Music were transformed from savage and barbarous people to civility, and
transported (as it were) from the violent current of natural cruelty, Vt lyram
vel citharam percu^iat, etc.
to affability and courtesy. Shall we descend to some diviner effects of
Music, confirmed by holy Writ? Saul being vexed with an evil spirit, when
David played upon his Harp, he was comforted, and the evil spirit departed.
Music causes mirth and moans; divine mirth, as appears in Solomon's Songs; a
holy Turtle-like moan, 1 Samuel 16.23. Music has a different working Melody,
Mirth and Melancholy. 2 King. 3.15. Exodus 15.20. Judith 16.2. Judge. 5.1. Aug.
Conf. lib. 10. cap. 33.
as appears in Ieremies lamentable Threnes, David's Penitential Psalms.
Elizeus prepared his spirit to receive the influence of prophecy by Music.
When Israel had passed the Red Sea, Moses with the men, and Miriam the
prophetess, sister of Aaron, with the women, sung Panegyries of praise to God,
with Hymns and Musical Instruments. The like did Judith, when she had
vanquished Holofernes. So did Deborah, when Sisera was discomfited. Augustine
reports of himself, what comfort he conceived at the beginning of his
Conversion; what tears he shed, and how he was inwardly moved with the
harmony and melody which was used in Churches: yet thought that holy Father (as
he rightly thought) that he offended when he was delighted more with the note
and melody of the song, than sense of the Psalm: and therefore highly
commends Saint Athanasius, Qui tam modic^flexu vocis faciebat sonare Lectorem
Psalmi, ut prenu^tianti vicinior esset quam canenti. ibid.
who caused the reader of the Psalm to sound out the words with so small a
forcing of his voice, as it seemed rather like one that did pronounce it, than
one that did sing it. But I fear me. I have struck too long on this string;
wherefore, lest I should wrong your generous patience too much, for whom I
addressed my self at first to this Task: I purpose now to descend from
speaking of Vocation in general, to speak of the Vocation of a Gentleman in
particular; hoping to make amends by refreshing you in this, whose patience I
have so much tired in the other.

NOw are we to address our selves in a more restrained and particular
discourse, The Vocation of a Gentleman in particular.
to propose a Gentleman his Vocation; which, perchance, by our nicer and more
curious Gallants, whose sense consists in sent, will be distasted and
dispalated: but to such, whose understanding consists not in Perfumes, nor tie
themselves, to the vain garb of complement, as the only posture whereon
Gentry relyes, these ensuing Observations will not (I assure me) seem
altogether unwelcome.

Quae retro sunt oblivisci, and ad ea quae ante sunt Apostolum sequi. Epist.
15. (...)

Dial. 11. Exodus 24.14. Genesis 28.12. Psalm. 15.2.

(...).

(...).


Saint Bernard writing to one Haimericus, Chancellor of Rome, in his very first
salutation, without further insinuation, Wishes him to forget those things
which are behind, and to follow the Apostle to those things which are before.
Which no man can do, that either stands still, or is idle. Wherefore Hermes
says generally, Nothing in the whole world is altogether idle. The Wiseman
has allowed a time for every thing else, but for idleness he has allowed no
time. Moses Arc had rings, and bars within the rings, to signify that it
was not made to stand still, but to be removed from place to place. Jacobs
Ladder had staves, upon which he saw none standing still; but all either
ascending or else descending by it. Ascend you likewise to the top of the
Ladder, to heaven, and there you shall hear one say, My Father does now work,
and I work also. Whereupon Basil notes, that King David having first said,
Lord, who shall dwell in thy Tabernacle? adds then, not he that has wrought
righteousness heretofore, but he that does now work righteousness; even as
Christ says, My father does now work, and I work also. Descend you likewise
to the foot of the Ladder, to the earth, and there you shall hear that Figtree
accursed, which did bear leaves and no fruit. (...).
Whereupon Theophylact notes, that John Baptist having first said, The axe is
laid to the root of the tree; adds then, Not every tree that has not brought
forth good fruit heretofore: but, every tree that does not now bring forth good
fruit shall be cut down, even as that fruitless Fig Tree was cut down, and
cast into the fire. Therefore we must so walk, as God seeing our continual
fruitfulness, may say of us, I see men walking like trees. Mark. 8.24. 1 Cor.
15.58.
Men walk like Trees, when men are never idle, but always abounding in the
work of the Lord: As the Tree of Life every month brings forth twelve
manner of fruits. But that I may the better proceed in that which I have taken
in hand; you are to know, that the life of man is either active or
contemplative, so as all our employments have relation to the one, or to the
other. Which two were represented in Mary and Martha. Luke 10.39.
The One whereof was very attentive, sitting at Jesus feet, and heard his
preaching: but Martha was cumbred about much serving. The former sitting at
Jesus feet, 40.
hearing him preaching, may signify likewise the spiritual man, whose
actions, affections, motions and intentions, are wholly bent to the service of
God, leaving all things to gain him, who left his life upon the Cross to save
him, The latter being cumbred about many things, signifies the natural man,
who betakes himself to the employments of this life, ministering to the
necessity of his family, laboring with his own hands to get him a competent
living. Neither are these to be divided one from the other, partaking indeed so
nearly one of another. For as we are not altogether to imitate Hermit or
Anchorite in being wholly retired from the world; so like the Libertine or
loose worldling are we not too much to be cumbred or entangled with the
world. For the First, as it implies a kind of hate to humane society; so the
Latter infers our too much care to the things of the Body. Now to observe that
golden mean, which may free us from being taxed by the one, or tainted with
the other: I do think it fitting, that Gentlemen should be sociably affected,
ever with a reservancie, with whom they keep company; likewise from worldly
affections weaned, that being on earth they may have their minds seated above:
being (I mean) so free in the inward man, as rather than they will slave the
noblest motions of the soul to the unworthy bondage of the body, they will
endure want, contempt, or whatsoever the blind world can lay upon them.

The Vocation of a Gentleman, The Vocation of a Gentleman has relation to
imploiment public or private.
without more curiosity of division, is either public or private. Public,
when employed in affairs of State, either at home or abroad: at home, either
in advising or acting; abroad, as by way of embassage, or personal exploits in
the field. Private, when in domesticke business he is detained, as in
ordering his household; or if not as yet attained to the name of Householder, in
laboring to know such things as may ripen his understanding when he comes unto
it.

Touching the First, to wit, Public affairs of State; as all are not fit for
such a charge or burden; so there is a necessity enjoined such, who are able
to undertake so great and weighty a Task, to submit themselves willingly to
the command of their Sovereign, whenever his pleasure shall be to make
trial of their sufficiency in affairs of State. In the carriage whereof,
diverse necessary cautions have been formerly observed by Statesmen. As first,
to avoid all occasions of distrust, never to show too much inwardnesse with
foreign States: for this may beget a suspect in your Prince, that your aims
are neither fair nor loyal. It was this which broke Byrons neck, Objections
framed against Byron, set his Treaty with foreign States.
being accused to have had conference with one Picote, borne at Orleans, and
fled into Flanders to have intelligence with the Archduke, to which Picote he
had given an hundred and fifty crowns for two voyages to that effect. Likewise,
it was objected against him, that he had treated with the Duke of Savoy three
days after his coming to Paris. Likewise, the intelligence he had from the
Duke of Savoy in the taking of Bourges, giving him advice to attempt against
the Kings Army. Likewise, that he should bring the King before S. Katharines
to be slain there: and to that end had written to the Governor, giving him
some tokens to know his Majesty. Likewise, that he had sent La Fin to treat
with the Duke of Savoy, and the Count of Fuentes. To which, although he
replied, and in some sort purged himself, yet those treaties or parlies which
were proved against him, showed him guilty of diverse indirect proceedings
against him. It is dangerous therefore to entertain conference with Strangers in
matters of State: Credulity in two respects dangerous to persons employed in
af^sires of State.

Credulity in believing the relations of others.


for howsoever your aims may be faithful and honest, such Treaties may be so
racked and misconstrued by such as malign your greatness, as they will bring
you in danger, if not to final distress. It is no less dangerous to one
employed in affairs of State, to be too credulous; and that in two respects:
either by being too credulous in giving trust to the relations of others, or by
being too credulous in imparting his thoughts to the secrecy of others. For
the former, it detracts much from the worth and estimate of man, yea (and if I
may so say) argues great indiscretion to have an ear open to all reports,
seconding whatsoever is related, with an opinion of credulity. For such as
these, whom either greatness of Place by Descent, or some more noble and
native characters of personal worth have advanced, need not want for Relaters
in this kind, especially if they find them apt to believe whatsoever they
shall be ready to report. Neither are any sort of men more subject to the
garb of strange and novell relations than Travelers: who may arrogate to
themselves a liberty of invention in this kind, by authority. Whence it is
said, that Travelers, Poets and Liars, are three words al of one
signification. Now there is no means better to avoid the company of these
fabulous Relaters, than by interrupting them, or by requiting their Tales (to
argue their incredibility) telling stories far more strange, and indeed
beyond the compass of common sense: whereof I have heard a merry conceited
Tale to this effect: A certain Traveller, or at least one who desired though
he never deserved that title, reporting wonderful and incredible things which
he had seen in his travel, amongst the rest related this: Upon a time it
befell (said he) that I traveled along a certain desert in Arabia felix,
where I with others who then accompanied me, were assailed by a violent
shower, so as laboring to fly for shelter to some covert, we might perceive a
little Coppice, wherein grew great store of Cabbages of such huge proportion,
as the very leaves thereof (so largely extended were the spurges) might by
their greatness give shadow to five hundred men. This Tale being told, one
amongst the rest, to answer his Tale, makes this reply by way of discourse upon
such occurrents as had happened him in his Travel, proceeding thus; It fortuned
that I with some other Gentlemen of eminent rank and quality, traveled near
the Riphean Mountains, in the clifts of which Mountains abundance of all
metals, but especially of copper, is daily found: Now as we coasted along, we
might perceive some three leagues Westward from those Mountains, a great
number of people beating and knocking with incessant labor, but for what end
we knew not: wherefore with one consent we resolved to approach nearer them,
and see about what they so eagerly labored. Where we found five hundred
Braziers making of one Caldron, which was of so huge proportion, as not any one
of all those Braziers, though they were all employed in one work, could hear
one another strike. Good God (quoth the former Traveller) for what use was so
huge a Caldron made? Surely (replied the second) I cannot imagine for what use
it should be, unless it were to boil your Cabbage in. This present and
pregnant answer so daunted that fabulous Traveller, as he was ever after more
sparing in discourse of his Travels. A Statesman ought likewise to beware of
giving credit to all foreign relations: for diverse there be who presuming of
the distance of place, will invent and vent their inventions to curry favor:
having so couched and digested their new-minted New^s, as they pass for
current, at least they seem probable for the present. And herein certainly
have many been abused, Credulity in imparting his thoughts to the secrecy of
others.
giving approbation to what was spoken only by way of insinuation. The second
respect, wherein a Statesman ought not to be too credulous, is this; he must
not be too open-brested in imparting his thoughts to the secrecy of others. For
if we say, that even a private man committing his secrecy to another, becomes
his slave to whom he committed it: much more a Statesman, whose affairs have
no other limit than the public state, by imparting his thoughts, or rather
laying himself open to the trust or secrecy of others, makes himself bound,
where he was before free; yea, he endangers the body of the State, whereof he
is an especial member, For Cabinet-counsell this may be their Motto; Plenu^
sum rimarum.
by commending or committing her private intendments to the hazard of rumor,
which should not be so much as possessed of the least intelligence given in
matters of such maine importance. To be full of chinks in affairs of ordinary
consequence, implies a great weakness: but especially, where the state is
interrested, there is enjoined that Comicke Impreza: If wise, seem not to know
that which thou know: at least, divulge not thy secret'st thoughts to the
danger of discovery, whereby thou put'st thy head under another girdle. He is
my dear friend (says one) to whom I will impart my inferior aims; but he
shall be incorporated with me, to whom I will make known what may endanger me.
The like is requisite to be observed in affairs of State: where all Counsels
and Consultations tending to the safety and security of the public state,
should be laid up as a secret Treasure, and not discovered to every man's trust.
Vt Thesaurus repositus. Leporis ventri quam vento vulgi, multo satius mandari
sentiens. Just.

Resolution in suffering neither price to draw him, nor power to overawe him.

Excitamur ad meliora magnitudine rerum, Salust.

Herodotus l. 3. initio.

Vid. Hotman de Legate.

Legatus ipsam Reipub. faciem suam attulisse videtur.

Ad virtutem laudesque habendas naturam si^e doctrina, quam doctrinam sino
natura valuisse. Cic.


This that prudent and politic Statesman, Harpagus rightly understood, when
in disclosing a secret of State unto Cyrus that Persian Monarch, he commanded
such letters as included the Sum of his directions, to be enclosed and sowed
in the belly of a Hare, and so dispatched the Messenger toward that victorious
Commander. There is likewise required a noble and prepared resolution in every
Statesman: being so affected, as neither price can taunt him, nor power
overawe him: addressing his aims wholly for the benefit of the State,
preferring death before his Countries prejudice. Of this resolution or
constancy of mind we have a notable example in Lewis Duke of Bavaria commended
for his constancy; in so much as being threatened by Albert the Marquess of
Brandenburgh, that if he would not condescend to some reasonable ransom for
his liberty, he would deliver him over into the hands of his enemy, answered,
Ask that thing of me being prisoner, that thou would ask of me at Liberty.
The like we read of Pantaleon, who restrained in most strait bondage, was
never a whit dismayed, nor so much as sighed, when he beheld his son
Paraxaspis thrust to the heart. This resolution or stoutnesse of mind, might be
illustrated by diverse examples of the like kind, but my purpose has ever been
(because these do rather illustrate than prove or confirm) to take them, as
it were by the way, but in no case to dwell on them: we will therefore descend
to foreign employments of State, as affairs of embassage or treaty with any
Prince or State.

Now it is expedient that such as be employed in affairs of this Nature, be
choice and select men both in gifts of Nature, and State-experience. For in
Nature is the foundation laid, which by experience and continual employment in
state-busines, uses to be stored, furnished, and accomplished. So as I do not
altogether assent to his opinion, who thought that in choice of instruments to
treat or negociate by way of Embassy betwixt Prince and Prince; it is better
to choose men of a plainer sort, who are like to do that that is committed to
them, and to report back again faithfully the success, than those that are
cunning to contrive out of other men's business, somewhat to grace themselves,
and will help the matter in report for satisfaction sake. For his conclusion
agrees not with his premises; For (says he) If you would work any man, you
must either know his nature, and fashions, and so lead him; or his ends, and so
persuade him; or his weakness and disadvantages, and so awe him; or those that
have interest in him, and so govern him. Now how should a man, whom a simple
plainness only possesses, one whom no diving or penetrating reach enableth,
one whom the outward semblance only instructs, how should he (I say) by
working any man, either know his nature or fashion, and so lead him; since his
eye can reach no farther than the outward seeming, which as often deceives, as it
receives diversity of habits which it wears? or how should he (I say) know his
ends with whom he treats, and so persuade him, since politic men do usually
pretend that which they least intend: showing a fair gloss, and putting on a
false face to delude, and deluding to color their designs more cunningly? or
how should he discover the weakness or disadvantages of the person with whom
he deals, when his own weakness so disables him, as he oft-times lets
opportunity slip, when the best advantage is for him? or how discern those
which have interest in him, when his aims are only to conclude with him, with
whom he deals, without relation to any intercedent means to effect his
business? Neither is it to be doubted, but such whose understanding has
attained a higher pitch, will be as ready to do that which is committed to
them, as those on whom a more plainness has naturally seized: for these will
duly consider the great danger they are like to incur, if they should exceed
their Commission either in doing too much, or detract from their Commission in
doing too little. For in affairs of this nature, especially parum agendum est
de proprio, yea, though in the opinion of the party employed, it seem that he
could go more effectually to work, Disobedience punished in attempts most
successive.
than just as his Commission directs him. Manlius Torquatus commanded his son
to be put to death, for fighting (albeit prosperously) against his
commandment. Pub. Crass. Mutianus sending to his Enginer to send him the
bigger of his two ship-masts that he had seen in Athens, to make a Ram to
batter down the walls; the Enginer sent him the less, imagining it to be
fitter: Virgis coedi jussit quibus misere periit. Plut. in apoth^g.
wherefore Mutianus sent for the Enginer, and caused him to be so cruelly
whipped with rods, that he dyed therewith. If disobedience in such affairs as
these, being of lesser consequence, seemed among the Heathen cause sufficient
to pronounce sentence of death upon the offender; what may they deserve, who in
conceit of their own wisdom, dare take upon them directions of their own;
without tying themselves expressly to their Commission? And of these there be
two sorts: The one, even in greatest and most important matters, will presume
to take upon them without direction of Authority: wherein as they commonly
err, so they give advantage to him with whom they have to deal, of making his
own bargain upon such Terms as shall best please him: for how should one
man's judgment equal a whole judicious Council? So as in dealing with cunning
persons, we must ever consider their ends, to interpret their Speeches; and it
is good to say little to them, and that which they least look for. The other
sort tie themselves something more strictly or precisely to their Commission;
for these will be loath to digress from it in matters of weight and substance,
but rather in some impertinent Ceremony or circumstance: as we read in the
general History of Spain, that there came two Ambassadors out of France unto
King Alfonse the ninth, to demand one of his daughters in marriage for their
Sovereign King Philip one of which Ladies was very fair, and named Vrraca;
the other nothing so gracious, and called Blanch. They both coming into the
presence of the Ambassadors, all men held it a matter resolved, that their
choice would light upon Vrraca, as the elder and fairer, and better adorned:
but the Ambassadors enquiring each of their names, took offense at the name
of Vrraca, and made choice of the Lady Blanch; saying, that her name would be
better received in France than the other. For matters of such indifferency as
these, it is not to be doubted but they are left to the discretion of the
instruments: but for affairs of State, as they require due deliberation in
discussing; so require they the joint assent and approbation of the State ere
they come to concluding.

THere are likewise public employments, How a Gentleman is to employ himself
in public affairs. Cypr^^. 1 Macc. 14.46. Magne, non been. A^g
wherein Gentlemen upon occasion may be interessed, which extend themselves to
military affairs: in which, as it is not the death, but the cause of the death
which makes a Martyr, so it is not the action, but the ground of the action
which merits the name of valor. That act of Razis, in taking out his own
bowels, and throwing them upon the people, it was an act (says S. Austin) that
tasted more of stoutnesse than goodness. For what could that act of his
benefit his Country? wherein could it add spirit to the distressed Maccabees?
wherein allay the heavy burden of their affliction, or minister the least
relief in the time of their persecution? That act of resolution by that noble
Bohemian, as it tasted more of true valor; so it reared a column of
perpetuity to his ever-living honor; which exploit is thus recorded: When
Mahom^t the second of that name besieged Belgrade in Servia, one of his
Captains at length got up upon the wall of the City, A Friar, who writ
diverse works viz. De Papae and Corelij, Autoritate. Speculum Clericorum. etc.
Zinglerus l. de (...) viris Germaniae, cap. 98. In Turc. Hist.
with banner displayed. Another Bohemian espying this, ran to the Captain, and
clasping him fast about the middle, asked one Capistranus standing beneath,
whether it would be any danger of damnation to his soul, if he should cast
himself down headlong with that dog, (so he termed the Turk) to be slain
with him? Capistranus answering, that it was no danger at all to his soul, the
Bohemian forthwith tumbled himself down with the Turk in his arms, and so
(by his own death only) saved the life of all the City. The like worthy
exploits might be instanced in those heirs of fame, the Rhodians, in the
siege of their City: the Knights of Malta in their sundry defeats and
discomsitures of the Turks: the inhabitants of Vienna, who being but a handful
in comparison of their enemies, gave them not only the repulse, but wholly
defeated their designs. This Valor or Fortitude, which indeed appears ever
in the freest and noblest minds, is excellently defined by the Stoics, Probe
def^^rur a Stoicis fortitudo, cum eam virtutem duunt. ^sse propugnatem pro
aequitate. Ci^. Salmacida spolia sine sanguine and judere. Si. lib. 4.
to be, A virtue ever fighting in defense of equity. These who are professors
of so peerless a virtue, are more ready to spare than to spill: their aims
are fair and honest, free from the least aspersion either of cruelty or
vainglory: for as they scorn to triumph over an afflicted foe, so they
dislike that conquest (unless necessity enforce it) which is purchased by too
much blood. The Salmacian Spoils relish better to their palate: for they are
so full of noble compassion, as the death of their enemy enforces in them
tears of pity. This appeared in those princely tears shed by Caesar at the
sight of Pompeys head; and in Titus that Darling of Mankind, in those tears
he shed at the sight of those innumerable slaughters committed upon the Jews.
Plut. in vit. Iul. Cas. Joseph in bell. Iud.

Clementiam id (...) Imperatoris pro inertia ducebant. Ib.

Dulce and decorum est pro p^tria mori. Hor. l. 3. od. 3.


Now as my purpose is not to insist on the postures of war; so I intend not
to dwell upon every circumstance remarkable in martial affairs, but upon the
maine scope of military discipline, whereto every generous and true bred
Soldier is to direct his course.

Let your aim be therefore, Gentlemen, to fight for the safety and peace of
your Country, in the defense of a good conscience, which is to be preferred
before all the booties of war: for as you have received your birth and
breeding from your Country; so are you to stand for her, even to the sacrifice
of your dearest lives; provided, that the cause which you entertain in her
defense be honest, without purpose of intrusion into another right, or
laboring to enlarge her boundiers by an unlawful force. For howsoever the
ancient Heathens were in this respect faulty, being some of them Truce
breakers, others violent intruders or usurpers of what was little due unto
them: we for our parts have learned better things, being commanded not to take
any thing from any man, Poeni faedifragi. Cic in Offic. Nulla sancta societas,
nec fides regni.

Philip. 4.11. A glorious enterprise recommended to the undertaking of all
generous spirits. Totum adimit, quo ingrata refulget.

Coping with the Persian Sapor in titular insolence, who caused himself to be
styled, Rex Regum, frater Solis and Lunae, particeps Syderum.


but in all things learn to be contended. But of all enterprises worthy the
acceptance of a Gentleman in this kind, if I should instance any one in
particular, none more noble or better deserving (as I have elsewhere formerly
touched) than to war against the Turk that professed enemy of Christendom; the
increase of whose Empire may be compared to the milt in man's body; for the
grandeur of it threatens ruin and destruction to all Christian States, drawing
light to his Half Moon by darkening of others, and showing even by the
multitude of his insolent Titles what his aims be, if the Lord put not a hook
in the nose of that Leviathan. Praiseworthy therefore are those glorious, and
(no doubt) prosperous expeditions of such English and other Christian
Voluntaries as have stood, and even at this day do stand engaged in personal
service against the great Turk: for these, though they perish in the battle,
shall survive time, and raise them a name out of the dust, which shall never be
extinguished. These are they who fight the Lords battle, and will rather die
than it should quail: These are those glorious Champions, whose aim is to
plant the blessed tidings of the Gospel once again in that Holy Land, which
now remains deprived of those heavenly Prophets which she once enjoyed, of
those godly Apostles which she once possessed, of that sweet Singer of Israel
with which her fruitful coasts once resounded.

O Gentlemen, if you desire employment in this kind, what enterprise more
glorious? A glorious fight is ever accompanied by a noble fate.
If you aim at profit, what assay to your souls more commodious? If you seek
after fame, (the aim of most soldiers) what expedition more famous? since by
this means the practices of Christ's enemies shall be defeated, the borders of
Christendom enlarged, peace in Sion established, and the tidings of peace
every where preached. Neither did ever Time give fairer opportunity to effect
it, than now, when the very Guard of his person, his Ianizaries begin to mutine
and innovate, by interposing their suffrages in his government. Besides, in
assayes of this nature, Non debet timere hostem fortem, ^u^ dominum habet
fortiorem. Esa. 63.1. Psalm. 22.12.
being taken in hand for the peace and safety of Christendom, assures more
security to the person engaged: for little need he to fear a strong foe,
that has a stronger friend. Admit therefore that you return, as one that
comes with red garments from Bozra, so as the Devil and his angels like
wild Bulls of Basan run at you, you shall break their horns in his Cross
for whom you fight.

As we have discoursed of employments public, which we divided into two
ranks, Civil and Military; and of the manner how Gentlemen are to demean
themselves in Court or Camp; so are we now to descend to employments private,
wherein we purpose to set down such necessary cautions or observances, as may
seem not altogether unprofitable or unusefull for the consideration of a
Gentleman.

How a Gentleman is to demean himself in private affairs.
And first, I will speak of the employment of a private Justice of Peace,
wherein he is appointed and made choice of, not only to redress such
annoyances as may seem to prejudice the state of that County wherein he
lives, and is deputed Justice; but likewise to mediate, atone and determine
all such differences as arise betwixt party and party; for to these also
extends the office of Justice of Peace. Yea, we are to wish him to be, as well
(...), as (...), a Compounder, as a Commissioner of the Peace. Godliness
should be their chiefest gain, and right and peace their greatest joy: for
such are both Pacidici, and Pacifici, Pleaders for peace, and leaders to peace:
Peace-lovers, and peaceable livers. As for the rest, they are deservedly
blamed, that confine all their practice not within those ancient bounds usque
ad aras, Sic crimine nota crumena est.

Quid non speremus, si nummos possideamus? Omnia nummus habet quod vult, facit,
addit and aufert.

This may be observed in Suits of Law, as well as private affairs of Justice.


but with those usual bounds, usque ad crumenas. The old position was was,
Justice is to be preferred before profit; but now the terms are transposed in
the proposition, and the avaritious desire of having never disputes of the
equity of the cause, but of the utilitie. Kind men such are but where they do
take, hardening their hearts against the cry of the poor. If a man come to
demand justice, he shall speed ill, having no money to give, no coin to
present, no friends to speak, his cause is like to fall. Suppose out of two
mites he give one: the rich adversaries horse eats up the poor Clients oats;
there needs no Oedipus to unfold this riddle: in the end the poor sheep, that
lost but a lock of his wool in the Country, loses his whole fleece in the
City; consumes what he has, spends his time, loses his hope, and falls
his suit, be it never so good and honest. Whereas such (and of such we only
speak) as do Deuteronomy. 10.18.
right judgment to the fatherless and widow, bear a resemblance of God, who
is a loving Father to the Orphane, and a gracious Judge to the widow. These
will not for conscience sake pervert the right of strangers, fatherless, etc.
for such as do so, shall be Deuteronomy. 27.13.
cursed upon mount Ebal: but these like pure Lamps, diffuse those divine
beams of unblemished justice, to all places where they reside, resembling
David, who 2 Samuel 8.15.
executed judgment and justice to all his people: or like that prophetical
Dove, Jeremiah, ever Ierem. 22.3.
exhorting to execute righteousness and judgment. Or like that good Patriarch
Abraham, ever Genesis 18.19.
commanding his Household to do righteousness and judgment. For these know,
how Deuteronomy. 32.4^
all the ways of God are judgments. And, that, 2 Esdr. 5.40. Romans 11.33.
Psalm. 36.6.
just and like a great deep are Gods judgments. And the wicked Act. 24.26.
tremble at Gods judgments. And the wicked, Prove. 28.5.
understand and not Gods judgments. And therefore strive against Ecclus.
11.7.8.9. Act. 28.4.6. 1 Timothy 1.5.19, 21.
perverse judgments. Because they know what 23.1.7. to 10.
equity is to be required in judgments. Having ever before their 2 Samuel
22.23.
eyes Gods judgments. O how precious are the lips of those who preserve
judgment, being an honor to their Country, a pillar to the State, leaving a
memorable name to themselves, which as that princely Prophet says, shall never
rot! These are they, who have their faces Job 9.24.
covered, lest they should have respect unto the person; as godliness is their
gain, and the preservation of a good conscience their principal aim; so if
there were neither reward here, nor else where, for such as executed justice
and judgment; yet for conscience sake, and a sincere love they bore to truth,
would they continue in their zealous care to the profession and protection
thereof. These are not of that Leaven who turn Judgment to worme-wood, and
leave off righteousness in the earth. For such in stead of judgment and
equity, Amos. 5.7.
execute cruelty and oppression. These are not of that sort, Purpuram magis
quam Deum coleutes.
who prefer the purple before the person, the person before the cause; never
examining the cause how good it is, but observing the man how great he is. No,
their counsels and counsultations tend to the public peace, and the redress
of such enormities as arise from vicious humors, breeding and spreading in the
State.

Now what employment more fitting or accommodate for a Gentleman of what degree
soever than this, which inables him in affairs tending as well to himself in
particular, as the Stern of the State public in general? Would you see
errors and abuses in the State redressed? You are seated where by your own
authority you may have them reformed. Would you have Officers execute their
places under you honestly, being from corruption freed? Your Prince, by
especial notice taken of you, has so advanced you, that you may see all
Offices under you duly executed, and where default shall be, have them
punished. Would you further the poor man's cause, and see his wrongs releeved?
It is in your hand to effect that which you have desired. Would you purge your
Country of such superfluous humors, as from long peace and too much
prosperity have ofttimes issued? You are those Physicians who may lance and
cure those broadspreading sores, with which the State has been so
distempered. Would you curb factious and contentious members, Judges 15.4.
who like Samsons firebrarnds tied to Foxes tails, kindle the fire of all
division, and labor to have them extinguished? You have authority to see such
censured, that public peace (as becomes a civil State) might be
maintained. Two perilous shelfes which in danger Justice.
Now there are two extremes which (like two dangerous rocks) are carefully to
be avoided, lest the precious freight of Justice might thereby be endangered.
The one is rigor, the other indulgence: I approve therefore of his opinion,
who would have intus mel, foris oleum; as well cordialls as corrasives: for as
some men (and those of the basest and servilest condition) are only to be
deterred from doing evil by the censure or penalty of the Law; So there are
others of a more generous and noble disposition, who are only to be reclaimed
by fair and affable means; and these are to be brought in rather by love
than awe. For as wormwood of it self, expels diseases, yet is to be anointed
with honey, that the improvident age of childhood might be deluded, and they
from their Nurses teats the sooner weaned: so though this wormwood of rigor
and severity be of force to cure and expel most diseases raging or reigning;
Sicut absynthiaper se pellunt morbos, melle tamen illiniuntur, ut puerorum
aetas improvida ludificetur.

Pic. Mirand. ad Hermol. Mark. 3.17.


yet being allayed with the honey of mercy and indulgence, it will sooner weane
children, that is to say, such whose soft and easy temper is best persuaded by
courtesy, than wormwood untempered, that is, than the law to her highest pin
wrested. Indeed these Boanerges, the sons of thunder, are powerful in
deterring such, whose braving and domineering natures use to oppose themselves
to right: for persuasions are as little available to these, as to sow sand in
the air; wherefore as the Law has provided fit means to curb and chastise
such, whose obstinate and refractory natures will not by easy means be
induced, so has it qualified or attempered the rigor or bitterness of such
provisions, where there is assured hope, that the party by easier persuasions
will be reclaimed. For if we will resemble that absolutest pattern or
abstract of all Justice, God himself, we shall read that he came as well in
a still voice, as in Thunder, So as, albeit Exodus 19.18.
God when he delivered the Law, came down in the sire; And the Exodus 24.17.
glory of God appeared on Mount Sinai, as a consuming fire; And out of Gods
mouth went a 1 Samuel 22.9.
consuming fire; And in Gods wrath against Deuteronomy. 31.22.
Israel was kindled fire; And 2 King. 2.11.
Eliah was taken up into heaven by a Chariot and horses of fire; And the Exodus
3.2
Angel appeared to Moses in a flame of fire; And 1 Cor. 3.13.15.
every man's work shall be tried by fire; Yet God, as he is to the wicked a
Deuteronomy. 4 9.10.24. Heb. 12.29.
consuming fire; so to the godly he is a Exodus 13.21, 22. Number. 9.15.
comfortable fire. Be not then ever clothed with fire; reprove the enormities
of the State with the spirit of mildness, which if it will not prevail,
unsheath the sword of Justice, that such may be severely curbed, who by
gentleness would not be cured. It is not to be doubted, but you shall
encounter with delinquents of several natures: the chastizing of both which
sorts is left wholly to your discretion: for many things, though expressly
enacted, are in respect of the manner, referred to your discretion to see them
executed. Many there are, who will rather die for the act, than discover the
act: like Epicharia a Libertine of Rome, who made privy to a conspiracy
against Nero, would not disclose the plotters thereof, though tormented with
cruel punishments: or Leena, who conspiratour against the Tyrant Hyppeas, was
not aghast at the death of her friends, though torn with extreme torments, but
resolute to the end would not reveal her partners, but bit in sunder her own
tongue, and spit in the Tyrants face. There are others likewise, who will
expose themselves to all extremities that Law can inflict, only to gain
themselves a name; such was Herostratus, who burned the Temple of Diana of
Ephesus, only for vainglory: but to these you are not to use indulgence; for
they that brave it in sin, esteeming mischievous practices to be their
chiefest glory, are fallen into that gall of bitterness, as in them there is
small hope of remedy. Better it is that one perish, Melius est qu^d perist
unus, quam unitas

Qui malis parcit, bonis nocet. Luxuriantes amputantur surculi, ut genuini
coalescant rami. In Putatione sarmenta flerilia reciduntur: ut ca quae
praevalent uberius fructum ferant Greg. in Mor. Exposit. in Job.

Nimius amor and nimiu^ odiu^ omne pervertaut iudicium. Chrysostom.


than that unity perish, and in these (sure I am) that maxim is true; He that
spares the evil, hurts the good: for it is impossible that any State should
flourish with increase of good men, where there is no difference made betwixt
the good and evil. Wherefore you are to deal in the State, as skillful
gardners or vine-dressers do with their Vines; they cause the wild branches to
be pruned, that their natural Siens may be better nourished. Unfruitful
members, and such as are more burdensome than behovefull to a State, are to be
purged and pruned, that such whose honest care and providence deserves due
praise among you may be the more encouraged, seeing these, who used to live on
others labors, duly punished. Yet in all your censures beware of this, that no
personal distaste aggravate in you the quality of the crime: I mean, let no
private hate or dislike to any person, cause you to punish him, for this is a
partial and indirect proceeding, relying rather upon the authority of your
place, than equity of the cause. Far more generous is it to bury all hate
toward your foes, especially when by means of your place, it rests in your
power to spare or punish. When Caesar commanded the demolished monuments of
Pompey to be set up again; Cicero told him that in erecting Pompeyes
trophies, he established his own. And no less generous was Scaurus, Domitius
his enemy, who when a certain servant of Domitius came before the judgment
seat to accuse his master, he sent him home to his master. The like of Cato
and Murena. Be your censures likewise free from passion; for there is nothing
that so troubles the pure current of Justice, or so much transformes man from
himself, as giving way to wrath. The saying of Archytas is much commended, who
being angry with one of his Hindes, said; O how would I have beaten thee, had I
not been angry with thee! Hear the poor man's cause with an equal and
impartial ear; let not the greatness of his adversary be any bar to his
plea, Malle se inter inimicos, quam amicos iudicare dicebat. Laert. in vit.
Eian.

Perit omne iudicium cum res transit in affectum. Sen.


or any hinderance to his cause: bear your selves sincerely with all
singleness, uprightly without partial connivence; standing for your foe
equally as your friend, if your foes cause be as honest as your friends. It
was Bias saying, that he had rather be a Judge amongst his Enemies, than
amongst his Friends: and this might probably be his reason; because his
enemies would pry more narrowly into his actions than his friends; and
therefore his desire was to be by them only approved, by whom he was chiefly
observed. Yea, herein might you partake of a right noble revenge upon your
enemies; in showing apparent testimonies of your care and zeal to the truth;
in preventing all occasions of scandal; in preferring, Justice even in cases
which nearly concern your friend, before all terms of friendship; Habeo in
me, quod testetur pro me.
having the testimony of a good conscience within you, as a wall of brass
against all opponents: for hence it was that Diogenes being asked how one
should be revenged of his enemy, answered, By being a virtuous and honest man.
For the whole life of every good man gives testimony unto God of the integrity
or uprightness of his conversation. Omnis piorum vita testimonium redilit Deo.
Cypr. de duplo martyrio, initio. Prob pudor! secundum fortunam aestimatur
persona, quum potius secundu^ personam aestimanda sit fortuna:

Tam bonus reputatur quam dives; tam malus, quam pauper; cum potius tam dives
sit reputandus quam bonus, tam pauper quam malus. De contem. mund. l. 1. cap.
16.


But beware above all things (as I formerly noted) of accepting or respecting
persons; for this is the very bane of Justice. Let not the rich man with all
his presents tempt you, nor those many friends which he has laid up in store
to speak for him, taint you. Fie for shame (says Innocentius) now adays man
is esteemed according to his money, whereas rather the money should be esteemed
according to the man. Every one is reputed worthy, if he be wealthy; and
naught, if he be needy; whereas rather every one should be reputed wealthy,
if be worthy; and needy, if he be naught. Marcus Caelius was said to have a
good right hand, but an ill left hand; because he could plead against a man,
better than for him. Be you so equally handed, as poyzing the weight of the
cause sincerely, you may minister right judgment to all parties, being as
ready to defend the cause of the needy, as of the wealthy, giving him the best
countenance; who has the best cause. It was Romes fault, which presages Romes
fall, to be facunda inimicitiis, facunda praemiis; far be it from our Island,
who as she has enjoyed a long peace, so ought she to become more thankful to
that God of peace, who in his mercy has strengthened her bulwarks, enclosed
her as a hedged Garden, fed her with the flower of Wheat, making her feet like
Hindes feet to run the ways which he has appointed. And so I come to
speak of such private affairs, as require the care and charge of a Gentleman,
even within the compass of his own family.

How a Gentleman is to demean himself in his own family. 1 Timothy 5.8. Aug.
IF there be any that provideth not for his own, and namely for them of his
Household, he denies the faith, and is worse than an Infidel, says the
Apostle. Now how careful should we be to remove from us, so hateful a title
as the name of Infidel? Have we not our appellation from Christ? but in vain
are we named after Christ, if we do not follow Christ. We were not borne to
pass our time in an improvident or careless sensuality; we were not created
only to cramme our selves, and spend our days in security; Man (says Job)
was borne to labor, as the sparks to fly upward; at least to provide for his
own family, over which he is made a Master, by releeving them outwardly with
all necessaries, and inwardly with all good and wholesome instructions.

Now to propose you a form, in what manner you are to demean your selves
toward all degrees within your family: I shall little need, since the Apostle
himself has so notably laid down every ones office or duty: where he shows
in what manner Wives are to submit themselves unto their Husbands; Ephesians. 5.21.
ad ul^.
and again, how Husbands should love their Wives, Even as Christ loved the
Church, and gave himself for it. In the next ensuing Chapter, he declares
the duty of Children in these words; Children obey your Parents in the Lord,
for this is right. Then he descends to the duty of Parents; Ephesians 6. ad 10.
And ye Fathers, provoke not your children to wrath but bring them up in
instruction and information of the Lord. Then touching Servants; Servants be
obedient unto them that are your masters according to the flesh, with fear and
trembling, in singleness of your hearts as unto Christ. Concluding the last
duty with masters; And ye Masters do the same thing unto them, putting away
threatening; and know that even your Master also is in Heaven, neither is there
respect of person with him. Thus have we briefly and cursorily run over
those particular duties, deputed to every one from the highest to the lowest in
their peculiar places and offices; where we can find no exemption from the
Servant to the Master, Demus, (inquit Aristoteles) est quas^ (...) Civitas, and
civitas quasi magna domus.

Every family a private Commonwealth.


but that certain particular duties are enjoined either. As every man's house
is his Castle, so is his family a private Commonwealth, wherein if due
government be not observed, nothing but confusion is to be expected. For the
better prevention whereof, I have thought good to set down sundry cautions, as
well for direction in affairs Temporal, as Spiritual: which observed, it is
not to be doubted, but that God will give you all good success to your
endeavors.

FIrst therefore, How a Gentleman is to bestow himself in Temporal affairs
within his Family. Genesis 28.20. Deuteronomy. 10.18.
in affairs Temporal I could wish you to observe this course; so to provide
for the relief and supportance of your family, as you may not only have
sufficient for your selves, but also be helpful unto others; sufficient for
your selves in providing food and apparel, being all which Iaakob desired of
God; and helpful unto others, in giving food and raiment to the fatherless,
in providing relief for the desolate and comfortless, in harboring the
poor, needy and succourlesse, and briefly in ministering to the necessity of
the Saints, and all such as are of the family of Faith. And because providence
is the way by which relief both to your selves and others, may be
sufficiently ministered, beware of Prodigality, and excess, Lest you give your
honor unto others, and your years to the cruel. Lest the strangers should
be filled with your strength, Prove. 5.9.10. Prove. 6.6, 7.
and your labors be in the house of a stranger. Go rather to the Pismire,
who though she have no guide, governor, nor ruler, provideth in Summer her
granary for Winter. Neither is it sufficient to gather, but frugally to dispose
of that which is gathered: This Providence admits of no Vitellius break-fasts,
nor Cleopatra's bankets. Luke 15.16. Genesis 25.33. 1 Samuel 14.27. Exodus 14.2.
The Prodigals dainty tooth brought him to feed on husks. Esau's to sell his
birthright for a mess of pottage. Ionathans for a honeycombe to endanger his
life. The Israelites to murmr against Moses. Babylons golden cup, to fill her
full of abominations.

I have observed, and no less admired than observed how some have, consumed
their estates in satisfying their appetites, and that only in the choice of
meats and drinks; and was not this a great vanity? that those whom meats,
though less delightful, yet more healthful, might have sustained, and fewer
diseases occasioned, could not content themselves with that which might have
better satisfied nature, but to show themselves Epicures rather than
Christians, will bestow the revennues of a Manor upon the superfluous charge
of a supper. For these are they, who like the Erycthons bowels, will disgorge
as much upon the boundless expense of their own Family, as might serve well for
releeving a whole Country. These are they who like the Endive or Misselto,
suck up all the native verdure and vigor of such plants as they inwreath: for by
their excess, though their own luscious palats taste no want, the comonalty
feels it, when they go to the Markets, and find the rate of all provision
inhaunced by such, whose Prodigality scarce extends a provident eye to
themselves, much less to the behoof of others. It is said of Cambletes the
gluttonous King of Lydia, that he dreamed he devoured his wife, while they
lay sleeping together in the same bed; and finding her hand between his teeth
when he awaked, he slew himself fearing dishonor. Howsoever the History be
authenticke; sure I am the Moral taxes such, whose Epicureall minds are only
set upon prodigal expense, without respect either of present fortunes, or care
to posterity, whose want is oft-times procured by their riot. To be short, as
Parcimony is too late when it comes to the bottom; so it may be with
discretion used, when it is at the top: for I approve of his opinion, Nec
soraide custodiat, nec prodige spargal. Salust.
who would have a Gentleman neither to hoord up niggardly, nor lash out all
lavishly. For as the former argues a miserable and ignoble mind, so the
latter shows a mind improvident and indiscreet; both which are to be so
avoided, that a mean betwixt both may be duly observed. For as I would have
a Gentleman, even in arguments of outward bounty, show whence he was descended;
so would I have him keep a hanke, lest his too free disposition be through
necessity restrained. So as in matters of expense, I hold his resolve
authenticke, who said; I will never spare where reputation bids me spend, nor
spend where honest frugality bids me spare. It is a good rule, and worthy
observation: for whosoever spares, when with credit and reputation he should
spend, is indiscreetly sparing: and whosoever spends, when with honest
frugality he may spare, is prodigally spending.

Now in government of a Family, as I would not have you too remiss; so I
would not have you too severe, toward your Servants (I mean) and those who
have received their several charge from you: this it was which moved the
Apostle to exhort masters to put away threatening; adding this reason: Ephesians. 6.9.
For know that even your Master also is in heaven, neither is there respect of
person with him. Therefore it was Saint Augustines prayer unto God, that he
would root out of him, all rashness, frowardness, roughness, unquietness,
slownesse, slothfulness, sluggishnesse, dullness of mind, blindness of
heart, obstinacy of sense, truculencie of manners, disobedience to goodness,
repugnance of counsel, want of bridling the tongue, making a prey of the
poor, showing violence to the impotent, calumniating the innocent, negligence
of subjects, Circa domest^cos severiratem. Med. cap. 1.
severity toward servants, harshnesse toward familiars, hardness toward
neighbors. Hence note, how in this holy Fathers repetition and enumeration of
many grievous and odious sins, Deuteronomy. 25.4. 1 Cor. 9.9. 1 Timothy 5.18.
he touches severity toward servants, as a heinous and egregious offense:
and not without great cause; for if we be taught not to muzzle the Ox that
treads out the corn: and that, we are to spare the life of our beasts: How
highly to be condemned was that act of Vedius Pollio, who tyrannzed so much
over his servants, that he caused one to be cast into a Fish Pond for breaking
a glass?
much more ought we to have mercy over such as partake with us in the same
Image, which we have equally from him received, by whom we live, move and
have our being. I approve therefore of them, who put on the spirit of mildness
toward such as are deputed or substituted under them, bearing with one
another weakness, as those who have a compassionate feeling of humane
infirmities, not laying such heavy burdens upon them, as they themselves will
not touch with their finger, but will in some measure partake with them in all
their labors. But of all other vices incident to masters, there is none more
hateful in the sight of God and man, than the unthankefulnesse or disrespect of
Masters toward their servants, when they have spent their strength, and wasted
themselves in their service. These like the Greyhound in the fable, may well
say, that they see nothing can please, but that which does profit: when they
were young, Invenes amarunt, senes ^derunt.

Famulos impubescentes amasse voluptas, adolescentes utilitas, senescentes
pietas.


able and fit to endure labor, they were respected; whereas now being old,
infirm, and helpless, either to themselves or others, they are slightly
regarded. Whereas, if they were thankful masters, these whom they once loved
for profit-sake in youth, they would now love in age, in respect of the profit
they reaped by their youth. But, alas, do we not see how nothing is more
contemptible than an old Servingman? He may say he was a man in his time, but
that is all. There is no man that will know him, since his blew-coat knew no
Cognizance; the loss of his Crest, makes him hang down his Crest, as one
crest-fallen: so as the poor Lark may boast of more than he may; Alauda
crista^ habet. Proverb.
for every Lark has his crest, says Simonides, but he has none. To
redress this, as in humanity you ought, so I know such as are Generously
disposed, will: that those who have deserved well under you, being now grown
aged, yet unpreferred, may by our care be so maintained, that their service of
Labor may be made a service of Prayer, offering their sacrifice of devotion
unto God, that great Master of a Household, that He in his mercy would give a
happy success unto all your endeavors. Now as the Labourer is worthy of his
wages; 1 Timothy 5.18.
for, cursed is he that defraudeth the labourer of his hire: so there is an
especial care required in every servant to look unto that which is given him
in charge. Domum suam coercere, plerisque baud minus arduum est, quam
prov^nciam regere. Tacit.
For the better discharge whereof, it is enjoined you that be Masters, not to
be too remiss in your care, and over-seeing thereof; for much oversight is
usually committed for want of a good overseer. Admonish your servants that they
intend their charge; suffer them not to idle, but in their peculiar places to
do that which they in duty are to perform, and you in reason are to expect.
Wherein, as they proceed in diligence, so are you to requite their care with a
cheerful thankfulness. If it be your lot to have such an one as Iaacob was,
(as rare it is to find such an one as he was) reward him not with a bleare-eyed
Leah, Genesis 29.23.
for a beautiful and fair Rachel: I mean, abridge not, nor scant not their
wages; for this is a discredit to your self, and a discouragement to your
servants. Gen, 31 38.
If he say, These twenty years I have been with thee: thine ewes, and thy
goats have not cast their young, and the rams of thy flock have I not eaten.
Whatsoever was torn of beasts I brought it not unto thee, Genesis 31.39.
but made it good my self: of mine hand did thou require it, were it
stolen by day, or stolen by night. I was in the day consumed with heat, and
with frost in the night, and my sleep departed from mine eyes. Thus have I
been twenty years in thine house, 40.
and served thee fourteen years for thy two daughters, 41.
and six years for thy sheep, and thou have changed my wages ten times. If (I
say) he has thus served you, and shown faithfulness in that charge over
which he was appointed, reward him with a bountiful hand, and encourage his
care with your best countenance. Whereas, contrariwise, if you meet with such a
Servant, Luke 12.45.
that says in his heart, My master does defer his coming; and shall begin
to smite the servants, and maidens, and to eat, and drink, and to be drunken;
you are not to use remissness to such a Servant, but to cut him off, lest you
give example unto others, by your indulgence, to be of the like condition. In
brief, as a good servant is a precious jewel, tendering the profit and credit
of him he serves; so an evil servant, whose service is only to the eye, and
not for conscience sake, is a scatterer of his substance whom he serves;
aiming only at his own private profit, without least respect had to his
Masters benefit. Difference therefore you are to make of their care in
cherishing the one, and chastising the other; which can hardly be effected,
unless you, who are to make this difference of your servants, have an eye to
their employments. Neither would I have your care so extended, as to afflict
and macerate your selves by your excessive care: a mean is the best, both in
the preservation of health and wealth* Prove. 27.23.27.
Be diligent (says Solomon) to know the state of thy flock, and take heed to
thy herds. Yet withal note his conclusion; Let the milk of thy goats be
sufficient for thy food, Hydropte^ habent conscientiam. Aug.

Quanto magis bibunt, tanto magis sitiunt.

Quanto magis capiunt, tanto magis cupiunt.

Quorum sitis neque copia, neque inopia minuitur.

Salust. Vera inopia, cupiditatum copia.


for the food of thy family, and for the sustenance of thy maids. Whence you
may observe, that to gather is admitted, so the use or end for which we gather
be not neglected. For such, whose Hydrop^icke minds ever raking and reaping,
yet know not how to employ the blessings of God, by a communicative exhibition
unto others, are become vassals unto their own; making their gold-adoring
affection an infection, their reason treason, and the wealth which they have
got them, a witness to condemn them.

But I have insisted too long on this point, especially in framing my speech to
you, whose more freeborn dispositions will ever scorn to be tainted with
such unworthy aspersions: wherefore I will descend briefly to such
instructions, as you are to use touching spiritual affairs, being Masters of
Households in your private families.

How a Gentleman is to employ himself in spiritual affairs within his
family. Genesis 18.19. 1 Chronicles. 1.2. Deuteronomy. 11.18, 19.20.
WE read that Abraham commanded his sons, and his household, that they should
keep the way of the Lord, to do righteousness and judgment. And we are
taught what we must do returning from Gods house to our own: and what we are
to do sitting in our houses, even to lay up Gods word in our heart, and in our
soul, and bind it for a sign upon our hand, that it may be as a frontlet
between our eyes. And not only to be thus instructed our selves, but to teach
them our children, speaking of them when thou sit in thine house, and when
thou walk by the way, and when thou lust down, and when thou risest up. And
not so only, but thou shall write them upon the posts of thine house, and upon
thy gates. Whence you see, how no place, time, or occasion is to be exempted
from meditating of God: but especially in Households and Families ought this
exercise of devotion to he frequently and fervently practiced; for a Blessing
is pronounced upon the performance hereof, as appears in the foresaid place,
and the nexet ensuing verse, Verse. 21. Consisting upon a precept and a promise.

Ostendit exemplo, quod promisit in praemio. Aug.


where he says; You shall do all that I have commanded you, that your days
may be multiplied, and the days of your children, in the land, which the Lord
swear unto your fathers to give them, as long as the heavens are above the
earth. Mark the extent of this Blessing, for it promises not only length of
days to them that perform it, but even to the children of them that perform
it; and that in no unfruitful or barren land, but in the land which the Lord
swear unto your fathers to give them; and that for no short time, but so long
as the heavens are above the earth. So as, this blessed promise, or promised
blessing, is (as one well observes) not restrained, but with an absolute grant
extended: so that, even as the people that were in the gate, and the Elders
wished in the solemnizing of that marriage betwixt Boaz and Ruth, that their
house might be like the house of Pharez; so doubtless, whosoever meditates of
the Law of the Lord, making it in his Family, Ruth 4, 11, 12
as a familiar friend to direct him, a faithful counselor to instruct him, a
sweet companion to delight him, a precious treasure to enrich him, shall find
success in his labors, and prosperity in the work of his hands.

But amongst all, Nimium est negoti^ continere c^s quibus praesis, nisi te ipse
contineus.
as it is the use of Masters of households to call their servants to account for
the day past; so be sure, Gentlemen, and you who are Masters of houses, to
enter into your own hearts, by a serious examination had every night, what you
have done, or how you have employed your selves, and those Talents which God
has bestowed on you, the day past; Anima mea quid secisit hodie? etc. Quod
malum hodie sanas^i^ Senec. deira, lib. 3.
in imitation of that blessed Father, who every night examined himself,
calling his soul to a strict account, after this manner; O my soul, what have
thou done this day? What good have thou omitted? what evil have thou
committed? what good, which thou should have done? what evil, which thou
should not have done? Where are the poor thou have releeved? the sick or
captive thou have visited? the Orphan or Widow thou have comforted? Where are
the naked, whom thou have clothed? the hungry, whom thou have refreshed? the
afflicted and desolate, whom thou have harbored? O my soul, when it shall be
demanded of thee, Quid comedit pauper? how poorly will thou look, when there
is not one poor man that will witness thy alms? Again, when it shall be
demanded of thee, Vbi nudus quem amiti victi? how naked will thou appear, when
there is not one naked soul that will speak for thee? Again, when it shall
be demanded of thee, Vbi sitiens quem potasti? esuriens quem pavisti? Vbi
captivus quem visitasti? Vby moestus quem relevasti? O my soul, how forlorn,
wretched, and uncomfortable will thy condition be, when there shall not appear
so much as one witness for thee to express thy charity? not one poor soul
whom thou have releeved! one naked whom thou have clothed! nor one thirsty
whom thou have refreshed! nor one hungry whom thou have harbored! nor a
captive whom thou have visited! nor one afflicted whom thou have comforted!
Veni ad judicium. Hieron.
Thus to call your selves to account, by meditating ever with Saint Hierome of
the judgment day, will be a means to rectify your affections, mortify all
inordinate motions, purify you throughout, that you may be examples of piety
unto others in your life, and heirs of glory after death: concluding most
comfortably with the foresaid Father; If my mother should hang about me, my
father lie in my way to stop me, my wife and children weep about me, I would
throw off my mother, neglect my father, contemn the lamentation of my wife and
children, to meet my Savior Christ Jesus. Paratum est cor meum. Ibid.
For the furtherance of which holy resolution, let no day pass over your
heads, wherein you address not your selves to some good action or employment.
Wherefore Apelles posie was this, Let no day pass without a line. Nulla di^s
sine linea. Esai. 28.10.

Choen^cine insideas. 2 Thessalonians 3.10 Joh. 14 3.


Be sure every day you do some good, then draw one line at the least:
according to that, Line upon line, line upon line. And Phythagoras posie was
this, Sit not still upon the measure of corn. Do not look to eat, except you
sweat for it: according to that, He which will not work, let him not eat. In
my Fathers house (says Christ) are many mansions. So that no man may sing his
soul a sweet requiem, saying with that Cormorant in the Gospel, Soul take thy
rest: for in heaven only, which is our Fathers house, there are many mansions
to rest in. In this world, which is not of our Fathers house, Luke 12.19.
there are not many mansions to rest in, but only Vine-yards to work in.
Wherein, because not to go forward, is to go backward, we are to labor even
to the day of our change. Hereupon Charles the fifth gave this Emblem,
Vlterius.
Stand not still, but go on further; Vlterius: Luke 14.10. Nunquam ei praeesse
familiae, quae parum studiosa est divinae gloriae.
as God says to his guest, Superius: Sit not still, but sit up higher, Doing
thus, and resolving to be no masters over that Family, whose chiefest care is
not the advancement of Gods glory, you shall demean your selves, being here
worthy that Vocation or calling, over which you are placed, and afterward, by
following hard toward the mark, Philip. 3.14.
obtain the prize of the high calling of God in Christ Jesus.

THE ENGLISH GENTLEMAN
Argument.
Of the difference of Recreations; Of the moderate, and immoderate use of
Recreation; Of the Benefits redounding from the One, and inconveniences arising
from the Other; Of Recreations best sorting with the quality of a Gentleman;
And how he is to bestow himself in them.

RECREATION.
RECREATION, Observat. 5.
being a refresher of the mind, and an enabler of the body to any office
wherein it shall be employed; The difference of Recreations.
brancheth it self into many kinds; as Hawking, which pleasure, one termed the
object of a great mind, whose aims were so far above earth, as he resolves
to retire a while from earth, Vid. Strab. Vid. Plut. Aul. Gell. in noct. At.
Laert. in vit. Cbyl.
and make an evening flight in the air. Hunting, where the Hounds at a loss
show themselves subtle Sophisters, arguing by their Silence, the game came not
here; again, by being mute, it came not there; L. Flor. l. 3. c. 8. Balsares
narrat a qua gente Balistas no^men duxisse, verisimile est, jasulandi art
omnium facile principes esse.
Ergo, by spending their mouths it came here. Fishing, which may be well
called the Emblem of this world, where miserable man, like the deluded fish,
is ever nibbling at the bait of vanity. Swimming, an exercise more usual than
natural, and may have resemblance to these diving heads, who are ever sounding
the depths of others secrets; or swimming against the stream, may glance at
such whose only delight is opposition. Running, a Recreation famously ancient,
solemnized by the continued succession, or revolution of many ages, upon the
Sicut nostri ab Anno Domini, prisci ab
Olympiads in Greece, so as the account or yearly computation came from Races,
and other solemn games used on Olympus, Wrestling, Leaping, Dancing, and many
other Recreations of like sort, Olympiad um stadio, sua comput arunt ^ secula.
Lucullian^ Horti. vid. Plut. in vit.
as they were by the continuance of many years upon Olympus kept, and with
public feasts duly celebrated: so in many places of this Kingdom, both
Southward in their Wakes, and Northward in their Summerings, the very same
Recreations are to this day continned. Shooting amongst the Scythians and
Parthians, was an exercise of especial request, as afterward amongst the
Amazonites, being women expert above all people of the world in Shooting, and
practicing the Dart. Bowling amongst the Romans was much used, especially in
Lucullus time, whose Garden-alleyes were ever stored with young Gentlemen, who
resorted thither to Recreate themselves with this exercise. The Greeks had a
Cynosargus, locus in quo palestriae exercebaniur; Cerostrotum, in quo eorum
corpora ungebantur.
Cynosargus, to train and exercise their Youth in wrestling, and a Cerostrotum
to anoint their bodies in before they wrastled. The ancient Romans had a
Circus, quia aculeatis spiculis circumclusus. vid. Varro. de antiq. Romans
Circus, to inure and practice their Youth against military service, wherein
they wrestled and contended. They used likewise, as the French do to this day,
the exercise of the Haec quae difficilis turget Bagenica pluma, Folleminus luxa
est, and minus arcta pila. Martial. lib. 14.45
Ball, which play is never sufficiently praised by Galen: being an exercise
wherein all the organs or faculties of man's body are to be employed; as the eye
to be quick and sharp in seeing, the hand ready in receiving, the body nimble
in moving, the legs speedy in recovering. That Fencing also was of much use and
practice among the Romans, even in their height of glory, and during the
flourishing time of their Empire, may appear by that high commendation which
Cicero gives it, terming it, Fortissima adversus me^tem, and dolorem
disciplina.
The strongest and soveraignest exercise against death and grief. The Iusts,
Tournaments and Barriers (likewise) were amongst our ancient Knights usually
practiced and observed, both for gaining the favor of such Ladies as they
loved, as also for the honor of their Country, vanquishing such strangers
with whom they contended; may appear in Histories of all ages.

Or to descend to more soft and effeminate Recreations: we shall find, of what
great esteem Music was, Vid Plut. in Apotheg. and in vit. Socr.
even with some, who were in years as ripe, as they were for wisdom rare.
Socrates, when he was well struck in years, learned to play upon the Harp.
Minerva and Alcibiades disliked the loud Music of Dulcimers and Shalmes, but
admired the warbling strains of the Harp. Flat. in Repub. Vid. Plut. in vit.
Lycurg.
Plato and Aristotle would have a man well brought up in Music. Lycurgus in
his sharp laws allows of Music. Chyron taught Achilles in his tender
years Music. Achasia, with Diotima and Hermione, taught Pericles Prince of
Troy (or rather Duke of Athens) Music. Epaminondas of Leuctra, was
experienced in Music. Themistocles was less esteemed, because not seen in
Music. Alexander was so ravished with Music, that when he heard a Trumpet,
he used to cry, ad arma, (...).
ad arma; not able to contain himself: so highly were his spirits erected by
the force of Music.

Painting likewise among the ancient Pagans, was for a Recreation used, though
at this day, through the dishonor our painted Sepulchers do to their maker,
much abused. Fabius surnamed Pictor from whence the Fabij took their names,
was a painter, for he painted the walls of the Temple of Peace. Metrodorus a
Philosopher, and painter of Ath^ns, sent to by L. Paulus to bring up his
children, and to deck the Roman triumphs. Protogenos his table wherein Bacchus
was painted, moved King Demetrius lying at the City Rhodes, so much to admire
his rare Art and Workmanship, that whereas he might have consumed the City with
fire, he would not for the preciousnesse of that table: and therefore staying
to bid them battle, Such like exquisite pieces may we imagine our rare Italian
Iec^ano limned: whose incon parable Art bestowed on them so much beauty, as
they wanted nothing but a Promethean fire to enliven fancy.
won not the City at all. So Campaspe pictured out in her colors by by
Apelles; and Crotons five daughters, lively pourtrai'd by Zeuxes, gained those
famous Artists no less honor. Howsoever his art was in painting, I cannot
choose but commend his quick wit in answering, being by them reproved whom he
most distasted; and thus it was. Two Cardinals reproving one Raphael a Painter,
in that he made the Pictures of Peter and Paul too red, answered, that Saint
Peter and Saint Paul were even as red in heaven, as they saw them there, to see
the Church governed by such as they were. This device or invention of painting,
was by the Pagans generally, but especially those of the better sort, taken
only for a recreation, and no trade or profession; laboring to show their
cunning in beautifying, garnishing and adoring the triumphs of their
Conquerours, or indecoring their Temples dedicated to the gods. As the Scythes
used to erect obeliskes or square stones upon the Hearse of the deceased, in
number so many as he had slain of his enemies: where he that had not slain an
enemy, could not drink of the Goblet, spiced with the ashes of some memorable
Ancestos, at solemn feasts and banquets. For other painting (too much affected
at this day) it was not so much as used by any Matron, Wife, or Virgin. Nazian.
contra ^ulieres immodice comptas. Nescit equo rudis Hae^ere irgenuus puer,
venarique timet ludere doctior, s^^ Graeco jubeas troc^o, seu m^lis vetita
legib^s alea. Her. Od. 4.8. Cor sule Victorem, in vit. Imperator. Studiosus
aleae lusor. ibid. Suct. in Aug.
whose best red was shamefastness, and choicest beauty maiden bashfulnesse:
only, as Festus Pompeius says, common and base whores, called Shaenicolae,
used daubing of themselves, though with the vilest stuff. But this may seem
an art, rather than a recreation; we will therefore descend to some others,
whose use refreshes, and recreateth the mind, if employed as they were first
intended, being rather to beguile time, than to reap gain.

And first for the antiquity of Dice-play, we have plenty of authorities every
where occurring: being much used by all the Roman Emperors at Banquets and
solemn meetings, where they bestowed themselves and the time, at no grame so
much as Dice. So as, Augustus was said to be a serious gamester at Dice:
affecting them much, when at any time he retired from Court, or Camp. Whence
it is, that Suetonius brings in Augustus Caesar speaking thus; Si quas manus
remisi cuique exegissem; aut retinuissem quod cuique donavi, vicissem, etc. If
I had exacted those chances which I remitted every one; and kept that which I
bestowed, I had gotten by play; whereas now I am a loser by my bounty. Though
no game more ancient, or which indeed requires a conceit more pregnant than
the Chesse; which we read to have been in great request amongst the ancient
Romans, whereof we have a History in the time of Caius Caligula, tending to
this purpose. This Emperor being naturally addicted to all cruelty, chanced
one day amongst others, to send for one Canius Iulus, a Philosopher of eminent
esteem at that time: with whom, after some conference, the Emperor fell into
such a rage, as he bade him depart thence, but expect within short time to
receive due censure for his boldness: For (quoth he) flatter not thy self
with a foolish hope of longer life, for I have doomed thee to be drawn by the
officer unto death: But see with what resolution this noble Canius bore
himself! I thank you (quoth he) most gracious Emperor, and so departed.
Within some few days after, the Officer (according to the Emperors
commandment) repaired to the houses of such as were adjudged, not by any
legal process, but only by the Emperors pleasure, to suffer death; amongst
which, he made repair to Canius house, whom he found playing at Chesse with
one of his companions. The Officer without delay gave him summons to prepare
himself, for it was the Emperors pleasure he should dye: whereat, as one
nothing amated or discouraged, he called the Officer unto him, and Vocatus
numeravit calculos, and sodali suo; Vide (inquit) ne post mortem meam mentiaris
te vicisse. Tum annuens Genturioni: Test is (inquit) eris, uno we antecedere.
Sen. de tranq. anim.
numbering the Chesse-men before him and his companion with whom he played: See
(quoth he) that after my death thou report not that thou had the better of
the game: then calling upon the Centurion or Officer, Be you witness (quoth
he) that I was before him one. Thus laughed this noble Philosopher at death,
insulting as much over death, as he insulted over him, who adjudged him to
death. This kind of game, now of latter years is grown so familiar with most
of our neighboring Countries, as no one play more affected, or more generally
used. So as we have heard of an Ape who played at Chesse in Portingall: which
employed, the daily use and practice of that game, brought the Ape to that
imitation, And certainly, there is no one game which may seem to represent the
state of man's life to the full, so well as the Chesse. For there you shall find
Princes and Beggars, and persons of all conditions, ranked in their proper and
peculiar places; yet when the game is done, they are all trussed up in a bag
together: and where then appears any difference betwixt the poorest Beggar,
and the potentest Peer? The like may be observed in this stage of humane
frailty: while we are here set to show during the Chesse-game of this life,
we are according to our several ranks esteemed; and fit it should be so, for
else should all degrees be promiscuously confounded: but no sooner is the game
done, the thread of our short life spunne, than we are thrown into a bag, a
poor shrowding sheet, for that is all that we must carry with us: where there
shall be no difference betwixt the greatest and least, highest and lowest: for
then it shall not be asked us how much we had, but how we disposed of that we
had.

Thus far have we discoursed of the first part, to wit, of the difference of
recreations: thinking it sufficient to have touched only such as are most
usual and known unto us. For some others, which we have purposely omitted,
lest our Mindian gate should grow greater than our City, we shall have occasion
to speak of some of them, when we are to discourse of such Recreations, as
are to be made choice of by Gentlemen of best rank and quality. In the mean
time we will descend to the second part, to wit, the moderate and immoderate
use of Recreation.

Of the moderate and immoderate use of Recreation. Pic. Mirand. in Epist. ad.
Hermol.
IF we eat too much honey, it will grow distasteful; so in Recreations, if we
exceed, they must needs grow hurtful. I approve therefore of his opinion, who
advises us to do with Recreations, and such pleasures wherein we take
delight, as Nurses do with their breasts to weane young children from them:
anoint them a little with Aloes; sprinkling our sweetest delights with some
bitterness, to weane us from them with more easiness. Neither is it my
meaning, that Gentlemen should be so from the pleasure of Recreation weaned, as
if from society wholly estranged: for this were like him, who became Hermit
because he might not have her he loved. Or like to him who immured himself to
a Rock, as if he cared not a button for the world, having bestowed upon
butters all the State he had in the world. But rather so to attemper, or allay
the sweetness of such pleasures or delights as they betake themselves to, that
they be never too much besotted with them. This course that Gentleman took,
who, perceiving himself too much affected on Hawking, resolved one day to
weane his mind a little from it, by trying his patience with some
inconveniences incident to it. Wherefore he set a lazy Haggard on his fist,
and goes to his sport: where he finds store of game, but few flights; for
wheresoever the Partridge flew, his Hawke never made farther flight than from
tree to tree, which drove the Gentleman faulconer to such impatience, as he
less affected the pleasure for long time after. The like I have heard of a
Gentleman, who used much bowling, which Recreation he so continually
practiced, for the love he bore it, as his occasions were much neglected by
it; which to prevent, as he rode far for his pleasure, so he stayed late
ere he returned home, of purpose, so to become wearied, that his mind by that
means might from his pleasure be the sooner weaned. But these experiments as
they are often failing, where the mind is not come to settling: so, in my
opinion, there is no means better or surer to weane man, endued with reason,
from being too much captived or inchayned with these pleasures, than to
consider what benefits redound from moderate Recreation, and again what
inconveniences arise from immoderate delight therein. First then, let us
consider the end for which Recreations were ordained, and we shall find that
they were rather intended to beguile time, than to bestow our selves on them
all our time. Though many, too many there be, who will not stick to say with
him who sported himself in the warm Sun, Vtinam hoc esset vivere, would to
God this were to live; would to God this Recreation were a Vocation, this
pleasure my trade for ever. No, as Recreation was at first intended for
refreshing the mind, and enabling the body to perform such offices as are
requisite to be performed: so is it not to be made a Trade or Profession, as if
we should there set up our rest, and intend nothing else. Consider therefore
the Benefits which redound by a moderate or temperate use of Recreation.

FIrst, The benefits redounding from moderate Recreation. Sen. de Tranq. anim.
it refreshes or cherishes the mind, accommodating it to all studies:
clearing the understanding which would be easily depressed, if either with
worldly cares, or more noble and generous studies, wholly restrained. It is
said of Asinius Pollio, that after the tenth hour he would be retained in no
business, neither after that hour would he read so much as any Letter. Of Cato
likewise, that he used to refresh his mind with wine: the like of Solon and
Archesilaus, that they would usually cheer their spirits with wine: yet,
whosoever should object drunkenness to Cato, might sooner prove that crime
honest, than Cato dishonest. So as, whether we believe the Greek Poet, It is
sometimes pleasing to be a little madding; or Plato, who in vain expulsed
Poets the bounds of his Commonweal; or Aristotle, That there can never be any
great wit without some mixture of folly: Nullum magnum ingenium sine mixtura
dementiae fuit. ibid.
we shall find, that even the gravest and most experienced Statists have
sometimes retired themselves from more serious affairs, to refresh and solace
their tired spirits with moderate Recreations. The Poet excellently describes a
man buried in the deep slumber of contemplation, after this manner; He dies,
Horat. ^. 1. ep. 7.
pent up with study and with care.
So were the Anchorites and Hermites in former time, being wholly divided from
society; yea so immured, as they seemed to be buried living. Whose
conversation, as (questionless) it argued a great mortification of all mundane
desires; so it ministered matter of admiration to such, who, given to carnal
liberty, wondered how men made of earth, could be so estranged from conversing
with inhabitants of earth. But to leave these, and imagine their conversation
to be in Heaven, Cellae and coeli habitatio cognatae sunt. Ber. de vit. solitar.
though their habitation was on earth: we perceive hence, how beneficial
Recreation is to the mind, in cheering, solacing, and refreshing her, if used
with Moderation. How it lessens those burdens of cares, wherewith she is
oppressed; revives the spirits, as if from death restored; cleares the
understanding, as if her eyes, long time shut, were now unsealed; and quickens
the invention, by this sweet respiration, as if newly molded. Neither is this
Benefit so restrained, as if it extended only to the mind; for it confers a
Benefit likewise to the body, by enabling it to perform such Labors, Taskes
or Offices, Non calathum Juno, non arcum semper Apollo Tendit: amant roquiem
corpora fessa suam.
as it is to be employed or exercised withal. There are two Proverbs which
may be properly applied to this purpose; Once in the year Apollo laughs; this
approves the use of moderate Recreation. Apollo's bow's not always bent; this
shows that humane employments are to be seasoned by Recreation: we are
sometimes to unbend the bow, or it will lose his strength. Continual or
incessant employment cannot be endured: there must be some intermission, or the
body becomes enfeebled. As for example; observe these men, who, either
encombred with worldly affairs, so tie and tether themselves to their business,
as they intermit no time for effecting that which they go about: or such as,
wholly nailed to their Deske, admit no time for Recreation, lest they should
thereby hinder the progress of their studies: See how pale and meager they
look, how sickly and infirm in the state of their bodies, how weak and
defective in their constitution? So as to compare one of these weaklings with
such an one as intermits occasions of business, rather than he will prejudice
his health; reserving times as well for Recreation and pleasure, as for
employment and labor, were to present a spectacle of Inius Dwarf, not two foot
high, Sueton. Tranq. (...).
and weighing but seventeen pound, with Iolaus the youthful son of Iphiclus,
whose feature was free, complexion fresh, and youth renewing; such difference
in proportion, such ods in strength of constitution. For, observe one of these
starved worldlings, whose aims are only to gather and number, without doing
either themselves or others good with that they gather; with what a sallow and
earthly complexion they look, being turned all earth before they return to
earth! And what may be the cause hereof, Avaritia bellua fera, immanis,
intoleranda est. Salust.
but their incessant care of getting, their continual desire of gaining, being
ever gaping till their mouths be filled with gravel. So these who are wholly
given, and solely devoted to a private or retired life, how unlike are they to
such as use and frequent society? For their bodies, as they are much weakened
and enfeebled, so is the heat and vigor of their spirits lestened and
resolved, yea their days for most part shortened and abridged; the cause of all
which proceeds from a continual secluding and dividing themselves from
company, Domi-porta, Limax; quia limum serpendo relinquit. Vid. Alciat. in
Emblem. Aelian. in not. Hist.
and use of such Recreations, as all creatures in their kind require and
observe. For if we would have recourse to creatures of all sorts, we shall
find every one, in his kind, observe a Recreation or refreshment in their
nature: As the Beast in his chase, the Bird in her choice, the Snaile in her
speckled case, the Polypus in her change, yea the Dolphin is said to sport and
play in the water. For as Revel. 4.11.
All things were created for Gods pleasure, so has he created all things to
recreate and refresh themselves in their own nature.

Thus far have we discoursed of moderate Recreation, and of the benefits
which redound from it; being equally commodious to the mind as well as the
body, the body as well as the mind: to the mind in refreshing, cherishing and
accommodating it to all studies; to the understanding, in clearing it from the
mists of sadness: to the body, in enabling it for the performance of such
labors, taskes, o^ offices, as it is to be employed or interessed in. It now
rests that we speak something of her opposite, to wit, of immoderate
Recreation, and the inconveniences which arise from thence; whereof we shall
but need to speak a word or two, and so descend to more useful points
touching this Observation.

AS the wind Caecias draws unto it clouds, The inconveniences arising from
immoderate Recreation. Immoderatione relaxantur artus, immin^untur vires:
moderatione religantur artus, reparantur vires. Laert. in vit. Chyl. Number.
11.33. Eccles. 7.4.
so does immoderate recreation draw unto it diverse and sundry maine
inconveniences: for this Immoderation is a loosener of the sinews, and a
lessener of the strength, as Moderation is a combiner of the sinews, and a
refiner of the strength. So dangerous is the surfeit which we take of pleasure
or Recreation, as in this we resemble Chylo, who being taken with the
apprehension of too much joy, instantly dyed. Now who sees not how the
sweetest pleasures do the soonest procure a surfeit? being such as most
delight, and therefore aptest to cloy. How soon were the Israelites cloyed
with Quails, even while the flesh was yet between their teeth, and before it
was chewed? So apt are we rather to dive than dip our hand in honey. Most true
shall every one by his own experience find that saying of Solomon to be, It is
better to go to the house of mourning, than to go to the house of feaesting;
for there may we see the hand of God, and learn to examine our lives, making
use of their mortality, by taking consideration of our own frailty: whereas in
the house of feasting, we are apt to forget the day of our changing, saying
with the Epicure, Eat, drink, and play; but never concluding with him, Amos
6.4.
To morrow we shall die. So apt are we with Messala Corvinus to forget our own
name, Man, who is said to be corruption; and the son of man, worms meat. For
in this Summer-Parlour, or floury Arbor of our prosperity, we can find time
to solace and recreate our selves: Lie upon beds of Ivory, Amos 6.4.
and stretch our selves upon our beds, and eat of the Lambs of the flock, and
the Calves out of the stall. Singing to the sound of the Violl, 5.
and inventing to our selves instruments of music like David. Drinking wine
in bowls, 6.
and anointing our selves with the chief ointments, but no man is sorry for
the affliction of Joseph: In the year of Iubile all captives were delivered,
all slaves enfranchised, all debts discharged. (...). Solon.
So universal are we in our Iubile, having once shaken off our former
captivity. To prevent which forgetfulness, it were not amiss to imitate the
Roman Princes, who (as I have elsewhere noted) when they were at any time in
their conquests or victorious triumphs with acclamations received, and by the
general applause of the people extolled, there stood one always behind them
in their Throne, to pull them by the sleeve, with Memento te esse hominem: for
the consideration of humane frailty is the soveraignest means to weane man from
vain glory. Whence it was that Themisto^les, when Symachus told him, that he
would teach him the Art of memory, answered, He had rather learn the Art of
forgetfulness: saying, he could remember enough; but many things he could not
forget, which were necessary to be forgotten; as the overweening conceit of
himself, the glory of his exploits, and merits of his actions, Dediscere
didisi, oblivisci qua memini.
the memory whereof tended more to his prejudice than profit.

But to descend to the particular inconveniences occasioned by immoderate
Recreation; we shall find both the Mind and Body, as by Moderation cheered and
refreshed, so by Immoderation annoyed and distempered. It was a good rule which
those great men of Rome observed in their Feastings and Cup-meetings; Sen. de
tranq: enim.
We will drink not to drown us, but to drown care in us: Not to reave
sense, but revive sense: Not as those who are ever carousing in the Cup of
Nepenthe, steeping their senses in the Lethe of forgetfulness. For these,
Plut. in Apoth.
like those base Elyots slaved to ebriety, have buried that glory of man, the
reasonable part, in the lees of sensuality. These are so far from standing
upon their guard, as the Devil may safely enter, either upon the Fore-ward or
Rere-ward, without resistance: for man's security is the Devils opportunity,
which he will not slip, though man sleep.

I read of one Leonides a Captain, who perceiving his soldiers left their
watch, upon the City walls, and did nothing all the day long but quaffe and
tipple in Alehouses near adjoining, commanded that the Alehouses should be
removed, Aelian. in varia Hist. lib. 3. cap. 14.
being the Cittadels wherein they resided, from that place where they stood,
and set up close by the walls; that, seeing the soldiers would never keep out
of them, at the leastwise that they might watch as well as drink in them.
These were soldiers fit for such a Captain, and a Captain worthy the
training of such soldiers; being one who could sort himself to the necessity
of the time, Dies festos nolite inhonorare (inquit Ignatius) quid tamen agunt
isti, qui licenti^s epulando crapulae indulgent, aut calites hauriendo
ebrietatem fovent? Melius est quod omni die foderent, quam omni die saltarent.

Aug. sup Psalm. 32.

Mark. 11.17. Ebrietate nil latius serpit, nil gravius s^vit. Panorm.

Homer. in Odyss. Horat. in Epist. Laert. in vit. Cleo^.


and frame himself to their humor; when he could not bring them off with
more honor, yet he brought them to stand upon their guard, though they could
hardly stand to their tackling; so as I conclude, their March could not choose
but be lazy, when their heads were so heavy. Generally, but irregularly is
this broad-spreading vice of Drunkenness holden now a-dayes for a Recreation;
so deeply rooted is the custom of impiety, being once strengthened by
impunity. For what is our Sabbath Recreation in City and Country, but drinking
and carousing; imagining (belike) that the Sabbath cannot be profaned, if we
use not such works or labors wherein our Vocation is usually employed? If the
Jews made the Temple of God a Den of thieves; we come near them in making
that our Temple, which gives harbor unto thieves. For what are our City, or
Country Alehouses, for most part, but the Devils Booths, where all enormities
are acted, all impieties hatched, all mischievous practices plotted and
contrived? These are those sinkes of sin, where all pollution and
uncleanness reigns, where fearful oaths and profanation rages, whence all
sensual liberty arises.

O Gentlemen! let not this professed friend to security attend you: It will make
you unlike your selves, transforming that glorious image which you have
received, like Circes guests, who became Swine, by being too sensually
affected. It was sage Cleobulus saying, That ones servant made merry with wine,
was not to be punished; for (says he) in seeing him, thou shall see thy
folly of drunkenness all the better. Whence it was that some Countries have
formerly used (though the custom seem scarcely approved) to make their slaves
or vassals drunk, to show unto their children the brutish condition of that
vice; whereby they might be the better weaned and deterred from that, which,
through the liberty of Youth, is usually affected. For if we should but observe
the brain-sicke humors of these professed Drunkards, we would rather admire
how reason should be so strangely drenched and drowned in the lees of
senseless stupidity, than ever be drawn to become affecters of so loathsome a
vice. Yet see the misery of deluded man; how many, and those of excellentest
parts, have been, and are besotted with this sin? for who ever lived, and
showed more absolute perfection in action and person, than that great Conqueror
and Commander of the whole world, Alexander the Great? Yet what uncomely parts
played he in his Drunkenness? How full of noble affability and princely
courtesy being sober? How passionately violent, once fallen to distemper?
Witness the burning of Persepolis, to which cruel attempt he was persuaded
by a common and professed Strumpet, even Thais, Vid. Quint. Curt. lib. 5.
whom all Greece had noted for a public prostitute. Likewise his killing of
Clitus, being one whom he so dearly affected, as he was never well, but when
he enjoyed his Company. Of both which facts he so repented, Armatis, divum
nullus pudor. Sil. Ital.
as it was long ere he would be comforted. Neither only such as he, who was a
Soldier, and therefore might seem rather to claim in some sort a liberty in
this kind: (for of all others, we observe such as these to be more addicted to
these distempers, than others whose more civil and peaceable conversation have
inured them to better temper:) but even those (I say) whose sincerity of life,
and severity of discipline had gained them all esteem in their Country, have
been likewise branded with this aspersion: As Censorius Cato, than whom none
more strict or regular; Asinius Pollio, than whom none more gracious or
popular; Solon, than whom none more legal; Archesilaus, than whom none more
formal. Yet if we did but note how much this vice was by the Pagans themselves
abhorred, and how they labored to prevent the very means, whereby this vice,
might be either cherished or introduced, we would wonder, that moderation in a
Heathen, should be so weakly seconded by a Christian. Amongst them, Plato.
kinsmen kissed their kinswomen, to know whether they drunk wine or no; and if
they had, to be punished by death, or banished into some Island. Plutarch.
Plutarch says, That if the Matrons had any necessity to drink wine, either
because they were sick or weak, the Senate was to give them license, and not
then in Rome neither, but out of the City. And how much it was hated, may
appear by the testimony of Macrobius, who says, That there were two Senators
in Rome chiding; Macrob.
and the one called the others wife an Adulteress, and the other his wife a
Drunkard, and it was judged that to be a Drunkard was more infamy. Thus you see
even in Pagans, who had but only the light of Nature to direct them, how loath
they were to drown the light of reason through drunkenness, being indeed (as
a good Father well observes) An enemy to the knowledge of God.

To conclude then this first point; may it be far from you, Gentlemen, to
deprive your selves of that which distinguishes you from beasts: 1 Timothy 6.23.
Mo^ico vino utere. Ecclesia matter est, noverca non est; libertas datur ad
necessitatem, modo cohibeatur ad vanitatem.
make not that an exercise or Recreation, which refreshes not, but darkeneth
the understanding. Drink you may, and drink wine you may, for we cannot
allow the device of Thracius, but we must disallow Saint Paul's advice to
Timothy, Use a little wine for thy stomachs sake, and thine often infirmities.
So as you are not enjoined such a strict, or Laconian abstinence, as if you
were not to drink Wine at all: for, being commanded not to drink, it is to
be employed, not to use drunkenness, wherein is excess; for in many places
are we allegorically and not literally to cleave to the Text. As for Origin,
strange it is, that perverting so many other places by Allegories, only he
should pervert one place, by not admitting an Allegory. For our Lord commanding
to cut off the foot, or any part of the body which offends us, does not mean
we should cut off our members with a knife, but our carnal affections with a
holy and mortified life; whence it is, that Itae evenit, ^t cum aliquid ubi non
oportet adhibetur, illic ubi oportet negligatur. Tertul. lib. de poeniten.
initio.
Origin was justly punished by using too little diligence, where there was
great need, because he used too great diligence where there was little need.
No less worthy was In Apolog. c. 45. Democritus excaecando seipsum
incontinentiam emendatione profitetur.

At Christianus salvis oculis faeminam videt, animo adversus ^ibidines caecus
est.


Democritus error of reproving, who was blinded before he was blind: for a
Christian need not put out his eyes, for fear of seeing a woman, since
howsoever his bodily eye see, yet still his heart is blind against all
unlawful desires. Neither was Crates Thebanus well advised, who did cast his
money into the Sea, saying, Ego mergam vos, neipse mergar ^ vobis.
Nay sure I will drown you first in the Sea, rather than you should drown me
in covetousness and care. Lastly, Noctium Attic. l. 19. c. 13. Homo miser
vites suas sibi omnes detruncat.
Thracius, of whom Aulus Gellius writes, was for any thing that I can see,
even at that time most of all drunken, when he cut down all his vines, lest
he should be drunken. No, I admit of no such strict Stoicisme; but rather (as
I formerly noted) to use wine or any such strong drink to strengthen and
comfort Nature, but not to impair her strength or enfeeble her: For as by a
little we are usually refreshed, so by too much are we dulled and oppressed.

There are some likewise, and these for most part of the higher sort, (I could
wish they were likewise of the better sort) who repair to the House of the
strange woman, sleeping in the bed of sin, thinking so to put from them the
evil day: And these are such as make Whoredom a Recreation, sticking not to
commit sin even with greediness, so they may cover their shame with the
curtain of darkness. But that is a woeful Recreation, which brings both
soul and body to confusion; singing Lysimachus song, Short is the pleasure of
Fornication, but eternal is the punishment due to the Fornicator: so as,
though he enjoy pleasure for a time, he shall be tormented for ever. But
consider this, Gentlemen; you (I say) whose better breeding has instructed you
in the knowledge of better things, that if no future respect might move you (as
God forbid it should not move and remove you from these licentious delights)
yet respect to the place whence you descended, the tender of your credit which
should be principally valued, the example which you give, and by which
inferiors are directed, should be of force to weane you from all inordinate
affections, the end whereof is bitterness, though the beginning promise
sweetness. Quo major, eo melior; idque exemplo perfice, ut aliis etiam been
vivendi exempla trilua^.
It was Demosthenes answer unto Lais, upon setting a price of her body, Non
emam tauti poenitere: sure I am, howsoever this Heathen Orator prized his money
above the pleasure of her body, and that it was too dear to buy repentance at
so high a rate; that it is an ill bargain for a moments pleasure, to make
shipwreck of the souls treasure; exposing reputation and all (being indeed
the preciousest of all) to the Object of lightness, and Subject of baseness,
paying the fraught of so short a daliance with a long repentance. Wherefore my
advice is unto such as have resorted to the House of the strange woman,
esteeming it only a trick of youth, Prove. 2.16, 17.
to keep their feet more warily from her ways: For her house draws near
unto death, and her paths unto Hell. So as none that go in unto her, shall
return, neither shall they understand the ways of life. Let such as have
herein sinned, repent; and such as have not herein sinned, rejoice, giving
thanks to God, who has not given them up for a prey to the lusts of the
flesh; craving his assistance to prevent them hereafter, that the flesh might
be ever brought in subjection to the spirit. For, as the Lioness having been
false to the Lion, by going to a Libard; and the Storke consorting with any
other besides her own mate, Observation of admirable continency, instanced in
beast, and birds.
wash themselves before they dare to return home; and the Heart after he has
satisfied his desire, retires to some private or desolate Lawne, hanging down
his head, as one discontent, till he has washed and rinsed himself, and then
he returns cheerfully to his herd again: so we cannot be unto God truly
reconciled, till we be in the flood of repentance thoroughly washed. Thus shall
you from the ways of the strange woman be delivered; Vt eruaentur a multere
altena, etc. ^^. verse. 12. The publication of Secula Plays used by the Heathen,
was cried in these words; Convenite ad ludos specta^dos, quos neque spectavit
quis quam, nec spectaturus est. Suet. in Claudio, cap. 21. Pol. Vug. de invent.
lib. 8. cap 1. Ovid. Trist. lib.
thus shall your good name, which is aptly compared to a precious ointment,
remain unstained; and a good report shall follow you, when you are hence
departed.

There is another Recreation used by Gentlemen, but especially in this City;
which, used with Moderation, is not altogether to be disallowed: and it is
repairing to Stage Plays; where, as they shall see much lightness, so they
may hear something worthy more serious attention. Whence it is, that Thomas
Aquinas gives instance in Stage Plays, as fittest for refreshing and
recreating the mind; which likewise Philo Iudaeus approves. But for as much as
diverse Objections have been, and worthily may be made against them, we will
here lay them down, being such as are grounded on the Sacred Word of God; and,
with as much perspicuity and brevity as we may, clear and resolve them.

Plays were set out on a time by the Citizens for the more solemnity of a
league concluded betwixt the Cantons of Berna and Tiguris; touching which
Plays, sundry differences arose amongst the Ministers of Geneva, which could
not easily be determined, about a young Boy, who represented a woman in
apparel, habit, and person: in the end it was agreed of all parts, that they
should submit the determination of this difference, with general suffrage and
consent, Object. 1. Primum quod urgent illi Histriom ast. di sumptum est e
Deuter. 22. ^e cultu multebri, An pueris li uit cum assumere; carumque mo res
assimilare? Vni Bezae omres acquiescunt Theologi.
to the authenticke and approved judgment of their Beza, holden for the very
Oracle both of University and City; and who had sometimes been versed in
theatrall composures, to his glory. This controversy being unto him referred,
he constantly affirmed, that it was not only lawful for them to set forth
and act those Plays, but for Boys to put on women's apparel for the time.
Neither did he only affirm this, but brought such Divines as opposed
themselves against it, to be of his opinion, with the whole assent and consent
of all the Ecclesiastical Synod of Geneva. Now in this first Objection, we may
observe the occasion, which moved these zealous and learned Divines to make a
doubt of the lawfulness of Stage Plays; because (said they) it is not lawful
for men to put on women's apparel, or women to put on men's: as we read how
Stephanio, an Actor of Roman Plays, was whipped, for having a man's wife
waiting on him, shorn in manner of a Boy. Which doubt, being so soundly and
sincerely cleared by so conspicuous a light of the Church, we will no longer
insist upon, but descend to the next Objection. Object. 2. Obj^ctio de sacra
Scriptura sumpta and perita.


We are therefore to come to another place of Scripture, pressed likewise by
such as oppose themselves to the lawfulness of Stage Plays, as we find it
written in the 118. Psalm: Turn away mine eyes that I see no vanity. Which
requires of us a twofold consideration; Generally, for the whole nature of
things, as in that place of Solomon, Vanity of Vanities, etc. in which sense I
freely confess that Stage Plays may pass under the name of Vanity.
Specially, for subjects vain, light, foolish, frivolous, fruitless, being
such as are to be applied or accommodated to no good use or profitable end; in
which sense or signification our Stage Plays may in no sort be termed Vanity.
Quam plurima in pubitcis Theatris sunt spectanda, ad regendos mores, dirigendos
motus, corrigendos animi metus, admodum utilia. Object. 3.
For we shall gather, by a right use and application of such things as we shall
hear and see, many excellent precepts for instruction, sundry fearful
examples for caution, diverse notable occurrents or passages which, well applied
(as what may not be perverted) may confer no small profit to the judicious
Hearer.

The third Objection may probably ground it self upon the testimony of Saint
Luke, chap. 6.24. W^e unto those that laugh now, etc. Whence it may be
gathered, That, if the Scripture condemn Laughter, then consequently
Stage Plays also, whose special aim and intendment is to make men laugh. But
it is to be understood, that Christ directs his speech to those perverse and
malicious men, whose mourning is but a dissembled sorrowing, outwardly
grieving, and inwardly laughing; who speak one thing with their mouth, but
profess another thing in their life: for this is not to be understood of the
common society or conversation of men, as if Christ should forbid any one to
laugh at all; but rather of immoderate laughter: whence is that of the Poet;
Woe unto thee whose Spleen affects laughter,
For thy short joy shall turn to sorrow after.


For, as fear begets humility, so too much mirth procures levity. Much
laughter corrupts manners, Vt metus humilitatem* sic nimia laetitia gestit
levitatem. Cic. Eccles. 3.22.
and loses the sinews of their former strength, but a grave countenance is
the preserver of knowledge: yet adds Ecclesiastes unto this; There is nothing
better than for man to rejoice in his works; which David confirms, Psalm
penult. So as there is nothing by this Objection proved, but what with all
reason may be approved; for immoderate mirth is that which is here condemned,
being that which we have in this observation especially touched and taxed:
whence we may infer, That moderate delight, tasting more of sobriety than
levity, is not only allowed, but commended.

The fourth Objection is taken from Saint Matthew, Chap. 12.36. But I say unto
you, Object. 4.
that for every idle word, etc. of which words, that we may use no other
exposition, than what the ancient Fathers themselves have used; we will show
in this place their several expositions upon this parcel of holy Scripture.
Tertul. lib. de Patient. Theophylact.
Tertullian in his book of Patience, understands by every idle word,
whatsoever is vain and superfluous. But Theophylact by idle words
understands lies, calumnies, all inordinate and ridiculous speeches.
Chrysostom.
Chrysostom, almost after the same manner interprets it, saying, that by
idle words are understood such as move uncomely and immodest laughter. Gregory.
Gregory understands by these which want the profit ever redounding from
modesty, and are seldom uttered upon any precedent necessity, things
frivolous, fables, old-wives tales. All which several expositions, as they
agree in substance, so do we cloze with them in every circumstance. For such
as these which corrupt Youth by light and scurrilous jests, so little are they
to be affected, as the very Stages* where these are used are to be hated.

For the fifth, it is written 1 Cor. 10.7. and Exodus 32.6. The people sat down
to eat and drink, and rose up to play: which argument is drawn from
Chrysostom, Object. 5.
where he shows that by these words the Apostle meant two maine
inconveniences, being the effects of false worship, and endangering the souls
shipwreck, to wit, the Idolatry, or Idolomany of the Israelites done to the
Golden calfe in Dan and Bethel. But far be this from the conceit of any, to
imagine, that Stage Plays, intended for modest delight and Recreation, should
ever move the Spectatour to such abomination. For so much ought Stage Plays to
be from introducing any to such impiety, as they should not so much as once
present in their shows or Pageants, ought that might tend to the depraving of
the Hearer in matters of conversation, De Deo loqui e^iam vera periculosissimum
est. Arnob.
much less in drawing their minds to any profane or Pagan opinion: which
should not be so much as once named, much less entertained amongst Christians.

For the sixth, Object 6.
it is grounded on the foundation of the same Apostle, where in diverse places
he writes expressly against fables; as 1 Timothy 1.4. Give no heed to fables, etc.
Again, 1 Timothy 4.7. But cast away profane, and old wives fables, etc. Again, 2 Timothy 4.4. Taxing such as shall turn their ears from the truth, and shall be
given unto fables. Again 2 Pet. 1.16. the Apostles in their doctrine were not
directed by deceivable fables. But for these Comedians, let them speak for
themselves, being such as follow the steps of Terence, In Comed. de Thaide.
Menander, etc. Or may be properly referred to the Lesbian rule of Menander,
and the Lydian stone of Paul. For such as breed corruption in our manners (that
I may jumpe in opinion with Plato) let them sail to Anticyrainsula est O^tae,
monti Thessalio opposita, ubi Helleborus crevisse dicitur.
Anticyra, and undergo due censure for their error. But how worthy the Works
of some of the Ancient Comedians have bin, may appear by the Apostle's
alleging diverse of their sentences in his Epistle, and vouchsafing to use the
name of their Poets, by a general title, to approve some things in them worthy
reading. As that of Luke 9.5. a proverb used by Euripides in his Tragedies;
that also of Menander, made sacred by the mouth of the Apostle Paul, 1 Cor.
15.33. As it is likewise manifest that the same Apostle Paul used the authority
of Aratus and Epimenides, Act. 17.28. All which add a reverend approbation to
the authority of Poets.

The seventh Objection which these Stage-Antagonists frame, Object. 7.
is taken from Ephesians. 5.4. where the Apostle wills and warns that these
(...) etc. that is, such things as become no man, and which our very ears
should abhor to hear, ought not to be so much as once named amongst
Christians. Whereto I answer, that as these things tending to lightness were
inveighed against by the Apostle, that he might leave unto us a more excellent
pattern or example of modesty, which is an ornament that suteth best with the
children of God: So there is none, having the light of grace in him, or fearing
the judgment that is to come, who will applaud these scurrilous jests, which
are wont to deprave, but seldom to edify the understanding: whereof the Poet
speaks; Jests that unseasond are I cannot bear,
For they distaste a modest bashful ear.


But it may be here again objected, Aut vinculum aut vehiculum. De civit Dei.
lib 9. cap. 5.
that every thing being (as Augustine testifies,) either a hinderance or a
furtherance; these Stage Plays, which are properly called the Bellows of
vice, may rather seem a hinderance in the course and progress of virtue, then
any furtherance to him in his practice therein. Besides, Plays (says Ambrose)
ought not to be known of Christians, because there is no mention at all made of
them in holy Scripture. Whereto we briefly answer thus with Peter Martyr, that
sound and profound Divine, that in holy Scripture we have (as it were) a
general rule set down unto us, Theatra Idolatricis Deorum sacris esse
turpiora etc.

Augustinus, Latinorum patrum Augustios de civit. Dei lib. 2. cap. 7.


touching all things mediate or indifferent, in the number whereof are Plays
necessarily included. Yea, but Augustine the Prince of the Latin Fathers,
seems to affirm, that even those Stages or Theaters where their interludes
were acted, were more abominable then those idolatrous sacrifices, which in
honor of the Pagan gods were offered. But hence is to be understood, that this
holy father meant of such solemn Plays or Interludes, as were acted and
usually celebrated by the Heathen in honor of their Father Nunc sum delignatus
Aedilis, habeo rationem quod a populo acceperim, mihi ludos sanctissimos,
maxima et ceremonia Cereri Liberoque faciendos. Cic. in Ver. Quintilianus
Hypocritam Histrionem appellat: Qui mores, motus gestus, incessus voces,
vultus, deponere and dediscere (quorum personas agunt) nullo modo possunt.
Elizabetha orbis Phoebe; inter mulieres Sibylla, inter reginas, Saba.
Liber, and other Ethnicke gods for the yearly increase of their fruits:
wherein many uncomely and immodest parts were played. Yea, but where shall we
find these Stage-actors in former times so much as countenanced, being such as
Quintilian terms expressly, Hypocrites, from counterfeiting the manner,
measure, motion, gesture, gate, grace, and feature of such persons as they
represent; whose fashion they often retain when they have resumed their own
Habit? Yes, and by the eminent'st and noblest personages. Edward the sixth so
much approved them, as he appointed one who was a witty Courtier to be (as it
were) the chief master or disposer of the Plays, who by his office should
take care to have them set forth in a princely and sumptuous sort; which Office
to this day reteines the name of the Master of the Revels. Likewise our late
Queen Elizabeth of blessed memory, rightly styled the worlds Phoebe; among
women a Sybilla, among Queens a Saba, how well she approved of these
Recreations, being (as she termed them,) harmless spenders of time, the
large exhibitions which she conferred on such as were esteemed notable in that
kind may sufficiently witness. Neither did she hold it any derogation to that
royal and princely Majesty, which she then in her regal person presented,
to give some countenance to their endeavors, whereby they might be the better
encouraged in their action. Yea, if we would but peruse some books treating of
this subject, we should find Poets in general to have received such
countenance and approbation from the most eminent'st Princes, as their poems
never wanted Patrons, nor the Authors themselves Benefactors: which by
instances I entend here to confirm, though the prosecution hereof may seem
digressive to our present discourse. Homerus, Sophocles heroicus; Sophocles,
Homerus tragicus.

Had Ovid supplied Cherilus place he might by this means have enriched his
fortunes above the condition of a Poet.




We read how much Amyntas King of Macedonia, made of the tragical Poet
Euripides, the Athenians of Sophocles; in what price the noble and heroic
poems of Homer were holden by Alexander, placing them in that curious Cabinet
which he got in the spoil of Darius: and not only Homer the Father of the
Poets, was so honored by him, but for his sake all other meaner Poets: in so
much as Cherilus no very good Poet had for every verse well made, a Philips
Noble of Gold, amounting in value to an Angel English, and so for every
hundred verses (which a cleanly hand could presently dispatch) he had an
hundred Angels. And since Alexander the great, how Theocritus the Greek Poet
was favored by Ptolomie King of Egypt, and Berenice his wife. Ennius likewise
by Scipio, Virgil and Horace by Augustus; betwixt which two Poets the Emperor
sitting one day, and one that might be bold asking what he did; Sedeo inter
suspiria and lachrymas.
Marry (said he) I sit here between groanings and tears; for the one was
ever sighing, and the other seemed as if he were ever weeping. But to descend
to our later times; how much were Iehan de Mehune, and Guillamn^ de Loris made
of by the French King? and Ieffery Chaucer, Father of our English Poets, by
Richard the second; who, as it was supposed, gave him the Manor of Newholme in
Oxfordshire? and Gower by Henry the fourth? Harding by Edward the fourth? Also
how Francis the French King made Sangelais, Salmonius, Macrinus, and Clemens
Marot of his Privy Chamber, for their excellent skill in Latin and vulgar
Poesy? And Henry the eighth, for a few Psalms of David, translated and turned
into English Meeter by Sternhold, made him groom of his Privy Chamber. Also
one Gray, in what favor grew he with Henry the eight, and after with the Duke
of Somerset, Protector, for his Hunt is up, Hunt is up? And Queen Marie, for
one Epithalamie, made by Vargus a Spanish Poet, at her marriage with King
Philip, solemnized in Winchester, gave him during his life two hundred Crowns
pension. Nor were Poets only eminent in this kind, but esteemed for their
universality of knowledge, apt for any office public; as in the administration
of Commonweals affairs, conduct of Armies, etc. For we find that Julius
Caesar was not only the most eloquent Orator of his time, but also a very good
Poet, though none of his doings therein be now extant. Quintus Catulus a good
Poet, and Cornel. Gallus Treasurer of Egypt; and Horace the most delicate of
all the Roman Lyricks, was importuned by many Letters of great instance, -- ego
laudoruris amoeni Rivos, and musco circumlita saxa, nemusque. Hor. 1. Epist.
10. Carmina sec^ssum scribentis and otia quaerunt.
to be Secretary of State to Augustus the Emperor; which he nevertheless
refused for his unhealthfulnesse sake; and being a quiet man, and nothing
ambitious of glory, retired himself from public deportments. And Ennius the
Latin Poet, was with all respect entertained as a fellow and Counselor by
African, for his amiable conversation. So Antimenides, of whom Aristotle
reports in his Politics; and Tyrtaeus the Poet, though a lame man, was chosen
by the Oracle of the gods from the Athenians, to be general of the
Lacedaemonians Army. Nor may that noble and honorable memorial of that worthy
woman twice French Queen, Lady Anne of Britain, wife first to Charles the
eighth, and after to Lewis the twelfth, add less glory to this exquisite Art;
who passing one day from her lodging toward the Kings side, saw in a Gallerie
M. Allan^ Chartier the Kings Secretary, an excellent Poet, leaning on a Tables
end asleep, and stooped down to kiss him, saying thus in all their hearings:
We may not of princely courtesy pass by and not honor with our kiss, the
mouth from whence so many sweet ditties and golden poems have issued. Frustra
poet as feres compos sui p^pulit. Sen. de Tranq. anim.
Yea Plato himself, howsoever he may be said to exclude diverse Poets the
bounds of his Commonweal, for their obscene and immodest labors, which
effeminated youth, training them rather to the Carpet than the Camp; yet wrote
he many Epigrams and excellent Poems in his younger years, before he intended
himself to Philosophy. For even in Fables appear seeds of Virtues, as
Macrobius testifies.

Yea, Macrob in some. Scipioni.
but our Stage-stingers, or Poet-scourgers, will again object, that these
Theaters, which were at first erected for honest delight and harmless
merriment, grow many times busy with states, laying aspersions on men of
eminent rank and quality; and in brief, will spare none, so they may gain
themselves by disparaging others. But I must answer thus much for them, albeit,
- Non me tenet aura Theatri; that such as employ their pens in taxing or
tainting any noble or meriting person in this kind, Ad reprehendenda aliena
facta atque dicta ardet omnis animus. Salust.
deserve no better censure, then as they whipped, so to be whipped themselves for
their labor: for they must know (to use the words of one who was once an
eminent Statist) that some things are privileged from jest, namely Religion,
matters of State, great persons, any man's present business of importance, and
any case that deserves pity; and generally, men ought to find the difference
between saltness and bitterness. Certainly, he that has a Satyricall
vein, as he makes others afraid of his wit, so he had need be afraid of
others memory. This was very straightly looked into by the ancient Heathens, who
ordained many strict Laws to punish such bitter Satyrists as touched the good
name of any Citizen, either in public Stage, or any private work. The ancient
Romans had a Law enacted in their twelve Tables, That whosoever should impeach
any ones good name, or detract from the credit of his person, either in verse
or action, should suffer death. So as Tiberius slew Scaurus, and not altogether
undeservedly, for writing a spiteful Tragedy against him. In like manner did
Augustus banish Ovid, for writing too wantonly toward some that were near
him. So Nero enjoined Lucan silence, for his (...).
smooth invection framed against him. So as Stesichorus, writing bitterly
against Helen, Aristophanes against Clean, Eupolis against Alcibiades,
Callisthenes against Alexander, suffered equal punishments according to their
demerits. Eupolis atque Cratinu^, Aristophanes que poetae.

Horat. Sermon. lib. 1. Sat. 4.


This Eupolis is said to be one of the first Comedians, and was drowned in
Hellespont, about the time of that famous Sea Fight between the Lacedaemonians
and Athenians: but I can scarcely assent to his opinion; for we find it
recorded, that he was thrown into the Sea by Alcibiades, for presenting him
on the public Stage, embracing Timandra in a lascivious sort; and that he
used these words: Saepius me Eupolis in Theatro demersisti, semel te in mari
demergam.
Often times, Eupolis, have thou drowned me upon the stage, I will once drown
thee in the sea. Thespis likewise is said to be the first inventer of a
Tragic Scene, as Ignotum Tragicae genus invenisse Camanae.

Dicitur, and plaus^ris vexisse poemata Thespis, Quae canerent agere^tque
peruncti faecibus ora.

Horat. in art. poet.


Horace witnesses: Thespis, some, say inventing first the strain
Of tragic Scenes, grew famous in his vein;
Whose Actors that ye might the better note,
With painted faces sung the lines he wrote,
Mounted in Chariots; which with greedy ears
The people heard, and hearing sent forth tears.


And in these did Satyrus (no doubt) among the Greeks show an admirable Art,
being so highly extolled by Demosthenes (for unto him did this Satyrus propose
the first form of speaking plainly and articulately) as he was no less
praised by him, then the Roman Roscius was by Cicero, or Aesopus, to whom
Cicero uses many titles of love and familiarity in his Epistles. For Roscius
and Aesopus were held the choicest and chiefest Orators, even at that time when
the Commonweal excelled not only in Eloquence, but also in wisdom. The
like of Pilades and Hyla, Master and Scholar, who were such passionate Actors,
as they enforced admiration in the hearer. But to what end should I prosecute
either Comicke or Tragic subjects any further? My opinion briefly is this; As
Comedies should breath nothing but Terenee's Art, Cecilius gravity, Menanders
sweetness, Aristophanes conceit, and Plautus wit: so Tragedies should relish
of nothing but of the royal and majestic measures of Sophocles, the
sententious fullness of Euripides, and the sincere integrity of Seneca. For
these which tend to corrupt youth, Hence it may appear how injuriously I was
^^aduced by Mr. W. P. in his Historiomas^ix.

Though the most able and s^nowy fancies, which of late times flourished
amongst our Italians for Dramatick measures, were accounted these: Lopis de
vega. Arisiofane. Mauzano. Mirinda. Vivianus. Assarino. Alvisus. Astolsus. Cum
fame craciantur Christi pauperes, effusis largitatibus nutriunt histriones.
Greg. Donare res suat histrionibus causa histrionatus, vitium est ^mmane and
non virtus. Aug. Sup. Johan. Daindigenti, and non da saltanti et Hiero. This
fearful Example disapproves not the use but abuse of Stage Plays.


making their Stages Stews, or their Scenes mere Satyrs, to detract from the
credit or estimation of any person, either public or private; as their Authors
deserve due punishment, so should they be avoided: the former sort, because
they are in danger to deprave us; the latter, because perhaps we shall hear
them touch the credit of such as are near us. For such as Enterludes (
Gentlemen) as participate with neither of these, but in a temperate and equal
course mix profit with honest delight; you shall account the time you bestow
in hearing them, not altogether fruitlesly spent. For albeit the Italians are
held worthy before all others to carry away the Garland for Poesy, being for
number and measure fuller, and for weight and merit better, as may appear in
the happy labors of Petrarch and Boccace; yet if we look home-ward, and
observe the grace of our presentiments, the curiosity of our properties, and
propriety of our action, we may justly conclude, that no Nation is, or has
been so exquisite in that kind.

But to draw in our sails, touching this Recreation: as I approve of the
moderate use and recourse which our Gentlemen make to Plays; so I wholly
condemn the daily frequenting of them: as some there be (especially in this
City) who, for want of better imploymnet, make it their Vocation. And these I
now speak of, be our Ordinary Gentlemen, whose day-taske is this in a word:
They leave their beds to put on their clothes formally, repair to an Ordinary,
and see a Play daily. These can find time enough for Recreation, but not a
minutes space for Devotion. So as I much fear me, when they shall be struck
with sickness, and lie on their deathbed, it will fare with them as it fared
with a young Gentlewoman within these few years; who being accustomed in her
health every day to see one Play or other, was at last struck with a grievous
sickness even unto death: during which time of her sickness, being exhorted
by such Divines as were there present, to call upon God, that he would in mercy
look upon her, as one deaf to their exhortation, continued ever crying, Oh
Hieronimo, Hieronimo, me thinks I see thee, brave Hieronimo! Neither could she
be drawn from this with all their persuasions; but fixing her eyes
intentively, as if she had seen Hieronimo acted, sending out a deep sigh, she
suddenly dyed. And let this suffice to have been spoken of the moderate use of
this Recreation: upon which I have the longer insisted, because I am not
ignorant how diverse and different opinions have been holden touching the law
fullness of Stage Plays, which I resolved to reconcile in as brief and plain
a manner as I could, before I descended to the rest.

For as much as we have begun to treat of such Recreations as require small
use or exercise of the body, we will first proceed with such as follow, being
ranked in the same Siedge, because Recreations of the same nature: descending
from them to exercises requiring more alacrity of spirit, and more ability of
body. Ludus ale ae et omnis ludus qui innititurfortunae prohibitus est. In Sum.
Pisan.


Of these, which may be rather termed exercises of the mind, then exercises of
the faculties of the body, are Cards and Dice, a special Recreation: merely
invented and intended to pass tedious Winter nights away, and not to hazard
ones fortunes at them, as many inconsiderate Gamesters now adays will not
stick to do: which done, what ensues hence, but entertaining of some
desperate course, which brings the undertaker many times to an end as
unfortunate, as his life was desolate? which makes me think I never see one of
these Gamesters, who in a bravado will set their patrimonies at a throw, but I
remember the answer of one Minacius, who having on a time lost at Dice not only
his money, but his apparel too (for he was very poor) fate weeping at the
Portall door of a Tavern: It chanced that a friend of his seeing him thus to
weep and lament, demanded of him, How it was with him? Nothing, (quoth
Minacius;) Why weepest thou then, (said his friend) if there be nothing?
Barthol. Merula. in Ovid. de art. amand, l. 2.
For this cause do I weep (replied Minacius) because there is nothing. His
friend still wondering; Why then (quoth he) do thou weep thus, when there is
nothing? For the very same cause (quoth he) because I have nothing. The one
understood that there was no cause why he should weep; the other wept because
he had Nothing left to play. How many be there who may sing Lachrymae with
Minacius, going by weeping-crosse: being either by cross fortune, as they
ascribe it, or rather by flat cheating, as they may properly term it, stripped
of their substance? Amongst the Romans Canis, canalicula seu Chius, apud
Romanos jactus erat omnium maxim inauspicatus; Hercules, Venus seu Basilicus,
omnium benignissimus. Vid. Lips. antiq. lect lib. ^. c. 1. Turn. adu. lib. 5.
cap. 6. In Tesserario lud^, Mydas jactu^ erat fortunatissimus.

De^^pst. antiq. Romans l. 5. c. 1.


Venus or Co^s was the best chance at Dice: but indeed the best chance that any
one can have, is not to throw at all. Howsoever, I could wish young Gentlemen
to beware of frequenting these common gaming houses, where they must either
have fortune with advantage, or else be sure to play like young Gamesters to
their owne-disadvantage. Truth is, I would have none to play much, but those
which have little to play. For these, as they have little to lose, so they
cannot be much poorer, if they lose all. Whereas such, whose Ancestors have
left them fair revenues, by investing them as Heirs to their providence; need
little to raise or advance their fortunes by these indirect means. For tell
me, Gentlemen, do ye game for gain, or passing time? If for gain, it is
needless, ye have sufficient. If for passing time, your stake should be less,
and your care for winning, more indifferent. Besides, do ye not observe what
foists ye have daily resorting and frequenting these houses; whose purses are
lined with cheats, and whose profession is only to sharke? Shun their companies
then, left they prey upon you: whereby you shall make your selves subjects both
of want and weakness. Of Want, by filling their purses with your coin: of
weakness, by suffering your selves to be made a prey of by their cheats. If
you will game, make choice of such as you know to be square Gamesters, scorning
to bring their names in question with the least report of advantage. As for
tricks frequently used in these days, learn rather to prevent them, then
profess them: For I never knew Gamester play upon advantage, but bring him to
the square, and his fortune was ever seconded with disadvantage. But above all,
use moderation in Play, make not your Recreation a distemper: and set up this
as your rest, never to mount your stake so high, as the loss of it may move
you to chol^r. And so I descend to Recreations more virile, wherein I will be
brief, because I would hasten to the next branch.

In this rank may be numbered Hunting and Hawking, pleasures very free and
generous, and such as the noblest dispositions have naturally affected. For
what more admirable then the pleasure of the Hare, if we observe the uses which
may be made of it, as I have In a Treatise entitled; The Hunismans Raunge.
elsewhere more amply discoursed; purposing here rather to touch them, then
treat of them? In her doubles, note her cunning; in the dogs, eagerness in
pursuing: Where all the senses remain for the time pleased, but when at
default, how much are they grieved? What an excellent Melody, or natural
Consort to delight the Ear? What choice Objects to content the Eye? What
odoriferous smells in the floury Meads, Vellet que videre, non etiam sentire.
Act aeon apud Ovid.
to refesh the Nose? only the Touch and Taste must have their pleasures
suspended, till the sport be ended. Non sine lepore, tanto labor, pro uno
Lepore homines torqueri video; says one very wittily and elegantly. I can
never choose but laugh, to see what labor men will take for a poor Hare. Quos
mortes ascendent, quas paludes transibunt, quas vepres sentesque sine sensu
percurrent, modoo unum lepusculum ta^to sudore capiant?
What Mountains they will climb, what Marshes they will pass, what brakes
and briars they will run through, and all for a Hare? which may be an Emblem
of humane vanity; where men (miserable deluded men) will refuse no toil or
labor to gain a trifling pleasure. What indirect courses they will take for a
moments delight, which is no sooner shown them, then vanished from them? These
pleasures are most commonly affected by Youth, because they have agility and
ability of body to maintain the pursuit of them: whence the Poet; The
beardlesse Youth, Horat.
when is guardians reins do yield,
Sports him in Horse, and Dogs, and open field:


The reason may be this; he cannot endure restraint: for the heat of Youth
must needs take air, or it choakes it self with too much holding. It must be
carried aloft on the wings of the wind, taking an Icarian flight, but never
fearing his fall. Such dogs as were presented by the King of Albanie unto
Alexander the Great, who would not stir at small Beasts, but at Lions and
Elephants, are the fittest for his kennell; for Youth is no sooner moving then
mounting. Whence Ascanius in a youthful bravery Wishes some Boar or savage
Lion should
Descend the Mount, Optat aprum, aut fulvum descendere monte Lecnem. Virg.
and cope with him he would.


So subject is Youth to expose it self to all dangers, swimming ever with
bladders of vainglory, till they receive water, and it sink. There are some
also of these youthful Hunts-men, who when they cannot speed in their sport,
will rather buy it, then want it; that having their game on their back, they
may proclaim to the world, how they are Masters of their profession. And these
are excellently displayed by the Poet, in the person of Gargilius. ^^t olim
Gargilius, qui mane plagas, venabula, servos Differtum transire forum,
populumque jubebat, Vnus ut e multis (Populo spectante) referret Emptum mulus
aprum. Horat. Epist, lib. 1.6.


At once Gargilius, who one Morn betime
Sent out his Servants forward to the chase,
With Hunting poles, and twisted nets of line,
To buy a Boar, which through the Market place
Laid on a Mule, as if his men had slain him,
Would, as be thought, eternal glory gain him.
So apt are many in inventing, and eager in pursuing ought which may raise them
a name, though in things merely indifferent. For as reputation is a common
conceit of extraordinary virtue, so every one labors to acquire the end,
albeit they miss the means of acquiring it. For how should any one imagine
(unless his conceit were wholly darkened) that these things could be any
means to perpetuate his name? But so soon transported is Youth with any
fantasy suggested (albeit upon no sufficient ground builded) as whatsoever
his conceit whispers to him, that may tend to his praise, he entertaines it
with a greedy and eager desire, laboring to effect what may gain him popular
esteem. So as the Lover is never more blinded with affection toward his
beloved, than Youth is in affecting that which may cause him to be praised. To
speak much touching this Recreation I will not address my discourse: only
this is my opinion, that as it is generous, so generally is it most harmless,
so it be moderately used; for otherwise it may weaken or enfeeble the body,
impair the health, and be occasion of many inconveniences: for in my discourse
upon the particular branch of this Observation, I am only to approve of such
Recreations as are used with Moderation: As Hawking, which (as I before
observed) is a pleasure for high and mounting spirits: such as will not stoop
to inferior Lures; having their minds so far above, as they scorn to
partake with them. It is rare to consider, how a wild Bird should be so brought
to hand, and so well managed as to make us such pleasure in the air: but most
of all to forgo her native liberty and feeding, and return to her former
servitude and diet. But in this, as in the rest, we are taught to admire the
great goodness and bounty of God, who has not only given us the Birds of the
Air, with their flesh to feed us, with their voice to cheer us, but with
their flight to delight us. The Eagle, which is indeed the Prince of Birds, and
the prime Hawke, was observed much among the ancient Romans in all their
Auguries: so as an Eagle hovering in the Air, Vid. Sueton. Tranquil.
in the reign of Augustus, and at last settling upon the name Agrippa, and
just upon the first letter of that name, A. a lightning descending down from
Heaven, struck the first letter of his own name out, C. whence Soothsayers,
by conjecturall arguments gathered, that he should but live an hundred days
after, and be afterward canonized for a god: because Aesar, the residue of
that name, in the Tuscane language signified God. For the Romans, of all
Nations under the Cope of Heaven, relied most upon the prophesying of Birds: so
as we read, that they ever kept their Oscines, or birds of Augury, by which
they collected what their success should be, both in peace and war. Albeit,
some there was among the Heathen, who made small account of them: so as
Claudius Pulcher, when in taking his Auspicia, or the predictions of his
success before Sicily, the Pullets would not feed, He commanded they should be
plunged in the sea, that they might drink, seeing they would not eat. Greg. in
Moral. exposit. in Job.
It is the saying of an ancient Father. That the piercing eye of the Eagle
exceeds the sight of all other birds: being of such sharp sight, as reflecting
the beams of the Sun fixed upon her, she can look upon the Sun without
shutting her eyes, which are not to be dazzled, shine the Sun never so
brightly. So as it is said, she makes a trial of her brood when they are but
young, by mounting up, and fixing their eyes against the Sun: of which, if
any be so tender-eyed, as they cannot look upon it, she disclaimes them; but
such whose sharp sight can look steadfastly upon it, she tenders them as her
self. Whence many secret and sacred uses might be gathered (for this is but
the type of a divine Moral) if I should insist upon the exposition of that
blessed Father; but I must briefly descend to speak of the Moderate use of
this Recreation.

This pleasure, as it is a princely delight, so it moves many to be so dearly
enamoured of it, as they will undergo any charge, rather then forgo it: which
makes me recall to mind a merry tale which I have read, to this effect. Diverse
men having entered into discourse, touching the superfluous care (I will not say
folly) of such as kept Dogs and Hawks for Hawking; one Paulus a Florentine
stood up and spoke: Not without cause (quoth he) did that fool of Millan
laugh at these; and being entreated to tell the tale, he thus proceeded; Upon
a time (quoth he) there was a Citizen of Millan, a Physician for such as were
distracted of Lunaticke; who took upon him within a certain time to cure such
as were brought unto him. And he cured them after this sort: He had a plat of
ground near his house, and in it a pit of corrupt and stinking water, wherein
he bound naked such as were mad to a stake, some of them knee-deepe, others to
the groin, and some others deeper, according to the degree of their madness;
where he so long pined them with water and hunger, till they seemed sound. Now
amongst others, there was one brought, whom he had put thigh-deepe in water:
who after fifteen days began to recover, beseeching the Physician that he
might be taken out of the water. The Physician taking compassion of him, took
him out, but with this condition, that he should not go out of the room.
Having obeyed him certain days, he gave him liberty to walk up and down the
house, but not to pass the out-gate; while the rest of his companions, which
were many, remaining in the water, diligently observed their Physicians
command. Now it chanced, as on a time he stood at the gate, (for out he durst
not go, for fear he should return to the pit) he beckned to a young
Gentleman to come unto him, who had a Hawke and two Spaniels, being moved with
the novelty thereof; for, to his remembrance, before he fell mad, he had
never seen the like. The young Gentleman being come unto him; Sir (quoth he) I
pray you hear me a word or two, and answer me at your pleasure. What is this
you ride on (quoth he) and how do you employ him? This is a Horse (replied
he) and I keep him for Hawking. But what call you that, you carry on your
fist, and how do you use it? This is a Hawke (said he) and I use to fly with
it at Pluver and Partridge. But what (quoth he) are these which follow you,
what do they, or wherein do they profit you? These are dogs (said he) and
necessary for Hawking, to find and retrive my game. And what were these Birds
worth, for which you provide so many things, if you should reckon all you take
for a whole year? Who answering, he knew not well, but they were worth a very
little, not above six crowns. The man replied; what then may be the charge you
are at with your Horse, Dogs and Hawke? Some fifty crowns, said he.
Whereat, as one wondering at the folly of the young Gentleman: Away, away Sir, I
pray you quickly, and fly hence before our Physician return home: for if he
find you here, as one that is maddest man alive, he will throw you into his
Pit, there to be cured with others, that have lost their wits; and more then
all others, for he will set you chin-deepe in the water. Inferring hence, that
the use or exercise of Hawking, is the greatest folly, unless sometimes used
by such as are of good estate, and for Recreation sake.

Neither is this pleasure or Recreation herein taxed, but the excessive and
immoderate expense which many are at in maintaining this pleasure: Who as they
should be wary in the expense of their coin, so much more circumspect in their
expense of time. The Romans, as may appear by their Laetoria lex, accounted
all Prodigals madmen. Cic. 3. de Offic. Horae non auri dispendium defleo.
So as in a word, I could wish young Gentlemen never to be so taken with this
pleasure, as to lay aside the dispatch of more serious occasions, for a flight
of feathers in the Air. The Physician says, that it is the best exercise
which is, ad ruborem, non ad sudorem; refreshing the spirits, and stirring up
the blood a little, but not putting a man into any great sweat: for he that
makes his Recreation a toil, makes himself likewise Pleasures thrall. Refresh
your spirits, stir up your blood, and enable your bodies by moderate
exercise: but avoid mixing of distemper with your pleasure, for that were not
to refresh, but depresse the spirits; not to stir up, but stop the course of
blood; not to enable, but enfeeble the body. And so I descend to the next
branch, treating of Recreations best sorting with the quality of a Gentleman.

Of Recreations best sorting with the quality of a Gentleman.
TO propose what Recreations may please best, I cannot, (because I know not how
to stand affected) but I shall, as near as I may, recount what especial
Recreations best sort and suit with your quality. Of all those which I have
formerly touched and treated, there is none but may be approved and entertained
with an equal indifferency, being (as I have said) tempered and moderated
with discretion. But some there are I have not touched, which may be so much
the more admired, forasmuch as they are by our young Gentlemen usually
affected; yea, and as especial Ornaments to grace and accomplish them,
generally esteemed: as Fencing and Dancing; the one to accommodate him for the
Court, the other for the Camp. Of which two Recreations, to give my opinion
freely, there is required a knowledge; but respectively to such (I mean) as
only intend to Court or Gallant it: for these shall have occasion to make use
of their knowledge, in the one to grace and beautify them; in the other to
shield and defend them. Yet in neither of these would I have them to imitate
their masters: for so may they turn Cowards, and so show themselves true
Fencers. Or in their Dancing use those mimicke tricks which our apish
professants use; but with a reserved grace to come off bravely and sprightly,
rather then with an affected curiosity. You shall see some of these come forth
so punctually, as if they were made up in a fute of Wainscot, treading the
ground as if they were foundred. Others you shall see, so supple and pliable in
their joints, as you would take them to be some Tumblers; but what are these
but Iacke-an-Apes in gay clothes? But others there are, and these only
praiseworthy, who with a graceful presence gain them respect. For in
exercises of this kind (sure I am) those only deserve most commendation, which
are performed with least affectation.

Now I have heard of some who could do all this; show an excellent grace in
their carriage; express themselves rare proficients in all School-tricks;
being so much admired as who but they: yet observe the cloze, and they spoil
all with an English trick, they cannot leave it when it is well. It is said of
Apelles, that he found fault with Protogenes, in that he could not hold his
hands from his Table: and right so fares it with these young Cavalieroes, when
they have shown all that may be shown to give content, striving to show one
trick above Ela, they halt in the conclusion.

For Fence-play, I have known some puffed up with a presumption of skill, to
have been too apt in giving offense; so as of professors of worth, they became
practisers of wrong. But see their unhappiness ^ this conceit or overweening
opinion of their surpassing skill, brings them many times to an unexpected end,
by exposing themselves to inevitable dangers. And this they do either for
vain glory, being ambitious after fame; or else out of a quarrelling
disposition, being no less apt to conceive or apprehend the smallest occasion
of offense, then to prosecute revenge upon occasion offered. For the first, the
bravest and noblest spirits have been affected to it, I mean Ambition, but
their ends were more glorious. Tus^^l. lib. 4.
As Themistocles, Who walked in the night time in the open street, because he
could not sleep: the cause whereof when some men did enquire, he answered,
that the triumph of Miltiades would not suffer him to take his rest. Quint.
Curt. lib. 4.
The like might be observed in Alexander, Who sighed that his Father should
win so much, and leave him so little to win. So as it is said that he
wept, hearing that there was another world, saying, He had not yet won one
World. But with these it fares many times, as it did with Marius, who not
contented with the glory he got in the Cimbrian wars, by seeking to augment
it, did extenuate it. Yet are these more noble in their aims, then such whose
Ambition it is to commit all impieties, only to gain them a perpetual
infamy: As Pausanias, who killed Philip of Macedon, only for fame or vain
glory; so did Herostratus burn the Temple of Diana, to get him a name by an
infamous act. For the latter sort, being such as are given to quarrels, I have
ever noted their gains to be small in all their adventures. For what are these
but such as value blood at a low rate? they pretend how their reputation stands
engaged; they cannot put up such disgraces but with touch of cowardice; and
what a blemish were it, for ones reputation to be brought in question, upon
terms so near concerning them, and not seek revenge? where the wide world
would take notice of their disgrace, pointing at them in the streets, and
saying, There go such and such who were most grossly baffled; preferring their
blood before their honor, their safety before their reputation! O Gentlemen,
how many of your rank and quality have perished by standing upon these terms!
how many, and those of the choycest and selected'st rank, have exposed
themselves to extremest danger, whereby they might gain themselves the style
of valiant! how many even upon trifling occasions have gone into the field, Heu
quantum potuit terrae pelagique parari,

Hos quem civiles hauserunt sanguine dextrae.


and in their heat of blood have fallen? Sure I am, their dear Country has
felt their loss, to whom in all due respect they should have tendered both
love and life, and not have made prodigal expense of that, which might have
been a means to strengthen and support her state. Yet do I not speak this,
as one insensible of wrong, or incapable of disgrace: for I know that in
passages of this nature, public imputations require public satisfaction, so
that howsoever the Divine Law, to which all humane actions ought to be squared,
may seem to conclude, That we are to leave revenge to whom revenge belongs;
yet so passionate is the nature of man, and through passion so much weakened, as
he forgets many times what the divine Law bids him do, and hastens to that
which is own violent and distempered passion pricks him to. Now to propose my
opinion, by way of direction, in a word it is this: As one may be Ephesians. 4.26
angry and sin not, so one may revenge and offend not; and this is by Romans
12.20. Prove. 25.21.22.
heaping c^ales of fire upon our Enemies head: for by this Prove. 15.1.^8.
meekness is anger appeased, and we of our own fury revenged. But the best
means to prevent occasion of distaste in this kind, is to avoid the
acquaintance or society of such as are given to offense: whence it is that the
wisest of Kings exhorts us in these words; Prove. 22.24.
To have no familiarity with an angry man, neither go with the furious man.
And why? Lest thou learn his ways, and receive destruction to thy soul. For
indeed these, whose turbulent dispositions are ready to entertain any occasion
of offense, albeit the occasion perchance was never intended, are unfit for any
company, or to pass time withal in any Recreation. So as, of one of these it
may be said, as was said of Scava, who showed apparent arguments of resolution,
to slave himself to the servile yoke of tyrannous subjection; Lucan.
Infelix dominum quanta virtute parasti!
How many courses, miserable man, have thou tried; how many ways have thou
traced; how many adventures entertained; to get thee a Master, Fury, Spiritus
magni magis quam utiles. Live. dec. 3. lib. 10. Is^i sunt maxim no^ij, quibus
minime noti.
Arch-traytor to that glorious fortress of Patience? These are those
Blood-bounds who are ever in quest, and are never satisfied in pursuit, till
their eyes become the s^d spectators of a fall: yea, rather then these men will
be out of action, they will engage themselves in maintaining other quarrels; so
prompt they are to take offense, as a strangers engagements must be made their
own, rather then they will discontinue in their former profession. Another
sort there are, who albeit they find ability in themselves to subdue and
moderate this passion of fury by the sovereignty of reason, The saying of
Adherbal, Bomilcars son; Vincerescis Hannibal, sed uti victoria nescis. L.
Flor. l. 2. c. 6.

Resembling Clement the fourth, who had a pregnant wit for projecting,
unfortunate for atchieving.


yet it fares with them as it did with Hannibal, Who knew better how to
conquer, then how to make use of his conquest: or as it is said of Glendor,
That he was more able to get a victory, then skillful to use it. So these,
though reason like a discreet Monitor advise them to moderate their passions,
yet so ambitious are they of popular praise, as rather then they will lose the
name of being esteemed resolute, they will oppose themselves to all perils, and
entertain a course in the eye of true valor most dissolute.

Yet respect to our good name, being indeed the choycest and sweetest perfume,
must not be so slighted, as to incur apparent terms of disgrace, and not
labor to wipe off that stain, by showing some arguments, that we have so
much conceit as to apprehend what an injury is, and so much Spirit as to take
revenge on him, by whom the injury is offered.

It is true; neither am I so stupid, as not to conceive how insupportable the
burden of those wrongs is, which touch our name. So as indeed, (to speak as a
man unto men) these wrongs are above the nature of mortality to bear: Object.
for the natural man tasting more of Earth then Heaven, Sol.
whilst he ponders the quality of his disgrace, and how far he stands
engaged, in respect of the opinion of men, to bear himself like himself, and
not to bury such wrongs in silence, as if senseless of the nature of an
injury; he never considers what the divine Law injoynes, but casts his eye
upon the wrong he sustaines. Wherein, if passion will needs over-master
reason, (albeit I do not hold it consonant to the Divine Law, Moral or
National, but to all generous spirits experimentally useful) I could wish him
to come off fair at the first, for this either wins him the buckler, or loses
it: so shall he ever gain to himself an esteem of conceit, in knowing the
nature of a wrong; and an opinion of spirit, in daring to wipe off the disgrace
that shall be laid upon him. For this is my Position, Fail at the first, and
fail ever: for as the first onset terrifies the enemy, so in actions of this
nature, the only means to gain opinion is to come off bravely in the
beginning. Now perchance it may happen, that he from whom you have received
wrong, will take no notice of your distaste, but will do as he did, who
receiving a Challenge upon some personal touch, whereby he apprehended the
occasion for his best advantage, of making choice (as the Challenged may) of
time, place, weapon, and Second, returned this answer to the Messenger; For
the time, I know not when; for the place, when that time comes, it shall be the
Alps; for the weapon, it shall be Guy's sword that slew the Cow on Dunmoth
heath; and for my Second, it shall be your self, that I may bring you within
the compass of Duelloes. If with such your fortune be to deal, (as many there
are more valiant in tongue then hand, more apt to offer wrong then tender
satisfaction;) know thus much, that these Alps which he has named, and
whereto he never means to come, is what place soever you shall meet him; the
time, whenever you shall have fit opportunity to encounter him; the weapon,
though he choose it, you may refuse it, (because it is too closely kept to come
to) and make choice of your own weapon, left by going to Warwick Castle to
procure a sword, you forget your wrong before you come there; and the Second,
your only self; that as you are particularly wronged, you may be particularly
righted: for, as the wrong touches you and no Second, so you are to right your
self without a Second. But the safest and surest course, (as I said before)
not to partake with men of this condition, is to refrain their company and
conversation: Vid Homer in Iliad.
for these fiery spirits, who have Thersites tongue and Ant aeus hand, are
dangerous to consort with; for they seldom resort to any meeting, but either
they do hurt, or receive it. So as, even in these tolerable Recreations of
Horse-races, Cockings, Bowlings, etc. you shall ever see these throw one bone
or other to make differences amongst men of quality and rank, wherein they
will be sure to be interested as Seconds, if not as principal Agents. My
advice therefore is, that you avoid their company, as disturbers of the public
peace, interrupters of all honest Recreations, and protest enemies to all
civil society. Plin. in Not. Hist.
For, as we read of the Bird Curuca, that she will rather hatch the eggs of
another, then hatch none at all; so these will rather engage themselves in
others differences, and like subtle Spiders spin the web of dissension, then
be without employment: but they hatch the Cockatrice eggs, reaping the fruit
of their labors to their shame. But we have insisted too long upon them;
wherefore we will return to our former discourse.

As we have briefly touched some Recreations well sorting with the quality of
a Gentleman, being such as tend especially to his accomplishment outwardly; so
are we now to treat of such as may confer no less benefit to the inward
man, Knowledges are as the Pyramides, whereof History is the Basis.
by enabling him for matters of discourse. Of which rank, Reading of History,
is to be accounted as one tending especially thereto; and that not only in
respect of discourse, but in respect of discipline and civil society; being
there taught how to demean or behave our selves in all our actions, how to
moderate our affections, how to gain worthy esteem both in our managements
public and private.

Cicero entering into the commendation of Histories, honors them with this
Rhetorical definition: Histories (says he) are the witnesses of times, the
light of truth, De Orat. l. 1.
the life of memory, the mistress of life, the messenger of antiquity: In
which notable exemplification, he shows what excellent fruits may be gathered
from the select flowers of Histories. Whence Cicero moved Luceius to record his
acts in his writings.

Annot. in Tacit. dequo vere dici po^est, ut inclytus ille Lipsius de
Guicciardino testatus est; "Prudens peritusque scriptor, et qui taies Lectores
suos facit.


First, how the passages and events of former times are there recorded;
Secondly, how the truth of things by the light of History is discovered;
Thirdly, our memory is revived; Fourthly, our life is directed; Fifthly,
antiquities successively transcribed. In Tacitus are three notes which are
required in a perfect History; First, Truth, in sincere relating, without
having any thing haustum ex vano; Secondly, Explanation not only of the
sequels of things, but also the causes and reasons; Thirdly, Judgment in
distinguishing things, by approving the best, and disallowing the contrary.
Touching which three notes, we are to observe first, that there is necessarily
required in every History a sincere relation of truth, foisting nothing in,
which may seem either fabulous or impertinent. Likewise, it is not enough to
lay down or explain the sequels or issues of things, but the causes and
reasons from whence those sequels issued. Thirdly, there is required judgment
in distinguishing probabilities from improbabilities; never setting ought down
for a grounded truth without approved authority. Having thus proposed unto you
the fruits redounding from History, as also what is required therein, to make
it more generally affected; it rests now that I show my opinion touching your
choice of Histories: of which subject, because I have In the Survey of
histories lately revised and amply enlarged; which might be rightly entitled,
The Muses Wardrobe, or, The Noble-mans Lecture, dilating on the various
delights of History, the best accomplisher of true Gentility.

Historicum nobilem et verum Aug. de Civit. Dei, l. 4. Graecorum Thucydidem et
Herodotum, Latinorum Salustium and T. Livium facile principes esse judicamus.
Laur. Vall. in ^r^oem Thucyd.


heretofore copiously treated, I will only speak a word, and so descend to the
last branch of this Observation.

Augustine, in his fourth book De Civit. Dei, calls Salust A noble and true
Historian; noble in respect of his descent; true in respect of his discourse.
Neither does he indeed deserve any lesser title: for his phrase is elegant
without affectation; his discourse continuate without impertinent digression,
and the Series of his History stored with much sententious instruction. From
the depth of a princely judgment, Caesar's Commentaries have received most
noble approbation. But if you would take view of a flourishing State, whose
greatness never any attained to, being raised from such beginnings; be
acquainted with ^linius Junior wished he might be mentioned in the Histories of
Cornel. Tacitus, because he did foresee their succeeding memory.
Tacitus or Livie, where you shall observe the courses and passages of many
eminent Princes, how they bare themselves in their height, how in their hate.
Hear you shall see, Those men who (as Cosmo says) carry their heart in their
mouth, are more to be pitied then feared: for these judge men only by the
outward appearance: whereas Tiberius gloried in nothing so much, as in
cunningly cloaking his purposes with fair pretenses, going invisible, and
deluding his subjects resolutions with a seeming good. Here you shall likewise
observe others so obsequiously seeming, as they strove not only to satisfy
the Non solum animis, sed etiam oculis servire Civium. Cic.
minds, but eyes of the Citizens, understanding well enough, that the common
sort of people were caught sooner by a Homines front and oratione magis quam
ipso beneficio, reque capiuntur. Ibid. Tusc. 4. Quint. Curt. 6.
cheerful countenance, and a pleasing outward semblance, then any other
respect whatsoever. Some you shall see note much, yet will be seen to note
little: therefore Agrippina in Tacitus, knowing her life to be attempted by
Nero, knew well that her only remedy was to take no notice of the treason: so
is Scipio described by Cicero, to be the most cunning searcher of men's minds;
and Sylla by Salust. Others you shall observe so much dejected presently upon
any loss sustained, as they entertain affliction with a desperate sorrow,
crying out with Afranius son, Alas me wretched! or Philotas-like, receive
such deep impression or apprehension of their disgrace, as through it they are
forced to lose the faculty of speech. Whereas others, like Furius Camillus are
neither puffed up with honor, nor cast down with disgrace: as his
Dictator-ship could not make him too haughtily affected; no more could exile
from his Country cause him to be dejected. Such was the resolution of the
ancient Romans, who at the disaster of Canna, when their utter ruin and
overthrow was rung in every place, did nothing unworthy themselves. Here you
shall encounter with a Iugurth, Speaking little, but doing much: there with a
Catiline, Speaking much, but doing little. Here one, in all men's opinions
worthy of an Empire before he had it, but most unworthy when he has it;
exemplified in Cicero said of Galba's leaden and lumpish body: His wit had an
ill lodging.
Galba: there one much doubted before he have it, but generally loved when he
had it; exemplified in Who would have majesty preserved, virtute non cultu.
Macrob. lib. 2. Saturnalium, c. 5. Dion. lib. 44.
Severus.

Again, observe you may in the course of Histories, how justly God has shown
himself toward such as practiced treason against their Princes, though they
were Heathens: find out one of all those who conspired Caesar's death in the
Capitol, who died in their bed. For no sooner had Antony showed in his
funeral Oration the thirty three wounds wherewith Caesar was deprived of life
by his conspirators, and erected a Temple to Caesar, and sung a mournful
hymn in memory of Caesar; then Trebonius and Decimus, were the first that were
dispatched, being of the conspiracy. Cassius likewise was killed on his
Birthday: who, some say, Appianus Alex.
killed himself with the same dagger wherewith Caesar was killed: Yea, observe
the misery of these Assasinates, being so unhappy, as they could hardly find
one so friendly, as to lend a hand to end their misery. For, Cassius offered
his throat to Pindarus his Page: Brutus to Strato, who denying to do it, was
answered by a servant; Votis tuis nec decrit amicus nec servus. Plut. in vit.
Bomp.
The like revenge was inflicted on Septimius, for betraying his Master Pompey.
The like on the Magi, for their treacherous attempts, after the death of
Cambyses. The like on Bessus for his disloyalty toward Darius. Justin. Quint.
Curt.
And to descend to later times, even within the bounds of our own nation, what
just revenge seconded those perfidious Accomplices; Alectus for conspiring
against his dear Sovereign Carausius; and that Arch-traytor Edrike, for his
treacherous practices with Canutus the Dane, Vid. Polydor. Fab. Stow. and al.
and breach of allegiance toward King Edmond? for seldom has any State in
any age been so happy, as it has not bred a Catiline with a Catulus, a
Cet^egus with a Curtius, a Sertorius with a Soranus, a Quadratus and Quintianus
with an Aemilius and Coriolanus. Besides, you shall observe what justice and
integrity appeared in the heathen, chastising such as would be bribed or
corrupted, though they were their enemies. So as Mitbridates took Manius
Acilius, Appian* Alex,
one of the chiefest Ambassadors of the Romans, and set him contemptuously upon
an Ass, till he was come to Pergamo, where he put molten gold in his mouth;
reproving the Romans for taking gifts. The like reward had Tarp^ia, being
corrupted by T. Tatius to deliver the Capitol: L. Flor. l. 1. c. 1 Quint.
Curt. l. 3.
for having betrayed the gates of the Capitol to the enemy, only upon
promise, that they should throw her the bracelets, which they wore on their
left arms; this they accordingly performed, throwing also their targets upon
her, with which she was pressed to death.

You shall likewise find there, what reverence the Pagans showed to their
Idolatrous Temples; and how careful they were to observe their Country rites,
which they esteemed sacred, and what success ever followed the enterprises of
such as committed sacrilege. The miserable ends of such as committed
sacrilege in their time.
The very heathen observed, that after such times as the Grecians once offered
violence to the Temple of Pallas, that they lost all their hope, and never
thrived after. Lactantius reports of diverse who were grievously punished for
their impiety and profaneness toward the gods; as namely Fulvius the Censor,
who for taking away certain marmoreas tegulas out of the Temple of Juno
Lacinia, Virg. Aeneid. 2. lib. 1. Lactant. de orig. error. cap. 8.
was distraught of his wits. Appius Claudius for translating and conveying
those sacred relics which were before consecrated to Hercules, within a while
after lost the use of his eyes. Dionysius, who made a jest of Sacrilege,
taking a golden cloak from Jupiter Olympius his Image, a woollen cloak being
put in stead thereof, saying, That a golden cloak was too heavy in Summer,
and too cold in Winter, but a linsiewoolsie cloak was fit for both; cutting
off also Aesculapius golden-beard, saying, It was no reason that the son should
have a beard, and Apollo his father have none; and taking away certain cups of
gold which they held in their hands, saying, It was a great madness, to refuse
them offered; was for these driven into banishment. Pyrrhus for robbing
Proserpina's treasury, suffered shipwreck not far from the shore. Zerxes, who
sent four hundred of his soldiers to Delphos, Valor. Max.
to spoil the Temple of Apollo, had them all destroyed, and burnt with thunder
and lightning. Marcus Crassus, for taking a great mass of money out of the
Temple, which Pompey would not meddle withal, perished there with his whole
Army. And here in Albion, we read of Brennus, who in his expedition to
Delphos, was by a sudden hurly-burly, or immoderate fear, through a noise
heard in the bowels of the earth, (raised indeed by the lamentable shrikings
and howlings of the distracted Druids and ministers of Apollo) despairing of
further success, Vid. Chron.
perished with all his Army. Whence may be observed, how justly such were
punished, who contemned the religion of their Country, robbing their Temples,
and enriching themselves with the spoil of their gods: who albeit they were
Idols and no gods, or rather Devils and no Idols, yet so ill was their success
in all their affairs afterward, as they attributed the cause of their
miserable ends to the contempt of their gods. But howsoever this may seem
erroneously ascribed, sure I am, that thus it may be rightly applied: that
where God is dishonored, his Temple profaned, and religion contemned, nothing
can be succesfully or prosperously concluded.

What good moral men have flourished in evil times.
It is wonderful to note in such evil times, so good men, as we shall every
where meet with in the course of Histories. An Aristides for Justice, a
Celopidas for Temperance, a Numa for Prudence, a Trajan for Patience, an
African for Continence; all which in this Cleanthes Table, History, show
admirable virtues in a corrupt government. Again, reflect your eye on those
whose love to their Country deserves eternal memory; and you will no less
wonder at the greatness of their minds, then the happiness of those Realms
that enjoyed them. Plut. initio Apotheg. regum.
King Darius upon a time, by chance opening a great Pomegranat, and being
demanded of what he would wish to have as many as there were grains in that
Pomegranat? answered in one word, of Zopyrus's. Now this Zopyrus was a right
noble and valiant Knight, who to reduce Babylon to the subjection of his Lord
and Master, and defeat the traitorous Assyrians, suffered his body to be rent
and mangled, and being thus disfigured, fled straight-wayes to Babylon, where
the Assyrians were entrenched: whom he made believe that Darius had misused
him in this sort, because he had spoken in their behalf, counselling him to
break up his siege, and to remove his Army from assaulting their City. They
hearing this tale, and the rather induced to think it true, because they saw
him so shamefully disfigured in his body, were persuaded to make him their
chief Captain: by which means he betrayed them all, and surrendered both
them and their City into his Masters hands. Justin. lib. 1. i^ fine.
The like we read of Codrus Prince of Athens, who according to the counsel
of the Oracle, sacrificed his life willingly, to preserve the Liberty of his
Country. The like did Gobrias, who offered his body to slaughter, to free his
Country of a tyrannous Traitor. Yet observe withal, the ingratitude of former
Ages to men of best deservings; Non dolenda solum sed periculosa etiam res est,
cum ingratis habere negotium. Sen. Appian. Alexand. O ingrata patria, ne ossa
quidem^ Valor Max.
which caused Aeschines say, That though the City of Thebes and Athens were
full of naughty men, yet not so full of any sort as of ungrateful men. This
felt Hannibal, this felt Asdrubal, this felt African; while Asdrubal within,
must be accused by Asdrubal without: and noble African, then whom none ever
deserved better of his Country, may beg a resting place for his bones, but
must not have it.

Again, it will not be amiss to note the sundry occasions of wars,
proceeding from the sundry dispositions of men. Some strove for sovereignty;
others for preservation of their Liberty: where, so eager was the one of
gaining glory, the other of defending their Liberty, they were many times
brought to such straights, as there was more room for beholders, Quint. Curt.
l. ^.
then fighters; many bearing arms, but could not use them. No less remarkable
is it, to note what incredile exploits have been achieved by a handful of
men under a valiant Leader: whereby a more particular survey had of their
actions, Plut. in Apotheg. Quarti d^x. tanti exercitus. L. Flor. l. 2. c. 18.
we shall find that observation of Plutarch to be most true: Better is an
army of Hearts, with a Lion to their Leader, then an army of Lions with a Heart
to their Leader: An Army being said to derive her strength from her self, but
her spirit from her Captain.

In a word, Gentlemen, to observe the revolution of times, the mutation of
States, the Natures and dispositions of persons, the issues and events of
things, Pecoritus fatigatis quoque velocior domum gradus est. Sen. de
tranquil. anim. lib cap. ^.
would be an employment of no less delight then profit; conferring the ebbings
and flowings of foreign estates with our own. But to draw homeward, lest,
like Messala Corvinus, by remembering the name of a stranger, we forget our
own: there is no History more useful, or relation more needful for any
Gentleman, then our own Modern Chronicles, where he shall observe many
notable passages worthy his reading: As first, how his Country was first
planted; how by degrees it became peopled; how to civility reduced; how by
wholesome Laws restrained; and how by the providence of the Almighty, in so
calm and peaceable manner established. Here he shall see a good King, but a
bad man; there a good man, but a bad King. Again, here he shall see the State
more weakened by civil broiles, then foreign wars; Security being no less
hurtful at home, then Hostility abroad. Scipio used to have this sentence in
his mouth; That easy, favorable and affable Captains, were profitable to the
Enemy, which though they were beloved of their Soldiers, yet they set little
by them. This shall you see verified in the too much indulgencie of many of our
Captains, through which lenity they made many hopeful Soldiers absolute
cowards.

Again, to note the raising of many obscure persons to great honor; as
likewise the pulling down of many eminent houses and families, would enforce
no less admiration in us of Gods divine Providence, then of his secret
Justice, who pulls down, and sets up, as seems best to his wisdom. To
observe likewise, in the corruption of blood, what Noble Families have been
tainted, which by the Princes clemency were again restored. What dangerous
attempts and practices have been undertaken, As in the reign of King John*
not only to shake, but supplant the glorious frame of this Island; laboring
to divide and remove all succession to this Crown, from the Royal Line of our
Princes, and to invest foreign Princes therewith: where an English King was
summoned to the French Kings Court, while Normandy was yielded by us, the
Welsh invaded us, Lewis with a speedy arrival accosted us, and John himself
was forced to leave us. Nay, which was more, one of the Nurseries of our Island
was displanted; for at that time was Oxford of her Students forsaken and
abandoned, A^. Dom. 1209.
(which before, for the space of three hundred and nine years, had
successefully flourished) so as not only the State, but Learning, the stern
of State, became much weakened. Yet observe, how happily this storm was calmed,
when it was least expected; for by the Vicount of Mellin his confession, lying
then upon his deathbed, was the whole practice of the French, by a Frenchman
discovered; which was no less happily afterward prevented. For King John,
being to repentace moved, took an oath before his Barons that all things
should be reformed, which the Barons likewise seconded with an oath to confirm
his proceedings. So John was absolved, and that Crown which he had before
resigned, he forthwith resumed; being in this made more happy, in that being
once so unhappy, he came to defeat his foes, Having crossed the Seas to
Jerusalem.
make sufficient trial of his friends, and recover that by submission, which
he had lost by his pride.

Again, if we should but read, and reading consider, how peaceful the
government, how quiet the sleeps, how cheerful the delights were of such as
came by lawful and lineall succession to the Crown; and the heavy Nights,
troubled thoughts, broken sleeps, and many tedious hours which those were
owners of, who came by usurpation to enjoy (with little joy) a princely Diadem;
we should of necessity conclude with Pompey; who being combred with his
Honor, exclaimed to see Sylla's cruelty, being ignorant after what sort to
behave himself in the dignity he had, and cried out; O peril and danger
never like to have an end! For to use one example for all; who should but
consider the practices which Richard the third used to get a Crown, planting
his kingdom on an indirect foundation, Blood, and those many strange passages
and overtures which happened in his Reign, with those fearful Visions which
appeared to him before his death, would certainly set down this for his rest;
that it is not what we have without us, but what we have within us that
procures us peace or disquiet. Id credo non fuit hominum, sed conscientia
sc^lerum. Polydor* Virgil*
Whence Polydore Virgil upon that terrible dream of Richard the third, the
night before Bosworth field, in which he was s^aine, uses these words; I do
not believe that these were the ghosts of men that did affright him, but the
guilt of a troubled conscience that did torment him. Certainly, discourses of
this nature cannot choose but minister profit with delight, and enable you that
are Gentlemen to entertain the time with much content to them that hear you.
For in this Treasury or Storehouse of History, you shall find better means,
then all the Helps of Discourse which our weak Pamphleters can publish, to
enable you for discourse in all companies. For to restrain or tie your selves
to a set form of discourse, as if you were to do nothing without rules, were
too pedanticall: besides, you should be sometimes so scantled, for want of
subjects, that unless the subject whereof you are to discourse fall happily
within your own Element, your Ship for want of Sea-roome would run a-ground.
Whereas History (the sweetest Recreation of the mind) will afford variety,
(being not curtaild by Epitome's, which are the Moths of History) both for
table-talke to delight, and discourse of more serious consequence. Which in my
opinion would better seem a Gentleman, then to entertain time in nothing but
the cry of Dogs, or flight of Hawks; which, as they are Gentlemanly pleasures,
and worthily approved (as I formerly noted) so are they to be used but only as
pleasures and Recreations: of which to speak sparingly were much better, then
only to discourse of them, as if our whole reading were in them. Neither do I
speak this without just cause; for I have noted this fault in many of our
younger brood of Gentry; who, either for want of Education in Learning, or
their own neglect of Learning, have no sooner attained to the strength of
making their fist a Perch for a Hawke, but by the help of some books of
Faulconry, whereby they are instructed in the words of Art, the will run
division upon discourse of this pleasure: whereas, if at any time they be
interrupted by occasion of some other conference, these High-flyers are
presently to be mewed up, for they are taken from their Element. Wherefore,
Gentlemen, let me advise you in a word, so to entertain time in Recreation, as
the pleasure you take therein, draw not your minds from more serious and
useful employments. I have proposed to you, and made choice for you, of some
Recreations which may no less delight and benefit your minds, then these other
active delights do your bodies; use them, and you shall find such pleasure in
them, as you may perceive profit and pleasure so equally mixed, as if at first
intended to make your delight perfect. And so I come to the last branch,
showing how a Gentleman is to bestow himself in them.

AS one said of Love, How a Gentleman is to bestow himself in Recreation.
that it should be a toy and no toil; so say I of Recreation; the spirits
should be cheered by it, not drowned in it; refreshed, not depressed. I do not
like of this eagerness after pleasure; for it argues too much sensuality: The
mind should be so tempred, as it may show an indifferency to the use of
pleasure. Which I have surely found, as a maine error in most part of young
Gentlemen; whose eager appetite so unmeasurably pursuing the quest of pleasure,
cannot contain it self from expressing outwardly, the love it conceives to
such a pleasure inwardly. So as I have observed some intraunced (as it were)
with joy in the chase of Hare, or the flight of Hawke; which in my opinion
argued much lightness: for no sooner was their pleasure at a stay or default,
then all their former delight was turned to a contrary passion. I commend
therefore his resolution who said; He was never so over-joyed with pleasure,
but he thought it good to allay that surpassing joy, with the remembrance of
the end of that pleasure. It is an excellent thing to moderate our joys, by
considering the shortness of them: and to allay the height of them, by
observing what breaches or intermissions are incident to them. Wherefore above
all it becomes a Gentleman to be circumspect in this kind, for even by his
outward carriage may his weakness be discovered. Sure I am there is nothing
that tastes more of true wisdom, then to temper our desires in effects of
joy* So as I cannot sufficiently wonder, how Chylo being accounted one of the
seven Sages of Greece, Defunctum asseruntimmodica laetitia and se^ii
imbecillitate, etc. Laert. in vit. Chyl.
should be so overtaken with joy, as to die with excess thereof. The like we
read of Argia the prophetess, who being carried in a chariot of gold to the
Temple by her two sons, whereat she conceived no less joy than if her two
sons had been invested with the title of Emperors, through excessive joy
immediately died. But these passions rather become women then men, who should
be themselves still, but especially when they feel any such conceit
undermining them. It is written of Polycrates, that meditating one day with
himself, how he had never any thing which crossed him all his life, but
enjoyed all success both at home and abroad, so as he became fearful to his
foes, and powerful to his friends, resolved to try how he might cross his
good fortune, by a voluntary incurring of losing that he did exceedingly love.
Wherefore one day he went unto the Seaside, where taking off a Ring which he
did especially tender, he threw it into the Sea, intending thereby to cross
himself, whom fortune would not: but see how Policrates was crossed in his
crosses: for not long after a fisherman came and presented him the Ring he had
lost, having found it in the belly of a fish; which did not a little trouble
the Prince, saying; I perceive the gods owe me a displeasure, which they will
do when I least expect it, and make me so much the more unfortunate, in that I
never knew what misfortune meant. Which he afterward found true, being
deprived both of Crown and Dignity. Certainly, there is no means better to
attemper and allay ones joy conceived in the pursuit of any pleasure, then to
cross himself in the quest thereof: for this tastes of true manhood, when
one can master his affections, and stay himself in that he loves. Neither is
this hard to do being once assayed; for we shall find more true content in
the moderation of our pleasure, then in the pleasure it self. I have heard of
some young Gentlemen, who purposely crossing themselves in some one pleasure or
Recreation which they loved, and betaking themselves to their chamber,
apprehended such a deep impression of the fruition of their pleasure, as they
visibly (as it were) enjoyed that pleasure in their chamber which others
enjoyed in the field. That conceit is strong I will not deny; but that it
should work so strange and strong an effect, I am doubtful; yet whosoever
they be (if any such there be) sure I am, they may well cross themselves in
pleasures abroad; having such pleasant conceits within themselves.

Now, as I would have young Gentlemen to use moderation in the exercise it
self; so would I have them observe like moderation in their expense or charge
requisite for that exercise or pleasure. It is dear bought pleasure that makes
the posterity beggars. Nero was taxed for his prodigality, because he would
have his Fishing-rods of gold, and his nets of purest silk; Suet. in Nero^^.
Plut. in vit. S^xt. A^rel. Herodian.
Vitellius for his embroderie, as well as his Epicurisme; Lucullus for his
Gardens; Antoninus for his Bathes; Caracalla for his Robes; Commodus for
prodigal expense in all Recreations. Now what madness is it to bestow that to
delight me, which I may wish one day I had to sustain me? to bestow that on
my pleasure, which I may chance need to releeve nature? We have heard of one
within this City, who like a prodigal Heir to his fathers thriving
providence, bestowed an incredible mass of money to satisfy his five Senses:
Virtus atque sapientia major in illis fuit, qui ox parvis opibus tantum
imperium fecere, quam in nobis, qui ea been parta vix retinemus Salust.

Majus dedecus est parta amittere, quam non omnino par avisse. Peculatu^ ararii
factus est Ibid.


but sure I think he was distraught of his Senses, and therefore quickly
satisfied. It is no pleasure but a brutish affection, which gives it self so
over to delight it self, as rather then it will be restrained or moderated,
will engage credit, state and all to have her desires fulfilled. Likewise in
Games at Cards, Dice, Chesse, or such houre-beguiling Recreatious, I would not
have our Gentlemen to play for that which may occasion in them the least base
or unworthy fear. You shall see some of these peasantly Gamesters, who partly
for desire of winning, or else for fear of loosing, show a perpetual palsy
in their joints; so full of troubled thoughts they are, or passionate fears,
which apparently discover a baseness of disposition in them, whom either hope
of gain or fear of loss can drive to such extremes. I would have you
therefore so to bestow your selves in these, as they may never force a change
of color in you: for there is nothing that may derogate more from the native
Character of a Gentleman, then to express the least semblance of fear, for
the loss of ought that he shall play. Neither is it any less touch to a
Gentleman, whose affections should be so composed as they may express his
Nature, without any other character, to fall into passion for ought that he
shall lose. Albeit I have heard of one, who (much subject to this imperfection)
chanced to be reproved by his friend, who in friendly and familiar sort wished
him either to learn more patience in gaming, or else to surcease from game.
What (quoth he to his friend) do thou think I am a stock or stone, that I
should have no sense of my loss? Surely I think there is no man that knows
how he comes by his money, but will be moved for the loss of it. But I
approve not of his Maxim: You shall see an old Gamester bear all cross
chances with an equal and undejected spirit, whereas our young Gamesters (for
passion is most incident to Novices) upon a cross throw, pull their hair,
tear the Cards, stamp and fret like gumm'd grogram: so far they are from
patience for want of experience. Their younger and unmellowed years never felt
the crosses of a Gamester, and therefore can hardly digest them when they come.
Assuetis nulla sit passio.
This the Philosopher seems to confirm, saying; Nothing can be violent, being
once habituate, For use or custom as it makes perfectness, so it begets a
composedness of mind, to endure with patience whatsoever the extremity of
fortune may inflict.

But now in my discourse of Passion, which makes men so much forget themselves
as they will, rather then want a fit subject to revenge their ill fortunes on,
minister occasion of offense to their dearest friends; there is one thing which
I would have our young Gentlemen to take heed of, and that is, in their heat
and height of passion to forswear gaming at all, or with such an one, because
they had never fortune to be savers at his hands; yet as men careless of what
they swear, without respect to what they formerly protested, presently fall to
game again with the selfsame company which they had so lately abjured. A
doleful and woeful example we had of this, within these few years, of one,
whose more eminent parts interested him greatly in his Countries hope; yet
having dipped his hand in blood, was, according to justice and equity adjudged to
die, which was afterward accordingly executed. This Gentleman, whose education
had been ever with the best, and in the most frequented places, used much
gaming, at which he had generally ill fortune; so as feeling the smart of it,
he resolved, binding his resolution with a solemn protestation, that if ever
he gamed again, he might be hanged: which imprecation was so usual with him,
as nothing more frequent. But see this Gentleman's miserable end! Within few
years after, he suffered in himself what he had so often wished for
himself. Take example hence, you, I say, who are so prodigal in oaths,
vowing, protesting and swearing, in your heat of passion, what you are no less
apt to forget having cooled your passion: For though you little fear the
effecting of that which you wish to your selves, yet time may come when you
would wish you had not used those imprecations upon your selves.

There is another thing likewise which I could wish young Gentlemen to be
mindful of, and it is to make distinction of times for their Recreations: for
as all times are not for all pleasures, no more are pleasures for all times.
We are therefore to reserve so much time for our more serious affairs, as not
to give way to pleasure or delight, and so neglect what we should principally
intend. Eresius.
No expense is more precious then the expense of time; which is rather employed
then wasted, when bestowed to the good and benefit of the imployer. So as, even
in matters of pleasure or Recreation, I could wish you to betake you to those
games which may best benefit your understanding; as in games at Cards, the Maw
requires a quick conceit or present pregnancy; the Gleeke (because of variety)
requires a retentive memory; the Cribbage a recollected fancy; the Pinache
quick and vn-enforced dexterity. These are good exercises of the mind, and
such, as being made Recreations only, and no tricks to circumvent, may afford
some help or benefit to the Gamesters understanding.

Now therefore, do not ( Theotimus-like) prefer lust before your eyes;
prefer not any profit you are to reap by gaming, before the inward benefit
which you may reap by conceiving. It is a mercenary Trade to frequent Gaming
houses for gain, to alter the property of a Recreation, and make that an
anguish, which should be a solace; a torture, which should be a pleasure. For
what pleasure can that Gamester enjoy by play, whose heart is surprised with
Hope, Fear, Passion, Despair, and a thousand perturbations, Suet. in Tiber.
which, like Tiberius vision, are ever startling him? Surely, if there be any
pleasure in these Recreations, those only enjoy it, whose minds are neither
cast down with the fear of loss, nor over-joyed with the hope of gain; Si
videas murem dominari alii muri, nunquid risum teneas? quanto magis ridiculum
est quando tax illum, quod est minoris valoris quam mus, homini dominetur? Sen.
making this use of all adverse or cross fortune: How miserable is that man,
whose highest hopes rely on so light a mistress? How simple he, whose conceit
is grounded on the constancy of fortune, who is only constant in inconstancle?
How pitifully pitilesse is his case, who puts finger in the eye, because he
has felt her frown? How forlorn is his hope, who having had experience of
the extremest affronts of fortune, is ever giving himself occasion of new
sorrowing? But contrariwise, how truly happy is he, who makes use of fortunes
braves, and receives what chance soever comes, with a cheerful brow? How
truly blessed he, who cares as little for the insults of misfortune, as he
prizeth all momentary success which so blind a Goddess can afford him? There
is no grief more base or unworthy, then that which takes beginning from loss
in game: For why will we make a voluntary hazard to procure us sorrow? From
this inordinate desire spring two maine branches: Cupiditas acquirendi;
aviditas retinendi: Eagerness of gaining; greedines of reteining.
Why should any one imagine himself to be more dearly tendered by fortune
then another? If you play square, without intendment of advantage, then expect
no more then another may look for, being equally interested in the share of
fortune. For in these Recreations, as it is mercenary gain which is got by
game; so it is an indiscreet grief to sorrow in loss, or rejoice in gain.
Recreations are not to be used as men use Trades; these are to maintain us;
the other to refresh us. So as they greatly pervert the use of pleasure, which
make it a daily Task, as many of our English Gentlemen do; who, made Heirs
of their Fathers providence, esteem it the only Generous quality, to make
use of their Fathers Coin, without respect to his Care. These are they who
blemish their Descent, and detract from the glory of their House, consuming the
Sunshine of their days in works of darkness.

I have read a conceited Treatise composed by an Italian, entitled A
Supplication to Candlelight: discovering the abuses committed and curtained by
the silence and secret shade of night. Where it might be demanded, as GOD in
Esaias did ask the Devil our subtle Watchman, Custos quid de nocte? And there
he shows how a great Office is not so gainefull, as the Principall-ship of a
College of Curtizans. For no Merchant in riches may compare with these
Merchants of maiden-heads, if their female Inmates were not so fleeting and
uncertain. Too many, I fear me, there be of these licentious Gamesters, who
make sin a Recreation, wantoning in the Lap of impudence, exposing their
estate and name to a miserable hazard: whose Youth, as it adds fuel to
desire; so Age, the truest Register of the follies of Youth, will besprinkle
those desires with the bitter tears of Repentance: grieving to have committed,
what may hardly be redeemed. Blos.
For he that surceaseth but then from sin when he can sin no more,
forsakes not his sins, but his sins forsake him. It is one thing to fall
into light sins, through occasion only, or humane frailty: and another thing
to fall through affected negligence and security. Far be the latter from you,
Gentlemen, whose aims ought to be so much the more glorious, as your Descents
are noble and generous. Though humane frailty move you to offend, labor to
redeem that time wherein you did offend, by vying sins with sighs, those
ungodly Tares with uncessant Tears; for if you will live when you be dead, you
must die to sin while you be alive. And for as much as pardon cannot be
procured, but where repentance is renewed: as we are Omnium notarum
pe^catores, Omnium notarum peccatores; Et nulli rei nisi panitentiae nati.
Tertul. de paenit. in fine.
so should we be Omnium horarum poenitentes; as every hour sinning, so every
hour sighing; as every hour committing, so every hour bringing forth fruits
of remission.

Thus, like Hismenias the Thebane, who would show Musicians of all sorts, to
imitate the best, and reject the worst; have I proposed and set down
Recreations of all sorts, making choice withal of such especial and select
ones, as best sort with the quality of a Gentleman; concluding how, and after
what manner he is to bestow himself in them. Neither have I taxed any
particular Recreation, provided that it transgress not the bounds of modesty,
but admitted it as indifferent for the use of a Gentleman. Yea, such
Recreations as may seem to undergo the censure of Lightness, have I not only
not reproved, but worthily approved, being with decency used. Whereupon
Gregory says, I admire King David a great deal more, when I see him in the
Quire, Quic quid repre^en dendum non damnandum est. Sen. de Benef. l. 6. cap.
39.

Davidem saltantem plus stupeo quam pugnantem. Moral. l. 27. c. 27.

2 Samuel 6.14. 1 Chro. 15.29.

Ludam (inquit) ut illudant. Bonus Ludus quo Michol. irascitur, and Deus
delectatur. Greg. Mag.


then when I see him in the Camp: when I see him singing as the sweet Singer
of Israel, then when I see him fighting as the worthy Warrior of Israel: when I
see him leaping, then when I see him weeping: when I see him dancing before the
Arc, then when I see him drawing forth his Army to the field. When David
fought with others, he overcame others, he wounded others, he made others
sick: But when he danced before the Arc, and delighted himself, he was
overcome himself, he was wounded himself, he was sick himself. But this
sickness did rather affect him, then afflict him; joy him, then annoy him. I
will play still (says he) that others may still play upon me. For it is a
good sport when GOD is delighted, though Michol be displeased. Whence you see,
that it is not the Recreation, but the circumstance tending to that Recreation,
which for most part gives occasion of offense; as the Time when Gods Sabbath
is not to be dishonored, nor our serious occasions intermitted; the Place
where the Holy ground is not by the feet of Lightness to be profaned, nor
Places where Justice is administered, to the exercise of such delights inured;
the Persons who, we must take such heed lest the weakest of our Brethren be
scandaled, or offense to any by our sports occasioned. Doing thus, we shall
glorify God, not only in this life, but in that best and blessed life which is
to come; if we fall not back into the same sins, but bid a long farewell
to the illusions of the Devil; if with diligent attention to the Word of God,
earnest desire of conversion, and continual confession of our sins, we
procure the careful eye of the Almighty to watch over us. For it suffices him
in his great mercy that we surcease from sin, whereby we shall be more
easily moved to the practice of all good works.

Chrysostom. In Genesis Hom. 5. Tom. 6. cap. 1.
Wherefore to conclude this Observance with that exhortation of golden-mouthed
Chrysostom, to the end we may render more honor to his Sabbath: Let not any
one henceforth be seen trying masteries on Horseback, nor spending any part
of the day in unlawful meetings; Let not any one henceforth consort himself
in games at Cards or Dice, or the tumultuous noise which arises from thence.
For I pray you answer me (says he) what profit is there in fasting, if all
the day eating nothing, you game, sport, swear and forswear, and so spend the
day in worse then nothing? Let us not, I beseech you, be so negligent in that
weighty affair of our salvation, but rather let our communication be of
Spiritual things. And let every one take in his hand a godly book, and
calling his Neighbors together, water both is own understanding and theirs
who are assembled, with Heavenly instructions, that so we may avoid the
deceits of the Devil. Performing this, Gentlemen, your Recreations shall be
healthful to your selves, helpful to your Country, delightful to the
virtuous, and beseeming men of your rank, nobly generous.

THE ENGLISH GENTLMAN.
Argument.
Of Acquaintance; Of the choice of Acquaintance; Of constancy in the choice of
Acquaintance; Of reservancy toward Acquaintance; Of the absolute end of
Acquaintance.

ACQVAINTANCE.
THE comfort of an Active life consists in Society, Observat. 6 Of the use of
Acquaintance.
as the content of a Contemplative consists in Privacie. Intermission of Action
in the former, is a kind of death; intention to Devotion in the latter, is a
pleasant life. One. Dentatus apud Senecam de tranq. anim.
For solitary places are the best for prayer; but public for practice. We read
that Christ went out into a solitary place, Mar. 1.35. Acts 6.9.
and there prayed: but he entered into the Synagogue, and there preached; that
such Libertines as were there trained might be reclaimed. And Wisdom cries
without, and utters her voice in the streets, Prove. 1* 20*
that her words might be practiced. As there is no public State which can
subsist without commerce, traffic, and mutual society; so there is no
creature living, whose life would not be tedious, being debarred from all use
of company. There are two Birds which are noted both in divine and humane writ,
to be lovers of solitariness; the Owl in the Desert, and the Pelicane in the
Wilderness: Which two, among diverse other birds, were accounted unclean, and
therefore were not to be eaten by the Jews. As retiredness from occasions
abroad, makes us more serious in occasions at home: so this privacie or
solitariness makes the memory more retentive in affairs useful to our
selves, but withdrawes our hand from affording help or assistance to others.
Deuteronomy. 14.16, 17.
But life should be communicative; not only intending it self; but laboring
wherein it may do good to any. For whereas Saint Bernard says, that the Bern.
de vita solitaria.
affinity is near between the dwellers in a Cell and in Heaven: it is to be
understood, that such whose mortified affections, and regenerate, will have
concluded all Honores Mundi, tumores Mundi. Eucher. Epist. Par^en-de contempt.
mundi.
worldly honors to be worldly tumors; and all Omnis seculi honor, Diaboli est
negotium. Hill. can. 3. in Matthew. Quaeremus unum bonum in quo sunt omnia, bona
et sufficit. Aug. Med.
secular honor to be the Devils traffic, have stepped near unto Heaven.
Neither are we to conclude thence, that such who have to deal in the world,
by commerce at home and abroad, are excluded from this affinity. For there are
many (as we are to be charitably persuaded) who live in the world, and have to
do with the world, yet are not of the world; that is, are not so affected to
the world, as they could not find in their hearts to forgo all things they
have in the world, for the love of him that created the world. Yea, who would
not say, and with much comfort affirm, We will seek one good wherein
consists all good, and that suffices, we will seek one joy wherein
consists all joy, and this only joys us. It is Greg. Diligenti Deum
sufficit ei placere quem diligit, quia nulla major expetenda est remuneratio
quam ipsa dilectio. Leo Magnus Sermon. de jejuno.

Mat. 4.1.3. Psalm. 63.4. 1 Timothy 2.8. Job. 7.1.

Bernard. in. 4. lib. de consid. ad Eugen. in eodem lib. cap. 4.

Periclita^ur castitas in delitiis, humilitas in divitiis, pi^tas in nego ^io,
verit as in multiloguio, charitas in hoc nequam saeculo. Bern.


Grace and not the Place, which saves the soul. For, as there may be a Wolf
in Sheeps clothing, so there may be a worldly mind in a Hermits dwelling.
Man's security is the Devils opportunity, which may be found in the Wilderness
as well as in the World, neither is the one place less subject to temptation
then the other. The Wilderness is secret, yet Christ was tempted in it. The
Night is silent, yet does that princely Prophet warn us, To lift up our hands
in the night watches of temptation. For the life of man, as it is a continual
temptation, so is there neither time, place, sex nor condition exempted from
temptation. The Monks Cell and the Monarchs Court are equally subject to it.
This, devout Bernard seems to confirm in his description of such as professed
a Monastic life, saying; They were large promisers, but slow performers; fair
tongued flatterers, but snarling back-biters; simple-seeming dissemblers, but
malicious betrayers. Again, We (says he) receive all in our Monasteries, in
hope to better them, whereas in the Court it is more usual to receive such as
are good, then to make them good: for we have found by experience, that more
good men have decreased then profited in it. Hence we may conclude this point,
that no place is privileged from temptation, neither Cell nor Court* but those
places are, and have been ever most subject to danger, where men were left to
themselves to enter lists with temptation: Which proceeds either from the
natural frailty of man, in that he falls from best to worst; or his want of
judgment to discern best from worst: whence the Poet most divinely
concludes, When want of judgment reigns in humane breast,
The best is taken for worst, the worst for best.


GOD in his sacred wisdom having created man, thought it not good that he
should be alone; and therefore made him an help meet for him. It was an
excellent saying of that sage Cynicke, who seeing a young man all alone by
himself, and demanding of him what he was doing, I am talking (quoth the
young man) with my self; Take heed (says he) thou talk not with thine Enemy.
For howsoever Cato might say, in respect of the inward delight he took in
Contemplation, I am never less alone, then when alone; we shall find this
true, that man is never more ready to give way to temptation, then when he is
alone. How needful then is Acquaintance, being indeed the life of the living;
the particular benefits whereof extend to discourse, advice, and action?

IT is Experience has begot wisdom, Asrariu^. Of the benefit we reap by
Acquaint^nce in matters of discourse.
and memory as a mother, has brought it forth. Now, what experience could we
gain, if we should only be left to our selves, and have none to help us in
treaties or matters of conference? It is said of Demosthenes, that he
recovered his speech only by direction; long would it be ere we attained to
any perfection of speech, either in manner or matter, if we wanted these usual
helps of conference, which enable us when, where and how we should speak. For
as the Satyr was afraid at the first sight of fire; or that Captain, who
looking himself in a glass when he was angry, was affrighted with his own
countenance; so should we, having never consorted or conversed with men, stand
amazed when we approached their company. For what is it that ministers
boldness and audacity to men, save their usual frequenting of assemblies? or
what is it, that so much benefits their knowledge, but their acquaintance with
such who are professants of knowledge? Plutarch reports, that Plato came
forth of Asia into Cilicia, for no other cause but only to see his dear
friend Phocion the Philosopher. Amor a praesente gauder, absente dolet. Bern.
sup. Cant.
See here the love of good men one to another; for amongst evil men can be no
true friendship. For it is the aim of Acquaintance that makes it good or
evil; as to insinuate ones self into acquaintance for their own ends, to
wit, to profit by it, or work on others weakness, this is acquaintance for
Machiavels Scholars, whose principal aim is to undermine; and under pretense
of amity, shroud their villainy. These hold concurrency with Friar Clement,
Nihil interest habere estium apertum, vultum clausma. Cicero.

No rush without mire, no corrupt heart without sin.


Ravilliae, Iaurequy, Baltazar Gerard. They have an open gate, but a shut
countenance; or if an open countenance, a close shut heart. Aristotle says,
that friendship is one soul which rules two hearts, and one heart which
dwells in two bodies, whereas these men, whose acquaintance has relation to
their own peculiar ends, have a heart and a heart; a Heart outwardly
professing, and a Heart secretly practicing; a Heart outward, and a Heart
inward; outwardly pretending, and inwardly plotting. These are no Acquaintance
for you, Gentlemen; their Hearts are too far from their mouths; learning to
prosper by others errors. Yea, by often conversing and practicing with others,
no less cunning then themselves, they have so far prevailed, as they are not
only able to match them, P^in. in Na^. hi^^.
but outstrip them: Serpens nisi serpentem comederit, non fit Draco: These are
they who hatch the Cockatrice eggs; come not therefore near them, Job 20.16.
for The poison of Aspes is under their Lips. Yea, they suck the gall of
Aspes, and the Vipers tongue shall slay them.

Yet, to leave you alone without company, would make your life as much loathed,
as choice of Acquaintance makes you love it. He is a weak Prince that enjoyes
an Empire without people; and no less desolate or disconsolate in his state;
who wants not for means, yet wants a friend to whom he may impart his mind.
Lend me your hands therefore ( Gentlemen) and I will direct you in a way how to
make choice of Acquaintance in matters of Advice, which is the second benefit
redounding from the use of Acquaintance.

Of the choice of Acquaintance in matters of advice.
IF a man (says Seneca) find his friend sad and so leave him; sick without
ministering any comfort to him; and poor without releeving him* we may think
such an one goes to jest rather then visit or comfort. Whence we may observe
the office or condition of a friend, who, if his friend be sick, he will
visit him; if ^ad, he will cheer him; if poor, he will releeve him; if
afflicted in mind, he will comfort him; otherwise his friendship is but
dissembling, his visiting him a mere mocking of him. Job called his friends
Miserable comforters, Job 16.2.
because their discourses were rather afflictions then comforts, their counsels
rather corasives then cordials, their exhortations rather scourgings and
scoffings, then soule-solacing refreshings. These do not advise friends, but
despise them; miserable are such Comforters. Wherefore I may well distinguish
Acquaintance into two sorts; the one Halcion-like, come to us in a storm; the
other Swallow-like, La^rt. in vit. Periand. Omnia pro tempore, nihil pro
veritate. Optatus. l. 1. (...) Eccles. 13.1.
draw near us in a calm. The former sort observe Perianders precept, Show thy
self still the same, whether thy friend be in prosperity or adversity: but the
latter observe that sentence of Optatus, All for the time, but nothing for the
truth. All Acquaintance may be either compared to pitch staining, or to balm
curing. He that touches pitch shall be defiled therewith, says the son of
Sirach; such is the nature of much Acquaintance, especially in these latter
days, where vanity is more affected, then the practice of virtue, which should
be only loved. Where many return worse then when they went forth, confirming
that sentence, Sanabimur, si separ^mur a coetu. But Balm, it refreshes,
cheereth, and cures; such is that Acquaintance, whose conceits are
delightful, discourse cheereful, and instructions fruitful. These, if we be
at any time doubtful, will advise us; if in necessity, will releeve us; if in
any affliction, either outward or inward, will bear a part with us, to allay
grief in us. A little Stybium is too much, such are the first; a great
quantity of Styrax is too little, such are the last. A Whose wood is sweetest,
shade coolest, and coal hottest. Fabiolae M^us. 15.
Iuniper-tree makes the hottest coal, and the coolest shadow of any tree: the
coal is so hot, that if it be raked up in ashes of the same, it continues
unextinguished by the space of a whole year: so does true friendship or
faithful Acquaintance; it affords the coolest shadow to refresh us, and the
hottest coals, implying fervor of affection, being once kindled, to warm us.
When poor Andr^mache craved Ulysses advice, what he thought best to be done
in behalf of her young son Astyanax; Lat^at, ^aec una salus. Sc^. in Troad.
Conceal him, (said he) this is the only means to save him. This showed his
faithfulness in advising, albeit her Countries foe; for otherwise he would
have persuaded her to submit her self and him to the hand of the merciless
soldier; or reap a benefit by their bondage, making them his own Captives:
As it is in the fable of the Crow, who coming to the Eagle that had got a
Cockle, the fish whereof he could not get out neither by force nor art, he
counseled him to mount up on high, and throw the Cockle down upon the stones,
and so break the shell: now all the while did the crafty Crow stay below
expecting the fall: The Eagle throws it down, the shell is broken, the fish
by the Crow is taken, and the Eagle deluded. Many such Counselors there be,
who advise not others for their good, but their own good. Others there be, who
make use of their friends or Acquaintance merely for their own ends; and
rather then they will be prevented of their aims, they will expose the life
and safety of their friend to imminent peril. And these resemble the Fox, who
seeing a Chestnut in the fire, made use of the Cats foot to take it out. But
these are not those friends, whose advice is faithful, as their friendship is
firm and grateful. Their aims are indirect, their advice tends to their own
benefit, their counsel tastes of profit, and their directions become as
pitsals to their friends.

Those to whom I would have Gentlemen known, are men of another rank and
quality, In Tiberius t^me.
appearing like the Canii, Senecae, Aruntii, and Sorani; whose admirable
virtues were inimitable in so corrupt a government. Neither would I have them
to shake off these friendly Monitors, if at any time their advice relish not
half well to their palate; but rather honor them for their virtuous
sincerity, as Epaminondas honored Lysias, Agesilaus Xenophon, Scipio Penetius,
Alcibiades Socrates, Achilles Phoenix, sent him by his father Peleus. For such
as will not endure a friendly reproof, I would have their Acquaintance do
with them as Plato did with Dionysius, who perceiving him to be incorrigible,
left him. The rebukes of a friend are better then the kisses of an enemy; Prove.
27.5.6.
for the one, though at first displeasing, tend (if rightly used) to his
conversion; but the other, though pleasing, tend (if not prevented) to his
confusion. Had Alexander understood this aright, he would have preferred the
faithful advice of his affectionate Clitus before all his conquests; for by
his instruction might he, have learned Humility, which lesson had been worth
his worlds Monarchy. Had Nero, that President of Tyrants, or Monster of men,
given ear to the wise advice of his loyal and learned Seneca, he might have
found a Subject to love him, a Scholar to live with him, a Soldier to fight
for him, and a Mother to bless him. For surely, as of all possessions
friendship is most precious; Lacrt. in v^t. Biant.
being suited with virtue, without which there is no true friendship; so are we
to value the life of our friend, as the crown of our glory. For tell me, are
you sad? your friends conceit, as a sovereign receipt, will cheer you. Are you
disposed to be merry? mirth alone, Suct. in Aug.
is a single consort, your friend will partake with you. Would you have one to
pass the tedious night away, in telling tales, or holding you with talk? your
friend will invent a thousand pastimes to cheer you, and make the night seem
less tedious unto you. Is the burden of your griefs too heavy to bear? you
have a friend to share with you in your burden. In brief, want you comfort?
he will supply it; want you means to releeve your wants? he will afford it;
want you counsel? he will impart it; want you all that man can want? you want
not a friend who will supply your wants with his want. And so I descend from
the benefit redounding from Advice, to the third and last, which is the profit
or benefit which redounds from one friend to another in every peculiar action,
exercise, or recreation.

CIcero, Tusc. lib. 1. Of the benefit properly derived from one friend to
another in every peculiar action.
the glory of Rome, and flower of Orators, exemplifying the prowess of
Themistocles and Epaminondas, uses these words; The Sea shall sooner
overwhelme the Isle it self of Salamine, then it shall drench the remembrance
of the Salamine triumph: and the town of Leuctra in Boeotia shall sooner be
razed, then the remembrance of the field there fought, forgotten. But howsoever
these Monuments may be razed or defaced by continuance of time, sure I am that
the love which they showed to their friends, even to the apparent danger of
their own lives, shall eternize their memory. Pelopidas a noble Grecian,
skirmishing with the Lacedaemonians against the Arcadians, until such time as
being hurt in seven places, he fell down at last for dead: Then presently
Epaminondas, out of a princely resolution and noble affection to his distressed
friend, stepping forth bestrid him, and fought to defend his body, he alone
against many; till being sore cut on his arm with a sword, and thrust into the
breast with a pike, Plutarch. in Pelopida, initio.
he was even ready to give over. But at that very instant, Agesipolis King of
the Lacedaemonians came with the other point of the battle in a hapyy hour,
and saved both their lives when they were past all hope.

Here see apparent arguments of true love, mixed with a noble and heroic
temper: for friends, are to be tried in extremities, either in matters of state
or life: in state, by releeving their wants; in life, by engaging themselves to
all extremes, rather then they will suffer their friend to perish. These are
they who will latch the blow of affliction laid upon their friends, Plutarch.
in Paulo Aemilio, sine.
with the buckler of affection; preferring death before their friends disgrace.
Marcus Servilius a valiant Roman, who had fought three and twenty combats of
life and death in his own person, and had always slain as many of his
enemies as challenged him man to man; when as the people of Rome resisted
Paulus Aemilius triumph, stood up and made an Oration in his behalf: in the
midst whereof he cast up his gown, and showed before them the infinite skars
and cuts he had received upon his breast; the sight of which so prevailed with
the people, that they all agreed in one, and granted Aemilius triumph.

Here observe the tender respect of one friend toward another honor: Nihil
tan aeque oblectaverit animum quam amicitia fidelis. Sen. in tranq. anim.
there is nothing unassayed, nothing unattempted, which may procure or further
it. For this friendship or combination of minds, as there is nothing more
precious, so there is nothing which does comparably delight or solace the mind
like unto it, being faithfully grounded. Their discourse (like some choice
Music) delights our hearing; their sight (like some rare Object) contents our
seeing; their presence fully satisfies us in our touching; their well-seasoned
jests (like some delicious banquet) relish our tasting; and their precepts
(like sweet flowers) refresh our smelling. Vt flores qui odore delectant. Ibid.
Nullus sine amicis locus amaenus: Omnis sine sociis mu^dus eremus.
Thus is every sense satisfied, by enjoying that which it loves: as the senses
wanting their proper objects, become useless; so men, whether in prosperity or
adversity wanting friends to rely on, are wretched and helpelesse: So as there
is no greater wilderness then to be without true friends. For without
friendship, society is but meeting; acquaintance a formal or ceremonial
greeting. Whereas it is friendship, when a man can say to himself, The
expressive Character of a real friend. (...).
I love this man without respect of utility: for (as I formerly noted) those
are no friends but hirelings, who profess friendship only to gain by it.
Certainly, whosoever has had the happiness to enjoy a true and faithful
friend, to whom he might freely impart the secrets of his breast, or open the
Cabinet of his counsels, he (I say) and only he has had the experience of
so rare a benefit daily redounding from the use of friendship: where two hearts
are so individually united, as neither from other can well be severed. And as
it is certain, that in bodies inanimate, union strengthens any natural
motion, and weakneth any violent motion; so amongst men, friendship multiplieth
joys, and divides griefs. It multiplies joys; for it makes that joy
communicative, which before was single; it divides griefs; for it shares in
them, and so makes them less.

Now perfection of friendship, is but speculation, if we consider the many
defects which are for most part subject to all worldly friendship: yea, and as
the world increases in age, so it decreaseth most commonly in goodness: for
in Courts, are suits and actions of Law; in Cities, tricks and devices to
circumvent; Nam in ^^ro sunt lites and actiones moles^^. Posidio.
in the Country, engrossing and regrating, of purpose to oppress. It is rare
to see a faithful Damon or a Pythias; a Pylades or Orestes; a Bitias or a
Pandarus; Nisus or Euryalus. And what may be the cause of this, but that the
love of every one is so great to himself, as he can find no corner in his
heart to lodge his friend in? In brief, none can gain friends, and make a
saving bargain of it, for now it is a rule commonly received, He that to all
will here be grateful thought, Si qu^s in hos mundo cunctis vult gratus
baberi; Det, capiat, quaerat, plurima, pauce, nihil. Plato.

Must give, accept, demand, much, little, naught.
So as it may seem, it is not given to man to love and to be wise; because the
Lover is ever blinded with affection toward his beloved; so as, he
dis-esteemes honor, profit, yea life it self, so he may gratify his
beloved. But my opinion is quite contrary; for I hold this as a firm and
undoubted Maxim; that he who is not given to love, cannot be wise. For is he
wise, that reposeth such trust in his own strength, as if he stood in no need
of friends? Is he wise, who depends so much on his own advice, as if all
wit and wisdom were treasured in his brain? Is he wise, who being sick
would not be visited; poor, and would not be succored; afflicted, and would
not be comforted; thrown down, and would not be raised? Surely in the same
case is he, who fleights the purchase of a friend, preferring his own profit
before so inestimable a prize. There is none, whether he be valiant, or a
professed coward, but may stand in need of a friend in a corner. For be he
valiant, he stands in need of a friend to second him; if a coward, he needs
one to support him: Therefore, whosoever wants fortitude, whether it be in
mind or body, let him embrace friendship; for if his weakness proceed from the
mind, he shall find a choice receipt in the breast of his friend, to strengthen
and corroborate him, so as grief may assail or assault him, but it cannot
dismay or amate him. Again, if his weakness proceed from the body, that
weakness is supplied by the strength of his friend, who will be an eye to
direct him, and a foot to sustain him. Telephus, when he could find none
amongst his friends to cure his wound, permitted his enemy to do it: and he
who purposed to kill Prometheus the Thessalian, opened his impostume with his
sword. If such effects have proceeded from enmity, what rare and incredible
effects may be imagined to take their beginning from amity? Then which as
nothing is stri^ter in respect of the bond, so nothing is more continuate in
respect of the time: being so firm, as not to be dissolved; so strict, as not
to be anulled; so lasting, as never to be ended.

Neither is this benefit derived from friend to friend, only restrained to
matter of action or employment; but extends it self to exercises of pleasure
and recreation. For tell me, what delight can any one reap in his pleasure?
wanting a friend to partake with him in his pleasure? Takes he delight in
Hunting? let him choose Acquaintance that may suit him in it: The benefits
which redound from the mutual union or communion of friends in the exercise of
Pleasure.
not only a Hunter, but one whose conceit (if occasion serve) can reach
further; such an one I would have him as could make an Emblem of the Forest
where he raungeth, compose a Sonnet on the objects which he sees, and fit
himself for ought he undertaketh. Of which rank, was that merry
Epigrammatist, (as it may be imagined) who being taxed for wearing a horn, and
could not wind it, made this reply; My friend did tax me seriously one morn,
That I should wear, yet could not wind the horn:
And I replied, that he for truth should find it,
Many did wear the Horn that nere could wind it:
Hows'ere of all, that man may wear it best,
Who makes claim to it as his ancient Crest.


Ioci non sint nimis salfi, multo minus in sulfi: illi enim multum ^fficiunt;
isti, nisi per cachinnum, parum proficiunt. Vanitati proprie festivitas cedit.
Cic. de orat. lib. 2.
To intervene conceits or some pleasant jests in our Recreations whether
discursive or active, is no less delightful then useful: but these jests
should be so seasoned, as they may neither taste of lightness, nor too much
saltness. Jests festive are often times offensive, they incline too much to
levitie; jests civil (for into these two are all divided) are better
relishing, because mixed with more sobriety and discretion. Catullus answer to
Philippus the Attorney, was no less witty then bitter: for Catullus and he
being one day at high words together; Why barkest thou, quoth Philippus?
Because I see a Thief, answered Catull^^. He showed himself a quick
Anatomist, who branched man into three parts, saying, That man has nothing but
substance, soul, and body; Lawyers dispose of the substance, Physicians of the
body, and Divines of the soul. Present and pregnant was Donato's answer to a
young Gentleman, who, beholding a brave company of amorous Ladies and
Gentlewomen, meeting Donato coming toward Rome, as one admiring their number
and feature, said, As many Stars as in the heavens be; So many Maids has Rome
to welcome thee. As many kids as on the downs we see; So many Prostitutes in
Rome there be.
Quot coelum stellas, tot habet tua Roma puellas.
by and by answered Donato, Pascua quot haedos, tot habet tua Roma Cinaedos


Phaedro being asked, why in the Collects, where Christian Bishops, and Pagans
be prayed for, the Cardinals were not remembered? answered, they were included
in that prayer, Oremus pro haereticis et Schismaticis. Well requited was that
young Scholar, who giving his Master this Evening salute: Domine magister,
Deus det tibi bonum sero; was answered by his Master: Et tibi malum cito. Witty
but shrewd was that answer of a disputant in my time to his Moderator in
Posterior: who demanding of him, what the cause should be, that he with whom he
disputed, should have so great a head and so little wit; replied, Omne m^jus
continet in se minus. A base mind was well displaid in that covetous man, who
unwilling to sell his corn while it was at an high price, expecting ever when
the Market would rise higher; when he saw it afterward fall, in despair hanged
himself upon a beam of his chamber; which his man hearing, and making haste,
cut the rope and preserved his life: afterward, when he came to himself, he
would needs have his man to pay f^r the cord he had cut. But I approve rather
of such jests as are mixed with less extremes: Scipio Nasica.
pleasant was that answer of Scipio Nasica who going to Ennius house in Rome,
and asking for Ennius, Ennius bade his maid tell him he was not within. So
Ennius on a time coming to Scipio's house, and asking whether he was at hom^?
I am not at home, answered Scipio: Ennius wondering thereat; Do I not know
that voice (quoth he) to be Scipio's voice? Thou have small civility in thee
(answered Scipio) that when I believed thy maid thou were not at home, yet thou will not believe me. Likewise to report a jest, is an argument of a quick wit,
as Leo Emperor of Bizantium answered one, who being crook-backt, jested at his
bleared eyes, saying, A tergo Nemesis.
Thou reproachest me with the defect of nature, and thou carriest Nemesis upon
thy shoulders. Domitius reproaching Crassus that he wept for a Lamprey; Crassus
answered, but thou have buried three wives without one tear. Alexander asking
a Pyrate, that was taken and brought before him, How he durst be so bold to
infest the Seas with his pyracy? was answered with no less spirit, That he
pl^ied the Pyrate but with on ship, but his Majesty with a huge Navy: which
saying so pleased Alexander that he pardoned him: reaping especial delight in
that similitude of action, by which was transported the current of the Kings
affection. Other Conceits there are more closely touched, covertly carried, and
in silence uttered; as that of Bias, who, when an evil man asked him what
goodness was? answered nothing: and being demanded the cause of his silence, I
am silent, quoth he, because thou inquire of that which nothing concerns
thee. The same Bias sailing on a time with some naughty men, by violence of a
tempest, the ship wherein they were became so shaken and tossed with waves, as
these naughty men began to call upon the gods; Laert. in vi^. Biant.
Hold your peace (said Bias) lest these gods you call upon, understand that you
be here. But lest by dwelling too long upon jests, I forget the Series of my
discourse, I will succinctly conclude this branch, with my judgment touching
Acquaintance in this kind.

As I would have Gentlemen to make choice of their Acquaintance by their sound,
A rule of infallible direction, touching choice of Acquaintance. Quis quis pl^s
justo non sapit ille sapit. Martial. l. 14. Those jests are best seasoned, that
are least salted.
so I would not have them all sound: Music does well with aires, but there is
no Music in that discourse which is all air. My meaning is, I would not have
these Acquaintance which they make choice of, all words or flashes of wit: for
I seldom see any of these who are so verbal, much material; or these who are
all wit, but through height of a selfe-conceipt they fall to much weakness. For
these many times prefer their conceit before the hearers appetite, and will
not stick to lose their friend rather then their jest; which in my opinion is
mere madness: for he that values his jest above his friend, over-values his
conceit, and had need of few jests, or great store of friends. I have known
some wits turn wittals; by making themselves Buffouns and stale jesters for
all assemblies. Which sort are fitter for Gentlemen to make use of as occasion
serves, then to entertain them as Bosome-acquaintance* for as the benefit
which redounds to one from another in action, exercise, and recreation, is
mutually imparted; so is the danger no less incident one to another, where the
ends or uses are perverted.

Thus far have we proceeded in the discovery of those particular benefits
which redound from discourse, advice, and action, by means of Acquintance:
being the Cement which so firmly joyneth minds together as they may be
encountered by extremes, but divided never. Now for as much as the essential
trial of Acquaintance consists in matters of highest consequence, we are now
to address our selves to such a choice, as our choice may admit no change.

Of the choice or judicious approvement of Acquaintance, in affairs of highest
consequence. Amicos sequere quos non pudeat elegisse. Bias.

Neither Timist nor Timonist are within the lists of Acquaintance to be
entertained.

The Timist or Time-observer displaied and displaced.


THe precept of that ancient Sage is worth remembering, Follow such friends as it
may not shame thee to have chosen. Certainly, there is no one argument to
evince man of indiscretion, more holding then this; That he makes no difference
or distinction in the choice of his friends: In which respect no man can be to
wary or circumspect, because herein, for most part, consists his welfare or
undoing. It were meet therefore that a Gentleman made choice of such for his
friends or acquaintance, as are neither Timists nor Timonists, Fawners nor
Frowners. For the first sort, they are for all seasons, and all weathers; so as
they may be fitly compared to the Hedge-hogge, who has two holes in his
fiedge; one toward the South, another toward the North: now when the
Southern wind blows, he stops up that hole, and turns him Northward; when
the North wind blows, he stops up that hole likewise, and turns him again
Southward. Such Vrchins are all Temporizers: they turn as the wind blows,
and suit themselves for every occasion. These friends or Acquaintance who
follow not us but ours, will be seen in all Liveries: Princes have felt the
inconveniency of them, and inferior States have not been free from them: but
the highest States, generally, are most subject to these reteiners; Nec tuta
fiducia regum, quae levibus plerunque suis nituntur amicis. Philip. Comin. l. 2.
For Princes by experience we have seen
Abused most where most their trust has been.


Now there are two kinds of Princes (says Comines); the one are so cautelous
and suspicious, as they are scarce to be endured: for they are almost come to
that pass, as they think themselves ever deluded and circumvented. Such was
Dionysius the tyrant of Syracusa, who grew so suspicious as he would not trust
any Barber to shave him, causing his own daughters to learn to shave. Others
there be, who are so far from harboring suspicion, Sext. Aurel. in
Constant. These Timists have resemblance to those applauding Parasites, by whom
A^tiochus was at one time saluted both (...) and (...), a glorious Prince, and
a furious Tyrant.
as being of a dull and lumpish wit, they scarce understand what is commodious
for them, and what not. Such was Domitian, who cared more for catching of
flies, then reteining of friends: being so far from preventing danger, as he
never foresaw it till he felt it. In these there is small constancy of mind;
for as they easily discontinue friendship, they as easily decline from hatred
and embrace friendship. Constantine the great, being a professed foe to all these
Timists, or temporizing Sycophants, was wont to call them Gnats and Moths that
pester a Princes Palace: So aspiring be their aims, so base their means; Who
like base Beetles as they have begun,
In every Cowsheard nestle near the Sun.


Whence, as it may be probably gathered, was that sentence derived, Amici
Curiae, Parasiti Curiae; fawning rather then friending, tendering only love
where they hope to receive gain. Th^se as they have Ianus front, for they
carry two faces under one hood: so have they S^m^ns heart professing love, but
practicing hate: of which sort the ever-living Homer thus concludes: (...), ^.

(...).
There Is naught on earth I more detest,
Then sugared breath in Serpents breast.


Whence it was that the great spi^ited Byron, who showed more passion then
resolution at his death, howsoever during all his time none was ever held for a
more brave or noble Soldier; perceiving his trust (as he collected) betrayed
by La Fin, with whom he had conspired, and by whom his practice was disclosed,
he confessed that La Fin had bewitched him, exhorting his host to be wary of
him, le^^ he should delude and circumvent him with his impostures. For
certainly, as more expressly appeared, not only at the time of his execution,
but in all the passages of his practice, as he had reposed great trust in La
Fin, in the whole management of that business; so having seen his trust weakened,
and those many protestations of amity infringed, (though in practices of that
nature there can be no true league of friendship) it moved him no less to
impatience, then the discovery of his teason.

But these fawning friends or Timists which we have now in quest, as they are
only for the present time, so will they undertake many times the most enormous
and indirect course, to raise their hopes, that can be devised. ^
When the rash aspiring Catiline had promised to divulge those new tables,
wherein were contained the Proscription of the rich, Magistracies,
Priest-hoods, rapines, and all other insolences, which either the shocke of
war, or will of the Conqueror gives way to: he had followers enough upon the
instant to second him in his hateful courses; being such as either his youth
had made him acquainted with, or his dissolute course had consorted with: which
unhappy followers made him, doubtless, more violent in his attempts, and less
considerate in his directions. How needful then is it, to prevent the occasion
of so maine an inconvenience? How expedient is it to avoid the frequent or
society of such as will not stick to be assistants in mischief? How
consequent a thing is it to weane ones self not only from their familiarity
and inward acquaintance, but even from so much as conversing with them or
writing to them. Themistocles was suspected to be known to Pausanias treason,
although most clear of himself, because he wrote unto him. For as the nature
of man is originally depraved, so by consorting with vicious men the arm of
sin becomes strengthened. The Fuller (as it is in the fable) would by no
means suffer the Collier to dwell with him under one roof, lest he should
soil what he had rinsed. Which Fable has a moral relation to the course of
our life, and the nature of such as we usually confort with: for there is a
traffic or commerce as well of manners as persons; of virtues and vi^es, as
other commodities. (...)
The Babylonian had been naturally said to be arrogant, the Theban
passionate, the Jew envious, the Tyrian covetous, the (...) rioter, the
Egyptian a sorcerer: neither did these nations keep these vices to themselves,
for they induced others likewise, to whom they had recourse and commerce, to be
affected to the like: for the very Egyptians had so bewitched Caesar himself
with their illusions, as he gave great attention to them; Peccatum semper
praegnans, aliudex alio gignit. Vitia morbi sunt animi. Sen.

Vitia ad vicinos serpunt et contactu nocent. Ib.


as Alexander was delighted with the Brachmanes. For vice is such an
over-growing or wild spreading weed, as there is no soil wherein it likes not,
no kind of nature (of what temper soever) it invades not, and invading
surprizeth not. To the body diseases are infectious, to the mind are vices no
less obnoxious: for vices are the diseases of the Mind, as infirmities breed
distempers and diseases to the Body. So as whether we observe the state of
Church or Commonweal, we shall find vices to be of a nature no less
spreading then diseases; neither the state or Symptom of the mind less
endangered by the infusion of the one, then the body by the infection of the
other. For as the state Politic is much weakened by the haunt of these vices,
Marcionist.
so is that mourning Dove the Church, many times afflicted to see her self
torn with Schisms and divisions: whereas Faciunt favos and Vespae, faciunt
Ecclesias and Marcionistae. Tertul. l. 4. cont.
Waspes make honey-combes, so Marcionists make Churches.

How needful then is it to divide our selves from the consorts of vice,
without entertaining the least occasion that might induce us to give consent to
her followers? Augustus wore ever about him, for preservative against thunder,
a Seals skin, which Pliny writes checketh lightning; as Tiberius wore
always about his neck a Wreath of Laurel. But let us carry about us that
Moli, or herb of grace, whose precious juice may repel the spells of so
enchanting a Siren. For as the Unicorns horn being dipped in water, cleares and
purifies it, so shall this sovereign receipt cure all those maladies, which
originally proceed from the poison of vice. The mind so long as it is evil
aff^cted, is miserably infected. For so many evils, Quae male afficitur, misere
inficitur. Quot vitiae, tot Daemonia: Tot Daemonia, quot crimina. Emisenus. Si
innocents existimari volumus, non solum nos abstinentes, verum etiam nostros
comites praestare debemus. Cic. Fro incerta spe, certa praentia. Salust.
so many Devils, first tempting and tainting the soul with sin, then tearing
and tormenting her with the bitter sense of her guilt. Saint Basil says, that
passions rise up in a drunken man, like a swarm of Bees buzzing on every side;
whatsoever that holy Father says of one vice, may be generally spoken of all:
so as we may truly conclude with that Princely Prophet; They come about us
like Bees: though they have honey in their thighs, they have stings in their
tails, wounding our poor souls even unto death. Requisite therefore is it to
avoid the society of such whose lives are either touched or tainted with any
especial Crime: these are dangerous Patterns to imitate, yea, dangerous to
consort with; for, as the Storke being taken in the company of the Cranes, was
to undergo like punishment with them, although she had scarce ever consented
to feed with them; so be sure, if we accompany them, we shall have a share of
their shame, though not in their sin. Avoid the acquaintance of these Heirs
of shame, whose affected liberty has brought them to become slaves to all
sensuality, and sure ere long to inherit misery. Give no ear to the Sycophant,
whose sugared tongue and subtle train are ever plotting your ruin; hate the
embraces of all insinuating Sharkes, whose smoothness will work on your
weakness, and follow the Poets advice; Gratia quae cocat sicti male sarta
sodalis, Est velut in Siculo Scylla cavenda mar^. Pub Faust. Andr.
Avoid such friends as feign and fawn on thee;
Like Scylla's rock within Sicilian Sea.
So dangerous are these Sirenian friends, that, like the Sicilian shelves, they
menace shipwreck to the inconsiderate sailer. For these, as they profess
love, and labor to purchase friends; so their practices are but how to deceive
and entrap those to whom they profess love. Whence it is that Solomon says, A
man that flattereth his Neighbor, spreads a net for his steps. That is, he
that gives ear to the Flatterer, is in danger, as the bird is before the
Fowler. He whistleth merrily, spreads his Nets cunningly, and hunteth after
his prey greedily. Prove. 29.5.
And let this suffice to be spoken for the Timist, who professes observance to
his friend only for his own end.

Now, The Timonist, or Time-detracter discovered and discarded.
Gentlemen, as I would not have you to entertain time with fawns, so neither
with frowns. The former, as they were too light, so the latter are too heavy:
The one too supple, the other too surly. For these Timonists (for we have done
with our Timists) as Cicero said of Galba's leaden and lumpish body, His wit
had an ill lodging, are of too sullen and earthly a constitution. It is never
fair weather with them, for they are ever louring, bearing a Calender of ill
weather in their brow. These for the most part are Malcontents and affect
nothing less then what is generally pleasing: appearing in the world
naturalized Demophons; Arist. Hist. anim.

Nosque ubi primus equis oriens afflavit anhelis, illie sera rubens accendit
lumina vesper. Tu voluptatem complecteris, nos compescimus: Tu omnia voluptatis
causa facis, nos nihil. Sen. de malis accidentibus bonis. Lib. 1.


whose humor was to sweat still in the shadow, and shake in the sun. So as,
howsoever they seem seated in another Clime, for disposition they are like the
Antipodes unto us, opposing themselves directly against us in all our courses.
They are of Democritus mind, who said, that the truth of things lay hid in
certain deep mines or caves; and what are these but their own brains? For
they imagine, there can be no truth, but what they profess. They proclaim
defiance to the world, saying, Thou miserable deluded world, thou embracest
pleasure, we restrain it: Thou for pleasure do all things, we nothing.
Now who should not imagine these Stoics to be absolute men? Such as are rare
to see on earth, in respect of their austerity of life, and singular command
over their affections? such as are divided (as it were) from the thought of any
earthly business, having their minds spheared in a higher Orb? Such as are so
far from intermedling in the world, as they dis-value him that intends
himself to negotiate in the world? Such, as when they see a man given to
pleasure, or some moderate Recreation, whereby he may be the better enabled
for other employments, slight him as a Spender of time, and one unfit for the
society of men? Such, as say unto Laughter, Thou art mad; and unto joy, What
meanest thou? Such, as take up the words of that grave Censor in the Poet:
Take thou delight to race those paths, Neu tibi pulthra placent caeci
vestigia mundi,

Fallere quae citius quam renovare selent?



where worldlings walked have,
Which seldom do refresh the Mind,
but often do deceive?


Yet behold, how many times these men's severity comes short of sincerity! They
will lay heavy burdens on others shoulders, which they will be loath to touch
with the tip of their finger. The Taskes which they impose on others are
insupportable, the pressures they lay on themselves very easy and tolerable.
Of this rank was Aglataidas, of whom that noble and faithful Historian
Comines writes, saying: While he served in the Camp he was of a most harsh
austere condition, doing many things perversely, and desiring rather to be
feared then loved. Such was this Timon, from whose name we entitle these
frowning friends, who can hardly be true friends to any, being so opposite or
repugnant to all, as they can scarcely hold concurrence with any. Plutarch.
Neither was this Timon (as Plutarch reports of him) only harsh and uncivil
toward men, but toward women also: so as going forth one day into his
Orchard, and finding a woman hanging upon a wild fig tree: O God (quoth he)
that all trees brought forth such fruit! Unfit therefore was this Timon for the
Acquaintance of man, who professed himself so mortal and irreconciliable an
enemy to the sociablest and entirest Acquaintance of man. So as, these
Timonists, are to be cashiered for two reasons; first, for their own harsh and
rough condition; secondly, for the unjust grounds of their opinion, which
dissents so far from society, as it disallowes of Marriage, the ordinary
means appointed to preserve society. So as, leaving them and their opinion, as
already evinced, we will descend to make choice of your nearest Acquaintance,
(I mean) the choice of your wife; the first day of which solemnity promises
either a succeeding Iubile, or a continued Scene of sorrow, where naught is
sung but doleful Lachrymae.

What directions are to be observed in the choice of a wife.
It was pleasantly spoken of him who said; Wives are young men's Mistresses;
Companions for middle age; and old-mens Nurses. The first sort, take as much
content in wearing their Mistress favor, as winning it; the second sort, in
winning rather then wearing it; the third neither in wearing nor winning it,
but like children, to be cherished and cockered by it. The second sort are we
only to speak of, where wives are to be made companions, Genesis 2.23.
and such entire ones, as they are bone of your bone, and flesh of your flesh.
In the choice whereof, we will propose such necessary cautions, as shall be no
less useful to your selves, if rightly observed, then motives of comfort, if
duly and exactly considered. He was reputed one of the wise men, that made
answer to the question; When a man should marry? A young man not yet, an elder
man not at all. Of which opinion was Arminius that Ruler of Carthage, The harsh
and heremiticall conceit of the Carthaginian Arminius, touching Marriage.
whose harsh conceit of marriage proceeding either from personal disability,
or some experience of woman's levity, deserves small approbation. For had it
been Arminius fortune to have matched with Arminia, he would doubtless,
rather have fallen into admiration of so sacred a rite, then into distaste of
it. For this Noble Lady being bidden to King Cyrus wedding, went thither with
her husband: at night when they were returned home, her husband asked of her,
how she liked the Bridegroom, whether she thought him to be a fair and
beautiful Prince or no? Truth (says she) I know not: for all the while I was
forth, I cast mine eyes upon none other, but upon thy self. Or had Calanus
prevented Hi^^o of his choice, he would have fallen from his Stoicall dream
to a Nuptial song; for one of Hiero^s enemies reproaching him with a stinking
breath, he went home and questioned his wife why she told him not thereof; but
what answer gave this continent Lady? Surely (said she) I thought all men had
the same savor. Or had Claudian enjoyed so inimitable a consort, as the no
less beauteous then virtuous Clara; whose constant affection to her decrepit
and diseased Valdaure, in sh^wing most love when a loathsome bed might have
ministered most dista^^e has recommended her living memory to the succeeding
Annals of posterity. O^ had Timon attained the happiness to join hands with
Theogena, wife to Agathocles, he had not inveighed so much against the state
of Marriage; for this renowned Lady showed admirable constancy in her husbands
greatest misery, Se non prosperae tantum, sed oranis fortunae inisse societatem.
showing her self most his own, when he was relinquisht and forsaken of his
own; saying, That she was not given him to be a sharer only in his
prosperity, but in what fortune so^ver should befall him. Or had Zenocrates
enjoyed Zenobia, he would no less have admired his fortune, then beshrewed
himself for depriving himself so long of so sweet a Companion. For this
princely Lady, after the death of Odonatus (though a Barbarian Queen yet) by
her reading of both Roman and Greek Histories, so managed the state after the
decease of her husband, as she retained those fierce and intractable people in
her obedience; -vix ulla pere^nior urna est, Vel tibi grata magis proprio quam
corpore busium

Condere. -- una requiescit in urna. O vid. Met. l. 4.


being a woman no less absolute for learning, then discreet governing: for she
abridged the Alexandrian, and all the Oriental Histories, (a task of no less
difficulty then utility) whereby she attained the highest pitch of wisdom and
authority. Or had Aristippus been so happy as linked himself with Artemisia,
he would have preferred so kind and constant a yoke fellow before all
exterior contemplations: for this chaste and choice Lady after the death of
her beloved Mansolus, thought it not sufficient to erect a glorious monument in
his memory, but to enshrine him in her own body, by drinking his ashes, and
interring him in her self. Many such eminent women may we read of in
Histories both divine and humane, whose virtues have equalled, if not surpassed
most men. So as, howsoever it was the Milesian Thales his saying, that he had
cause to give Fortune thanks for three things especially; first, for that he
was a man, and not a beast: secondly, that he was a man, and not a woman:
thirdly, that he was a Greek borne, and not a Barbarian: Women there be whose
more noble endowments merit due admiration, because as in their sex weaker and
inferior, so in the gifts of the mind richer and superior.

But now to our Choice: for it is to be received as already granted, being by
the authority of an Apostle confirmed, Heb. 13.4. Arist. lib. 1. Polit. cap. 1.
Eum eligas magistrum, quem magis admireris cum videas, quam cum audias. Seneca.

Egnatius quod condidos habet dentes renidet usque quaque, seu ad rei ventu^
est subsellium. Vid. Catul. in lib. Eleg.


that Marriage is honorable among all: and every honorable thing is more
eligible, then that which is not honorable: So as he that shunneth Marriage,
and avoideth society, is to be esteemed a foe to humanity, or more then a man;
as he whom Homer reprehendeth, saying: That he was tribe-lesse, law-lesse,
and house-lesse. I could wish every young Gentleman to make that Choice of his
Mistress, which Seneca would have one observe in the choice of a Master; Choose
him for thy Master (says he) whom thou may more admire, seeing him, then
hearing him: Neither altogether, as Egnatius in Catullus is brought out showing
the whiteness of his teeth: for all outward perfections, are but as fuel to
feed desire, without that inward fair, which only makes woman worthy loving.
For what is a beautiful complexion, being an exterior good; or that which
Euryclea his nurse praised, when she washed the feet of Ulysses, namely,
gentle speech, and tender flesh, wanting those inward graces, which truly
adorn and beautify women? So as it is much better to follow his direction in
the choice of a wife, who said, that they were to be chosen Epictet, Enchirid.
Modestia non forma; which Modesty cannot admit of this ages vanity, where
there is nothing less affected then what is comely. For, Cypr. de disciplina
and habitu virg.
these garish fashions agree well with none but prostitutes and shameless
women. Petr. Mart. 2 Reg. 9.30.
Neither can that face be a good one, which stands in need of these helps.
For Cyprian.
what madness is it to change the form of nature, and seek beauty from a
Picture? Ambr. Hexam. lib. 6. cap. 8.
Which Picture is vices posture, and the ages imposture. Hieron.
Neither do these affected trumperies, nor exquisite vanities become a
Christian. Iunius.
For what is more vain, then dying of the hair, painting of the face, laying
out of breasts? Aug. de Christ. fide.
Do not say that these can have shamefast minds, who have such wandering and
immodest eyes. Ambros. l. 1. de offic. cap. 18.
For the habit of the mind is to be discerned by the carriage: so as even in
motion, gesture, and pace, is modesty to be observed. How miserable then is the
state of these fantastic Idols, who can endure no fashion that is comely,
because it would not be observed? How base is her shape, which must borrow
complexion from the shop? Hier. ad Furiam de vid. Ser. Tom. 1.
How can she weep for her sins (says S. Hierome) when her tears will make
furrows in her face? With what confidence does she lift up her countenance to
heaven which her Maker acknowledges not? Tertul. de hab. Mul. Cap. 7.
I would, I poor wretch, ( says Tertullian) might see in that day of
Christian exaltation, whether with Cerusse, and Vermillion, and Saffron, and
those tyres and toys upon your head, you are to rise again! which if they
do, they shall certainly witness against them, Scult.
to receive the reward of their painting in a Lake of tormenting. Cyprian. in
lib. de hab. virg.
For these are they who lay hands upon God, correcting with a hand of contempt
the workmanship of God. These never carry a box of ointment to bestow on the
members of Christ, but a Vict. ad Salmonem.
box of complexion they have in readiness to bestow on a cheek. Which sort of
Wantons (for how should I otherwise term them) are well displayed by one in
their colors after this manner; Tho. Hudson.
She surely keeps her fault of Sex and Nation,
And best allows still the last Translation:
Much good time lost, she rests her faces debtor,
Sh' as made it worse, striving to make it better.
This introduced Ulcer, which is now esteemed no sore, because custom has
taken away the sense of a sore; how much it was abhorred formerly, may appear
by that command or constitution purposely exhibited to restrain it. Clemens
alexconst. Apost. lib. 1. cap. 9.
Do not paint thy face which God has made. But if our women would but
consider how hateful these abuses are in the sight of the Almighty, yea, how
much they were loathed even of all honest women in former ages, they would
distaste them, sure I am, far more then they affect them. For if we will
credit Saint Hier. de exitu Leae.
Hierome; writing to Marcella, who says; That those women are matters of
scandal to Christian eyes, which painted their faces and their eyes with
Vermillion, and such like adulterate complexions. Yea he writes, That
Maximilla Montanus his Prophetess, a woman-divell, by command from him whom
she served, did use to paint. So Festus Pompeius says, That common and base
Whores, called Schoenicolae, used dawbing of themselves, though with the vilest
stuff. So did the Druids amongst the Romans, expressly shadowed by the Poet,
Vict. ad Salmonem.
Preserve what Nature gave you, noughts more base,
Than Belgian color on a Roman face.
Caesar. in comment.
So did our ancient Britains, but not to make their faces more amiable, but to
appear more terrible to the enemy. Thus much, Gentlemen, I thought good to
write, before you make your choice, that you may see who are worth loving
before you make your choice. Nazian. contra mulieres immodice comptas:
There is one flower to be loved of women, a good red, which is shame
fastness? Here make your choice, and you shall find far more content in a
native then artificial blush. For as Diogenes said to one that had anointed
his hair; Laert. lib. 6. Optimisunt odores qui odorant mores; aliter non sunt
flores sed faetores.
Take heed that thy smelling head bring thee not an ill-smelling life; so
beware lest these perfumed Ones become not polluted Ones. For whosoever shall
use them, I cannot choose but suspect them: howsoever I have read of some that
maintained the use of painting, grounded upon these ensuing respects: Lessius
de justitia and jure. lib 4. cap. 4. fol. 801.
Such a cause there may be (says one) that Women may use painting, and without
sin: As for example, if it be done of purpose to cover any blemish or
deformity. Likewise, if the Husband command that his Wife should do it, to the
end that among other Women she might appear more amiable: Which opinion
seems likewise confirmed by another, who affirms. Pet. Alagora in Compendio
Manual. Navar. c. 23. Number. 19 fol. 257.
That to receive more beauty by attire or painting, though it be a counterfeit
work, yet it is no mortal sin. So as Platina writes, that Paulus Secundus,
Bishop of Rome, used to paint himself: Whom if Diogenes had seen, he would
doubtless have said to him, as he once said to a youth too curiously and
effeminately dressed: If thou go to men, all this is but in vain; if unto
women, it is wicked. Wicked surely, it cannot choose, being (as it were) a
reproving or reforming of the Almighty, whose workmanship is so absolute, as it
admits of no correction. Take heed therefore that you be not taken with one of
these Idols, as Pigmalion was with his Image; but so direct your affections, as
she may be worthy your embrace, whom you shall choose.

Which that you may the better effect, Laert. in vita Cleeb.
follow the Sages advice in your choice: Match with your equal, if not in
fortunes, for so both may prove beggars, at least in descent: so will she the
better content her self with your estate, and conform her the better to your
means. For I have seldom seen any difference greater, arising from Marriage,
than imparity of birth or descent, where the wife will not stick to twit her
husband with her Parentage, and brave him with repetition of her descent.
Likewise, as I would not have you to entertain so maine a business without
mature advice, so I would not have you wholly rely upon a friends counsel: but
as you are to have the greatest Oar in the Boat, so to make your self your
own carver: for he that is enforced to his Choice, makes a dangerous
bargain. Wherefore ground your Choice on Love, so shall you not choose but
like; making this your conclusion; To her in Hymen's bands I Will nere be tide,
Whom Love has not espoused and made my Bride.


For what miseries have ensued on enforced Marriages, there is no Age but may
record: where rites enforced, made the hands no sooner joined then their minds
divorced, bidding adieu to Content, even at that instant when those unhappy
rites were solemnized.

The next Observance in making your Choice, is matter of Portion; a business not
altogether to be neglected; for if she be a good wife, a good Portion makes her
no worse: and if an ill one, she had need of a Portion to make her better. For
he has a hard bargain that has neither Portion in a Wife, nor out of a Wife.
We would account him a weak and simple man, that would enter bond without
either consideration, or security to keep him harmeles. You are sure to be
bound, be not so far from consideration, as have nothing to show for your self
for your own security. I can commend his wit who having made choice of a
Proportion, moving enough to gain affection, was not content so, but he must
know further touching her Portion; that as her Proportion procured love, so her
Portion might enable him how to live: like a quick Epigrammatist he proceeds
thus; Portion and Proportion.
I got a Portion and Proportion too,
One got, the other I desired to know;
Which known, though at this season I was free,
A thousand pound cost me my liberty.
O fool (quoth my Alexis) to be bound,
To thraldomes yoke, to gain a thousand pound!
Content thee friend (said I) for wot'st thou what,
I have been bound for a less sum then that,
Yet nere was Banke-rupt; but if so I doubt
To lose by the bargain, I will bank her out.


It is a true saying, Something has some savor; whereas he that neither gets
good wife nor good portion, will make but a hard saver. For he that wants a
wife to cherish him, had need of some money to cheer him.

Having now made choice of your wife, being so well disposed (as it is to be
intended,) she should not be much restrained; for she has already resolved
to be no gadder, but, in resemblance of the Snaile, a good housekeeper.

The Egyptians, by an especial decree (as Plutarch reports) enjoined their
Women to wear no shoes, because they should abide at home. The Grecians
accustomed to burn, before the door of the new married, the axletree of that
coach wherein she was brought to her husbands house, letting her to understand,
that she was ever after to dwell there. Which custom she approves, having
made her family her common weal, where she addresseth her self to govern
without intermedling in others affairs. Neither is she only to be freed from
restraint of liberty in going abroad (for her occasions call her, or else she
could be contented to be housed for ever:) but in her desire of apparel, or
any thing else that she affects. For whersoever Christ is, there is Vbi deu^
est, ibi pudicitia, Hieron. ad ^uriam de vid. Sermon Tom. 1.
shamefastnes; like as wheresoever Antichrist is, there is Velamen istud
Antichristi. ibid.
shamelesnes. And this chosen vessel well understands that all garish and
gorgeous attire, is the attire of sin, which she will not so much as partake
with, having learned how that Modesty is the only ornament which beseemes a
Matron. Wherefore, you should much wrong your choice to restrain her from the
use of any pleasure which she affects, for so well disposed is she, as she
affects no pleasure than to converse with Virtue, which she holds at a
higher rate than to be purchased with a mass of treasure.

But admit it were your fortune to bestow your self on one, whose licentious
affection might second Faustina's, whose pride Sempronia's, and whose shrewd
tongue Zantippe's: you must make a virtue of a necessity, and so learn to
inure you to patience, as you may be able by continual exercise to encounter
and subdue the violentest passions. How wisely did Aurelius cover his
Faustina's shame, laboring to reclaim by mildness, when he could not
prevail by bitterness? How discreetly was Sempronias proud humor curbed and
with as little impatience as might be reproved? How resolutely did Socrates
forbear his wife Zantippe, though a froward woman, because he thought he
might better and with more patience converse with others? For Marriage is no
such merchandise, as to promise return with advantage to all factors. There is
a ceremonial custom used by the Duke of Venice upon the Ascension day, to go
in a vessel called the Bucentor, made Galley-wise, with other Nobles a mile or
two into the Sea: casting a Ring into it, (by which ceremony they wed the Sea)
that it may never leave the City upon dry land. Certainly, whosoever he be
that marries a wife, empledging his faith unto her by a Ring, must not think
that he has brought his ship to a perpetual harbor, but rather that he is
now putting off from Land, and entering the maine Ocean, where he is to
encounter with many violent blasts, contrary winds, surging waves, ebbes and
flows, which will not end till his journey end. It were wisdom therefore to
bear what we may not avoid: considering, that as the Marriage state is
subject to many occurrences, so it is endowed with sundry excellent
privileges, Cael. Rhod. lib. 12 cap. 8. Privileges of Marriage.
as the gravity of the state requires: As in Rome, the Lex Iulia gave
precedence to him who had most children; and in Florence at this day, he that
is father of five children, straightway upon the birth of the fifth, is
exempted from all Imposts, Subsidies, and Loanes. Also here in England, a
married man (out of a tender respect to h^s posterity) is not so soon pressed
into the wars as single men or Batchelors. Wherefore as the state is more
honored, so is more sobriety and government in it required; bearing your
selves patiently without bitterness, and forbearing your wives for their sexes
weakness.

Having thus far discoursed of Acquaintance, both at bed and board; it were
not amiss, Plin. 35.^.10.
if we set down some especial direction, which might better instruct you in
the choice of them; which, as Protogenes seeing but a little line drawn in a
Table, knew straight-wayes it was Apelles doing, whom he had never seen;
shall upon first sight resolve you, that those friends, or Acquaintance to
which these instructions shall direct you, are worthy loving and knowing. There
is no one note more infallible of true friendship, then to express a
faithfulness in misery: which faithfulness is ever found in these noble and
generous Dispositions, Laeert. in vit. Chyl.
who can say with Chilo, That in all their lifetime they were never guilty of
Ingratitude. So as Nobility and Affability hold for most part concurrency:
whence the Poet; A disposition towardly and good,
Implies a generous and a Noble blood.
These keep continual records of courtesies received; with a Catalogue of
such friends as have at their hands worthily deserved. It is reported of Hen.
the 5. that he never promised any thing, but he registered and set it down
with his own hand. Such noble sparks are these, who, as they receive
acceptably, so they render back bountifully, making no other benefit of Amity,
then as of a mutual or reciprocal courtesy. Neither is it to be wondered
at, Optimi^ opti^mis claruere gratiis:

Pessimi pessimis caluere vitiis.


that I should here make choice of Descent, or Birth, as an especial or
infallible note of true and faithful Amity: for there is a natural strain in
all creatures, which they take from the parents that bred them. Strong men from
Strong their native strength do gather,
Both Bull and Horse take spirit from their father.
It is a common saying amongst us, Fortes creantur fortibus et bonis. Est in
juvencis, est in equis patrum Virtus -- Horat.

(...).

Infelicem dicebat Bias qui far nequiret infelicit atem. Laert.

Pomp. Mela. lib. 1.


That a Gentleman will do like a Gentleman; he scorns to do unlike
himself, for his word is his gage, and his promise such a tie as his
reputation will not suffer him to dispense with. Men of this rank, as they are
ready to bear an equal share in their friends misery, so are they resolved
with a spirit undanted, (if such be their chance) in their own persons to
sustain misery; for they esteem no man so unhappy, as he that cannot bear
unhappiness. In Sicilia there is a fountain called Fons Solis, out of which
at midday, when the Sun is nearest, flows cold water; at midnight when
the Sun is farthest off, flows hot water. Such fountains are these firm
friends, who, when the Sun shines hottest upon you, with the rays of
prosperity, will yield you cold water, no great comfort or succor, because you
need it not: but when the Sun is farthest off, and the darkest clouds which
fortune can contract, sit heaviest on you, then they send forth hot water; they
weep with you, there is hot water; they suffer with you, there is hot water;
they cheer you drooping, comfort you sorrowing, support you languishing;
Quorsum alter dives, alter pauper? Theophrast. Nil habet infelix paupertas
durius in se, Quam quod ridiculos homines facit -- Iuven. Sat. 3. Quem fugiam
scio, quem sequar nescio. Homer. Iliad. 5 This was never more exemplarily then
in that place, and at this time presently confirmed; where faction gilded over
with pretenses of religion, labors to bring an united State to division.

Nihil turpius dubio and incerto, pedem modo referente, modo producente. Sen.
Ep. 96.


and in your extremest fortunes are ever sharing. These cry with Theophrastus,
What care we if this friend be rich, that friend poor, we are the same to
either? Make choice therefore of these well bred Ones, for though some
degenerate, most of them hold. Whereas, contrariwise, these who are of a base
dunghill descent, it is seldom seen but they have some base and unworthy
condition; being generally all for the time, but little for trust; or as Tops
which always run round, and never go forward, unless they be whipped. Such a
Neuter among the Romans was Tully, who could not resolve, whether he should
take Caesar's part or Pompeyes part. Among the Grecians was Tydides, who could
not determine whether he should join himself with Achilles or Hector. (...).
Among the Persians was Nabarzanes, who seeing his Masters fortunes decline,
labored to join himself to him whose fortunes, were in rising. Such were
Tiberius friends, who shrunk from him, hearing with patience Tiberium in
Tiberim. And such were our Northern Borderers, who have been always
uncertain friends in extremities, and assured enemies upon advantage. Of which
it may be said, as was spoken of the Philosophers cloak, Pallium video,
Philosophum non video: I see the cover of a friend, but no friend. For as
nothing is more hateful then a doubtful and uncertain man, who now draws
his foot back, and now puts it forward; so there is nothing more
distastefull to any man, then these fair protesting friends, whose hollow and
undermining hearts make a show of fair weather abroad, when there is a tempest
at home; coming toward you with their feet, but going from you with their
hearts. In brief, they are Danaus tubs, or running sieves that can hold no
water. leave them therefore to themselves, if you desire in safety to enjoy
your selves.

Now, to the end I may acquaint you likewise with the rest of such Motives to
Love as are powerfully working in the affection of the mind; as we have
touched the first Motive or inducement to Love, to wit, Parentage or descent,
which cannot so far degenerate from it self, but it must of necessity show
it self: Sundry motives to love recounted: Parentage. Benovelence. Fame.
so it attracts other motives of love unto it, as Benevolence in rewarding:
excellency or admiration proceeding from the fame of such redoubted Hero's, as
have their names charact'red and engraven in leaves of brass, to preserve
their memory: As Solomon for his Wisdom, whom, no doubt, Nicaula Queen of
Saba had a desire to see and be known to, through report of his wisdom; so
as her long journey seemed short, having understood that to be true with her
own ear, which she had only heard of before by report. How much likewise
was David affected for his Valor, in discomfiting the uncircumcised Philistin?
So was Alexander, whose report brought the Amazon Thalestris from her own
Country, of purpose to be known to so invincible a spirit. So Hercules,
Achilles, Dardanus, Diomedes, Scipio, Hannibal, Constantine, etc. whose
exploits purchased them Love to such as were never acquainted with their
persons. Pardoning of injuries.
Pardoning likewise of injuries, is an excellent motive of Love. When Chyle's
brother was angry, that himself was not made Ephorus as well as he: O (quoth
he) I know how to suffer injuries, so do not thou! Though Diogenes the
Cynicke answered uncivilly to Alexander, when he came to his poor Mansion in
Synope, his Philosophers Barrel, yet he replied unto his Satyricall speech
with no indignation, but said to such of his attendants, as derided the boarish
and exoticke speech of Diogenes, If I were not Alexander, I would wish to be
Diogenes. The like instance may be confirmed by holy Writ: Number. 12.10, 13.
where Miriam, for murmuring against Moses, was stricken with a loathsome
Leprosy: he could not suffer this condign punishment to be inflicted on her,
but demanded of God that he would cure her. Concurrency in hatred.
Another motive to Love, is Hatred, where an ill occasion procures among
enemies a reconciliation. Herod and Pilate enemies before, were reconciled in
combining their powers, Compassion in afflictions. 1 King. 23.2, 2 Samuel 15.37.
together against Christ. Mastives, if set together, will fight till death, but
in the presence of a Bull will join together. Sometimes mutual affliction
procures mutual affection. Such resorted to David, as were persecuted by
Saul, being such as were amaro animo. Where Saul's enmity brought David to a
trial of Hushai's faithful amity; where he found the words of Ecclesiasticus
to be true, Eccles. 6.14. Vatus in infamitate persicitur.
A faithful friend is a strong defense; and he that finds such a one,
finds a treasure. For when we are in the greatest straights, such an one
shows the most strength: So as the Apostles words may be verified, strength
is made perfect in weakness; Where one afflicted friend supporteth another, 2
Cor. 12:7.
by joining their strenghts together. Delivery from danger. Judith. 3.10.
Esther. 8.^1.
Another motive there is, proceeding from some especial delivery from danger:
for who will not esteem him for a friend, who will expose himself to danger,
to deliver his friend? Judith entered Bethulia with Holofernes head, and by that
means preserved her Country from ruin and desolation. Esther procured the
death of Haman, repealed those severe and cruel laws enacted, proclaimed, and
even ready to be executed by Hamans suggestions, Exodus 15.1. Joshua 24.31 Judge.
16.2. Maccab. 13.5.

Vid. Eccle. a cap. 44 ad 51.


in the kingdom of the Medes and Persians; whereby she purchased eternal
honor, love and memory in her Country. The same love gained Moses for
delivering the Israelites from the thraldom of Egypt. The like may be said of
Joshua, Sampson, Macchabeus, and many others frequent in holy Writ. The Romans
so highly honored and affected such as protected their Country, and defended
her Liberty, as they bestowed no less style on them then Patres Patriae.
Another motive there is, drawing one Enemy to love another, induced thereto in
respect of Compassion, Expression of virtue. 1 King. 24.26.
or some other princely virtue which he sees in him. When Saul understood that
David might have taken away his life, and would not, Levavit vocem and flevit:
his threats were changed into tears, and his passion into a teare-swolne
admiration, to see his foe so full of compassion. Acknowledgement of injuries.

A position of Aristot. Rh^t. 2. cap 4. Vt tenuissima scintilla quae in Oceanum
demittitur. Chrysostom. in hom. ad Pop. Suffering of injuries.

Bounty, or Munificence. 2 Cor. 9.7. Eccles. 6.8.13. Eccles. 12.8.9. Ibid c.
13.9.8. Obad. 7.


We are induced likewise to love them that tell and confess sincerely their
offenses; for an ingenuous acknowledgement of what is done, moves us to
commiserate his case by whom it is done; yea quenches all hate, as if a small
spark were drenched in the Sea. Likewise in the toleration of wrongs, we are
enforced to love him who suffers them, and having power to revenge, will not
out of the nobleness of his spirit, do what he may. To conclude, Bounty is
a motive to Love; for giving gifts gathers friends: which Bounty is most
worthy acceptance, when done with cheerfulness: Hilarem datorem diligit Deus.

Thus have we traced over such Motives as generally induce or procure Love,
Friendship, or Acquaintance; wherein observe the lesson of the Son of Sirach:
Depart from thine enemies, and beware of thy friends: for some man is a friend
for his own occasion, and will not abide in the day of thy trouble.

Now if you would understand, how a man may know a friend, you shall find him
described, and by certain infallible marks discovered in the twelfth Chapter
of the same book. But always, Beware (says he) of deceitful friends, lest
feeling the bitterness of them, you find the saying of the Prophet true: All
the men of thy confederacy, have driven thee to the borders: the men that were
at peace with thee, have deceived thee, and prevailed against thee: they that
cat thy bread, have laid a wound under thee: there is none understanding in
him. Make choice then of him for your Acquaintance, whom you may worthily
esteem of as a second-selfe: so may you communicate your counsels freely,
acquaint him with your griefs friendly, and share in comforts and afflictions
fully. Thus much for the choice of Acquaintance; Arist. Eth. l. 4.
wherein I have the rather enlarged my discourse, because I know that as there
is nothing more useful to direction or instruction, then where good ones are
elected; so there is nothing more hurtful in the maine matter of discipline or
conversation, then where ill ones are affected and frequented.

Of Constancy in the choice of Acquaintance. Eccles. 6, 7.
MAny and singular were the commendations attributed to Augustus, amongst which
none more absolute then this: As none was more slow in entertaining, so none
more firm or constant in reteining: which agrees well with that of the Son
of Sirach: If thou gettest a friend prove him first, and be not hasty to credit
him. But having found him, we are to value him above great treasures: the
reason is annexed: A faithful friend is a strong defense, 14.
and he that finds such a one, finds a treasure. This advises every one
to be no less wary in his choice, then constant in the approvement of his
choice; so as it rests now, that we presie this point by Reasons and
Authorities, illustrating by the one, and confirming by the other, how
consequent a thing it is to show our selves constant in the choice of our
Acquaintance.

There is no one thing more dangerous to the state of man, or more infallibly
proving fatal, then lightness in entertaining many friends, and no less
lightly cashiering those who are entertained. Which error I have observed to
have borne principal sway in our new-advanced Heirs, Amarunt Solemn ardentem,
oderunt arguentem.
whose only ambition it is to be seen numerously attended, phantastically
attired, and in the height of their absurdities humoured. These are they who
make choice of Acquaintance only by outward habit, or which is worse, by
roisting or ruffian behavior: with whom that false Armory of yellow Bands,
nittie Locks, and braving Mouchato's, have ever had choice acceptance. And
herein, observe the misery of these depraved ones, who having made choice of
these mis-spenders of time, and abusers of good gifts, they will more
constantly adhere to them, then with better affected Consorts. Oh that young
Gentlemen would but take heed of falling unwarily upon these shelves, who make
shipwreck of their fortunes (the remains of their fathers providence;) yea not
only of their outward state, which were well to be prevented, lest misery or
baseness over-take them; but even of their good names, those precious odours
which sweeten and relish the Pilgrimage of man! For what more hateful then to
consort with these companions of death, whose honor consists merely in
protests of Reputation, and whose only military garb is to toss a Pipe in
stead of a Pike, and to fly to the Tinderbox to give charge to their smoakie
Ordnance, to blow up the shallow-laid foundation of that shaken fortress of
their decayed brain? these hot liver'd Salamanders are not for your company
(Gentlemen) nor worthy your Acquaintance; for of all companions, those are the
worthiest acceptance, who are so humble-minded and well affected, Vt abiis
melicres f^ant, aut eos quibuscuns versantur, meliores faciant.

Inter Vestales hoc celebr^ juit, primo discunt quid agant, postea agunt quod
discunt, tertio alios do^ent guod discant, and agant.

Non est strepitus oris, sed jubilus cerdis; non sonus labiorum sed morus
gaudiorum; concordia voluntatum, non consonantia vocum: Parum enim prodest sola
voce cantar^ sine cordis intention. Bern.


as they consort with others purposely to be bettered by them; or being knowing
men, by their instructions to better them. That course which the ancient
Vestals observed, such useful Companions as these have ever seconded: They
first learned what to do; secondly, they did what they had learned; thirdly,
they instructed others to do as they had learned. Such as these were good
Companions to Pray with, to Play with, to Converse or Commerce with.

First, they are good to Pray with; for such as these only were they who
assembled together in one place, employing their time religiously in prayers,
supplications, and giving of thanks, and honoring him, whom all Powers and
Principalities do honor with divine Melody: which was expressed not so much
with the noise of the mouth, as with the joyful note of the heart: nor with
the sound of the lips, as with the soule-solacing motion of the spirit; nor
with the consonance of the voice, as with the concordance of the will: For, as
the precious stone Diacletes, though it have many rare and excellent
soveraignties in it, yet it loses them all, if it be put in a dead-mans mouth:
so Prayer, which is the only pearl and jewel of a Christian, though it have
many rare and exquisite virtues in it, yet it loses them every one, if it be
put into a dead-mans mouth, or into a man's heart either, that is dead in sin,
and does not knock with a pure hand. So many rare presidents have former times
afforded, all most inimitable in this kind, as to make repetition of them,
would crave an ample volume; we will therefore only touch some special ones,
whose devotion has deserved a reverence in us toward them, and an imitation
in us after them. Nazianzin in his Epitaph for his sister Gorgonia, writes,
that she was so given to Prayer, that her knees seemed to cleave to the earth,
and to grow to the very ground, by reason of incessancie or continuance in
Prayer; so wholly was this Saint of God dedicated to devotion. Gregory in his
Dialogues writes, that his Aunt Trasilla being dead was found to have her
elbowes as hard as horn; which hardness she got by leaning to a deske, at
which she used to pray; so continued was the devotion of a zealous professor.
Eusebius in his History writes, that James the brother of our Lord, had knees
as hard as Camels knees, benumbed and bereaved of all sense and feeling, by
reason of continual kneeling in Prayer; so sweet was this Task, undertaken
for Gods honor, where practice made that an exercise or solace, which the
sensual man makes a toil or anguish. Hierome in the life of Paul the Eremite
writes, that he was found dead, kneeling upon his knees, holding up his
hands, lifting up his eyes: Etiam cadaver mortui officioso geslu precabatur.
Quaerite quod quaeritis, sed non ubi quaeritis. August.
so that the very dead corpse seemed yet to live, and by a kind of zealous and
religious gesture to pray still unto God. So transported or rather intraunced
was the spirit of this lovely Dove, as even in death he expressed the practice
of his life: These followed Augustines rule in their form of Prayer: seek
(says he) what you seek, but seek not where you seek. Seek Christ, that is
a good what. Seek what you seek; but seek him not in bed, that is an ill
where. But seek not where you seek: Moses found Christ not in a soft bed, but
in a bramble bush. For as we cannot go to heaven on beds of down, no more can
these devotions pierce heaven which are made on beds of down. Albeit, every
place is good, for as no place is freed from occcasion of sin, so no place
should be free from Prayer, which breaks down the Partition wall of our
sin. But certainly those downie Prayers taste too much of the flesh,
Delicatus magister est, qui pleno ventre disputat de jejunio. Hieron. Qui satur
est, pleno laudat jejunia ventre.
to relish well of the spirit: for as he is a delicate Master, who when his
belly is full, disputes of fasting; so he is a sensual Prayer, who in his
bed only, addresseth himself to devotion.

Neither are these only good companions to pray with, but also to play with; I
mean to recreate and refresh our minds with, when at any time pressed or
surcharged either with cares of this world, or in our discontinuance from more
worthy and glorious Meditations of the world to come; for as in the former we
are usually plunged, so by the latter we are commonly enfeebled, at least
wearied, if by some Recreations, to entertain and allay the tediousness of
more weary hours, we be not refreshed and solaced. Eccles. 13.19. Quin. Cur.
l. ^ Amicitiae ut pares quaerunt ita et faciunt: ut cuique est aetas, it a
quemque facetus adopta. Hor. l. 1. Epist. 6. Suaves omnes fiunt soles inter
socios et sodales.

Qua dementia est potius trabi quam sequi. Seneca.


Now in our choice of Acquaintance, as like requires like, so are we to sort
our selves to an equality both in degree and condition. When some of Alexanders
companions demanded of him, if he would run a race with them; Willingly,
(said he) if there were Kings to run withal. For this parity breeds
affection, and an equality of minds in any recreation: while neither respect to
an inferior rank begets contempt, nor an eye to superiority begets fear.
Besides, as there is an equality of degree, so is there an equality of mind
concurring with that degree. There is no pleasure affected by one, which is not
entertained with free approbation by another: for in all their jestings,
sportings, and delightful meetings, they are provided of a disposition,
equally tempered to give a jest, and take a jest: having ever in mind that
common English Proverb, Play with me, but hurt me not; jest with me, but shame
me not. For their sports as they are harmless without guile, so their
conceits are pleasant without gall: There is neither saltness in the one, nor
harshnesse in the other. Neither do these make sport or pastime a vocation, as
if they were borne to nothing else then Play: for these delights of theirs,
which are ever moderate, and therefore truly seasoned, they make use of, as
Physicians of suger-plates, which they minister to their patients, to take away
the taste of a more bitter potion* It is worth observing, to note the excellent
use, which these men make of Recreation. They can use it with such temperance,
as they can command the pleasures which they use, and not be commanded by it.
Their only pleasure is to contemn pleasure, yea, "even to dis-esteeme it in
their height of pleasure: neither, because pleasure delights, Nec quia
delectat, placet; sed quia placet, delectat. ibid

Egregium apud vos virtutis officium voluptates persuanere: Super mens^m
recognoscentes omnia gentium animalia: and quo magis implentur, e o magis
inexplebiles, Ibid.


does it please them; but because it pleases, it does delight them. It is the
excellent'st office of some men's virtue to persuade the use of pleasure,
recounting at their Table creatures of all sorts, with which by how much more
they are filled, by so much more their appetites remain unsatisfied. Briefly,
whereas their discretion has subjected appetite to reason, in gaming they play
without desire of gaining; in Recreations of the Body, their aim is to refresh
and renew Nature, without any desire of mastery; in their solemn feasts, they
feed without surfeiting; in their May-games, they are merry without exceeding;
in their flashes or encounters of wit, they are pregnant, present, and pleasant
without offending. Those are most fruitful and fertile in rendering fruit
(says the Philosopher) which partake most of cold and moist: which position
intends the conceptive part; but my assertion reaches further; for I
conclude, such as these being equally tempered, to be most copious in the
principle works or faculties of the understanding, being three; first to
discourse, secondly to distinguish, third to choose.

For the first whereof, Three faculties of the understanding.
it rests that we now proceed in proof, concluding, These not to be only
the best Companions to pray or play with (as we have formerly proved;) but to
converse or commerce with, as we shall hereafter make manifest. Megabizes
esteemed Alexander as a Prince, whiles he stood in his School and said
nothing; but when he began to talk of things which he knew not, he said
unto him, That even his little children would laugh him to scorn. This speech
of Megabizes proceeded (as may be imagined) from some words utrered, or reasons
alleged by Alexander, which relished little of Philosophy, being a Study to
which a Soldier is for most part a stranger. But these men, whom we now have
in hand, and whom we have made choice of, as fit companions to converse and
commerce with, are men of such singular discretion, as they will prefer
silence before discovery of their ignorance. These observe that maxim; He that
knows how to speak well, knows also when he must hold his peace.
These know for what end or purpose the bars and gates of the lips and teeth
(like a double ward) were ordained to limit or restrain the Tongue. These
observe, how man has two eyes to see with, two nostrils to breath with, two
hands to labor with, two feet to walk with, but one Tongue to talk with;
implying that one Tongue requires as much government as any two members of all
the body. Neither only is their speech wisely silenced, but when delivered,
discreetly seasoned: Seasoned with mildness and affability, without the least
expression of roughness or austerity. These think an hour before they
speak, and a day before they promise. In lib. disecrit. secretor.
Where two meek men meet together, their conference ( says Bernard) is sweet
and profitable; where one man is meek, it is profitable; where neither, it
proves pernicious. Neither in mildness and affability only, but in the
highest pitch of wisdom, is their discourse seated. Whence it was (as I have
heretofore noted) that Aristotle debating of the convenience and propriety of
discourse before Alexander; maintained, That none where to be admitted to
speak, but either those that managed his wars, or his Philosophers which
governed his house. Which wisdom of discourse has been formerly so much
affected, as Plutarch reports that Plato came forth of Asia into Cilicia, for
no other cause but only to see his dear friend Phocion the Philosopher, and
to converse with him. This caused Nicaula, the Queen of Saba, to travel from
her own Country to Judea, to hear the wisdom of Solomon: yea, peruse those
Athenian Nights in Gellius, how, and in what excellent manner, with what
variety of discourse, propriety of conference, strength of arguments those
Winter-nights were bestowed, and you shall find there fit companions for
Scholars, Soldiers, and all Generous professors.

Neither are they consorts only fit to converse with, but to commerce with
also; for these are no bankrupt Merchants, or desperate Factors, who use to
dispense with conscience and credit, rather then in a conscionable sort
discharge their credit. So as, howsoever the Son of Sirach may seem to
conclude, Ecclus 26.28, 29.
There be two things, which me think to be hard and perilous; A Merchant
cannot lightly keep him from wrong, and a Victualler is not without sin. So
well and equally are the ships of these good Merchants ballasted, as rather
then they will make shipwreck of a good conscience, or run their reputation
upon the shelfe of disgrace, they will suffer the worst of extremes. These are
none of those, who make sale of deceitful commodities, to enrich their seldom
thriving progeny with impostures. Talis substantia non est slabilis, aut ipsis
inventoribus est peritura, aut a molis haeredibus est diss^panda. Chris. in Mat.
These are none of those tri^^ing Mountebanks, who draw on customers with fair
protests, and show strange experiments upon their sophisticated oiles, to
delude the ignorant. These are none of our inconsiderate Factors, who make
exchange of English money with Indian trifles, enriching foreign Countries
with our treasures, and fooling our own with their feathers. These are none of
our Sea-sharkes, who under pretense of merchandise, exercise pyracie; bearing
the world in hand that they befriend us, when they practice all hostility
against us. These are none of our dangerous Spies, who pretending they come to
trade or commerce with us, arrive purposely to note what strength is amongst
us. No, these are Factors of better temper and more honesty, hating deceit,
though that might enrich them; scorning the Mountebankes trade, though that
might draw customers to them; discarding all inconsiderate Factors, who give
money for feathers, though in fooling others, they might gain by them;
casheering all Sea-sharkes, who by pyraticall practices use to support them;
excluding all dangerous Spies, who to discover others weakness, purposely
embarke them. In brief, would you have their character? They can discourse of
novelties without affectation, impart their minds freely without dissimulation,
valuing no loss so great, as the hazard of their reputation. These are those
friends which deserve your choice and acceptance; These are they, who, as upon
good grounds you have made choice of, so should you be constant in your choice.
For you are not to be so light in the choice of your Acquaintance, as in the
choice of your fashion; where every giddy head sorts himself to what is
newest, not what is neatest; for so should you be ever choosing, and far from
constancy in choosing. Rather having got a friend and proved him, first in
matters of small weight, and afterward in affairs of greater consequence;
labor by all means to retain him, Ecclus. ^.10.
for you have found a treasure: Forsake not this old friend, for the new is not
comparable unto him. You have got a friend, proved and tried him to be no
ambitious man, for ambition is fearful, and for the least cross of fortune
will forsake true friendship. You have got a friend, proved and tried him to be
no covetous man, for covetousness sells fellowship, faith and honesty; to
conclude, you have got a friend, who will not by glozing deceive you; by aiming
at his own private ends, entrap you; by hunting after popular praise disvalue
you; or by consorting with Politic heads, endanger you. Keep him then, and be
constant in your choice, holding him so firmly knit unto you, Arist. l. 4. Eth.
as if he were individually united to your self; for a friend, (provided that
he be such an one as we have charactred him) is a second-selfe, and therefore
as impossible to be divided from you, as you from your self. And may this
suffice to be spoken touching constancy in the choice of Acquaintance, wherein
as we ought to be circumspect in our choice, so ought we to be constant,
having had proof of the faithfulness of our choice.

THere is nothing which argues more indiscretion, Of Reservancy toward
Acquaintance. Chap. 27.16. to 22.
then an aptness of discovering our selves; so as, we are advised in getting
a friend, to prove him first, and not to be hasty to credit him. For albeit the
precept may seem general, The secrets of our friend we may not discover;
which is confirmed by the Son of Sirach, Who discovers secrets, loses his
credit, and finds no friend after his will: yet, how many are there, who
either through weakness that they cannot conceal, or through unfaithfulness,
as they will not, have brought their friends to extremest hazard? Yea, not
only our common friends, but even those who sleep in our own bosom; as
Dalilah played with Samson, either simply or subtly, will discover our
secret'st counsels to our enemy: so as, we may take up the complaint of
Samson, Judge. 14.18.
which he made in the discovery of his Riddle: If he had not plowed with our
Heifer, he had not found out our Riddle. Had not that Woman by the River of
Soreke, Chap. 16.19.
that subtle Dalilah, betrayed his trust, how invincible had Samson remained;
no less powerful to his friends, then fearful to his enemies? Whence we may
gather, how dangerous it is to discover the secrets of our heart, even to those
to whom we have engaged our heart: for we ought not to give our friend power
over us. This is seconded by a divine precept: Ecclus 33.18.
Give not thy son and wife, thy brother and friend, power over thee while
thou live; and give not away thy substance to another, lest it repent thee,
and thou entreat for the same again. Whence we are advised to a twofold
reservancy; first, in concealing our secrets; secondly, in reteining our
substance. For the first, he explaines himself more fully in the ensuing
verse; As long as thou live, and have breath, give not thy self over to any
person. For the second, he gives a reason in the end of the former verse; Give
not away thy substance to another, lest it repent thee, and thou entreat for
the same again. Of which two parts, and the Reservancy which we are to observe
in either, my purpose is briefly and plainly to entreat; and first of the
first, to wit, Reservancy of secrets, wherein I will be as brief as the
quality of the Subject will suffer me.

It is said of Geese, that when at the change of seasons, they pass from
Cilicia over the mountain Taurus, which abounds with Eagles, they carry stones
in their bills, for fear their cry should discover them to their enemies.
Reason should teach us that which Nature has instructed them, lest by
diverting from the rule of reason, we become inferior to them, who never had
the use of reason. For there is nothing which detracts more from the glory of
man, than by too prodigal a discovery of himself, to lay himself open to the
trust of another: so as it may be positively averred, There is nothing that
betrayeth a man so much to ruin, Aditam nocendi perfido praestat sides. Sen.
in Oedip.
as his own credulity. Dionysius gave straight commandment the head of Brias,
one of the Gentlemen of his Chamber, should be cut off, for telling Plato, who
had demanded of him what the Tyrant did, That he had stripped himself by
reason of the heat, and was painting in a Table. So tender were Princes of the
discovery of their actions, even in affairs of indifferency. Let us imitate
therefore that Grecian of former times, who being told that his breath did
smell, answered, It was by reason of the many Secrets, which had a long while
lain rotting, and putrefying within him. Let our bosom (the recluse of
Secrets) be like the Lions den in the Apologue; toward the mouth whereof, the
prints and prickings of sundry sorts of beasts, might easily be discerned, --
Sed nulla retrorsum, but from thence none at all. Let us always talk with
Harpocrates, at the sign of the finger on the mouth; and learn of Anacharsis,
that the tongue has need of more strong restraint than Nature. Let us not be
too curious, 1 Samuel 6.19. 2 King. 10.13
with them of Bethshemesh, in the search of other men's Secrets, nor yet too
careless with Hezekiah, in the discovery of our own. Morality gives us a
prohibition for the one, and a precept for the other: Arcanum neque
tuscrutaberis ullius unquam; Commissumque teges, and vino tortus and ira. Hor.
Seek not to know that Secrecy
Thy friend reserved has,
But keep what is tendered to thy trust,
Though drunk with wine and wrath.
And indeed it is a profanation of duty to publish any thing we should not; and
too much insinuation to wind our selves into the privacy of others secrets,
which make known we ought not. Those things therefore, which are to be
concealed, let us conceal them, Vt curia Martis, Athenis, as close as either
silence or darkness will afford us means to keep them, both from eye and
ear: for the better effecting whereof, there is necessarily required in every
one a wise distrust, and slownesse of belief, wherewith the breast must so
equally be ballasted, that he may suddenly run on, without suffering
shipwreck in such a doubtful and dangerous course. Front^m aperiat, mentem
tegat. Cic.
It has been ever held a singular argument of policy, to have an open face,
but a shut heart; to give entertainment with a free and affable countenance,
but with a wise and discreet reservancy of our counsels, to prevent the
occasion of giving our friend power over us.

Yea, but it may be objected, It may sometimes fall out that a friend cannot
perform the office of a friend, but by discovering the secret purpose or
practice of another. For how could faithful Jonathan advertise David of Saul's
wicked purpose against him, 1 Samuel 30.12.
but by discovering what Saul in secret had imparted to him? How could he (I
say) have advertised David of his fathers fury, by shooting three arrows, but
by discovering what his father had secretly intended against him?

To which objection it may be thus answered; That, as amongst evil men there
can be no true friendship continued, so neither are the Secrets of such men,
tending ever to mischief and effusion of innocent blood, to be concealed, but
by all means should be discovered, that such tragical issues might be
prevented.

Yea, but it may be again objected, That admit this were so, may we not
impart our griefs to a friend, or communicate our counsels to one, whom we
have made trial of to be trusty and faithful?

To which I answer, That we may, but with this provision, that we never unrip
our bosom so far, as to give our friend power over us, in matters which may
either concern life, state, or name. For though your experience of the trust
of such a friend has been long, and those affairs wherein you have employed
him, of serious consequence: we have known many Comicall beginnings, have a
Tragical Catastrophe; many promising mornings turn to duskie after-noones;
many fair glozing friends recoile (like the Bat in the fable) and become
either neuters, or professed enemies. So as, it was wisely answered by that
learned Sage to one who demanded of him, what he thought to be the hardest
thing in the world; To keep counsel, Quid difficile ^arcana (inquit)
retie^re, and ocium recte disponere. Laert. in vit. Chyl. Aristot.
quoth he. We say it is good sleeping in a whole skin; but how can our sleeps
be quiet, our rest from terrors freed, when we have lost our liberty by
committing our Secrets, to others trust?

Yea, but friendship, being one soul ruling two hearts, or one heart dwelling
in two bodies, loses her prerogative, if excluded from partaking in her
friends griefs or comforts: for would you think it well, that your friends
should find you sad, and so leave you; sick without ministering any comfort to
you; or poor, without releeving you? Surely, you could not choose but think
such an one comes to jest, rather than to visit or comfort you. Now, how
should he comfort you, who is wholly ignorant of the cause of your discomfort?
or how minister any receipts to you, when he knows not what distempers you? or
how releeve you, when he knows not of any poverty that has befallen you?

Whereto I answer, that these are not to be numbered among those Secrets which
we hold unfitting to be imparted or discovered, by one friend to another; for
the discovery of these may profit, but cannot prejudice us: Whereas, the
disclosing of such secrets as concern our name, may afterward brand us with
infamy; or such as concern our state, may bring us to poverty; or such as
concern our life, may weave our unhappy web in a fearful tragedy.
Therefore it is good counsel, not to give our friend power over us, but with a
circumspect eye to take heed whom we entertain as a friend; and of what nature
those secrets are, which we impart to that friend, Sext. Autel in vit. Commodi.
When that unhappy Emperor Commodus had communicated his secret'st thoughts to
Martia, his best affected Concubine; and withal, how his purpose was, before
many days were ended, to dispatch Latus and Electus two of his Senators: She
perceiving how the world went, and that the Emperor was no less inconstant in
his love, than illimited in his lust, discovered to the Senators what the
Prince had intended against them; which to prevent, with one consent they
resolved to dispatch the Emperor, and so rid them of all occasion of fear.
Far more hateful was that act of Bessus and Nabarzanes, in discovering the
counsels of their unfortunate Prince Darius; which discovery, though it deposed
their Prince of Crown, and deprived him of life, rewarded those disloyal
Traitors with a deserved end. Should we but take a view of the doubleness and
deceitfulness of friends, whose only aims are, for most part, to take
advantage of our o^pennesse, we should find, though there be some Hushai's or
faithful friends; so there be some false brethren, who secretly (under
pretense of amity) will labor to undermine us. 2 Samuel 15.32.
For if we be great, we shall have some to ply our vein, soothing us with
the height of our place, the eminence of our state, our easy access to a
higher step, if we will take hold of occasion; and with these are yong-men,
whose unripened judgments never attained to the discovery of persons, chiefly
pleased; to these are their secret'st thoughts ever imparted; on these are they
wholly planted, and in these is their principal trust reposed: yet lo, they
trust in broken staves of reed, 2 King. 18.21.
on which if they lean, they will go through their hand and pierce it. Again,
are we rising to greatness, and in the first Spring of promotion? We shall
find these chattering Swallows ever flying about us, pertending friendship and
secrecy in our counsels; but misery attends us, if we entertain them. To be
brief, are we rich? If we have discovered any Secret to them, which may
prejudice us being revealed, we shall be sure to have that Secret vented, if
our hollow counselor be not rewarded. Are we poor? though our state need
not fear undoing, our secrets must be discovered, if the meanest may be
gratified by the discovery.

Thus no Rank may be exempted, no degree freed from prejudice, where counsels
are disclosed. Indeed sometimes it happens, that a friend discovers the secrets
of a friend; because, out of the justness of himself, and the integrity of
his own conscience, which no respect will suffer him to violate, he cannot
endure the sinister or indirect practice of his friend, and therefore discovers
it to give means of prevention to the innocent. Which may be instanced in the
vicount of Melin his confession, who lying upon his deathbed here in England,
disclosed the purpose of King Lewis his Master, to the chief Peers and Barons
of the Realm; who considering the inevitable danger into which they were
falling, by giving free entry to the French King, Stow. Annal. in vit. Johan.
wisely in time (and but in time) expulsed him, receiving their unhappy deposed
King, to avoid an ensuing mischief. Now the occasion of this discovery, though
it be diverse ways conjectured, yet the probablest in my opinion is, to
refer it to the compassion which Count Melin had of the English Nation, whose
state had been, to the judgment of all men, grievously shaken, had Lewis, as
he was already arrived, been peaceably possessed of the same. Now to conclude
this point, I hold that English Proverb worthy our remembrance, in affairs of
Secrecy: One may keep counsel, but two cannot: implying, that it is the
safest and surest course to be a man's own Secretary, so shall he not give his
friend power over him, but sleep quietly without fear of discovery, having
none but his own breast to betray him to his enemy.

Reservancie in respect of our Substance, Salust.
The second thing, which, as we formerly noted, requires a Reservancie in us
toward our Acquaintance, is a respect to our Substance; which should neither
be lashed out lavishly, nor hoorded up niggardly. And herein I have observed a
great vanity in young Gentlemen, who are no sooner mounted in their fathers
saddle, or made hei^es of his providence, then upon purchase of Acquaintance,
(which a young Master cannot want) he begins to squander his revenues upon
gifts, to feed his thirsty followers: but see the issue of these bountiful
Novices, they change their Acres into pieces, and so peece-meale divide them,
till they fall all into pieces, and have not one piece to cover them. So as, it
is true which the Poet has observed; The Prodigal and fool gives Predigas
and siultus donat quae spernit, et edit. Herat. l. 1. cp ^^

what he scorns and hates,
And with his state makes other men
to glory in their states.


Wherefore the lesson is good, and well deserves our observation^ which is
given to us by the Son of Sirach; that not only to our friends, Acquaintance,
or the like, but even to our children, whose natural respect to their Parents,
should bind them to be grateful, we should not be too forward in
distributing our Substance, Ecclus 33.21.
concluding thus: For better it is that thy children should pray unto thee,
then that thou should look up to the hands of thy children. Nos proprii
simus praedi Coloni.
If we be advised to use this Reservancie to our own, even those whose natural
affection will enforce bounty at the Parents hand, much more to our
acquaintance, whose pretended semblances, or outward protestations many times
tend rather by fawning to feed on us, then by true profession of friendship to
bestead us.

Oh Gentlemen, how many through too easy a hold have exposed themselves, as a
prey, to the avaritious desires of their followers: where many times it falls
out, that the servant is able to purchase his Master, having enriched himself
by feeding his humor! Yet see the unthankefulnesse of many of these; having
made them a garment of their masters shreads, and raised themselves to a great
estate by his prodigality, they can learn to put on a scornful countenance
toward their landlesse master, entertain him with contempt, forget his
bounty, and ascribe all to their own thriving providence, which proceed merely
from his profuseness. So well can these thriving Timists, who raise their
fortunes from their masters ruins, shape themselves to all times, that they
may profit by all means.

There are Acquaintance likewise, whose aims as they extend only to
themselves, so they will use any indirect course, how irregular soever, to
bring their purpose about. And of these, we had a late example, even in our
own Country, and within the walls of this flourishing City: which example,
that it might remain to the memory of succeeding times, for the benefit
whereof, as well as of these present, our labors should be addressed, I
thought good here to set down. There was a young Gentleman, whose profuser
course having consumed much of his means, was enforced upon some present
extremities urging him, to make a morgage of a piece of land, which piece was
the very last which he had left him: the money being lent and spent, and now
the un-foreseene day of payment approaching, the young Gentleman driven to an
exigent, made recourse by chance, to an ancient Acquaintance of his, by trade a
Chandler, who was a monied man, and could find a friend in a corner, who upon a
commodious bargain would at any time bestead him of a good Sum. He, the
Chandler I mean, noting what benefit the Morgage of the young Gentleman's land
might be unto him, if he redeemed his estate, which now lay a bleeding, and
took the Morgage into his own hand, concluded with the Gentleman, and
releeved his present wants, proposing a certain day for redemption of the said
Morgage: which was kindly accepted of by the Gentleman, little thinking how he
fell from the fire into the flame, and by avoiding Charybdis, had fallen into
Scylla. The time now drewneer, which was limited the Gentleman to redeem the
premises: whence a double care or fear ensued; a fear and provident care in
the Gentleman of procuring money to redeem it; a fear in the Chandler, lest
it should be redeemed, and so the hopes he had of so beneficial a bargain
frustrated. Which to prevent (mark the impiety of the age even in this one
example) the Chandler against the day limited and prefixed, repaires to a
consort of opportunate Agents for his purpose; Assassinates fleshed in all
mischief, and ready to embrace any motion, or engage themselves in any action,
which might minister fuel to their riot. And these he acquaints (as it seems
their Acquaintance was ancient) how he knew of a rich Booty for them, if they
had hearts to attempt, and resolutions to effect, what their present wants
enforced them to attempt. They desirous to hear of that booty, promising him
reward if their purpose came to effect, pressed him (as little pressing needed
to such a base instrument) that he would discover, where this booty might be
purchased. He imparted his mind freely, and told them that such a Gentleman
(being the same who had made a Morgage of his land unto him) was to come
provided of a great Sum of money, upon such a day, and by such a place, as
gave opportunity for the attempt, which they might easily obtain, having none
but himself and his man to resist them. They, at the first seemed jealous of
him, imagining it was some fetch merely to entrap and circumvent them; but
being more confident upon his protestations, that his purpose was to benefit
them, not to betray them; they generally consented to this plot, provided that
they might have his company, not only to direct them, but share and partake
with them: whereto the Chandler condescended, choosing rather to be an
assistant in the practice, then prevented of his purpose. To be short, vizards
and disguises were provided, and all things fitted, that such an attempt might
be furthered: where, by direction of their Leader, they took their stand,
where the unfortunate Gentlemen was to pass; who, within some few hours
after, came according to their expectance, provided of a Sum purposely to
redeem his estate (the last remainder of his fortunes) out of the hands of the
Chandler But he is intercepted and bid stand, whose present occasions admit no
stay: and in brief, stripped of all his money, and bound, he and his man, and
thrown into a gravell-pit, where we leave them; and return to this perfidious
Chandler, who expecting to be a sharer as well in the stake, as in the
forfeiture of his estate, is by his witty Copesmates used after another sort
then he looked for; being bound hand and foot, and thrown into a ditch
adjoining; where he remained, till a Shepherds boy having occasion to come
that way, hearing one pitiously mourning, drew near to the place where he
heard the voice; but seeing one lie there bound in an ugly vizard, and
disguised after an uncouth manner, as one afraid, he run from him, albeit the
Chandler humbly entreated him, to lend his helping hand to loose him. The noise
which the Chandler made, desiring aid from the Shepherd, and the Shepherd
denying aid to the Chandler, was now come to the ear of the afflicted
Gentleman, and his man: wherefore they sent out their complaint, as men
pitifully distressed; which the Shepherd hearing came forthwith to the place
where they lay bound, and seeing the Gentleman, and his man, lent them his
helping hand, and delivered them from their bands: directing them withal, to
the Pit where the Chandler, his treacherous Acquaintance, lay; whom he knew by
his disguise to be one of those, who had taken his money from him: but having
pulled off his vizard, and perceived him to be none but the Chandler, his
professed friend, you may imagine what diversity of perplexed thoughts
encountered him; but suspecting the worst, which after proved the truest, he
caused him to be brought before a Justice, where he was examined touching the
premises, which, to his shame, he confessed, discovering himself to be both
Actor and Author of that persidious complot. For which, being committed, and
legally tried, he was adjudged according to his desert, to receive the
condign punishment of death. Whose goods being confiscate, our late Prince of
renowned memory, out of his royal compassion to the Gentleman's estate,
allotted him so much in his princely bounty, as redeemed his engaged lands,
repossessing him thereof to his great joy, and an example to succeeding ages,
not to repose too much confidence in the profession of Acquaintance. Many
examples of like sort (though this may seem imparallel) might be here
produced, but I cannot insist upon this point. What has been herein
discoursed, principally tends to this end and purpose, to deter young
Gentlemen from discovering themselves too openly to these glozing and
temporizing Acquaintance, whose only aim is to benefit themselves by their
weakness, and make their prodigality the only foundation of their providence;
whence it is that many times they become enrichers of their retinue, but
beggerers of their posterity. And which is of all others most miserable, those
whose Sponges they were, and had squeased them of all their fortunes, will
contemptuously demean^ themselves toward them, and unthankfully slight them,
who by improverishing their own means, have enriched them; whose natures in
the person of one especial ungrateful man, are to life expressed by the Poet;
Ragg'd rocks him bred, Nascitur e scopulis nutritus lacte ferino, Et dicam
silices pectus babere sum. Ovid.
brute beasts him sed,
No thankfulness can enter
His scared Breast, or sealed Chest,
which is of flinty temper.


And let this suffice to be spoken of Reservancie toward Acquaintance, both
in respect of our secrecy of counsel; lest by discovering our selves either
upon confidence of another trust, or transported with passion, (the end
whereof is the beginning of repentance) we give our friend power over us, and
so by too credulous trust bewray our own weakness: or in respect of our
Substance; by a prodigal bounty to our friends and followers, without respect
had of our means, and so make our followers our masters. So as, it is right
wholesome counsel, which that wise Son of Sirach gave, and which we formerly
alleged, but cannot be too often renewed; Give not away thy Substance to
another, lest it repent thee, and thou entreat for the same again: Ecclus.
13.18.28.
concluding with this excellent Precept; Be not excessive toward any, and
without discretion do nothing.

Now excuse me Gentlemen, if I have insisted longer on these two points, then
the quality of the Subject we have in hand, might seem to require: for I am
not ignorant how many of your rank have unfortunately fallen on these two
dangerous shelves; either, I mean, by too open a discovery of themselves, or
by too prodigal a hand in giving, what they may afterward stand in need of to
releeve themselves. But of these we shall have occasion to speak more amply
in our discourse of Moderation; mean time, let this lesson be ever imprinted
in the Tablet of your memory: Impart your Mind, but not your Secrets; give
where you see desert, but with such Reservancie, as it may neither repent you
to have given, having extended your bounty to such as are thankful; nor
grieve you to have discovered your selves, having imparted your mind to such as
are faithful.

Of the absolute end of Acquaintance.
IT is a maxim in Philosophy: Whatsoever is, it is for some end: so as all our
counsels and consultations, businesses and negotiations, have ever an eye or
aim to some special end, to which they are properly directed. For as we see
in Elementary bodies, every one by natural motion tends to their own proper
center, as light bodies upward, heavy ones downward, being places wherein they
are properly said to rest or repose; even so in Arts and Sciences, or the
proper Objects to which they are directed, and wherein they are peculiarly said
to be conversant, there is ever a certain end proposed, to which, and in which
their aims are limited or confined. Whence it is, that excellent Moral says,
That every Task, Labor, Omnis labor aliquo referatur, aliquo respiciat. Sen.
de tranque anim. Cornel. Gall.
or Employment must have reference and respect to some end: which the Poet
confirms saying, All things which are, must have a proper end,
To which by course of Nature they do tend.


So as in my opinion, there is nothing which proceeds in a course more contrary
to Nature, then Suits of Law, whose Object is end without end; consuming time
and substance in frivolous delays, and multiplicity of Orders, which like
Hidra's heads, by lopping off, or annulling one, gives way to decreeing of
another.

Now to enter into discourse of the absolute end of Acquaintance, we are as
well to reprove the indirect ends, which some make of it, as approve of those
good and absolute ends for which it was ordained. Wherefore to come unto the
point, we are to understand that Acquaintance is nothing else but a familiar
friendship, Seneca.
or friendly familiarity, which we have one with another. Now there is nothing
which does comparably delight the mind, like a faithful friendship; being, as
the Stagyrian Philosopher well defines it; One soul which rules two hearts,
and one heart which dwells in two bodies. Aristot. Laert. in vit. Biant.
So as, of all possessions friendship is most precious, where we are to make
no other estimate of our friends life, then of our own glory: a friend being
nothing else then a second self, and therefore as individuate as man from
himself. How much then is this sweet union or communion of minds abused, when
friendship is only made a state of, professing love and familiarity only for
our own ends? And where shall we come, where this abuse of friendship and
sociable Acquaintance is not practiced? In the Court we shall find smooth and
sweet-sented friends, who make friendship a complement, and vow themselves ours
in Protests, Congies, and Salutes: but whereto tend they, but to wind us in,
and so become engaged for them? For it stands with reason think they, as we
are familiar with them in complements of courtesy, so they should be familiar
with us in the Mercers book. Too precious are these men's Acquaintance, and too
heavy their engagements; let us therefore turn from them, and travel toward
the City. And what shall we find there, but many dangerous and subtle
friends, who like politic Tradesmen, having heard of our estates, and how we
are come to years to dispose of them, will profess themselves to be our
Contrymen, in which respect we cannot choose, but make bold with them and
their commodities rather then any stranger? Yet it is strange to see how
strangely and unconscionably they will use us, making ever their commodities
vendible with protestations, and binding them upon us with terms of courtesy.
We must then needs conclude, that these men tender friendship but only for
their own ends. We are therefore to seek further, and descend to the
Country, where we are likest to find them. Yet see, the general infection of
this Age! We shall find there, even where simplicity and plaine-dealing used
ever to keep home, great monied men, who to enrich their seldom prospering
Heirs, will offer us any courtesy, and to show they love us, they will lend us
to support our state, and maintain our riot: but observe their aims; in
feeding us, they feed on us; in succouring us, they soake us; for having made a
prey of us, they leave us. Likewise we shall find there, many
Summer-Swallowes, and find that Sentence in them verified; Though one Swallow
make no Summer, yet one man's Summer makes many Swallows. Where then shall we
find them? Surely in all these places which we have traced: for in the Court,
we shall find friends no less complete then complementall; in the City,
frinds no less trusty then substantial; and in the Country, friends no less
faithful then real. Ecclus 6.13.8.
Notwithstanding, we are taught to beware of our friends; and the reason is
this, for that some man is a friend for his own occasion, and will not abide
in the day of trouble. Having now made choice of such friends and Acquaintance,
as may seem to deserve both our knowledge and acceptance, we are to respect
the aim or end to which all friendship and Acquaintance may truly and properly
be referred. Which (as we formerly observed) is not only matter of gain or
worldly profit, as these Brokers and sellers of amity esteem it: for as much
friendship may be found in Cheap amongst the Huxters, or in Smith-field with
the Horsecoupers, as these profess. But rather, how we may benefit the inward
man by a friendly conversation one with another. For which cause (as we have
elsewhere noted) came Plato forth of Asia into Cilicia to see and converse
with his dear friend Phocion; Nicaula the rich Saban Queen, to visit Solomon;
Brutus the sincere Roman, to converse with Vtican. These, though Pagans, so
highly valued knowledge, as their aim was to entertain friendship with
knowing-men, purposely to increase, at least preserve their knowledge. For
Learning, which is the producer of knowledge, has ever had such exquisite and
admirable effects, as it has gained due and deserved esteem, not only in
respect of opinion, but title and honorable approbation. In Itinerarie. page
444.
So as, Nathan Citraeus writes, that in Prage, an University of Bohemia, where
John Hus, and Hierom of Prage professed, that, they that have continued
professors for the space of twenty years together, are created Earls and
Dukes both together. And therefore their style is to be called Illustres,
whereas they which are singly and simply but only either Earls or Dukes, are
called Spectabiles. Neither makes it any matter that they have no revenews, to
maintain Earledomes or Dukedomes: for they have the title notwithstanding,
even as Suffragans have of Bishops. This esteem of Learning was no less
effectually expressed by one, who encountering with a Scholar, who through
necessity was enforced to turn beggar, cried out; Scholasticus? et Mendicus? o
Secula ^oeca!
A Scholar and a Beggar too?
The Age is blind does plainly show.
Yet how contemptible Riches (that worldlings Idol) has ever been to these,
whose conceits were not engaged to pelse, nor their affections to desire of
having, may appear by the admirable contempt of diverse Pagans toward riches,
Nonne alterius seculi ros est transire per terramauri sine auro? Bern. de
Consid. lib. 4.

Zeno noster cum omnia sua audiret submersa, jubet (inquit) me fortuna
expeditus philosophari. Sen. de tranq. anim. Mergam vos ne mergar a vobis.
Magnum est malum non posse far malum. Sen.

Sen. de mal. accident. bonis. lib. 1.


preferring a voluntary poverty before all worldly possessions. This might be
instanced in Anacharsis, who refused the treasure sent him by Croesiis; in
Anacreontes, who refused the treasure sent him by Polycrates; and Albionus, who
refused the treasure sent him by Antigonus. The like indifferency toward
riches, appeared in the admirable and inimitable patience of Zeno, who hearing
all his substance to be drowned by shipwreck upon the Sea; Fortune (quoth
he) bids me to address my self to Philosophy more speedily. The like in
Mimus, who threw his goods into the Sea, saying; Pack hence, ye evils, for
ye were hindrances to me in my pursuit after better goods; it is better for
me to drown you, then be drowned by you. Whence it was that Demetrius was
wont to say, That nothing could be more unhappy then that man, to whom no
adversity ever happened: for that opinion even amongst the Ethnicks has been
generally held for most authenticke, That nothing can be truly said to be good
or evil, but a good or evil mind.

Now whereas we have sufficiently proved, that no true friendship can be but
only amongst good men, (I mean morally or civilly good) and that aim in the
profession of friendship or Acquaintance, is either to better them, or be
bettered by them: we are in like sort to make this our aim or supreme end,
that having made choice of such whose eminent parts deserve our respect and
acceptance, we are to employ our time in conversing and conferring with them,
the better to enable us in employments public or private. Neither is this
only the absolute aim or end of friendship, for so we should infer that our
acceptance or intertainment of friends had reference only to our own private
ends, without relation to him with whom we have entered the lists of
Acquaintance. We are therefore to have an eye to these especial offices of
friendship, being such as deserve our observation and imitation, if so be we
deserve the name or title of friends.

Especial Offices wherein friendship and Acquaintance should be exercised.
First is, If we see our friend doubtful or unresolved, to advise him; if
afflicted, to comfort him; if sick or restrained, to visit him; if weak in
estate or impoverished, to relieve him; if injured, to labor by all means to
right him, and in all things to be helpefull to him, supplying his necessity by
apparent testimonies of our approved amity. It is reported, that on a time,
Duke Godwin bringing up a service to Edward the Confessors Table, he chanced to
slip with one of his feet, but to recover himself with the other; whereupon
presently he used these words in the Kings hearing; One brother supports
another. O (quoth the King) so might I have said too, if Godwin had not been!
meaning, that he was the cause of his brothers death, whose life was a staff
to his state, but his fall a weakening to his feet. Certainly, every faithful
friend should be as a Brother: or, as in a natural body one member ministers
aid and succor to another; where the head cannot say to the foot, I have no
need of thee, nor the foot to the hand, but every one in their distinct and
mutual offices are ready to execute their several duties: So, I say, should
friends and Acquaintance be one to another; not in preying or feeding one upon
another, as if all were fish that came to net; for this were to make no
difference or distinction betwixt friend or foe, but for some intendment of
private benefit to dissolve the strict bond of friendship. Arist. Maxima
foelicitas hujus mundi confiftis in anticis. Boet. de consol. Phil.
Whereas a friend, being indeed a man's second self, or rather an individuate
companion to himself, (for there is one soul which rules two hearts, and one
heart which dwells in two bodies) should be valued above the rate of any
outward good, being such a happiness, as he gives a relish to the days of our
pilgrimage, which otherwise would seem like a wilderness: for the world, as it
is both to be loved and hated; loved as it is the work of the Creator; hated
as the instrument of temptation unto sin; ministers some few hours of
delight to the weary pilgrim, by the company and society of friends, recourse
and concourse of Acquaintance, without which comfort, how tedious and grievous
would these few years of our desolate pilgrimage appear? How highly then are
we to value the possession of a good friend, who partakes with us in our
comforts and discomforts, in the frowns and fawnes of fortune, showing
himself the same both in our weal and woe? Nemome amicus beneficentia, remo
inferenda injuria inimicus superavit. Plut. in vit. Syl.

Posse et nolle, nobile.


It is written of Sylla, that never any did more good to his friends, or more
harm to his enemies. Which princely courtesy to his friends could not choose
but increase them, howsoever his extreme courses toward his enemies might
seem rather to inrage than appease them. For as remembrance of benefits argues
a noble nature, so forgetting of injuries (having in the mean time power to
revenge) implies a bravely resolved temper. Whence it was, that Themistocles,
when Symmachus told him, he would teach him the art of memory, answered, he
had rather learn the art of forgetfulness; saying, he could remember enough;
but many things he could not forget which were necessary to be forgotten. As
the overweening conceit of himself, indignities done him by his foes,
opposition in the quest of honor, and the like; all which a great mind could
hardly brook, being so illimited as he can admit of no corrivall in his
pursuit of honor.

But to descend to the greatest benefit which proceeds from friendship,
Commerce and Acquaintance: we shall find how miserable the state and condition
of this flourishing Island had been, whose Halcyon days have attained that
prerogative of peace, which most parts of Christendom are at this day deprived
of; had not the friendly compassion, and devout zeal, of sundry learned and
faithful instruments of Christ, delivered her from that palpable blindness
and Heathenish Idolatry, under which she was long detained captive. Vsque ad
adventum Christi Brittannia fertilis provincia tyrannorum, and Scoticae gextes,
omnesque usque ad Oceanum per cir^^itum barbarae ^ationes, Moysen, Propheta^que
igno^abant.
S. Jerome, in the end of his Dialogue against the Pelagians, writes thus:
Until the very coming of Christ, (says he) the Province of Britain, which
has been oftentimes governed by Tyrants, and the Scottish people, and all the
Nations round about the Ocean Sea, were utterly ignorant of Moses and the
Prophets. So that then, by the testimony of S. Jerome, all our Religion was
superstition, all our Church Service was Idolatry, all our Priests were
Painims, all our gods were Idols. And to appropriate to every Nation their
peculiar god, there was then in Scotland the Temple of Mars; in Cornwall the
Temple of Mercury; in Bangor in Wales, the Temple of Minerva; in Stow Annal in
vita Morgani.
Malden in Essex, the Temple of Camdeni Britan. in Essexia.
Vistoria; in Bath the Temple of Apollo; in Leycester, the Temple of Ianus; in
York, where Peter's is now, the Temple of Stow Annal. in vita Blad^d, and Leyre
Regum, and Severi Imperatoris
Bellona; in London where Paul's is now, the Temple of Iuellus in Tractat. de
sacris scripturis page 129. Acts 19.28. Templum Christi in templum Iovis,
Mariae in Veneris, diceres conversa. D. Aegidius.
Diana* Therefore it is very likely, that they esteemed as highly then of the
Goddess Diana in London, as they did in Ephesus; and that as they cried there,
Great is Diana of the Ephesians, so they cried here, being deluded with the
same spirit, Great is Diana of the Londoners. Even no more than 53. years
before the incarnation of Christ, when Julius Caesar came out of France into
England, so absurd, senseless and stupid were the people of this Land, that in
stead of the true and ever-living Lord, they served these Heathenish and
abominable Idols, Mars, Mercury, Minerva, Victoria, Apollo, Ianus, Bellona,
Diana, and such like. And not long after, Anno Christi 180. King Lucius being
first christened himself, forthwith established Religion in this whole
kingdom. But thanks, thanks be to God, in the time of the New Testament,
three and fifty years after the incarnation of Christ, when Joseph of
Arimathea, came out of France into England, many in this Realm of blind and
ignorant Pagans became very zealous and sincere Christians. For Saint Philip
the Apostle, after he had preached the Gospel throughout all France, at length
sent Joseph of Arimathea hither into England: Who, when he had converted very
many to the faith, died in this Land, and he that buried the body of Christ,
was buried in Gildas. lib. de victoria Aurelii. Am.
Glastenbury himself. Also Simon Zelotes, another Apostle, after he had
preached the Gospel throughout all Mauritania, at length came over into
England: who when he had declared likewise to us the doctrine of Christ
crucified, was in the end crucified himself, and buried here in Nicephorus l.
2. cap. 40.
Britain. About this time Dorotheus in Synopsi. cap. 23. Romans 16.10. 2 Timothy
4.21. The flourishing state of the Church, amidst many hoarie winters of
innovation.
Aristobulus, one of the seventy Disciples, whom Saint Paul mentions in his
Epistle to the Romans, was a reverend and renowned Bishop in this Land. Also
Claudia a noble English Lady, whom St. Paul mentions in his second Epistle to
Timothy, was here amongst us a famous professor of the faith. Since which time,
though the civil state has been often turned up-side down by the Romans, by
the Saxons, by the Danes, by the Normans, yet the Gospel of Christ has never
utterly failed or been taken from us. This the holy Fathers of the Church,
which have lived in the ages next ensuing do declare. Tertullian, who lived
Anno 200. writes thus; Adver. Iudae. cap. 3. Hispaniarum omnes termini, and
Galliarum diversae nationes, and Britannorum inaccessa Romany loca Christo
vero subdita.
All the coasts of Spain and diverse parts of France, and many places of
Britain which the Romans could never subdue with their sword, Christ has
subdued with his word. Origin who lived Anno 260. writes thus; Hom. 4. in
Ezekiel. Quando terra Britannia ante adventum Christi in unius Dei consensit
religionem? Nunc vero universa terra cum latitio cl^mat ad Dominum.
Did the I Will of Britain, before the coming of Christ, ever acknowledge the
faith of one God? No; but yet now, all that Country sings joyfully unto the
Lord. Constantine the Great, the glory of all the Emperors borne here in
England, and of English blood who lived Anno 306. writes in an Epistle thus;
Socrat. l. 1. c. 9.
Whatsoever custom is of force in all the Churches of Egypt, Spain, France,
and Britain, look that the same be likewise ratified among you. Saint
Chrysostom who lived An. 405. writes thus; Hom. 18. in 2 Cor.
In all places wheresoever you go into any Church, whether it be of the
Moors, or of the Persians, or even of the very Isles of Britain, you may hear
John Baptist preaching. Saint Jerome, who lived Anno 420. writes thus; Epist.
ad Evagrium. Anno 500. Columbanus in Anglia, Palladius in Scotia, Patritius in
Hi^ernia floruit.
The Frenchmen, the Englishmen, they of Africa, they of Persia, and all
barbarous Nations worship one Christ, and observe one rule of religion.
Theodoret who lived Anno 450. writes thus; Advers. Graes. lib. 9.
The blessed Apostles have induced Englishmen, the Danes, the Saxons, in one
word, all people and countries, to embrace the doctrine of Christ. Gregory the
Great, who lived Anno 605. writes thus; Epist. lib. 2. cap. 5.8.
Who can sufficiently express how glad all the faithful are, for that the
Englishmen have forsaken the darkness of their errors, and have again
received the light of the Gospel? Beda, who lived Anno 730. writes thus; Hist.
lib* 1. c* 1.
England at this present is inhabited by Englishmen, Britains, Scots, Picts,
and Romans; all which though they speak several tongues, yet they profess
but one faith. Thus you see, how the Gospel of Christ, having been first
planted in this Land, by Ios^ph of Arimathea, and Simon Zelotes (in whose time
Aristobulus and Claudia, Vide praeter caeteror nec minus inclyti nominis, vitam
Bernardi. 2. cap. 7. et Bernard. de con^iderat. l. 3.
and not long after King Lucius also lived) has ever since continued amongst
us; as testifies Tertullian, Origin, Constantine the Great, Athanasius,
Chrysostom, Ie^ome, Theodoret, Gregory, Beda, and many more, which might here
have been alleged.

Now, how singular and exquisite a benefit have our Progenitors received, by
means of these faithful Professors of the Gospel, and first Planters of the
Christian faith here in this Island? What a miserable famine of the Word had the
people of this Land sustained, if these faithful friends and sincere Witnesses
of the truth, had not loosed from the shore, and embarked themselves in danger,
to deliver them from the danger of souls shipwreck? In which danger, we
likewise had been sharers, had not this so rich a fraught, so inestimable a
prize rescued us from danger, and directed our feet in the way of peace. The
story of Theseus includes an excellent Moral; whose love to his dear friend
Perithous, the Poet laboring to express, shows how he went down to Hell,
of purpose to deliver his friend from the thraldom of Pluto, Si miscere licet
figmentis s^cra profanis: Atque paludiferis pura fluentalocis*
under whom he remained captive; which without offense or derogation, may
properly seem to allude, (next to that inimitable mirror of divine amity) to
these noble and heavenly Warriors, who descended (as it were) even to the
jaws of hell, encountering with the insolent affronts of many barbarous
Assassinates, ready to practice all hostility upon them: Yet see their
undaunted spirits! their godly care enflamed with the zeal of devotion, and
their love to the members of Christ, kindled with the coal of brotherly
compassion, made them as ready to endure, as those hellish fiends and furies,
the enemies of truth, were ready to inflict: choosing rather to perish in the
body, then to suffer the poorest soul, bought with so high a price, to be
deprived of the hope of glory. These were good and kind friends, being such as
would not stick to lay down their lives for their friends; suffering all
things with patience and puissance of mind, to free their distressed brethren
from the servile yoke of hellish slavery, and bring them by means of Gods
spirit, by which they were directed, to the knowledge of the all-seeing verity.
Such as these profess not friendship under pretenses or glozing semblances,
making their heart a stranger to their tongue, or walking invisible, In upupae
nido lapis est diversi coloris, qui tam occultae est virtutis ut gerentem plane
invisibilem reddet. Albert. Mag. Basil.
as if they had found the stone in the Lapwings nest; but as they are, so they
appear, affecting nothing but what is sincerely good ^, and by the best
approved. Their absolute aim or end of friendship is to improve, reprove,
correct, reform, and conform the whole Image of that man with whom they
converse, to his similitude whom all men present. If at any time they enter
into discourse, it ever tends to fruitful instruction; if at any time they
enter into serious meditation of the world, their meditation is not how to
purchase estate, or fish after honor, or build a foundation on oppression, to
enrich their posterity with the fruits of their injurious dealing. No, they
have the testimony of a good conscience within them, which testifies for them,
should the world and all her Accomplices bandie against them. Wherefore, admit
they should be put to all extremities, and suffer all the indignities, which
envy or malice could dart upon them, Omnis injuria in sensu patientis.

Gravis est miseria inique ferenti suavis autem est divino amore ferventi.


the weight of every injury is to be measured by the sense or feeling of the
sufferer; for the apprehension of the Sufferer makes the injury offered, great
or little; if he conceit it small or no injury, howsoever others esteem it,
the burden of the wrong is light, and therefore more easily sleights it.

Now, Gentlemen, we have traced over the whole progress of Acquaintance,
wherein if happily it be thought, that we have sojourned too long, my answer
is; That in passages of greatest danger, there is required more circumspection,
then rashly to go on without due deliberation. And what occurrent in all the
passage or pilgrimage of man, is beset with more danger then the choice of
Acquaintance; especially to you, Gentlemen, whose means is the Adamant of
Acquaintance? We have therefore insisted the longer upon this Subject, that
you may be the less subject to such, who will wind them in with you, of
purpose to feed and prey on you. To cure which malady, no receipt more
sovereign, then to imprint in your memory that golden rule or princely
precept, recommended by that pious and puissant Saint Lewis to his son
Philip, in these words: Have especial care that those men, whose Acquaintance
and familiarity you shall use, be honest and sincere, whether they be Religious
or Secular; Praecept. 9. vid. Goguin. lib. 7. Hist. Franc. Sur. Tom. 4.
with whom you may converse friendly, and communicate your counsels freely; but
by all means avoid the company of naughty and wicked men: whose society ever
tends to inordinate respects. Take these Cautions therefore as the last, but
not least worthy your observation. Be not too rash in the choice of your
Acquaintance, for that shows weakness; Nor inconstant to those you have
chosen, for that argues lightness; Nor too forward in the discovery of your
counsels; for so you might be taxed of too much opennesse; ever aiming at that
absolute end of Acquaintance, to profit more and more in the practice of
goodness. So shall God be your Guide, good men your friends, and your
Country where you had education, receive much glory from your life, and
conversation.

THE ENGLISH GENTLEMAN.
Argument.
Moderation defined; No virtue can subsist without it; Wherein it is to be
used; Wherein to be limited; Of the accomplished end which attends it.

MODERATION.
IN the whole progress of man's life, Observe. 7.
which is nothing else, but a medley of desires and fears; we shall find,
that there is no one virtue which does better adorn or beautify man, than
Temperance or Moderation; which indeed is given as an especial attribute to
man, purposely to distinguish him from brute beasts, whose only delight is
enjoying the benefit of Sense, without any further aim.

THis Moderation therefore, Moderation defined. Omnis quae a ratione suscipitur
de aliquare institutio, debet a definitione proficisci, ut intelligatur quid
sit id de quo disputetur. Cio. offic. l. 1.
being a note of distinction betwixt man and beast, let us draw near to the
knowledge of this so exquisite a virtue; which, that we may the better
attain, let us first see how she is defined: because every instruction
grounded upon reason touching any subject, ought to proceed from a definition,
that we may the better understand what that is, whereof we dispute. Moderation
is a subduer of our desires to the obedience of Reason, and a temperate
conformer of all our affections, freeing them from the too much subjection
either of desires or fears. First, it causes our Desires to be subject to the
obedience of reason, pulling us always by the sleeve, and remembering us how
we are men and partake of reason, and therefore ought not to subject our
Desires to the captivity of Sense, as brute beasts which have no reason.
Secondly, it is a conformer of all our affections, freeing them from all
unworthy subjection, either in respect of our Desires or Fears: of our
Desires, as having learned in all things to be contented, whether that portion
wherewith God has blessed us, be little or great: of our Fears, as suffering
no worldly thing to be so nearly endeered to us, as to fear the losing of it,
which we so dearly tender. For the first, it is an excellent saying of a sage
Moral, Nihil interest an habeas, an non concupiscas. Sen.
There is no difference between having, and not desiring; for he that desires
nothing, injoyes more then he that possesses the whole world; for his desires
are satisfied, which the worldling can never be, so long as his thoughts and
desires are to the objects of earth engaged: so as, the difference betwixt the
poor wanting, and rich not using, is by these two expressed, the one carendo,
the other non fruendo: whereas, if the poor having little, desire no more then
that little which they have, they become rich in desire; and enjoy by desiring
little, more above estimate then the dunghill wretch (whose eyes cannot enjoy
themselves for coveting) will ever be master of. For as men sick of an
Atrophie, eat much, but thrive not; so these, though they devour widows
houses, feed upon the fat of the Land, lay land unto land, and hoord up
treasure to enrich a progeny of rioters, yet these seldom thrive with the fat
of their oppressions, but make oft-times as fearful ends, as their beginnings
were calm and prosperous. It is a singular blessing, which the Poet attributes
to one, who was not only rich, but could enjoy that he had freely; Dil tibi
divitias de derant artemque fruendi. Hor. Epist. lib. 1.
God gave thee wealth and power to use it too,
Which these Earth-wormes of ours can never do.
Neither only in matters of Desire, are we to entertain the choice company
of Moderation, but in our Fears, where we many times fear to forgo, what we
already with much content enjoy. So as the former direct their aim to what
they have not; but the latter stand surprised with fear, lest they should
leese what they already have: the former argues an avaritious mind, who can
never confine his Desires to what it has; the latter, a worldly besotted
affection, that can never find heart to forgo what it already enjoyes. A
Philosopher perceiving Dionysius to sit merrily in the Theater, after he was
expulsed his Realm, condemned the people who banished him: Certainly, this
Prince showed an admirable Moderation, both in respect of his Desires and
Fears; first, in his Desires, extending not his thoughts above that low verge
whereto his Tyranny had forced him; nor fearing any succeeding loss, being
above the reach of greater misery. Plutarch. in vit. Camill.
This Moderation appeared in Furius Camillus, whom neither honor could too
much transport, nor disgrace cast down; bearing the former with no less
temperance, then he did the latter with patience; and esteeming it his only
conquest, to conquer passion in the height of affliction. It is likewise a
great argument of Moderation, when in extremity, we stand prepared to
encounter with the worst of danger, passing all inducements to fear, with a
mind no less resolute than cheerful, saluting affliction with a smile, and
entertaining surmises of danger with a jest. This did Crassus, who being willed
by the Arabian guides to make haste before the Moon was past Scorpio; But I
(said he) fear more Sagittarie, Appian. Alex.
meaning the Archers of Persia. There is nothing which expresses more true
worth in any man, then his constancy and courage in the encounters of this
life; imitating, in this respect, Vespasian, who upon the instant of his
Dissolution, when death had summoned him to make present surrender, by paying
his debt to Nature, of that short Lease of life, which with many an unquiet
hour he had traced, standing up upon his feet, Plutarch. in vit. Vespas.
used these words; It became an Emperor to take his leave of earth standing:
implying, that the extremities, which either Nature or Fortune could inflict
upon him, could not so much deject him, or by their assaults enforce him to do
ought unworthy himself. Whence we are taught (and well may this lesson
deserve our observation) to entertain this life with patience, Habere vitam in
patientia, mortem in desiderio. Sen.
expecting death with a desired assurance: for there is no better means to
moderate the passions of Desire and Fear, then to enter into meditation of the
world; and withal to consider, how there is nothing of that esteem in the
world, that may seem worthy our Desires, coveting to have it; or worthy our
Fear, inwardly doubting to lose it. This serious consideration will be of
force to move the greatest worldling to a Moderation of his desires, subjecting
them to the obedience of reason. Whereas, if he should give reins to his own
Avarice, Ericthous bowels could not contain more in proportion, then his in an
illimited desire and affection: for the World, being like a City without a
wall, a house without a door, a ship without helm, a pot without a cover, and
a horse without a bridle; has brought out people equally consorting with her
in nature and temper; of unbridled and uncorrigible dispositions, naturally
affected to all sensual liberty, Cohaeres Christi, quid gaudes? quia socius es
pecorum? Aug.
preferring one minutes pleasure or profit before an eternity of succeeding
pleasures and profits, reserved for those only whose lives are employed in
promoting their Makers glory, being wholly addressed to please him; and whose
deaths, like the choicest odours, sent out a sweet smell, the perfume of a good
and virtuous life, sending out a voice even in their last period to praise him.

What admirable moderation diverse ancient Princes have shown, especially in
their contempt to the glory and pomp of this life, Histories can afford
sufficient examples; but to omit foreign instances, my purpose is to insert
here one of our own; which, by how much more near us, by so much deeper
impression should it enforce in us. Canutus that was absolute King almost of
five kingdoms, somewhat before the Conquest, upon a time in his Progress
riding near the Thames, light and sat down before the shore: then, as it
were to try a conclusion, he commanded the water being now ready to arise
again and to flow, not to come any nearer him: But the water keeping his
natural course, came up still higher and higher, till it began to wet him.
Whereupon to his Nobles, which were about him, Ye call me (says he) your
King and Master, and so indeed I am; and yet lo ye, I cannot command so much
as this little stream; but do what I can that will do still as it list.
Whereupon presently he posted to Westminster, and resigned his Crown to the
Crucifix there; neither could he ever after this be persuaded to wear it any
more. The like indifferency to all princely, honors, showed those memorable
Saxons, Kingulfus, Iva, Ceodulphus, Eadbertus, Ethelredus, Keredus, Offa.
Sebbi, Sigebertus. Charles the fifth Emperor of Germany, gave up his Empire
into the hands of the Princes Electors, and withdrew himself in the year
1557. into a Monastery. The like of late years did his son, King Philip of
Spain. Neither need we to exemplify this subject, touching contempt of the
world, only in such as the glorious light of the Gospel had shone upon, but
such whose time of darkness had never attained to so blessed a Sunshine:
Mihi credit, mori mallem quam imperare. Otho.
As it may be instanced in Dioclesian, who voluntarily relinquished the
flourishingest Empire in the world. Yea, to add one example more, even amongst
those whose best Religion is Policy, and whose only aims are to enlarge
their own Sovereignty: Amurah the second, Emperor of the Turks, after he had
gotten infinite victories, became a Monk of the straightest Order amongst
them, in the year of our Lord 1449. All which may seem to confirm what
Sel^ucus being King was wont to say, Curia curis stringitur, Diadema spinis
cingitur. Aphorism.
That if a man knew with what care a Diadem was clogged, he would not take it
up, though it lay in the street. So as, when the Romans had despoiled Antiochus
of all Asia, he gave them great thanks, saying, they had rid him of many
insupportable cares.

Now, as we have defined this virtue to be a subduer of our desires to the
obedience of reason, and a temperate conformer of all our affections; so are
we to direct our eye to the conclusion, to wit, a freer of the affections from
the too much subjection, either of desires or fears. So as, we are here to
observe, that he is the man whom our definition only aims at, whose
well-tempered breast is neither transported with a desire of enjoying what it
has not, nor surprised with a fear of losing what it now enjoyes: Having so
much as may content him, the loss whereof should he sustain, could nere
deject him. Such an one the Tragic Poet entituleth a Prince, as one too worthy
to be numbered amongst the inferior rank: Sen. in Thiest.
Who fears, desires, and flilling cares suppress,
Are Kings at least, they can be nothing less.
For these are they who have absolute sovereignty over their passions, and in
prosperity scorn as much to be proud, as in adversity to show themselves base.
Yea, they will rather entertain the extremest encounters that misery can lay
upon them, then lose the least of that liberty of mind, with which their noble
temper has endued them. In brief, those only who dis-value sublunary things,
esteeming them as they are, only to minister to our necessity, and not to
rear them, as blind worldlings use, in the tabernacle of their heart to commit
idolatry, keep consort with this Definition; for the golden mean, as it is
only approved by them, so in a princely moderation of their affections, they
are ever readiest to enter lists with their own passions, that if any either
exceed or come short of this mean, they may so square and hammer it till it
be reduced to a proposed mean. And let this suffice, for the Definition: we
will now descend to the second branch, wherein we intend to show, that no
virtue can subsist without Moderation, being indeed the temper which allayeth
and aptly disposes all our actions, making them equally seasoned, which
otherwise would become violent and immoderate.

AS Moderation is a subduer of every inordinate or indisposed affection, so is
it a seasoner or temperer of all our actions, making them seem worthy the
title of virtuous, No virtue can subsist without it.
which without this temper would appear vicious. For without this Moderation,
he that is liberal should incur the name of prodigal, the frugall the name
of miserable, the resolute be termed dissolute, the moral civil man a coward,
the wise Stoicall, the regular merely formal, the just rigorous, the
merciful remiss. So defective is the structure of all virtues, wanting the
sweet temper of Moderation to season them. Neither proceeds this from the
malevolent or uncharitable censures of men, as former times, have been too apt
to traduce or mis-interpret their best deservings, by aspersing some unworthy
blemish upon their demerits: As in Rome, if the Pisoes be frugall, they are
censured-parcimonious; if the Metelli religious, they are taxed superstitious;
if the Appii popular, they are termed ambitious; if the Manlii austere, they
are styled tyrannous; if the Lelii wise, they are curious; the Publicolae
aspiring if courteous; But merely upon the want or deficiency of such actions,
which are not tempered with Moderation. For to give instance in each kind; how
nobly and invincibly did Alexander the great bear himself in all exploits?
how much feared abroad, and how much loved at home? how affable to his friends,
and how terrible to his foes? Yet how much were all his actions, of valor and
matchless resolution darkened through want of Moderation, being so excessively
given to passion in his drink, as his nearest and dearest friends could not
be secure from his fury? For howsoever those acts and exploits of his against
Darius, yea against all opponents, expressed the nobleness of his person, with
the continued attendance of succeeding fortune; yet the death of Clytus, the
torments he inflicted on Callisthenes, and depopulation of Persepolis, Quint.
C^tt.
detracted as much from his glory, as ever his Conquests gained him glory.
Plutarch. in vit. Ages.
Likewise, how just and sincere was Agesilaus held in all matters of justice?
how free from this Ages stain, corruption? how far from personal respect,
or to be overawed by the offenders greatness? so as, Plutarch in Alexandro.
like the worlds General (of whom we even now made mention) and of whom
Plutarch reports, that he used to shut the one ear with his hand when he heard
any accuser in criminal causes, thereby (as he said) reserving audience for
the defendant; semblably did this renowned Patron and Pattern of unblemished
Justice greatly eclipse those more glorious lights which shone in him, for want
of moderating his affection toward his children? Plut in Apotheg. Eras. in
Apotheg. Ludens par impar, equitausque in arundinelonga. Agis rex Lacedemon.
So as his riding upon a cockhorse did no less argue his weakness, than his
sincerity in matters of Justice witnessed his uprightness. Albeit, his
discreet parentall Answer to such Sages as occasionally repaired to him amidst
that trifling pleasure, might seem to qualify this error: Gentlemen, ye that
see me thus highly taken with this childish and unmanly pleasure, till ye
have children of your own, suspend your censure. Lastly, how profoundly wise
was the Lacedemonian Chilo held to be, being numbered among the Seven Sages of
Greece, Laert in Chilo.
and elected Ephorus, a place of especial honor and esteem? how exquisite
his sentences? how quick and pregnant his answers? how solid his reasons? how
absolute in all his proceedings? Yet behold for want of moderation of his
passions, how childishly he gave way to excess of joy, whereby he was
enforced to pay his debt to nature. Whence we may easily collect, that no
virtue, how Cardinal soever, can subsist without the assistance of moderation,
being that Lesbian rule which direct^ the Model, and makes it truly
accomplished.

What excellent fruits are derived from Temperance.
All virtues (says one) do make a Commonwealth happy and peaceable: but
Temperance alone is the sustainer of civil quietness; for it takes care that
the Realm be not corrupted with riot and wanton delights, whereby diverse
States have bin cast away* Or, to descend more particularly to those divine
effects which this virtue produces, it hinders dishonest actions, restrains
pleasures within certain bounds, and which makes men to differ from bruit
beasts. Moreover, this is that herb, which Mercury gave to Ulysses, lest he
should taste of the Inchanters cup, and so with his fellows be transformed
into a Hog, Homer. lib. 10. Odyss.

Oculi dolores. Plut. in vit. Alex.

Honores mundi, tumores mundi. Euche. Epist. Paren. de contempt. mundi.

Velamen istud Antichristi. Hieron. ad Furiam de vid. Sermon. Tom. 1. Amici fure^
temporis. Cic.


wallowing in the mire of all sensual delights. So as, whosoever is endued
with this virtue, stands fortified against all assailants; those eye-sores (for
so Plutarch calls them) I mean those attractive objects of lust, cannot
surprise him: nor those worldly tumors (for so Eucherius styles them) I mean
worldly honors, entrap him. Not those robes or rags of shame, the gorgeous
attire of sin (which Hierome calls Antichrists veil) delude him. Nor those
Thieves of time, (for so the Orator is pleased to call them) I mean friends
and acquaintance, over-joy him. In brief, as the Unicorns horn being dipped in
water, cleeres and purifies it; so there is no poison either arising from the
tempting object of beauty, from the ambitious aspiring to honor, from the
attire of sin or cover of shame, or from those sweet time-beguilers or
Acquaintance, which is not frustrated by this choice and sovereign receipt of
Temperance. So as this is that virtue, which (though in general it deserve to
be affected of all) great men ought specially to embrace, that by their
example the common sort might become temperate: for this is the reason why so
many now a days live riotously like beasts, Arist. lib. 1. Ethic. cap. 5*
namely, because they see Noblemen, and Magistrates that govern the
Commonwealth, to lead their lives wantonly, as Sardanapalus did. Whence it was
that the Poet so seriously concluded; Great is the crime, it cannot choose,
If he be great that does it use.
For as we see in colors, there is none which discovers any soil or blemish
so much as white; or as we have observed in the eclipse of the Sun, that it
draws more eyes to view it, than the darkning of any inferior light: so
amongst the children of men, though sin be sin in every one, yet more
noted, and in that more exemplar, in these high peering Cedars, I mean our
Peers and Nobles, then in these lower shrubs, whose humble condition frees
them from like public observance. How necessary is it then for you, Gentlemen,
whose birth has enobled you, whose breeding has enabled you, and whose more
generous spirits have emboldned you, to undertake assayes for the glory and
benefit of your Country, the better to express your love and allegiance to
your Prince: to become affecters and practisers of so singular a virtue, that
your lives might be patterns of Moderation unto others, seeing more eyes are
fixed upon you than on inferiors? Accepit luxuriet sceptrum; quid sperandum est
praeter naufragium? August.
You are Moulds wherein meaner men are ^asten; labor then by your example to
stamp impressions of virtue in others, but principally Temperance, seeing no
virtue can subsist without it. It is dangerous (says Austine) when prodigality
and riot sway a Scepter; neither only is it dangerous for the person whose
illimited affections, of a Prince make him a vassal; but for the whole body of
the State, training it to all impiety by his evil example. The Laconians, by
means of wife and temperate Princes, Plut. in Apoth.
became admired for their Moderation and continence: insomuch as their spare
diet, their homespun raiment, and their general hate to all access, made
them no less honored at home, than feared abroad. Whereas, contrariwise, the
Sidonians, by following the riotous examples of some of their licentious
Princes, fell into all excessive gluttony. So powerful and persuasive were the
lives of Princes, to enforce impressions of goodness or badnesse in the
imitation of their Subjects.

But to take a review of those maine assailants of Temperance, Caro and mundus
pleni sunt spinis: conversari in his and non laedi, divinae potentiae est and
non virtutis humanae. Bern.
lust, ambition, gorgeousness in apparel, luscious fare, company-keeping, and
the like, we shall find that where this temperance is, albeit these objects
even in their height should encounter him, the bait will be long laid ere it
can take him. For to run over all these, and illustrate them with proper
instances, we shall plainly show; that where a divine power is ready to
assist, and man no less ready, upon temptations approaching, to resist, all
these motives can take no place. What admirable Continency showed Alexander in
the conquest of his affections, sparing Darius wife and his three daughters?
Quint. C^^t. lib. 3.
how greatly did this worlds Monarch enlarge his glory by this only conquest?
Yet to reflect upon those objects of beauty we shall find; if records be true
which write of them, that for beauty they were incomparably gracious, and for
state the choicest Dames of Persia. The like we read of Scipio, who being a
young man of four and twenty years of age, Cum de virtutibus agitur, nulla
excellentior cernitur quam illa quae in castis adolescentibus in venitur.
Salust. in I^g. Bell.

Vid. Plutarch. in Apotheg. Q. Curt. lib. 4. cap. 11.


of strong constitution, and promising personage, in the taking of a City in
Spain, repressed his flames of lust, albeit a beautiful maid was brought him;
restoring her to a young man called Allutius, to whom she was espoused, with a
great reward. But incredible is the report of Zenocrates Continency, who lying
all night with Lais though she used all the provocations and inticements she
could devise, yet he remained immovable to her voluptuous inducements. And to
close this illustration with an heroicke instance, Cleopatra in the last
tragic Scene of her disasters, kneeling at the feet of Caesar, laid baits for
his eyes; but in vain, her beauties were beneath that Princes chastity.
Neither are Histories (those precious treasuries of time) less plentiful in
instances of Moderation touching motives of Ambition. When all the worldly
Romans (I mean such whose demerits had gained them an eminent esteem with
their country) had a desire to preserve their memories by erection of their
Statues, Cato would not; and being demanded the cause, Mallem quae^i cur Statua
mihi nulla posita fit, quam cur sit. Cato. Seneca.
answered; If I might choose, I would rather have it asked why Cato has no
Statues erected for him, than why they are erected for him: Implying that
Virtue, which is the most continued shrine, and, as that sage Moral says,
makes man a god, had more power to eternize him, than all material Monuments;
which, as they are subject to corruption, so shall their names be, which are
engraven on them. From their contempt shown to these sumptuous covers of
corruption, Prasulgeb^^t Iunin^ and Blaesus eo ipso, quod effigies eorum non
viseb^ntur. Tacitus.
Iunius and Blaesus, by the testimony of Tacitus received no less glory; whose
Statues, because they were not engraven in stone, appeared more conspicuous to
the eye of the State. No less Moderation of his desires showed Agesilaus, that
princely pattern of Justice; who, when the Egyptians, came forth of purpose
to adore him, for those numerous and glorious victories which he had
achieved, couched himself close upon the grass, without least show or
semblance of Majesty, expressing the humility of his thoughts by the lowness
of his seat. But of all others, there is no one example, to instance a true
Moderator of Ambition, like that noble and victorious Champion; Godfrey de
Boloigne, whose valor so bravely employed in expulsing the Turks and freeing
Jerusalem, that City of the great King, from miserable slavery, had gained him
so deserved a name, as it was thought fit his honorable service should be
rewarded with a golden Diadem; but how answered this glorious Champion? Far
be it from me (quoth he) to suffer the servants head to be with a Crown of
gold paled, where the Masters head was with a Crown of thorns pierced. To
produce likewise instances in such whose Moderation in attire, manifested their
contempt to these covers of shame, we shall find Lycurgus, Phocion, Pelopidas,
Plut. in vit. Legitur in Gestis Romanorum, quod ille q^i primitius inter eos
vestem purpuream induit, a fulgure percussus est, and sic interiit.

Faces faecesque superbiae. Sueton.

Aul. Gell. Noct. Atti. l. 13. c. 11. Alex. Genesis dic. lib. 5. c. 21.


with many others, such professed foes to gorgeous apparel, as they always
retained their ancient country wear with such plainness, as they expressed
what they were, by the garments they wore. For a man's garment (says the Son
of Sirach) and his excessive laughter, and his going, declare what person he
is. Insomuch as Augustus Caesar bore always hatred to gorgeous and sumptuous
apparel, terming it the blazer and bruiter of our pride, the nests to hatch
the lascivious brood of Lechery. In like manner, to descend to all those
assailants of Temperance, we shall find many excellent subduers of their own
affections, using an admirable kind of restraint or Moderation in their fare.
The number of guests amongst the Romans in any solemn feast privately
observed, was not great, seldom times exceeding nine; whence Aulus Gellius
says, that the number of guests should begin with the Graces, and end with
the Muses; that is, they must not be fewer then three, nor more then nine.
Which use was occasion of that adage, Septem convivium, novem convitium
faciunt; Seven make a banquet, nine a riot. Albeit that luxurious Emperor
Heliogobalus seems to have been delighted with the number of eight; whence
he invited to supper, to make his feast more singular, 8. bald ones, eight
blind ones, S^uckius de convi. lib. 2. cap. 2.
eight gouty ones, eight deaf ones, eight hoarse ones, eight very black ones,
eight very long ones, eight very fat ones, and eight hooke-nosed ones, being
delighted with that Greek Proverb, (...): whose Ape, it seems, that late
conceited Academicke was, who invited the blind, lame, and deformed to a
supper, for whom he had provided fowls, as different to their pallat by
nature, as they were to others in feature; furnishing his feast with Owls,
Cuckowes, Staniels, and Popinjayes, to make himself infamously famous for his
invention. But to proceed with these Ethnicke instances of Moderation;
Democritus preserved his life without any other sustenance, save only the smell
of hot bread, for the space of nine days: which abstinence or restraint was
not enjoined him; for neither his own estate, nor any superior commanding
power, had enforced him to that misery; but purposely to prepare himself for
celebrating with more solemnity the feasts which were kept in honor of Ceres,
called commonly (as I take it) Buthysia; resembling in greatness of celebrity,
and magnificence of estate, that huge sacrifice called Hecatombe. Pythagoras
likewise was of that wonderful Moderation in his fare, and that through no
infirmity of Nature, in that he could not, but through an incessant desire to
his studies; with a vehement affection to the preservation or propagation
rather of all living creatures; as he would desire two things of God, if the
possibility thereof could stand with the conservation of humane society; that
he might not Speak, that he might not Eat: Haec d^od Deo, modo cum
conservetione naturae stare poterint, unice postulaebat; ut a loquendo and
edendo perpetuo abstineat.
by the one to prevent offense in discourse, by the other avoid surfeit by
excess. So as, he commanded his scholars even in unreasonable things, as
Birds, Beasts, Fishes, etc. to abstain from cruelty; entreating both Fowlers
and Fishers to let go the foul and fish they had caught, or else redeem them
with money, and let them go. But too immoderate was this care, and too foolish
this pity; for creatures were ordained for the use and service of man; he
then that neglects the use, neglects likewise the ordinance. But in
Subjects of Moderation, none more absolute, then where Nature is urged by
necessity to crave relief, and occasion is ministered, yet the desire
restrained: as in extremity of thirst, when Nature requires drink, Vltimum
refugium naturae, est potus. Axioma.
which according to the Philosophers axiom, is the very last refuge of Nature,
either through compassion or manly Moderation, her desires is restrained. This
did Alexander, who out of a princely Moderation or noble compassion, when he
was almost consumed with drought, having a head-peece full of water presented
unto him, would not drink himself, but offered it to his soldiers. Much to
be admired was this act of Moderation, and a motive of general affection,
that a Prince urged by the extremest effects of thirst, and having occasion
and means to satisfy the request of Nature, yet moved with compassion toward
his fellow soldiers (for so used he to term them) he chused rather to want
himself, then to be wanting in any compassionate office to their necessity.
Certainly this act deserves so much the more to be commended, by how much the
extremity was greater which he suffered. Darius, when in his flight he drank
muddy and stinking water, said, That he never drank a sweeter draught. Which
implies, what torment he indures who feels the extremity of thirst. The last
assailant of Temperance (as we formerly observed) was Company-keeping; which
indeed is such a stealer of time, or beguiler of tedious hours, as it makes
passing of time a mere pastime. Yet observe, what diligent care has been
had, by making choice of such (as I have elsewhere noted) whose society might
better them. Gell. in Noct. Attic.
Peruse those Athenian nights in Gellius, and you shall find how fruitfully
those nights were employed, how delightfully passed: making discourse of
Philosophy, that well-consorting melody, which gave general content to all
the Company. Aug. de Academ.
Besides, it is worth our observation, to take a view of the special care
diverse Ancients have had of the Company they consorted with: having such in as
great distaste that were evil, as they bore all due reverence to such as were
good. We read how the Prienean Bias, having occasion to sail on a time with
some ill-disposed men, by reason of a violent tempest, the ship wherein they
sailed was so shaken, as these wicked men, moved rather by fear then devotion,
begun to call upon their gods; Laert. in vit. Biant*
which Bias hearing, Hold your peace (quoth he) lest the gods you call upon
understand that you be here; covertly taxing their impiety, and showing that
their prayers would be little acceptable to the gods. But an example much more
divine, and so much deserving our imitation, may be here commended to us in the
person of the blessed Evangelist S. John, August. lib. 3. de Bapt. cont. Don.
cap. 10.
who would not come within the Bath where the Heretic Cerinthus was, so much
did he hate the Fellowship of him, who, to use Augustines words, Was no fan
for the Lords floor.

Thus have we run over those mainest and mightiest assailants of Temperance;
now let us, as we have illustrated each of them with proper instances of
Moderation, annex some reasons why these assailants of Temperance ought to be
restrained: and first for the first.

Lust, the sensual man's sin, is said to be a friend which brings man in
acquaintance with the Devil, as Ebriety is an enemy to the knowledge of God.
Ebrietas inimica est cognitioni Dei; Cupidit as amica necessitudini Diaboli.
Ambros. lib. 1. de Abraham. Qui luxuriatur, vivus mortuus est. Hier.
Besides, it is a vice detestable both to the brute beast and Barbarian; it
with-drawes the mind of the creature from meditation of his Creator; makes man
commit sin even with greediness; makes the Image of God companion for a
Harlot; makes him who should be the Temple of the Holy Ghost, a Cage of
unclean birds; prostitutes the glory of the soul to the pleasure of sin;
and prefers a sensual delight before the obedience of reason. He sels his
Birthright for less then a mess of pottage, exposing his soul to the
traffic of shame. He values a minutes joy above all future delight; yea,
rather then lose his present content, he will suffer an eternity of torment.
This bleere-eyed Lover is so blinded with affection toward his beloved, that
he will rather lose his own soul, then lose that which he affects. Thus
you see the Lustful man uncased, Bona est castitas conjugalis, melior
continentiae vidualis, optima perfectio virginalis. Beda.

Qui non nubent, ^xores non ducunt, sicut Angeli in terra sunt. Ambros.

Supergreditur virginitas conditionem humanae naturae, per quam homo angelis
assimilatur. ibid. Virginitas si labitur, nulla poenitentia reparatur ad
integritatem. Ifid. de Sum. Bon.

Audenter loquor, cum omnia possit Deus suscitare, tamen non potest virginem
post ruinam. Valet quidem de poena liberare, sed non valet coronare corruptam.
Hier.


his blindness discovered, his sundry weaknesses displayed, and the heavy
effects which from hence are derived: good reason then have you to restrain an
affection so over-spreading, a motion so mortally wounding, a contagion so
generally killing. Take into your consideration the shortness of the pleasure,
being but a moment; the vengeance or punishment due to that pleasure, being
eternal. What wise man, having nearly served his apprentiship, will for a
minutes pleasure forfeit his Indenture, and lose his freedom for ever? We
should hold him destitute of common sense, who having a Princess offered him,
will foolishly lose her for embraces of an Harlot. If you will keep your
selves unspotted till the day of his coming, you shall be espoused to a
princely Bridegroom, and receive Palms in your hands at his coming. Go^ not
in by the ways of the strange woman, but keep your beds undefiled, knowing
the state which you have undertaken to be honorable before God and man. For I
in no case will limit you to a monasticke or regular restraint, but approve of
both estates, I mean both the single and married life, being undertaken in the
fear of God, worthy the acceptance of every faithful Christian. For the
Virgins estate, as it draws nearer to angelical perfection, so the Married to
the preservation of humane society or propagation. So as Saint Augustine might
seem rather to be traduced, then truly alleged for this place, Virgins do
more then lawful, as Adulterers less: for my conceit shall ever be freed,
from imagining so divine a Father to approve of such an error: for both
estates are commended; the one good, the other better; both which titles, as
they are by the Apostle on these two estates conferred, so are they by us to be
reverently esteemed. Briefly, restrain all immoderate desires of the flesh,
which fight against the spirit, so shall you find that inward tranquillity
which obedience to your lusts shall never bring you.

Ambition, the second assailant of Temperance, is such an high-mounting bird,
as she uses to build her nest ever in the tallest Cedars, hatching her aeries
in the highest spires, to express her unbounded aims. This passion or
distraction rather, of all others, brings man soonest to a forgetfulness of
himself: ever aspiring, but never obtaining; ever sailing in a tempestuous
sea, attented by many hostile and piraticall adherents, whose aims are to
intercept all peaceable passengers, filling the whole state full of mutinies
and combustions. Pindarus describes him to be such an one, who strives to touch
the Clouds, and cope with Jove himself, but is aims draw him on to speedy
ruin. What reason then is there to foster or cocker such a professed foe to
public and private peace? Who is he, having understanding, will receive into
his barge, where he is, a quarrellous turbulent fellow, who in desperate fury
will not stick to over-whelme the vessel, both of himself, and the rest that
consort him? Who is he that will engage him in peril, when he may in safety
enjoy himself, and be free from danger? Who is he that will desire to climb,
when he knows there is no means to save him from falling, being got up?
Surely the Ambitious man is ever environed with peril, yet such is his folly,
he will rather choose to incur danger, then lose the present opportunity of
acquiring honor. Besides, they whom this unbounded passion has once
surprised, are so much distempered, as of sleep they are quite deprived; which
disquiet proceeds either from emulation toward others, or an ambitious desire
of advancement in themselves. For the first, Themistocles was wont to say, that
Miltiades victory in Marathon, bereaved him of his sleep. For the latter,
Sylla could never take rest, till by the terror of his legions, Vel^a, or
Velleia. Alphons. in lib. de Haeres. in verb. Tyrannis. Soto. lib. 5. de Just.
and Iure. quaest. 1. artic. 3.

Si tanta humilitate se deprimit divina majestas, superbire in quo audet and
praesumit humana infirmitas? Aug. de conflictu vitiorum.

Mihi mirabile fit quod non enecentur, cum tantum o^us bajulent.

Clem. Alexan. 2. Paedag. O nobilem magis quam faelicem pan^um! Stob. Sur. 47.
Si Adam nunquam offendisset, ad dume^^ non confugisset, nec ficul nec folia in
perizomara consuisset.


he had obtained the law Valeria to be made, whereby he was created Dictator
for eight years; as Caesar the law Servia, by which he was perpetual
Dictator. Albeit, having obtained what they desired, and arrived at the port
whereto their course was directed, they found an Empire to be a monstrous and
untamed beast, wounding them with many thorny cares, which deprived them of all
seasonable rest. Do you then love to be at peace to enjoy perfect liberty, to
be divided from all occasions of disquiet? Restrain those Icarian thoughts,
whose soaring wings are ever laved in the depth of ruin. Confine your thoughts
within an equal limit: and let not your projectments be above hope of
effecting. Those braving builders of Babel, aimed at too high a story to bring
their work to perfection. Let the foundation be built on firm ground, and the
building will prosper better. For howsoever fair pretenses may for a time
appear in the habit of truth, daubing up a rotten inside with a specious
outside; he that sits in the Heavens and searches the hearts and reins,
shall have them in derision, breaking them in pieces like a potters vessel.
Restrain then this fury or frenzy of the mind, and with timely Moderation so
bound in and confine your affections, as no aspiring thought may enter that
place, which is reserved for a higher place: so shall you enjoy more absolute
content in restraining, then enlarging your thoughts to the motives of Ambition.

Gorgeous attire, being the third assailant moving man to glory in his shame,
and gallant it in his sin, is to be especially restrained, because it makes
us dote upon a vessel of corruption, strutting upon earth, as if we had our
eternal mansion on earth. What great folly is it to prefer the case before
the instrument, or to bestow more cost upon the Sign then on the June? Me
thinks the bitter remembrance of the first necessity of clothes, should make
men more indifferent for them: if man had never sinned, his shame had never
needed to have been covered. For sin was the cause of Adams shame, and his
shame the cause he fled unto the shade, which afforded him Fig Leaves to cover
his nakedness. What vanity then, yea, what impudence to glory in these covers
of shame? Would any one having committed some capital offense against his
Prince; for which he is after pardoned, but on condition he shall wear a
halter about his neck, become proud of his halter, and esteem it an especial
badge of honor? We are all in the selfsame case; we have committed high
treason against the King of heaven, yet are we received to mercy, bearing
about us those Memorials of our shameful fall or defection from our King;
which should in all reason rather move us to be ashamed of our selves, Sen.
Epist. 47.
then to prize our selves higher for these ornaments of shame. Sure I am, as
he is a fond man that values the worth of his horse, by his sumptuous saddle
or studded bridle; so he is most foolish, who estimates a man by his garment.
Yet see the misery of this age! the cover of shame is become the only luster
to beautify him: but be not ye so deluded; prize the ornaments of the mind
for the choicest and chiefest beauty: far be it from you to glory in this
attire of sin, Visus jam est vestis non regumenti. Clem. Alex. Paedag. lib.
2. cap. 16. Chrysostom. Tom. 1. Hom.
these rags of shame, these worme-workes, which withdraw your eyes from
contemplating that supreme bounty and beauty, purposely to fix them upon the
base objects of earth, which detract much from the glory of a reasonable soul.
The Swan prides not her self in her black-feet; no more should you in these
Covers of your transgression, which, whenever ye look on, may put you in
mind of your first pollution. No reason then to affect these, which had man
never sinned, he had never needed, being before clothed with innocence as with
a garment, and with primitive purity, as with a raiment. Whence it appears,
that many glory in the rags of shame, while they glory in these robes of sin:
Now who, endued with reason, would pride him in that which augments his shame,
or esteem that a grace which asperseth reproach on him? Nicetas says
plainly; No punishment so grievous as shame. And Nazianzen yet more expressly;
Better were a man die right out, then still live in reproach and shame. Ajax
being ready to dispatch himself, used these as his last words; No grief does
so cut the heart of a generous and magnanimous man, as shame and reproach. For
a man to live or die, Vivere et mori naturae functio, ludibrio esse proprio
ducitur. Ambros. ep. 70.
is natural; but for a man to live in shame and contempt, and to be made a
laughing stock of his enemies, is such a matter, as no well bred and noble
minded man that has any courage or stomach in him, can ever digest it.
Delight not then in your shame, but in a decent and seemly manner affect that
habit most, which becomes most; restraining that profuseness, which the
vanity of this age so much exceeds in; and assuming to your selves that attire
which gives best grace to modesty, and has nearest correspondence with
Gentility. Neither is Luscious fare to be less avoided, or with less
strictness restrained. Many reasons whereof might be here produced, but we
will cull out the chiefest, to weane our Generous Vitellians from their
excessive surfets. Venture vitae Charybdis. Diog. apud Laert.
First, dainty dishes are foments to wanton affections, begetting in the soul
and unaptnesse to all spiritual exercises: for this is a general rule, that
the body being strengthened, the soul becomes weakened: for fasting is a
preparative to Devotion, but riot the Grand-master of Distraction. Look how it
is in the health of the body, Chrysostom. Hom. 4. in Genesis Impossible est hic
implere ventrem, and ibi mentem. Hier. in Epist.
and so it is in the state of the soul: if a man have a good appetite, and a
stomach to his meat, it is a sign he is well in health; in like sort, if a
man be content to follow Christ for the Loaves to fill his belly, and care not
for the food of his soul, questionless all is not well between GOD and him;
but if we have a longing and a hungring desire of the Word, then indeed his
heart is upright in the sight of God. For as Saint Augustine notes well; If
the Word of GOD be taken by us, it will take us. Si sermo meus caperetur,
caperet: Nam fic est sermo Die, and sic esse debet fidelibus, sicut pisci
hamus; tum capit quando capitur, nec sit captis injuria; ad salutem enim, non
ad perniciem capiuntur.

Aug. Tract. 42. in Johan. Aug. in l. Confess. Blos. Collyr. Haeret. Gregor. in
Mor. exposit. in Job.

Qui per annos plurimos tecum familiariter vixit, ad mensam tuam sedit, cibum
de manu tua sumpsit, in ^inutu^ dormivit: cum voluit, tecum colloquium habuit,
hic jure haereditario servustum est. Bernard. Aristot. de Historia animalium.
lib. 6. c. 9. Lucretius l. 6. Oppianus l. 2. de venatione. Non cervus fluvios
sic avet algidos, Cervus, turb^ canum quem premit, etc; Buchan. in Psalm. 42.
Ebrio sus confundit naturam, emittit gratiam, perdit gloriam, incurrit
damnationem aeternam. Ambros. l. de poenit. Dum absorbent vinum, absorbentur ^
vino. Vt cautes, evitemus calices, ni in ore nauseam, in mente naufr^gium
sentiamus.


But what means may be used to procure this longing and hungring desire in us?
Not Luscious or curious fare; for that will move us rather to all inordinate
motions, then the exercise of Devotion: no, it is fasting that makes the soul
to be feasting; it is macerating of the flesh, that fattens the spirit. For it
is sumptuous fare, that is the souls snare: Sagina corporis, Sagena cordis: It
is the net which intangles the heart of man, drawing her from the love of her
best beloved Spouse, to dote on the adulterate embraces of sensual beauty.
Neither is it fare, but delight in fare; not simply the meat, but the desire or
liquorish appetite, which produces those odious effects: as for example, when
the loose affected man makes choice or election of such meats, purposely to
beget in him an ability, as well as desire, to his sensual pleasures. Whence a
learned Father most divinely concludes: I fear not (says he) the
uncleanenesse of meats in respect of their difference, but uncleanness of
desire in respect of concupiscence. Neither does the kind or difference of the
meat (says another) pollute so much, as the act of disobedience, eating that
which is inhibited. Now to propose a rule of direction; not any one surer or
safer can be set down, then what an ancient Father has already proposed. We
nourish our bodies (says he) lest by being too much weakened, they fail us;
and we weaken them by abstinence, lest by too much feeding them, they press
us. So then, temper your desires, that neither too much restraint may enfeeble
them, nor excess surcharge them. For as the body being weakened, the soul
becomes strengthened; so where the body becomes too much enfeebled, the
performance of spiritual exercises is disabled: but in all things, take heed
of pampering a disobedient servant; he sleeps in your bosom, that imagines
mischief against you. Who, the more he is fostered, the more is your danger
furthered: the more he is cockered, the more is your heat of devotion cooled:
chastise then this domesticke enemy in time, for he participates of the nature
of a Serpent, who spreads most his poison, where he receives harboring. Now
as the Philosophers observe of the Heart, that being pursued by dogs in hunting,
by reason of heat, and loss of breath, being tired with the chase, he
hasteneth to the Rivers; or wearied in fight with a Serpent, or stung, or
wounded by him, while the Serpent rests on the the ground, he seeks to
some cold Fountain, whereby the affection of the venom received, may be
abated, and his former vigor restored. Even so, such as are wounded, and
stricken of the old Serpent, must have recourse to Christ, that Fountain of
living waters, that all sensual desires arising from excessive delight in
delicious fare, may be the better allayed. Neither only is restraint to be
used in the choice, and change of meats, but in the excessive use of drinks.
The reasons are two; the one is, it is an enemy to the knowledge of God; the
other is this, it is held to be an enfeebler or impairer of the memorative
parts; for you shall ever note that deep drinkers have but shallow memories.
Their common saying is, Let us drown care in healths: which drowning of care
makes them so forgetful of themselves, as carried away with a brutish
appetite, they only intend their present delight, without reflection to what is
past, or due preparation to what may succeed. O restrain then this mighty
assailant of Temperance! Be ever your selves; but principally stand upon your
guard, when occasion of company shall induce you; being the last we are to
speak of.

Pestis non saevius grassatur in urbe, quam Ebrietas in cord.
This Company-keeping, how much it has depraved the hopefullest and towardliest
wits, daily experience can witness. For many we see civilly affected, and
temperately disposed of themselves not subject to those violent or brain-sicke
passions, which the fumes of drink beget; till out of a too pliable
disposition they enter the lists of Good fellowship (as they commonly term it)
and so become estranged from their own nature, to partake with Zanies in their
distempered humor. So as in time, by consorting with evil men, they become
exposed to all immoderate affections; such is the strength of custom. Whence
it is, that Saint Basil says, Basil.
Passions rise up in a drunken man (note the violence of this distemper) like a
swarm of Bees buzzing on every side. Now you shall see him compassionately
passionate, resolving his humor into tears; anon like a phrenticke man,
exercising himself in blows; presently, as if a calmer or more peaceable
humor had seized on him, he expresses his loving nature in congies and
kisses. So different are the affections which this valiant Mault-worme is
subject to; yet howsoever, out of a desperate Bravado he bind it with oaths,
that he will stand to his tackling, he is scarce to be credited, for he can
stand on no ground.

But to annexe some reasons which may effectually dissuade every
generous-affected spirit from consorting with such Amongst which consorts of
death, if at any time it be your fortune to encounter with these civil city
foysts whose Cheats are their Chequer, timely discard them, lest untimely
experience make you distaste them. Run with the Roe unto the Rose;

The Roe must win, the Rooke must loose: For Northern Rookes are little
worth, Compared with those the South brings forth. Senec de tran. anim.

Bernard. August. Emissenus. Stultum est servire diabolo offenso, qui nullo
placatur obsequio.

Greg.


Sociats as are a blemish to a Gentleman; imagine with your selves, how
mortally dangerous it is to enter an infected house; how fearful would any
one be of the state of his body, if he should have one in his company who had
the carbuncle or plague sore running upon him? how much would he condemn his
own rashness to entertain any such in his company? and with what respect or
cautelous advice would he prepare to expel the poison of that infection, at
least to prevent the occasion? no cost might be spared, no care intermitted,
that some sovereign, receipt might be procured, whereby the apparent danger,
into which his inconsiderate rashness had brought him might be removed. Now if
our bodies, being but the covers of more curious and exquisite instruments, be
so especially tendered, with what respect ought we to provide for the safety or
security of our souls? The ground of a disease is to mix the sound with the
sick: now the souls disease is sin, wherewith she labors more painfully
than the body can do, being annoyed with any infirmity. Those that are sick,
are vicious men, whose disease though it be insensible, and in that less
curable it breaks out into loathsome ulcers, which stain the pristine beauty
of the soul. Now as we serve so many vices, we serve so many masters; and so
many masters, so many devils, each one having so many devils, as evils. Which
miserable servitude to prevent (for no slavery is baser than the service of
sin) the best and soveraignest receipt that may be applied or ministered to the
soule-sicke patient is the receipt of adversion; to turn aside from the ways of
the wicked, and to keep no company with the transgressour: for this adversion
from the companions of sin, is a conversion to the God of Sion. Would you then
have God turn to you? turn you from your sins. Would you be at one with
your Maker? be ever divided from these sensual mates, so shall you be made
happy by the company of your Maker. Would you be sound at heart? leave to
consort with these of an uncircumcised heart, whose paths lead to perdition,
and they that walk therein shall be the heirs of shame. For howsoever these
instruments of sin (as I have sometimes observed) may make a show of
godliness, or pretend, merely under color to give a varnish to their vicious
lives, and a semblance of goodness; yet it is but mere painting they deal
with; they deny the power thereof in their life and conversation. A ridiculous
Actor in the City of Smyrna, pronouncing, O co^lum! O heaven! pointed with his
finger toward the ground: which when Polemo the chiefest man in the place saw,
he could abide to stay no longer, but went from the company in a chase, (...).
saying: This fool has made a Solecisme with his hand: he has spoken false
Latin with his hand. Such ridiculous Actors are these time-spenders; they
pronounce heaven with their mouth, but point at earth with their lives; like
wise Polemons therefore stay no longer with them, if at any time you have
consorted with them; for their practice is only to gull the world, and with
smooth pretenses delude their unhappy consorts. Their profession is how to play
the hypocrite Christian, but being unmasked, their odious Physnomies are
quickly discovered. Make use therefore of your experience, and with all
Temperance so counterpoize the weight of your passions, as none of these
assailants (though their incursions be never so violent) may ever surprise the
glorious fortress of your mind. Which the better to effect, let Lust, be
counterpoized by continence; Ambition by humbleness; gorgeous Apparel by
comeliness; luscious fare by abstinence, and company-keeping by that sweet
seasoner of all virtues, Temperance. Thus you have heard, how as without salt
there can be no seasoning, no war without discipline, no tillage without
manuring, no estate without mannaging, no building without a foundation; so no
virtue can subsist without Moderation.

AS we have hitherto expressed the dignity or sufficiency of this virtue, in
that it gives subsistence to all other virtues: so are we now to entreat of
the amplenesse of it, Wherein Moderation is to be used.
proposing such subjects wherein it is principally said to be conversant. Now,
though there be no humane action which is not subject to many defects, being
not thoroughly seasoned by this exquisite virtue, yet the use thereof may be
reduced to these two, as proper subjects wherein it is to be exercised; expense
of coin, and expense of time: for without moderation in the one, we should be
prodigal of our substance: without moderation in the other, we should grow too
profuse in the expense of that, Au^um horamque petunt, petendo perdunt perdende
pereunt. Expense of Coin.
which is more precious than any earthly substance.

Now touching worldly substance, as we are to be indifferent for the loss or
possession of it, so ought we to to careful in the use or dispensation of it.
As it is not to be admired when we possess it, no more is it to be altogether
dis-esteemed, because we stand in need of the use of it. If money be so much
to be contemned, (says an ancient Father) express thy bounty, Tertul.
instit. lib. 3. cap. 23.
show thy humanity, bestow it upon the poor: so may this, which of necessity
thou must lose, releeve many, which otherwise might perish by hunger, thirst,
or nakedness. Thus to bestow it, were not prodigally to spend it, but to lay
it up in a safer Treasuris, even in Christ's almes-boxe, to the disbursers great
advantage. Yea, but you will object you have other means to employ it in; you
have a family to support, a posterity to provide for, a state to maintain, and
pleasures suiting with your rank and quality to uphold: I grant it, and you
do well in having a care to your family, for he is worse then an Infidel that
wants this care. It is commendable likewise in you to have an eye to your
posterity, for Nature requires this at your hand. To maintain likewise your
state, and to continue your pleasures suiting with men of your rank; I allow
it. But where, or in what sort must this be done? For the place where, surely
none fitter than your own country where you were bred; setting up there your
rest, where you received your birth; Let your country (I say) enjoy you who
bred you; showing there your hospitality, where God has placed you, This is
excellently seconded by a Princely pen, in a pithy poem directed to all persons
of rank or quality to leave the Court and return into their own Country.
and with sufficient means blessed you. I do not approve of these, who fly
from their Country, as if they were ashamed of her, or had committed something
unworthy of her. How blameworthy then are these Court-comets, whose only
delight is to admire themselves? These, no sooner have their bedridden fathers
betaken themselves to their last home, and removed from their crazie couch, but
they are ready to sell a Manor for a Coach. They will not take it as their
fathers took it: their Country houses must be barred up, left the poor
passenger should expect what is impossible to find, relief to his want, or a
supply to his necessity. No, the cage is opened, and all the birds are fled;
not one crum of comfort remaining to succor a distressed poor one.
Hospitality, which was once a relic of Gentry, and a known cognizance to all
ancient houses has lost her title, merely through discontinuance: and great
houses, which were at first founded to relieve the poor, and such needful
passengers as traveled by them, are now of no use but only as Way-markes to
direct them. But whither are these Great ones gone? To the Court; there to
spend in boundless and immoderate riot, what their provident Ancestors had so
long preserved, and at whose doors so many needy souls have been comfortably
releeved. Yet see the misery of many of those rioters! Though they consume
their means, yet is the port they live at mean: for they have abridged their
family, reduced their attendants to a small number, and (unnecessary expenses
set aside) drawn themselves to within as narrow a compass as possibly they
may. For to take a view of those which are in ordinary roll; you shall find
none but a Page, a Coachman, a Lackey, and perchance a Cook. If the vailes of
the house will maintain one, The rich retinue of a rare rioter.
or they be not in fee with some City-Cooke, whom they usually repair to, at
best betrust, and so run on score quarterly. Now if you ask me, how their
means should be consumed, when they live at so low commons; my answer is, the
less they bestow on their Caterer, the more they bestow on their Tailor. They
cut it out of the whole cloth, and divide their acres peece-meale into shreds.
Where their phantasticke light-ones resort oftener to the house of the
body-maker than the soule-maker: affecting nothing more than what may make them
most noted. But observe the issue of these courses, Gentlemen; when they have
maintained their riot with much expense, and engaged their means to these great
monied men, whose Iubile it is to entertain acquaintance with one of these
green wits, they run upon the shelfe of ruin, and make their posterity the
heirs of want. Which having incurred, what distracted and divided sleeps,
what distempred thoughts, Relata ad se magnitudine aeris aticujus, quam quidam
Eques Romanus dum vixit celaverat, culcitram emi cubicularem sib^ ^ussit: et
praeceptum mitantibus hanc ratione^ reddidit; Habenda est ad somnum culcitra,
in qu^ ille cumtantum deberet, dormire potuit. Macrob. Saturn. l. 2. c. 4.
what hourly afflictions may we imagine them to be subject to? For what
engagement worse then debt, when every shadow resembles a Sergeant, every
familiar touch or stroke of a friend, an arrest of an Officer? Augustus Caesar,
hearing of them talk in his Court, what a huge sum of money a certain
Knight in Rome owed at his death, and that all his goods were to be sold, to
make payment of his debts, commanded the Master of his Wardrobe to buy for him
that bed, wherein this Knight used to lie: For, says he, if I cannot sleep
soundly in that bed wherein he could sleep, that owed so much, then surely I
shall sleep in n^ne. Surely, there is no affliction greater to a Noble Spirit,
whose thoughts cannot endure engagement, then to be subject to the extremity of
an unconscionable Creditor, who usually makes advantages his revenues, and
forfeitures the inhauncers of his fortunes. Neither is this respect to be had
only in the disposing of your selves in Court or City, but likewise in the
Country: for though it be best spent, which is bestowed in Hospitality, and in
releeving those hungry souls, whose express images require your charity; yet
are you to consider how charity begins with it self: so as, howsoever you are
bound to releeve and support those, whose present wants exact so much at your
hands, yet ever with reservancie of a competent or convenient providence, so to
sustain the want of others, as not to procure want to your selves by
sustaining others. But this needs little pressing: for experience shows, that
very small instruction will suffice any one to be provident enough in their
bounty or exhibition to the poor. Let us therefore divert the current of our
subject, and address our exhortation to you; purposely moving you to a
moderation of your expense in your pleasures, or those more easy vanities of
this life.

As profit and pleasure make the sweetest Music, so there is no pleasure, how
incomparably delightful soever for the present, but it affords much
bitterness, Frugall men being rightly styled, (...). Tusc. l. 3.
having no respect to Providence. Now, as all virtues may be comprised under
the name of frugality, provided that we understand it to be of that absolute
power and command, that neither excess nor diminution bear any sway in it, it
appears that without this frugall moderation no state can be well managed,
no estate rightly husbanded; so as, whether you have an eye to pleasure or
profit, this frugality or equally tempered providence must be Soveraignesse in
both. For first, there is no pleasure which has not respect to virtue: how
then may that properly be termed a pleasure, which has no relation to
frugality, under which name all virtues may seem to be comprised? Likewise,
there is no profit which is not joined with honesty, how then may that properly
be termed a profit, which has no respect to honest providence, upon which all
profits are truly grounded? The best course then that you can follow, either in
your choice of pleasures, or pursuit of profit, is ever to examine whether that
pleasure which you affect, have respect to virtue, or that profit which you
have in pursuit, be firmly grounded on honest providence: so shall neither
pleasure so much inthrall you, as to engage your fortunes to her, nor profit so
entangle you, as to neglect conscience for the love you bear her. Surely,
there is naught more dangerous to young Gentlemen, whose unriper years have
not sufficiently instructed them in the follies of vanity, then to give reins
to their desires, and so become Bondslaves to pleasure. For those that will
deny their eyes nothing that they can desire, nor resist their own wills in
ought that they affect, be they endued with never so much wisdom, it becomes
foolishness, being blinded with their own delights. They then only, whose
native temperance has prepared them, or continual wrestling with the
infirmities of nature has inured them, have attained this degree of
perfection; not only (I say) to use Moderation in their expense, but in their
restraint of every pleasure; laboring to become commanders of themselves in
the desires and affections of this life: which of all others make men the
absolutest conquerours. For man, whose natural pravity, drawn from the
corruption of his first parents, is ever working in him new motions of
disobedience; lays continual siege and battery to the fortress of the
soul, suggesting to her motives of pleasure and delight, which the carnal man
will easily condescend to, because he savoureth not the things of the spirit.
Yea, how many do we see, who begin in the spirit, but end in the flesh, making
their end far worse then their beginning? How necessary then is this
Moderation, to curb or check such inordinate motions as arise in us, by
reason of our natural infirmity and weakness?

Neither do I so much insist upon the Moderation of your expenses, as if Coin
were of that esteem, as it only deserved respect. For if Riches increase, we
are not to set our hearts upon them; but rather to show our indifferency
toward them in our free and liberal use of them. But he who gave gifts
before he gave time, Dona prius quam tempora dedit.
creating all things for our use in the world, before he brought us into the
world, without the use or ministry of these could preserve and support us,
whom he has appointed as governors or rulers over all these: for he who
created all things without means, can likewise preserve those things which he
has created without means. Yea, though he has given us the fruits of the
earth to feed us, Datur etiam vermibus nere e visceribus, accuratiorem cultum
praebere hominibus. Vid. Pet. Mart.
the fels of beasts to cloth us, yea, works out of the bowels of worms to
beautify us; yet is he tied no more to these exterior means, then he was
before, creating all things without means. No King is necessarily tied, that
only pure Bullion should be current among his Subjects, for if occasion
serve, he may stamp Leather, Brass, or any other metal, which being
authorized by his image or superscription, is not to be denied within his
Dominions. Much more he, who conteines the world in his fist, restraines not
his power to any outward means, working sometimes with means, sometimes
without means, sometimes against means, sometimes above means. With means,
as when he fed those which followed him into the wilderness with bread; above
means, when he fed so much people with so little bread; without means, when
he himself fasted so long without bread; against means, when he caused the
very Ravens to bring his Prophet bread. No, this exhortation rather tends to
move you to rely on Gods providence, yet withal not to abuse those creatures
which he has bestowed on you, but to use them with Temperance, Sobriety, and
Moderation: for what is it to abound in all riches, surfeit in pleasures, enjoy
the treasures of the whole earth, yea to want nothing that either the eye can
desire, or the heart affect? Surely nothing. Qui totum orbem possederit, ne in
orb Sepulchrum in venire poterit.

Quo cumuli gazae, si desint ossibus urnae? Eosdem penates habuit and regiam,
and rogum, and sepulchrum. Valor. Max. de Tull. Hostil.


Alexander, the Monarch of the world, had all other things save only a
Sepulcher to bury him in, when he was dead; he never thought of that: for
alas, when corruption shall receive what Mortality renders, and man after so
many days passed over in delights, shall make his bed in the dark, those
perfunctory pleasures, which he so much affected, those temporary blessings
which he enjoyed, shall be as if they had not been. So moderate therefore
your expenses in the use or dispensation of your earthly Mammon, that it may
appear, your hearts are where your Treasure is, and your Treasure where your
heavenly Master is: for what is this world, but a List environed with fearful
Combats? So as the world is more to be feared when it smileth, Ambros.
then when it frowneth; Aug. Epist. 144.
and more to be taken heed of, when it allures us to love it, then when it
moves or induces us to contemn it. Howsoever, they who embrace the world are
like unto them, who are drowned in waters; for their minds are so drenched in
the depth of worldly affections, Bernard. de Adventu sermon. 1. August. in Med*
cap. 9.
and so entangled by the reeds and oaze of earthly vanities, as they are
divided from the Sailers Star, and the Haven of the ship-wrackt soul, being
miserably forced to grope in darkness, without a light to direct them; and to
remain woefully shelfed, being far from sight of heaven to receive them.

And let this suffice to have been spoken touching Moderation in your expense
of coin; I mean, your frugall dispensation of such estates, as God has
blessed you withal; ever remembering that you must give account of your Talent;
not only (I say) of your Talent of knowledge, but of that Talent of Substance,
whereof in this life you were possessed. And so I descend to your Expense of
time, that precious Treasure which is incomparably to be valued above all that
we enjoy; because it affords a respit of using or employing, whatsoever we
enjoy.

TIme is so absolute and sovereign a Regent, as he is all-commanding, but not
to be countermanded; Expense of time.
whence we commonly say, Time and Tide stays for no man. There is nothing
undertaken by man, which can be effected without the attendance and graceful
assistance of Time. Neither can experience be gained, nor Truth, the Daughter
of Time discovered, nor the issue of any man's expectance attained, nor any
thing worthy observance produced, Eucheriars* Nil preciosius tempore, and heu
nil body eo vili^s i^venitur: transeunt dies salutis and nemo cogitas. Bern.
unless Time further it. There is nothing of consequence, that can be done at
an instant: great Taskes require long Time; neither can we limit Time, but
Time will limit us: whence it appears, that nothing can be intended, much
less affected, unless Time assist and second it. Time being thus precious,
we must of necessity value it above any inferior Substance, seeing without the
company of Time, we are wholly deprived of the use of our Substance. Whence it
was that a friend of mine caused these two verses to be set directly before his
Table of accounts; If Coins expense be such, pray then Divine
How rare and precious is the expense of Time?
Now there be three sorts of persons, with whom I am to encounter by way of
admonishment, for their abuse or careless expense of Time; the Ambitious,
Voluptuous, and miserable covetous person. For the first, he trifles away
Time, in the pursuit of impossibilities, spending his means, and mis-spending
Time, in hope of a day; which day he seldom or never sees, for his Time is
abridged before it come: So as the date of his death anticipates the day of his
hopes. Now to point out the place of his abode; he is ever to be found in the
eminentest places, for obscurity fits not his humor, whose only aims are to
acquire honor. He is so far from moderating his humor, as he is humorously
conceited of his worth, and thinks whatsoever the Parasite says in his
commendations, to be no less then what he in his own proper person deserves.
For his Contemplations, they are ever mounting, yet seldom so high mounting as
heaven, for his thoughts are directed to another Sphere. He is prodigal in
his feasts, solicitous in the pursuit of friends, impatient in the quest of
rivals, and importunate in the dispatch of his affairs: and though it be a
greater reproach to lose what is got, Majus dedecus est, parta amittere, quam
non omnino paravisse. Salust.
then not at all to get; yet his aim is to get, though he foresee his loss
before he get: and though the least liberty be apportioned to the greatest
fortune, yet in his highest fortunes will he use the greatest liberty: the
reason his, he conceits himself to walk in a Cloud, where no popular eye can
reach him. He is unmeasurably opinionate, and admires his own knowledge,
wherein he discovers his own folly: for as he that seeks to be more wise
then he can be, shall be found to be less wise then he should be; so he who
conceits himself more wise then he is, displayes himself to the world what
he is. So as it seems, he differs in opinion from the Poet; who holds this
as a maxim: Martial. l. 14.
He Is solely wise, who is not selfely wise,
But humble in the judgment of his eyes.
Now his daily Tasks may be aptly compared to Domitians sports, who spent the
whole day in catching Flies. Sext. Aurel. in Domit.
For those many projects which he has devised, those impossible aims he
has contrived, those ayrie Turrets he has reared, fall in the end to
nothing; and like those misty conclusions of the deluded Alchymist, bewray the
folly of him that formed them. Ne quid usquam honesti oculis occurreret. Vid.
Tacit.
And as Domitian grew ashamed of his own impieties, exiling all Arts, lest the
knowledge of them should bring him to a discovery of himself: so the ambitious
man, whose aims are as boundless, as his purposes fruitless, when his eyes
begin to be unsealed, and those scales of ambition, which hindered his sight,
removed, he will then (if then be not too late) acknowledge his shame, and
ingenuously confess, that his unbounded aims deserved no better guerdon; Quam
quisque pessime fecit, tam maxim ltutus est, Sa^ust.
for had his actions been sincere, they had made him more secure. Likewise for
the Voluptuous man, whose belly is his god, and sensuality his delight, let me
speak thus much: as his care extends but only to the day, slaving himself to
the pleasures of sin, and preferring the husks of vanity, before the soul
solacing cates of eternity: so shall his misery appear greater, when deprived
of those delights, wherein his sole felicity consisted. This fleshly Libertine
mis-imployeth Time in two respects; first, in respect of himself; secondly, in
respect of those good creatures which were ordained for the use or service of
himself. In himself, by exposing so glorious an Image to the subjection of
sense, and mis-applying those gifts which he has received, being diverted
from those good offices, for which they were bestowed. In Gods good creatures,
by converting them to abuse, which were only ordained for use; and turning them
to wantonness, which were created for health and relief of weakness. This is
he, who makes life a merriment, his pilgrimage a pastime, each year his
Iubile. This is he, who turns fasting into feasting, praying into playing,
almsdeeds into all mis-deeds. This is he whose sole delight is in dainty
feeding, to cause inordinate motions to be stirring, without least respect at
all of his souls starving. Cujus cupe diae, fercula in actu, cujus januae
carceres mendici.
This is he, whose dishes are the poor man's curses, and whose gate is the
beggars Jail, where they are barred from the least crum of comfort. This is
he, who walks and struts in the street; sends forth his eye to bring him in a
booty of Lust, or acquaint him with some new fashion, or delight him with some
vain show. This is he, who sends forth his ear, to convey unto him some
choice melody to intraunce him; his taste, with some luscious viands to provoke
him; his smell, with some rare perfumes to cheer him; his tooth, with soft
clothing, or whatsoever may more effeminately move him. But whereto shall
these outward delights avail him, when the cold earth shall entertain him,
when he shall be divided from them, and they from him? When Belshazzer beheld
the hand upon the wall, Dan. 5.6.
he was put quite out of his humor of jollity; his cheerfulness was turned
into pensiveness, his mirth into mourning, his solace into sorrowing. Even so
shall it fare with the Voluptuous man, whose delight was only on earth; when
that fearful and ungrateful summons shall peremptorily injoyne him to bid
adieu (a long adieu) to those sensual consorts which accompanied him, those
inordinate meetings which so much delighted him, yea, all those licentious
pleasures which so inchained him; he will exclaim (but in vain shall be
those exclamations) and curse the occasions of his misspent Time. O what a
hard task would he endure, to redeem what his security has lost? What
extremities would he suffer? what difficulties undergo? How great and
exceeding things would he promise? In what bonds of firm devotion would he
stand engaged? Fet. Dam. de bora mortis
Surely there is nothing that either flesh could sustain, or Mortality suffer,
which he would not most willingly endure, to deliver his endangred soul from
eternal torments. Lastly, for the miserable Covetous wretch, who makes great
use of his Coin, but small use of his Time, treasuring up vengeance against
the day of wrath; how careful is he in making his barnes larger, in filling
his chests fuller, in inhauncing his rents higher; but how respectlesse of that
supreme good, wherein all happiness consists? See, how Menedemus-like, Sic
mihi divitias, famuli patiendo labores, Nec minorest domino servus in aere suo.

Eccles. 4.8. Vtinam invidi oculos baberent in omnibus locis, ut de omnibus
foelicitatibus torquerentur: Nam quanta sunt faelicium gaudia, tanti invidorum
sunt gemitus. Seneca.


he is ever digging and delving to raise a fortune for his seldome-thriving
posterity. Thus lives he to become an eternal affliction to himself; in
whose person the Poet very properly expressed a Misers nature after this
manner; Thus do I dig, thus do I delve
to enrich my state thereby,
Yet th'poorest slave of all I have,
enjoyes as much as I.
This was one of those vanities which the wisest of Princes observed, as
incident to the children of men, that many gathered, yet knew not for whom they
gathered, having likewise no power to use what God had in his mercy bestowed.
Now to give this miserable Caitiffe his due Character: He is his own
executioner, being good to none, but worst to himself. His eye is so fixed on
earth, as he finds no Time to erect it to heaven. He employes so much time in
getting and gathering goods, as he reserves no time for doing good. He little
observes how all earthly things are sweeter in the ambition, then in the
fruition; in the affection, then possession. Nor how the circular World cannot
fill the triangular Heart, no more then a Circle can fill a Triangle; where
still there will be some empty corners. He runs on still in desire, laboring
of a disease incurable, till death cure him. He increases his cares with his
substance, and the more he adds to his estate, the more he detracts from his
content: The poor he has always with him, for he makes all poor that
deal with him. In brief, he is of all others most miserable, because in his
riches he has all his consolation: which like the Egyptian reed, will fail
him in his confidence, leaving him bare and naked to the testimony of a guilty
conscience. Luke 12.19.
For how secure was the Rich-man (as he thought) when he invited his wretched
soul to take her rest, having much goods laid up for many years; but this
self security was the occasion of his succeeding misery; for that night was
his soul to be taken from him. It is a true saying, 20.
that the Devil requires nothing of man but Security, for that gives him
opportunity of practicing his undoing. Now, how bitter is the remembrance of
Death, much more the unwelcome approach of Death to this miserable covetous
man, who has all his peace in his substance? For if nothing be so terrible as
Death (as Aristotle writes:) which Antiochus feeling sensibly in himself, 1.
Mac. 6.11.
cries out thus; Oh into what adversity am I come, and into what floods of
misery am I now fallen? He adds the reason anon after; For I must die with
great sorrow in a strange Land. 13.
Surely then, to the miserable worldling, who has made a covenant with sin,
and a league with transgression, must the approach of Death seem terrible,
being to be divided from the staff of his confidence, from thence to descend
without least hope of comfort to the land of forgetfulness: for, Fieri non
potest ut male moriatur, qui been vixerit. Blos. Enchirid. parvul. author.

Non potest male mori qui been vixerit, and vix been moritur qui male vixerit.
Aug. de discip. Christiana.

Moderation of the Passions of the mind reduced to two Subjects.


as it cannot possibly be, that he should dye ill, who has lived well; so it
cannot be, that he who has lived ill, should dye well: for as the Scorpion
has in her the remedy of her own poison a receipt for her own infection; so
the evil man carries always with him the punishment of his own wickedness,
the which does never leave (so incessant is the torment of a guilty conscience)
to wound and afflict his mind, both sleeping and waking: so as to what place so
ever he betake him, he cannot so privately retire, but fear and horror will
awake him; nor fly so fast, though he should take the wings of the morning,
but fury and vengeance will over-take him. Having thus far proceeded in the
treating of such subjects, wherein Temperance is required, and of such
assailants, by whom she is usually encountered and impugned: it rests now, that
I impart my advice briefly touching Temperance or Moderation of the Passions of
the mind, whereof (omitting the rest, as having elsewhere discoursed of them)
I will only, and that briefly, insist of these two, the passions of Joy and
Sorrow.

This passion (to insist on Joy first) requires direction, to order our desires
aright in the matter Joy. Every man loves a glad heart; and wishes Joy, Joy.
as the fruit of his labors; but therein many mistake. First, one rejoices in
his Substance, Job. 31.25. Hester. 5.11. Eccles. 2.2. Dan. 5.1.2, 3. etc, Job
31.29. Prove. 10.2^.
he has gotten much. Secondly, another rejoices in his Promotion. Thirdly,
another doateth upon that mad mirth which Solomon speaks of. Fourthly, another
rejoices in a Table richly decked, an overflowing cup, a faring deliciously
every day. Fifthly, another rejoices at the destruction of him, whom he hates.
Sixthly, another rejoices in sin, and wickedness. It is a pastime to a
fool to do wickedly. It is the Drunkards joy to be at the cup early, and to
sit till the wine has enflamed them. The twilight glads the heart of the
Adulterer. The Oppressor danceth upon the threshold of him that is oppressed.
Esaias 5.11. Job. 24.1^. Zeph. 1.9. Gen 21.9. Job. 17.6. Psalm. 69.12.
Ismael geereth at Isaac. Holy Job was as a Tabret to the godless ones; and
the Drunkards made songs on David. But this is not that Joy which is required,
because the foundation of this Joy is grounded on sin: wherefore we are to
find a Joy more pure, more permanent: for the Joy of the wicked is short, but
the Joy of the righteous shall endure for ever. This Joy which we are to
seek, and whereon we are to ground our sole content, is no carnal but a
spiritual Joy: the Joy of our hearts, the divine Melody of our souls,
conclude with the blessed Apostle; GOD forbid that we should rejoice in any
thing, but in the Cross of Christ, and him crucified: For in this did all the
Saints and servants of God joy, disvaluing all other joy, as unworthy the
entertainment of the soul. We are to rejoice likewise, for as much as God
has called us not to uncleanness, 1 These. 4.7.
but unto holiness. We are to rejoice in the testimony of a good conscience,
being that continual feast which refreshes every faithful guest. We are to
rejoice in our brothers aversion from sin, and conversion to God; in his
prosperity and success in his affairs of state. But above all things we are
so to moderate our joy in the whole progress of our life, that our joy may the
more abound in him, who is the crown of our hope after this life.

The like directions are required in our moderation of sorrow: Sorrow.
for there is a sorrow unto death; which to prevent, understand this by the
way, that not so much the passion, 2 Samuel 13.2.
as the occasion enforcing the passion, is to be taken heed of. Sorrow we
may, but not as Ammon did, till he had defloured Thamar, 1 Kin. 21.4. Genesis
37.11.
for that was the sorrow of licentiousness: Sorrow we may, but not as Ahab
did, till he had got Naboths vineyard, for that was the sorrow of
covetousness: Sorrow we may, but not as Joseph's brethren did, greiving that
their father should love him more than them, for that was the sorrow of
maliciousness. Sorrow we may, but not as Jonah did, Jonah 4.1.
grieving that the Ninivites were not destroyed, for that was the sorrow of
unmercifulness. Lastly, sorrow we may, but not as the Or Gederans. Joseph.
li. 17. c. 13. Matthew. 8.34. Quo quisque sanctior, eo ejus in orando fletus
uberio^. Aug.
Gergesenes did, grieving for the loss of their swine, for that was the sorrow
of worldliness. These sorrows are not so much to be moderated as wholly
abolished, because they are grounded on sin: but there is a religious and godly
sorrow, which, though it afflict the body, it refreshes the spirit; though it
fill the heart with heaviness, it crowns the soul with happiness. And this
is not a sorrow unto sin, but a sorrow for sin: not a sorrow unto death, but
a sorrow to cure the wound of death. By how much any one (says a good Father,)
is holier, by so much in prayer are his tears plentifuller. Here sounds the
Surdon of religious sorrow, the awaker of devotion, the begetter of spiritual
compunction, and the sealer of heavenly consolation; Via est incipientibus:
veritas est proficientibus: and vita perfectis. Tho. a Campis in solileq.
animae c. 12.
being the way to those that begin; truth to those that profit, and life to
them that are perfect. But alas, the natural man (says the Apostle)
perceives not the things of the spirit of God; for they are foolishnes unto
him, neither can he know them, because they are spiritually discerned. It is
true; and this should move us to more fervor of devotion, beseeching the divine
assistance to minister strength to our weakness, that what is wanting in the
flesh, may be supplied by the spirit; 1 Cor. 2.14.
yea daily to set an houre-glasse beside us, and observe those precious grains
(the minute treasures of time) how swiftly they run through the Cruet, whereof
not one must fall unnumbred: for as a hair of the head shall not perish, no
more shall the least moment of time. Now how healthful were it (though the
carnal man distate it) to vie tears with grains of sand; Bernard.
that our sins, being as the Sands of the Seashore, that is, numberless,
might be bound up and thrown into the deep Sea of eternal forgetfulness:
so as they may neither rise up in this life to shame us, nor in the world to
come to condemn us. Surely if you would know those blessed fruits which true
penitent sorrow produces, you shall find that He who sowes in tears, shall
reap in joy: Neither can any one go to heaven with dry eyes. May your tears
be so shed on earth, that they may be bottled in heaven; so shall you bring
your sheaves with you; and, like fine flower, being boulted from the bran of
corruption, receive your portion in the land of the living. And may this
Sacrifice of tears which you offer up unto him, whose eyes are upon all the
ways of the children of men, minister like comfort to your souls, as they
have done to many faithful members of Christ's Church. And let this suffice to
have been spoken of such Subjects, wherein Moderation is to be used: for to
speak of Moderation of sorrow for sin, I hold it little necessary, seeing
most men (so insensible are they of their inward wounds) come rather short of
that sorrow which is required, then exceed in any sort the measure that is
prescribed.

AS Moderation in all the precedent subjects is to be used, so in all and every
of them is it to be limited; Wherein Moderation is to be limited.
for to be so Stoically affected (as we have formerly noted) as not to
entertain so much as modest mirth, or approve of the temperate and moderate
use of those things, which were at first ordained for the use and service of
man, digressing as far from the rule of Moderation in restraint, as the
profusely minded Libertine does in excess. How hard a thing is it then to
observe with indifferency an equal or direct course herein, when either by
leaping short or over, we are subject to error? So says blessed Cranmer; Some
lose their game by short shooting, some by over-shooting: some walk too much on
the left hand, some too much on the right hand. Now to propose what form of
direction is best to be observed herein: we will take a view of those
Subjects, whereof we formerly treated, and set down in each of them what
Moderation is to be used. All waters are derived from three ways or currents:
springing either by fountains and spring-heads, from the bowels of the earth
inwardly drained; by rivers and conduits, from those fountains derived: or
hail and snow from the earth extracted; where some ascend, some descend: so
passions are three ways moved in our bodies; by humors arising out of our
bodies; by external senses, and the secret passage of sensual objects; or by
the descent or commandment of reason. Now to insist on the motion or effect of
each passion, we shall not greatly need, having sufficiently touched them in
our former discourse: we will therefore upon a review of those several
subjects, Lust, Ambition, Gorgeous apparel, Luscious fare, Company-keeping,
etc. reduce them and the occasion of them to those three troubled Springs, from
whence miserable man, by means of the immoderate appetite of sense, sucks the
banefull poison of sin; The Concupiscence of the Flesh, the Concupiscence of
the eyes, and the Pride of life: for whatsoever is in the world (as a good
Father notes, and as the blessed Apostle himself affirms) is one of these:
Aug. Solileq. cap. 12. 1 John 2.16. Concupiscence of the flesh.
As first, whatsoever suiteth or sorteth with the desire or delicacy of the
flesh, ministers fuel or matter to feed the Concupiscence thereof. Now this
fleshly Libertine takes no delight in the Spirit, but in the Flesh; he loves to
be clothed in purple and fare deliciously every day; he loves to be clothed
in purple and fare deliciously every day; he loves to keep company with those
consorts of ruin and misery, who drink till they be inflamed, and delight
themselves in the pleasures of sin. Secondly, whatsoever relisheth of vanity,
ministers him objects of content, to feed the unsatiate concupiscene of his
eyes: Genesis 34.1.
which eyes like Dinah, stray from him, fixing themselves upon some vain
object, which suits ever best with his choice, who owes them, and so conveyes
some present but perfunctorie delight unto him. As if he be covetous, they show
him Naboths vineyard; 1 King. 21.2. 2 Samuel 11.2. Judith 16.11. Genesis 25.30.
if wanton, a beauteous Bersheba, or the sandals of Judith, which ravished the
eyes of Holophornes; if dainty-tooth'd, Jacobs red pottage; if proud the silks
of Tire; in brief they fit every one with an object according to his
condition. Lastly, whatsoever may minister content to the proud and high-minded
man, who walks upon his Turrets, saying, Is not this great Babel which I have
builded? Dan. 4.27. Esther 7.10. Dan. 5.1. Dan. 5.30. Acts. 12.22.
is suggested to him; putting him in mind of Hamans honor, but never of
Hamans Ladder; telling him of Balthazars birthday, whereon he feasted royally,
but never of his last day, whereon he died fearfully; showing him Herod's
garment which shone as the Sun, and of his applause, The voice of God and not
of man; Qui modo immortalis vocabar, etc. Eusebius.
but never of the eclipse of that sun, when he became so loathsome as his
smell could be endured by no man. Now to propose our rules of limitation in the
Moderation of these: As we are commanded to subdue the flesh with those
inordinate affections, which arise from the infirmity thereof; so are we not
enjoined to kill the flesh, for so should we digress from the rule of
humanity: for no man hates his own flesh, Ephe. 5.29. August. de civit. Dei,
l. 19. c. 27.
but loves and cherishes it. No, our righteousness in this life, which may
be rather said to consist in the Remission of sins, than perfection of
virtues, as it is to be furthered by all ordinary and direct means, so are we
not to transgress that law, line, or limit which is prescribed. We must not
cut off our members with a knife, but our carnal affections with a holy and
mortified life. Tertul lib. de poeniten* initio.
Whence it is, that Origin was justly punished by using too little diligence
where there was great need, Quem de flumine Galio qui per Phrygiam labitur,
propinesse arbitremur; de quo quicungue bibit, tantopere insanire solet, ut
scipsune ililco castraturus est. Pomp. Laetus de sacred. Bl^s. Tertul. in
Apolig c. 45.
because he used too great diligence where there was little need. For, gelding
himself, he prevented himself, of a greater conquest: for there is no
mastery to get the mastery, of sin through disabilitie. For as he that
surceaseth but then from sin, when he can sin no more, forsakes not his
sins, but his sins forsake him; so he who disableth himself for committing
sin, lest his ability should draw him to sin, disableth not his sins,
but his sins disable him: for howsoever he has disabled the act of sin, he
has not suppressed the occasion, which rests not so much in the act, as in the
desire to sin. No less worthy was Democritus error of reproving, who was
blinded before he was blind: for a Christian need not put out his eyes for
fear or seeing a woman; since howsoever his bodily eye, see, yet still his
heart is blind against all unlawful desires. The princely Prophet says
indeed, Lord turn away my eyes from vanity; but this turning does not so much
imply the look of the eye, as the lust or assent of the heart. Psalm. 11.8.
Neither is it so requisite to make a covenant with our eyes that they shall
not look upon a woman, as to make a covenant with our hearts that they may
never lust after a woman. In like sort, if any intemperate or immoderate desire
to luscious fare or delicious drink should surprise us, whose subtle fumes
unrivet each joint of the memory, and loosen the cement which held it fast;
(for you shall ever note, as I said before, that deep drinkers have but
shallow memories:) we are so to prevent the abuse, that we contemn not the
moderate and healthful use of them. For as to use them in excess is to abuse
them, so not to use them at all is to contemn or neglect Gods providence in
them. We must not say with the Epicure, Let us eat and drink, for to morrow
we shall die; but rather let us eat and drink, as if to morrow we should
die; remembering that strict account which every one must give of the use or
abuse of Gods creatures: for it is not the use, but abuse which produces
sin. So as Thracius, whom I formerly touched, and of whom Aulus Gellius
writes, covertly glancing at his folly, was for any thing that I can see,
Noctium Atticarum li. 19. c. 13.
even at that time most of all drunken, when he cut down all his vines, lest
he should be drunken. Likewise in the quest or pursuit of honor, as it is
ambition to hunt after it, undeserved; so it is the most apparent testimony of
true and approved virtue to obtain it undesired. For this reluctance to
receiving of honor, can never be without some mixture of pride: for they
would have the world to observe, how well they deserve it; and again, their
humility (which is seldom in these without some tincture of vainglory) in
that they so little desire it. So as, these popular and fiery spirits, whose
only aims are to dignifie themselves, deserve no sharper curb for
over-valuing them selves, than these, who pride themselves in their humility,
deserve for counterfeiting a kind of debasing or dis-valuing of themselves to
the eye of the world. Whence I might take occasion to speak of those precise
Schismatics, who cannot endure any precedence or priority of place to be in
the Church, but an equality of Presbytery; nay, what is now grown amongst
them to a more desperate frenzy, their maine work is to advance a
Lay-presbytery, which till by Farel and Viret from the Chymera's of a vaporous
or viperous brain hatched, was never dreamed: but I will leave them to a sharper
censure, til they be thoroughly cured of their distemper.

Concupiscence of the eye.
Now for the second motive to sin, which is the Concupiscence of the eye; as
it is so to be moderated that it stray not, so should it be so directed that
it sleep not; sleep not, I say, in the survey of that, for which it was
created. The eye strayeth when it coveteth what it should not; it sleeps when
it retireth from what it should: it strayeth when it lusts after a strange
woman; it sleeps when it reads not the law of God, to reclaim it from
lusting after a strange woman: it strayeth, when it lusts after Naboths
vineyard; it sleeps when it looks not after Gods vineyard. Neither is the
eye so to be limited, as if contemplation were only intended; for as it is not
sufficient to pray, unless we practice as well as pray: so is it not
sufficient to look upon the Law, unless we live after the Law on which we
look. We read that Abraham buried Sarah in the cave of Macpelah, that is, in
a double Sepulcher. He that burieth his mind in knowledge only, Genesis 23.19.
without any care of practice, he buries Sarah in a single Sepulcher: but he
that buries his mind, as well in the practice and feeling of religion, (which
is all in all) as in the knowledge and understanding of it, he buries Sarah in
a double Sepulcher: and so must all we do which are the true children of
Abraham: for then with Abraham burying our spirit in a double Sepulcher, we
shall with Elizeus have a double Spirit; a spirit that as well does, as
teaches. Otherwise, we are but tinkling Cymbals, 2 King. 29.15. ^ Cor. 13.1.
making only a sound of religion, without any sound or sincere profession:
being (as that honey-tongu'd Father says) in body inward, but in heart
outward. Now the eye, as it is the tendrest and subtilest Organ of all others,
Coepore interias, sed cord exterius. Bernard, Med. cap. 8.
so should the Object on which it is fixed be the purest and cleerest of all
others. The Eagle accounts those of her young ones bastards, which cannot fix
their eyes upon the Sun, and with equal reflection (as it were) reverberate
the beaming vigor or splendor thereof: which should be the Emblem of divine
contemplation; teaching us, that howsoever we have our feet on earth, we are
to have our eyes in heaven: not by prying too saucily into the sealed Arc of
Gods inscrutable will, but by meditating ever of him, so to rest in him,
Col^wella lib 5. cap. 9. Vnum musculu^ prae caeteris animalibus oculum
elevantem babet* quo ad coeleslia magit rapiatur, terrestribus minus capiatur.
Ib.
that after earth we may for ever rest with him. It is observed by professed
Oculists, that whereas all creatures have but four muscles to turn their eyes
round about, man has a sift to pull his eyes up to heaven. How far divert
they then their eyes from the contemplation of that Object, for which they were
created, who cannot see their neighbors ground but they must cover it, nor his
beast but they desire it, nor any thing which likes them, but with a greedy eye
they heart-eat it? So large is the extent or circuit of their heart to earthly
things, as they can see nothing but they instantly desire; so strait is the
circumference of their heart to heavenly things, they set no mind on them, as
if altogether unworthy their desire. So as I cannot more aptly compare these
idolizing worldlings to any thing, then to the bird Ibis, which is of that
filthy nature, as she receives those excrements in at her mouth, which she
had purged before from her guts. Foetorem, quem ab illis prius emisisset, ab
ore denud recipit. Plin. in Not. ^ist. Aeliah. Gersen.
Neither do they resemble this bird only in respect of their bestiall or
insatiate receipt, but also in the unbounded extent of their heart. Oris Apollo
writes, that the Egyptians when they would describe the heart, paint that bird
which they call Ibis; because they think that no creature, for proportion of
the body, has so great a heart as the Ibis has. Neither has our worldly Ibis
a less heart to the filthy desires of the world, being of necessity forced to
leave the world, before he can leave desiring the things of this world: or
their eyes, Satan-like, come from compassing the whole earth, esteeming no joy
to the worldling, like much enjoying: yet am I not so rigorously affected, or
from feeling of humanity so far estranged, as with Democritus, to move you to
pull out your eyes, that the occasion of temptation might be removed, by being
of your eyes, those motives to temptation, wholly deprived. Nor with that
inamored Italian, Ariosto.
to wish you to fix your eyes upon the beams of the Sun, till they were
feared, that the sight of your Mistress might not move your disquiet. No;
enjoy your eyes, and make them direct^rs to guide you, Erga mundum habecmus
oculum retortum.
not as blind deceitful guides to entrap you; use the object of this sense,
but weane it from assenting to concupiscence; concluding over with that good
remembrance, May that object be from our eyes removed, which makes us from our
dear Lord divided.

Now for the last Motive, Pride of life.
which is the Pride of life; it was Lucifers sin, and therefore should be
each true Christians scorn. For this sin (says an ancient and learned
Father) are the children of the kingdom thrown into utter darkness: August.
Soliloq. cap. 29.
and whence comes this, but because they ascend up unto that Mountain, unto
which the first Angel ascended, and as a Devil descended? He who
entertaineth this Motive, is an ambitious man, who (as one rightly observes)
may be well and fitly similized with the Chameleon, who has nothing in his
body but Lungs; so the badge of the ambitius is to be windy and boisterous:
whereas, if he would measure all his undertakings, rather by the dignity of the
thing, then the Ambition of his mind, he should find as much content as now
he finds disquiet. It was the rule of a wise Statesman, and well deserves it
the observance of every private person, but especially of such who sit nere the
Stern of State; Omnia metiri malim dignitate quam ambitione. Plin in epist.
not to suffer any ambitious heat transport him, but to measure all things
according to their dignity and worth: and withal, rather to refer the
opinion of themselves and their actions to the censure of others, and freely
put themselves to be weighed in the judicious scale or balance of others, then
to be approvers of themselves without the suffrage of others: for certainly,
as there is no humor more predominant then Ambition, nor apter to make man
forgetful of himself; so he who is of a haughty and proud disposition
Judging of another consists in these* three points; First, when a man does
well, to say he does evil.

Secondly, when a man does evil, to say that man does worse.

Thirdly, when a thing is doubtful to take it in the worse part. Vid Annal.
Stow. Laort-in vit. Pittaci.


dis-values all others, purposely to prize his own deserts at an higher
estimate. I remember with what character that proud English Cardinal was
decolored, who bare so great a strok in this Kingdom, as it was in his power
to shake the foundation of Monasteries, and from their ruins to raise his own
structures; that he was so puffed up with Ambition, as he preferred the
honor of his person, before the discharge of his Profession. Surely that
sentence was verified in him, Promotion declares what men be; for never was
his Nature thoroughly discovered, nor his inside displayed, till his outside
was with the Cardinals Pall graced. How necessary is it then for man, being
more subject to Pride himself in his height, then with patience to receive a
fall, to learn how to moderate his acception of honor, before he come to
honor? For I do not so limit him, as if he should not at all receive it, but
rather how he should demean himself having received it. Neither in Ambition
only, but in that attire of sin, gorgeous apparel, is the like limitation
to be used: for herein are we to observe such decency, as neither the
contempt thereof may tax us of irregular carelessness, nor affectation thereof
evince us of too singular niceness: for the former, as it implies a careless
indifferency, so the latter argues an effeminate delicacie: for God hates no
less in man this sloth and sluttishnesse, then he hates too much neatness
and niceness. Sola socordia innocents. Tacit.
Yea, I have oft-times observed no less pride shrouded under a threadbare
cloak, than under a more sumptuous coat, So as, Antisthenes went not far a
wrong, who seeing Socrates show his torn cloak, showing a hole thereof unto
the people; Lo quoth he, ^allium video, Philosophum non video.
through this I see Socrates vanity. It is not the Hood which makes the Monk,
nor the Cloak which makes the Philosopher; but the Disposition of the mind,
which makes him a true or false professor. It is good therefore, in the use of
these things to observe the end for which they were ordained; now apparel was
not ordained to pride us in it, but to be kept warm by it. Peter Martyr
shows, that Clothing does keep the body warm two ways: Comment. in ^ Reg.
cap. 1.
By keeping in the natural heat of the body; and by keeping out the
accidental cold of the air. This then being ordained for necessity, is not to
be used for vainglory: for howsoever (to such excess of vanity is this age
grown) that fashion is esteemed nearest, which is newest; discretion will
inform you better, and tell you that fashion is of all other the choicest,
which is the comliest. But that these three maine Motives to temptation, and
professed assailants of Moderation. I mean, Concupiscence of the flesh,
Concupiscence of the eyes, and Pride of life may be the better resisted,
Chrysostom. lib. de orando Deo.
incessant Prayer is to be used. For Prayer is Gods honor, Man's armor, and
the Devils terror; it is Gods oblation, Man's munition, and the Devils
expulsion. By Prayer are those Treasures dug, which faith in the Gospel
beholds. As it is then Gods Sacrifice, let it be Man's exercise, that it may
defeat the Devils malice: saying with blessed Augustine; August. Soliloq. cap.
12.
Behold, O Lord my God, the whole world is full of the snares of Concupiscence,
which they have prepared for my feet, and who shall escape them? Truly he, from
whom thou shall take away the Pride of his eyes, that the Concupiscence of his
eyes may not seize upon him; and from whom thou shall take away the
Concupiscence of the flesh, that the Concupiscence of the flesh may not
surprise him; and from whom thou shall take away an irreverent and unbridled
mind, that the pride of life may not craftily deceive him. O happy he, to whom
thou shall do this I surely he shall pass his days in safety! Thus far have I
proceeded in discourse touching both manner and matter, how and wherein
Moderation is to be limited. Where, in the pursuit of honor, as I would have
you no Canius, too Stoically to contemn it; so no Cassius, too tenderly to
affect it: Likewise in the pursuit of Wealth, as I would have you no Mimus, too
scornfully to hate it; so no Midas, too slavishly to hug it: Likewise in the
pursuit of Fancy, as I would have you no Arminius, too severely to loath it;
so no Arsenius, too dearly to love it: Likewise in Fare, as I would have you
no Phythagoras, too rigorously to abstain from it; so no Diagoras, too
riotously to epicure it: Likewise in Apparel, as I would have you no Diogenes,
too carelessly to use it; so no Demosthenes, too curiously to choose it: Lastly,
in Pleasure, as I would have you no Philopomenes, too strictly to despise it;
so no Philoxenus, too highly to prize it. For Origin himself eunuching,
Democritus his eyes blinding, Crates his money drowning, and Thracius his vines
destroying, no less offended (as we have before observed) in exceeding the
limit by Nature proposed, then the Libertines of their time, came short of that
rule which Moderation had prescribed. But drawing near shore, I am now to
descend to the last branch of this Observation, treating of the Accomplished
end which attends Moderation.

AS there is no Art or Science which has not some especial end, Of the
accomplished end which attends Moderation.
to which it is properly directed; so is there no Virtue which works or
actuates not for some end; in the acquisition whereof it is fully satisfied.
Now touching this end, whereto all virtues were and are properly directed; both
Heathen and Divine Philosophers with one consent have concluded it to be that
Summary or Supreme good, then which nothing could be better in respect of the
fullness, higher in respect of the worthiness, or safer in respect of the
secureness. But how different in opinion the ancient Philosophers have been
touching this Summary or Supreme good, what it should be, or wherein it might
be properly said to consist; there is none having bin conversant in their
Ethics, but he sufficiently knows it. So as Varro reports, that these
ancient Philosophers have held and maintained two hundred threescore and eight
several opinions concerning Felicity. Where some placed their Summary good in
Honors or preferments, Lib. de Philosophia apud. Aug. de Civitate Dei. lib.
19. cap. 1.
others in Pleasures or delights, but few in that true or accomplished
Felicity, the testimony of a good conscience, which only makes man happy; and
without which, enjoying all, he enjoyes nothing: for were this Felicity or
accomplished end, to which all virtues are properly directed, to be found on
Earth, then were the hopes of many good and virtuous men frustrated, whose
thoughts are so far above the foundation of earth, or all those perfunctory
delights, The difference betwixt the Ethnicke and Christian Ethick in the
opinion of Felicity.
which this low Theater can afford, as they have esteemed such men of all
others most miserable upon earth, whose thoughts were not erected above earth,
but slaved to the desires of this life, as if their hopes extended no further.
No, in vain were those many sighings and groanings in the spirit, those
incessant labors and watchings, which the faithful so willingly undergo, if
there were no happiness save only in enjoying the delights of this life; the
fruition whereof, as they tender no true sweetness, so are they ever attended
by sharp repentance. For howbeit, every one be reputed worthy, if he be
wealthy, and naught if he be needy; yet when Sin, having three punishments,
Fear, Shame, and Guilt; Fear of judgment, Shame of men, and Guilt of
conscience: shall convent and convict him, he shall find that riches cannot
deliver in the day of wrath. So as howsoever the sin seem sweet, the sting
of sin shall wound his heart: For the bread of deceit is sweet to a man, but
his mouth shall be filled with gravel. Prove. 20.17.
Likewise the High-minded man, whose heart has been only set on Titles of
honor, howsoever he seemed raised or reared above the pitch of common earth,
disdaining these poor wormelings, who had the selfsame Maker, though
inferior to this high Cedar in honor; when he shall be forced to call
Corruption his mother, and worms his brethren and sisters; when he must leave
that high Babel, which his pride erected; those worldly swelling Tumors, his
slippery honors, which he once enjoyed; those Sycophants, the followers of
greatness, which he so much affected; yea, the world it self, where all his
imaginary glory was stored; he shall then find goodness to be far better
then greatness, and worldly dignity to add fuel to these Viols, which he
has worthily incurred. Likewise the Voluptuous man, as he has enjoyed the
treasures of sin for a season, sported him in his beds of Ivory, feasted
royally, fared deliciously, and fed all his miserable senses with a loathed
satiety, he shall feel that the pleasure of sin was final, but the
punishment due to sin eternal; he shall feel a worm ever gnawing, never
ending, fiery tears ever streaming, never stinting, grief ever griping, never
ceasing; death ever living, never dying: yea, that worm which gnaweth and
dies not, that fire which burns and quenches not, August. Bernard.
that death which rages and ends not. But if punishments will not deter
us, at least let rewards allure us. The faithful cry ever for the approach of
Gods judgment; the reward of immortality, which, with assurance in Gods mercy,
and his Sons Passion, they undoubtedly hope to obtain; with vehemence of
spirit inviting their Mediator: Come Lord Jesus, Revel 22.20.
come quickly. Such is the confidence or spiritual assurance which every
faithful soul has in him, to whose express Image as they were formed, so in
all obedience are they conformed, that the promises of the Gospel might be on
them conferred and confirmed. Such as these care not so much for possessing
ought in the world, as they take care to lay a good foundation against the day
of trial, which may stand firm against the fury of all temptation. These see
nothing in the world worthy their fear* (...). Nazi^n.
This only (say they) is a fearful thing, to fear any thing more than God.
These see naught in the world worthy either their Qui nil ^^bet in mundo quod
app^t^t, nihil est quod de mundo p^^timescat. Cyprian.
desire or fear and their reason is this, Quis ei deseculo metus est, cui in
se^ulo Deus tutor est? ibid. De hoc die lux proficit, sed ^ox deficit. Aug.
(...) appellat Clemens.
There is nothing able to move that man to fear in all the world, who has God
for his guardian in the world. Neither is it possible that he should fear the
loss of any thing in the world, who cannot see any thing worthy having in the
world. So equally affected are these toward the world, as there is nothing in
all the world, that may any way divide their affection from him who made the
world. Therefore may we well conclude touching these, that their Light shall
never go out: For these walk not in darkness, nor in the shadow of death, as
those to whom the light has not as yet appeared: for the Light has appeared
in Darkeness, giving light all the night long to all these faithful believers,
during their abode in these Houses of Clay. Now to express the Nature of that
Light, though it far exceed all humane apprehension, much more all
expression: Clemens understands by that Light which the Wise-woman, to wit,
Christ's spouse, kept by means of her candle which gave light all the night
long, the heart; and he calls the Meditations of holy men, Candles that never
go out. Saint Augustine writes, among the Pagans in the Temple of Venus,
there was a Candle which was called Inextinguishable: whether this be or no of
Venus Temple, we leave it to the credit of antiquity, only Augustines report
we have for it; but without doubt in every faithful hearer and keeper of the
Word, who is the Temple of the Holy Ghost, there is a Candle or Light that
never goes out. Whence it appears that the heart of every faithful soul is
that Light which ever shines, August. de Civit. Dei. lib. 21. cap 6.
and his faith that virgin Oil which ever feeds, and his Conscience that
comfortable Witness which assures, and his devoted Zeal to Gods house that
Seal which confirms him to be one of Gods chosen, because a living faith
works in him, which assures him of life, howsoever his outward man, the
temple of his body, Tract. 49. in Io.

Vnde mors in anima? quid non est fides. Vnde mors in corpore; quid non est
animae. Ergo animae tu^ anim^ est fides.


become subject to death. Excellently says Saint Augustine: Whence comes it
that the soul dies? because faith is not in it. Whence that the body dies?
because a soul is not in it. Therefore the soul of thy soul is faith. But
forasmuch as nothing is so carefully to be sought for, nor so earnestly to be
wrought for, as purity or uprightness of the heart: for seeing there is no
action, no study, which has not his certain scope, end, or period; yea, no
Art but labors by some certain means or exercises to attain some certain
proposed end; (which end surely is to the Soul at first proposed, but the last
which is obtained:) how much more ought there to be some end proposed, to our
studies, as well in the exercises of our bodies; as in the readings,
meditations, and mortifications of our minds (passing over corporal and
external labors) for which end those studies or exercises were at first
undertaken? For let us think with our selves, if we knew not, or in mind
before conceived not, whither or to what especial place we were to run, were
it not a vain task for us to undertake to run? Even so to every Action are
we to propose his certain end: which being once attained, we shall need no
further striving toward it, being at rest in our selves by attaining it. And
like end are we to propose to our selves in the exercise of Moderation, making
it a subduer of all things which sight against the spirit, which may be
properly reduced to the practicing of these four; overcomming of anger by the
spirit of patience; wantonness by the spirit of continence; pride by the spirit
of humility; and in all things unto him whose Image we partake, so nearly
conformed, that, like good Proficients, we may truly say with the blessed
Apostle, We have in all things learned to be contented.

Anger.
For the first, to wit, Anger, as there is no passion which makes man more
forgetful of himself; This might be instanced in our late Fleetstr^et tumult.
so to subdue it, makes man an absolute enjoyer of himself. Athenodorus a wise
Philosopher, departing from Augustus Caesar, and bidding him farewell, left
this lesson with him, most worthy to be imprinted in an Emperors breast; That
when he was angry, he should repeat the four and twenty Greek letters.
Plutarch in Apotheg. Romans
Which lesson received Caesar as a most precious jewel, making such use
thereof, as he showed himself no less a Prince in the conquest of this
passion, than in his magnificence of state, and majesty of person. No less
praiseworthy was that excellent sovereignty which Architas had over this
violent and commanding passion, (as we have formerly observed) who finding his
servants loitering in the field, or committing some other fault worthy
reproof, like a worthy master, thought it fit first to over-master himself,
before he would show the authority of a Master to his servants: wherefore
perceiving himself to be greatly moved at their neglect, as a wise Moderator
of his passion, he would not beat them in his ire, Cic. Tus. lib. 4.
but said; Happy are ye that I am angry with you. In brief, because my purpose
is only to touch these rather than treat of them, having so amply discoursed
of some of them formerly: as the Sun is not to go down upon our wrath; Ira
mortalium debet esse mortalis. Lectant.
so in remembrance of that son of righteousness, let us bury all wrath: so
shall we be freed from the viols of wrath, and appear blameless in the day of
wrath. For in peace shall we descend to our graves without sighing, if in peace
we be angry without sinning.

Wantonness.
Secondly wantonness, being so familiar a Darling with the flesh, is ever waging
war with the spirit; she comes with powdered hair, painted cheeks, straying
eyes, mincing and measuring her pace, tinkling with her feet, and using all
immodesty to lure the unwarie youth to all sensuality. These light professors
(as St. Jerome to Marcella says) are matter of scandal to Christians eyes;
those eye-sores which wound the inward man with the sting of anguish. Now what
receipt better or more sovereign to cure this malady, than to take away the
cause which begets this infirmity? And what may we suppose the cause to be,
but the complacency of the flesh? when we labor to satisfy our desires, and
give easy reins to our affections. August.
For the flesh, while she is obedient, becomes a servant to the soul: she
governs, the other is governed: this commands, that is commanded: but
having once begun to usurp, she will scarcely ever become a faithful and
loyal subject. What necessity then is there enjoined us to stand upon our
guard, when we have a Tarpeia within our gates, ready to betray us to our
professed enemy? With what continual and incessant labor ought we to employ
our selves, that this untamed Iebusit^ might be so tired and wearied, that all
inordinate motions might be extinguished, which by sloth and want of
employment are ever cherished? Let us then embrace Continence, and by power of
so good a spirit dispossess the bad. Let us not entertain those dangerous
motives to sin, which, like a Snake in the bosom will wound us to death. And
what be those motives? Wanton thoughts and wanton words, which corrupt men's
manners with wicked works. It is a sure note and worthy observance; Whenever
any thought is suggested to you which tastes of evil, make the door of your
heart fast, lest you give actual possession to the Devil. Wanton words
likewise are dangerous motives to incontinence; the habit whereof being once
attained, will hardly be relinquished. So as Speech, which Democritus calls the
image of life, being exercised in scurrility, seems to deface that Image, by
laying on it the dark and sable color of death. For as muddy water is an
argument that the fountain is troubled: so filthy words are witnesses that the
heart is corrupted. A good Tree brings forth good fruit, a pure Spring clear
water, and an incorrupt heart words tending to the edification of the hearer.
Now he who uses his tongue to filthy communication, incurres a threefold
offense: First, in dishonouring God; Secondly, in sinning against his own
soul; Thirdly, in ministering matter of scandal or offense to his brother. How
necessary is it then, to keep a watch upon our mouth, and a gate of
circumstance unto our lips, that we offend not with our tongue; which like the
poisonous Adder, stings even unto death, wounding the soul with an incurable
dart? Neither do I, speaking of wantonness, only restrain my discourse to
incontinence, but to whatsoever else may properly tend to the complacency or
indulgence of the flesh, as to tender obedience to her in the desire of
luscious and lascivious meats, or the like; including all such as turn the
grace of God to wantonness, making a profession of faith, but denying the
power thereof in their life and conversation.

Thirdly, Pride.
Pride, that Luciferian sin, whose airie thoughts are ever mounting, must be
subdued by the spirit of humility. We would hold it to be no faithful part of
a subject, to make choice of no livery but his, who is a professed foe to his
Sovereign. And what I pray you, do we, when we attire our selves in the
habiliments of Pride; not only outwardly in gorgeous apparel, choicest
perfumes, and powdered locks; but likewise inwardly, in putting on the spirit
of Pride, attended by scornful respects, disdainful eyes, and haughty
looks? Can we be truly termed Subjects? May we, wearing the Devils crest,
partake of the seamelesse coat of Christ? May we expect a Crown after death,
that oppose him who wore a thorny Crown to crown us after death? No; as the
Soldier is known by his Colors, the Servant by his Cognizance, the Sheep by
his mark, and coin by the stamp; so shall we be known by our Colors, if
we be Christ's Soldiers; by our Crest or Cognizance, if his followers; by our
mark, if his Sheep and Lambkins; by our stamp or superscription, August^
if his Coin or Sterling. O know, how much we are the humbler, by so much to
our Beloved are we the liker! Let us resemble him then in all humility, that
afterward we may reign with him in glory. Lastly, that we may become
conformable unto him, whose Image we have received, we are to learn of the
blessed Apostle, in all things to be contented. Content (says the Proverb)
is worth a Crown, but many Crowns come far short of this content. Now to
propose a rule how this Content may be acquired, were a Lesson well worthy our
learning: which I could wish might be as soon learned as proposed: for
Content briefly, consists in these two; Wherein true content properly
consists.
To be free from desiring what we have not; to be free from fearing to lose
what we already have. Now he, who sees nothing in the world worthy desiring,
cannot choose but be free from fear of losing, being so indifferent touching
the world, or whatsoever else he has in enjoying. For he that neither has,
nor sees ought in the world which he esteems worthy his love, enjoys naught
but he can willingly be content to leave; for no man fears the loss of
that which he does not love. But to draw nearer a point: these two passions or
affections of desire and fear; desire of having more than we have; fear of
losing what we already have, may be properly said to have a threefold respect:
To the goods or endowments of the Mind, of the Body, and of Fortune. For the
first, Plato in his Timaeo says; The goods of the Mind. Plato in Timaeo.

Primum oritur, postremiun moritur.


If a man lose his eyes, or feet, or hands, or wealth, we may say of such an
one, he loses something; but he who loses his heart and reason, loses
all. For in the womb of our Mother, the first thing which is engendered or
participates form, is the heart; and the last which dies, is the same heart.
So as properly it may be called Reasons Treasury or storehouse; where those
divine graces are seated, which confer the best beauty to man, giving him a
note of distinction from other creatures, the more to dignifie man. For
howsoever all creatures have hearts, yet only to man is given an understanding
heart. Other creatures have hearts indeed sensible of present pain, but they
cannot recall to mind what is past, or probably collect by what is past, the
seasons of times, or issues of affairs likely to ensue. In the heart of man,
there is the reasonable power, with which he governs himself; the irascible
power, with which he defends himself; and concupiscible, by which he
provideth for things necessary to releeve himself. Now admit we were deprived
of that principal blessing, the intellectual part, so as like raving and
raging Orostes, we were forced to take many blind bypath, wanting the means
of direction by reason of our woeful distraction, and crying out with Octavia
in Seneca; O, to the spirits below that I were sent,
For death were easy to this punishment! Quis me Stygias mittet ad umbras?
Mori juvabit, poenae nam gravior^ nece esi. Senin Octav.

Admit, I say, all this; yet is the afflicted soul to be content, abiding
Gods good leisure, who as he does wound, so he can cure; and as he opened old
Tobiths eyes, so can he, when he pleases, where he pleases, and as he
pleases, open the bleered eyes of understanding: so with a patient expectance
of Gods mercy, and Christian resolution to endure all assaults with constancy,
as he recommendeth himself to God, so shall he find comfort in him: in whom
he has trusted and receive understanding more clear and perfect than before
he enjoyed. Or admit one should have his memorative part so much infeebled, as
with Corvinus Messala he should forget his own name; Messala Corvin.
yet the Lord, who numbreth the stars, and knows them all by their names,
will not forget him, though he has forgot himself; having him as a Sign^t
upon his finger, ever in his remembrance. For what shall it avail, if thou
have memory beyond Cyrus, who could call every soldier in his army by his
name, when it shall appear thou have forgot thy self, and exercised that
faculty rather in remembering injuries, than recalling to mind those
insupportable injuries, which thou have done unto God? Nay more; of all
faculties in man, Memory is the weakest, first waxes old, and decays sooner
than strength or beauty. And what shall it profit thee, once to have excelled
in that faculty, when the privation thereof adds to thy misery? Nothing,
nothing: wherefore, as every good and perfect gift comes from above, where
there is neither change nor shadow of change, so as God takes away nothing but
what he has given, let every one in the loss of this or that faculty,
refer himself with patience to his sacred Majesty, who in his change from
earth will crown him with mercy.

Secondly, for the goods or blessings of the Body, as strength beauty,
agilitie, The goods of the Body. Plut. in vit. Anl. Gel. Nect. Attie. l. 5. c.
9. Su^t^^. Tranqull. Homer in Odys.
etc. admit thou were blind with Appius, lame with Agesilaus, tongue-tied with
Samius, dwarfish with Ivius, deformed with Thersites; though blind, thou have
eyes to look with, and that upward; though lame, thou have legs to walk
with, and that homeward; though tongue-tied, thou have a tongue to speak, and
that to Godward; though dwarfish, thou have a proportion given thee, aiming
heavenward; though deformed, thou have a glorious feature, and not brutish to
looke-downward. For not so much by the motion of the body, and her outwardly
working faculties, as by the devotion of the heart, and those inwardly moving
graces, are we to come to GOD. Again, admit thou were so mortally sick, as
even now drawing near shore, there were no remedy but thou must of necessity
bid a long adieu to thy friends, thy honors, riches, and whatsoever else are
dear or near unto thee: yet for all this, why should thou remain
discontented? Art thou here as a Countryman, or a Pilgrim? No Countryman sure;
for then should thou make earth thy Country, and inhabit here as an abiding
city. Certum est quod morieris, inc^rtum est quando, quomodo, aut ubi; quoniam
ubique te mors expectat, tu quoque si sapiens fueris, ubique eam expectabis.
Ber. in Med. 3.
And if a Pilgrim, who would grieve to be going homeward? There is no life but
by death, no habitation but by dissolution. He then that fears death, fears
him that brings glad tidings of life. Therefore to esteem life above the
price, or fear death beyond the rate, are alike evil: for he that values life
to be of more esteem than a pilgrimage, is in danger of making shipwreck of
the hope of a better inheritance; and he that fears death as his professed
enemy, may thank none for his fear but his security. Certainly, there is no
greater argument of folly than to show immoderate sorrow either for thy own
death, or death of another: for it is no wisdom to grieve for that which thou
can not possibly prevent, but to labor in time rather to prevent what may
give the occasion to grieve. For say, is thy friend dead? I confess it were a
great loss, if he were lost; but lost he is not, though thou be left; gone
he is before thee, not gone from thee; divided only, not exiled from thee. A
Princess we had of sacred memory, who looking one day from her Palace, might
see one show immoderate signs or appearances of sorrow, so as she moved with
princely compassion, sent down presently one of her Pensioners to inquire who
it was that so much sorrowed* and withal to minister him all means of
comfort; who finding this sorrowful mournes to be a Counselor of State, who
sorrowed for the (...) of his daughter; returned directly to his Sovereign,
and acquainted her therewith. O (quoth she) who would thinks tha^ a wise man
and a Counselor of our State could so forget himself, as to show himself
(...) for (...) of his child's! And surely, whosoever shall but duly con^ider
man's (...) with death necessity, cannot choose but wonder why any one should
be so wholly destitute of understanding, to lament the death of any one, since
to die is as necessary and common as to be borne to every one. Excusit
redeuntem natura, ut intrantem. Sen.
But perchance it may be by some objected, that the departure of their friend
is not so much lamented, for that is of necessity, and therefore exacts no
tears of sorrow, being, if spent, as fruitless as the doom reverselesse; but
their sudden and inopinate departure. Whereto I answer, that no death is sudden
to him that dies well: for sudden death has properly a respect rather to the
life, how it was passed or disposed, than to death, how short his summons were,
or how quickly closed. Io. Mathes. preaching upon the raising up of the woman's
son of Naim by Christ, within three hours afterward died himself: The like
is written of Luther, and many others. As, one was choked with a fly, another
with a hair, a third pushing his foot against the tressal, another against the
threshold falls down dead: So many kind of ways are chalked out for man,
Vnus intro^tus, innumori exitus. Men.
to draw toward his last home, and weane him from the love of the earth. Those
whom God loves, said Menander, the young: yea, those whom he esteems
highest, he takes from hence the soonest: And that for two causes; the one, is
to free them the sooner from the wretchedness of earth; the other, to crown
them the sooner with happiness in Heaven: For what gain we by a long life,
or what profit reap we by a tedious Pilgrimage, but, that we partly see,
partly suffer, partly commit more evils? Priamus saw more days and shed more
tears than Troilus. Let us hence then learn so to measure our sorrow for
ought that may or shall befall us, Nazian. in funeb. orat. pro Caesario.
in respect of the body, that after her return to earth, it may be
gloriously reunited to the soul, to make an absolute Consort in Heaven.

Thirdly, and lastly, for the goods or blessings of Fortune; they are not to
command us, The goods of Fortune.
but to be commanded by us; not to be served by us, but to serve us. And
because he only in the affairs of this life is the wealthiest, who in the
desires of this life is the neediest; and he the richest on earth, who sees
little worth desiring on earth: we are so to moderate our desires (as I have
formerly touched) in respect of those things we have not, that we may labor
to over-master our desires, (in thirsting after more than we already have;)
likewise so to temper and qualify our affections in respect of those things we
have, as to show no immoderate sorrow for the loss of those we have, but to be
equally minded, as well in the fruition of those we have, as privation of those
we have not. For of all others, there is no sorrow baser nor unworthier, than
that which is grounded on the loss of Ox, or Cow, or such inferior subjects.
Neither incur they any less opinion of folly, who carried away with the love
of their Horse, Hound, or some such creature, use of some prize or conquest
got, to rear in their memory some Obeliske, or Monument graced with a
beauteous inscription, to preserve their fame; because (poor beasts) they have
nothing to preserve themselves: for howsoever this act seem to have some
correspondence with gratitude, laboring only to grace them who have graced us,
rearing a stone to perpetuate their fame, who memoriz'd our Name by speed of
foot, yet is it gross and so palpable to those, whose discretion is a moulder
of all their actions, as they account it an act, worthier the observation of an
Heathen than a Christian. Cimon buried his Mares, bestowing upon them specious
Tombs, when they had purchased credit in the swift races of the Olympiads.
Xantippus bewailed his Dogs death, which had followed his master from Calamina.
Alexander erected a City in the honor of Bucepha^us, having been long
defended by him in many dangerous battles. And the Ass may well among the
Heathen be adorned with Lilies, Violets and Garlands, when their Goddess Vesta
by an Asses bray, avoided the rape of Priapus. But howsoever these actions
among Pagans might carry some color of thankfulness, rewarding them, by
whose speed, fury, agility, or some other means, they have been as well
preserved as honored: yet with Christians, whose eyes are so clearly opened,
and by the light divine so purely illumined; would these seem acts of
profaneness, ascribing honor to the creature, to whom none is due; and not to
the Creator, to whom all honor is solely and properly due. In brief, let us
so esteem of all the goods and gifts of Fortune, as of Vtensils, fit for our
use and service, but of the Supreme good, as our chiefest Solace: Aug. S^liloq,
cap. 20*
For he who subjected all things to the feet of man, that man might be wholly
subject unto him, and that man might be wholly his, he gave man dominion over
all those works of his: so he created all outward things for the body, the
body for the soul, but the soul for him; that she might only intend him, and
only love him, possessing him for solace, but inferior things for service.

Thus far, Gentlemen, has this present discourse enlarged it self, to
express the rare and incomparable effects, which naturally arise from the due
practice of Moderation, being indeed a virtue so necessary, and well deserving
the acquaintance of a Gentleman, (who is to be imagined as one new come to his
lands, and therefore stands in great need of so discreet an Attendant) as there
is no one virtue better sorting rank, not only in matters of preferment,
profit, or the like; but in matters of reputation or personal engagement,
where his very name or credit is brought to the tesh. Look not then with the
eye of scorn on such a follower: but take these instructions with you for a
farewell. Does Ambition buzze in your care motions of Honor? This faithful
Attendant, Moderation, will dissuade you from giving way to these suggestions,
and tell you, Ambition is the high road which leads to ruin, but Humility is
the gate which opens unto glory. Does Covetousness whisper to you matters of
profit? Here is one will tell you, the greatest wealth in the world, is to want
the desires of the world. Does Wantonness suggest to you motives of Delight?
Here is that H^rbe of Grace, which will save you from being wounded, and salve
you already wounded. In brief, both your expense of Time and Coin, shall be
so equally disposed, as you shall never need to redeem Time, because you never
prodigally lost it; nor repent your fruitless expense of Coin, because you
never profusely spent it. Thus if you live, you cannot choose but live for ever;
for ever in respect of those choice virtues which attend you: for ever, in
respect of your good Example, moving others to imitate you: and for ever, in
respect of that succeeding glory which shall crown you.

THE ENGLISH GENTLEMAN.
Argument.
Of Perfection; Contemplative and Active; The Active preferred; Wherein it
consists; Of the absolute or Supreme end whereto it aspireth, and wherein it
rests.

PERFECTION.
WE are now to treat of a Subject, Observat. 8.
which, while we are here on earth, is far easier to discourse of, then to
find; for Perfection is not absolute in this life, but graduall. So as,
howsoever we may term one perfect or complete in respect of some especial
qualities, wherewith he is endued; yet, if we come to the true ground of
Perfection, Deus fecit hominem ratione sapi^^tem, vitainnocen tem, domino
potentem.
we shall find it far above the Sphere of Mortality to ascend to: for man,
miserable man, what is he, or of himself what can he, to make him absolutely
perfect? Exceed he can, but in nothing but sin, which is such a natural
imperfection, as it wholly detracts from his primitive Perfection. Time was
indeed, when man knew no sin, and in that ignorance from sin consisted his
Perfection. But no sooner was that banefull Apple tasted, then in the knowledge
of sin he became a professant. We are therefore to discourse of such
Perfection, as we commonly in opinion hold for absolute, though in very deed
it appear only respective and definite; for to treat of that Perfection which
is transcendent or indefinite, were to sound the Sea* or weigh the Mountains,
so far it exceeds the conceit of man: yea, I say, to task humane
apprehension to the discussion of that sovereign or supreme Perfection, were
as unequally matched, as ever were earth and heaven, strength and weakness, or
the great Beh^moth, and the silliest worm that creeps in the chinks of the
earth. Let us address our selves then to this Task, and make this our ground,
That as no man is simply good but God; so no man is absolutely perfect till he
be individually united to God; which on earth is not granted, but promised; not
effected, but expected; not obtained, but with confidence desired, when these
few, but evil days of our Pilgrimage shall be expired: yet is there a
graduall Perfection, which in some degree or measure we may attain, becoming
conformable unto him, whose Image we have received, and by whom we have so
many singular graces and prerogatives on us conferred. And this Perfection is
to be procured by assistance of Gods Spirit, and a desire in man to second that
assistance by an assiduall endeavor: Which devout and godly endeavor, that it
might be the better furthered, and his glory, by whose grace we are assisted,
the more advanced; needful it were to reduce to our memory, daily and hourly,
these two maine Considerations. Two Considerations of maine consequence.

Bern. Med. 15.


First, those three professed Enemies that infatigably assail us, which should
make us more watchful. Secondly, that faithful friend, who so courageously
fights for us, which should make us more thankful: for our Enemies, as they
are some of them domestic, so are they more dangerous; for no foe more
perilous then a bosom foe. Besides they are such pleasing Enemies, as they
cheer us, when they kill us; sting us, when they smile on us. And what is the
instrument they work on, but the soul? And what the time limited them to
work in, but our life? Which humors do swell up, sorrows bring down, heats
dry, air infect, August. Manual. cap. 8.
meat puff up, fasting macerate, jests dissolve, sadness consume, care
straineth, security deludeth, youth extolleth, wealth transporteth, poverty
dejecteth, old age crooketh, infirmity breaks, grief depresseth, the Devil
deceives, the world flattereth, the flesh is delighted, the soul blinded, and
the whole man perplexed. How should we now oppose our selves to such furious
and perfidious Enemies? Or what armor are we to provide for the better
resisting of such powerful and watchful Assailants? Certainly, no other
provision need we, then what already is laid up in store for us, to arm and
defend us, and what those blessed Saints and servants of Christ have formerly
used, leaving their own virtuous lives as patterns unto us. The Christians
complete Armor.
Their Armor was fasting, Prayer, and works of Devotion: by the first, they
made themselves fit to pray; in the second they addressed themselves to pray as
they ought; in the third they performed those holy duties, which every
Christian of necessity ought to perform.

Augustine. Sicut nullus locus vacat a peccando, it a nullus locus vacet a
precando.
And first, for Fasting, it is a great work, and a Christian work; producing
such excellent effects, as it subjects the flesh to the obedience of the
spirit; making her of a commander, a subject; of one who took upon her an
usurped authority, to humble her self to the souls sovereignty. Likewise
Prayer, how powerful it has been in all places, might be instanced in
sundry places of holy Scripture. In the Matt. 4, 1, 3.
Desert, where temptation is the readiest; In the Luke 19.47.
Temple, where the Devil is oft-times busiest; On the Mark. 4.38.
Sea, where the floods of perils are the nearest; In 1 These. 5.3.
Peace, where security makes men forgetfullest; And in Exo. 17.11, 12.
War, where imminent danger makes men fearfull'st: Yea, whether it be with
Daniel in the Dan. 6.22.
Den; or Manasses in the 2 Paralip. 37.
Dungeon; whether it be with holy David in the 2 Samuel 12.10.
Palace; or heavenly Jeremy in the Ier. 37.15.
Prison: the power and efficacy of Prayer, sacrificed by a devout and zealous
believer, cannot choose but be as the first and second reign, fructifying the
happy soil of every faithful soul, to her present comfort here, and hope of
future glory elsewhere. Thirdly, works of Devotion, being the fruits or
effects of a spiritual conversation; as ministering to the necessity of the
Saints; wherein we have such plenty of examples, both in divine and humane
writ, Qui copiofiores sunt, ^t volunt pro arbitrio quisque s^o quod visum est
contribuunt, et quodita colligitur apud praepositum deponitur, etc. Just. Mart.
Apol. 2. Non pecca^erem, sed ^uf^um paupere^ ^utrit, quia in illo non culpa^^,
sed naturam diligit, etc. Greg. M^g.

The fruit of Fasting. Vid Cyprian. sermon. de jejunio, tom. 2. Basil. de jejun
homil. 1. Tertul, lib. de jejun. Origin. hom. 10. in Levit. Vid. Bedam. quo
viro vere venerabili (testimonio P^^lyd^ti) nihil fuit cas^ius, nihil melius,
nihil verius, etc. Polydor. lib. 1. Greg. in Mo^. Expos. In Job. Hieron.


as their godly charity, or zealous bounty might worthily move us to imitate
such blessed Patterns in actions of like- Devotion, For such were they, as
they were both liberal, and joyed in their liberality, every one contributing
so much as he thought fit, or pleased him to bestow. And whatsoever was so
collected, to the charge or trust of the Governor, or Disposer of the stock
of the poor, was forthwith committed. Here was that poore-mans Box, or indeed
Christ's Box, wherein the charity of the faithful was treasured. Neither did
these holy Saints or Servants of God, in their Alms, eye so much the quality
of the person, as his Image whom he did represent. And herein they nourished
not a sinner, but a righteous begg^^; because they loved not his sin, but his
nature. But now, because we are to treat of Perfection in each of these we
are to observe such cautions, as may make the work perfect without blemish,
and pure from the mixture of flesh.

As first in that godly practice of Fasting, to observe such mediocrity, as
neither desire to be known by blubbered eyes, hanging down the head, nor any
such external passion may tax us to be of those Pharisees, whose devotion had
relation rather to the observance of man, then the service of God; neither so
to macerate the body, as to disable it for performing any office which may tend
to the propagation of the glory of the Highest. For the first institution of
Fasts, as it was purposely to subdue the inordinate motions of the flesh, and
subject it to the obedience and observance of the spirit; so diverse times were
by the ancient Fathers and Councels thought fitting to be kept in holy
abstinence, of purpose to remove from them the wrath of God, inflicted on them
by the sword, pestilence, famine, or some other such like plague. Saint Gregory
instituted certain public Fasts, resembling the Rogation Week, with such
like solemn processions against the plague and pestilence, as this
Rogation-weeke was first ordained by another holy Bishop to that end. As for
the Ember-dayes, they were so called of our ancient forefathers in this
Country, because on these fasting days, men eat bread baked under embers or
ashes. But to propose a certain rule or form of direction, there is none
surer or safer, then that which we formerly proposed: So to nourish our
bodies, that they be not too much weakened, by which means more divine offices
might be hindered; and again, so to weaken our bodies, that they be not too
much pampered; by which means our spiritual fervor might be co^led. For too
delicate is that master, who, when his belly is crammed, would have his mind
with devotion crowned.

Secondly, for Prayer, as it is to be numbered among the greatest works of
charity, The power of Prayer.
so of all others it should be freest from hypocrisy: for it is not the sound
of the mouth, but the soundness of the heart, which makes this oblation so
effectually powerful, and to him that prays, so powerfully fruitful. It is
not beating of the breast with the fist, but inward compunction of the heart,
flying with the wing of faith, that pierces heaven. For neither could
Trasylla's devotion, whereof Gregory relates, In Dei auribus desidertum
vehemens clamor magnus est; remissa intentio, vox submissa.

Bernard. Greg. in dialog. Nazian. in Epitaph. Gorgon. sororis ejus.

Eusebius. in hist. Hieron. in vit. Paul. Eremit. Vid. Doct. Andr. in Tortura Tort.


have been so powerful; nor Gorgonius supplication, whereof Nazianzen
reports, so fruitful; nor James the brother of our Lord his invocation,
whereof Eusebius records, so faithful; nor Paul the Eremites daily oblation,
whereof Jerome recounts, so effectual; if pronunciation of the mouth, without
affection of the heart; beating of the breast, without devotion of mind;
dejection of face, without erection of faith, had accompanied their prayer. For
it is not hanging down the head like a bulrush, which argues contrition, but a
passionate affection of the heart which mounts up to the throne of grace, till
it purchase remission.

Thirdly, for Almsdeeds and other works of Devotion, being the fruits or
effects of faith, as they are sweet odours, and shall not lose their reward,
being duly practiced; so we must take these three cautions by the way, lest
such sweet fruits be corrupted. The first is, to give her own, and not
another, for that were robbery: The second is, to give to the poor, and not
to the rich in hope of commodity: The third is, to give in mercy or
fellow-feeling of others wants, and not for vainglory. For howsoever the
poor need not care for any of these respects, because he is rewarded; yet the
giver is to care, because his reward should hereby become frustrated.
Certainly, there is nothing which relisheth better to the palate of our Maker*
then ministering relief to the needy Beggar, Greg. Nazian.
who is Gods beggar, as a holy Father calls him, and therefore should be
relieved for his cause that sent him. Those Goats set on the left hand do
affright me, not because they were robbers, but because they were no feeders,
says Nazianzen: therefore are we willed to feed the hunger-starved soul, lest
want should famish him; for if we suffer him to die for food, we, and none
but we did famish him. Thus if we observe a-right the zealous and religious
practice of those blessed Patterns, who have gone before us, and have left
their memorable lives as examples to be imitated by us, we shall in some
measure attain to that Perfection, whereof we now discourse; laboring so to
moderate our affections herein, as neither vainglory, nor any other fleshly
respect may interpose it self in actions of such maine and serious
consequence. For albeit, as I formerly noted, no man may come to that absolute
Perfection, either in matters of knowledge, or practice of life, as if nothing
could be further attained, but that the very highest pitch of Perfection were
acquired; yet are there degrees which in some measure may be attained, if those
virtues which conduce to this Perfection be duly practiced. For, it is not
professing of virtue, but practicing; neither practicing of one, but all, which
gives life to this Perfection. For he whom we sincerely perfect call,
Excels not in one virtue, but in all.
Which Perfection far exceeds all others, derived from some exqui^ite
knowledge in Arts or Sciences; for these, how absolutely soever they be, come
far short of that perfection which longer time and experience might bring
them to. Alcibiades is reported to have been so skillful in all Arts and
Exercises, that he won the prize in what enterprise soever he took in hand;
which was no small glory, when in the Olympian or Istmian games he no sooner
appeared, than those who were to contend with him, were forthwith dismayed: yet
came this perfection short of that whereof we now discourse. For it may be
probably gathered, that, albeit he was the activest in his time on Istmus. yet
all the activest youths of Greece were not on Istmus; or if they were, yet the
whole world had youths more active, and in all parts more absolute than they
were in Greece. For to seek perfection on earth, either in respect of mind or
body, In flumine palladis ignem.
either in ability of the one, or excellency of the other, were -- in aethere
quarere nidum; he only being most perfect, who acknowledges himself to be
most imperfect. Cicero brings in M. Antony, saying that there be many follow,
Cicero 1, lib. de Orat.
and yet come not to the perfection. Which he might have instanced the best in
himself: for who, for discipline more exquisite, for attempts in his own
person more valiant, for ripeness of wit more pregnant, or for tongue more
powerfully persuasive than M. Antony? Yet to observe how much those more
excellent parts were disabled, that light of understanding darkened, that
pregnancy of wit rebated, that persuasive Orator by a wanton Oratresse seduced;
yea, even that Mirror of men blemished, might move us freely and ingenuously to
acknowledge, as there is nothing more variable than man in respect of his
condition, so nothing more prone to evil in respect of his natural
corruption. So as, howsoever he may seem in some sort perfect, either in
moderating his affections with patience, or subduing his desires with reason,
yet there is ever some one defect or other that darkens those Perfections.
Wherefore, as Marius bombasted his stockins to give a better proportion to his
small legs; if any one would have his good parts set out, he had need to wear
some counterfeit disguise to cover his wants, Plut. in vit.
and so gull the world, as Juno deceived Ixion with a cloud. Truth is, that the
worthiest men have been stained with some notable crime. Caesar, though he
were moderate, yet was he incontinent: Alexander though continent, yet was he
immoderate: Sylla, though valiant, yet was he violent: Cicero. 4. lib. T^s^ul.
Galba, though eminent, yet was he insolent: Lucullus generous, yet delicious;
Marcellus glorious, yet ambitious; Architas patient, yet avaritious; Archias
pregnant, yet lascivious. So as Homers understanding, (...). Solonis dict.
Platoes wit, Diogenes phrase, Aeschines Art of Oratorie, and Cicero's tongue,
could not assume to themselves such Perfection, as to free them from other
blemishes, which detracted as much from their worth, as these Perfections added
to their glory. For howsoever that saying of Solon may seem authenticke; All
things among men are sound and perfect; it is to be understood that he meant of
dealings or Grata commercia, na^tae gratia: bona consortia, vitae solatia.

(...).

2. Physic. Matthew. 5 48. Heb. 6.1. 1 Cor. 1.10. Colloss. 1.28.


commerce among good men, whose word is their bond, and whose profession is to
deal uprightly with all men. All things among such men are sound and perfect,
for no commodity can move them to infringe their faith, or falsify their word
for any advantage. But it may be objected, if none can be perfect, whence is it
that we read* we ought to be perfect as our heavenly Father is perfect? or how
is it that Paul exhorts us to Perfection? or how may we be presented every
man perfect in Christ Jesus? Surely not of us, nor of our selves, but through
him who became righteousness, and all Perfection for us, that he might perfect
that in us, which was far from us, without his especial grace working or
operating in us. Yet are we to labor and strive hard toward the mark that is
set before us, not ceasing till we become conformable unto him, and be made
perfect in him. But become conformable unto him we cannot, unless we take
delight in contemplating him, to whom our desire is to be conformed. We will
therefore descend to the second branch proposed, to wit, the Contemplative part
of Perfection, wherein we shall easily find what divine comfort is ministered
to the mind, in contemplating Him, who distinguished Man from the rest of his
creatures, by a reasonable mind.

IT was the saying of a Heathen, If God took delight in any felicity, it was
in contemplation. Of the contemplative part.
To the free use whereof, even those which are (as Hortensius called L.
Torquatus) unlearned, rude an ignorant, may be admitted. For howsoever some
have been pleased to term the Images of Saints, Laymens-Bookes; sure I am,
whosoever he be, be he never so simple or ignorant, that contemplateth God in
his creatures, shall find sufficient matter, in that voluminous book of his
Creation, to move him to admire the work-manship of his Maker. Psalm. 89 11.
For the heavens are his, the earth also is his; and he has laid the
foundation of the world, and all that therein is. So as, even from the Cedar of
Lebanon to the grass upon the wall, has he shown his power, and his might to
the ends of the world. Now to the end this Contemplation might not be hindered
by any worldly objects, we are to withdraw our eye from the Creature, and fix
it wholly upon our Creator. For how can any one behold the glory of Heaven,
when his eyes are poring upon earth; or how should he, whose affections are
planted upon his gold, erect his thoughts to the contemplation of God? So as
we must not only leave whatsoever we love on earth, but even leave our selves
till we become wholly weaned from earth; so shall our affections be in heaven,
though our temporary plantation be on earth. Euclionum animae, Struthionum
^lae.
For what are these Ostrich-winged worldings, who never fly up, stooping to
every lure that either honor, profit, or preferment cast out, but base
Haggards, who lie down and dare not give wing for fear of weathering? Whereas
these high fliers, whose aims are above earth, are ever meditating of earths
frailty and heavens felicity. These consider, how the solace of the captive
is one, and the joy of the freeman another. August.
These consider, how that he who sighs not while he is a Pilgrim, shall not
rejoice when he is a Citizen. These consider, that it is an evident sign that
such an one hates his Country, who holds himself to be in good state while
he lives a Pilgrim. These will not prefer the husks of vanity before those
inestimable treasures of glory. These, and only these, value earth as it should
be valued, desiring rather to leave earth, than set their love on ought upon,
earth. Neither can death take anything from him going out of the world,
Lanspurg.
who sets his love on nothing in the world. Whereas it is much otherwise with
them, whose eyes are accustomed to darkness; for they cannot behold the beams
of that supreme verity: neither can they judge any thing of the light, whose
habitation is in darkness: they see darkness, they love darkness, they
approve of darkness, and going from darkness to darkness, Aug. S^liloq. cap.
34.
they know not whither they fall. Such was Demas, who forsook his faith, and
embraced this present world. Such was Simon Magus, who bewitched the people
with sorceries, to gain himself esteem in the world. 2 Timothy 4.10. Acts 8.11.
Such was Demetrius the Silver-Smith, who brought great gains unto the
Crafts-men, and mightily enriched himself in the world. And, Acts 19.25.
in a word, such are all those whose eyes are sealed to heavenly
Contemplations, but opened to the objects of earth, prizing nothing else worthy
either viewing or loving. It is rare and wonderful to observe what admirable
Contemplations the Heathen Philosophers enjoyed, though not so much as
partakers of the least glimpse of that glorious light which is to us revealed!
How deeply searching in the influence of Planets, how studious after the
knowledge of Herbs, Plants, virtue of Stones, which enforced in them no less
admiration, than delight in so sweet a Contemplation? Now if the Heathens, who
had no knowledge of God, but only a glimmering light of Nature, being not so
much (I say) as the least beamling in comparison of that glorious light which
we enjoy, conceived such sweetness in the search of causes and events,
preferring their Contemplation before the possession of earth, or all that
frail earth could promise; what surpassing comfort or ineffable sweetness are
we to conceive in the Contemplation of GOD; the one and only practice whereof
makes man blessed, although in outward things he were the poorest and
needfullest in the world? The blessed Saints and faithful servants of GOD have
been so ravished with this sweetness, Ignoravi quod tam suavis, O bone Jesus,
^sset tuus amplex^^, tam henestus attactus tuus, tam diliciosus convictus tuus.
Bonavent.
as they were drunk with joy in Contemplation of the Highest. For either
honor or preferment, they were so indifferent, as they rejected it; and for
riches so equally contented, as they dis-valued it, selling their possessions,
and laying the money at the Apostles feet. Yea Peter, to instance one for all,
no sooner tasted this sweetness, than forgetful of all inferior things, he
cried out as one spiritually drunk, saying; Lord, it is good for us to be
here; let us make us here three Tabernacles, let us stay here, let us
contemplate thee, because we need nothing else but thee; it suffices us, Aug.
Soliloq. cap. 22.
Lord, to see thee, it suffices us, I say, to be filled with such swetnesse
as comes from thee. One only drop of sweetness he tasted, and he loathed
all other sweetness. What may we imagine would he have said, if he had
tasted the multitude of the sweetness of his divinity, which he has laid up
in store for those that fear him? Surely, the contemplative man, Nec inveni^
guidlicentius appellandum extstimemus coelum caeli domino quam contemplantem
etc. Aug. Med. cap. 19.
whose affections are estranged from earth, and seated in Heaven, makes use of
whatsoever he sees on earth, as directions to guide him in his progress to
heaven. His eyes are not like the Ambitious man's, whose eyesore is only to see
others great, and himself unadvanced: nor like the Covetous man's, whose eyes (
Tarpeia-like) betray his soul, seeing nothing precious or prosperous which he
wishes not: nor like the Voluptous man's, whose sealed eyes are blind to the
objects of virtue, but unsealed to the objects of vanity, seeing nothing
sensually moving which he affects not: nor like the Vainglorious man's, who
practices seldom what is good or honest for the love of goodness, but to be
praised and observed. Whereas the true Contemplative man loves virtue for
virtues sake, concluding divinely with the Poet; This amongst good men has
been ever known,
Virtue rewards herself, herselfe's her crown.
And for these light objects of vanity, he as much loathes them as the
Voluptuous man loves them; and for coveting, he is so far from desiring more
then he has, as he is indifferent either for enjoying or forgoing what he
already has; Vanity has not art to forge that illusion, that may surprise a
fixed divine Contemplation.

August. Soliloq. cap. 21


and for aspiring, he holds it the best ambition of any creature, to promote
the glory of his Maker. He is ever descanting on this divine ditty; O how
glorious things are spoken of thee, O thou City of God! For his thoughts are
spheared above earth, and lodged in the Contemplation of heaven. And if so be,
that he chance to fix his eye upon earth, it is, as I said before, to direct
his feet, and erect his faith to the Contemplation of heaven. For by
consideration had to these temporal goods (to use the words of a devout
Father) he gathers the greatness of the heavenly Council: Comprehending by
the little ones, those great ones; by these visible, those invisible ones: For
if the Lord show, or rather shower so great and innumerable benefits from
heaven, and from the air, from the land and sea, light and darkness, heat
and shadow, dew and rain, winds and showers, birds and fishes, and
multiplicity of herbs and plants of the earth, and the ministry of all
creatures successively in their seasons ministering to us, to allay our
loathing, and beget in us toward our Maker, an incessant longing, and all this
for an ignoble and corruptible body; what, how great, and innumerable shall
those good things be, which he has prepared for them that love him, in that
heavenly Country, where we shall see him face to face? If he do such things
for us in this prison, what will he do for us in that Palace? Great and
innumerable are thy works O Lord, King of heaven! For seeing, all these are
very good and delectable, which he has equally bestowed upon both good and
evil: how great shall those be which he has laid up only for the good? If
so diverse and innumerable be the gifts, which he bestows both upon friends
and foes; how sweet and delectable shall those be, which he will only bestow
upon his friends? If such comforts in this day of tears and anguish, what will
he confer on us in that day of Nuptial solace? If a prison contain such
delights, what, I pray you, shall our Country contain? No eye, (O Lord)
without thee, has seen those things which thou have prepared for them that
love thee: for according to the great multitude of thy magnificence, there is
also a multitude of thy sweetness, which thou have hid for them that fear
thee: for great thou art, O Lord our God, and unmeasurable, neither is there
end of thy greatness, nor number of thy wisdom, nor measure of thy mercy,
neither is there end, nor number, nor measure of thy bounty: but as thou art
great, so be thy gifts great: because thou thy self art the reward and gift of
thy faithful warriors. Thus is the spiritually Contemplative man ever
employed, thus are his affections planted, thus his desires seated, caring so
little for earth, as he is dead to earth long before he return to earth;
drawing daily nearer heaven, having his desire only there, long before he
come there.

Now to instance some, whose profession was merely contemplative, having
retired or sequestered themselves from the society of this world, we might
illustrate this subject with many excellent Patterns in this kind, as those
especially who strictly professed a monasticke life, becoming severe Enemies
to their own flesh, and estranging themselves from conversing with man. Which
kind of discipline, as it was in respect of humanity too unsociable, so in
respect of themselves doubtless, sweet and delightful; being so intranced
with divine contemplation, as they forgot earth and all earthly affections. Of
this sort, Venire ad Er^mum s^m^^ perfectio est. Caesar Ar^latensis. hom. 23.
p. 14. Aug. in retract. de Anton. Eremita hoc refert, quem Damescenus p^imum
monasticae vitae professorem vocat. Vid. Histor. Barlaam. Vid. Paul. Diaconum.

2 Timothy 6.6.18, 19.

Philip. 4.11.


you shall read sundry examples; whereof one more memorable then the rest
might be instanced in him, who reading that sentence of holy Scripture, Go
and sell all that thou have, presently imagining it to be meant by him, did
so. The like contempt toward the world, might be instanced in holy Jerome,
Paulinus that good Bishop of Nola, and many others, upon which I would be
loath to insist for brevity sake. Neither certainly can they, whose thoughts
are erected above the center of earth, having their Hearts planted where their
treasure is placed, deigne to fix their eye upon ought in the world, because
they see nothing worthy affecting in the World: for they think godliness is a
great gain, if a man be content with that he has. They do good, being rich
in good works, and ready to distribute, and communicate; laying up in store
for themselves a good foundation against the time to come, that they may
obtain eternal life. Yea, they have not only learned in whatsoever state they
are, therewith to be content, but wholly to relinquish both self and state to
advance the glory of God.

But it may be now well objected, that these men whereof we now treat, are
fitter for a Cell then a Court, and therefore too regular masters to have young
Gentlemen for their Scholars: for how should these, whose education has been
liberty, conversation public society, and who hold good fellowship an
appendice to Gentry, betake themselves to such strictness, as to be deprived
of common air, live remote from all company, passing the remainder of their
days in a wilderness, as if they had committed some egregious fact that
deserved such severe Penance? mistake me not, my meaning is much otherwise:
for as I would not have Gentlemen Libertines, so I would not have them Hermits;
for the first, as they are too prodigally secular, so the latter are too
severely regular. Neither am I ignorant how a Magis resistit ignis ferro quam
ligno, sed cum ignis vincat utrumque, inten^ior est calor in ferro quam in
ligno. Stell* de centemtr. m^nd. Qued tentation^ quo^^ndam Sanctorum assimilari
potest: Acrius tentationi resis^unt, susceptam tamen al^i^^. retinent.
Cloister may be no less shelter unto error, then a more public place of
delight or pleasure. But my discourse touching this Contemplative Perfection,
was purposely to draw the Curtain from before the Picture, and to show to
their eye that fair Idaea, or feature which has been so long shadowed; I
mean the fair and beautiful structure of the inward man, which so long as it
is darkened with these bleere-eyed Leahs, these objects of vanity cannot enjoy
it self, but peece-meale, as it were, divided from it self, seems wholly
deprived of life; for a Heart divided cannot live.

And what are these objects of vanity, whereon the eye of your Contemplation is
usually fixed, but those soule-soiling sores of this Land, Pride and
Voluptuousness? With what greediness^ will a young Gallants eye gaze upon some
new or phantasticke fashion, wishing (O vain wish!) that he had but the
brains to have invented such a fashion, whereby he might have given occasion
to others of imitation and admiration? With what insatiablenesse, will he fix
his eye upon some light affected Curtezan, whose raiment is her only ornament,
and whose chiefe^t glory is to set at sale her adulterate beauty? No street, no
corner but gives him objects which draws his eye from that choicest object,
whereon his whole delight should be seated: No place so obscure, wherein his
contemplative part is not on the view of forbidden objects greedily fixed. How
requisite then were it for you, young Gentlemen, whose aims are more noble
then to subject them to these unworthy ends, to take a view sometimes of such
absolute Patterns of Contemplative Perfection, as have excelled in this kind?
But because a threefold cord is hardly broken, I will recommend unto your
consideration a threefold Meditation, the daily use and exercise whereof may
bring you to a more serious view of your own particular estate. First is, the
worthiness of the soul; secondly, the unworthiness of earth; thirdly,
thankfulness unto GOD, who made man the worthiest creature upon the earth.

A threefold Meditation of necessary consequence. Aug. Med. cap. 27.
For the first: What is she, and in glory how surpassing is she (to use the
selfsame words which an holy Father uses) being so strong, so weak, so
small, so great, searching the secrets of God, and contemplating those things
which are of GOD, and with her piercing wit is known to have attained the
skill of many Arts for humane profit and advantage? What is she, I say, who
knows so much in other things, and to what end they were made, yet is wholly
ignorant how her self was made? A Princess surely; for as a Queen in her
Throne, so is the soul in the body; Vita corporis anima, vita animae Deus.
being the life of the body, as God is the life of the soul; being of such
dignity, as no good, but the Supreme good may suffice it: of such liberty as no
inferior thing may restrain it. How then is the soul of such worthiness,
August. Manual. cap. ^5.
as no exterior good may suffice it, nor no inferior thing restrain it? How
comes it then that it stoops to the Lure of vanity, as one forgetful of her
own glory? How comes it then to be so fledged in the Viscus est amor
possessionis, affectus cognationis, cupidit a^ honoris, and carnis voluptas.
Bern. Med. 14.
bird-lime of inferior delights, as nothing tastes so well to her palate as
the delights of earth? Surely, either she derogates much from what she is, or
there is more worthiness on earth, then we hold there is. Having then taken a
short view of the dignity or worthiness of the soul; let us reflect a little
upon the unworthiness of Earth, and see if we can find her worthy the
entertainment of so glorious a Princess.

Earth, as it is an heavy element, and inclines naturally downe-ward, so it
keeps the earthly minded Moule from looking upward. There is nothing in it
which may satisfy the desire of the outward senses, much less of the inward.
Nothing may satisfy the senses, but the divine Essence.
For neither is the eye satisfied with seeing, be the object never so
pleasing; nor the ear with hearing, be the accent never so moving; nor the
palate with tasting, be the cates never so relishing; nor the nose with
sm^lling, be the confection never so perfuming; nor the hand with touching,
be the Subject never so affecting. And for those sugared pills of pleasure,
though sweet, how short are they in continuance, and how bitter, being ever
attended on by repentance? And for honors, (those snow-bals of greatness) how
intricate the ways by which they are attained, and how sandy the foundation
whereon they are grounded? How unworthy then is Earth to give entertainment to
so princely a guest, Palea ad triticum, siliquae ad panem, c^pae et allia
Egypti ad coelestem Mann^m.
having nothing to bid her welcome withal, but the refuse and rubbish of
uncleanness, the garnish or varnish of lightness? For admit this guest were
hungry, what provision had Earth to feed her with, but the Husks of vanity? If
thirsty, what to refresh her with, but with Worme-wood of folly? If naked, what
to cloth her with, but the Cover of mortality? If imprisoned, how to visit
her, but with Fetters of captivity? Or if sick, how to comfort her, but with
Additions of misery? Since then, the worthiness of the soul is such, as Earth
is too unworthy to entertain her, expedient it were that she had recourse to
him that made her, and with all thankfulness tender her self unto him, who so
highly graced her.

Let man therefore in the uprightness of a pure and sincere soul weaned from
Earth, and by Contemplation already sainted in heaven, say; What shall I render
unto thee, Aug. in Med. cap. 15.
O my God, for so great benefits of thy mercy! What praises, or what
thanksgiving? For if the knowledge and power of the blessed Angels were present
with me to assist me, yet were I not able to render ought worthy of so great
piety and goodness, as I have received from thee; yea surely, if all my
members were turned into tongues, to render due praise unto thee, in no case
would my smalnesse suffice to praise thee, for thy inestimable charity which
thou have shown to me unworthy one, for thy only love and goodness s^ke,
exceeds all knowledge. Neither is it meet that the remembrance of a ^enefit
should be limited by day or date; No^ est (...) tempore and die ^^mortam
benefi^^^ de^^ni^i Cicero.
but as the benefits we receive are daily, so should our thankfulness be
expressed daily, lest by being unthankefull, God take his benefits from us, and
bestow them on such as will be thankful. And let this suffice for the
Contemplative part of Perfection; descending briefly to that part, which makes
the Contemplative truly perfect by Action.

WE are now to treat of that, Of the Active part. (...), nihil ag^^e.

Gasper in Hipposit.

(...)

Gell. Noct Attic. lib. 17. cap. 19.


which is easier to discourse of than to find: for men naturally have a desire
to know all things, but to do nothing; so easy is the Contemplative in
respect of the Active, so hard the Practicke in respect of the Speculative. How
many shall we observe daily propounding sundry excellent Observations, divine
instructions, and Christian-like Conclusions touching contempt of the World,
wherein this Active Perfection principally consists, yet how far short come
they in their own example: so easy it is to propound matter of instruction to
others, so hard to exemplify that instruction in themselves! This may be
instanced in that Ruler in the Gospel, who avouched his integrity and
Perfection, concluding that he had kept all those Commandments which Christ
recounted to him, from his youth up: yet when Christ said unto him, Sell all
that thou have and distribute unto the poor, and thou shall have treasure in
heaven, Luke 18.21*
and come follow me: we read, he was very sorrowful; for he was very rich.
So miserable and inextricable is the worldlings thraldom when neither the
incertainty of this life, nor those certain promises made unto him, in hope of
a better life, can weane him from the blind affection of earth. Necessary
therefore it is, that he who desires to attain this Active Perfection, unto
which all good men labor, moderate his desires toward such things as he has
not, and address himself to an indifferency of losing those things which he
already has: for he, Multi miseri (...) magis (...) quod amant, quam c^rendo
Amando enim res (...) miser^, b^be^do sunt misertores. Aug


whose desires are extended to more than he enjoyes, or who too exceedingly
admires what he now enjoyes, can never attain that high degree of Active
Perfection. The reason is, no man whose content is seated on these external
flourishes of vanity, can direct his Contemplation, or erect the eye of his
affection to that eternal Sun of verity, whom to enjoy, is to enjoy all true
Perfection; and of whom to be deprived, is to taste the bitterness of deepest
affliction. Now, how are we to enjoy him? Not by knowledge only, or
Contemplation; but by seconding, or making good our knowledge by Action: for we
know, that there is a Woe denounced on him, who knows the will of his Father
and does it not; when neither his knowledge can plead ignorance, nor want of
understanding in the Law of God, simplicity or blindness. We are therefore not
only to know, but do; know, lest ignorance should mis-guide us; do, lest our
knowledge should accuse us. Behovefull therefore were it for us to observe that
excellent precept of holy Jerome: So live (says he) that none may have just
cause to speak ill of you. Sic vivite, ut nemo de vobis m^le l^qui abs. que
mendacio possit.

Hieron. Epist. ad coelum de inflit. matris.


Now there is nothing which may procure this good report sooner, than laboring
to avoid all means of scandal; as consorting with vicious men whose noted
lives bring such in question as accompany them. This was the cause (as I
formerly noted) why Saint John would not stay in the Bath with the Heretic
C^rinthus. O how many, and with much grief I speak it, have we known in this
little Island, well descended, with choicest gifts of nature accomplished, of
their own disposition well affected, who by consorting with inordinate men
have given reins to liberty, and blasted those fair hopes, which their
friends and country had planted on them! how requisite then is it, for every
one whose thoughts aim at Perfection, to consort with such as may better him,
and not deprave him; inform him, and not corrupt him? For if there be a kind
of resemblance betwixt the diseases of the body, and the vices or enormities of
the mind; Morbi animi sunt vi^^a.
what especial care are we to take, lest by keeping company with those who are
already depraved, we become likewise infected? Men would be loath to enter any
house that is suspected only to be infected; which if at unawares they have at
any time entered, they presently make recourse to the Apothecary to receive some
sovereign receipt to expel it. And if men be so afraid lest this house, the
body, which like a shaken building menaceth ruin daily should perish, Petrarch.
what great respect ought to be had to the soul, which is the guest of the
body? Shall corruption be so attended and tendered, and the precious Image of
incorruption lessened and neglected? God forbid; specious or gorgeous
Sepulchers are not so to be trimmed, that the cost bestowed on them should
cause the divine part to be wholly contemned. Two especial memorials
recommended to our devoutest meditation.

1. The Author of our Creation.

2. The end of our Creation, Aug. Soliloq. c. 8.


To remove which contempt (if any such there be) I will recommend to your
devoutest meditation these two particulars. First, who it was that made us:
Secondly, for what end he made us: To which two briefly, we intend to refer
the Series of this present discourse.

For the first, we are to know that no man is his own maker: It is he that
made us, who made all things for us, that they might minister unto us and to
our necessity, ordaining these for our Service, and himself for our Solace. He
it is who has subjected all things to the feet of man, that man might wholly
become subject unto him: yea, and that man might become wholly his, he gave
man absolute dominion over all those works of his; creating all outward things
for the body, the body for the soul, and the soul for himself. And to what
end? Even to this end, that man might only intend him, only love him,
possessing him to his Solace, but inferior things to his Service. Aug.
Soliloq. Cap. 22.
Now, to dilate a little upon this great work of our Creation, we may collect
from sacred scripture a fourfold Creation or Generation. The first in Adam,
who came neither of man nor woman; the second in Eve, who came of man without
woman; the third in Christ, who came not of man but woman; the fourth in us,
who came both of man and woman. For the first, as he had from Earth his
Creation, so it showed the weakness of his composition, the vileness of his
condition, with the certainty of his dissolution. For the second, as she had
from man her forming, so it figured their firmness of union, inseparable
communion, and inviolable affection. For the third, as he came only of woman,
so he promised by the Seed of the woman, to ^ruise the Serpents head, who had
deceived woman, and restore man to the state of grace, from which he had
fallen by means of a woman. For the fourth, as we came both from man and
woman, so we bring with us into the world that Original sin, which we
derive both from man and woman; the sting whereof cannot be rebated, but only
through him, who became man borne of a woman. But in this great work of our
Creation, we are not to observe so much the matter, as quality and nature of
our Creation. For the matter of our Creation, or that whereof we be composed,
what is it but vile earth, slime and corruption? So as, howsoever we appear
beautiful, specious and amiable in the sight of man, whose eye is fixed on the
external part, yet when the oil of our Lamp is consumed, and we to dust and
ashes reduced, we shall observe no better inscription than this; Ecce pulchrum
ac pretiosum lipidem putre ca^^ver tegentem! Gasp. in Her^clit. Plato.
Behold a specious and a precious shrine covering a stinking corpse! Wherefore
ought we to observe the internal part, and the especial glory we receive by
it: for hereby are we distinguished in the quality of our Creation, from all
other creatures, who govern their actions by Sense only, and not by Reason.
Hence it was, that that divine Philosopher gave God thanks for three special
bounties conferred on him: First was, For that God had created him a reasonable
creature, and no brute beast; Second, For creating him a man and no woman;
Third, For that he was a Grecian, and no Barbarian. This it was which moved
that blessed and learned Father Saint Augustine to break out into this
passionate rapsodie of spirit: Aug. ^^liloq. cap. 9.
Thy hand could (O Lord) have created me a stone, or a Bird, or a Serpent, or
some brute beast: and this it knew, but it would not for thy goodness sake.
This it was which forced from that devout and zealous Father this emphaticall
discourse, or intercou^se rather, with God; who upon a time walking in his
garden, and beholding a little worm creeping and crawling upon the ground,
(...). A^sel.
presently used these words; Dear Lord, thou might have made me like this
Worm, and crawling despicable creature, but thou would not, and it was thy
mercy that thou would not; O, as thou have ennobled me with the Image of thy
self, make me conformable to thy self, that of a worm I may become an
Angel; of a vassal of sin, a vessel of Sion; of a shell of corruption, a
Star of glory in thy heavenly mansion. And in truth, there is nothing which may
move us to a more serious consideration of Gods gracious affection toward us,
than the very Image which we carry about us: preferring us not only before
all the rest of his creatures in sovereignty and dominion, but also in an
amiable similitude, feature, and proportion; whereby we become not only
equal, but even superior unto Angels, Aug. S^liloq. cap. 8.
because Man was God, and God Man, and no Angel. To whom are we then to make
recourse to, as the Author of our Creation, save God, whose hand has made and
fashioned us, whose grace has ever since directed and prevented us, and whose
continued love (for whom he loves, he loves unto the end) has ever extended
it self in ample manner toward us? How frivolous then and ridiculous were
their opinions, who ascribed the Creation of all things to the Elements; as
Anaxim^nes to the piercing Air; Hippeas to the fleeting Water; Zeno to the
purifying Fire; Zenophanes to the lumpish Earth? How miserable were these
blinded, and how notably evinced by that learned Father, who speaking in the
persons of all these Elements, and of all other his good creatures, proceeds
in this sort? I took my compass, (says he, speaking to God) in the survey of
all things, Aug. Soliloq. cap. 31.
seeking thee, and for all things relinquishing my self. I asked the Earth if
it were my god, and it said unto me that it was not, and all things in it
confessed the same. I asked the Sea, and the depths, and the creeping things in
them, and they answered, we are not thy god, seek him above us. I asked the
breathing Air, and the whole Air, with all the inhabitants thereof made
answer, Anaximenes is deceived, I am not thy God. I asked the Heaven, Sun,
Moon and Stars: neither are we thy god, answered they. And I spoke to all
these who stand about the gates of my flesh, tell me what you know concerning
my god, tell me something of him: and they cried out with a great voice, He
made us. Then I asked the whole Frame and fabric of this World, tell me if
thou be my god: and it answered with a strong voice, I am not, said it, but by
him I am, whom thou seek in me; he it was that made me, seek him above
me, who governs me, who made me. The interrogation of the creatures is the
profound consideration of them, and their answer the witness they bear of
God, because all things cry, God has made us: for as the Apostle says, the
invisible things of God are visible to be understood by those things which are
made, by the creatures of the world. Romans 1, 20.
Thus we understand the Author of our Creation, of whom seriously to meditate,
and with due reverence to contemplate, is to die to all earthly cogitations,
which delude the sinne-be-lulled soul with extravagancies. And let this
suffice for the first Memorial or Consideration, to wit, who it was that made
us; we are now to descend to the second particular, which is, for what end he
made us.

He who rested not till h^ had composed and disposed in an absolute order of
this Universe, The end of our Creation.
proposed us an example that we should imitate: So long as we are Pilgrims here
on earth, so long as we are Sojourners in this world, we may not enjoy our
spiritual Sabbath; we may stay a little and breath under the Cross, after
the example of our best Master, but rest we may not. For what end then did he
make us? That we might live such lives as may please him, and die such deaths
as may praise him; lives blameless and unreprovable; lives sanctified
throughout, pure without blemish, fruitful in example, plentiful in all holy
duties, and exercised in the works of charity; that he who begets in us
both the Will and the Work, may present us blameless at his coming. Now,
that our lives may become acceptable unto him, to whose glory they ought to be
directed, we are in this Tabernacle of clay to address our selves to those
studies, exercises and labors, which may benefit the Church or Commonwealth,
ministering matter unto others of imitation, to our souls of consolation, and
in both to Gods name of glorification: wherein appears a maine difference
betwixt the Contemplative and Active part: for sufficient it is not to know,
acknowledge and confess the divine Majesty; to dispute or reason upon high
points touching the blessed Trinity; to be wrapped up to the third heaven (as
it were) by the wings of Contemplation; but to address our selves to an
actual performance of such offices and peculiar duties, as we are expressly
enjoined by the divine Law of God. Our Lord in the Gospel, Luke. 11.27.28.
when the woman said, Blessed is the womb that bare thee, and the breasts that
gave thee suck: Answered, Yea rather blessed are they that hear the word of
God, and keep it. And when one of the Jews told him that his mother and
brethren stood without, desiring to speak with him; Matthew. 12.47, 48, 49, 50.
He answered, and said unto him that told him, Who is my mother? and who are
my brethren? And stretching forth his hand toward his Disciples, he said,
Behold my mother and my brethren: For whosoever shall do the will of my Father
which is in heaven, the same is my brother, and sister, V^d. Aegid. in hunc
locum. Feria Quart. and Quint. Hebd. Prim.
and mother. It is not knowledge then, but practice which presents us
blameless before God. Therefore are we exhorted to work out our salvation
with fear and trembling. Not to idle out the time in the marketplace, as such
who make their life a repose or cessation from all labors, studies, or
virtuous intendements. Of which sort those are, (and too many of those there
are) who advanced to great fortunes by their provident Ancestors, imagine it a
Task worthy men of their places to pass their time in pastime, and employ
their days in an infinite consumption of misspent hours, Nec proderunt hic
divitiae divitibus, nec parents filiis, nec Angeli ipsi proderunt.

Chrysostom. Ille Iudex nec gratia praevenitur, misericordia jam flectitur, nec
pecunia corrunspitur, nec satisfactione vel poena mitigabitur. August.


for which they must be accomptants in that great Assize, where neither
greatness shall be a subterfuge to guiltiness, nor their descent plead
privilege for those many hours they have misspent. O how can they answer for
so many vain and fruitless pleasures, which they have enjoyed, and with all
greediness embraced in this life? Many they shall have to witness against
them, none to answer for them: for their Stoves, Summer-arbours, Refectories,
and all other places wherein they enjoyed the height of delight, shall be
produced against them, to tax them of sensual living, and witness against
them their small care of observing the end for which they were made.

O Gentlemen, you whose hopes are promising, your more excellent endowments
assuring, and your selves as patterns unto others appearing, know that this
Perfection whereof we now entreat, is not acquired by idling or sensual
delighting of your selves in carnal pleasures, which darken and eclypse the
glory or luster of the soul, but in laboring to mortify the desires of the
flesh, which is ever levying and levelling her forces against the spirit!

Now this Mortification can never be attained by obeying, but resisting and
impugning the desires of the flesh. Wherefore, the only means to bring the
flesh to perfect subjection, Singular precepts of Mortification.
is to cross her in those delights which she most affects. Does she
delight in sleep and rest? keep her waking; takes she content in meats and
drinks? keep her craving; takes she solace in company? use her to privacie
and retiring; takes she liking to ease? inure her to laboring: Briefly, in
whatsoever she is delighted, let her be always thwarted; so shall you enjoy
the most rest, when she enjoyes the least. Hence it was that Saint Jerome,
that excellent pattern of holy discipline, counsels the holy Virgin
Demetrias, to eschew idleness: Hieron. ad Demet.
exhorting her withal, that having done her prayers, she should take in hand
wool and weaving, after the commendable example of Dorcas, Act 9.39.
that by such change or variety of works, the day might seem less tedious,
and the assaults of Satan less grievous. Neither did this divine Father advise
her to work, because she was in poverty, or by this means to sustain her
family; for she was one of the most noble and eminent women in Rome, and
richest; wherefore her want was not the cause which pressed him to this
exhortation, but this rather, that by this occasion of exercising her self in
these laudable and decent labors, she should think of nothing, but such as
properly pertained unto the service of God: which place he concluded in this
manner. I speak generally, Ibid. prope finem.
no raiment, ornament, or habit whatsoever, shall seem precious in Christ's
sight; but that which thou make thy self, either for thine own peculiar
use, or example of other Virgins, or to give unto thy grandmother, or thy
mother, no, though thou distri^ute all thy goods unto the poor. See how
expressly this no^le woman was enjoined to her task, that by intending her
self to labor, she might give less way unto error. Certainly, as man's
extremity is Gods opportunity, so the Devils opportunity is man's security: we
are then principally to take heed, lest we give way to the incursion of Satan,
by our security of life and conversation. And what is it that begets this
security, but Idleness, which may be termed, and not improperly, the Souls
Lethargy? Idleness begets security, properly termed the Souls Lethargy
Parum est le ger^, ^ur ^o^igere; sed intell gere and in formam red^ g^re, hoc
artis, hoc laboris est. Casman.
For nothing can be more opposite to this Actual Perfection, then re^ or
vacancy; we say, virtue consists in Action, how then may we be said to be
favorers, followers, or furtherers of virtue, when we surcease from Action,
which is the life, light, and subsistence of virtue? Wherefore, as it is little
to read or gather, but to understand and to reduce, to form what we read,
gather or understand; for this is the ornament of Art, the argument of labor:
so it is little or to no purpose, that we know, conceive or apprehend, unless
we make a fruitful use of that knowledge by serious practice, to the benefit
of our selves and others. I have known diverse Physicians, some whereof were of
great practice, but small reading; others of great reading, but small practice;
and I have heard sundry men of sufficient judgment confidently aver, that in
cases of necessity they had rather hazard their lives in the hand of the
Practicke then Theoricke: and their reason was this; though the Practicke had
not exercised himself in the perusal of books, he had gained him experience
in the practice of cures; and that the body of his patient was the only book
within his Element. To which assertion I will neither assent, nor wholly
dissent; for as he that practices before he know, may sooner kill than cure;
so he who knows, and seldom or never practices, must of necessity, to get
him experience, kill before he cure. But sure I am, that many ignorant
Laymen, whose knowledge was little more then what nature bestowed on them, by
means of regular discipline, and powerful subduing of their own affections,
Vid. Histor. Barlaam. Aug. in retract.
have become absolute men; being such as reached to as high a pitch of Actual
Perfection, as ever the learned or profoundest man in the world attained:
for it is neither knowledge nor place, but the free gift of Gods grace, which
enableth the spiritual man to this Perfection. Bernard.


Now, forasmuch as not to go forward, is to go backward; and that there be
two Solstices in the Suns motion, but none in times revolution, or in a
Christians progression; the only means to attain this Actual Perfection, at
least some small measure or degree therein, is every night to have our
Ephemerides about with us, A Christians Ephemerides
examining our selves what we have done that day; how far we have profited,
wherein benefited our spiritual knowledge. Again, wherein have we reformed
our life, or expressed our love to Christ by communicating to the necessity of
his Saints. By which means, we shall in short time observe what remains
unreformed; esteeming it the sweetest life, every day to better our life. But
principally, are we to look to our affections which rise and rage in us; and,
like the Snake in the fable, pester and disturb the inner house of man: for
these are they, Basil.
which (as Saint Basil says) rise up in a drunken man, (drunk I mean with
all spiritual fornication) like a swarm of Bees buzzing on every side. When
the affections of men are troubled, they change them like Circes cups,
Plutarch. in Moral.
from men to beasts. Neither is it so ill to be a beast, as for man to live
like a beast. O then, let us have an eye to our affections; let them be
planted, where they may be duly seasoned! Earth makes them destastefull; let
them be fixed then in heaven, the only thought whereof will cause them to be
delightful. And to conclude this branch; it will not be amiss for us, to
counterpoize our affections (if we find them at any time irregular) with
weights of contrary nature; as if we find our selves naturally affected to
Pride (that Luciserian sin) to counterpoise it with motives of Humility;
Revel. 9.1.
as the vileness of our condition, baseness of our composition, and weakness
of our constitution: or naturally inclined to Covetousness (that Mammons
sin) to give, Coloss. 3.5.
though the gift afflict us, liberally, that our forced bounty may in time
weane us from our inbred misery: 1 King. 21.4.16. Luke 19.8.
if of grating oppression, or grinding extortion (that Ahabs sin) let us make
restitution with good Zacheus, and though we cannot do it so frankly as he
did, yet let us do it as freely as we may; that our restitution may in some
sort answer for our former oppression: Luke 16.19.
if of excess in fare and gluttony (that Dives sin) let us so moderate our
delight in feeding, that our delight may be to sustain Nature, and not
oppress her with exceeding: 2 Samuel 13.2.
if of Lust or sensuality (that Ammons sin) where that sin may abound, the
Sense is obeyed, let us subject all our delights to the government of reason,
and reason to the sovereignty of grace, that the flesh may be resisted in what
it most affects, and in that seconded, wherein it least delights: Genesis 3.1.
and ^7.4. Genesis 4.5. Prove. 26.15.
if of Envy, (that Serpentine sin) let us entertain brotherly love, for
Envy can bear no sway where Love reigns: if of Wrath (that Cains sin)
embrace Patience; so shall Fury be suppressed, where Patience is lodged: if of
Sloth, (the Sluggards sin) let us inure our selves to some Exercise that may
most delight us, so in time we may become exercised in Taskes of greater
difficulty: being first from Sloth weaned, afterward to greater labors
inured. Thus to fight were to vanquish; thus to enter lists, were to reap
spiritual solace; for through him should we triumph, who sees us fighting,
cheers us failing, and crowns us conquering. And this shall suffice to have
been spoken of the Active part of Perfection, purposing according to our
former method, to compare the Contemplative and Active together; the parts or
properties of both which, being duly examined, it shall more plainly appear
how the Active is to be preferred.

IT is a barren faith, The Active part preferred.
we say, that is not attended on by good works; and no less fruitless is
that knowledge which is exercised only in Contemplation, and never in Action.
We are therefore with Elizeus to have a double spirit; a spirit that as well
does, as teaches, not only a profering of words, Agapetus.
but also an offering of works. So as, it is not breathing or moving, or
talking, which argue a spiritual life, but abounding plentifully in all holy
duties, expressing those effectual and powerful fruits of a living faith by
works of charity and obedience, which may any way tend to the glorifying of
God, edifying our neighbor, or conforming our selves to him, Bern. de inter.
domo. c. 1.
whose Image we bear. Now, as there is no comfort comparable to the testimony
of a good conscience, being that inseparable companion which shall attend us to
glory or confusion, so there is no punishment, Nicet as. Nazi^nzen, Ambros.
epist. 70.
torment or affliction so grievous as shame, which deriveth the cause, ground,
and beginning, either from doing that which we ought not, or from not doing
that which we ought: as the comfort we reap from the testimony of a good
conscience, deriveth properly the primary cause and effect from doing that
which we ought, and abstaining from doing that which we ought not. And what
be those works which are principally commended unto us, but works of charity
and devotion? For to our own souls (says a devout Father) shall we be right
acceptable and grateful, A^imae tuae gratum ^eceris si misericors fueris,
Bern, de modo been vivandi.

Nil magis commendat Christianum animum etc. Ambros.

^. Tim. page 8. Tract. 5. in Johan.

Dives factus est prop^er pauperem, and pauper propter divitem; pauperis est
r^g^re, divitis erogore, August. He preaches best,

Qui dieit non lingua sed vita. Aug ser. 18. de verb. Dom.


if we compassionate the estate of our poor brother, by being merciful: yea,
there is nothing that commends more a Christian man, or argues a
Christian-like affected mind, then to show compassion to those that are
afflicted. For in this there is a resemblance betwixt the Creature and Creator,
loving, as he himself loved; showing compassion, as he showed. O let me
commend this so commendable and generous a quality, to your admittance,
Gentlemen! for believe me, there is no one property that shall better
accomplish you, no armoury that may more truly deblazon you: for it is a badge
of Gentry to show compassion toward misery. What profit shall you reap, if
having only superficially read some Treatise tending to the comfort of such as
either in body afflicted, or in mind perplexed, or in both distressed; if you
apply not these directions of comfort to them thus miserably dejected? What
reward, I say, shall you receive, upon the account by you given, of the Sick
which you have visited; when having known how to comfort men in their
affliction, you have not ministered the least comfort to them in their
visitation? Or when you shall be demanded, where are the hungry which you have
refreshed, the thirsty whose thirst you have quenched, the naked whom you have
clothed, the miserable oppressed soul, whose case you have not only pitied
but redressed? And you shall answer, how you did indeed visit them, but
minister small comfort unto them; you knew them to be oppressed, and the way
to redress them, but other occasions detained you, as you could not releeve
them; Nay rather, have you not added wormwood to their affliction? Have you
not surfetted in their suffering, fatned your selves in their famishing, and
raised your states by their ruin? Were not your tables stored, when they were
starved; did not you feast, when they fasted; did it not affect you to see them
afflicted? If at any time you felt this in your selves, let the doleful
remembrance thereof produce torrents of tears from your distreaming eyes;
supply your manifold misdeeds with many almsdeeds; your transgressions with
compassions; your oppression with fourfold restitution; that your sin may
no more be had in remembrance: yea, let me use that exhortation to you, which
a learned Father used upon like occasion, Let charity smite your bowels;
Charitas vis^^ra tua percu^iat. August.
see not the Image of your Redeemer disgraced, but forthwith labor to right
him; see him not oppressed, but to your power redress him; see him not starve,
if you have bread to releeve him; or thirsty, if you have drink to refresh
him; or naked, if you have a garment to cloth him; or in any sort distressed,
if you have means to succor him. Oh consume not that on prodigality, which
might procure the prayers of many poor souls for you! Vta Christo accepimus
beneficium, praesiemus Christi^^^ officium, praebendo membris Christ^ hospirium
their prayers are your praises; their morning and evening sacrifice, way
marks to direct you unto Paradise: take heed then you offend none of these
Little ones, but cheer them; be not as thorns in their eyes, or pricks in
their sides, but minister all necessary comfort unto them.

Now, if this appear a matter of difficulty, pretending that the supportance
of your state exacts so much of you, as you can reserve nothing to exhibit
upon these works of charity; hear me whosoever thou be that make this
objection: Provocaris Chri^^iane, provocaris a vidua in certamen. August. 1
Kin. 17.15.
Be provoked, O Christian, be provoked by the widow of Sarepta to this
encounter! Encounter I call it, because the flesh suggests sundry occasions to
avert thee from it. That charitable Widow though she had but a little meal,
she imparted of that little to a Prophet; though she had but a little oil,
yet she freely bestowed it to refresh a Prophet. The woman of Samaria, when
JESUS said unto her, Give me to drink, answered; How is it that thou being a
Jew, ask drink of me, John 4.7, 9.
which am a woman of Samaria? Sundry such like answers will flesh and blood
make, to dispense with works of charity; or like the answer of churlish Nabal;
Who is David, and who is the son of Ishai? There be many servants now
adays, that break away every man from his master: Shall I then take my bread,
and my water, and my flesh which I have killed for my hearers, and give it unto
men, whom I know not whence they be? O let not these objections divert the
current of thy compassion! Eye not so much his Country, whether neighbor
borne, or a stranger, as his Countenance, the express Image of thy Savior.

But to descend to some reasons, why the Active part of Perfection is to be
preferred before the Contemplative, this amongst others is the most effectual
and impregnable. In that great day of Account, when the sealed book of our
secrete^^ sins shall be unsealed, our privatest actions discovered, our
closest and subtillest practices displayed, and the whole inside of man
uncased; Eo d^e in quo ratio reddetur, quid fecimus, non quid ^ovimus,
quaeretur.
it shall not be demanded of us, what knew we, but what did we. Fitting
therefore it were to prefer Action before knowledge in this life, being so
infallibly to be preferred after this life. Howbeit greater is their shame, and
sharper (doubtless) shall be their censure, whose education in all Arts
divine and humane has enabled them for discourse, fitted or accommodated them
for managements public or private; yet they, giving reins to liberty, invert
their knowledge to depraved ends; either making no use of such noble and
exquisite indowments, or which is worse, employing them to the satisfaction of
their own illimited desires. O happy had these been, if they had never known
the excellency of learning, for ignorance is to be preferred before knowledge
loosely perverted ^ Yea but, Object.
will some object, I cannot see how any one should observe a Law before they
know it; wherefore, as I think, Knowledge is to be preferred, because by
Knowledge is Action directed. It is true indeed, Sol.
Knowledge directs and instructs, for otherwise we should grope in darkness;
neither do I exclude all Knowledge, but admit so much as may instruct man
sufficiently in matters of faith, put him in remembrance of Heaven, whose joys
are ineffable; of Hell, whose pains are intolerable; of the last judgment,
whose sentence is irrevocable. So as I exclude only this gross ignorance, or
blind Paganism, for to these is the way to heaven closed, because they are
divided from that light, without which the celestial way cannot be discerned.
Whereas then I have so much insisted heretofore upon the contemplative part of
Perfection, my aim was to show how those, who continued in a Contemplative and
solitary life, sequestring themselves from the cares and company of this world,
doubtless conceived ineffable comfort in that sweet retirement; yet in regard
they lived not in the world, the world was not bettered by their example. But
in this Active Perfection, where the Active part no less then Contemplative is
required, we intend those who do not only know, but do; and in the Actions
of this life, use to make their Light so shine before men, that they may see
their good works. Luke 5.16. Object.
Yea, but it may be again objected, All sins be properly called (...), and
bear the name of ignorance: how then may we exclude any knowledge? Sol.
Every Sin indeed implies an ignorance of the creature toward the Creator;
which ignorance imports rather a forgetfulness. For admit a man should steal,
commit perjury, or any such act contrary to the express will and commandment
of GOD; it were to be imagined, that this breach or transgression of the
divine Law, proceeded not of ignorance: for he could not choose but know, that
consent to any of these incurred the breach of his Law: but rather it may be
said, he had not God before his eyes, but out of a wilful forgetfulness,
violated the ordinances of God.

The Active preferred before the Contemplative for two respects.
But to conclude this Branch in a word, the Active is to be preferred before
the Contemplative, for two respects: The first, whereof has relation to our
selves: The second to others. To our selves, having account to make for the
Actions of our life, how we have employed or bestowed those Talents which he
has lent us; what use, profit, or benefit we have made of them; in what
spiritual affairs have we been exercised, in what holy duties trained! Have
we not preferred private profit before the testimony of a good conscience?
Have we not labored to inhaunce our means by sinister and indirect courses?
Have we not with-drawne our hand from releeving our needful brother, or
defrauded the labourer of his wages? Have we not consorted with the evil
doer, and encouraged him in his sin? Have we not hindered some pious work
tending to the honor of God, and imitable for example of others? Have we
propagated the Gospel, comforted Sion when she mourned, repaired those
breaches which were in her, and received those in peace which blessed her? Have
we only sought the kingdom of God, and the righteousness thereof; esteemed
godliness to be great riches; left our selves and all, to be followers of him
who gave us dominion over all? If we have done this, as we are here in the
Alpha of grace, we shall be there in the Omega of glory: here initiate, there
consummate: but having known the will of our Father, and done it not; read
principles or instructions of a good life, and observed them not; conversant in
deep mysteries, and applied them not; studied in all Arts and Sciences, and
practiced them not; how miserable is our knowledge, pronouncing on us a heavier
judgment! Wherefore in respect of our selves, whether our knowledge be great
or little, if our conversation be not in heaven, though our habitation, during
our Pilgrimage be on earth, our knowledge is but as a tinckling Cymball, and
shall smally avail us before the high Tribunal. For knew we the power and
virtue of all creatures, of all plants and vegetive bodies, from the Cedar of
Lebanon, to the Hyss^p upon the wall, yet were this knowledge fruitless, being
not seconded by a life conformable to that knowledge.. Secondly, in respect of
others; Action is the life of man, and example the direction of this life. How
much then do such men prejudice those who live in the world, that betake
themselves to a private or retired life, estranged from humane society, and
ending their days in some solitary cave, as men divided from the world! For
howsoever their manner of life be religious, their discipline strict and
rigorous, and in their devotion fervent and zealous; yet they deprive others of
the benefit, which they might reap by their example. Gaspar. in Heraclito. c.
2. Mundum ex animo prius fugare, quam mundum fugere.
Wherefore most safe and sure it is (to use the words of a judicious Author)
for those who have a desire to take upon them a solitary life, to retire and
withdraw their affections before they withdraw their bodies from the world, and
to force the world to fly from their mind, before they fly the world; lest
going out of the world, they carry about with them the world. For as he may
live ill, who lives apart from the society of men; even so, though they fly
not into the wilderness, yet may they fly the world, and amidst the crowd of
people live solitarily by an inward Contemplation of the supernall glory; and
in midst of a clamorous Court confer with themselves, and converse with God:
in the mean time, whatsoever they know or can do* that may any way tend to
the common-good, benefit or utility of humane society, Nec divinitus accepium
talentum in terram defodore. ibid.
to effect it accordingly, and not bury that talent in the ground, which they
have received from above; which rule they are to observe after the example of
the most holy and excellent men of both Orders, Ecclesiastical (I say) and
Secular.

Thus far have we proceeded in the examination or discussion of these two
especial parts of Perfection, Contemplative and Active; wherein by manifest
and infallible arguments we have proved, how the Active part is to be
preferred, both in respect of our selves and others; because a life well acted
shall minister most comfort to our selves, besides that light of example which
it yields unto others. Now as the Active is preferred, it rests that we show
you wherein this Active part of Perfection consists; which discovered, that
whereof we treat, and would gladly find, may be the sooner attained.

THere is no building, Wherein the Active part of Perfection consists.
which as it relies on a foundation, consists not of some material
composition; no body but it consists of nerves, arteries or sinews, which
cement the lineaments together; nor confection which consists not of some
simples, for otherwise it were not mixed, but simple and uncompounded. The like
may be said of this choice and exquisite Confection, this Active part (I
mean) of Perfection. For as all Rivers tend to the Sea, to make one Ocean; all
Creatures to make one Universe; so all Virtues aim at Perfection; which once
attained, they surcease from action.

Now in this discourse of Active perfection, the period of Man, we do not
mean of that absolute perfection or accomplishment, which admits no blemish
or imperfection; for we are to seek that above us, not below us; for our
righteousness, justice and Perfection is such in this life, as it rather
consists in the remission of sins, than Perfection of virtues. Yea, Aug. de
Civit. Dei. l. 19. cap. 27.
we sin daily, so as properly we can attribute nothing to our own strength
but weakness, to our own ability but infirmnesse, to our resolves but
uncertainnesse, to our wills but untowardnesse, to our affections but
depravednesse, nor to the whole progresie of our lives but actual
disobedience. But rather (I say) we mean of that Christian Perfection, which
every one in this Tabernacle of clay is to labor for; that we may become
perfect through him who became weak that we might be strengthened, hungry
that we might be nourished, thirsty that we might be refreshed, disgraced
that we might be honored; yea, who became all unto all, that by all means
he might gain some.

Active Perfection consists in Mortification of action and affection.
But wherein may this actual perfection be properly said to consist? In
Mortification; which like the swift gliding torrent of Hydaspes, divides or
dilates it self to two channels; Action, and Affection: Action in expressing
it; Affection in desiring to express it: Action in suffering, Affection in
desire of suffering. The one actuating no less in will, than the other in
work. Where the Action being more exemplar, and in that more fruitful, gives
precedence to Affection, which concurres with the act to make the work more
graciously powerful. For, where a work of Mortification is performed, and a
hearty desire or affection to that work is not adjoined, that Action may be
properly said to be enforced, rather than out of a free or willing disposition
accepted. Now this twofold Mortification extends it self properly to these
three Subjects; Mortification extends it self in a threefold respect, to
these three distinct subjects.
Life, Name, Goods. Life, which even Humanity tendreth; Name, which a good man
before the sweetest odours prefers; Goods, on which the worldling, as on the
supreme good, lies.

For the first, many excellent and memorable examples of sundry devout and
constant servants of Christ Jesus, are in every place frequent and obvious; who
for the confirmation of their faith, and the testimony of a good conscience, 1.
Life. 2. Name. 3. Goods.
Mortification in our dis-esteem of Life.


joyfully and cheerfully laid down their lives, esteeming it an especial
glory to be thought worthy to suffer for him, who with all constancy suffered,
to become an example of patience to them: which were easy to illustrate by the
sufferings of many eminent and glorious Martyrs. Prudentius writes, that when
Ascl^piades commanded the tormentors to strike R^manus on the mouth, the meek
Martyr answered; I thank thee, O Captain, that thou have opened unto me many
mouths, whereby I may preach my Lord and Savior: Tot ecce laudant ora, quot
sunt vulnera: Look how many wounds I have, so many mouths I have to praise
and laud the Lord. Ignatius words were these, to witness his constancy at the
time of his suffering: Frumentum sum Christi, Iren. advers. haeres lib. 5. cap.
28.
and per dentes bestiarum molor, ut mundus panis Dei inveniar. I am Christ's
corn, and must be ground by the teeth of wild beasts, that I may become pure
manchet for the Lord. It is reported that blessed Laurence, being laid upon the
Gridiron, used these words to his Tormentors: Turn and eat, it is enough.
Saint Andrew, when he went to be crucified, was so rapt with joy, as he
rejoiced unmeasurably in that blessed resemblance of his Masters death. Blessed
Bartholomew willingly lost his skin for his sake, who had his skin scourged,
that he might be solaced. John drank a cup of poison, to pledge his Master
in a cup of affliction. Thus Laurence's Gridiron, Andrews Cross,
Bartholomew's Skin, John's Cup, expressed their Mortification, by a willing
surrender of their life for his sake who was the Lord of life: Yea, should we
survey those strange invented torments, during the bloody issue of the ten
Persecutions, which were contrived by those inhumane Assasinates, whose hands
were deep^ died in the blood of the Saints, Eusebius. i^ Eccl. Hisp.
we should no less admire the constancy of the persecuted suffering, than the
cruelty of the Persecutors infesting: What rackes, hooks, harrowes, tongs,
forkes, stakes were purposely provided to torment the constant and resolute
Professors of the truth, wearying the tormentors rather with tormenting, than
abating any part of their constancy in the height and heat of their
tormenting! Ruff^nus l. 10. hist. cap. 36.
Yea, they were solaced in the time when they suffered; esteeming Infoelix
multis theta est, mihi litera f^elix. Si (...) scribit, scribit and illa (...).
death to be such a passage, as might give them convoy to a more glorious
heritage. Neither did these blessed Professors of the faith, receive comfort by
the eye of their meditation firmly fixed on heaven, but by the compassion and
princely commiseration of diverse eminent ad victorious Emperors bearing
sovereignty then on earth. Constantine the Great used to kiss the eye of
Paphnutius which was bored out in Maximinas time. The like noble and princely
compassion we read to have been showed by Titus, Trajan, Theodosius, and
many other Princes graciously affected toward the poor afflicted and
persecuted Christians: Yea, God moved the hearts of those, who naturally are
most remorselesse or obdurate, in commiserating the estate of his afflicted.
Act. 16.33.
Which may appear by the Gaolor in the Acts, who washed Saint Paul's stripes
and wounds. O how comfortable were these passions or passages of affliction,
these tortures or torments, the trophies of their persecution; the blessed
memorial whereof shall extend the date of time, receiving a crown of him, who
is the length of days! Plin. l. 8. c. 32.
So, as King Alexanders Stagges were known and hundred years together by
those golden collars, which by the Kings commandment were put about their
necks; or as King Arthurs body being taken up some what more than six hundred
years after his death, was known to be his by nothing so much, as by the
prints of ten several wounds which appeared in his skull; so these glorious
stampes of their passion, shall appear as trophies to them in the day of
exaltation; because, as they lost their lives for the testimony of the Gospel,
they shall find them recorded in the book of life, receiving the crown of
consolation, for the deep draught which they took of the cup of affliction.
And reason there is, we should dis-value our lives for the profession of our
faith, Aug. Tract. 49. in Johan.
since forlorn and miserable is his life, that is without faith. For if the
Heathen, whose future hopes were fixed on posterity, and not so much as the
least knowledge of eternity, dis-esteemed their lives to gain them renown, or
propagate their countries glory; much more cause have we to subject our lives
to the censure of death, having hope after death to live in glory. It is
reported, that the body of Cadwallo, an ancient King of the Britains, being
embalmed and dressed with sweet confections, Hollins^ed.
was put into a brazen image, and set upon a brazen horse over Ludgate, for a
terror to the Saxons: and Zisca, the valiant Captain of the Bohemians,
commanded that after his decease his skin would be flayed from his body, to
make a drum, which they should use in their battles, affirming that as soon as
the Hungarians, or any other Enemies, should hear the sound of that drum, they
would not abide but take their flight. This moved Scipio to appoint his
Sepulcher to be so placed, as his image standing upon it, might look directly
toward Africa, that being dead, he might still be a terror to the
Carthaginians. If respect of Pagans to their Country, or an eye to popular
glory did so inflame them, as their Countries love exceeded their love of life,
surviving in their death, and leaving monuments of their affection after death;
how lightly are we to value the glory of this life, if the loss thereof may
advance our Fathers glory, Cyprian. Con^rarii sunt illis factiosi haeretici,
quorum conscientiae usque adeo sunt amplae, ut in illis civitatem december millium
civium aedificare possis, quemadmodum quid^m Magnum Alexandrum depinxit. Aegid.
in 1 Thessalonians. 5. Tertul. lib. 4. cont. Marcionist.
or ought tending to the conversation of this life; being assured by him, whose
promises fail not, by such a small loss to gain eternity? Now, as it is not
the death, but the cause of the death which makes the Martyr; we are to know,
that to die in the maintenance of any heretical opinion is Pseudo-martyrdom^
for howsoever those Arians, Manichees and Pelagians; those Macedonians,
Eutichees and Nestorians; yea, generally all Heretics were constant and
resolute enough in seconding and maintaining their erroneous opinions; yet
forasmuch as the cause for which they contended was Heresy, tend it might to
their confusion, but never to their glory: for as honey-com^es (says learned
Tertullian) are by Waspes composed, so are Churches by the Marcionists (and
consequently by all Heretics) disposed: in whose Synodals or conventicles,
many thousands are perverted, none converted, or to the Church of Christ
faithfully espoused. Whereas Truth, which may be pressed, but not oppressed;
assailed, but never soiled, like the green Bay Tree in the midst of hoarie
winter, or a fresh Spring in the sandy desert, appears most glorious, when her
adversaries are most malicious; bearing ever a countenance most cheerful,
when her assailants are most dreadful. Neither only in this glorious act of
Martyrdom, but in all inferior works, the affection of the mind, In omnibus
quae egimus, finem intenti onis, m^gis quam actum operationis intendit. Aug.
Soliloq. c. 14.
as well as the action of the man, is to be considered: for God himself, who
has an eye rather to the intention than action, will not approve of a good
work done, unless it be well done. As for example; when the Pharisie fasted,
prayed, gave alms, and paid tithe of all that he possessed, he did good
works, but he did not those good works well: the reason was, he exalted
himself in his works, without attributing praise unto him, who is the
beginner and perfecter of every good work: for his fasts were hypocritical
and not of devotion, Luke. 18.14.
his prayers ineffectuall, because they sounded of Ostentation; his alms
unacceptable, because exhibited only for observation; and his tithes
abominable, being given to color his secret oppression: for which cause did
our Savior pronounce a woe upon them, saying, Woe unto you Pharisees; for ye
tithe Mint and Rue, and all manner of herbs, and pass over judgment and the
love of God: these ought ye to have done, Luke 11.42.
and not to leave the other undone. Whence it appears, that the work it self
was approved, but the manner of doing it reproved; for that they preferred the
tithing of Mint and Rue, before the judgment and love of God; so they
preferred it, as the one was performed, while the other of more serious and
consequent importance was omitted. Whence we are cautioned, that in our works
of Mortification, we do nothing for any sinister or by-respect; but only for
the glory of God, to whom, as all our Actions are properly directed, so are
they to have relation only unto him, if we desire to have them accepted.

Is it so, that this Actual Perfection is to be acquired by Mortification,
wherein is required not only the action but affection? And that we are even to
lay down our lives, if the cause so require, to promote the glory of our
Maker? Tell me then, Gentleman, how far have ye proceeded in this spiritual
progress? Have ye unfainedly desired to further the honor of God, repair
the ruins of Sion, and engage your own lives for the testimony of a good
conscience? Have ye fought the Lords battle, and opposed your selves against
the enemies of the Truth? Have ye shut the door of your chamber, the door of
your inner parlour, I mean your heart, from the entrance of all earthly
affections, sensual cogitations, and expressed true arguments of
Mortification, the sooner to attain this high degree of Christian Perfection?
Have ye made a covenant with your eyes not to look after the strange woman; a
covenant (I mean) with your hearts never to lust after her? Have ye weaned
your itching and bewitching humors, from affecting foreign and outlandish
fashions. Which howsoever they be to fashion conformed, they make man of all
others most deformed? Have ye done with your reere-suppers, midnight revels,
Curtain pleasures, and Courting of Pictures? Have ye left frequenting
Court-maskes, Tilt-triumphs, and Enterludes, boasting of young Ladies favors,
glorying more in the purchase of a glove, than a Captain in the surprizall of
a Fort? Have ye cashiered all those Companions of death, those seducing
Consorts of misery, and betaken your selves to the acquaintance of good men,
conceiving a settled joy in their society? O then thrice happy you! for having
honored God, he will honor you; having repaired the ruins of Sion, he will
place you in his heavenly Sion; or engaged your lives for the testimony of a
good Conscience, he will invite you to that continual feast of a peaceable
Conscience; or fought the Lords battle, he will say you have fought a good
fight, crowning you after your victory on earth with glory in heaven; or shut
the door of your Chamber, and kept the room clean and sweet for your Maker,
he will come in and sup with you, that you may rejoice together; or made a
covenant with your eyes not to look after the strange woman, with those eyes
ye shall behold him, who put enmity between the Serpent and the Woman; or
weaned your itching and bewitching humors from affecting Outlandish fashions,
madding after phantasticke habits (for Par^m refert, vestis tua ^n Sericea an
Cilicea, modo pudica ^it, non meretricia.
stuff it skils not, whether silken or woollen, so the fashion be civil and
not wanton,) you shall be clothed in long white robes, and follow the Lamb
wheresoever he goes; or done with your midnight revels, and Court pleasures,
you shall be filled with the pleasures of the Lords House, and abide in his
Courts for ever; or left frequenting Maskes, Tilt-triumphs, and Enterludes, the
glorious Spectacles of vanity, you shall be admitted to those angelical
triumphs, singing heavenly Hymns to the God of glory: or chashier'd those
companions of death, whose end is misery, you shall have the Saints for your
companions, and share with them in the Covenant of mercy. Do ye not hence
observe what inestimable comforts are reserved for those who are truly
mortified; mortified, Lanspurg. in Pharetra divini amoris.
I say, in respect of your contempt to the world, which is expressed by ceasing
to love it, before you leave it? Who would not then disvalue this life, and all
those bitter sweets, which this frail life affords, to possess those
incomparable sweets which every faithful soul enjoys? Yea, but our silken
worldling, or delicate Wormeling will object; This discipline is too strict for
flesh and blood to follow. Who can endure to yield his head to the block, or
his body to the faggot, when the very sight of death in another, ministers to
the beholder motives of terror? Surely, this is nothing to him that duly
considers, how be that loses his life shall save it, but he that saves his
life shall lose it. What is a minutes anguish to an eternity of solace? We can
endure the launcing or fearing of a putrified member, Ibid.
and this endures as long as our time of wrestling with our Dissolution, which
brings us to our Savior: nor skils it much, Scire debes, quod quamvis de morte
meditari sit horribile, de statu finalis judicii cogitare ut aestimo, non minus
est formidabile: quia nullus tunc poterit fallere sapientiam, flectere
justitiam, inclinare clementiam, declinare ultionis and justae retributionis
sententiam. Bern.

Mortification in our dis-respect of Fame or report.

Mortification in averting our ear from our own praise. Phavor. in l. 1. de
rebus gest. Alphons.

Regiis auribus, ni escianatae, Adulantium lauds maxim ingratae.


what kind of death we die, seeing no kind of death can hurt the righteous,
be the terrors and torments of death never so numerous. The way then to
contemn death, is to expect it, and so to prepare our selves for it, as if we
were this very hour to encounter it; resolving never to go with that
conscience to our bed, with which we durst not go to our grave; being so
uncertain whether before the next morn we shall be taken out of our bed,
and shrouded for our grave. And this shall suffice touching our Mortification
or Contempt of life, if with such a sacrifice we may be thought worthy to
honor him who gave us life.

We are now to speak of Mortification in respect of name or report; wherein,
you are to understand, that this is twofold: First, in turning our ^ares from
such as praise us; Secondly, in hearing with patience such as revile us. For
the first, it is and has been ever the condition of sober and secret men to
avert their ear from their own praises; at least with a modest passing over
such virtues as were commendable in them: which modesty appeared in Alphonsus
Prince of Aragons answer to an Orator, who having repeated a long Panegyricall
oration in his praise, replied, If that thou have said consent with truth, I
thank God for it; if not, I pray God grant me grace that I may do it. Others
likewise we read of, who could not with patience endure their persons or
actions to be praised above truth: this princely passion appeared in
Alexander, who hearing Aristobulus, a famous Greek Historian, read his writings
purposely penned upon the memorable acts he had achieved, wherein he commended
him far above truth; being mightily incensed therewith, threw the book into
the river, as he was sailing over Hydaspes, saying with all, he was almost
moved to send Aristobulus after. Neither indeed will any wise man endure to
hear himself praised above truth, seeing no less aspersion may be laid on
his person by being too highly praised, than if he were discommended: for
should we praise one for his bounty, who is publicly known to the world to
be parcimonius; or for his humility, who is naturally ambitious; or for his
continency, who is licentious; our praises would not tend so much to his
honor; as to the display of his nature: yea, even he himself, guilty in
himself, would tax us, knowing that he the least of all others deserved these
praises from us. It is flattery (says one) to praise in absence; that is, Ea
laus, D. Augustini judicio, unice approbanda est, quando nec laudantem adulatio
movet, nec laudatum tentat elatio.
when either the virtue is absent, or the occasion is absent. But in the report
of our own praise, admit we should deserve it, the safest course is to
withdraw our ear from hearing it, lest vainglory transport us upon hearing
of those praises which are spoken of us: for if our aims be only to purchase
popular esteem, preferring the praise of men, before the praise of God, or the
testimony of a good conscience; as our aims were perverted, so shall we be
rewarded. Now there is no better means to abate or extenuate this desire of
praise in us, than duly to consider whose gifts they be, that deserve this
praise in us: for were they our own, we might more properly be praised for
them; but they are Gods, and not ours, therefore is the praise to be ascribed
unto God, and not unto us. For he that would be praised for Gods gift, and
seeks not Gods glory, but his own in that gift, Aug. Soliloq. cap. 15.
though he be praised by men for Gods gifts, yet is he dispraised by God; for
not seeking Gods glory, but his own for this gift: and he who is praised by
men, God dispraising, shall not be defended by men, God judging, nor be
delivered, God condemning. Whereas, he that loves God, Mortification in
suffering aspersions laid on our good name. Matthew* 5.11.12.
will choose rather to be deprived of all future glory, than detract by any
means from God the Author of all glory. Let us then so avert our ear from
selfe-praise, or ought else that may beget in us vainglory or ostentation, that
we may become like unto him, who dis-esteemed all worldly praise from the hour
of his birth to the hour of his passion. Secondly, we are to hear with
patience such as revile us: and reason good; for observing this, a blessing is
pronounced on us; Blessed are ye (says the Lord of all blessing) when men
shall revile you, and persecute you, and shall say all manner of evil against
you falsely for my sake: rejoice and be exceeding glad, for great is your Qui
jusius est and maledicitur, praemium ei pro maledictione redditur. Aug. Quod si
ips^ Dei filius a Diabolo in Eremo tentatus fuit; quis Eremitarum idem non
expectet? Gaspar. in Heraclito. Vid. Aegidium in hunc locum. Matthew. ^, 7, 8.
reward in heaven; for so persecuted they the Prophets which were before you:
Yea, not only the Prophets, but even Him of whom all the Prophets bare
witness; yet became he as one that did not hear, having no rebukes in his
mouth. When he was tempted in the wilderness, the Scripture was his armor of
resistance; when he was reviled on the Cross, he prayed for his enemies, to
express his heavenly patience. Now, if the Son of God was in the desert
tempted, what Hermit can expect to be from temptation freed? If the Master be
reviled, how may the servant look to be entreated? For howsoever some, or
indeed most of the ancient Fathers, doubt whether the Devil did know that
Christ was GOD or no; touching that parcel of Scripture, wherein Christ was
tempted in the Desert; yet may it appear probable by inference from the text
it self, that after Jesus had said unto him, It is written thou shall not
tempt the Lord thy God; the Devil took him up into an exceeding high
mountain, and showed him all the kingdoms of the world, and the glory of
them; saying, All those things will I give thee, if thou will fall down and
worship me. Whence I collect, that after Christ had told him that he was God,
he continued his temptation; which was an argument to evince him of palpable
ignorance; or of distrust to Christ's speech, which argued his diffidence: but
our purpose is not too curiously to insist upon these subtle digressions; Tota
vita Christi in terris quae per hominem gessit, disciplina morum fuit. Omnia
bona mundi Christus contempsit, quae contemnenda docuit: and omnia mola
sustinuit, quae sustine^da praecepit; ut in illis non quae reretur foelicites,
neque in istis timeretur infoeluitas. Aug. de ver. rel.
it sufficiently appears, that Christ who ought to be every faithful
Christians pattern, was reviled, yet opened not he his mouth; but with sweet
silence and amiable patience offered his prayers unto his Father for them who
maliciously offered him upon the Cross; leaving us an example of admiration
and imitation, that following him and suffering with him, we might likewise
reign and remain with him: yea but will our spritely-stately Gallant object,
Can any man, who knows the value of reputation, with patience suffer public
disgrace? Is there any punishment so grievous as shame? Yea, were it not better
for a man who is eminent in the eye of the world, to die right out, than still
live in reproach and shame? For a man to live or die, is natural; he
performs but that task to which al mortality is enjoined; but for a man to
live in shame and contempt, and be made a spectacle of disgrace to the world,
an apparent touch or taint to his friends, a laughing stock of his enemies, is
such a matter, as no well-bred and noble minded man, that has any courage or
stomach in him, or tenders his esteem, can ever digest it. True it is, that
flesh and blood will suggest many such objections; and if there were nothing to
be valued so much as worldly esteem, Ambr. ep. 70.
o^ popular grace, which relieth on opinion, as soon lost as got, there were
some reason to stand so punctually upon terms of reputation, but the eye of a
Christian ought to extend it self to an higher object. We are exhorted to
heap coals on our enemies heads; Beneficium se putabat accepisse augustae
memoriae Theodosius, quoties rogabatur ignoscere. Optabatur ineo, quod
tilmebatur in atiis, ut irascereur. De obit. Theo.

Charon nec Lethis caeca Charybdis faedarunt sacras sorde Charites, Socrat. in
Eccles. Hist. l. 1. cap. 21.

The Arians scandalized the great Athanasius, of practicing magic with the
dismembered hand of Arsenius.


to render good for evil; and to be revenged on them by well doing. Diogenes
being asked how one should be revenged of his enemy, answered, by being a
virtuous and honest man. What matter then though all the world revile us,
having a sincere and unblemished conscience within us, to witness for us?
Socrates in his Ecclesiastical History writes, that Athanasius being accused
by one Iannes, to have killed Arsenius, and after to have cut off his hand,
that he might use it to magic and sorcerie, cleared himself notably of this
slander: having by good hap found out Arsenius, who lay hid for the nonce; he
brought him before the Council of Tyrus, whereto he was convented, and there
he asked his accuser, whether he ever knew Arsenius or no? He answered, Yes:
then Athanasius called him forth, with his hands covered under his cloak, and
turning up the one side of his cloak, showed him the one of his hands; and
when most men surmised, that the other hand at leastwise was cut off;
Athanasius without any more ado, casts up the other side of his cloak, and
shows the second hand, saying, You see Arsenius has two hands, now let mine
accuser show you the place where the third hand was cut off. Whence two
remarkable considerations are recommended unto us: malicious subornation in
the accuser: gracious moderation in the accused. For the former, let the speech
of a Heathen man for ever be printed in your hearts; who when his friend came
unto him, and desired him to take a false oath in a cause of his, made answer:
(...). You must (says he) bear with me, there are many friends to be gotten
if I lose you; but if by forswearing my self I lose the favor of God, I
cannot get another there is but one God. For the latter, as soft words pacify
wrath, so by a pleasant conceit he cooled all wrath, sleighting so much the
aspersion of his accuser, as even of his enemies he gained him honor. To
instance which Moderation or patience, even in sundry Heathen men, toward such
as aspersed disgrace upon them, were it not that I fear enlarging of this
branch too much, I might produce many heroicke and princely examples, as
Vespasian, his son Titus, Marcellus, Demetrius, yea, the stiff and
rough-hew'd Hercules, who cared not a fly for backbiting terms. But I am to
use a word or two unto you, Gentlemen, by quest of inquiry how you are found
affected herein, and so descend to the third and last Branch arising from this
Subject.

Have ye not delighted in hearing your own praise, but reproved such as
praised you, or turned your ear from their applause, lest it should transport
you? Have ye distributed to the poor, without looking who saw you? Have ye
fasted without hanging down your head, to cause men observe you? Have ye
prayed with zeal, fixing your eye only on God, that he would look on you?
Have ye performed the works of charity, and that for conscience sake, and not
for vainglory? Have ye not too Pharisaically prided your selves in your own
integrity? Have ye ascribed to your selves shame, and to God the glory? Have
ye heartily wished rather to be deprived of all hope of glory than by your
means to detract in any wise from Gods glory? O then happy and blessed are
you! for having turned your ears from the applause of men, you shall receive
applause from Angels; or having distributed to the poor without looking who
saw you, you shall be plenteously rewarded by him, whose eyes are ever upon
you; or fasted without hanging down your heads, to cause men observe you, you
shall feast with him, who will erect your heads, and with glory crown you; or
performed works of charity for conscience sake, and not for vainglory, your^
works shall go before you, and be accounted for righteous through him who
shall cloth you with glory; or not too Pharisaically prided your selves in
your own integrity, you shall become justified with the Publican* and admitted
to honor by humility; or ascribed to your selves shame, and to God the glory,
God shall wipe off your shame, and bring you to the full reuition of his glory;
or heartily wished to be deprived of all hope of glory, rather then by your
means to detract in any wise from GODS glory; your desire of advancing Gods
glory, shall after your passage from this vale of misery, estate you in the
inheritance of glory. Again, have ye heard with patience such as revile you?
Have ye answered them as he did, who being accused by his enemy of one sin,
accused him likewise of ignorance, saying, Thou accusest me of one, Non solum
quorum ate incusafti, fateor reum, sed vere cogor tuam inculpare ignorantiam,
quiaunius me fecisti reum, quando conscius fui millium.
when I am guilty of a thousand? Have ye not stood upon terms of reputation*
but with patience suffered all disgraces? Have ye overcome your enemy with
mildness? taken revenge on him by your virtue and goodness? fortified your
selves against all calumny, with the spirit of patience? O then right blessed
are you! for having heard with patience such as ^evile you, an eternal
blessing is pronounced on you; or having been as ready to condemn your
selves, as others to accuse you, your purged conscience shall freely acquit
you; or not stood on terms of reputation when men disgraced you, you shall be
graced in heaven, where no disgrace shall touch you; or overcome your enemy
with mildness, the mild Lamb shall crown you with happiness; or taken
revenge on him by your virtue and goodness, you shall be refreshed with the
fountain of sweetness; or fortified your selves against all calumny with the
spirit of patience, with Palms in your hands shall ye sing with joyfulnesse.
Gather, O gather hence what ineffable solace is conferred on the patient!
whatsoever he suffer here, shall in superabundant measure be recompensed
elsewhere. But it may be objected, that some aspersions are not to be borne
with: for those scandals which are laid upon our persons, where our faith is
not taxed or touched, may be more easily endured; but where these are struck
at, they are not to be suffered. To confirm which, we read how Peter and
John having by prayer and imposition of hands, given the Holy Ghost, and Simon
the Sorcerer saw that through laying on of the Apostles hands, the Holy Ghost
was given, Act. 8.17, 18,
he offered them money, saying, Give me also this power, that on whomsoever I
lay hands, be may receive the Holy Ghost. But Peter incensed herewith, 19.
says unto him, Thy money perish with thee, because thou have thought that the
gift of GOD may be purchased with money. Whence it appears, 20*
that out of a holy zeal, one may show passion toward such as detract from
the honor of God, or asperse a blemish upon his servants in the work of their
ministry. The like we read of Paul, that glorious vessel of election
conceiving much indignation against one who had withstood the word; 2 Timothy 4.14*
saying, Alexander the Copper-smith did me much evil, the Lord reward him
according to his works. The reason is inclusively annexed; of whom be thou
ware of, for he has greatly withstood our words. 15.
The like spirit of zeal might James and John be said to be of, who when they
saw that the Saritanes would not receive Christ, said; Lord will thou that we
command fire to come down from heaven and consume them, even as Elias did? But
how this passion of theirs was approved, may appear by the ensuing verse, Luke
9.54.55.
But he turned and rebuked them, and said, Ye know not what manner of spirit
ye are of. Now to clear this objection, there is no Pattern which we ought
sooner to imitate then Christ himself, who is the master of truth, and
directs us in all truth; who as he was most blameless of all others, for in
his mouth was never guile found, yet was he in his own person more blamed, in
his doctrine more reproved, in his miracles more injured then all others: for
one while he is accused to have a Devil; John y. 20. Matthew. 9.34. Matthew.
11.19 Acts 2.13.
anon, that he casts out Devils through the Prince of the Devils; anon, that
he is a man gluttonous and a wine-bibber, a friend of Publicans and Sinners:
yet what answer vouchsafed he unto all these save only this, Wisdom is
justified of her children? Scandalum Pharisaeorum. Scandalum Pufillorum.
Scandalum activum. Scandalum passivum.
Now I know there are differences of Scandals or aspersions, where some leave
deeper impression then others do: for as the name is more precious then any
earthly substance, so it receives the deepest stain when the estimation of
our faith is questioned, being the very maine foundation whereon all religion
is grounded, and the perfection of that building which makes a Christian
rightly accomplished. Saint Basil could show himself calm enough in his
conference with the Emperor, till a Cook came in, and saucily told him, he
did not well to stand so precisely upon such small matters, but rather to yield
to his master the Emperor in a word or two: for what were those divine
affairs whereon he so much insisted, but such as with indifferency might be
dispensed? But what answered this reverend Father? Yea, Sir Cook (quoth he)
it is your part to tend your pottage, and not to boil and chop, up divine
matters, which, as they little trouble you, so in weight and consequence are
far above you. And then with great gravity turning to the Emperor, said,
that those that were conversant in divine matters, which were principally to be
intended, would with conscience rather suffer death, then suffer one jot of
holy Scripture, much less an article of faith already received, to be altered
or corrupted. Another holy man, though most innocent, could endure to be
counted a whore-master, an unclean person, and the like; but when one called
him an Heretic, he could bear no longer: so near be we touched, when our
faith is questioned. But as we have a noble and glorious Pattern, who showed
himself a Conqueror in his suffering, let us wrestle with flesh and blood;
that suffering all things for him, and with him, we may after our conquest joy
in him, Mortification in our contempt of all worldly substance.
and with him. And let this be sufficient to have been spoken of Mortification
in respect of our name or esteem in the world, laboring daily to dis-value
and humiliate our selves while we are in the world.

If it be no great thing to leave our substance, but our selves; let us at
least leave our substance, Prove. 3 9.10.
that we may the better enjoy our selves. It was the wise exhortation of the
wisest of Princes; Honor the Lord with thy substance, and with the first
fruits of all thy increase; Two remarkable considerations: first, by whom these
blessings are conferred on us: secondly, how they are to be disposed by us.
annexing a promise to this precept: So shall thy barnes be filled with
plenty, and thy press shall burst out with new wine. But forasmuch as many
things are required to the mortification of this earthly Mammon, we will
reduce them to two special heads, the better to retain in memory this means
of mortification: 1. to consider from whom we have received these worldly
blessings. 2. how to dispose of them, lest they become cursings of blessings.

For the first, we are positively to set down, that every good gift and every
perfect gift comes from above; the beasts that graze on a thousand hills are
his; the treasures of the earth are his: for from whom should we think are
they derived to us, Non dabit ^uod non babet. Aug.
but from him by whom they were created for us? He who never had it, how can
he give it? but he who has all, guids all, governes all, and is all in all,
is sole sufficient for all. He it is then that makes rich and makes poor,
exalts and humbles, sending forth his waters out of their treasuries, and
all things are drowned; shuts them in their treasuries, and all things are
dried. He it is that makes the fruitful barren, and the barren fruitful.
Instead of the thorn shall come up the fur tree, and instead of the briter
shall come up the myrtle tree, Isa. 55.13.
and it shall be to the Lord for a name, for an everlasting sign that shall
not be cut off. He it is that made Heaven and Earth and all things replenished
Heaven and Earth with all things, giving Man dominion, over all things, that
Man might be subject unto him who made all things.

Mow as he gave them to man, so are they to be disposed of by man, to his
glory who made man. Isa. 55.13.
And how is that? Not in laying land unto land with the oppressor; nor in
repairing to the house of the strange woman with the adulterer; nor consuming
your substance in excess with the rioter; nor hoording up vengeance against
the day of wrath with the miser; nor grinding the face of the poor with the
extortioner: but rather distributing freely of that which you have, and
communicating to the necessity of the Saints: so shall you make to your selves
friends of your unrighteous Mammon, Luke 16.9.
and shall be fed with Manna in the Courts of Sionr Gainefull is the use of
that money, which is put out to the works of charity; which be it more or
less, cannot but be exceeding great, being given with devotion, and the work
attended by singleness of heart and sincerity of affection; for where a
sincere will is not joined with the work, the work cannot be effectual to
the doer, howsoever it may seem fruitful to the beholder. At which sort of
men, who erect sumptuous works rather for popularity and affectation, then
piety or sincere affection, the Poet pleasantly glanceth; THESE Statues rear
in public ways, Signa viis reparant, ut nomina nota relinquant M^rmore quae
sculpto nomen inanis habent.

as trophies of their love,
Which, as they hear, in passengers
will admiration move,
And gain a fame unto their name,
which may survive in them:
But trust me, Sirs, these works of theirs
show them vainglorious men.


Which works, howsoever useful unto others, were better undone then done in
respect of themselves: for to glory in our works, does not only derogate from
our works, but denounce upon us a greater damnation, ascribing to our selves
what duly, properly, and solely ought to be attributed to the glory of God.

But to draw nearer the point we have in hand; there is nothing that weaneth
our minds more from the meditation of God and mortification to the world, then
our earthly affections, which bear such sway over us, as they will not suffer
those divine motions or meditations to take root in us. This is excellently
shadowed in that Parable of the great Supper, where many guests were invited,
but all with one consent began to make their excuse: Luke 14.16, 17. etc.
the first, he had bought a piece of ground, and he must needs go see it:
the second had bought five yoke of oxen, and he must go prove them: and
another had married a wife, and therefore he could not come. These, though the
fatlings be provided, the choicest dainties prepared, wherewith their
hunger-starved souls might be refreshed, cannot come; the world must detain
them, their earthly respects inchaine them, their sensual delights restrain
them: they cannot come, though often invited; nor resort to this great Supper,
though all things be provided. These seldom or never take into their more
serious consideration, the state of the blessed in Heaven, or the state of the
damned in Hell. Neither can the joys of the one allure them, or the pains of
the other deter them. These will dispense with the word for the profit of the
world, and enjoy the pleasures of sin for a season, deferring repentance till
it be past season. Saint Chrysostom relates how Paulus Samosetanus that
arch-hereticke, Poenitentia dolorum, non remissionis peccatorum. Chrysostom. hom.
7. in Johan. Aug. lib. 1. de civit. dei. c. 18. Greg. lib. 20. Moral. c. 12.
for the love of a woman for-sooke his faith. Saint Augustine relates diverse,
who denied the torments of hell to have eternity, thereby to flatter their
affection with a pretended assurance of impunity. Saint Gregory imputes it to
avarice and covetousness, that many forsake their faith. These follow not the
example of sundry devout men, the memory whereof is recommended unto us in holy
writ; who being possessors of lands or houses, sold them, and brought the
prices of the things that were sold, and laid them down at the Apostles feet:
and distribution was made unto every man according as he had need. Act. 4 34,
35.
The like contempt, in respect of earthly substance, we read to have been in
many noble and equally affected Pagans, as Crates, Bisias, Zeno, Bias,
Anacreon, Anacharsis; who* though they had scarce the least glimpse of an
eternity, yet they dis-valued the substance of earth as the subject of vanity.
But I must now draw in my sails, and take a view of your dispositions
(Gentlemen) how you stand herein affected; that seeking what I expect to find,
I may no less glory in your aversion from earth, then if you were ascending
Jacobs ladder, to have your names enrolled in the kingdom of heaven.

Have ye honored the Lord with your substance, and tendered him the first
fruits of his bounty? An accurate repetition and connection of the precedent
Meditations.
Have ye acknowledged every good thing to come from him, as from the fountain
of mercy? Have ye subjected your selves unto him, as he has subjected all
things to your sovereignty? Have ye disposed of them soberly and solely to his
glory? Have ye been oppressors, and with good Zacheus made fourfold
restitution? Have ye not exposed your inheritance to riot and pollution? Have
ye not hoorded up vengeance against the day of affliction? Have ye not
grinded and grated the face of the poor with extortion? Have ye distributed
freely, and communicated to the Saints necessity? Have ye made you friends of
your unrighteous Mammon, and so made your selves way to the heavenly Sion? Have
ye done these works of compassion with singleness of heart, and without
affectation? Have ye been by no earthly respect detained from coming to that
great Lords Supper, to which you were invited? O then in a happy state are you!
for having honored the Lord, he will fill your barnes with plenty; or having
acknowledged all good things to be derived from his mercy, he will give you a
fuller taste of his bounty; or subjected your selves to his obedience, he will
cause every Creature to do you service; or disposed of them soberly and solely
to his glory, he will exhibit his good gifts unto you more fully; or been
oppressors, and made restitution, you shall with Zacheus become vessels of
election; or not exposed your inheritance to riot and pollution, you shall be
safe from the doom of confusion; or not grinded the face of the poor with
extortion, the poor shall bear record of your compassion; or distributed
freely to the Saints necessity, he that sees in secret shall reward you
openly; or made you friends of your unrighteous Mammon, Manna shall be your
food in the heavenly Sion; or done these works singly, and without
vainglory, you shall be clothed with the garment of mercy; or not detained
by the world from going to that great Lords Supper, ye shall be graciously
admitted and exalted to honor. Thus to dispose of the substance of the world,
is to despise the world: preferring one meditation of the pleasures and
treasures of heaven, before the possession of the whole earth: and esteeming it
far better to be one day in the House of the Lord, then to be conversant in
the Palaces of Princes. O then, ye whose generous descents and mighty estates
promise comfort to the afflicted, relief to the distressed, and an hospitable
receipt to all such as repair to you for succor or comfort, minister to the
necessity of the Saints, be liberal and open handed to the poor, having
opportunity, do good unto all men, Gal. 5.6.
especially unto them who are of the household of faith; be exercised in the
works of the spirit and not of the flesh, so shall ye build upon a sure
foundation, and in the inheritance of Gods Saints receive a mansion. Turn not
(I say) your ear from the cry of any poor man, lest his cry be heard, and
procure vengeance to be poured on your head: Pity the moanes of the afflicted,
wipe off the tears of the distressed, comfort them that mourn in Sion. The
ordinary form of begging in Italy, is, Do good for your own sakes. Do good
for your own sakes, for your own selves, for your own souls. No Nullum Deo
gratius sacrificium quam zelus animarum. Greg. in bom. 12. sup. Ezec.
sacrifice to God more grateful, to your selves more useful, or to your own
souls more fruitful, then to be zealous in all holy duties, and compassionate
to the needful: Nam qui non ardet, non accendit. Bernard.
for, he that in himself burns not in devotion, can never inflame another
with the zeal of devotion: Nec lucere potest, nisi prius ardeat. Aquin. in 5.
Johan:
neither can any one shine, unless before he burn: shine in the works of
compassion, unless he burn before with the zeal of a devout affection. So as
many though they be Lucernae quoad officium, extinctae quoad effectum. Ibid.
Quod emittitur voluntarium est: quod amittitur necessarium. Ambros. Elemosyna
in vita, est Lucerna lucens; Elemosyna post mortem, Lucerna caecutiens.
Lights in respect of their ministry or office, yet are they Snuffs in respect
of their use, effect or service. Exhibit therefore freely of those good gifts
and bounties which God has bestowed on you, and show your liberality now in
the opportunate time; for, as there is a time that none can work, so there is
a time when none can give: give it then in your life time, that you may
express your charity with your own hand, and not by way of Legacy: for many
make good wills, which I much fear me proceed not of good will; being rather
by the sentence of mortality enforced, then of their own charitable
disposition affected, to leave to the poor afflicted of the world, which they
so exceedingly love, while they sojourned here in the world. And what shall
these bountiful Legacies avail them, these charitable Wills profit them, when
they shall make their beds in the dark, and enter parlie with their own
Consciences, whether this coacted charity of theirs proceeded from compassion
or compulsion, leaving what they could no longer enjoy, and giving that which
was not in their power to give? Surely, no more benefit shall this enforced
charity confer on them, then if they had sown the sand: for fruitless is
that work which deriveth not her ground from a pure intention or sanctified
will. In the Eastern countries, they put coin in the dead man's hand, Qui a
dle in diem deferunt, donec Parcae cuncta auferunt.
to provide for him after his departure hence. The like provision carry these
along with them to their graves, who defer giving, till they cannot give,
making their Executors their Almoners, who many times defeat the poor, or
number themselves in Bead-roll of the poor, whereby they gull the deceased,
enriching their own Coffers with the poor man's box. Non memini me legisse
mala morte mortuum, qui libenter opera pietatis exercuit. Hieron. in epist. ad
Nepotianum. Quam immensa est laetitia de recordatione transactae virtutis; etc.
Bern. in fest. omnium Sanctorum. sermon. 2.
O Gentlemen, you whose corpse are followed with many mourners, and oft-times
inward rejoycers; send out those sweet odours of a good and devout life before
you; dispense and dispose faithfully, in whatsoever the Lord above others has
enriched you; defer not your charity to your death, lest you be prevented of
your charity by death; bethink your selves how you would be provided if that
great Master of accounts were this hour to call you before him, and make your
reckoning with him; would you not be glad; your conscience told you, how you
had been faitfull disposers or imployers of those Talents, which were
delivered to you? Would not your hearts rejoice within you to have such a
Testimony, as the witness of an undefiled or spotless conscience within you?
Would it not intraunce you with an exceeding joy, to hear that happy and
heavenly approbation, Well done, good and faithful servants, you have been
faithful over a few things, I will make you rulers over many things: enter ye
into the joy of your Lord? If this could not choose but joy you, so dispose of
your earthly Mammon, that you may be partakers of this surpassing joy in the
Courts of Sion. And so I descend to the last Branch of this last Observation,
expressing that object of ineffable consolation, whereto this Active Perfection
aspireth, and that spiritual repose of heavenly solace and refection, wherein
it solely and properly rests.

Job. 5.7. The absolute or supreme end whereto this Actual Perfection
aspireth, and wherein it solely rests. Chrysostom. Aug. Solioq. c. 2.
MAn is borne unto trouble, as the sparks fly upward, being here a sojourner in
the Inn of this world; and drawing every day nearer and nearer the end of his
Pilgrimage; where man's life is the Travelers emblem; his form of living, the
very mirror of his sojourning; his home returning, the type or figure of his
dissolving. In which progress or journall of man, by how much more the
Sun-diall of his life proceeds, by so much nearer the nightshade of death
approaches. Yet, behold the misery of man! His desires are daily to disquiet
and disturb himself: for show me that man howsoever affected, or in what
degree soever placed, whose desires are so firmly fixed, as his mind is not
troubled in the pursuit of that whereto his aims are directed. For to begin
with the Highest, because his thoughts are ever aspiring'st; does the Ambitious
man aim at honor or preferment? Behold, he purposes with himself to gain
or attain such a place under his Prince, not so much for his own ends (as he
pretends) but to be useful to his friends, and behovefull to his Country;
but since that hour, he entertained the first infant thoughts of Ambition, he
has felt sufficiently the danger of that infection: reaping no other fruits
but distractions, in respect of Competitors, or want of enjoying himself,
being pestred by multitude of Suitors. Or, is he covetous? There is nothing
which he eyes or beholds upon this Universe, tending to profit, or promising
hope of profit, which he presently conveyes not to his heart, coveting
whatsoever he sees, and seeing nothing that he does not covet: he tumbles and
tosses, and will not suffer his eyes to slumber, but like miserable Menedemus
in Terence, or greedy Gripus in Plautus, he afflicts and torments himself,
Terent. in Heauton.

Plau. in Rudeute.


making his own desires his own disquiets. Or, is he Voluptuous? His fond
affection procures in him this frenzy or distraction: He goes to the house
of the strange woman, gives ear to her incantation, sports with Ismael, lusts
after her beauty in his heart: and is taken with her eye lids; Prove. 6.25.
yet see how sensuality brings him to misery! by means of this whorish woman,
he is brought to a piece of bread: and the adulteress will hunt after his
precious life: but to pass over these, and take a view of such whose course of
life seems better disposed, then to converse with the world, either by
ambitiously aspiring to Honors, the great man's Darling; or by too eager a
pursuit after Riches, the worldlings Mammon; or by too hot a quest after
pleasure, the wantons Minion. For to reflect a little upon the aims of such
who affect Contemplation, and every day better their knowledge in the serious
or exquisite search of the natures, virtues, or operations of all creatures;
we shall find, to use the words of Solomon, Ecclus. 1.23.
That even in these there is vanity and affliction of spirit: for, howsoever
wisdom raines down skill and knowledge of understanding, exalting them to
honor that hold her fast; yet Salomons conclusion after the search of wisdom
and folly, Eccles. 1.18.
is definitively this; In much wisdom is much grief: and he that increases
knowledge, increases sorrow. For should man labor to engrosse all learning,
knowledge and wisdom, his labor were but vain, and his search fruitless;
seeing he, whose understanding was deepest, conceit quickest, and wisdom
greatest of all them that were before him in Jerusalem, 16.7.23, 24.
has thus concluded: All this I have proved by wisdom; I said, I would be
wise, but it was far from me. Adding the reason hereof; That which is far
off, and exceeding deep, who can find it out? For be our search never so
curious, our desire covetous in the pursuit of knowledge, we shall find by
daily experience our own weakness: where, though our wills be strengthened, our
abilities are weakened, being ever more hopeful in our undertakings, then
powerful in our performance; yea, Scire omniae volumus, nihil agere. Gasper.
in Herac. c. 2.
it is a property inherent to us, and naturally ingraffed in us, to have an
itching desire of knowing all things, but of doing nothing: yet neither in
knowledge nor Action may we satisfy our desire or affection: vain and
endless therefore is our search in the former, as weak and fruitless is our
pursuit of the latter. There is no end of writing many books, Sub quorum
velamine, frequenter magna avaritia comperitur. Vincent. de vit. Spirit. cap. 1.
no end of reading many books, no end of storing our Libraries with many
books: for under the cover of these, much covetousness oft-times lurketh.
These are not of that inestimable price, (though they contain much spiritual
comfort) as may fully store or enrich the heart; fully replenish or satisfy
the heart; fully settle or establish the heart: for where the desires of the
heart are not fulfilled, how can she hold her self sufficiently enriched? Or
where her desires are not accomplished, how may she rest satisfied? or being
not there seated, where her desires are settled; how can she be quieted? Sive
dormiam five vigilem, somniat: and cogitat qui^qui deii occurrit. Bern. Med.
cap. 9.
Hence it is, that a devout Father compares his Heart unto a Mil; For as a Mil
(says he) swiftly wheeleth and turns about and refuses nothing, but
whatsoever is put upon it, it grindeth: but if nothing be put upon it, it
consumes it self: so is my unstable heart always in motion, and never
rests: but whether I sleep or wake, it dreameth and thinks of whatsoever it
encountreth. Can then neither Honor, nor Wealth, nor Pleasure satisfy his
unconfined Heart? can neither Honors surprise her, wealth enjoy her, nor
pleasure intraunce her? No: these are vanity, and lighter then vanity, In
petendo honorem timet ne praeveniatur, in possidendo valde timet ne privetur.

Cui tam deest quod habet, quam quod non habet: Adeptae voluptatis Coronidem si
quaeres, poeniten^iam invenies. Cum se cuncta novisse putat, plura se ignorosse
quam didicisse, indies sentit.

Sid Deo non affligatur homo, seipsum affliget. in Herac. cap. 3.

Ita de humano arbitratu penfitatur divinitas, nisi Deus homini placuerit, Deus
non erit. Tertul. in Apol. cap. 5.


receiving their true color from the Poet, who bestows on them this
portraiture; Wealth is a wave, Honor a bait of death,
Catching at which were caught and choked therewith.
For tell me, is not the Ambitious man as fearful to incur disgrace, after
he is received to his Princes favor, as he was jealous of a Competitor
before he got into favor? again, is not the miserable rich man, who reposeth
all comfort in his substance, all his consolation in his riches, as fearful
to lose what he already enjoyes, as he was doubtful of prevention in what
he now enjoyes? Or is not the voluptuous carnal man, whose only delight is
daliance with his perfidious Dalilah, stinged with as much grief after his
desires are satisfied, as he was stirred with delight before his pleasures
were effected? Or is not the Contemplative man, whose aims being higher,
should tender him content in fuller measure, afflicted in mind, when he finds
himself come short in knowledge of what he expected, and reads every day
something which he never before observed? What content then in these
flourishing May-buds of vanity, which in repentance and affliction of spirit,
do only show their constancy? So as one well observes, If man should not be
afflicted by God, yet should he be afflicted by himself; consuming himself
with his own envy, rancour, and other distempered affections, which have more
fury and torment attending on them, then the evil it self which procures
them. Yet behold the wretched condition of unhappy man! Though neither Honor
be permanent, nor from peril freed; nor Riches prevalent to make him after
death the better friended, nor pleasures so excellent, as to free him from
affliction when they are ended: yet are they for most part preferred before
those heavenly honors which are ever permanent, and never altering; before
those incorruptible riches, which enrich the soul after death without
decreasing; and before those ineffable pleasures, where neither desires breeds
longing, nor satiety loathing. So as, I cannot more fitly compare the actions
of these sensual affected men, Ibid. cap. 3.
then with that childish act of the Emperor Honorius, who taking especial
delight in a Hen called Roma: upon a time understanding, by report of such as
told him, that Roma was lost, he exceedingly lamented: whereupon some of his
familiar friends, and such as were neere-him, Vid. vit. Honor.
noting his terror; It is not your Hen that is lost, but your City Roma, that
is taken by Alaricus King of the Goths. Wherewith coming a little to
himself, he seemed to bear with much more patience the surprise of the one,
then the loss of the other. O childish simplicity! you say well; yet the like
is in us. We cannot endure that any one should steal from us our silver; yet
either honor, riches, or pleasure may have free leave to steal away our
heart. We would by no means be defrauded of our treasure; yet it troubles us
little to be depraved with error. Corporis vitamus venena non animi. Ibid. in
Heraec.
We avoid the poisons of the body, but not of the mind; intending more the
diet of the body, then the discipline of the mind.

Since then, in these external desires, this Actual Perfection, whereof we
have formerly treated, may receive no true rest or repose, for to those it only
aspireth, wherein it rests; we must search higher for this place of peace,
this repose of rest, this heavenly Harbor of divine comfort: we are to seek
it then while we are here upon earth, Quis vicinus malus, quis latro, quis
infidiator tibi tollit Deum? Et potest tibi tollere totum good po^^ides
corpore, non tibi tollit cum quem possides cord. Aug. Ecclus. 23.28.
yet not on earth: would you know, what this sovereign or absolute end is,
wherein this Actual Perfection solely rests, wherein the Heart only
glories, and to the receiver, long life, with comfort in abundance amply
promises? Hearken to the words of Jesus the Son of Sirach: It is a great
glory to follow the Lord, and to be received of him is long life: Nor skils it
much, how worldlings esteem of us; for, perhaps, they will judge it folly to
see us become weaned from delights or pleasures of the world; to see us embrace
a rigorous or austere course of life, to dis-esteem the pomp and port of this
present world. This (I say) they will account foolishness; But blessed are
they who deserve to be of that number, which the world accounts for fools, God
for wise men. But miserable is the state of those forlorn worldlings, whose
cheifest aim is to circumvent or entrap their brethren, Beauti qui ex eorum
numero esse merentur, quos mund^^ prostultis, Deus pro s^pientibus habet. Blos.
Enchirid. parvul. auth. Esther. 7, 9, 10. Ecclus. 1.15.
making their highest aims their own ends, and accounting bread eaten in
secret to be the savourest, and stolen waters the sweetest: for these never
drink of their own Cisterne, or feed of the flesh of their own fold; but
partake in the spoil of others, yet wipe their mouths as if they were
innocent: but behold this Haman-policy shall make them spectacles of final
misery, wishing many times they had been less wise in the opinion of the
world, so they had relished of that divine wisdom, which makes man truly happy
in another world; even that wisdom (I say) who has built an everlasting
foundation with men, and shall continue with their seed: neither can this
divine wisdom choose but be fruitful, standing on so firm a root, or the
branches dry, receiving life and heat from so fair a root.

Now to describe the beauty of her branches springing from so firm a root; ^0.
with the solidity of her root, diffusing pith to her branches: The root of
wisdom (says the wise Son of Sirach) is to fear the Lord, and the branches
thereof are long life. This fear, where it takes root, suffers no wordly fear
to take place. Multi miseri sunt metu, ne miseri fiant: multi mori metuentes,
moriuntur. Gaspar. in Herac.
Many worldlings become wretched, only through fear lest they should be
wretched; and many die, only through fear lest they should die: but with
these, who are grounded in the fear of the Lord, they neither fear death,
being assured that it imposes an end to their misery; nor the miseries of this
present life, being ever affied on the trust of GODS mercy. How constantly,
zealously, and gloriously many devout men have died, and upon the very instant
of their dissolution expostulated with their own souls, reproving in
themselves their unwillingnesse to die; may appear by the examples of such;
whose lives as they were to GOD right pleasing, so were their souls no less
precious in their departing: The^ reason of his frequent repetition of sundry
sentences, similitudes, and other memorable discoveries thorowout this Book.
upon some whereof, though I have formerly insisted, yet in respect that such
memorable patterns of sanctity cannot be too often represented, I thought good
purposely (as usually I have done in all the Series of this present Discourse,
where any remarkable thing was related, to have it in diverse places repeated)
to exemplify this noble resolution or contempt of death, in the proof and
practice of some one or two blessed Saints and Servants of God.

Jerome writes of Hilarion, that being ready to give up the ghost, he said
thus to his soul; Go forth my soul, why fear thou? Go forth, why
tremblest thou? Hier. in vit.
Thou have served Christ almost these threescore and ten years, and do thou
now fear death? Saint Ambrose when he was ready to die, speaking to Stillico
and others about his bed; I have not lived so among you (says he) that I am
ashamed to live longer to please God: Pontius in fine vitae ejus.
and yet again I am not afraid to die, because we have a good Lord. The
reverend Bid, whom we may more easily admire, than sufficiently praise for
his profound learning, in a most barbarous age, when all good literature was in
contempt, being in the pangs of death, said to the standers by; I have so lived
among you that I am not ashamed of my life, neither fear I to die, because I
have a most gracious Redeemer. He yielded up his life with this prayer for the
Church; O King of glory, Lord of Hosts, which have triumphantly ascended into
heaven, In vit. Bedae.
leave us not fatherless, but send the promised Spirit of thy truth amongst
us. These last funeral Tears, or dying men's Hymns, I have the rather renewed
to your memory, that they might have the longer impression, being uttered by
dying men, at the point of their dissolution. And I know right well (for
experience has informed me sufficiently therein) that the words of dying men
are precious even to strangers; but when the voice of one we love, Extrema
morientium eloquia, audientium Oracula: ultimae voces, viventium vates. Nicet.
in funeb. orat.
and with whom we did familiarly live, calls to us from the Deathbed, O what a
conflict do his words raise! How strongly do grief and affection strive to
enclose them! knowing that in a short space, that tongue, the organs whereof
yet speak, and move attention by their friendly accents, was to be eternally
tied up in silence, nor should the sound of his words salute our cares any
more: And certainly, the resolution of a devout dying man, being upon the point
of his dissolution, cannot but be an especial motive to the hearer, of
Mortification. Which was one cause, even among the heathens, of erecting
Statues, Sepulchra enim non tam mortuorum quam viventium memoriae condita sunt.
Obelisks, or Monuments upon the Dead; that eying the Sepulchers of such noble
and heroic men as had their honor laid in the dust, they might likewise
understand, that neither resolution of spirit, nor puissance of body could free
them from the common verdict of mortality: which begot in many of them a
wonderful contempt of the world. Albeit it is to be understood, that
Christians do contemn the world much otherwise than Pagans: for ambition is a
guide to these, but the love of God unto them. Ambitio his dux illis, amor Dei
Gasp. in epist. ante Heraclit.
Diogenes trod upon Plato's pride with much greater selfe-pride: but the
Christian with patience and humility surmounteth and subdueth all wordly pride;
being of nothing so careful, as lest he should taste the Lotium of earthly
delights, and so become forgetful with Ulysses companions of his native
Country. Mean time he sojournes in the world, not as a Citizen, but as a
Guest, yea as an Exile. But to return to our present discourse now in hand; in
this quest after that sovereign or supreme end whereto all Actual Perfection
aspireth, and wherein it rests, we are to consider three things: 1. What is
to be sought: 2. Where it is to be sought: 3. When it is to be sought. For the
first, we are to understand that we are to seek only for that, the
acquisition whereof is no sooner attained, than the mind, whose flight is
above the pitch of frailty, is fully satisfied. Now that is a blessed life,
when what is best, is effected and enjoyed: for there can be no true rest to
the mind in desiring, but partaking what she desires. What is it then that
we seek? To drink of the water of life; where our thirst may be so
satisfied, as it never be renewed; our desires so fulfilled, as never higher or
further extended. Vitruvius l. 8. cap. 3.
He that has once tasted of the fountain named Clitorius fons (and choice is
the taste of such a fountain) will never drink any wine; no wine mixed with
the dregs of vanity, no wine drawn from the lees of vainglory: the reason
is, he reserves his taste for that new wine, August. Manual. cap. 8.
which he is to drink in his Fathers kingdom. And what kingdom? The
Kingdom of heaven; a kingdom most happy, a kingdom wanting death, and
without end; enjoyng a life that admits no end. Ibid. cap. 3.
And what life? A life vital, a life sempiternall, and sempiternally joyful,
And what joy? A joy without sorrowing, rest without laboring, dignity without
trembling, wealth without losing, health without languishing, abundance without
failing, life without dying, Luke 18.19. Trinitas divinarum personarum est
summum bonum. quod purgatissimis mentibus cernitur. Aug. lib. 1. de Trin. cap.
2.
perpetuity without corrupting, blessedness without afflicting, where the
sight and vision of God is seen face to face. And what God? God the sole
sufficient, summary, supreme good: that good which we require alone; that God
who is good alone. And what good? The Trinity of the divine persons is this
summary good, which is seen with purest minds. The Heart triangle-wise
resembles the image of the blessed Trinity; which can no more by the
circumference of the World be confined than a Triangle by a Circle is to be
filled. So as the Circular world cannot fill the Triangular heart, no more than
a Circle can fill a Triangle; still there will be some empty corners: it
says, so long as it is fixed on the world, Sheol, it is never enough: but
fixed on her Maker, her only Mover, on her sweet Redeemer, her dearest Lover,
she chants out cheerfully this Hymn of comfort; There is no condemnation to
them which are in Christ Jesus. Romans 3.1.
She then may rest in peace. And what peace? A peace which passes all
understanding. She then may embrace her Love. And what Love? A Love constantly
loving. She then may enjoy life. And what life? A life eternally living. She
then may receive a Crown. And what Crown? A Crown gloriously shining. This
crown (says S. Peter) is undefiled, (...).
which never fades away. The Greek words which S. Peter uses, are Latin
words also; and they are not only Appellatives, being the Epithetes of this
Crown, but also Propers; the one proper name of a Stone, the other of a
Flower: for Isidore writes, there is a precious stone called Amiantus,
Isidorus Etymol l. 16. c. 4.
which, though it be never so much soiled, yet it can never at all be
blemished; and being cast into the fire, it is taken out still more bright and
clean. Also Clemens writes, that there is a flower called Amarantus, which
being a long time hung up in the house, yet still is fresh and green. To both
which, the stone and the flower, the Apostle, as may be probably gathered,
alludeth in this place. Here then you see, what you are to seek. For are your
desires unsatisfied? here is that which may fulfill them. Are your souls
thirsty? here is the Well of life to refresh them: Would you be Kings? here is
a Kingdom provided for you. Would you enjoy a long life? a long life shall
crown you, and length of days attend you. Would you have all goodness to
enrich you? enjoying GOD, all good things shall be given you. Would you have
salvation to come unto your house and secure you? rest you in Christ Jesus, and
no condemnation shall draw near you. Would you have your consciences speak
peace unto you? the God of peace will throughout establish you. Would you have
your constant'st Love ever attend you? He who gave himself for you, will never
leave you. Would you have him live for ever with you? Leave loving of the
world, so shall he live ever with you and in you. Would you have a Crown
conferred on you? A Crown of glory shall empale you. Aug. Manuel. cap. 34.
Seek then this one good wherein consists all goodness, and it suffices.
Seek this sovereign or summary good, from whence comes every good, and it
suffices. For he is the life by which we live, the hope to which we cleave,
and the glory which we desire to obtain. For if dead, Ibid. 12* Aliud noli
petere, uni suffice, quia una tibi sufficient. Aug. in Psalm. 26.

Where we are to seek.


he can revive us; if hopeless and helpelesse, he can succor us; if in
disgrace, he can exalt us. Him then only are we to seek, who, when we were
lost, did seek us; and being found, did bring us to his sheepe-fold. And so I
descend from what we are to seek, to where we are to seek, that seeking him
where he may be found, we may at last find him whom we so long have sought.

For the second, we are to seek it while we are on earth, but not upon
earth, for earth cannot contain it. It is the Philosophers axiom, That which
is finite may not comprehend that which is infinite. Now that supreme or
sovereign end, to which this Actual Perfection is directed, whereto it
aspireth, and wherein it rests, is by nature infinite: End without end,
beginning and end, imposing to every creature a certain, definite, or
determinate end. The sole solace of the soul, being only able to fill or
satisfy the soul, without which all things in heaven or under heaven, joined
and conferred together, cannot suffice the soul: so boundless her extent, so
infinite the object of her content. How should Earth then contain it, or to
what end should we on Earth seek it; seeing whatsoever contains, must of
necessity be greater than that which is contained? But Earth being a mass of
corruption, how should it confine or circumscribe incorruption? Seeing nothing
but immortality can cloth the Soul with glory, it is not the rubbish or
refuse of Earth that may add to her beauty. Besides, the Soul while it so
journes here in this earthly mansion, she remains as a captive enclosed in
prison. What delights then can be pleasing, what delicates relishing to the
palate of this prisoner? She is an exile here on Earth: what society then can
be cheerful to one so careful of returning to her Country? If Captives
restrained of their liberty, Exiles estranged from their Country, can take no
true content either in their bondage, be it never so attempred; nor in that
exile, be they never so attended, how should the Soul apprehend the least
joy, during her abode on Earth? Where the treasure is, there is the heart: her
treasure is above, how can her heart be here below? Mortality cannot suit with
immortality, no more can Earth with the soul. Whereto then be the motions of
our soul directed? To Him that gave it; no inferior creature may suffice her,
no earthly object satisfy her, August. Med. cap. 19.
nothing subject to sense fulfill her. In Heaven are those heavenly objects,
wherewith her eye rests satisfied; in Heaven are those melodious accents,
wherewith her ear rests solaced; in Heaven those choicest odours, wherewith
her smell is cherished, in Heaven those tastefull'st dainties, wherewith her
soul is nourished; in Heaven those glorious creatures, wherewith her self is
numbered. What difference then betwixt the satiety and saturity of Heaven, and
the penury and poverty of Earth? Here all things are full of labor, Eccles.
1.8.
man cannot utter it: The eye is not satisfied with seeing, nor the ear filled
with hearing: whereas in Heaven there is length of days, and fullness of joy
without ending. And wherein consists this fullness? Even in the sweet and
comfortable sight of God. But who has seen GOD at any time? To this, blessed
Augustine answers excellently: Albeit (says he) that summary and incommutable
essence, Aug. Med. cap. 28.
that true light, that indeficient light, that light of Angels, can be seen
by none in this life, being reserved for a reward to the Saints only in the
heavenly glory; yet to believe, and understand, and feel, and ardently desire
it, is in some sort to see and possess it. Now, if we will believe it, though
our feet be on earth, Sipes in terris, spes sit in coelis.
our faith must be in heaven: or understand it, we must so live on earth, as
if our conversation were in heaven: or feel it, we must have so little
feeling of the delights of this life, as our delight may be wholly in heaven:
or desire it, we must hunger and thirst after righteousness, to direct us in
the way which leads to heaven. It cannot be (says a devout holy man) that
any one should die ill, Blos. Enchirid parvul, auth.
who has lived well. We are then to labor by a zealous, religious, and
sincere life, to present our selves blameless before the Lord at his coming.
O if we knew (and gross is our ignorance if we know it not) that whatsoever
it sought besides God, Ibid.
possesses the mind, but satisfies it not! we would have recourse to him, by
whom our minds might be as well satisfied as possessed. But great is our
misery, and miserable our stupidity, who, when we may gain heaven with less
pains then hell, will not draw our foot back from hell, Minore negetionobis
calum comparem possum^s, quam infernum. Ibid. Hilar. enar. in. Ps. 18.
nor step one foot forward toward the kingdom of heaven. Yea, when we know,
that it pleases the Devil no less when we sin, then it pleases God to
hear us sigh for sin; yet will we rather please the Devil by committing
sin, then please God by sending out one penitent sigh for our sin. For
behold, what dangers will men expose themselves unto, by Sea and Land, to
increase their substance! Again, for satisfaction of their pleasures, what
tasks will they undertake, no less painful then full of peril! A little
expectance of penitential pleasure can make the voluptuous man watch all the
night long, when one hour of the night to pray in would seem too too long.
Early and late, to enrich his careless heir, will the miserable wretch
address himself to all slavish labor, without once remembering either early
or late to give thanks to his Maker. Hi, lice^ ^lta nimis cogitent* humiliter
se gerent, quo aliorum gratiam sibi concilient, in litibus decernendis justa
statuent, quo majoreus ^ibi reverentiam, f^cata ea Iustitia larva, sibi
adferant: in^^rim, alios dum capiunt, sese decipiunt; aliena dum rapiunt,
misere ruunt.

Vid. Annal, Hiber. Bernard.


Without repose or repast will the restless ambitious Spark, whose aims are
only to be worldly great, task himself to all difficulties to gain honor,
when even that which so eagerly he seeks for, oft-times bring ruin to the
owner. Here then you see where you are to seek: not on earth, for there is
naught but corruption; but in heaven, where you may be clothed with
incorruption: not on earth, for there you are Exiles; but in heaven, where you
may be enrolled and infranchised Citizens: not on earth the grate of misery,
but in heaven the goal of glory. In brief, would you have your hearts lodged,
where your treasures are locked; all your senses seated, where they may be
fully sated; your eye with delightfull'st objects satisfied, your ear with
melodious accents solaced; your smell with choicest odours cherished, your
taste with chiefest dainties relished, your selves, your souls amongst those
glorious creatures registered? Fix the desires of your heart on him, who can
only satisfy your heart; set your eye on him, whose eye is ever upon you, and
in due time will direct you to him; intend your ear to his Law, which can best
inform you, and with divinest melody cheer you; follow him in the smell of
his sweet ointments, and he will comfort you in your afflictions; taste how
sweet he is in mercy, and you shall taste sweetness in the depth of your
misery: become heavenly men; so of terrestrial Angels you shall be made
Angels in heaven, where, by the spiritual union of your souls, you shall be
united unto him who first gave you souls. And so I come to the third and last;
When we are to seek, lest seeking out of time, we be excluded from finding
what we seek, for want of seeking in due time.

When we are to seek. Eccles. 3.1.
If words spoken in season be like apples of gold with pictures of silver; sure
I am, that our actions being seasonably formed or disposed, cannot but add to
our souls much beauty and luster. To every thing there is a season, and a time
to every purpose under the heaven: which season neglected, the benefit accruing
to the work is likewise abridged. There is a time to sow, and a time to reap:
and sow we must before we reap; sow in tears, before we reap in joy.
Seek we must before we find; for unless we seek him while he may be found,
seek may we long ere we have him found. After the time of our dissolution
from earth, there is no time admitted for repentance to bring us to heaven. Hoc
momentum est de quo pendet aeternitas. Either now or never; and if now, thrice
happy ever. Which is illustrated to us by diverse Similitudes, Examples and
Parables in the holy Scripture: as in Esau's birthright, which (once sold)
could not be regained by many tears; Genesis 25.34.
and in the Parable of Dives and Lazarus, where Abraham answered Dives, Luke
16.24.25.
after he had beseeched him to send Lazarus that he might dip the tip of his
finger in water, and cool his tongue; Son, remember that thou in thy
lifetime received'st thy good things, and likewise Lazarus evil things: but
now he is comforted, and thou art tormented. And in the Parable of the ten
Virgins, where the five foolish Virgins took their Lamps, Matthew.
25.3.4.10.11.12.
and took no oil with them; but the wise took oil in their vessels with
their Lamps; and when the Bridegroom came, those that were ready, went in with
him, and were received: but those foolish ones who were unprovided, though they
came afterward, crying, Lord, Lord, open unto us, could not be admitted. For
know, dear Christian, and apply it to thy heart, (for knowledge without use,
application or practice, Deus co^versioni tuae indulgentiam promisit: sed
dilationi tuae diem crastinum non promisit. Aug.
is a fruitless and soule-beguiling knowledge;) that he who promises
forgiveness to thee repenting, has not promised thee to morrow to repent in.
Why therefore deferrest thou till to morrow, when thou little know but thou
may die before to morrow? This day, this hour is the opportunate season;
take hold of it then, lest thou repent thee when it is past season. Man has no
interest in time save this very instant, which he may properly term his; let
him then so employ this instant of time, as he may be heir of eternity, which
exceeds the limit of time. Matt. 11.16.
Let us work now while it is day, for the night comes when no man can work.
Why therefore stand we idling? Why delay we our conversion? Why cry we with
the sluggard, Yet a little, and then a little, and no end of that little?
August.
Why to morrow, and to morrow, and no end of to morrow, being as near our
conversion to day as to morrow? Why not to day, as well as to morrow, seeing
every day brings with it her affliction, both to day and to morrow? Meet it
is then, for us to make recourse to the Throne of mercy in the day of mercy,
and before the evil day come, lest we be taken, as he who beat his fellow
servants, when the great Master of the Household shall come. Ierem. 22.30.
O earth, earth, earth, hear the Word of the LORD! Earth by creation, earth by
condition, earth by corruption. Eccles. 12. a verse. 1. ad 8.
Remember now thy Creator in the days of thy youth, while the evil days come
not, nor the years draw nigh, when thou shall say, I have no pleasure in them.
While the Sun, or the light, or the Moon, or the Stars that be not
darkened, nor the clouds return after the rain. In the day when the Keepers
of the house shall tremble, and the strong men shall bow themselves, and the
grinders cease, because they are few, and those that look out of the windows
be darkened: And the doors shall be shut in the streets, when the sound of the
grinding is low, and he shall rise up at the voice of the bird, and all the
daughters of music shall be brought low. Also when they shall be afraid of
that which is high, and fears shall be in the way, and the Almond tree shall
flourish, and the Grasshopper shall be a burden, and desire shall fail:
because man goes to his long home, and the mourners go about the streets. Or
ever the silver coard be loosed, or the golden bowl be broken, or the pitcher
be broken at the fountain, Genesis 3.19.
or the wheel broken at the Cisterne. Then shall the dust return to the earth
as it was, and the spirit shall return unto God who gave it. Hence then are
we warned not to defer time, lest we neglect the opportunate time, the time
of grace; which neglected, miserable shall we be, when from hence dissolved.
Yea, but will some object; True repentance is never too late: which is most
true; but again I answer, August. Poenitentia poenae; non p^na p^nitentiae.
that late repentance is seldom true. Repent then while ye have time; for as
in Hell there is no redemption, so after death there is no time admitted for
repentance. O remember that a wounded conscience none can heal; so that, like
as the Scorpion has in her the remedy of her own poison; so the evil man
carries always with him the punishment of his own wickedness, the which
does never leave to torment and afflict his mind both sleeping and waking. So
as, the wicked man is oft-times forced to speak unto his conscience, 1 King.
2^.20.
as Ahab said to Eliah, Have thou found me, O mine enemy? Now there is no
better means to make peace with our consciences, then to set God continually
before our eyes, that his Spirit may witness to our spirits, that we are the
children of grace. Wherein many offend daily, who promise to themselves
security, either by sinning subtly or secretly: Subtly, as in dazzling or
deluding the eyes of the world with pretended sanctity, and concluding with the
Poet; Da mihi sallere, da justum sanctumque videri, Noctem peccatis and
fraudibus ob^ice nubem. Nullus est in rima, nullus qui me ex^^udiat. Eras.
Dial. (...). -- cernit Deus omnia vindex. 1 Kin. 21.20. Annon pudet id facere
in conspectu Dei, actes^ibus sanctis Angelu, quod pudet facere in conspectu
hominum.
That I may just and holy seem,
and so the world deceive,
And with a cloud my cunning shroud,
is all that I do crave.
But such Hypocrites will God judge, and redouble the viols of his wrath upon
their double sin. Secretly, when man in the foolishness of his heart
commits some secret sin, and says, Who sees him? There is none looking
through the chinke to se me, none that can hear me, but simple fools: how
much are these deceived? Is there any darkness so thick and palpable, that
this (...) the piercing eye of heaven cannot spy thee through it? O if thou
hope by firming secretly, to sin securely, thou shall be forced to say unto thy
God, as Ahab said unto Elijah, Have thou found me, O mine enemy? Nay, O God
terrible and dreadful, thou have found me. And then let me ask thee in the
same terms that the young Gallant in Erasmus asked his wanton mistress; Art
thou not ashamed to do that in the sight of God and witness of holy Angels,
which thou art ashamed to do in the sight of men? Art thou so afraid of
disgrace with men, and little carest whether thou be or no in the state of
grace with God? Art thou more jealous of the eyes of men, who have but power
only to asperse a blemish on thy name, or inflict a temporal punishment on
thy person, then of his, who has power to throw both thy soul and body into
the burning Lake of perdition? Quid si tuta possint esse scelera, ^^ secura
e^se non possunt? vel quid prode^t nocentibus habuisse latendi facultatem, cum
liten^i fiduciam non habent?

Sen. opist. 97. Bernard. de vita Solitaria Sen. epist. 11. August. Mau cap.
19. Quicquid ages mundo, furtimve palamve, momento, Inspectatorem semper adesse
Deum. Prudentius hymno^um. l. 1. cont. Symmach. Aug. Soliloq. cap. 11.


It was a pretty saying of Epicurus in Seneca; Whereto are offenses safe, if
they cannot be secure? Or what availes it guilty men to find a place to lie
hid in, when they have no confidence in the place where they lie hid in?
Excellent therefore was the counsel of zealous Bernard, and sententious
Seneca, that we should always, as in a mirror, represent unto our eyes the
example of some good man; and so to live as if he did always see us, always
behold us: for we, who know that the eyes of God are upon all the ways of
men, and that no place so remote, no place so desert or desolate, as may divide
us from his all-seeing presence, ought to be in all our works so provident and
circumspect, as if God were present before our eyes, as in truth he his. And
therefore Prudentius in one of his Hymns gives this memorandum; Think with
thy self, if thou from sin would free thee,
Be It day or night, that God does ever see thee.
O then let us fix our thoughts upon God here on earth, that we may gloriously
fix our eyes upon him in heaven! Let us so meditate of him here on earth, that
we may contemplate him there in heaven! So repent us to have dishonored him
here on earth, that we may be honored by him in heaven! Let us become humble
Petitioners unto him, and prostrate our selves before his footstool: of whom
if we beg life, his hand is not so shortened, as it will not save; his ear
so closely stopped, as it will not hear. It is reported that when a poor man
came to Dionysius the Tyrant, and preferred his Petition unto him standing, the
imperious Tyrant would not give ear unto him; whereupon this poor Petitioner,
to move him to more compassion, fell down prostrate at his feet, and with much
importunity obtained his suit: after all this, being demanded by one why he
did so; Aures habet in pedibus Aristippus.
I perceived (quoth he) Dionysius to have his ears in his feet, wherefore I
was out of hope to be heard till I fell before his feet. But God, who intends
rather the devotion of the heart, then the motion of the hand, or prostration
of the body, will hear us, if we ask faithfully, and open unto us, if we
knock constantly, and having fought a good fight, crown us victoriously.

Thus you have heard what we are to seek, where we are to seek, and when
we are to seek. What; a Kingdom, not of earth, but of heaven. Where; not on
earth, nor in earth, but in heaven. When; while we are here on earth, C^nt.
4.12. 2 Timothy 4.8. Mat. 13.44. Mat. 10.16. 1 Cor. 2.7. 2 Cor. 3.17. Mat. 6.33.
Esaias 56.7. Matthew. 21 13. Number. 12.^. Rom 9.8. 2 Samuel 5.7.9. Luke 17.21.
that after earth we may reign in heaven. What; a Garden enclosed, a Spring
shut up, a Fountain sealed. What; a crown of righteousness, a precious
pearl, a hid treasure. What; wisdom, health, wealth, beauty, liberty, and all
through him who is all in all. Aristippus was wont to say, that he would go
to Socrates for wit, but to Dionysius for money: whereas this we seek, and
seeking hope to enjoy, confers upon us the rich treasures of wisdom, and
abundance of riches for evermore. For, first seek we the kingdom of heaven,
and the righteousness thereof, and all things else shall be ministered unto
us. Secondly, where we are to seek. Where; in Heaven, the house of God, the
City of the great King, the inheritance of the just, the portion of the
faithful, the glory of Sion. Where; not without us, but within us; for the
Kingdom of God is within us. So as I may say to every faithful soul, Intus
habes quod quaeris; That is within thee, which is sought of thee. It is God
thou seek, and him thou possessest; Qui amat desiderare, defideret amare.
Bern. de amore Dei. c. 3. Vid. Greg. Mor. lib. 18. cap. 28.
thy heart longs after him, and right sure thou art of him, for his delight
is to be with those that love him. Lastly, when; on Earth: when; in this life:
when; while we are in health; while we are in these Tabernacles of clay;
while we carry about us these earthly vessels; while we are clothed with
flesh; before the evil day come; or the night approach; or the shadow of death
encompasse us; now in the opportunate time, the time of grace, the time of
redemption, the appointed time, while our peace may be made: not to defer
from youth to age, lest we be prevented by death before we come to age; but
so to live every day, as if we were to dye every day, that at last we may
live with him who is the length of days. What remains then, but that we
conclude the whole Series or progress of this Discourse with an exhortation to
counsel you, an instruction to caution you; closing both in one Conclusion to
persuade you to put in daily practice, what already has been tendered to you.

Now, Gentlemen, that I may take a friendly farewell of you; I am to exhort you
to a course Virtuous, which among good men is ever held most Generous. A^pithy
exhortation.
Let not, O let not the pleasures of sin for a season, withdraw your minds
from that exceeding great weight of glory kept in store for the faithful,
Via^i^tutis, s^ella salutis. Pandect.
after their passage from this vale of misery! Often call to mind the riches
of that Kingdom after which you seek: those fresh Pastures fragrant Medows,
and redolent Fields diapred and embrodered with sweetest and choicest flowers:
Happy misery, when clothed with the white roabe of immortality, cheered with
heavenly harmony, holy melody!
those blessed Citizens, heavenly Saints and Servants of God, who served him
here on Earth faithfully, and now reign with him triumphantly. Let your Hearts
be exditers of a good matter, and your voices viols to this heavenly measure.
O how glorious things are spoken of thee thou City of God; as the habitation
of all that rejoice is in thee! Thou art founded on the exaltation of the whole
Earth. There is in thee neither old age, nor the misery of old age. There is
in thee neither maime, nor lame, nor crooked, nor deformed, seeing all attain
to the perfect man, to that measure of age, or fullness of Christ. Who would
not become humble Petitioner before the Throne of grace, Aug. Man. cap. 17.
to be made partaker of such an exceeding weight of glory?

Secondly, A powerful Instruction.
to instruct you where this Crown of righteousness is to be sought; it is to
be sought in the house of God, in the Temple of the Lord, in the Sanctuary of
the most High. O do not hold it any derogation to you, to be servants; yea,
servants of the lowest rank, even Doorekeepers in the House of the Lord!
Constantine the Great gloried more in being a member of the Church, Majorem
s^bi gloriam conferri existimab^t, in seipsum exhibendo membrum Ecclesiae, quam
caput imperii. Vid. Eusebius.
than the Head of an Empire. O then, let it be your greatest glory to advance
his glory, who will make you vessels of glory! But know, that to obey the
deligths of the flesh, to divide your portion among Harlots, to drink till the
wine grow red, to make your life a continued revell, is not the way to obtain
this crown. Tribulation must go before Consolation; you must clime up to the
Cross, before you receive this Crown. The Israelites were to pass through a
Desert, before they came to Canaan. This Desert is the world, Canaan heaven. O
who would not be here afflicted, that he may be there comforted! Who would
not be here crossed, that he may be there crowned! Who would not with
patience pass through this Desert, only in hope to come to Canaan! Canaan, the
inheritance of the just; Canaan, the lot of the righteous; Exodus 3.8.
Canaan, a fat Land flowing with milk and honey; Canaan, an habitation, Exodus
15.13.
of the most holy; Canaan, a place promised to Abraham; Canaan, Genesis 12.7. Luke
16.22
the bosom of Father Abraham, even Heaven; but not the heaven of heaven, to
which even the earth it self is the very Empyraean heaven, for this is heaven
of heaven to the Lord: Aug. Soliloq. cap. 31.
because known to none but to the Lord.

Thirdly, and lastly, that I may conclude, and concluding persuade you; neglect
not this opportunate time of grace that is now offered you. A persuasive
Conclusion.
I know well, that Gentlemen of your rank cannot want such witty Consorts, as
will labor by their pleasant conceits to remove from you the remembrance of
the evil day: but esteem not those conceits for good, which strive to
estrange from your conceit the chiefest good. Let it be your task every day,
to provide your selves against the evil day; so shall not the evil day, when
it comes affright you, nor the terrors of death prevail against you, nor
the last summons perplex you, nor the burning Lake consume you. O what sharp,
extreme, and insuperable taskes would those woeful tormented souls take upon
them, if they might be freed but one hour from those horrors which they see,
those tortures which they feel! O then while time is granted you, omit no
time, neglect no opportunity! Be instant in season and out of season, holding
on in the race which is set before you, and persevering in every good work even
unto the end. Matthew. 10.22.
Because they that continue unto the end, shall be saved, What is this life
but a minute, and less than a minute in respect of eternity? Yet if this
minute be well employed, it will bring you to the fruition of eternity. Hebr.
10.36. Prove. 16.32.
Short and momentany are the afflictions of this life; yet supported with
Patience, and subdued with long sufferance, they crown the sufferer with glory
endless. Short likewise are the pleasures of this life, which as they are of
short continuance, so bring they forth no other fruit than the bitter pills of
repentance: whereas in heaven there are pleasures for evermore, comforts for
evermore, joys for evermore: no carnal, but cordial joy: no laughter of the
body, but of the heart: for though the righteous sorrow, Greg. in Moral.

Exposit. in Job.

Blos. Enchirid. parvul. auth.


their sorrow ends when they end, but joy shall come upon them without end. O
meditate of these in your beds, and in your fields; when you are journeying on
the way, and when you are so journing in your houses: where compare your
Court-dalliance with these pleasures, and you shall find all your rioting,
triumphs and revelling, to be rather occasions of sorrowing than solacing,
mourning than rejoicing! Bathe you in your Stoves, or repose you in your
Arbours, these cannot allay the least pang of an afflicted conscience. O then
so live every day, as you may die to sin every day! that as you are ennobled by
your descent on earth, you may be ennobled in heaven after your descent to
earth.

Laus Deo.
Totum hoc ut a te veniet, totur^ ad te redeat.
A Gentleman
IS a Man of himself, without the addition of either Tailor, Millener,
Seamster or Haberdasher. Actions of goodness he holds his supreme happiness:
The fate of a younger brother cannot depresse his thoughts below his elder. He
scorns baseness more than want; and holds Nobleness his sole worth. A Crest
displayes his house, but his own actions express himself. He scorns pride,
as a derogation to Gentry; and walks with so pure a soul, as he makes
uprightness the honor of his Family. He wonders at a profuse fool, that he
should spend when honest frugality bids him spare; and no less at a miserable
Crone, who spares when reputation bids him spend. Though heir of no great
fortunes, yet his extensive hand will not show it. He shapes his coat to his
cloth; and scorns as much to be holden, as to be a Gally-slave. He has
been youthful, but his maturer experience has so ripened him, as he hates to
become either Gull or Cheat. His disposition is so generous, as others
happiness cannot make him repine, nor any occurrent, save sin, make him
repent. He admires nothing more than a constant spirit, derides nothing more
than a recreant condition, embraces nothing with more intimacie, than a
prepared resolution. Amongst men he hates no less to be uncivil, than in
his fear to Godward to be servile. Education he holds a second Nature; which
(such innate seeds of goodness are sown in him) ever improves him, seldom or
never depraves him. Learning he holds not only an additament, but ornament to
Gentry. No complement gives more accomplishment. He intends more the tillage
of his mind, than his ground; yet suffers not that to grow wild neither. He
walks not in the clouds to his friend, but to a stranger. He eyes the Court
with a virtuous and noble contemplation; and dis-values him most, whose sense
consists in sent. He viewes the City, with a princely command of his
affections. No object can withdraw him from himself; or so distract his
desires as to covet ought unworthily; or so intraunce his thoughts, as to
admire ought servilely. He lives in the Country without thought of
oppression; makes every evening his days Ephemeris. If his neighbors field
flourish, he does not envy it; if it lie fit for him, he scorns to covet it.
There is not that place he sees, nor that pleasure he enjoyes, whereof he
makes not some singular use to his own good, and Gods glory. Vocation he
admits of, walking in it with so generous and religious a care, as he makes
Piety his Practice, acts of Charity his Exercise, and the benefit of others his
sole solace. He understands that neither health comes from the clouds
without seeking, nor wealth from the clods without digging. He recommends
himself therefore in the morning to Gods protection and favor, that all the
day long he may more prosperously succeed in his labor. He holds idleness
to be the very moth of man's time: Day by day therefore has he his task
imposed, that the poison of idleness may be better avoided. He holds, as
Gods opportunity is man's extremity; so man's security is the Devils opportunity.
Hoping therefore he fears, fearing he takes heed, and taking heed he
becomes safe. Hospitality he holds a relic of Gentry: He harbors no
passion but compassion. He grieves no less at another loss than his own;
nor joys less in another success than his own peculiar. Recreation he
uses to refresh him, but not surprise him. Delights cannot divert him from a
more serious occasion; neither can any houre-beguiling pastime divide him from
an higher contemplation. For honest pleasures, he is neither so Stoicall as
wholly to contemn them, nor so Epicureall as too sensually to affect them.
There is no delight on mountain, vale, coppice, or river, whereof he makes
not an useful and contemplative pleasure. Recreation he admits, not to
satisfy his sense, but solace himself. He fixes his mind on some other
subject, when any pleasure begins too strongly to work upon him: He would
take it, but not be taken by it. He attempers his attractivest pastimes with
a little Alloes; to weane him all the sooner from their sweetness. He scorns
that a moment of content should deprive him of an eternity of comfort. He
corrects therefore his humor, in the desire of pleasure, that he may come off
with more honor. Acquaintance he entertaines with fear, but retains with
fervor. He consorts with none, but where he presumes he may either better
them, or be bettered by them. Virtue is the sole motive of his choice: He
conceives how no true amity, nor constant society can ever be amongst evil
men. He holds it a blemish to the repute of a Gentleman, and an aspersion to
his discretion to make choice of those for his associates, who make no more
account of time, than how to pass it over. Conference he affects; and those
he admits only into the list of his discourse, whom he finds more real
than verbal, more solid than complementall. He will try him before he rely
on him: but having found him touch, they touch his honor that impeach him.
Moderation in his desires, cares, fears, or in what this Theater of Earth may
afford, he expresses so nobly, as neither love of whatsoever he enjoyes can
so enthrall him, nor the loss of what he loves can any way appall him. A true
and generous Moderation of his affections, has begot in him an absolute
command and conquest of himself. He smiles, yet compassionately grieves at
the immoderation of poor worldlings in their cares and griefs; at the
indiscretion of ambitious and voluptuous Flies in their desires and fears.
Perfection he aspires to; for no lower mound can confine him, no inferior
bound impale him. Virtue is the staire that raises to height of this Story.
His ascent is by degrees; making Humility his directresse, lest he should
fail or fall in his progress. His wings are holy desires; his feet heavenly
motions. There is no sense which he offers not up as a sweet incense, to
expedite his course and refresh his conscience. He holds it the sweetest life
to be every day better, till length of days reunite him to his Redeemer. He
has played his part on this Stage of Earth with honor; and now in his Exit
makes heaven his harbor.

FINIS.
An exact TABLE, or Directory, leading to the Principal points contained in
this BOOK,
YOVTH. Observat. 1.
OUR youthful years, our Climactericall years; with the dangers that attend
on youthful years; seconded by an authentic story out of Eusebius. p. 1.2
The vanity of Youth displayed in four distinct Subjects. 3 Two reasons why
Young Men were not admitted to deliver their opinions in public assemblies.
6.7 Three violent passions incident to Youth. 15 Two reasons why Youth is
naturally subject to those illimited passions of Ambition, Lust, Revenge. ibid.
Especial motives or incendiaries, tending to the increase of those passions.
16 The proper postures of a complete Roarer. 23 Physic prescribed, and
Receipts applied, to cure these maladies in Youth. 26 What choice employments
deserve entertainment from a Gentleman. ib.
DISPOSITION. Observat. 2.
THe diversity of Dispositions. page 29 A probable judgment of our
Dispositions, drawn from the delights we affect, or company we frequent. 30
Passion the best discoverer of our Disposition. ibid. Discovery of Dispositions
in distempers. ib Promotion held ever, man's best Anatomy Lecture. 31 The
Disposition is not to be forced. 32 What Disposition (being distinguished by
three infallible marks) is most generous: Mildness. 34 Munificence. 34
Stoutnesse. 34
The proper aim or end whereto the Actions of true resolution are directed:
with the prudent observation of Cortugall, one of the Turkish Princes, in his
persuasive Oration for the besiege of Rhodes. 40
EDVCATION. Observat. 3.
WHat Education is. page 43 Education dilates it self to three subjects. ibid.
Our knowledge reflects upon two particulars. 44 A profitable Exhortation to all
such as are drawn away by strange doctrine. 46 Two especial errors incident
to subjects of discourse; Affectation, Imitation, whereof Gentlemen are
seriously cautioned. 47 Persuasion, being the life and efficacy of Speech,
consists on three parts. ibid The excellent Moral of a Bird, and a Fowler.
48.49 Immoderate passion, in arguments of Discourse and reasoning, to be
avoided 50 Education either improveth or depraveth. 52 Education, the best
seasoner of Action, as well as of Speech, or Knowledge: no less prevalent in
Arts Manual; than actions Martial. ibid. and 53 The admirable effects of
Education. ibid. How a Gentleman may be best enabled by Education. 5^
Education, the best seasoner of Youth. 57
VOCATION. Observat. 4.
THe Definition, necessity, and conveniencie of a Vocation without personal
Exception or Exemption. page 59.60.65 Virtue consists in Action, Time in
revolution, the maze of man's life in perpetual motion. page 61. l. 24 Three
necessary considerations touching the conveniencie of a Vocation; divided and
applied. 62 The efficacy of Prayer in every Vocation; and the exercise thereof
seriously recommended. ibid. We are to resist vices, by practicing and doing
acts of the contrary virtues. 65 Men of place, in respect of three distinct
Objects, are three ways servants. 66. l. 2. Men of place, of all others are
least exempted from a Vocation. 67. l. 22 The ground of all Novellisme. 69
Vocation in general. 70 The first invention of Trades, Arts, or Sciences. 72
The Ancient Borough of Kendall (upon serious discourse of Manufacture) worthily
commended for their industry in Wooll-worke: the judicious Dutchmen of
Kes-wick, for their Copper-worke. 71 A serious survey and judicious display of
all the Liberal Sciences. 72.73 The Vocation of a Gentleman in particular. 75
The Vocation of a Gentleman has employment public or private. 77 How a
Gentleman is to demean himself in public affairs of State. ibid. How in
choosing Knights and Burgesses of Parliament, those are ever to be preferred,
who seek least after it: And how a too eager pursuit after offices, argues
either arrogance, avarice, or weakness. ib. The life of man either Active or
Contemplative. 76. l. 30. Directions of reservancy, useful to all Gentlemen in
their keeping of company. ibid. l. 49 Credulity, in two respects, dangerous to
persons employed in affairs of State. 77 Credulity In believing the relations
of others. Credulity In imparting his thoughts to the secrecy of others: showed
in a conceited story. 77.78. Resolution in suffering neither price to draw him,
nor power to overawe him: the one to taint him, nor the other to daunt him. 79
Disobedience punished in acts most successive. 80 The holy war, as a consequent
action of honor, recommended to the undertaking of all young Gentlemen. 81.
lin. 7 How a Gentleman is to employ himself in public affairs. 82 How a
Gentleman is to demean himself in private affairs. ibid. Two perilous
shelfes which endanger Justice. 84 How Justice is to be poized equally. ibid.
Impunity the foster-mother of all impiety. 85 How a Gentleman is to demean
himself in his own family. 86 Every family a private Commonwealth. 87. marg.
A Gentleman is so to demean himself in his family, as he neither hoord up
niggardly, nor lash out lavishly. 88. l. 13 He is to keep a hanke of his
bounty, lest too much profuseness bring him to misery. ib. l. 18 He is neither
to be too remiss, nor too severe in his family. ibid. How a Gentleman is to
employ himself in spiritual affairs within his family. 90 The exercise of
devotion commended, a Blessing thereon pronounced, if duly performed; which
Blessing is on a precept and a promise grounded. 90.91
RECREATION. Observat. 5.
THe difference of Recreations. page 53 Of the moderate and immoderate use of
Recreation. 96 The benefit redounding from moderate Recreation. 97 The
inconveniences arising from immoderate Recreation. 99 The year of Iubile
defined and described. ib. Objections against Stage Plays, proposed and
resolved. 103.104 What honors ancient and modern times have conferred on
Poets, and what bounties for their poems. 106.107 What especial subjects are
privileged from I^sts. 108 Who the first Comedian, who the first Tragedian.
ibid. A woeful example of a Gentlewoman, who was a continual frequenter of
Stage Plays. 109 His vindication from a traducing opinion, conceived of him
touching Stage Plays. ib. mar. Excess of Gaming reproved. 110 Cheaters
displayed; their humors experimentally decolored, their Habit, garb, and
formal insinuation discovered. ibid. Young Gamesters most subject to passion.
125 A doleful example of one that at game used imprecation. ibid. Another
Modern example covertly shadowed, of one who desperately surprised with
distemper of loss, poisoned himself. ibid An excellent moral discourse of
Hunting. 111 The story of the fool of Millan, and his discourse with a
Falconer. 113 Of Recreations best sorting with the quality of a Gentleman. 114
In exercises of Recreation, those only are most approved, by whom they are
with least affectation performed, and with most freedom of mind embraced. 114.
l. 22 The misery of Duello's. 115 An accurate discourse of valor, and how in
arguments of contest or challenge, a Gentleman may come off with honor. 117 A
collection and election of Histories. 118 The knowledge of our own Modern
Chronicles, most beneficial to Gentlemen. 121.122 History the sweetest
Recreation of the mind. 220 The judgment of God inflicted upon the actors and
authors of Treason, Sacrilege, etc. 119.120 What good moral men have
flourished in evil times. 120.121 How a Gentleman is to bestow himself in
Recreation. 123 Prodigality condemned, moderation in expense, as well as in the
exercise it self, commended. 124 Distinction of times for Recreations,
necessarily enjoined. 126 No expense more precious, then the expense of time.
ibid. Election of Games for Recreation: which conduce most to memory or
retention; which to pregnancy of conceit or apprehension. ibid.
Acquaintance. Observat. 6.
OF the use of Acquaintance. page 129 Man's security, the Devils opportunity.
130. l. 22 A display of some Monasticke professors. ib. Privacy no less
perilous than society. ibid. The particular benefits derived from
Acquaintance, extend to Discourse. 131 Advice. 131 Action. 131
Of the benefit we reap by Acquaintance in matters of Discourse. ibid. Of the
choice of Acquaintance in matters of advice. 132 Friendship resembled to the
Juniper tree, whose wood is sweetest, shade coolest, and coal^ hottest. ib.
marg. Of the benefit properly derived from one friend to another in every
peculiar Action. 133 The Expressive Character of a real friend. 134 The
benefits which redound from the mut^all union or communion of friends in the
exercise of pleasure. 136 All Jests either festive or civil. ibid. Those jests
are best seasoned, that are least salted. 137 A rule of infallible direction
touching choice of Acquaintance. ibid. Of the choice or judicious approvement
of Acquaintance, in affairs of highest consequence. 138 Neither Timist nor
Timonist are within the Lists of Acquaintance to be entertained. ib. The
Timist, or Time-observer, displayed, and displaced. ibid. The Timonist, or
Time-detracter, discovered and discarded. 141 Evil society the source of all
sensuality. 140 What directions are to be observed in the choice of a wife.
142 Which branch has proper relation to three choice Characters, annexed to
the end of this Work; which Characters are in some Copies only annexed, and
for some other Observations hereafter reserved. The harsh and heremiticall
conceit of the Carthaginian Arminius, touching Marriage. ibid. The Character of
a shameless wanton. 142 The Character of a shamefast woman. 143 Advice in
respect both of portion and proportion. 144.145. etc. Privileges granted to
such as are married. 147 Nobility and Affability hold equalli'st concurrency.
ibid. l. 34 Sundry inducing motives to Love recounted. 149 Of Constancy in the
choice of Acquaintance. 150 Who are best consorts to pray with, to play with,
to converse or commerce with. 151 l. 28 Three faculties of the Understanding,
with their Objects. 153 Of reservancy toward Acquaintance. 155 A twofold
reservancy; 1 In reconciling our secrets. ibid. etc. 2 In reteining our
substance.
An admirable story, clozing with an unexpected Catastrophe, of a prodigal
Gentleman, and an unconscionable Creditor. 159. etc. Of the absolute end of
Acquaintance. 162 All things by course of nature have their proper end, save
only suits of Law, which admit no end. ibid. l. 29 A brief survey of
Acquaintance, in city, court, and country. 163 Learning, the moving'st
inducement and exquisitest ornament of Acquaintance. ibid. etc. Titles formerly
conferred on such as were learned ibid. The absolute aim or end of
Acquaintance, is either to better them, or be bettered by them. 164 Especial
offices wherein friendship and Acquaintance should be exercised. ibid. What
gracious effects were produced by the friendly compassion of those faithful
instruments of Gods glory, in the first conversion of this kingdom.
165.166.167 The flourishing state of the Church, amidst many hoary winters of
innovation, turbulent times of persecution. 167.168 An excellent conclusive
precept recommended to all young Gentlemen. ib. and 169
MODERATION. Observat. 7.
MOderation defined. page 171 Our life a medley of desires and fears. ibid.
Moderation of Princes in their contempt of Sovereignty, illustrated by an
example of one of our own. 173 Otho's resolution, who by dying had rather
prove himself a mortal creature, than by living, load himself with cares of
an Emperor. 174 No virtue can subsist without Moderation. 176 A review of
those maine assailants of Temperance, Lust, Ambition, Gorgeousness in
apparel, luscious fare, company keeping, etc. illustrated by diverse instances.
177.178 etc. What excellent fruits are derived from Temperance. 176 Conquest of
a man's affections, the greatest victory. 177 Chastity the choicest ornament of
Youth. ibid. A distinction of degrees, Conjugall, Viduall, Virginal. 180 A
more particular display of Cheaters, with their obsequious natures, etc. 184
Wherein Moderation is to be used. Expense of coin. Expense of time. 185
Motives to Hospitality with a reclaim of our Gentry from the Court to their
Country. 186 Three sorts of persons encountered and reproved for their abuse or
careless Expense of Time, the Ambitious. Voluptuous. Miserable-covetous. 189
The Ambitious man's designs aptly compared to Domitians catching flies, or the
misty conclusions of the deluded Alchymist. 190 The Voluptuous Libertine
misse-imployeth time in two respects; 1 In respect of himself. 2 In respect of
those good creatures, ordained for the use and service of himself. ibid.
The Covetous wretches Treasury, the storehouse of his misery. 191 Nothing so
terrible as the approach of death to a worldling. 192 Moderation of the
passions of the mind, reduced to two subjects, Joy. Sorrow. ibid.
The Christians Joy is no carnal but a spiritual Joy. 193 His sorrow is not a
sorrow unto sin, but a sorrow for sin. ibid. Eye is made the sense of
sorrow, because the sense of sin. 194 Wherein Moderation is to be limited. 194
The occasion of all immoderation derived from those three troubled Springs:
Concupiscence of the flesh; 195 Concupiscence of the eye; 195 Pride of life.
195
Excellent rules prescribed for moderating cares of the flesh. ibid. The Eye,
as it is the tendrest and subtillest Organ of all others, so should the object
whereon it is fixed, be the purest and clearest of all others. 197 The Eagle an
Emblem of Divine Contemplation. ibid. The worldlings earthly honor resembled
to the bird Ibis, her filthy nature. ibid. The desperate fate of an inamoured
Italian. ibid. l. 44 The proud Luciferians of this world similized to the
Chamelion, who has nothing in his body but lungs. 198. lin. 6 Promotion
declares what men be; instanced in Cardinal Woolsey. ibid. The power of prayer
expressed by these three distinct Characters: It is. Gods honor; 199 Man's
armor; 199 The Devils terror. 199 Or thus, Gods oblation; 199 Man's munition;
199 The Devils expulsion. 199

Which pious practice, as it is Gods sacrifice, so should it be man's exercise.
ibid. And absolute clozing direction tending to true Moderation. ibid. Of the
accomplished end which attends Moderation. ibid. The difference betwixt the
Ethnicke and Christian Ethicke, in the opinion of felicity. 200 The Exercise of
Moderation reduced to a threefold practice; 1 Overcomming of Anger, by the
spirit of patience. 2 Wantonness, by the spirit of continence. 3 Pride, by the
spirit of lowliness. 202
He who uses his tongue to filthy communication, incurs a threefold offense:
1 In dishonouring his Maker. 2 In blemishing his souls image or feature. 3 In
ministering matter of scandal to his brether* 203
Wherein true Content properly consists 204 Those two passions or affections
of desire and fear; desire of having more than we have; fear of losing what
we already have, may be properly said to have a threefold respect: To the
goods or Endowments of Mind. ibid. Body. ibid. Fortune. ibid.
No Attendant more tenderly constant to a Gentleman's reputation, than
Moderation. 207 Moderation the best Monitor in advising and advancing him to
the true title of honor.
PERFECTION. Observat. 8.
NO Perfection in this life absolute, but graduall. page 209 Two considerations
of maine consequence: 1 The foe that assaults us. 2 The friend that assists us.
210
The Christians complete armor. ibid. The first institution of Fasts, with
the fruit thereof. 211 The power of Prayer: with examples of such as were most
conversant in that holy Exercise. ibid. and 212 Circumstances observable in
works of charity and devotion. ibid. Objections and resolutions upon the
ground of Perfection. 213. lin. 26. etc. Of the Contemplative part of
Perfection. 214 A Corollary betwixt the Heathen and Christian contemplation.
215 Examples of a contemplative and r^tired life. 217 A threefold Meditation
of necessary importance: 1 Worthiness of the Soul; 2 Unworthiness of Earth;
3 Thankfulness unto God, who made man the worthiest creature upon earth. 218.
etc.
Of the Active part of Perfection. 219 No contagion so mortally dangerous to
the body, as corrupt company is to the soul. 220 Two especial memorials
recommended to our devoutest meditations: 1 The Author of our creation. ib. 2
The end of our creation ib.
A fourfold Creation. 221. lin. 3 The fabulous and frivolous opinions of
four Heathen Philosophers, ascribing the creation of all things to the four
Elements. 222. l. 3 Their arguments evinced by pregnant testimonies, both of
Scriptures and Fathers. ibid. The End of our creation. ibid. Singular precepts
of Mortification. 223 Idleness begets security, properly termed the Souls
Lethargy. 224 A Christian Ephemerid^s; or his Evening account. ibid. The Active
part of Perfection, preferred before the Contemplative. 225 No ARMORIE can more
truly deblazon a Gentleman, than acts of charity and compassion. 226 The Active
preferred before the Contemplative, for two respects; the first whereof has
relation to our selves; the second to others. 228.229 Ignorance is to be
preferred before knowledge loosely perverted; with a comparison by way of
objection and resolution, betwixt the conveniences of Action and Knowledge.
ibid. Action is the life of man, and Example the direction of his life. 229.
lin. 5 Wherein the Active part of Perfection consists. 229 Active Perfection
consists in Mortification of Action and Affection. Mortification extends it
self in a threefold respect, to these three distinct Subjects: 1 Life. 2
Name. 3 Goods.
Illustrated with eminent Examples of Christian resolution, during the ten
Persecutions. 230.231 Not the act of death, but the cause of death makes the
Martyr. 232 No action, how glorious soever, can be crowned, unless it be on
a pure intention grounded. ibid. Mortification in respect of name or report, is
twofold: 1 In turning our ears from such as praise us. 2 In hearing with
patience such as revile us. 234
Scandals distinguished: and which with more patience than others may be
tolerated. 237.238. etc. Mortification in our contempt of all worldly
substance: pitching upon two markeable considerations 1 By whom these blessings
are conferred on us. 2 How they are to be disposed by us. 238
Vainglory shuts man from the gate of glory. 239 An exquisite connection of
the precedent Meditations. 240 The absolute or supreme end whereto this Actual
Perfection aspireth, and wherein it solely rests. 242 Singular Patterns of
Mortification, in their Contempt of life, and embrace of death. 243.244 The
reason of his frequent repetition of sundry notable occurrences throughout this
whole Book: Wherein sundry passages throughout this last Edition have suffered
in the obscurity of their expressions, by the omissions of their marginall
authorities, digits or directions. 245 The Heart can no more by circumference
of the World be confined, than a Triangle by a Circle filled. 247. lin 16
Though our feet be on earth, our faith must be in heaven. 249 A pithy
Exhortation; a powerful instruction; clozing with a persuasive Conclusion.
253.254 A Character entitled, A Gentleman.
THE ENGLISH GENTLEVVOMAN, DRAWN OVT TO the full Body: EXPRESSING What
Habilliments do best attire her, What Ornaments do best adorn her, What
Complements do best accomplish her.


The third Edition revised, corrected, and enlarged.

By RICHARD BRATHVVAIT Esquire.

Modestia, non Forma.

LONDON, Printed by I. Dawson. 1641.

TO HER, WHOSE TRVE LOVE TO VERTVE HAS HIGHLY ENNOBLED HERSELF, Renowned her
sex, Honored her house: The Right Honorable ANNE, Countess of PEMBROKE; the
only Daughter to a memorable Father, GEORGE Lord CLIFFORD, Earl of CVMBERLAND.
The accomplishment of her divinest wishes.
MADAM;
SOme months are past, since I made bold to recommend to my Right Honorable
LORD your Husband, an ENGLISH GENTLEMAN; whom he was pleased, forth of his
noble disposition to receive into his Protection. Into whose most Honorable
service he was no sooner entertained, and upon due observance of his integrity
approved; then upon approvement of his more piercive judgment, he became
generally received. Out of these respects, my most Honorable Lady, I became so
encouraged, as I have presumed to prefer unto your service an ENGLISH
GENTLEWOMAN, one of the same Country and Family, a deserving sister of so
generous a brother: Or (if you will) a pleasing Spouse to so gracious a Lover.
Whom, if your Honor shall be but pleased to entertain (and your noble Candor
is such, as she can expect nothing less) especially, seeing her exquisite
feature takes life from his hand, whose family claims affinity with your
fathers house; you shall find excellently graced with sundry singular
qualities, beautified with many choice endowments, and so richly adorned with
diverse exquisite ornaments, as her attendance shall be no derogation to your
Honor, nor no touch to your unblemished Self, to retain her in your favor.
The living memory of your thrice noble and heroic Father, may justly exact
this addressement of mine to his Daughter: of whom my Father sometimes held
such near dependence, being ever cheered by his countenance, and highly
obliged to his goodness. This Memorial made me confident of a Patroness;
and so much the rather, being to prefer a Maid so complete and richly
qualified, as she could not choose but deserve highly from the hand of so noble
a Mistress. Sure I am, the sweetness of her temper, sorts and suits well with
the quality or disposition of your Honor: For she loves without any painted
pretenses to be really virtuous, without any popular applause to be affably
gracious, without any glorious gloss to be sincerely zealous. Her Education
has so enabled her, as she can converse with you of all places, deliver her
judgment conceivingly of most persons, and discourse most delightfully of all
fashions. She has been so well Schooled in the Discipline of this Age, as
she only desires to retain in memory that form which is least affected but
most comely; to consort with such as may improve her Knowledge and Practice of
goodness by their company; to entertain those for real and individuate
friends, who make actions of piety expressivest characters of their amity.
Diligent you shall ever find her in her employments, serious in her advice,
temperate in her Discourse, discreet in her answers. She bestows far more
time in eying the glass of her life, to rectify her errors, if there be any,
then the glass of her face in wiping off such outward stains as might blemish
her beauty. Neither in preserving that, is she altogether so remiss, as not
to retain that seemly grace in her feature, as may put her in remembrance of
the unexpressive beauty and bounty of her Maker. Neat she goes usually in her
Attire, which she puts on with more care then cost. And to these she adds
such a well-seeming grace, as she bestows more beauty on them, then she
receives from them. Phantasticke habits or foreign fashions are so far from
taking her, as with a slight but sweet contempt they are dis-valued by her.
She wonders how a wise state should employ so much time in inventing variety of
disguises to disfigure their Shape. This makes her desire rather to be out of
request with time, then with a civil and well-composed mind; whose honor it
is to be prized more by her own internal worth, then any outward wear.
Constant she is in her Behavior; wherein she affects little, but observes
much; With a bashful admiration she smiles at these civilized simpring Dames,
whose only glory it is to affect a kind of reserved state; which, as they
hold, consists principally in a mine'd speech, set look, or ginger pace* She
loves always to be her self, nor to entertain ought which may estrange her
from her self. So as, there is nothing in the whole posture of her Behavior,
but with a native graceful propriety does infinitely become her. Take upon her
to instruct others, she will not, such is her Humility; albeit, every moving
posture which comes from her, may be a line of direction unto others to follow
her. Complement she affects not, as the world takes it. The word in his own
native and unborrowed signification is good, and in that sense she admits it;
but to be restrained to an enforced formality, she cannot relish it. Whence
it is, that she prefers the incomparable Liberty of her mind, before the
mutable formality of a deluded age. She desires to be Complete in the
exercise of goodness; to improve her Honor not by titles but a lovely and
lively proficience, graced with a continuate practice in all virtues. She
cannot endure this later introduced kind of Complement, which consists in
Cringies, Congies, or supple Salutes. A cheerful modesty is her best
Complement, which she ever wears about her as her chiefest ornament. Decency
she affects in her Clothes, affability in her Discourse; she has made a
covenant with her eyes never to wander, nor intentively to bestow themselves on
any other object than the glory of her Maker. A proper personage is no such
attractive motive to her eye, to make her loose her self. Whatsoever she
undertakes beseemes her, because she affects naught but what naturally becomes
her. Her beauty is her own; and whatsoever else may better accomplish her. Her
paths are evenly virtuous; her desires truly religious; Piety is her practice;
which she expresses so fully in every action; as the whole course of her
well-disposed life is not so much as justly conscious of the least aspersion.
So highly she values her Estimation, as she will not engage it to suspicion.
Promises cannot tempt her, nor hope of advancement taint her. She wonders one
should prefer a conceit of being great, before a desire of appearing good.
Protesting Lovers she holds for no better then deceiving Lures. Be their
vows of service never so incessant, their assaults never so violent; her
resolves have vowed her constant. Hope of Profit cannot surprise her, nor
thought of Pleasure vainly delude her. Estimation she holds her highest
grace, with which untainted she purposes to go to her Grave. She knows how
to fancy; and in her she reteines what she fancies most; A chaste soul: this
is that she loves, and with which she cheerfully lives. She was never yet
acquainted with a passionate Ah me; nor a careless folding of her arms, as if
the thought of a prevailing Lover had wrought in her thoughts some violent
Distemper. So seriously does she task her self to employment, as she never
reserves so much time as to treat of so light a subject. Yet she unfainedly
vows, that if it be ever her fortune to make her Choice, her constant
affection must never admit any Change. To be Generous in every action, has
been ever the height of her ambition. Howsoever she might boast of Descent,
her desire is to raise it by Desert. She holds, no family can be truly
Generous, unless it be nobly virtuous. Her life must express the line from
whence she came. She scorns to entertain one thought below her self: Or to
detract from the glory of that house from whence she came. As the blood that
streams through her veins was nobly derived, so must it not by any action or
affection drawn from the rule of her direction, become corrupted. For Honor,
she admits it, but seldom or never admires it; the Stairs by which she
means to clime to it, must be fair and firm, or she will never mount them.
She rather admires the Ages folly; while she observes how many hazard their
high-priz'd liberty, for a vading glimpse of popular glory. Her desires are
higher seated, where they are only to be sated. A secure State consists not in
styles but virtues, which are Honors surest stays. Therefore her highest
Honor reflects on her Creator, wherein she is so far from fearing, Such, to
your Honor, is her zealous affection, as she makes it the sole Apology of her
Presumption: which she weaves up in this Dimension: To serve some GREAT ONES
I Have been ofttimes wooed, But HERS I Am vowed that is both GREAT and GOOD.
wherein she is so far from fearing, as she is ever wishing more Corrivals.
THIS is the GENTLEWOMAN whom I have presumed here to present unto your
Ladyships service, whose sweet converse will at retired hours afford you
choicest solace. Neither should you rank her amongst the lowest of your meney,
will it displease her, such is her Humility: for she has learned as well to
obey as command. Nor will she spare for any pains, so her diligence may
please. Only ( Madam) be pleased to shine upon her with the gracious rays of
your favor, to shroud her bashful endeavors under the wings of your Honor;
and entertain her blushing approach with your benign Censure. So shall you
find a constant desire of requital in her; and engage Him, whose intimate
Zeal to your Honor recommended her,

Your Ladyships devoted servant: Richard Brathwait.

TO THE GENTLEVVOMAN READER.
GENTLEVVOMEN:
I Have here presented unto your view one of your own Sex; One, whose
improved Education will be no blemish but a beauty to her Nation. Peruse her,
and I make little doubt, but you will so approve of her Behavior, as you shall
acknowledge her right worthy the title of a Sister. More shall you find in her,
by freely conversing with her, than in those YOUNG but loose ENGLISH
GENTLEWOMEN, whose long mercinary Prostitution upon the Stall, has brought
them out of request, and made them grow too Stale, by being exposed to public
Sale. Many Countries has she coasted, sundry Dangers accoasted, Courts and
Cities has she frequented, to return home better freighted, and re-convey
the benefit of that fraught to this Island, where she was first bred and now
arrived. Do ye itch after Fashion? She is for you; yet not that, which the
vanity of this Age admits; but what Modesty only affects. She has observed
much in foreign Courts, which deserved rather Contempt than Imitation; this
she would not for a world introduce into a well-governed State; so tender she
is of her Fame, as no place nor person shall derive from her the least stain.
Whatsoever she has commendably seen, is no less fully than faithfully
shown, and with that temporate style drawn, as in every line some one precept
of Virtue seems to shine. Neither in this her strict or serious Observation of
Times, does she resemble those Lamiae, who use to take their eyes with them
when they go abroad, but lie them aside when they come home: No; so little
does she favor her self, as she preferres others Censures before her own;
and in no one particular so much expresses her own true glory, as in the
constant practice of Humility. Hence it is, that she is no curious Pryer into
others actions, nor too censorious a Reproover of others Directions: being,
indeed, a TYRESIAS in the eying or de^scrying of others errors, an ARGVS in her
own. What is good and amiable in the eye of virtue, she embraces with an
affectionate tender; making it her highest honor, to promote the glory of her
Maker. But lest by being too serious, she might become tedious; she will not
stick to walk abroad with you into more pleasing groves or pastures of
Delight: where she will converse with you of Love, and intermixe her Discourse
with such time-beguiling Tales, as variety shall no less sharpen your
attention, then the modesty of her Method beget admiration. Every subject she
treats of, you shall find so equally tempered with profit and delight; as the
one shall no less benefit your mind, than the other solace your ear. She can
reprove without gall, blush without guilt, love without guile, live without
gain. Her gain is to purchase virtue more followers; her guile, to deprive
the world of her favorers; her guilt, to defeat all vicious pioners; her gall,
to dis-relish all Voluptuous practisers. She can discourse of Love without
lightness; converse with Love without looseness; and consort with those she
loves without lewdness. She knows how to retain a seemly state without
pride; to express her self praiseworthy without selfe-praise; and in all her
actions to make Virtue her highest prize. Humility, which is the princess of
Virtues, the conqueresse of Vices, the mirror of Virgins, and Crown of
Christians, she so much honors, as she values it above all humane glory:
whence it is, that she has ever reapt more spiritual profit by dis-esteeme
then selfe-esteeme. Day by day she recreates her self in her Garden of
good will; and in her recreation, she makes this her soule-solacing
Meditation: Who be they that neighbor near me, and whose weak estates
stand in need of me? Concluding with this charitable resolution: There is none
so poor, but to my power I will relieve, so long as I live, for the honor of
his Image whom I love. She divides her day into hours, her hours into holy
taskes. Employment takes away all occasions of distraction. Should she suffer
a light or indisposed thought to work upon her imagination: or give way to any
such intruder to disturb the peace of her inward house, she would endure her
self worse for many years, and inflict upon her extravagant affections such a
censure, as might deter them thenceforth to wander. She distates none more
than these busy house-wives, who are ever running into discourse of others
families, but forget their own. Neither holds she it sufficient to be only
an Housekeeper; or, Snayle-like, to be still under roof: she partakes
therefore of the Pismire in providing, of the Sareptan widow in disposing:
holding ever an absent providence better then an improvident presence. She is
no common Frequenter of public feasts, but if neighborhood require it, she
will admit of it: wherein she demeanes her self so civilly, as there is no
discreet person but joys in her society. There is nothing must beget in her a
distemper, having ever a tender eye over her honor. In the report of others
praises she is attentive, but deaf to her own. Be she in places of public
resort or privately retired, she ever enjoyes her self; neither can excess
of birth transport her, or any cross occurrent much perplexe her. There is
naught that aliens her mind more from those with whom she consorts, then an
immodest discourse, which she interrupts with a discreet anger. Wheresoever
she sets her rest, she makes Virtue her guest; whom she entertaines with so
sweet an embrace, as nothing can divide them: so firm and inviolable is the
league that is betwixt them. She conceives no small delight in Educating the
young and unexperienced Damsels of your sex: wherein she reteines an
excellent faculty and facility. It shall not be amiss therefore for you who
have Daughters, to recommend them to her direction, whose government is such,
as neither her too much indulgence shall spoil them; nor restraint dull them.
Whatsoever she in many years has learned (so desirous is she to benefit
where her Observations may afford profit) she is willing to impart; to the end
she may procure Her more servants, whom she religiously has ever vowed to
serve. Long has she been a Learner, neither is she ashamed to be so still.
Only for Virtues honor, is she become a Teacher; that the Younger may be
instructed by those that are Elder; the undisciplined by such as are riper.
Neither shall you find her show in performing what she has so perfectly
learned: For her very Life is a continued line of Direction, being solely
dedicated to a virtuous profession. Saint Cyprian did sharply reprove a rich
woman, for coming into the Lords Temple without her Oblation: But this
reproof she would be loath justly to incur: therefore she goes better
prepared, that her portion of Glory may be sooner shared: having an Oblation
in her hand, Devotion in her heart, and a Crown of Consolation in hope. You
then, who love modesty, entertain her; for she will sort well with your
humor, and through her acquaintance improve your honor. For such, who
sacrifice the Morn to their Glass, the Afternoon to the Stage, and Evening
to revelling; she holds no correspondence with them. These she holds for no
employments; nor the Professors of them worthy her knowledge. They must not
abuse time, that are commended to her trust. She is not so weary of time,
neither does she so disvalue it, as with such impertinences to consume it.
Those likewise, who prefer Fashion before Decency, formal Punto'es before
real Formality, and will suffer themselves to be deluded by Vanity; they must
not be admitted into her family. She has learned better things than to fool
her self in a painted disguise; or to labor of that Universal disease, which
the corruption of a full and flourishing State usually produces. She has
learned with that better Sister, to choose the better part. Constant be her
purposes, contentment her desires, consonant her delights. Be it then your
honor to be informed by her* seeing her instructions are equally mixed with
profit and pleasure. Now if you object, that she has been too slow in
coming, seeing her GENTLEMAN so long since arrived; hear mine answer; and
suspend your Censure, by imputing this fault to our English Error: Where Venus
is longer in trimming, than Mars in training: though he too, in these
distracted times, has been too slow in marching. Many provisions were
required by her, before the World were to be possessed of her. Much likewise
expected from her, before the World had knowledge of her; this made her the
longer to retire, that she might profit the more in her return. May you,
Gentlewomen, be the instance of it; so shall both the Author and his Labor
rejoice in it. To draw then to a Conclusion, lest my Por^ell rise too high for
my Building; As you are not to expect from her any guga-tyres, toys, or
trifles; love-sented gloves, amorous potions, perfumed pictures, or love-sicke
pouders; so she doubts not, but to find in you an Ear, prompt to attention; a
Tongue, clear of invection; a Spirit, free from detraction: with an Heart apt
to harbor affection.

Now for the Volume, I had purposely made it more portable, that it might
become your more sociable follower; had not my observation told me, that
albeit amiablenesse consist in a lovely feature, the goodlinesse of a
Gentlewoman rests in her comely Stature. Virtue can never be shown in too
large a Volume: nor Vice scantled by too small a proportion. Ample Iliads are
too strait for the one: little Models too large for the other. Besides, this
corresponded better with the Portraiture of the ENGLISH GENTLEMAN, her
affianc'd Lover. For the Margin, I have not charged it with many Notes, lest
you should neglect the Garment, by being taken too much with the border.
Improve it to your best profit, and let GOD have the glory of it.

THE ENGLISH GENTLEVVOMAN.
Argument.
The Necessity of Apparel; Of the Use and Abuse of Apparel; Two means by
which the Use may be inverted to Abuse; That Apparel most comely, which
confers on the Wearer most native beauty, and most honor on her Country.

APPAREL.
HAD ADAM never committed sin, Observat. 1 The necessity of Apparel.
he had never needed figge-leaves, to cover his shame. Sin made him fly to
the grove for shelter, and shame compelled him to play the artlesse Tailor, and
through mere necessity to make him a Cover. Well enough was he before that
time attyred, albeit naked: and so happily stated, as we are to imagine, that
ignorance kept him not from the knowledge of his nakedness, but that his
original purity freed him from these necessities. But no sooner was the
forbidden fruit tasted, then poor Adam became tainted, his nakedness
discovered; so as now for honor of modesty, he must of necessity betake
himself to that science, whereto (being free till that time) he was never
bound Apprentice. His inhibited taste made him sensible (and therein more
miserable) of what before he felt not. No distemperature of cold or heat could
before that time annoy him. Now his failing in performing what he ought, brings
him to a feeling of that he never knew. Now tender Eve, whose temperate repose
ministered her all content in a sweet and cheerful Arbor, with all the
varieties and delicacies of nature, feels a shaking and shivering in her
joints: Such a strange distemper has the taste of an Apple wrought in her. She
must fit her self then to endure that with patience, which she procured to
her self and second self, through disobedience; and put on what before she
needed not, a Veil to cover her nakedness, and subject her self to these
Necessities. It is true, that Clothing keeps the body warm two ways: By
keeping in the natural heat of the body; and by keeping out the accidental
cold of the Air. All Creatures enter the world sheelded and shrouded, save
only poor man, who enters lists naked. Tender and delicate h^ is by nature;
more subject to prejudice by distemper, then any other Creature. Now to fence
himself against all occurrents, and the better to endure all intemperate
violence, the Divine Providence has accommodated it self to his Necessity,
from the very first entrance of his infancy: yet were it fit, when he reflects
upon himself thus decked and attired, to recall to mind the prime occasion of
these Necessities. So equally tempered was the Air where he first breathed;
so far from the distemper of heat or cold freed; with such variety of all
delights stored; as then in all happiness he seemed to be stated: but
presently after his fall, began these to fail. That soil, which before was
naturally fruitful, became wild without manuring: Those Rivers, which before
were purely relishing and delighting, became muddy, brackish, and distasting:
Yea, that Air, which before was ever sweetly and temperately breathing, became
unseasonably scorching or freezing. Necessity then has provided for Adam and
his collapsed posterity a Coat, to shroud them from the inclemency of all
seasons. And whence came this necessity, but from sin? To glory then in these
necessities, is to glory in sin: Which were, as if some grave Capital
offender, having committed high Treason against his Sovereign, should,
notwithstanding, out of a Princely Clemency be pardoned; yet with this
condition, that he should wear a Cord or Halter about his neck during his
life, to put him in remembrance of his disloyalty and treason: In which Badge,
this frontlesse Traitor should pride himself more, then if it were some
ancient Crest of honor. Reflect then upon the original source of your sorrow,
Eve, ye daughters of Eve. Ambition prompted her to sin, sin brought her to
shame, shame to her shroud. Mere necessity compelled her to wear what before
she knew not, and to provide her self of that which before she needed not.
How is it then, that these rags of sin, these robes of shame, should make you
idolize your selves? How is it, that ye convert that which was ordained for
necessity, to feed the light-flaming fuel of licentious liberty? Was Apparel
first intended for keeping in natural heat, and keeping out accidental cold?
How comes it then that you wear these thin Cobweb attires, which can neither
preserve heat, nor repel cold? Of what an incurable cold would these
Butterfly-habits possess the Wearer, were pride sensible of her self? Sure,
these attires were not made to keep cold out, but to bring cold in. No
necessity, but mere vanity, introduced these Pye-coloured fopperies amongst
us. Vnvaile many of our light Curtezans, whose brothell practice has reft them
of the ornament of a woman, and you will find a strange Metamorphosis; Venus
armata turned to Venus calva: We say there is no good congruity in a proud
heart and a beggars purse: Why should we then pride our selves in that which
displayes our beggary? Before we had clothes, we wanted nothing; having
clothes, we stand in need of all things. Primitive purity exempted us from
these necessities; Original impurity subjected us to these necessities. Cold
we grew in Charity, cold in every Christian duty; garments then stood we in
need of, to shroud us against the tempest of a benumbed Conscience. These
habits then, it appears, were ordained, at first, for necessity to shield us:
Vanity had not then set invention on work, nor the age sent her Phantasticks
abroad to traffic with foreign fashions. Winter made choice of his garment
to fit the season; so did Summer, without an affected singularity, fit him to a
seasonable fashion. They stood not much either upon color or curious border;
temperate heat they desired to retain, intemperate to repel; cold to keep
out, natural warmth to keep in. This was that ancient times intended; this
was all that they affected. Necessity enforced them to do what they did;
otherwise, I am persuaded, they had not been, to this day, made. Those then
that esteem more of Apparel, how gorgeous soever, then of a work of
Necessity, detract from their own glory, to suit themselves in stuffes of
vanity.

THere is nothing in its own nature so absolutely good, The use of Apparel.
but it may be corrupted; what was at first intended for some good Use, if
perverted, declines into some apparent Abuse. Now, Gentlewomen, (for to you I
direct this discourse) would you observe the right use, and divert in no
particular from the Ordinance of Apparel; Modesty must be your guide, virtuous
thoughts your guard, so shall heaven be your goal. When the Roman Princes, in
their Conquests, or triumphant honors, were with acclamations and vollies of
salutes received, by the general applause of the people extolled, and in their
triumphall Eber or Chair of State seated; there stood always one behind them
in their Throne, to pull them by the sleeve with this Memorial; Remember thou
art mortal. A more useful Memorial you cannot have, then these Robes you
wear, of your own frailty nor a more effectual motive to humility. Had not
sin worn you out of Gods favor, and rest you of your native splendor, you
had never worn these habits, signals of your dishonor. I commend her for the
good use which she made of her Apparel, who never eyed her garment, but she
watered it with a tear, remembering what necesities her ambitious thoughts had
brought her to: for by aspiring to know more then she did, she became
deprived of that excellent beauty which she had. Patterns likewise of modesty
you may be, and herein singularly useful by your examples, unto others of
your sex. Nor can you possibly express it better, then in observing that
divine precept, by learning how to array your selves in comely apparel, with
shame-fastnesse and modesty, not with broided hair, or gold, or pearls, or
costly apparel; But, as becomes women that profess the fear of God. For
even after this manner in time past did the holy women, which trusted in God,
tire themselves. Here is a prescript form by way of direction, for your habit.
Choicer ornaments you cannot have to adorn you; nor any fashion that will
better seem you. Where you walk, you may enjoy your selves freed from light
eyes, gazing and admiring vanity: your very habit is your Testate to witness
for you: loose thoughts nestle not in your bosom, nor do wandering
distractions surprise your breast: you have learned to your highest solace,
even in every motion, action, posture, gesture, to observe modesty, as an
ornament to honor. For, seeing that the very habit of the mind may be best
discerned and discovered by the state or carriage of the body, the disposition
of the body by the habit; to avoid scandal, and retain that Christian opinion
which every one ought to preserve, we are to make choice of that attire, which
confers most seeming gravity on us. This the very Heathen, whose best direction
was mortality, were careful of: for in the use of Apparel, they retained such
constant course, as they held it the greatest blemish they could asperse upon
their Nation, to introduce any new or exoticke fashion, either to effeminate
the dispositions of their people, or to derogate from the honor of their
memorable predecessors; whose model was their direction in habit, and all
other observable customs. What a simple, honest Rusticity our Ancestors
retained in their wear, might be easily discerned, if we should make
recourse to one of their ancient Wardroves; where antiquity may prescribe for
many ages, and constantly second what antiquity had introduced. Yea, so
observant were former times of those fashions which preceding ages had
recommended to them, as they held it ominous to innovate, or bring in any new
form, even in matters of indifferency. When Darius had altered the fashion of
his Sword, which used to be Persian, into the form of the Macedonian (in the
year immediately before he fought with Alexander) the Chaldees or
Soothsayers prophesied, that into what fashion as Darius had altered his
Sword, time would reduce his State; and that the Persian glory was drawing
toward her last period, by subjecting herself to the Sovereignty of Macedon.
Which prediction was soon confirmed by the next years Conquest. But tell me,
ye curious Dames, who hold it a derogation to your honor, to entertain ought
that is vulgar; whereto were Clothes first ordained, but to cover that
nakedness which sin brought, and to skreene that shame which the effect of
sin first wrought? The use of Apparel is not to dignifie the wearer, or add
more beauty to the Creature. Sure I am, that a judicious eye, who measures
dignity by desert, scorns to prefer the Case before the Instrument, the
Rind before the Pith. Those who are worthy to be your Judges, will determine
your worth by what there is in you, not by what you wear on you. Let Maygames
and Morrices beautify themselves with Anticke dressings, to captivate the
vulgar eye; your breeding has been better, your judgments clearer, your
observations wiser, than to stoop to such base Lures. Our life consists in the
perfection or temperate infusion of natural or radical humor, or in the
conservation of natural heat: to preserve this, to increase that, Nature has
provided means inward and outward. To invert the use, is to pervert the
Ordinance it self: So use the outward, that you darken not the inward; so
dispose of the inward, that it may rectify the outward. Reflect on antiquity,
yet no farther then may suit with the decency of the age, wherein you live. I
am not ignorant, how many fashions formerly used, would in this age deserve
rather derision than approvement. And that the infancy of the world had many
shapes, as then but only in their Embrio or rather Conception, which
succeeding times, accommodated by more exquisite artists, brought afterward to
perfection. Use your habit as an ornament of decency; let it not have the least
Edging of vanity. Many Eyes are fixed on you, sundry motives of imitation are
derived from you. Send not out one fruitless sigh for any phantasticke fashion
which you see: they cannot be sighs of compassion, that are sent merely out
for fashion. Sigh rather that your Country should labor of so vain a birth,
as to prefer foreign inventions before the ornament of a Maiden I Will,
constant modesty. Spend not a fruitless hour in an unprofitable garnish of
corruption: Use these outward dressings as if you did not use them: Let them
be rather your scorn than your pride; your contempt than content. Be those
curious Cases of mortality decked or dawbed with never so much adulterate
beauty, they cannot confer upon themselves one beameling of lasting glory.
Look upon those poor bases of frailty, your feet, what a tinkling they make,
to partake of a lascivious meeting in privacy: Eye those rising mounts your
displayed breasts, with what shameless art they woo the shamefast passenger:
View those wandering Lamps, how they rove abroad, as if they would fly out of
their Lodges, and sphere themselves in some amorous Orb. Call them home,
lest, Dinah-like, they lose themselves by straying, impeach their honor by
wandering, bring themselves woe by their lascivious wooing. Affect no fashion
that may beget in your generous bosoms a light thought; Contemn that fashion
which detracts from the native beauty of the feature, or which brings it to
that admiration of the Creature, as it makes it forgetful of the Creator. O
how contemptible a thing is man (the word may reflect equally upon either sex)
if he erect not his thoughts above man! What a poor use makes that miserable
creature of his being here, who bestows so much time in the Tyring-house, as
he forgets what part he is to play on the Stage? O consider the preciousnesse
of time! it is all that may be properly s^id ours. Neither can we term that
portion of time which we call ours, years, or days, or hours: A moment is
our portion, and the Commandingst Emperor has no larger proportion. Of which
moment, whatsoever is past, is not now: and whatsoever is to come, is not yet.
Eye then your Houre-glasse, vye in tears with grains of sand. Bestow not this
little scantling, this moment shorter than nothing, in too curiously attiring
of vanity, but in meditating of your own frailty, and redeeming the time you
have lost in security. As Apparel was ordained for necessity, use it with
Christian civility. In observing this, you make the use good, which shall
hereafter redound to your greater gain.

O But the misery and levity of this age is such, as that becomes generally
least affected, The Abuse of Apparel.
which adornes us most; that valued most, which beseemes us least. Time was
indeed, and may that time once reshine upon us, when the only flower to be
loved of women, was a native red, which was shamefastness. The face knew not
then what painting was, whose adulterate shape takes now acquaintance from the
Shop. Then were such women matter of scandal to Christian eyes, which used
painting their skin, powdring their hair, darting their eye. Our Commerce
with foreign Nations was not for fashions, feathers and follies. There was
distinction in our attires; differences of ranks and qualities; a civil
observance of decent habits; which conferred no less glory on our I Will at home,
than victorious mannagements by the prowess of our Inhabitants did abroad. If
we reflect on them, we must of necessity blush at our selves; seeing, what
we have received for use, we have converted to abuse. That distinction which
decency found out for habits virile and feminine, what commixture has it found
in latter times? What near resemblance and relation has woman's to man's:
suting their light feminine skirts with manlike doublets? Semiramis, that
victorious Princess, commanded all to wear Tyres upon their heds, and to put
upon them woman's apparel without distinction, that she might reign securely
without exception: Thus the comely habit of modesty became a pretended veil to
an usurped Sovereignty. A feminine Regiment occasioned this Ornament: Invention
then became a project of Policy, and found no head to look out from a light
Balcone or Prospect of vanity; But these succeding times have tired our women
with tyres; translating them to a plume of Feathers. Fashion is now ever under
fail: the Invention ever teeming, Phantasticke Wits ever breeding. More time
spent how to abuse time, and corrupt licentious youth, than how to address
employment for the one, or to rectify the distempers of the other. Take a
survey of all degrees, and tell me what uniformity you find in this
particular. And to make instance in three several places (for to these all
others may have proper relation) take a more precise and punctual perusal of
City, Court, and Country; and return me a brief of your Survey. In the
first, you shall find many grave Matrons, modest Maids, devont Widows: but
are these all? No; with these you shall find a strangely mixed generation: Some
affecting nothing more than what is most novell and phantasticke: Others
envying what they disdainfully see in others; which fashion rather than they
will miss, they will not stick to set their honor at sale: All, or most,
true Biantines, carrying all their wealth about them. For the second, you shall
find, amongst many other plants of promising growth and excellent proficience,
sundry sweet-sented sprigs of Cynnamon, whose rind is worth all the body. No
discourse can relish their formal palate, but fashion; if Eves Kirtle should
be now shown them, how they would geere their Grandam? For the last, though
it be long ere they creep into form, having once attained it, they can take
upon them as unbeseeming a State in a Country Pew, as if they were Ladies for
that year, and had been bred in the Art of Mincing since their childhood* But
what are these, but such, whose expense of time is scarcely valued? Sacrificing
more hours to their Looking-glass, than they reserve minutes to lament their
defects. Such, whose virtuous thoughts never harbor the least conceit that may
betray their honor, or deprave those more noble parts wherewith they are
endowed; scorn to drown their better part in these dregs of sensuality.
Virtue is their attendant, Honor their object, all inferior delights their
lowest subjects. Day by day have these their task imposed, that the poison of
sloth may be better avoided: No day passes without a line, no action without
a limit: observing the course of that virtuous Mirror, of whom it is said, In
distinct hours she did divide the day,
To walk, to work, to meditate, and pray.


Much different from this pious resolution, was that Libertines impious
conclusion, who held that none could be frequently devout in prayer, and
fashionably decent in attire. She bestowed too much time on her Glass, to
reserve any for her Lamp. Pride had exiled her zeal; delicacy of habit,
sanctity of heart. Her day might be easily divided: She bestowed the
forenoone on her skin, the afternoon on a Play, clozing her Evening Lecture
with a reere supper: and this was her Christian Task. Miserable is the
condition of that Creature, who, so her skin be sleake, cares not if her soul
be rough: so her outward habit be pure and without blemish, values little her
inward garnish. Such an one has made a firm Contract with vanity, clozing her
contemptuous age with a fearful Catastrophe. Thus far have we discoursed
of the effect or abuse it self, we are now to treat of those two sources,
from whence these abuses properly arise; to wit, Delicacy in being more curious
in our Choice of Apparel than necessity or decency does require; secondly,
Superfluity, in storing more variety and change of rayments than either nature
needs, or reason would admit, were she not transported with a sensual
affection, by giving way to what unbounded appetite requires.

IN the search of any Mineral, How the use of Apparel may be inverted to
abuse.
we are first to dig for the vein: and in the curing of any malevolent
effect, we are duly and seriously to inquire the producing cause, that by
stopping the Spring or source, we may stay the violence of the stream. We
are then to insist of those two precedent means, by which the use may be
inverted to abuse; and that which of it self is approveable, if observed with
decency, becomes justly reprehensible by corrupting so necessary and consequent
an use, either by delicacy, which weakens and effeminates the spirit, or by
Superfluity, which ever darkens the beameling of reason with the Cloud of sense.

Reproof touching Apparel may be occasioned from four respects:

First, when anyone wears Apparel above their degree, exceeding their estate
precious attire. Whence it is that Gregory says; There be some who are of
opinion, that the wear of precious or sumptuous Apparel is no sin: Which if
it were no fault, the divine Word would never have so punctually expressed, nor
historically related, how the Rich man, who was tormented in hell, was clothed
with Purple and Silk. Whence we may note, that touching the matter or subject
of attire, humane curiosity avails highly. The first stuff or substance of
our garments, was very mean; to wit, Skin with Wool, Whence it is we read,
that God made Adam and his wife Coats of Skins, that is, of the Skins of
dead beasts. Afterward (see the gradation of this vanity derived from humane
singularity) they came to Pure Wool, because it was lighter than Skins.
After that to rindes of trees, to wit, Flax. After that to the dung and ordure
of Worms, to wit, Silk. Lastly, to Gold and Silver, and precious Stones.
Which preciousness of attire highly displeases God. For instance whereof
(which the very Pagans themselves observed) we read that the very first among
the Romans, who ever wore Purple, was struck with a Thunderbolt, and so dyed
suddenly, for a terror and mirror to all succeeding times, that none should
attempt to lift himself proudly against God in precious attire.

The second point reprehensible is, Softness or Delicacy of Apparel: Soft
Clothes introduce soft minds. Delicacy in the habit, begets an effeminacy in
the heart. John Baptist, who was sanctified in his mothers womb, wore sharp
and rough garments. Whence we are taught, that the true servant of God is not
to wear garments for beauty or delight, but to cover his nakedness; not for
State or Curiosity, but necessity and convenience. Christ says in his Gospel,
They that are clad in soft rayments, are in Kings houses. Whence appears a
maine difference betwixt the servants of Christ, and of this world. The
servants of this world seek delight, honor, and pleasure in their attire:
whereas the servants of Christ so highly value the garment of innocence, as
they loath to stain it with outward vanities. It is their honor to put on
Christ Jesus; other robes you may rob them of and give them occasion to joy in
your purchase.

The third thing reproveable is, foreign Fashions: When we desire nothing
more than to bring in some Outlandish habit different from our own; Zephan. 1.
in which respect (so Apishly-anticke is man) it becomes more affected than our
own. Against such the Lord threatens, I will visit the Princes and the Kings
children, and all such as are clothed with strange Apparel. Which strange
Apparel is after diverse fashions and inventions, wholly unknown to our
Ancestors. Which may appear sufficiently to such, who within this 30, or 40,
or 60. years never saw such cutting, carving, nor indenting as they now see.

The fourth thing reproveable is, Superfluity of Apparel, expressed in these
three particulars: first, in those who have diverse changes and suits of
Clothes; who had rather have their garments eaten by moaths, than they should
cover the poor members of Christ. The naked cry, the needy cry, the
shreekingly complain unto us, how they miserably labor and languish of hunger
and cold. What availes it them that we have such changes of rayments nearly
plaited and folded; rather than we will supply them, they must be starved?
How do such rich Moath-wormes observe the Doctrine of Christ when he says in
his Gospel; He that has two Coats let him give one to him that has none?

Secondly, we are to consider the Superfluity of such who will have long
garments purposely to seem greater: yet, which of these can add one cubit to
his stature? This puts me in remembrance of a conceited story which I have
sometimes heard, of a diminutive Gentleman, who demanding of his Tailor, what
yards of Satin would make him a Suite, being answered far short in number of
what he expected: with great indignation replied, Such an one of the Guard to
my knowledge had thrice as much for a Suite and I will second him. Which his
Tailor with small importunacy condescended to, making a Gargantua's Suite for
this Ounce of man's flesh, reserving to himself a large portion of shreads,
purposely to form a fitter proportion for his Ganimede shape.

The third Superfluity arises from their vanity, who take delight in wearing
great sleeves, misshapen Elephantine bodies, trains sweeping the earth, with
huge poakes to shroud their phantasticke heads, as if they had committed some
egregious fact which deserved that censure: for in the Eastern Countries it
has been usually observed, that such light Women as had distained their
honor, or laid a public imputation on their name, by consenting to any
libidinous act, were to have their heads sowed up in a poake, to proclaim
their shame, and publish to the world the quality of their sin.

NOw to insist more punctually on that effeminatour both of youth and age,
Delicacy of Apparel.
Delicacy of Apparel; I would have our Daughters of Albion, reflect upon
themselves, those poor shells of corruption: what a trimming and tricking they
bestow on their brittle houses. Petrarch's advice was, that we should not be
afraid though our outhouses, these structures of our bodies, were shaken, so
our souls, the guests of our bodies, fared well. Whereas contrariwise, these,
whose only care is to delude the outward appearance with a seeming fair, so
they may preserve the varnish, disvalue the foundation. O may this folly be a
stranger to our Nation! To allay which fury, attemper which frenzy, I hold no
receipt more sovereign, then to enter into a serious meditation of your
frailty: As first to consider, what you were before your birth; secondly, what
from your birth to your death; lastly, what after death. If you reflect upon
the first, you shall find that you have been, what before you were not,
afterward were what now you are not; first made of vile matter (see the
Emblem of humane nature) wrapped in a poor skin, nourished in an obscure
place, your Coat the second skin, till you came to a sight of the Sun,
which you entertained with a shreek, implying your original sin. Thus
attired, thus adorned came you to us; what makes you then so unmindfull of that
poor case wherein you came among us? Has beauty, popular applause, youthful
heat, or wealth taken from you the knowledge of your selves? Derive your
pedigree, and blush at your matchless folly, that pride should so highly
magnify it self in dust, or glory most in that which brings with it the most
shame. Why do you walk with such haughty necks? why do you extol your
selves so highly in these Tabernacles of earth? Attend and consider; you were
but vilde corrupted seed at the first; and now fuller of pollution then at the
first. Entering the world with a shreeke to express your ensuing shame, you
became afterward exposed to the miseries of this life and to sin; in the end
worms and worms meat shall you be in the grave. Why then are you proud, ye
dusty shrines, ye earthen vessels, seeing your conception was impurity, birth
misery, life penalty, death extremity? Why do ye embellish and adorn your
flesh with such port and grace; which within some few days worms will devour
in the grave? Mean time you neglect the incomparable beauty of your souls.
For with what ornaments do ye adorn them? With what sweet odours or
spiritual graces do ye perfume them? With what choice Flowers of piety and
devotion do ye trim them? What Habits do ye prepare for them, when they
must be presented before him who gave them? How is it that ye so dis-esteeme
the soul, preferring the flesh before her? For the Mistress to play the
Handmaid, the Handmaid the Mistress, is a great abuse. There can be no
success in that family, where the household is managed so disorderly. O
restrain your affections, limit your desires, bear an equal hand to the
better part! The Building cannot stand unless you remove the rubbish from the
foundation. The Soul in the body is like a Queen in her Palace. If you would
then have this little Commonwealth within you to flourish, you must with
timely providence suppress all factious and turbulent molesters of her peace:
your passions, especially those of vain glory, must be restrained; motives to
humility cherished; chaste thoughts embraced; all devious and wandering
cogitations excluded; that the soul may peaceably enjoy her self, and in her
Palace live secured. Whereto if you object, that this is an hard lesson; you
cannot despise the world nor hate the flesh; tell me where are all those
lovers of the world, cherishers of the flesh, which not long since were among
us? Nothing now remains of them but dust and worms Consider diligently (for
this consideration will be a Counterpoize to all vainglory) what they now
are, and what they have been. Women they were as you are: they have eat,
drunk, laughed, spent their days in jollity, and now in a moment gone down
to hell. Here their flesh is apportioned to worms, there their souls
appointed to hell fire: till such time as being gathered together to that
unhappy society, they shall be rolled in eternal burnings, as they were before
partakers with them in their vices. For one punishment afflicts, whom one
love of sin affects. Tell me, what profits them their vainglory, short
joy, worldly power, pleasure of the flesh, evil got wealth, a great family,
and concupiscence arising carnally? Where now is their laughter? Where their
jests? Where their boasting? Where their arrogance? From so great joy, how
great heaviness? After such small pleasure, how great unhappiness? From so
great joy they are now fallen into great wretchedness, grievous calamity,
unsufferable torments. What has befallen them, may befall you; being Earth of
Earth, slime of slime: Of Earth you are, of Earth you live, and to Earth you
shall return. Take this with you for an infallible position in these your
Cottages of Corruption: If you follow the flesh, you shall be punished in the
flesh: if you be delighted in the flesh, you shall be tormented in the flesh:
for by how much more your flesh is cockered in this world with all delicacy; by
so much more shall your souls be tormented in hell eternally. If you seek
curious and delicate rayments, for the beauty and bravery of your rayments
shall the moath be laid under you, and your Covering shall be Worms. And this
shall suffice to have been spoken touching Delicacy of Apparel: we are now
to descend briefly to the second branch, Superfluity; whereof we intend to
discourse with that brevity, as the necessity of the Subject, whereof we
treat, shall require, and the generality of this spreading malady may enforce.

DIvine is that saying, Superfluity of Apparel.
and well worthy your retention: The covetous person before he gain loses
himself, and before he take ought is taken himself. He is no less wanting
to himself in that which he has, than in that which he has not. He finds
that he lost not, possesses that he owes not, detaines that he ought not, and
hates to restore what he injuriously enjoyes. So unbounded is the affection, or
rather so depraved is the avaritious man's inclination, as he cannot contain
his desires within bounds, not enter parley with reason, having once slaved his
better part to the sovereignty of a servile affection. This may appear even in
this one particular. Food and raiment are a Christians riches: wherein he
uses that moderation, as he makes that Apostolical rule his Christian
direction; Having food and raiment, I have learned in all things to be
contented. But how miserably is this golden rule inverted, by our sensual
worldling? Competency must neither be their Cater in the one, nor Convenience
their Tailor in the other. Their Table must labor of variety of dishes, and
their Wardrobe of exchange of raiments. No reason more probable than this of
their naked insides, which stand in need of these superfluous additaments. What
myriads of indisposed hours consume these in beautifying rotten tombs! How
curious they are in suiting their bodies, how remiss in preferring their
souls suit to their Maker! How much they are disquieted in their choice, how
much perplexed in their change, how irresolute what they shall wear, how
forgetful of what they were! This edging suits not, that purle sorts not, this
dressing likes not: off it must after all be fitted, and with a new Exchange,
less seemly, but more gaudy suited. The fashion that was in prime request but
yesterday, how it begins to dif-rellish the wearer, as if it had lost the
beauty by unseasonable weather; thus is fashion fallen into a quotidian Fever:
See our completest Fashion-mongers, how much they tire themselves with their
attiring, how they trouble themselves with their trimming! Had we more new
Exchanges erected, we should have them plenteously peopled, and with such
variety of feminine fancies stored, that invention should sooner lose her
spirit, then our fantastic Dames their appetite. And to take a fuller view of
vanity, that pride may blush at her own formality; observe what Babies, most
of our fashion affecters be! Rare trinkets they have got, to improve their
Projectors gain; yet having won them, they know not how to wear them. A
foreign Tyre-woman must have a constant pension, to put this love-bespotted
Idol into a more complete fashion. It seems wonderful to me, that they are
not wholly crushed, with that onerous burden with which they are pressed. What
a shop of guga nifles hang upon one back? Here the remainder of a greater
work, the relics of ancient manor converted to a pearl Chain. There the
moity of an ill-husbanded demaine reduced to a Carknet. Long trains must
sweep away long acres: the Epidemicall vanity of this age does exact it; and
she is held least worthy affecting, that does least affect it. What? says my
delicate Madam; Is it for one of my rank or descent to affect what is vulgar?
how then should I become popular? I confess, we are all composed of one
Earth, yet is there to be presupposed a difference in our birth. Were it
fitting that I should fall off, either from that delicacy which is generally
approved, or that variety which is by our more generous formalists applauded?
What availes a mighty fortune to a miserable disposer? Or brave means, where a
base mind is the dispenser? Apparel must be with delicacy sorted, variety
suited, or the dignity of the person, be it never so conspicuous, will be
obscured. Admit variety be mere superfluity, at worst it is but the ages
vanity; which is such an universal malady, as it pleads exemption without
farther apology. Whereto I answer; it is true, the Age labors of this disease,
where the eye becomes a determiner of our worth, by the outward habit which we
wear: It reflects not on what is in us, but what is on us. She is not to be
accounted a Court visitant, who restraines her self either in her choice of
delicacy, or variety of habit. What then? Shall a vicious or effeminate age
deprave your judgment? Or a corrupt time deprive you of judgment? No; you
have more absolute perfections within you, than to be blemished with these
imperfections which you too frequently carry about you. The more you display
your pye-coloured flagge of vanity, the more Lures you throw out of loosest
liberty; the more foments you use of soule-soyling delicacy, the deeper Lodging
you bespeake your selves in the Lake of eternal misery. To such I only
speak, who, so they may furnish themselves of a dainty artist, to teach them
how to dye well, make it the least of their care how to live well. These who
love to dye their hair, but never change the dye of their corrupted heart:
these will not stick with frontlesse impudence to boulster their depraved
liberty; they may be, without control, dispensers and disposers of their
own. This variety and delicacy wherein they express themselves by an
especial mark of distinction from others, they derive it from the affluence
of their own fortunes, and not from others: which being so justly enjoyed, and
without injury, admits no exception in all probability. Whereto I reply, with
the words of a Divine Father, Art not thou, whosoere thou be, a Robber, who
have received goods as a Steward or dispenser, and entitlest thy self the
impropriator or owner? for what fair glozes or pretenses soever thou make
for thy self, to gild thy shame, or mince thy sin, it is the bread of the
needy, which thou with-holdest; the Coat of the naked, which in thy Chest thou
storest; the shoes of the barefoot, which with thee lie rotting; the coin of
the beggar, which with thee lies moulding. Away then with these Superfluous
dressings; you see daily objects of your Charity, bring out your Wardrobe, and
cloth the naked. That which you so prodigally spent upon your selves, convert
it to the more glorious attiring of your naked souls. See that your Kings
daughter be all glorious within, that the King of Kings may take pleasure in
her. Let not so precious an Image be defaced, so specious a Virgin defiled, so
glorious a Creature dishonored. Instead of Delicy, deck your selves modestly;
instead of Superfluity, out of your variety communicate freely to others
necessity. We are now to descend briefly to the last branch of this first
Observation, declaring, how, That Apparel is most comely, which confers on the
Wearer most native beauty, and most honor on her Country.

AS that is ever held most generous which is least affected, That Apparel most
comely, which confers on the Wearer most native beauty, and most honor on her
Country.
most genuine which is least forced; so there is nothing which confers more
true glory on us, then in displaying our own Countries garb by that we wear
upon us. The Crow in the fable was sharply taxed for her borrowed feathers:
The fable, though it spoke of a Crow, the Moral pointed at a man. Habit (we
say) is a Custom; why should it be our custom to change our Habit? With what
constancy some other Nations observe their native attire, Histories, both
ancient and modern, will sufficiently inform us. Nothing is held more
contemptible with them, then apishly to imitate foreign fashions:
Prescription is their Tailor, antiquity their Tutor. Amongst the ancient
Heathen, even their very habit distinguished Widows from Matrons, Matrons
from Virgins. So as not only sexes, states, conditions, years, but even
linages, races, and families were remarkeably discovered. We usually observe
such a fashion to be French, such an one Spanish, another Italian, this Dutch,
that Poland; mean time where is the English? surely, some precious Elixir
extracted out of all these. She will neither rely on her own invention, nor
compose her self to the fashion of any one particular Nation, but make her
self an Epitomized confection of all. Thus becomes she not only a stranger
to others, but to her self. It were to be wished, that as our Country is
jealous of her own invention in contriving, so she were no less cautelous in
her choice of wearing. Gregory the Great thought that Angles did nearly
symphonize with Angels, not so much in letter, as in favor and feature; Were
it not pity that these should darken their beauty with vailes of deformity?
Were it not pity that there should not be an Analogy in their name and nature;
that the Angles might partake of Angels in nature as well as feature? But the
gold has changed his color; our purer mintage her native splendour. Truth is,
there is nothing which confers more native beauty on the wearer, then to be
least affective in whatsoever she shall wear. She asperseth a great blemish
on her better part, who ties her self to that formality, as she dare not put
off the least trifle that she wears, nor put on ought more then she wears,
lest she should lose the opinion of Complete. There is a native modesty even in
attire as well as gesture, which better becomes, and would more fully
accomplish her, if fashion were not such a pearl in her eye, as it keeps her
from the sight of her own vanity. I confess, light heads will be easily taken
with such toys: yea, I have sometimes observed a phantasticke dressing strike
an amorous inconsiderate Gooseling sooner into a passionate Ah me, with a
careless love-sicke wreathing of his enfolded arms, then some other more
attractive object could ever do. But what is the purchase of one of these
Greene-wits worth? What benefit can a young Gentlewoman reap in enjoying him,
who scarcely ever enjoyed himself? Means he may have, but so meanly are they
seconded by inward abilities, as his state seems fitter to manage him, then he
to marshall it. A long Lock he has got, and the art to frizle it; a Ring in a
string, and the trick to handle it: A whole Forest of Synonimies, has he by
retaile purchased; which, like so many dis-jointed Similees, impeach his
novellisme of palpable Nonsense. For his discourse, to give him his true
Character, his silence approves him better; for his wit, he may laugh at a
conceit, and his conceit never the wiser; for his other parts, disclaiming his
substance, I appeal to his picture. Now, Gentlewoman, tell me, do you trim
your self up for this Popinjay? Would you have the fool to wear you, after
so many follies have out-worne you? Let modesty suit you, that a discreeter
mate may choose you. Be it your prime honor to make civility your director.
This will incomparably more grace you, then any phantasticke attire; which
though it beget admiration, it clozeth always with derision. You cannot
possibly detract more from the renown of your Country, where you received
birth and education, than by too hot a quest or pursuit after Outlandish
fashions. Play not the Dotterell in this too apish and servile Imitation; let
other Countries admire your Constancy and Civility: while they reflect both on
what you wear, and what you are. Be it your glory to improve your Countries
fame. Many eyes are fixed on you, and many hearts will be taken with you, if
they behold those two Ornaments, Modesty, and Humility, ever attending you:
Discretion will be more taken and enamoured with these, then toys and
feathers. There is nothing so rough but may be polished; nor ought so
outwardly fair but may be disfigured. Whereas the beauty of these two cannot
by adulterate Art be more graced, by the aged furrows of time become defaced,
or by any outward Occurrent impaired. There are many beauteous and sumptuous
Cases, whose Instruments are out of tune. These may please the eye, but they
neither lend nor leave a sweet accent in the Ear. May-buds of fading beauty;
Fruits which commonly fall before they be ripe, and tender small sweetness to
them that reap. These Baths of voluptuous delights, chaste feet disdain to
approach. Virtue must either be suited with Consorts like her self, or they
must give her leave solely to enjoy her self. Be you Maids of honor to this
maiden Princess. Consecrate your day to virtuous actions, your night to
useful recollections. Think how this World is your Stage, your Life an Act.
The Tiring-house, where you bestowed such care, cost and curiosity, must be
shut up when your Night approaches. Prepare Oil for your virgin Lamps;
marriage robes for your chaste souls; that advancing the honor of your
Country here on Earth, in your translation from hence, you may find a Country
in heaven.

THE ENGLISH GENTLEVVOMAN.
Argument.
Behavior reflects on three particulars; How to behave her self in Company;
How in privacy: That Behavior most approved, which is clearest from
affectation freed.

BEHAVIOR.
Behavior being an apt composure, of the body in arguments of Discourse and
Action, Observat. 2.
expresses every person in so fair a Character, that if his breast were
transparant, he could not be displayed fuller. Albeit, some love to become so
estranged or retired rather from the eye of the world, as they have made it
their highest art and absolutest aim, to shrowde themselves from the conceit
or discussion of man: by entering covenant or contract with Dissimulation, to
appear least to the eye, what they are most in heart. Of this stamp was
Tiberius, who gloried in nothing so much (neither indeed had he many
demeriting parts to glory in) as in cunningly cloaking his foul purposes with
fair pretenses, going invisible, and deluding his Subjects anxious resolutions
with a seeming good. Sometimes imminency of danger, begetting an apprehension
of fear, will produce this eflect: whence it was, that Agrippina in Tacitus
knowing her life to be attempted by Nero, knew well that her only remedy was
to take no notice of the treason. Neither is it rare to find a staide look,
and a staid thought in one and the same subject. But for as much as this is
held the seldomest erring Index, ever expressing innocent thoughts the best,
and discovering disloyal thoughts the soonest, we are to proceed to such
particulars as the Subject principally reflects on: which are three; Action,
Behaviour^ eflects on three particula^s.
Affection, Passion: whereon we purpose so to insist, as what deserves
approvement in each of these particulars, may be by our Nobly disposed
Gentlewomen cheerfully entertained, carefully retained, and to the improvement
of their Fame, the choicest Odor, chiefest honor of true Nobility, employed.

Action.
Virtue is the life of action, action the life of man: without the former, all
actions are fruitless: without the latter, all our days are useless. Now in
this one Subject, it is strange to observe what diversity of active
dispositions we shall find. Some are employed to the purpose, but they are so
remiss in their employment, as they lose the benefit of it. Others are
employed to no purpose, making a passing of time a mere pastime, coming as
far short of one useful action at their death, as they were incapable of it
at their birth. Others sleep out their time in careless security; saluting
the morning with a sacrifice to their Glass, the Noone with a luscious repast,
the Afternoon with a Play or a Pallet repose, the Evening with a wanton
consort, accoutred with a reere-banket, to belull the abused soul with the
sleep of an incessant surfeit. Others have crept into such an Apish formality;
as they cannot for a world discourse of ought without some mimmicke gesture or
other; which, seem it never so complete to them, appears ridiculous to the
beholder. This was Semphronia's error, for which she was generally taxed,
before ever her honor was publicly tainted. What a tinkling you shall observe
some to make with their feet, as if they were forthwith to dance a Morris?
They are ever in motion like Puppets, but in actions of goodness mere Punies.
Their pace is a Pavin in the street; their look a Lure to a lascivious
attempt; They express nothing by their gesture worthy the image they bear.
Besides, who is he, whose judgment will not tax these of lightness, by
these light an uncivil appearances? A woman's honor is of higher esteem, than
to be thus dis-valued. Light occasions are many times grounds of deep
aspersions. Actions are to be seasoned with discretion, seconded by direction,
strengthened with instruction, lest too much rashness bring the undertaker to
destruction. In the Maze or Labyrinth of this life, many be our cares, mighty
be our fears, strong our assailants, weak our assistants, unless we have
that brazen wall within us to fortify us against all occurrents. O then, let
not the least action betray you to your enemy, for you have many; within you,
for they are dangerous, because domestical; without you, for they are
strangers, and therefore doubtful! Let your actions be your applausivest
Actors; The Scene of your life is short, so live that your noble actions may
preserve your memory long. It was Seneca's counsel to his dear friend
Lucilius, that whenever he went about to do any thing, he should imagine
Cato, or Scipio, or some other worthy Roman to be in presence. To second his
advice, which may confer on your glorious actions eternal praise, set
always before your eyes, as an imitable mirror, some good woman or other,
before whom you may live, as if she eyed you, she viewed you. You may find
women, though weak in ^exe and condition, yet parallels to men, for charity,
chastity, piety, purity, and virtuous conversation. Re-visit those ancient
families of Rome, and you shall find those famous Matrons, Octavia, Portia,
Caecilia, Cornelia, make a Pagan State seem morally Christian. Nor were
Nicostrata, mother to Evander, Corvina, Sappho, women less famous for
Learning, than the other for blameless living. Neither have our modern times
less flourished with feminine worthies, as might be illustrated with sundry
eminent instances, if I would reflect upon this Subject: but this has been
the Theme of sundry Panegyric Poems, which makes me more sparing in it: Only
in your behalf, and to your honor, let me retort their Critic Censure, who
draw from the very Etymon of your name an occasion of error: Women are woe to
men; No they are the way,
To bring them homeward when they run astray.


In a word, conform your selves to such patterns as are imitable; imitate
them in all such actions as are laudable; So live, that none may have occasion
to speak evilly of you, if they speak truly. The memory of Dorcas lives
still; She was full of good works and alms which she did. Yea, even the
very Coats and Garments which she made, while she was living, were shown the
Apostle as arguments of her industry, memorials of her piety. Hence it was that
Saint Jerome, that excellent pattern of holy Discipline, serious professor of
Divine Doctrine, counsels the holy Virgin Demetrias to eschew idleness:
Exhorting her withal, that having done her prayers, she should take in hand
wool and weaving, after the commendable example of Dorcas, that by such change
or variety of works, the day might seem less tedious, and the assaults of
Satan less grievous: concluding his devout Exhortation, with this definite
position,

I speak generally, no raiment, ornament, or habit whatsoever, shall seem
precious in Christ's sight, but that which thou make thy self, either for
thine own peculiar use, or example of other Virgins, or to give unto thy
Grandmother, or thy Mother, no, though thou distribute all thy goods unto the
poor.

See how strictly this holy Father proceeds with his religious Daughter! Yet
was this Demetrias, to whom he addressed this his exhortation, a Noble Lady;
not one, whom poverty did enforce to actions of such necessity: but one
honorably descended, richly endowed, powerfully friended. Let this Lady be
your Pattern, her action your direction, her obedience your instruction, that
you may share with her in a peaceful dissolution. Entertain no time without
some devout task: reflect upon the Nobleness of your descent, ennoble it with
excellence of desert.

For you must know true honor is not won,
Until some honorable deed be done.
Waste not prodigally the precious Lamp of your life without some virtuous
action that may purchase love. Your time is less than a minute in respect of
eternity, employ that minute so, as it may eternize your memory. Let this be
your highest task; to promote the honor of your Maker, esteeming all things
else a slavish and servile labor.

Affection.
THere is nothing which requires more discretion, than how to behave or carry
our selves while we are enthralled to affection. The Lover is ever blinded
(says wise Plato) with affection toward his beloved. Reason is laid a sleep,
while Sense becomes the master Wooer. Whence came that usual saying, One
cannot love and be wise. But I wholly oppose my self to their assertion, who
seem thus far transported with the sensual opinion of affection. My Tenet
is, One cannot truly love, and not be wise. It is a Beldam frenzy and no
fancy, which gives way to fury, and admits not reason to have sovereignty. Yet
in this Subjects, Gentlewomen, is your temper best tried, your discretion most
required, and your Patience, oft-times, most exercised. Look therefore how you
plant it, lest you bootlesly repent it, when it is mis-placed.

It is most certain, there is nothing more impatient of delay than love, nor
no wound more incurable while we live. There is no exemption, all have a taste
of this Potion, though it have several degrees of operation.

Look all about you; who so young that loves not?
Or who so old, a comely feature moves not?
Yet what different passions arise from one and the selfsame Subject? Here,
Gentlewomen, you shall see some of your Sex so surprised with affection, as it
bursts out into violent extremes; their discourse is semibrev'd with sighs,
their talk with tears; they walk desperately forlorn, making Launds and
desolate Groves their disconsolate Consorts. Their eyes are estranged from
sleep, their weakened appetite from repast, their wearied limbs from repose.
Melancholy is their sole melody; They have made a Contract with grief, till
grief bring them to their grave. And these poor wenches are much to be
pitied, because their own tender hearts brought them to this exigent: having
either set their affections, where they thought verily they might be requited
and were not, or else where they received like seeming tender of affection, but
afterward rejected, what they wished to effect they could not. So as, in time,
if continuance of absence reduce them not to a better temper, they fall into a
poor Maudlins distemper, by giving reins to passion, till it estrange them
from the sovereignty of reason. Whereas others you shall see, though not such
kind souls, nor half so passionate, yet more discreet in their choice, and in
the passages of love more temperate. These will not deigne to cast a loose
look upon their beloved: but stand so punctually upon their terms, as if they
stood indifferent for their choice, albeit constantly resolved never to admit
of any change. These scorn to paint out their passions in plaints, or utter
their thoughts in sighs, or shed one dispassionate tear for an
incompassionate Lover. Their Experience has taught them better Notions: they
will seemingly fly to make them follow, and so take them by whom they are most
taken. They can play with the flame, and never cinge their wings; look love in
the face, and preserve their eyes; converse where they take delight, and color
their affection with a seeming disdain. These are they who can walk in the
Clouds to their intimatest friends: make their eyes strangers to their hearts,
and conclude; nothing more foolish then Love, if discovered; nothing more wise,
if artfully shadowed. But I neither approve the violence of the former, nor
indifference of the latter. The one interlayeth affection with too much
passion, the other with too much dissimulation. These were well to be so
allayed or attempered, as neither too much eagerness tax the discretion, nor
too much remissness argue coolness of affection. For the former, I must tell
them, they give great advantage to an insulting Lover, to entertain Love with
such vehement ardour: it fares with these, as with hot duellists, who fight
themselves out of breath, and so subject their relenting force to the command
of a better tempered enemy. For the latter, they hold constantly that position
in arguments of Love, as well as in other actions of their life; She knows not
how to live, nor how to love, that knows not how to dissemble. I must tell
these, Dissimulation sorts not well with affection: Lovers seldom read Loves
Politics. Let them appear what they are, with that discreet temper, as they
may deserve the embraces of a Noble Lover. In brief, let such as are too hot
in the quest of their desires, attemperate that heat with intermissions: such
violence is best rebated by absence. Contrariwise, such as are too cool, let
them quicken that easiness with their more frequent conference, and assiduate
presence.

WHat a furious and inconsiderate thing is Woman, Passion.
when Passion distempers her? how much is her Behavior altered, as if Iocasta
were now to be personated? True it is, some with a bite of their lip, can
suppress an intended revenge: and like dangerous Politicians, pleasingly
entertain time with one they mortally hate, till opportunity usher revenge,
which they can act with as much hostility, as if that very moment were the
Actor of their injury. But this Passion never works more tragic or fearful
effects, then when it streams from Jealousy or Competition in the Subject
where they love. Whereof we have variety of instances even in our own Island,
to omit Italy, which is a very Theater of Tragic Conclusions in this kind. It
is not long since we had one matchless President of this stamp. It sometimes
pleased a young Gentlewoman, whose fortunes had swelled her high, to settle her
affection on a Gentleman of deserving parts, which he entertained with a
generous requital: nothing was omitted that might any way increase this
respect, or second the height of their joys. Continual resort and frequent
made them inseparably one: No day so pleasing, as when they were together; No
hour so tedious as when they were asunder. But how short is that moment of
vading happiness, which has in it a relish of lightness, and is not
grounded on essential goodness! Long had they not thus lived, and sociably
loved, but the Gentlewoman conceived some private suspicion, that her self was
not sole soveraignesse of his heart, but that another was become sharer in his
love. Neither was this Competitrice, whom she suspected, any other then her
own attendant, whose Caskets she secretly opened, where she found a Ring of
especial note, which she had formerly bestowed on him. This confirmed her
Conceit, changed her real love into mortal hate; which she seconded with
this tragic act: Inviting him one day to a Summer Arbor, where in former
times they were usually wont to repose, amidst of an amorous discourse, she
casually fixed her eye upon three Lennets, one whereof picking some Privet
leaves purposely to build her nest, flew away, while the two which remained,
lovingly billed one with another: which she intentively observing, used these
words; How tenderly and intimately do these poor fools mate it? Were it not
pity they should ever be divided? Which words she had no sooner uttered,
then the Shee-Lennet flew away, and left the Male alone, till another returned:
with whom the Hee-Lennet billed, and amorously wooed as he had done before:
Which she more seriously eying, O, quoth she, How light these males are in
their affection; This may seem to you an easy error, but were I judge of
Birds, it should receive due censure. Why Lady, (replied he) these poor Birds
do but according to their kind. Yea, but what do ye kind men then, who
engage your loves, interest your selves, empawne your souls to be constant
where you profess love, and perform nothing less then what you profess
most. Nor would her long intended revenge admit more liberty to her tongue; for
with a passionate enterbreath she clozed this speech with a fatal stabbe:
leaving so much time to her unfortunate and disasterous Lover, as to discover
to one of that sorrowful family the ground of her hate, the occasion of his
fall, which hastened on the doleful Scene of her Tragedy. Now to allay or abate
these passionate furies, there is no better means then to enter parley with
reason; to chastise all such innovating motions as disquiet the inward repose
of the mind; to use the help of such wholesome instructions, as may attemper
the heat of those indisposed and inordinate passions. Anger, being an
inflammation of blood about the heart, is such a fury, as to give way to it, is
to disclaim reason: much wisdom is then required, mature advice to be used,
all assistants of Art and Nature to be employed before this Adder can be
charmed. For we shall hardly see any one more forget themselves, then when
they are surprised with this Passion. Some you shall observe so amazed or
entranced, as they become wholly silenced: They cannot utter an articulate word
to gain a kingdom. Gladly would they express their distaste, and menace
revenge, if their tongues would give them leave, but wrath has tied them to
good behavior. Others are so voluble of tongue, as nothing can pass them
untouched, to asperse disgrace on such by whom they hold themselves wronged. If
any infamy (which to that time lay buried) offer it self to their memory, how
they joy in the occasion of venting their malice on their persons, be their
Calumny seconded with words of fowlest aspersion: Which sort of people the ever
living Pindarus terms persons of unbounded and unbridled tongues. To remedy
which enormities, take along with you these instructions: they will benefit you
much in the height and heat of your anger, and allay your passion when it
rages and rises into hugest distemper. Forthwith, so soon as you shall
perceive your selves moved, restrain your passion; but if you cannot appeal
nor compose your inward Commotion, at least restrain your tongue, and injoyne
it silence, that if it speak no good, it may speak no evil, lest being loose
and set at liberty, it utter what wrath, and not reason dictates: More
sovereign and peaceful it will be for you to retire from society, make
recourse to your Oratory, by recommending to your best Physician the cure of
this infirmity. Use likewise this Cordial salve to your corroding sore; the
receipt is Divine, if seasonably applied, and will minister you comfort when you
are most distempered. So soon as your disquieted minds begin to expostulate
with the quality of your wrongs, which your Enemy is apt to aggravate and
exasperate, purposely to hasten your precipitate revenge; propose and set
before you all the disgraces which possibly you can suffer, and confer them
with those that were aspersed on your Savior: this will prepare you to suffer,
teach you to conquer: for Arrows foreseen menace less danger.

Likewise, when you consider the injuries which are done you by others, you may
reflect upon the wrongs which are done by you unto others: for the
consideration of your own infirmity, will exact of you toward others an
impunity. Weigh with your selves how much others suffer of you, how much God
himself suffers of you, who, if he should have inflicted revenge for every
particular offense, you should have perished long since. In a word, you your
selves are frequently grievous, and displeasing to your selves: Seeing then you
are so distastefull unto your selves, as you must of necessity suffer many
injuries and affronts from your selves, repine not at the sufferings which are
inflicted by others on your selves.

You are likewise to consider these discommodities which arise from this
Passion; which will arm you with patience, if of your selves you have any
compassion. What availes it to be revenged, after our injury be received? Is
your wound by another wound to be cured? Or disgrace tendered, by rendering
disgrace restored? Besides all this, see what he obtains, who anger obeys:
1. He is deprived of the Crown of glory, and reward of eternity. 2. He
becomes a Minister and Instrument of the Devil: 3. He destroys his own
soul, that he might hurt another body: For a dispassionate or angry person
is like unto him, who, that he may kill his Ass, destroys himself; or
rather like him, who for huge debts which he is not able to discharge, is
thrown into prison, and disdainefully refuses any ones offer to pay his debt
for him. For by him, who does you wrong, is the debt which you owe to God,
forgiven, if with patience you suffer the injury which is done. Whereas the
angry person, who will be his own revenger, tells God how and in what sort
he is to deal with him: that as he suffered not small disgraces from
another, so neither should small things be suffered in him by God: As it is
written, With what measure you mete, the same shall be measured to you again.
Six other detriments or discommodities there be which arise from the
exorbitancy of this passion. For by Anger is lost, first, Wisdom, while
reason becomes blinded. Secondly, Righteousness; for the wrath of man works
not the righteousness of God. Thirdly, Society; for the Acquaintance of one
angry man, is pleasing unto none. Be not, says the Wiseman, a companion with
the angry man. Fourthly, Concord, while peace is disturbed. Fifthly, the Light
of Truth; because anger casts the darkness of confusion upon the mind or
understanding, from whom God hides the cheerful beam of his Divine
knowledge. Sixthly, the Splendour of the holy spirit: upon whom, says the
Prophet, shall my spirit rest, but upon the humble and quiet? that is, upon the
meek, mild, and compassionate.

Thus you see what benefits may be procured by attempering, what
discommodities incurred by fostring this Passion. Whereon I have the rather
insisted, because I am not ignorant, how the strongest and constantest tempers
have been, and may be distempered and disparaged by it; much more you, whose
mainest strength consists in the expression of that Passion. At all times
therefore use a moderate restraint; in the prime of your years, when youth
sends forth her first promising blossoms, behave your selves mildly without
bitterness, humbly without haughtiness, modestly without lightness, soberly
without childishness. The Caske will retain her first taste; the Wool her
first dye; the purest Tablet her prime impression; the loyall'st Spirit her
first affection. If you show too much waywardness in your youth, small good is
to be expected in your age. As you tender your preferment, seem mild while
you are maids, lest you prove scare-crowes to a young man's bed. Conform your
selves likewise to a nuptial State, and preserve your honor without stain.
Contest not with your head for preeminence: you came from him, not he from
you, honor him then as he cherishes the love he conceives in you. A
domestic fury makes ill harmony in any family. The discord which was hatched
and increased toward M. Anthony by Fulvia, was ever allayed and attempered by
the moderation of Octavia. Be you all Octavia's; the rougher your cross, the
richer your Crown. The more that injuries press you, the more shall your
patience praise you. The Conflict is but short and momentanie, the Triumph
glorious and impall'd with eternity. And thus much touching those three
particulars, whereon your Behavior principally reflects; we are now to
descend to the next branch, which shall show how a Gentlewoman of rank and
quality, (for to such only is my discourse directed) is to behave her self in
Company.

How to behave herself in Company.
SOciety is the solace of the living; for to live without it, were a kind of
dying. Companions and friendly Associats are the Thieves of time. No hour can
be so tedious, which two loving Consorts cannot pass over with delight, and
spend without distaste. Be the night never so dark, the place never so mean,
the cheerful beams of conceiving consorts will enlighten the one, and their
affections mutually planted, enliven the other. What a Desert then were the
world without friends? and how useless those friends without conceiving
minds? and how weak those minds, unless united in equal bonds? So then,
love is the Cement of our life: a load without love. Now, Gentlewomen, you are
to put on your vailes, and go into Company. Which (I am persuaded) you cannot
enter without a maiden-blush, a modest tincture. Herein you are to be most
cautelous, seeing no place can be more mortally dangerous. Beware therefore
with whom you consort, as you tender your repute: for report will brute what
you are, by the Company which you bear. Augustus being at a combat, discerned
the inclinations of his two daughters, Iulia and Livia, by the Company which
frequented them: for grave Senators talked with Livia, but riotous persons with
Iulia. Would you preserve those precious odors of your good names? Consort with
such whose names were never branded, converse with such whose tongues for
immodesty were never taxed. As by good words evil manners are corrected, so by
evil words are good ones corrupted. Make no reside there, where the least
occasion of lightness is ministered; avert your Ear when you hear it, but
your heart especially, lest you harbor it. To enter into much discourse or
familiarity with strangers, argues lightness or indiscretion: what is spoken
of Maids, may be properly applied by an useful consequence to all women: They
should be seen, and not heard: A Traveller sets himself best out by
discourse, whereas their best setting out is silence. You shall have many
trifling questions asked, as much to purpose as if they said nothing: but a
frivolous question deserves to be resolved by silence. For your Carriage, it
should neither be too precise, nor too loose. These sempring made faces partake
more of Chambermaid then Gentlewoman. Modesty and mildness hold sweetest
correspondence. You may possibly be wooed to interchange favors: Rings or
Ribonds are but trifles; yet, trust me, they are no trifles that are aimed at
in those exchanges. Let nothing pass from you, that may any way impeach you,
or give others advantage over you. Your innocent credulity (I am resolved) is
as free from conceit of ill, as theirs, perhaps, from intendment of good: but
these intercourses of Courtesies are not to be admitted, lest by this
familiarity, an Entry to affection be opened, which before was closed. It is
dangerous to enter parley with a beleagring enemy: it implies want or weakness
in the besieged. Chastity is an enclosed Garden, it should not be so much as
assaulted, lest the report of her spotless beauty become soyled. Such Forts
hold out best, which hold themselves least secure, when they are securest. It
was the saying of a worthy General, Presuming on a man's own strength is the
greatest weakness; and the ready way to betray himself to dangers is to
contemn them. Nasica, when the Roman Commonwealth was supposed to be in most
secure estate, because freed of their enemies, and strongly fenced by their
friends, affirmed, that though the Achaians and Carthaginians were both brought
under the yoke of bondage, yet they were most in danger, because none were
left, whom they might either fear for danger, or who should keep them in awe.

How subject poor Women be to lapses, and recidivations, being left their own
Guardians, daily experience can sufficiently discover. Of which number, those
always proved weakest, who were confidentest of their own strength.
Presumption is a daring sin, and ever brings out some untimely birth, which
viper-like deprives her unhappy parent of life. I have known diverse so
resolute in their undertakings, so presuming of their womanish strength, so
constantly devoted to a single life, as in public consorts they held it their
choycest merriment to give love the affront, to discourse of affection with an
imperious contempt, geere their amorous suitors out of Countenance, and make a
very Whirligig of love. But mark the conclusion of these insulting spirits:
they sport so long with love, till they fall to love in earnest. A moment makes
them of Sovereigns Captives, by slaving them to that deservedly, which at
first they entertained so disdainfully. The way then to prevent this malady, is
to weane you from consorting with folly. What an excellent impregnable
fortress were Woman, did not her Windows betray her to her enemy? But
principally, when she leaves her Chamber to walk on the public Theater; when
she throws off her veil, and gives attention to a merry tale; when she
consorts with youthful blood, and either enters parley, or admits of an
enter-view with love. It is most true what the sententious moral sometimes
observed: We may be in security, so long as we are sequestered from society.
Then, and never till then, begins the infection to be dispersed, when the
sound and sick begin to be promiscuously mixed. Tempt not Chastity; hazard
not your Christian liberty. You shall encounter with many forward youths, who
will most punctually tender their useless service to your shadows at the very
first sight: do not admit them, lest you prostitute your selves to their
prostrate service. Apelles found fault with Protogenes, in that he could not
hold his hands from his Table. Whereas our Damsels may more justly find fault
with their youthful Amorists, for that they cannot hold their hands from under
the Table. It is impossible to come off fair with these light-fingred fools.
Your only way is rampire your chaste intentions with Divine and Moral
instructions, to stop the source, divert the occasion, subject affection to
reason, so may you become Emperesses of that which has sometimes tyrannized
over Emperors: By this means shall every place where you publicly resort
minister to you some object of inward comfort: By this means shall Company
furnish you with precepts of chastity, enable you in the serious practice of
piety, and sweetly conduct you to the port of glory.

How to behave herself in privacy.
PRivacy is the seat of Contemplation, though sometimes made the recluse of
Tentation. From which there is granted no more exemption in the Cell, than in
the Court. Here is the Lawne where Melancholy draws her line. Here the mind
becomes our Mate; Silence, our sweetest Conference: where the retired becomes
either the best or worst friend to himself. There is none, who ever conversed
with himself, or discanted solely with his own humor, who can be ignorant
of those numerous slights or subtilities, which by that great Tempter (whose
long exercise has made him no less subtle in contriving, than cruel in
practicing our ruin) are privately shadowed and shrouded, purposely to
circumvent poor man, and leave him deluded. Diogenes, when he found a young
man talking alone, demanded of him What he was doing? who answered, He was
conversing with himself: Take heed (quoth he) thou conversest not with thine
enemy. Of the like stamp was that lovesick Girl, who became so immazed in
loves error, as she minded her work least when she eyed her Sampler. Never
less alone then when most alone: for then, and never so freely as then,
enjoyed fancy full scope of action, as when her retired privacy gave her
thoughts leave to converse with affection. Then and only then became jealous
Love a Projector, contriving ways for enjoying her Lover. No Italian device,
closed it never so inordinately with sense, could be unattempted, to catch him
by whom she was catched; to seize on him by whom she was surprised. So
eagerly cunning became fancy in feats of policy, as she would rather lose
herself, then by means of her deluded privacy, lose opportunity. To you,
Gentlewomen, I direct my discourse, whose privacy may enable you, if well
employed, for better things than the toys, tyres, and trifles of this age. How
many (the more our misery) bestow their private hours (which might be
dedicated to Contemplation, or works of piety and devotion) upon
light-feather'd inventions, amorous expostulations, or minting of some
unbeseeming fashions? How few enter into account with their own hearts; or so
consecrate their hours to Gods honor, as they make Privacy their souls
harbor? The day they spend in visitations; how rare and tedious is one hour
reserved for meditation? What a serious intercourse or sociable dialogue is
between an amorous Mistress and her Looking-glass! The point or pendent of
her feather wags out of a due posture; her Cheek wants her true tincture; her
captious Glass presents to her quick eye one error or other, which drives her
into a monstrous distemper. Pride leaves no time for prayer. This is her
CLOSET for LADIES, where she fits and accommodates her self to Fashion, which
is the period of her content, while purer objects are had in contempt. This is
not the way to make Privacy your minds melody. These employments should sooner
afflict than affect you, because they will sooner distract than direct you.
Your spirits will be revived most, when these are valued least. Let me
therefore recommend to your choice, Patterns of more exquisite worth: such
whose devotion may be your direction, whose direction your instruction.

Devout mention is made of zealous Anna, who made recourse to the Temple,
offering her incessant prayers, a vial of sweet odours, that she might
conceive a son: of whom, to her succeeding memory, the Scripture records,
that after her tears so devoutly shed, her prayers so sincerely offered, her
religious vows so faithfully performed, her countenance was no more altered;
Piety begot in her divine love, faith in Gods promise made her believe, and
zeal to Gods house caused her to persevere: thus sighing she sought, seeking
she obtained, and obtaining she retained a grateful memory of what she
received. No less fervor showed Ester in preferring the suite of her
distressed Israelites* what persuasive Oratory, what powerful Rhetoric, what
inducing reasons she used, to have their unjust censure reversed, their
insupportable wrongs redressed, their aggrievances relieved, the incensed King
appeased, and them to favor restored! She wooed with tears in her eyes,
faith in her heart, alms in her hand: Gods cause was the progress of her
course; she desired nothing more then how to effect it; which was seconded
with a successive conclusion, because begun, continued, and ended with
devotion. The like zeal expressed Judith for her besiedged Bethulites; the
love of God had so inflamed her, as no fear of the enemy could amate her;
faith armed her with resolution, constancy strengthened her against all
opposition. Her armor was prayer, Bethulia's cure her care, holy desires her
sole attendants; she enters her enemies pavilion with a zealous confidence;
implores the Divine assistance in her entrance; and discomfits a daring foe
with cautelous silence. Her sighs and tears were as the first and second
rain; they brought success to her thirsty soul, and a glorious Conquest to
her native soil. No less are we to admire the wonderful devotion of that
teare-swollen Magdalen, who with devout love sought her dear Spouse intombed,
whose body with obsequious Odours she had embalmed before ever he was
interred. She, when his Disciples were departed, left not the Sepulcher of her
sweet Master; still she sat sorrowing and sighing, weeping long and much,
rising from her seat of sorrow, her grave of grief: Where he was, he is not;
and where he is, she knows not: with pious tears, watchful eyes, weary
ways, she re-visits again and again the desert caves of his relinquished
Sepulcher, hoping at last to have the happiness to behold, whom with so
fervent a desire she sought. Now once and again had she entered his desolate
Tomb; but little was all this to her that loved so much: The power or efficacy
of every good work consists in Perseverance. But observe the comfortable
effect of her effectual love! For as much as she loved more than the rest,
and loving wept more than the rest, and weeping sought more than the rest, and
seeking persever'd, allowing her self no rest: therefore deserved she to
find, behold, and speak unto him before the rest. And not only so, but to
become the very first messenger of his glorious resurrection to his Disciples,
according as her choice Spouse had commanded her, and by especial Commission
recommended to her: Go, tell my Brethren that they go into Galile, there they
shall see me. Hence note the fruit of a devout heart; the incomparable
prerogative granted to Divine love! Nazianzen in his Epitaph for his sister
Gorgonia, writes, that she was so given to prayer, that her knees seemed to
cleave to the earth, and to grow to the very ground by reason of incessancy or
continuance in prayer. Gregory in his Dialogues writes, that his Aunt Trasilla
being dead, was found to have her elbowes as hard as horn: which hardness
she got by leaning to a Deske, at which she used to pray. Such as these
deserve your imitation; for their Virtues, like sweet Odours, have sent out a
pleasant perfume. They prayed, and obtained what they prayed for; They lived
and practiced what they sought for; They died and enjoyed what they so long
time sighed for. You are taught to Enter your Chambers and be still. Still,
and yet stirring still: Still from the clamours and turbulent insults of the
World; still from the mutinous motions and innovations of the flesh. But never
still from warring, wrestling, bickring and embattailing with the Leader of
those treacherous associats, tyrannous assassinats. O should you consider what
troops of furious and implacable Enemies are ever lying in ambuscado for you;
how many soule-tempting Sirens are warbling notes of ruin to delude you; what
fears within you, what foes without you, what furies all about you; you would
not suffer one grain of sand to drop through the Cruet, without a dropping
eye; not one minute pass undedicated to some good employment, to prevent the
fury of such desperate assailants. Make then your Chamber your private Theater,
wherein you may act some devout Scene to Gods honor. Be still from the world,
but stirring toward God. Meditation, let it be your companion: It is the
perfume of the memory; the souls rouzer from sins lethargy, the sweetest
solace in straits of adversity. Let it be your key to open the Morning, your
lock to close the Evening. What an argument of indiscretion were it for one,
amidst variety of choice and delicious viands, to discourse of vanity, and
suffer himself to famish in the presence of such plenty? This is your case, if
amids so many soule-solacing dainties of spiritual comforts, you divert your
eye, by fixing it on these Objects of earth: and repose not your selves in
those fragrant borders of Divine Contemplation; which, by how much they are
more frequent, by so much they become more sweet and redolent. Surely, there is
nothing that relisheth more sweetly, tastes more daintily, with-draweth your
minds from the world more speedily, strengthens you against the temptations
of your enemy, excites or exercises you in every spiritual duty, as the
soule-ravishing Contemplation of the Supreme Deity. All other Objects are
vanity. They may play upon your fantasy, and so delude you; but being weakly
grounded on piety, they can never suffice you. Task your selves then
privately, lest privacy become your enemy. As man's extremity is Gods
opportunity, so the Devils opportunity is man's security. Let not a minute be
mis-spended, lest security become your attendant. Be it in the exercise of
your Needle, or any other manual employment, attemper that labor with some
sweet meditation tending to Gods honor. Choose rather with Penelope to weave
and unweave, than to give Idleness the least leave. Wanton Wooers are
time-wasters: They make you idolize your selves; and consequently hazzardize
the state of your souls. Let not their Lip-salve so annoint you, as it make
you forgetful of him that made you. Be you in your Chambers or private
Closets; be you retired from the eyes of men; think how the eyes of God are
on you. Do not say, the walls encompasse me, darkness o're-shadowes me,
the Curtain of night secures me; these be the words of an Adulteress*
Therefore do nothing privately, which you would not do publicly. There is no
retire from the eyes of God. I have heard of some, who for want of more amorous
or attractive Objects abroad, have furnished their private Chambers with wanton
pictures, Aretine tables, Sibariticke stories. These were no objects for
Christian eyes: they convey too inordinate an heat from the eye to the heart.
The history of Christ is a piece of portraiture that will suite your Chambers
best. Eye no object which may estrange you from thought of your Maker. Make
every day your Ephemerides. Let your morning initiate your purposes for the
day, the day second what your morning purposed, the Evening examine your
mornings purpose, your days purchase. And so I descend to the next branch, how
you are to behave your selves in public, which should be by so much more
punctual, for as much as the world is more Stoicall.

WOmen in sundry Countries, This branch might seem included in our former
discourse of Company; but that reflected on persons, this on affairs.
when they go into any public concourse or press of people, use to wear
vayles, to imply that secret inscreened beauty which best becomes a Woman,
Bash-full modesty. Which habit our own Nation now in latter years has
observed: which, howsoever the intention of the wearer appear, deserves
approvement; because it expresses in it self Modest shamefastness, a Woman's
chiefest Ornament. I second his opinion, who held it; for diverse maine
respects, a custom very irregular an undecent, that Women should frequent
places of public resort, as Stage Plays, Wakes, solemn Feasts, and the like.
It is Occasion that depraves us; Company that corrupts us. Hence it was that
some flourishing States, having eyed the inconveniences which arise from the
usual resort of Women to Enterludes and other public Solemnities, published
an express inhibition against such free and frequent meetings. Had Hippodamia
never wandered, she had proved an Hypemnestra, and had never wantoned. Had
Dinah never roaved, she had proved a Diana, and had never been ravished. Yet
far be it from me, to be so regularly strict, or Laconically severe, as to
exclude Women from all public societies. Meetings they may have, and improve
them, by a Civil and Moral use of them, to their benefit. They may chat and
converse with a modest freedom, so they do not gossip it. For these
Shee-Elpenors, and Feminine Epicures, who surfeit our their time in an unwomanly
excess, we exclude them the pale of our Commonweal. Be they of what state
soever, they are stains to their Sex for ever. Especially such, who carouse
it in deep healths, rejoice at the color of the wine, till it sparkle in
their veins, inflame their bloods, and lay open a breach to the frailty of
their Sex. For prevention whereof, we read that kinsmen kissed their
kinswomen to know whether they drunk wine or no; and if they had, to be
punished by death, or banished into some Island. Plutarch says, that if the
Matrons had any necessity to drink wine, either because they were sick or
weak; the Senate was to give them license, and not then in Rome neither, but
out of the City.

Macrobius says, that there were two Senators in Rome chiding, and the one
called the others wife an Adulteress, and the other his wife a Drunkard; and
it was judged, that to be a drunkard was more infamy. Truth is, they might
join hands as mates of one society, for I have seldom seen any one subject
to Ebriety, preserve long untainted the honor of their chastity.

Now for public Employments, I know all are not borne to be Deborahs, to
bear virile spirits in feminine bodies. Yet, in choosing the better part, you
may fit and accommodate your persons to public affairs, well sorting and
suting with your rank and quality. Claudia and Priscilla were nobly descended,
yet they publicly resorted where they might be religiously instructed; and no
less publicly instructed others in those principles wherein they were
informed. It is said of the Vestall Virgins, that they first learned what to
do; secondly, they did what they had learned; thirdly, they instructed others
to do that which they had both done and learned. For this, the rich Saban
Queen left her own Region to hear the Wisdom of King Solomon. Surely,
howsoever some, no less properly than pregnantly, have emblematiz'd Woman by a
Snaile; because she still carries her house about her, as is the property of a
good Housekeeper: yet in my judgment (wherein I ingenuously submit to others
censure) a modest and well Behaved Woman may by her frequent or resort to
public places, confer no less benefit to such as observe her behavior,
than occasion of profit to her private family, where she is Over-seer. I have
seen some in these places of public repair, express such a well-seeming
State without Apish formality, as every action deserved imitation of such as
were in their Company. Their Conceits were sweetly tempered without lightness;
their jests savory, yet without saltness; their discourse free without
niceness; their answers mild without tartness; their smile pleasing, mixed
with bashfulnesse; their pace graceful without too much activenesse; their
whole posture delightful with a seemly carelessness. These are such mirrors
of modesty, patterns of piety, as they would not for a world transgress the
bounds of Civility. These are Matrons in their houses, Models in public
places. Words spoken in season, are like apples of gold with pictures of
silver: So opportunately are their words delivered, so seasonably uttered, with
such unaffected eloquence expressed, wheresoever this sweet and well-tempered
discretion is seated. Whereas others there be, whose indiscretion makes
discovery of an Ocean of words, but a drop of reason. They speak much, but
express little; their conceits are ever ballased with harshnesse; their jests
foisted in with too much dullness; their discourse trimmed up with too much
neatness; their answers leavened with too much sowrenesse; their looks
promising too much lightness, or unsociable perverseness; their pace either
too quick or too slow in dispatch of business; their whole posturean indisposed
frame of irregular absurdities. But to draw in our fayles, touching the
prosecution of this branch; our reproof shall reflect upon two sorts
especially, whose devious course drawn by an indirect line, may seem to
deserve reprehension worthily. The first are such who give too easy raines to
liberty, making Pleasure their Vocation; as if they were created for no other
end, then to dedicate the first fruits of the day to their Glass; the residue
to the Stage or Exchange. These, no sooner have they laid their Artificial
Complexion on their adulterate faces, then they grow sick for their Coach.
They must visit such a Lady, or what, perchance, is worse, such a Lord. A
minute now in their Chambers seems a month. Shall we display one of these in
her colors? The Play-bils must be brought her by her Pentioner: her eye views
and reviewes, and out of her feminine judgment culs out one from among them
which she will see, purposely to be seen. Much she observes not in it, only
she desires to be observed at it. Her Behavior in a Box, would make any one
think she were a Be in a box; she makes such a buzzing and rusling. This is
her daily task, till death enter the Stage and play his part; whom she
entertaines with such unpreparednesse, as her extreme act presents objects of
infinite unhappiness: As it sometimes fared with a Gentlewoman of our own
Nation, who so daily bestowed the expense of her best hours upon the Stage, as
being surprised by sickness, even unto death, she became so deaf to such as
admonished her of her end, as when her Physician was to minister a Receipt unto
her, which he had prepared to allay the extremity of that agonizing fit
wherewith she was then assailed, putting aside the Receipt with her hand, as
if she rejected it, in the very height and heat of her distemper, with an
active resolution used these words unto her Doctor: Thanks good Horatio, take
it for thy pains. So inapprehensive was she of death at her end, because she
never meditated of death before her end. Now for the second sort, they are
mere Antipodes to the former; These are only for profit, as the other were
for pleasure. These become so wedded to the world, as they afflict their
spirits, macerate their bodies, estrange themselves from offices of
Neighborhood, to improve their revenewes, by discovering their too much
providence to the world. And these are commonly such, as are matched to
Scholars, whose contemplation has taken them from the world, and recommended
the management of their estate to their wife. Now to both these sorts let me
address my instruction: As I could not possibly approve of the former, because
they made pleasure their business: so I cannot commend these, because they
make not their business a pleasure. Let these take heed, that they incur not
that miserable insensibility, which I have heard sometimes befell to a
Worldling of their sex: Who approaching near her haven, and entering now her
last conflict with Nature, was, by such as stood about her, earnestly moved to
recommend her self to God, tender the welfare of her soul, and to make her
salvation sure; thus briefly, but fearfully answered, and forthwith departed: I
have made it as sure as Law will make it. De (...) worie.
Or as we read in a book enituled The Gift of fear, how a Religious Divine
coming to a certain Vsuresse, to advise her of the state of her soul, and
instruct her in the way to salvation, at such time as she lay languishing in
her bed of affliction; told her, how there were three things by her to be
necessarily performed, if ever she hoped to be saved: First, she was to be
contrite in heart; secondly, she was to confess her sins; thirdly, she was
to make restitution according to her means. Whereto she thus replied; Two of
those first I will do willingly: but to do the last, I shall hold it a
difficulty; for should I make restitution, what would remain to raise my
children their portion? To which the Divine answered; Without these three you
cannot be saved. Yea but, quoth she, Do our Learned men and Scriptures say
so! Yes surely, said the Divine. And I will try (quoth she) whether they say
true or no, for I will restore nothing. And so resolving, fearfully dyed,
fearing poverty temporal, more then eternal, which she was of necessity to
suffer, (without Gods infinite interceding mercy) for preferring the care of
her posterity, before the honor of her Maker.

To be short, the former sort deserves reproof, for making pleasure their
^ocation; the latter for barring business all recreation. A discreet temper
will moderate both these; the first, by holding pleasure a pastime, and no
business; the last, by applying a cure to an incessant care, and immixing some
pleasure with business, to attemper it, lest it incline to heaviness. Both
which, equally concurring, are ever conferring to the laboring mind, inward
quietness.

COmplexion enclosed in a box, gives no tincture to the Cheek, nor moral
precepts unapplyed, beauty to the mind. Thus far have we proceeded in
directions of Behavior; That Behavior most approved which is clearest from
affectation freed.
insisting on such remarkable observances, as might better enable you in each
particular. We are now to say before you, upon serious discussion of the
premises, how that Behavior is to be most approved, which is clearest from
affectation freed.

Apes are caught in Deserts by imitation. Would not you be caught by
indiscretion? Imitate nothing servilely, it detracts from your gentility. I
have noted some of our Chambermaids take upon them such an unbeseeming state,
when they came to visit their poor friends in the Country, as they punctually
retained both gate and garb of their mincing Mistresses in the City. To their
Parish Church they repair to be seen and shown; where if any of these
civilized Iugs chance to be saluted by the way, having quite forgot both broom
and mop, with a scornful eye they will not stick to return this majestic
answer: We thank you, my good people. It is discretion that appropriates to
every peculiar degree their proper distinction. Many things will beseem the
Mistress, which agree not with the quality of the Maid. But in no degree will
that Behavior seem comely, which affectation has introduced, be it in Court,
City, or Country. You shall see many, purposely to cover some natural blemish
or deformity, practice that which makes them appear far more unseemly. Here
one indents with her lips to semper, that she may hide the want or greatness
of her teeth. Another contracts with her Tailor, lest Nemesis should be seen
sitting on her shoulder. A third wears her Gown with a careless looseness,
to cover or color her bodies crookedness. This, with Fabulla, buys an
artfull Periwig to supply her art-fallen hair: That enazures her seered
veins, embolsters her decayed breasts, to purchase a sweetheart. What an
affected state this generally-infected state assumes, purposely to gain a
popular esteem? Survey our streets, gaze on our windows; you shall see gazers
to entertain your eyes with variety of phantasticke Behaviors. But these are
none of Virtues followers. Would you be prayse-worthy? Virtue to her self is
her chiefest praise, her choycest prize. There is nothing comparably precious
to a continent soul. Affectation she will not admit, for her habit; both her
Habit and Behavior are proper not enforced; native and not apishly introduced.
She cannot woo a wanton Lover with a dissembled blush, nor promise more with
an outward presence, then she resolves to admit with a spotless Conscience.
Outward semblances, if light, she holds apparent blemishes to her life. Her
life, as it is a line to her self, so she would have it a light to others.
Lacides Prince of Argos, was accounted lascivious only for his sleeke looks,
and mincing gate. So Pompey, because he used to scratch his head with one
finger, albeit very continent and modest. Believe it, though your Person be the
Book, your Behavior is the Index. Which will require a large Comment, if it
express it self in ought probably incontinent. Now, for as much as nothing
better seems you, more commendably adornes you, or more absolutely
accommodates you, then what is native and unaffected, so it be by Education
seasoned: be your own Women; dis-value all apish formality; resort not to the
Temple to take a pattern of some new fashion: modest discretion blusheth at
such servile imitation. What you see in another, may become them, which would
not become another. The Ass in the fable seeing the dog fawn and leap upon
his Master, though it would beseem him, but sorting not with his nature, it
got him a beating for his labor.

Now to distinguish betwixt an enforced and unaffected Behavior, it is most
easy; the very first blush will discover the one by the other. You shall
observe these who are tied to affectation in this kind, set their look, gate,
and whatsoever else may confer a phantasticke grace on their usurped
Behavior, so punctually, as if they had entered a solemn Contract with eye,
face, hand, foot and all, to hold constantly their dimension, to beget in the
beholder a more settled admiration. Whereas contrariwise, these whose free,
genuine, and generous demeanours express themselves less strictly, but far
more comely, scorn to tie their affections to these servile restraints. They
hold it far more suitable with an Italian Pantomime, who professes hope of
profit upon the Stage, to confine them to these regularities, then discreet
Women, whose honor is their honest Behavior; and whose praise it is, to be
exemplary to others in goodness, and not others Apes in imitating their
fantastic fashions. To conclude then this Observation; as you are generous by
birth, dote not on that which is most ridiculous on this Stage of earth.
Approve your selves chaste Virgins, continent Wives, discreet Matrons,
honorable Widows, in your virtuous and modest demeanor. Preserve that
eternally, which gives accomplishment to Gentility. Your Educations (as may be
presupposed) have so beautified you, as the garb you retain is most proper
unto you. The Hyaena is a dangerous beast: yet her subtilty and cruelty take
life from affectation and imitation. Desire you to be so Behaved, as others
may admire you? In your choice of Behavior, inure your selves to what is
neatest, not what is newest. Invention in subjects of this kind, does more
harm than good. So behave your selves, that too much curiosity may not tax
you of pride, nor too much majesty of State: Modesty mixed with humility will
temper both these, and make that Behavior which appears in you, so well
become you, as if it were borne with you, and not affectively derived from
others to you.

THE ENGLISH GENTLEVVOMAN.
Argument.
Complement defined; how it may be corrupted; how refined; wherein it may be
admitted as mainely consequent; wherein omitted as merely impertinent; what
Complement gives best accomplishment.

COMPLEMENT.
COMPLEMENT has been anciently defined, Observat. 3 Complement defined.
and so successively retained; a no less real than formal accomplishment.
Such as were more nobly and freely educated, and had improved their breeding by
foreign Observations (so sweetly tempered was the equal union and communion
of their affections) instructed others in what they had seen and observed,
either at home or abroad, worthy imitation or approvement. Nothing was admitted
in those times publicly, but what was by the graver Censors first discussed
privately. Jealous were the Pagans of foreign fashions: for, with such
constancy they retained their own, as they seldom or never itched after
others. The Tyrian and Sidonian were so suspected of pride, through their
effeminacy in attire, and other light fashions which they used, as they were
held dangerous to commerce with. So purely did those poor beamelings of Nature
reflect on her people; that formality was held palpable hypocrisy, fair
semblances and cool performances mere golden shadows to delude others, but
gull themselves most. Princes Courts were Princely Seminaries. Delicacy was
there no Tutresse, nor effeminacy Governesse. If Alcibiades, albeit in Athens
the beautifull'st, for native endowments the pregnant'st, and for descent one
of the noblest, introduce ought irregularly; or express any Complement which
relisheth not of Civility; the author must suffer the censure of the City. It
was very usual in former times, when any Embassy was addressed from one state
unto another, for the Senate or Council, from whence any such Legate was sent,
to school them in sundry particulars before they took their journey or
received their Commission: but in no caution were they more strict, then in
express command that they should use no other garb, Complement, nor salute
upon their approach in foreign Courts, then what they had seen used and
observed at home. Thus their own native fashion, became a note of distinction
to every Nation.

Neither am I ignorant, how, even in one and the selfsame Province, there may
be generally introduced a different or distinct garb: which proceeds either
from the Commerce and Confluence of people there resorting, and consequently
improving their Behavior and Elocution by their mutual conference; or from
the Princes Court, where all State and Majesty has residence; or from the
temperature of the Air, to which some have attributed an especial
preeminence. Whereas, in desert and remote places, on which the beams of
Civil society seldom reflect, we shall find nothing but barbarism and
unsociable wildness. Education is the improver of the one, and producer of the
other. We shall ever see Complement shine most in places eminent. There are
Objects fit for such Subjects: Such as expect it, and bestow their whole days
practice in exercise of it: These aspire to the nature or definition of no art
more eagerly, then Complement, which they hold the absolute ornament of
Gentility. Howsoever, mainely repugnant be their Tenets touching the
subsistence of Complement.

Some have held, it consisted in congies, cringes, and salutes; of which
error, I would this age wherein we live, did not too much labor: others,
merely in a painted and superficial discourse; wherein they so miserably tied
themselves to words, as they tired the impatient hearers with foolish
repetitions, frivolous extravagancies; being, in a word, so affianced to the
shadow, as they forgot the substance. The last, which were only real and
complete Courtiers, held a seemly graceful presence, beautifide with a native
comeliness, the deservingst Complement that could attend us. Certainly, if
we should exactly weigh the derivation of the word, we could not imagine so
meanly of it, as to consist merely of words, or anticke works. It was first
intended to distinguish betwixt persons of civil and savage carriage: yea, to
appropriate a title of preeminence to such, who exceeded others in grounds or
precepts of Morality; whose lives appeared as Lamps to enlighten others, and
consequently perpetuate the memory of themselves. Many noble and eminent Ladies
are recorded, both in divine and humane writ, to have excelled in this
Complement of honor. These knew the definition of it, and molded their
conversation to it: They knew what belonged to a posture of state; they could
court it without apish curiosity; embrace love with a reserved modesty;
express themselves complete without singularity. Foreign fashions they
distasted; painted Rhetoric they dis-relished; real Complement was all they
affected. Love they could without dissembling; discourse without affecting;
show court'sie without congying; still retaining what was best beseeming. In
the Court they resided to better it; not a straid look could promise a loose
Lover least hope of a purchase; nor Coyness dishearten a faithful servant
from his affectionate purpose They knew not what it was to protest in j^st; to
walk in the clouds; to domineere over their captives, or entertain many
Suitors. They freed Complement of dissimulation, made virtue their Lodestone
to affection; their actions were dedicated to good ends: by which means they
made God and good men their friends. Nor do I fear it, but that our
flourishing Albion has many such noble and complete Ladies; who so highly
esteem the true and native definition of Complement, as they prefer the
substance before the shadow. Honor is their dearest tender, goodness their
line, by which they daily draw nearer to perfection, their proper Center. Thus
far for the Definition, wherein we have the rather enlarged our discourse,
that the Subject whereof we treat, may be discovered in her own nature; such
as owe attendance to her, become better proficients in their instructions
derived from her. Neither can we observe what may really deserve your
imitation, but by discerning the excellence of that whereof we treat by a true
and proper definition.

THere is nothing on earth so pure, How Complement may be corrupted.
but abuse may corrupt it; nothing so good, but custom may deprave it. This
may appear in this one Subject, which we have now in discourse. Former times
were not so jaded to fashions, as to esteem nothing formal, but what was
fantastical. It was not then held the life of Complement, to have the art to
set a face, court a glass, make a cringe or a ducke. Legs were held for
useful supporters, but no Complementall postures. New-minted words made not
their tongues more complete: nor an Outlandish Salute their Persons more
admired. Virgin-modesty made resolution her Steletto to guard her honor:
Plumes and Feathers were held light dressings for staid minds; suspicious
trimmings for stale Maids. Actors might wear them in their presentiments upon
the Stage, but modest Matrons were never allowed to wear them in the State.
Women were admitted to have Painters, but not to be their own painters:
Campaspe was pictured out in her colors by Apelles: Crotons five daughters
lively depictured by Zeuxes, yet these, without any help of art, still
retained their own native features. It was the Complement of that age to
deliver their mind freely without mincing, converse friendly without glozing;
walk the street demurely without gazing. Wherein (with submission ever to
graver judgments) this latter age, in mine opinion, deserves just reproof.
Education is a second Nature, and this has given that freedom to women, as
they may admit any opportunity to entertain time with their amorous servants;
redart wanton tales with light blushes; pass a whole afternoon in a
Bay-window, in Congies, Courtesies, and other useless Complements. Flashes of
wit are made beguilers of time; and these mixed now and then with such
lascivious passages, as modesty might justly hold it self abused to be so
encountered: Alas! Who knows not what secret trains are laid for credulous
women, under these pretenced parlies? Do you observe how their tongues are
tipped with your praises; how they honor your shadows; admire the earth you
tread on; adore the Air you breath on; and with their ayrie applauses so gild
you, as in the end they palpably gull you; leaving you no less miserably
deluded, than themselves seized of what their sensual quest pursued? Beware of
that Complement which gives way to rob you of your choycest Ornament. Egnatius,
in Catullus, is brought out, showing the whiteness of his teeth: a poor
subject to raise an Encomiasticke poem. These are Theames for an amorous Muse:
White teeth, rolling eyes, a beautiful complexion (all exterior and inferior
goods) being that which Euryala his Nurse praised, when she washed the feet of
Ulysses, namely, gentle speech, and tender flesh. No less persuasive by the
elegancy of the one, than invasive by delicacy of the other. But all these
outward imbellishments give but small accomplishment to the inward beauty:
"Where good's a better attribute than fair. Now be not these dainty subjects
for a Complete youth to discant on? What Crotchets and extemporall Conceits are
hatched out of an addle brain? The very shadow of Iulia's hair must not want
the compleatest honor, that either art can devise, or cost erect. Not a
Cooplet but must be poetically Complete; which, out of an amorous frenzy,
must, with mounting Hyperboles, be thus continued: Skin more pure than Ida's
snow,
Whiter far than Moorish milk,
Sweeter than Ambrosia too,
Softer than the Paphian silk,
Indian plumes or thistle-downe,
Or May-blossoms newly blown,
Is my Mistress Rosie-pale,
Adding beauty to her veil.


An excellent piece of Complementall stuff to catch a selfe-conceited one.
Many you have of your sex, who are too attentive auditors in the report of
their own praises. Nothing can be attributed to them, which they hold not
properly due unto them. Which conceit, many times, so transports them, as,
Narcissus-like, they are taken with their own shadows; doting on nothing more
than these Encomiasticke bladders of their desertlesse praises. Let me advise
you, whose discretion should be far from giving light ear to such ayrie
Tritons, to disrellish the oily Complement of these amorous Sycophants. It is
hateful Oratorie, that brings you to Self idolatry. Much more useful and
beneficial it will be for you to retain that modesty which appeared in
Alphonsus Prince of Aragon's answer to a plausive Orator; who having repeated a
long Panegyricall Oration in his praise, replied; If that thou have said,
consent with truth, I thank God for it; if not, I pray God grant me grace
that I may do it. You shall encounter with some of these Complete Amorists,
who will make a set speech to your Glove, and sweeten every period with the
perfume of it. Others will hold it an extraordinary grace to become Porters of
your Misset, or holders of your Fan, while you pin on your Mask. Service,
Observance, Devotion, be the General heads of their Complement. Other Doctrine
they have none, either to instruct morally, or inform politically. Believe it,
Gentlewomen, they are ill-spent hours, that are bestowed in conference with
these Braine-wormes. Their frivolous discourse will exact from you some answer:
which if you shape justly to their dialect, there will be more vain wind
spent, than you can redeem with many tears. Let no conceit transport you
above your selves; hold it for no Complement worthy your breeding, to trifle
time in love-toyes. They detract both from discretion and modesty, and
oft-times endanger the ruin of the latter fearfully. This kind of Complement
with great ones, were but mere Canting among Beggars. He or she are the
Completest, who in arguments of discourse and action are discreetest. Full
vessels give the least sound. Such as hold Complement the sole subject of a
glib tongue, active cringe, or artfull smile; are those only Mimicks, or
Buffouns of our age, whose Behaviors deserve far more derision than
applause. Thus you have heard how Complement may be corrupted; we now
purpose, with as much propriety and brevity as we may, to show you how it may
be refined: To the end, that what is in its own nature so commendable, may
be entertained with freedom of choice, and retained without purpose to change.

THe Unicorns horn being dipped in water, How Complement may be refined.
cleares and purifies it. It is the honor of the Physician to restore nature,
after it be decayed. It is the sole work of that supreme Architect to bring
light out of darkness, that what was dark might be enlightened; life out of
death, that what was dead might be enlivened; way out of error, that the
erring might be directed; knowledge out of ignorance, that the ignorant might
be instructed; a salve out of sin, that sins sore might be cured; comfort
out of affliction, that the afflicted might be comforted; hope out of
despair, that the desperate might be succored; a raising from falling, that
their fall might be recovered; strength out of weakness, that his great work
might be glorified. Gold thrice tried, becomes the purer and more refined: And
Complement the most, when it is best accommodated. True it is, that Society is
either a Plague or a Perfume. It infects, where Consorts are ill-affected; but
works excellent effects, where virtuous Consorts are assembled.

It is the sweetest note that one can sing,
When Grace in Virtues key, tunes Natures string.
Where two meek men meet together, their conference (says mellifluous
Bernard) is sweet and delectable: where one man is meek, it is profitable:
where neither, it proves pernicious and uncomfortable. It is Society that gives
us, or takes from us our Security. Let me apply this unto you, Gentlewomen,
whose virtuous dispositions, (so sweetly has nature graced you) promise
nothing less than fervorous desires of being good. Would you have that refined
in you, which others corrupt, by inverting the means? Or express that in her
native Colors, which will beautify you more than any artificial or
adulterate colors, whose painted Varnish is no sooner made than melted? Make
choice of such for your Consorts, whose choice may admit no change. Let no
Company be affected by you, which may hazard infecting of you. The World is
grown a very Pesthouse: timely prevention must be used, before the infection
have entered. You have no such sovereign receipts to repel, as you have to
prevent. The infection of vice leaves a deeper spot or speckle on the mind,
than any desease does on the body. The Blackmoore may sooner change his skin,
the Leopard his spots, than a soul deep dyed in the grain of infection, can
put off her habituate corruption. Be it then your principal care to make
choice of such bashful Maids, modest Matrons, or reverend Widows, as hold it
their best Complement to retain the opinion of being Continent. Infamy has
wings as swift as fame. Shun the occasion, lest you undergo the brand.
Posthuma, because given to laughter, and something forward to talk with men,
was suspected of her honesty; where being openly accused, she was acquitted by
Spurius Minutius, with this caveat, to use words suitable to her life. Civility,
trust me, is the best and most refined Complement that may be. Courting in
public places, and upon first sight, it affects not; for it partakes more of
impudent than Complete. Be it of the City that argument of discourse be
ministered, it can talk freely of it without mincing; or of the Court, it can
address it self to that garb in apt words without minting; or of the
Country, in an homespun phrase it can express whatsoever in the Country
deserves most praise. And all this in such a proper and familiar manner, as
such who are tied to Complement, may aspire to it, but never attain it. He
that has once tasted of the fountain Clitorius, will never afterward drink
any wine. Surely, howsoever this civil and familiar form of dialect may seem
but as pure running water in comparison of Complement, which, like Nectar,
streams out in Conduits of delight to the humorous hearer: yet our discreet
Complementer preferres the pure fountain before the troubled river. It is
true, that many fashions, which even these later times have introduced, deserve
free admittance; yea, there is some thing yet in our Oar, that may be refined.
Yet in the acceptance of these, you are not to entertain whatsoever these
finer times have brought forth. Where variety is affected, and the age to
inconstancy subjected, so as nothing but what is rare and new becomes esteemed:
Either must our inventions be present and pregnant, our surveyes of foreign
places serious and sollicitant, or we shall fall into decay of fashion, or
make old ones new, and so by antiquity gull our Nation. Truth is, though our
tongues, hands, bodies, and legs be the same, our Elocution, action,
gesture, and posture are not the same. Should the soul of Troilus, according
to that erroneous transmigration of Pythagoras, pass into the body of one of
our English Courtiers; or Hortensius, (who was an Orator active enough) into
one of our English Lawyers; or Antigone (who was Complementall enough) into one
of our English Curtezans; they would find strange Cottages to dwell in. What
is now held Complete; a few years will bury in disgrace. Nothing then so
refined, if on earth seated, which time will not raze, or more curious conceits
dis-esteeme, or that universal reduction to nothing dissolve. That Complement
may seem pleasing; such a fashion generally affecting; such a dressing most
Complete: yet are all these within short space covered with contempt. What you
observe then to be most civil in others, affect it; such an habit needs not to
be refined, which cannot be bettered. Fashion is a kind of frenzy; it admires
that now, which it will laugh at hereafter, when brought to better temper.
Civility is never out of fashion; it ever reteines such a seemly garb, as it
conferres a grace on the wearer, and enforces admiration in the beholder. Age
cannot deface it; contempt disgrace it; nor gravity of judgment (which is ever
held a serious Censor) disapprove it.

Be thus minded, and this Complement in you will be purely refined. You have
singular patterns to imitate, represent them in your lives, imitate them in
your loves. The Corruption of the age, let it seize on ignoble spirits; whose
education, as it never equaled yours, so let them strike short of those nobler
indowments of yours: labor daily to become improved, honor her that will make
you honored: let virtue be your crown, who holds vanity a crime: So may you
show holiness in your life, enjoy happiness at your death, and leave examples
of goodness unto others both in life and death.

COurts and eminent places are held fittest Schools for Complement: Wherein
Complement may be admitted, as mainely consequent.
There the Cinnamon tree comes to best growth; there her bark gives sweetest
sent. Choice and select fashions are there in only request; which oft-times
like those Ephemera, expire after one days continuance: whatsoever is vulgar,
is thence exploded; whatsoever novell, generally applauded. Here be weekly
Lectures of new Complements; which receive such acceptance, and leave behind
them that impression, as what garb soever they see used in Court publicly, is
put in present practice privately; lest discontinuance should blemish so
deserving a quality. The Courts gloss may be compared to glass, bright, but
brittle; where Courtiers (says one) are like Counters, Plutarch.
which sometime in account go for a thousand pound, and presently before the
Count be cast, but for a single penny. This too eager affection after
Complement, becomes the consumption of many large hereditaments. Whereto it may
be probably objected, That even discretion injoynes every one to accommodate
himself to the fashion or condition of that place wherein he lives. To which
Objection I easily condescend; for, should a rusticke or boorish Behavior
accompany one who betakes himself to the Court, he might be sure to find a
Controuler in every corner to reprove him; or some complete Gallant or other,
pitifully to geere and deride him. But to dote so on fashion, as to admire
nothing more then a phantasticke dressing, or some anticke Complement, which
the corruption of an effeminate State has brought in, derogates more from
discretion, then the strict observance of any fashion adds to her repute. This
place should be the Beacon of the State; whose mounting Prospect surveyes
these inferior coasts which pay homage and fealty unto her. The least
obliquity there, is exemplary elsewhere. Piercing'st judgments, as well as
pregnant'st wits should be there resident. Not a wandering or indisposed hair,
but gives occasion of observance to such as are near. How requisite then is it
for you, whose Nobler descents promise, yea, exact more of you then inferiors,
to express your selves best in these best discerning and deserving places? You
are women, modesty makes you completest: you are Noblewomen, desert
accompanying your descent will make you noblest. You may, and convenience
requires it, retain a Courtly garb, reserve a well seeming State, and show
your selves lively Emblemes of that place, wherein you live: You may entertain
discourse, to allay the irkesomenesse of a tedious hour; bestow your selves in
other pleasing recreations, which may no less refresh the mind, then they
confer vigor and vivacity to the body. You may be eminent stars, and
express your glory in the resplendent beams of your virtues; so you suffer no
black cloud of infamy to darken your precious names. She was a Princely
Christian Courtier, who never approached the Court, but she meditated of the
Court of heaven; never consorted with her Courtiers, but she contemplated
those Citizens of heaven; nor ever entered the Presence Chamber, but she
thought of the presence of her Maker, the King of heaven. And how she was
never conscious of that thought which redounded not to her Subjects honor;
which she preferred next to the love of her Maker, before the fruition of an
Empire. Such Meditations are receipts to cure all inordinate motions. Your Lives
should be the lines to measure others Actions. Virtue is gracious in every
subject, but most in that, which the Prince or Princess has made gracious.
Anciently, the World was divided into three parts, whereof Europe was held the
soul; properly, every Politic State may be divided into three Cantons,
whereof the Court is the Sun. You are Objects to many Eyes; be your actions
platformes to many lives. I can by no means approve that wooing and winning
Complement (though most Courts too generally affect it) which makes her sole
Object, purchase of Servants or Suitors. This garb tastes more of Curtezan
then Courtier: it begets Corrivals, whose fatal Duello's end usually in blood.
Our own State has sometimes felt the misery of these tragic events; by
suffering the loss of many generous and free-bred Sparks; who, had not their
Torches been extinguished in their blood, might to this day have survived, to
their Countries joy and their own same. So great is the danger that lies hid
in affable Complements, promising aspects, affectionate glances, as they leave
those who presumed of their own strength, holding themselves invulnerable,
many times laboring of wounds incurable. Be you no such Basilisks; never
promise a calm in your face, where you threaten a storm in your heart.
Appear what you are, lest Censure tax you of inconstancy, by saying, you are
not what you were. An open countenance and restrained bosom sort not well
together. Suit your discourse to your action; both to a modest dispose of your
affection. Throw abroad no loose Lures, wandering eyes, strayed looks; these
delude the Spectators much, but the Actors most. A just revenge^ by striving to
take in others, they are taken by others. How dangerous do we hold it to be,
in a time of infection, to take up any thing, be it never so precious, which
we find lost in the street? One of your loose looks, be it darted with never
so Complementall a state, is far more infectious, and mortally dangerous.
There is nothing that sounds more cheerfully to the ear, or leaves a sweeter
accent; nothing that conveyes it self more speedily to the heart, or affords
fuller content for the time, then conceit of love. It will immaze a perplexed
wretch in a thousand extremes; whose amazed thoughts stand so deeply engaged
to the Object of his affection, as he will sustain any labor, in hope of a
trifling favor. Such sovereignty beauty reteines; which, if discretion temper
not, begets such an height of conceit in the party beloved, as it were hard to
say, whether the Agent or Patient suffer more. To you let me return, who stand
fixed in so high an Orb; as a graceful Majesty well becomes you, so let
modesty grace that Majesty; that demeaning your selves like Complete and
gracious Courtiers on earth, you may become triumphant and glorious Courtiers
in heaven.

THis garb, Wherein Complement may be omitted, as merely impertinent.
as it suites not with all Persons, so sorts it not to all Places. For a
Mechanicke to affect Complement, would as ill seem him, as for a rough-hewen
Satyr to play the Orator. It is an excellent point of discretion, to fit ones
self to the quality or condition of that place where he resides. That Vrbanity
which becomes a Citizen, would relish of too much curiosity in a Countryman.
That Complement which gives proper grace to a Courtier, would beget derision or
contempt, being personated by a Merchant or his Factor. In affairs of State,
is required a graceful or Complete posture; which many times procures more
reverence in the person interessed, then if that state were omitted. Whereas,
in ordinary affairs of traffic, it were indiscretion to represent any such
state, or to use any expression, either by way of discourse or action, that
were not familiar. That person, who prefers Complement before profit: and will
rather speak not to be understood, then lose one polite-stollen phrase, which
he has purchased by ear only, and understands not, may account himself one
among his bank-rupt brethren, before he break. It is pitiful to hear what
a remnant of fustian, for want of better Complement, a Complete-Countrey-Gossip
(for so she holds her self) will utter in one hour amongst her Pew-fellowes.
How she will play the Schoole-Mistresse in precepts of Discipline and moral
Behavior! Nothing so graceful in another, which she will not freely reprove;
nothing so hateful in her self, which she will not confidently approve.
Teach she will, before she be taught; and correct Form^ it self, to bring
Form out of love with it self. To which malady, none is more naturally
subject, then some Ladies cashiered Gentlewoman, or one who has played
Schoole-Mistresse in the City, and for want of competent pay, removes her Camp
into the Country: where she brings enough of vanity into every family
throughout the Parish. She will not stick to instruct her young Pupils in
strange points of formality, enjoining them not to ask their Parents blessing
without a Complement. These, as they were never Mistresses of families, so they
are generally ignorant in employments of that kind. Those three principal
works or faculties of the Understanding, which might enable them to Discourse,
Distinguish, and to Choose, are so estranged from them, as their Discourse
consists solely in arguments of vanity, their Distinction in mere shadows of
formality, their Choice in subjects and Consorts of effeminacy.

Eight things, says Hippocrates, make ones flesh moist and fat; the first, to
be merry and live at hearts ease; the second, to sleep much; the third, to lie
in a soft bed; the fourth, to fare well; the fifth, to be well apparelled and
appointed; the sixth, to ride always on horseback; the seventh, to have our
will; and the eighth, to be employed in Plays and pastimes, and in such
time-beguiling recreations, as yield contentment and pleasure. These are the
only receipts in request with those Shee-Censors we now discourse of; and of
whom it may be said, as was sometimes spoken of one Margites, that he never
plowed, nor dug, nor did any thing all his life long that might tend unto
goodness; and by necessary consequence wholly unprofitable to the world. Who,
howsoever they are less then women at their work, yet at their meat (so
unconfined is their appetite) they are more then men, and in their habits (so
phantasticke is their conceit, neither women nor men. So as, were Diogenes to
encounter one of these, he might well expostulate the cause with her, as he
did upon like occasion with a youth too curiously and effeminately dressed: If
thou go to men, all this is but in vain; if unto women, it is wicked. But
these we hold altogether unworthy of your more generous society; whose
excellent breeding has sufficiently accommodated you for City, Court, and
Country; and so fully informed you how to demean your selves in all affairs;
as I make little doubt, but you know wherein it may be admitted, as mainely
consequent; and wherein omitted as merely impertinent. I mean therefore to
descend briefly to the last branch of this Observation; declaring, what
Ornament gives Complement best beauty or accomplishment.

IT is true, what the son of Sirach sometimes said; When a man has done his
best, Eccles. 18.6.
he must begin again; and when he thinks to come to an end, he must go
again to his labor. There is nothing so exact, which may not admit of
something to make it more perfect. We are to go by stayres and steps to the
height of any story. Virtues are the Stairs, Perfection the Spire. What
Complement gives best accomplishment.
But I must tell you, Gentlewomen, the way for you to ascend, is first to
descend: Complete you cannot be, unless you know how replete you are of
misery. Humility is the staire that conducts you to this spire of glory. Your
beauty may proclaim you fair; your discourse express a pregnancy of conceit;
your behavior confirm you outwardly complete. Yet there is something more
then all this required, to make you absolutely accomplished. All these outward
becommings, be they never so graceful, are but reflections in a glass; quite
vanished, so soon as the glass is removed. Critolaus balance was of precious
temper, and well deserving estimation with Heirs of Honor; who poised the
goods of body and fortune in one skale, and goods of the mind in the other:
where the goods of the mind so far weighed down the other, as the Heaven
does the Earth and Seas. To lead a dance gracefully; to marry your voice to
your instrument musically; to express your selves in prose and verse morally;
are commendable qualities, and enforcing motives of affection. Yet I must tell
you, for the first, though it appear by your feet to be but a mere dimension,
in the opinion of the Learned, it is the Devils procession: Where the Dance is
the Circle, whose center is the Devil. Which may be restrained by a more easy
or moderate gloss to such wanton and immodest Revels, as have anciently been
used in the Celebration of their profane feasts by Pagans, and are to this day
by Pagan-christians; who, to gain applause from the Spectator, care not what
shameless parts they play in the presence of their Maker. But what are these
worth, being compared with these inward Ornaments or beauties of your mind;
which only distinguish you from other creatures, and make you soveraignesses
over the rest of Gods creatures? You have that within you, which will best
accomplish you. Let not that be corrupted, by which your crooked ways may be
best corrected. Hold it no such necessary point of Complement, to show a kind
of majesty in a Dance; and to prefer it before the Complement of a Religious
task. Those sensual Curtezans, who are so delighted in songs, pipes, and
earthly melody, shall in hell rore terribly and howl miserably; crying, as it
is in the Apocalips; Woe, Apoc. 8.
Woe, Woe. Woe shall every one cry severally, for the reward they have received
in hell eternally; saying and sighing, Woe is me that ever I was borne: for
far better had it been for her, that she had never been borne. And again,
Cursed be the womb that bare me a sinner. After this, shall she cry out in
her second Woe against her self and all the members of her own body: Woe be
unto you my accursed feet, what evil have you brought upon me, miserable
wretch, who by your perverse paths and wicked ways have shut heavens gate of
me? Woe unto you my hands, why have you deprived me by your sinful touch,
and sensual embrace, of the Crown of glory? by your means am I brought to
hell fire, where I shall be tormented eternally. Woe unto thee, thou cursed
tongue, what mischief have thou brought upon me, by uttering words so
scurrilous and filthy, and singing uncivil songs so frequently? O ye cursed
Eyes, who by your unlawful objects of concupiscence, have deprived me of Gods
presence, and never shed one tear for your sins in token of repentance! Now
begins your intolerable weeping (ye teare-swolne eyes never dried) before all
the Devils and the damned. Woe unto thee my heart, what have thou put upon me,
who by thy lustful thoughts and unlawful joys, have deprived me of eternal
joys? The third Woe, that she shall cry out, is this, saying: Woe unto the
bitterness of my torments, for they are comfortless: woe unto the multitude
of them, for they are numberless: woe unto the eternity of them, for they are
endless. Would our wanton Curtezans, who sport it in their beds of Ivory,
surfeit it in their delicacy, wanton it in the bosom of security, and dedicate
their whole time to sensuality, reflect upon such a sovereign salve or
spiritual balm as this; they would draw back their feet from the ways of
wantonness, and exercise them wholly in the paths of righteousness. They
would remove their hands from unchaste embraces, and inure them to the search
of Scriptures. They would stop their mouths from uttering ought uncivilly, and
teach their tongues to be Orators of modesty. They would turn their eyes from
vanity, and fix them on the purest objects of eternity. That so, instead of
bitterness of torments, they might taste the sweetness of divine comforts:
instead of multitude of torments, they might partake the numberless number of
Gods mercies: and instead of the eternity of those torments, immortality with
Gods Saints and Servants.

Prevention is the life of policy: the way to avoid those, and enjoy these, is
to live in your Court here on earth, where you are spheared, as in the presence
of God and his heavenly Angels, where your hope is seated. Though your feet be
here, your faith should be there: here your Camp, there your Court. Mean
time, while you sojourne here, you are to hold a good Christian the completest
Courtier: and that virtue is the ornament, which gives Complement the best
accomplishment. Silken honor is like painted meat; it may feed the eye, but
affords no nourishment. That Courtiers Coat gives a vading gloss, whose heart
is not inwardly lined with grace. Let goodness guide you in the way, and
happiness will crown you in the end. Let your Complete armor be
righteousness, your Complement lowliness: complete in nothing so much as
holiness; that in your convoy from Earth, you may be endenized in heaven,
natural Citizens, angelical Courtiers.

THE ENGLISH GENTLE-VVOMAN.
Argument.
Decency recommended as requisite in four distinct Subjects: Decency the
attractivest motive of affection: the smoothest path that leads to perfection.

DECENCY.
DEcency takes Discretion ever along with her to choose her fashion. Decency
recommended as requisite in four distinct subjects.
She accommodates her self to the place wherein she lives, the persons with
whom she consorts, the rank or quality she partakes. She is too discreet to
affect ought that may not seem her: too constant to change her habit for the
invention of any phantasticke wearer. What propriety she expresses in her
whole posture or carriage, you shall easily perceive, if you will but with a
piercing eye, a serious survey, reflect upon her demeanor in her Gate, Look,
Speech, Habit. Of which, distinctly, we purpose to entreat, in our Entry to
this Observation; that by these you may probably collect the excellency of her
condition.

THat, GATE.
wherein we should express our selves the humblest, many times transports us
most, and proclaims us proudest. It is no hard thing to gather the Disposition
of our heart, by the dimension of our gate. What a circular gesture we shall
observe some use in their pace, as if they were troubled with the vertigo!
Others make a tinkling with their feet, and make discovery of their light
thoughts, by their wanton gate. Others with a jetting and strutting pace,
publish their hauty and selfe-conceited mind. Thus do our Wantons (as if they
had transparent bodies) display their folly, and subject themselves to the
censure of levity. This cannot Decency endure. When she sees Women, whose
modesty should be the Ornament of their beauty, demean themselves more like
Actors than civil Professants, she compassionately suffers with them, and
with choice precepts of moral instruction (wherein she has ever shown her
self a singular proficient) she labors to reclaim them: With amorous, but
virtuous Rhetoric, she wooes them, hoping by that means to win them. She
bids them look back to preceding times, yea those, on which that glorious
light which shines in those Christian days, never reflected; and there they
shall find Women highly censured, for that their outward carriage only made
them suspected. A veil covered their face, modesty measured out their pace;
their Spectators were as so many Censors: Circumspect therefore were they of
their carriage, lest they should become a scandal or blemish to their sex.
Their repair to their Temples was decent, without any loose or light gesture;
Entering their Temples, constant and settled was their behavior. Quick was
their pace in dispatch of household affairs; but slow in their Epicureall
visits or sensual gossipings. They had not the art of imitating such huffing
and mounting gates, as our light-spirited Dames now use. They were not as then
learned to pace: so far estranged were they from the very least conceit of
vanity in this kind. How much more should these purer times, where verity is
taught and embraced, vanity so much taxed and reproved, affect that most, which
adornes and beautifies most? Is it not palpable folly, to walk so hautily in
these streets of our captivity? Eye your feet, those bases of frailty, how
they, who so proudly strut on earth, are but earth, and approach daily nearer
their earth. The Swan, when she prides her self in her whiteness, reflects on
her black feet, which brings down her plumes, and allayes her self-conceit
with more humbleness. What anticke Pageants shall we behold in this survey of
Earth? With what Apish gestures they walk, which taxes them of lightness?
How like Colosso's others walk, which discovers their haughtiness? How
punctually these, as if they were Puppets drawn by an enforced motion? How
phantastically those, as if their walk were a theatrall action? These unstaid
dimensions argue unsettled dispositions. All is not well with them. For if one
of the Spartan Ephori was to lose his place, because he observed no Decency in
his pace, how may we be opinion'd of such Women, whose years exact of them
stayednesse, whose places retain in them more peculiar reverence, and whose
descents injoyne them to a state-reservance; when they, to gain observance,
admit of any new, but undecent posture? Deserve these approvement? No;
discretion cannot prize them, nor judgment praise them. Vulgar opinion, whose
applause never receives life from desert, may admire what is new, but
discretion that only which is neat. It is one thing to walk honestly as on
the day, another thing to walk uncivilly as on the night. Decency becomes the
one; Deformity the other. Neither only are modest women to be cautelous how
they walk, but where they walk. Some places there be, whereto if they
repair, walk they never so Civilly, they cannot walk honestly. Those who
value reputation, will not be seen there; for Honor is too dear a purchase
to be set at sale. Such as frequent these places, have exposed themselves to
shame; and made an irrevocable Contract with sin. They make choice of the
Twy-light, lest their paths should be discovered; and shroud their distained
actions with the sable Curtain of night, lest they should be displayed.
These, howsoever their feet walk softly, their hearts post on swiftly, to
seize on the voluptuous prey of folly.

Far be these ways from your walks, virtuous Ladies, whose modesty makes
you honored of your Sex. Though your feet be here below, let your faith be
above. Let no path of pleasure draw you from those joys which last for ever.
Though the world be your walk while you sojourne here; heaven should be your
aim, that you may repose eternally there. Live devoutly, walk demurely,
profess constantly; that devotion may instruct you, your ways direct you,
your profession conduct you to your heavenly Country. It is a probable
argument, that such an one hates her Country, where only she is to become
Citizen, who thinks it to be well with her here, where she is a Pilgrim.
Walk in this maze of your Pilgrimage, that after death you may enjoy a lasting
heritage. So shall you praise God in the gate, and, after your Christian race
finished, receive a Crown.

IT is most true, LOO^E.
that a wanton Eye is the truest evidence of a wandering and distracted mind.
The Arabians proverb is elegant; Shut the windows, that the house may give
light. It is death that enters in by the windows. The House may be secured,
if these be closed. Whence it was, that princely Prophet praid so earnestly,
Lord turn away mine eyes from vanity. And hence appears man's misery: That
those Eyes, which should be the Cesternes of sorrow, Limbeckes of contrition,
should become the lodges of lust, and portals of our perdition. That those
which were given us for assistants and associates, should become our
assassinat^. Our Eye is made the sense of sorrow, because the sense of sin;
yet more apt is she to give way to sin, then to find one tear to rinse her
sin. An unclean eye is the messenger of an unclean heart: confine the one,
and it will be a means to rectify the other. Many dangerous objects will a
wandering eye find, whereon to vent the disposition of her corrupt heart. No
place is exempted, no subject freed. The ambitious eye makes honor her object,
wherewith she afflicts her self, both in aspiring to what she cannot enjoy,
as likewise in seeing another enjoy that, whereto her self did aspire. The
Covetous makes wealth her object; which she obtaines with toil, enjoyes with
fear, forgoes with grief: for being got they load her, loved they soil her,
lost they gall her. The Envious makes her Neighbors flourishing field, or
fruitful harvest, her object; she cannot but look on it, looking pine and
repine at it, and repining justly consume her spirit with envying it. The
Lascivious makes beauty her object, and with a leering look, while she
throws out her lure to catch others, she becomes caught herself. This
object because it reflects most on your sex, let it be thus disposed, that
the inward eye of your souls may be on a superior beauty fixed. Do ye
admire the comeliness of any creature? remove your eye from that object, and
bestow it on the contemplation of your Creator. Worms and flies, that have
layen dead all winter by reflexe of the Sun beams, are revived: so these
flesh-flyes, who have been long time buried in these sensual Objects of
earth, no sooner reflect on the Sun of righteousness, than they become
enlivened and enlightened. Those filmes which darkened the eye of their minds,
are removed, those thick Cataracts of earthly vanities are dispersed and
dispelled, and a new light into a new heart infused.

I know well, Gentlewomen, that your resort to places of eminent resort, cannot
but minister to you variety of Objects. Yea, even where nothing but chaste
thoughts, staid looks, and zealous desires should harbor, are now and then
loose thoughts, light looks, and licentious desires in especial honor. The
means to prevent this malady, which like a spreading ulcer disperseth it self
in every society, is neither willingly to take nor be taken. Dinah may be a
proper Emblem for the eye; she seldom strayes abroad, but she is in danger
of ravishing. Now to preserve purity of heart, you must observe a vigilant
discipline over every sense. Where, if the eye, which is the light of the body,
be not well disposed, the rest of the senses cannot choose but be much
darkened. We say, that the want of one peculiar sense supplies that defect with
an higher degree of perfection in the rest. Sure I am, there is no one sense
that more distempers the harmony of the mind, nor prospect of the Soul, then
this window of the body. It opens ever to the Raven, but seldom to the Dove.
Raving affections it easily conveyes to the heart; but Dovelike innocence it
rarely reteines in the breast. As it is a member of the flesh, so becomes it a
servant of the flesh; apprehending with greediness, whatsoever may minister
fuel to carnal concupiscence. This you shall easily correct, by fixing her on
that pure and absolute object, for which she was made. It is observed by
professed Oculists (an observation right worthy a Christians serious
consideration) that whereas all creatures have but four Muscles to turn their
eyes round about, man has a fifth to pull his eyes up to heaven. Do not then
depresse your eyes, as if they were fixed on earth, nor turn them round, by
gazing on the fruitless vanities of earth; but on heaven, your haven after
earth. In the Philosophers scale* the soul of a fly is of more excellence
then the Sun; in a Christian scale, the soul of man is infinitely more
precious then all creatures under the Sun. Preserve then the honor of a
beautiful soul, which suffers infinitely when it is blemished with any soil.
So order and dispose your looks, as censure may not tax you of lightness,
nor an amorous glance impeach you of wantonness. Send not forth a tempting eye
to take another; nor entertain a tempting look darting from another. Neither
take nor be taken. To become a prey to others, will slave you^ to make a prey
of others, will transport you. Look then upward, where the more you look you
shall like, the longer you live you shall love.

SPEECH.
WIthout Speech can no society subsist. By it we express what we are, as
vessels discover themselves best by their sound. Discretion makes opportunity
her anvile, whereon is wrought a seasonable discourse. Otherwise, howsoever we
speak much, we discourse little. That sage Stagyrian debating of the
convenience and propriety of discourse before Alexander, maintained, that none
were to be admitted to speak (by way of positive direction) but either those
that managed his wars, or his Philosophers which governed his house. This
Opinion tasted of too much strictness (will our women say) who assume to
themselves a privilege in arguments of discourse, be the argument never so
course whereon they treat. Truth is, their tongues are held their defensive
armor; but in no particular detract they more from their honor, then by
giving too free scopeto that glibbery member. For to such as profess their
ability at this weapon, may that saying of Pandolphus be properly applied:
They speak much ill, but they speak little well; they speak much, but do
little. Again, They do little well, but they do much ill; they say well, but
do ill. They promise much, but do little. What restraint is required in
respect of the tongue, may appear by that ivory guard or garrison with which
it is impaled. See, how it is double warded, that it may with more reservancy
and better security be restrained! To give liberty to the tongue to utter what
it list, is the argument of an indiscreet person. In much Speech there can
never want sin, it either leaves some tincture of vainglory, which
discovers the proud heart, from whence it proceeded; or some taste of
scurrility, which displayes the wanton heart, from whence it streamed; or some
violent and dispassionate heat, which proclaims a rancorous heart, from whence
it issued. Whereas, a well-disposed mind will not speak before it conceive;
nor deliver ought by way of expression, till it be prepared by a well-seasoned
deliberation. That Philosophers speech deserves retention; who seeing a silent
guest at a public feast, used these words: If thou be wise, thou art a
fool; if a fool, thou art wise in holding thy peace. For as propriety of
speech ministers no less delight then profit to the Hearer: so it argues
discretion in the Speaker, begetting him such attention, as not one syllable
falls from him, which merits not retention. In your dialect then, you are not to
hide your talent, if it probably appear that you may improve any one by it.
Wherein let me advise you never to tie your selves so strictly to elegancie or
ornament, as by the outward trimming to forget the benefit of speech, and so
fall into expressions impertinent. This were to prefer the rind before the
pith: and to engage Sense to a profuse Speech. As discourse usually edifying
confers a benefit to the Hearer; so discourses ^^itlesse and wandering, as they
tire the ear, so they tax the discretion of the Speaker. It was an excellent
precept of Ecclesiasticus: Thou that art young, speak, if need be, and yet
scarcely when thou art twice asked. Comprehend much in few words; in many be as
one that is ignorant: be as one that understands, and yet hold thy tongue.
The direction is general, but to none more consequently useful then to young
women; whose bashful silence is an ornament to their Sex. Volubility of
tongue in these, argues either rudeness of breeding, or boldness of
expression. The former may be reclaimed by a discreet Tutor, but the latter,
being grounded on arrogance of conceit, seldom or never. It will beseem you,
Gentlewomen, whose generous education has estranged you from the first, and
whose modest disposition has weaned you from the last, in public consorts, to
observe rather then discourse. It suites not with her honor, for a young woman
to be prolocutor: But especially, when either men are in presence, or ancient
Matrons, to whom she owes a civil reverence, it will become her to tip her
tongue with silence. Touching the subject of your discourse, when opportunity
shall exact it of you, and without touch of immodesty expect it from you; make
choice of such arguments as may best improve your knowledge in household
affairs, and other private employments. To discourse of State-matters, will
not become your auditory: nor to dispute of high points of Divinity, will it
sort well with women of your quality. These Shee-Clarkes many times broach
strange opinions; which, as they understand them not themselves, so they labor
to entangle others of equal understanding to themselves. That Divine sentence,
being made an individuate consort to their memory, would reclaim them from
this error, and free them from this opinionate censure: God forbid, that we
should not be readier to learn then to teach. Women, as they are to be no
Speakers in the Church, so neither are they to be disputers of controversies of
the Church. Holy Bernard pleasantly glanced at these, when on a time entering a
Church, wherein the image of our Lady was erected, he was saluted by the Image
in this manner, Good morrow Bernard; which device having quickly discovered,
perceiving some person to be purposely enclosed in it, he forthwith replied:
Your Ladyship has forgot your self; Women should be no Speakers in the
Church. In one word, as modesty gives the best grace to your behavior, so
moderation of Speech to your discourse. Silence in a Woman is a moving
Rhetoric, winning most, when in words it wooeth least. Now, to give Speech
and Silence their distinct attributes or personal Characters, we may gather
their several tempers by the several effects derived from them. Ambros. in
lib. de offic. Greg. in mor*
More shall we see fall into sin by Speech then Silence: Yea, whosoever
intends himself to speak much, seldom observes the course of doing what is
just.

In the whole current of your discourse, let no light subject have any place
with you: this, as it proceeds from a corrupt and indisposed heart, so it
corrupts the hearer. Likewise, beware of selfe-prayse; it argues you have slow
neighbors, or few deserts. Let not calumny run descant on your tongue: it
discovers your passion too much; in the mean time, venting of your spleen
affords no cure to your grief, no salve to your sore. If opportunity give your
sex argument of discourse; let it neither taste of affectation, for that were
servile; nor touch upon any wanton relation, for that were uncivil; nor any
State-politicall action, for the height of such a subject, compared with your
weakness, were unequal. If you affect Rhetoric, let it be with that
familiarity expressed, as your plainness may witness for you, that you do
not affect it. This will make your Speech seem gracious to the Hearer,
confer a native modesty on the Speaker, and free you of all prejudicate
censure.

HABIT.
THere is nothing which moves us more to pride it in sin, then that which was
first given us to cover our shame. The fruit of a Tree made man a sinner; and
the leaves of a Tree gave him a cover. In your Habit is your modesty best
expressed; your dispositions best discovered. The Habit of the mind is
discerned by the state or posture of the body; the condition or quality of the
body by the Habit, which either adds or detracts from her beauty. As we
cannot probably imagine such to have modest minds, who have immodest eyes; so
can we not properly say such women to be modest matrons, or professors of
piety, who in their attire show arguments of their immodesty. It skils not
much, for the quality of your habits, whether they be silken or woollen, so they
be civil and not wanton. For albeit, some have affirmed that all gorgeous
attire is the attire of sin, the quality of the person may seem to extenuate
the quality of that sin. For noble and eminent personages were in all times
admitted to wear them; and to be distinguished by them: Neither, indeed, is
the sumptuousness of the habit so reprehensive, as the phantasticknesse of the
habit in respect of the form or fashion. It is this which derogates higly from
the repute of a Christian, to see her affect variety and inconstancy of attire,
more then ever did Pagan. There is nothing which introduces more effeminacy
into any flourishing State, then vanity in habit. Where we may observe
fashion, many times, so long affected, till all fashion become exiled. Surely,
whatsoever our lighter disposed Curtezans think, it is Civility which adds
most grace; Decency which expresses best state; and Comeliness in attire,
which procures most love. Other habits, as they display the mind of the wearer,
so are they subjects of laughter or contempt to any discreet beholder. Time is
too precious to be made a Pageant or Morris on. These misconceived ornaments
are mere deformities to good minds. Virtuous and discreet Matrons would be
loath to wear ought that might give least scandal or offense to their sex.
Foreign fashions are no bai^s to catch them, nor phantasticke, rather
phanaticke dressings to delude them. They cannot eye that habit which deserves
approving, nor that attire which merits loving, where Civility is not pattern.
Decency is their choycest Every, Cic. in lib. de leg.
which sets them forth above all Embroyderie. There was an ancient Edict
amongst the Romans, purposely to rid the State of all useless loyterers, that
no Roman should go through the streets of the City, unless he carried with
him the badge or signal of that trade whereby he lived: insomuch, that Marc.
Aurelius, speaking of the diligence of the Romans, gives them this deserving
testimony, That all of them followed their labor. Now I marvel, whether upon
due survey of all those Artizans, either Periwig, Gregorian-maker, or
Tyre-woman, had any set place or proper vocation, or what badges they might
bear to signify their profession. Would not these newfound Artists have been
rather derided then approved, geered then applauded? Sure, Rome was more civil
then to give way to so contagious an evil. Vesta had her maidens, so had
Viriplaca her Matrons; but neither of their followers could admit of any new
minted fashions. That Lady City had never soveragniz'd over so many rich
States, swelling Empires, victorious Princes, had she exposed her self to
such vanity, which had been the greatest Eclipse to her spreading glory.

To you let me bend my discourse, whose more generous parts confer more true
beauty on themselves, then these outward fopperies can ever do: do not betray
your names to suspicion. The Chaplet of fame is not reserved for Wantons, nor
such as suit themselves to the habit of lightness; for these add one degree
more to their sexes weakness: but for such women as array themselves in comely
apparel, 1 Timothy 2.9, 10.
with shamefastness and modesty, not with braided hair, or gold, or pearls,
or costly apparel. But, as becomes women that profess the fear of God. 1
Pet. 3.5.
For even after this manner, in time past, did the holy women, which trusted in
God, tire themselves. Here you have a direct platform, how to attire your
selves outwardly; suting your civil habit with variety of sweet graces
inwardly. Let not then these Spidercauls delude you, discretion will laugh at
them, modesty loath them, Decency contemn them. Loose bodies sort best with
these adulterate beauties. Those, whose conversation is in heaven, though they
so journe here on earth; Those, whose erected thoughts sphere them in an
higher Orb then this Circle of frailty; Those, whose spotless affections have
devoted their best service to goodness, and made Modesty the exact mold of all
their actions, cannot endure to stoop to such braine-sicke Lures. And such are
you, whose generous descent, as it claymes precedence of others, so should your
virtuous demeanor in these four distinct subjects, GATE, LOOK, SPEECH,
HABIT, improve your esteem above others. In Gate, by walking humbly; in Look,
by disposing it demurely; in Speech, by delivering it moderately; in Habit, by
attiring your selves modestly: all which, like four choice borders, perfumed
with sweetest odours, will beautify those lovely lodges of your souls with
all Decency. Mean while, imprint these Divine motions in your memory. And
first for the first, hold this tenet; To walk, walking to meditate, meditating
to make the subject of it your Maker, is the best portion of the Creature: for
the second, to fix your eye with that indifferency on the Creature, as it never
avert your contemplative eye from your Creator: for the third, to direct your
Speech to the benefit of the hearer, and to avoid impertinences for
conscience sake far more then censure: for the fourth and last, to make
choice of that Habit, whose Civility may do you honor, and publish you
examples of Decency to any discreet or temperate beholder.

Decency the attractivest motive of affection.
WHat is it that conveyes more affection to the heart, then Decency in the
object we affect? The Spouse in the Canticles was black, but comely; and this
gave praise to her beauty. A straid look may move affection in a light heart,
but in a virtuous mind it begets hate. Truth is, in this disordered age, where
the best shot to be discharged is the Tavern bill, the best Alarm is the
sounding of healths, and the most absolute March is reeling; discretion has
received such a maime, as affection is seldom measured by what we are, but
what we wear. Vanity has set up her Flagge; and more fresh water soldiers
desire to fight under her Banner, then the Ensign of honor. But all this
works little upon a constant and rightly-tempered disposition. Such an one
plants there his love, where with comfort he may live. Do you think that a
jetting Gate, a leering Look, a glibbery Tongue, or gaudy Attire can move
affection in any one worthy your love? Sure no; he deserves a light one for
his choice, who makes his choice by one of these. To be an admirer of one of
these, were to prefer in his choice a May-marrian before a Modest Matron. Now
there are some fashions which become one incomparably more than another: the
reason whereof may be imputed either to the native propriety of the party
using that form, habit, or complement; or else to the quality of the person,
which makes the fashion used, infinitely more gracious. For the first, you
shall never see any thing imitated, but it seems the imitator worst at the
first: Habit will bring it into a second nature; but till such time as custom
has matur'd it, many imperfections will usually attend it. Whereas, whatsoever
is naturally inbred in us, will best beseem and adorn us; it needs no other
face than what nature gave it, and would generally become worse, were it never
so little enforced. For the second, as in any Theatrall presentment, what
becomes a Peer or Potentate, would not sort with the condition of any
inferior substitute; every one must be suited to the person he presents: So
in the Theater of state, distinct fashions both in Habit and Complement are to
be retained, according to the place wherein he is ranked. Lucrece, no doubt,
stamped a deeper impression of affection in the heart of her beholder, by
addressing her self to hous-wivery and purple-spinning, than others could ever
do with their reere bankets and riotous spending. All are not of Aegystus
mind, who was taken with a Complement of lightness. This argued, that a
youthful heat had rather surpised his amorous heart, than any discreet
affection preferred him to his choice. But how vading is that love, which is so
lightly grounded? To what dangerous overtures is it exposed? Where Virtue is
not directrice in our choice, our inconstant minds are ever prone to change.
We find not what we expected; nor digest well what we formerly affected;
All is out of square, because discretion contrived not the building. To repair
this breach, and make the Object we once entertained, ever beloved: Let
nothing give us Content, but what is decent. This is the Habit, Gentlewomen,
which will best become you to be wooed in, and content a discreet Suitor most
to have you woone in. All others are neither worth viewing, wooing, weighing,
nor wearing. Rich Jewels, the more we look on them, the more are we taken
with them. Such Jewels, are modest women, whose countenance promises
goodness, an enforced smile native bashfulnesse, every posture such tokens of
Decency and comeliness, as Caius Tarquinius in his Caia could conceive no
fuller happiness: She, I say, who made wool and purple her days task, and
this her constant impreze, Where thou art Caius, I am Caia. Conform then your
generous Dispositions to a Decency of fashion, that you may attract to your
selves, and beget in others, motives of affection.

Fountains run by many winding and mazie Currents into one maine River;
Decency the smoothest path that leads to perfection.
Rivers by sundry Channels into one maine Ocean. Several ways direct
passengers into one City; but one only way guides man to the heavenly City.
This way is Virtue, which like some choice confection sweetens the difficulty
of every Occurrent that encounters her in her quest after Perfection. Of all
those Cardinal Virtues, it is Temperance only which seasons and gives them a
virtuous relish. Which Virtue dilates it self to several branches; all which
bud forth into one savoury fruit or other. It is true, that he who is every
way Complete, may be properly styled an absolute man. But what is it which
makes him Complete? It is not a served face, an artfull Cringe, or an
Italionate ducke that deserves so exquisite a title. Another age will
discountenance these, and cover these Complete formalists with dust. No,
Ladies; it is something that partakes of a more Divine Nature, than a mere
Complementall gesture. If you would aspire to perfection, observe the mean,
that you may attain the end. Temperance you cannot embrace, if Decency be
estranged from your choice. If temperate, you cannot choose but be decent: for
it includes an absolute moderation of our desires in all subjects.

Come then, Gentlewomen, love to be decent, and that will teach you the best
Complement. You have that in you, which, divinely employed, will truly ennoble
you. Your descent may give you an higher ascent by way of precedence before
others, but this you cannot appropriate to your own deserts, but that Nobility
of blood which is derived to you by others. Labor to have something of your
own, which you may challenge to be yours properly, without any help of an
ancient pedigree. How well does it seem you, to express a civil decent state
in all your actions? You are in the eyes of many, who precisely observe you,
and desire to imitate whatsoever they note observable in you. You may then
become excellent patterns unto others, by reteining decency, and entertaining
her for your follower. She will make you appear gracious in their sight,
whose judgments are pure and uncorrupted; howsoever our Corkie censurers
traduce you, your fame cannot be blemished, nor the odor of those virtues
which so sweetly chafe and perfume you, decayed. Decency attended you in your
life, and the memory of your virtues shall crown you after death. Aug.
Soliloq. cap* 35.
Even there, Where youth never ageth, life never ends, beauty never fades,
love never fails, health never vadeth, joy never decreaseth, grief is never
felt, groans are never heard, no object of sorrow to be seen, gladness ever
to be found, no evil to be feared. Yea, the King shall take pleasure in your
beauty, and at your end invest you with endless glory* Prize not then the
censure of sensual man, for he is wholly set on vanity; but fix your eyes on
him, who will cloth you with eternity. Sen. de vita beata.
Let this be your Crown of comfort, that many are improved by your Example,
many weaned from sin, many won to Sion. By sowing the seed of goodness,
that is, by giving good examples, expressed best by the effectual works of
faith, you shall reap a glorious harvest. Actions of goodness shall live in
you, and cause all good men to love you. Whereas, those are to be esteemed
worst, who not only use things evilly in themselves, but likewise toward
others. For, of so many deaths is every one worthy, as he has left examples
of naughtiness unto posterity. Aug. M^d ^.4. Greg. in mor.
Let virtues then be stayres to raise you; an improved fame the rudder to
steer you; these will add unto your honor, seat you above the reach of
Censure, and join you individually to your best Lover.

THE ENGLISH GENTLEVVOMAN.
Argument.
Estimation, a Gentlewomans highest prize; how it may be discerned to be real;
how superficial: how it may be impregnably preserved; how irreparably lost:
The absolute end, whereto it chiefly aspires, and wherein it cheerfully rests.

ESTIMATION.
ESTIMATION is a good opinion drawn from some probable grounds: Estimation, a
Gentlewomans highest prize.
An unvaluable gemm^, which every wise Merchant, who tenders his honor,
prefers before life. The loss of this makes him an irreparable Bankrupt. All
persons ought to rate it high, because it is the value of themselves, though
none more dearly then those, in whom modesty, and a more impressive fear of
disgrace usually lodge. These, so cautelous are they of suspicion, as they will
not engage their good names to purchase affection. Public resorts, because
they may corrupt, they avoid; Privacy they consort with, and in it converse
with their own thoughts, whether they have in them ought that may betray them.
They observe what in others deserves approvement, and this they imitate; with
an incorrupt eye they note others defects, which they make use of as a caveat.
For, as life is a Globe of examples; so these make the pious examples of
others, the Models or Patterns of their life's. Pure is their mold, but far
purer the temper of their mind. Fame they hold the sweetest flower that ever
grew near the border of Time. Which, lest either it should wither for want of
moisture, or wanting warmth should lose its vigor, they bedew it with gracious
affects, and renew it with zealous resolves. Descent, as they draw it from
others, so would they improve it in themselves. Ancient houses, now and then,
stand in need of props and pillars; these would they have supplied with the
Cardinal virtues.

These are Emblemes of your selves ( Noble Ladies) who so highly tender your
honor, as Estimation gains you more then what your bloods gave you. For this
is inherent and primitive, whereas the other is descendent and derivative. It
is a Princely command of your affections, which mounts you to this height of
goodness: distinguishing betwixt blind love, and discreet affection. Pleasure
cannot make you so forgetful of your honor, as to deprive you of that in a
moment, which you shall never recover. Virtue has taken that seazure of you,
as no light thought can seize on you, or dispossess her of that claim she
has in you. Treacherous Tarpeia's may be taken with gifts; but your honor is
of too high an estimate to suffer the least blemish for reward. You observe
what stains have laid, and do yet lie upon many ancient families by means of
attainders in their Progenitors. Their bloods (say we) were corrupted, whereby
their estates became confiscated, their houses from their lineall successors
estranged, and they to lasting infamy exposed. Certainly, though not in so
high degree (for these were Capital) many families have received deep stains
from light actions; which neither time, though never so aged, could wear out,
nor the living exploits of their noble successors wipe off. For the highest
family sticks ever upon it the deepest infan^y, when at any time stained: and
diffuseth her beams with fullest glory, where it is by piety graced. Vice has
ever been of a deeper dye then virtue; and the memory of the one commonly
survives the fame of the other. Wounds, when they are healed, leave their
scarres behind them: Paths retain their prints. Your memory shall neither
receive life from that noble blood which sprinkles in you, nor from any
monumentall shrine which may her eafter cover you, but from those precious
odours of your ever-living virtues, which shall eternize you. These are of
power to make such as long since dyed, and whose unequalled beauty is for many
ages since to ashes turned, retain a flourishing fame in the grateful memory
of the living.

Penelope for spending chaste her days,
As worthy as Ulysses was of praise.
A daily siege she suffered, and in her Conquest equal was she to those
victorious Peers of Greece, who made Troy their triumph. Estimation was her
highest prize. Suitors she got, yet amidst these, was not her Ulysses forgot.
Long absence had not estranged her affection; youthful consorts could not move
in her thoughts the least distraction; neither could opportunity induce her to
give way to any light action.

Well might Greece then esteem her Penelope of more lasting fame then any
Pyramid that ever she erected. Her unblemished esteem was of far purer
stuff then any Ivory statue that could be reared. Nor was Rome less beholden
to her Lucrece, who set her honor at so high a price, as she held death too
light to redeem such a prize.

Though force, frights, foes, and furies gazed upon her,
These were no wounds but wonders to her honor.
The presence of a Prince no less amorous then victorious, could not win
her; though with him price, prayer, and power did jointly woo her. Well
deserved such two modest Matrons the choice Embraces of two such heroicke
Champions, as might equal their constant Loves with the tender of their
dearest lives. And two our Histories afford, whom succeeding fame has recorded
eminent, because double Conquerours, both of Cities and of themselves; puissant
and continent. This noble testimony we receive of Scipio, that being a young
man of twenty four years of age, in the taking of a City in Spain, he
repressed the slaming heat of his youthful desires, when a beautiful maid was
brought him, restoring her to a young man called Allutius, to whom she was
espoused, with a great reward. Right worthy was he to conquer another, who
could with such temper subdue himself: such good success has ever attended
on these Moral virtues, Tit. Live. lib. 4. cap. 11.
though professed by Pagans. The other Hero was rightly AUGUSTUS both in name
and nature; and wheresoever, you look, a victorious CAESAR. Cleopatra kneeled
at his feet, laid baits for his eyes; but in vain; her beauties were beneath
that Princes chastity.

Absolute Commanders were these Heroicke Princes of their affections, yet a
far more singular argument of his composed disposition, and of Moral, if not
Divine Mortification, showed that young man SPVTIMIA in Valerius Maximus, whose
beauty did so incomparably become him, as it occasioned many women to lust
after him: which this noble youth no sooner perceived, then he purposely
wounded his face, that by the scarre he sustained, his beauty might become
more blemished, and consequently all occasion of lusting after it, clearly
removed. This might be instanced in one of your own Sex; a religious
votaresse, whose chaste bosom was a sacred Recluse dedicated to goodness: and
who upon the encounter of a lascivious Lover, returned this answer: Sir, I
honor you so much, as I have chosen rather to suffer, then by my tyrannous
beauty to make you a Prisoner: Wherewith discovering her face, in complexion
much altered, by some impostured colors, which she had caused to be laid
upon it: he vowed to relinquish his suit, imagining that she had poisoned her
face, to waine him from his impure affection. This he had no sooner said, then
she ran to a Spring near adjoining to wash it off: See, said she, I am the
same I was; but you are much better: for now you are brought to see your
error, in being so much taken with a skin-deepe beauty, which only consists
in dye and color.

Now ( Gentlewomen) if you make Estimation your highest prize; if you prefer
honor before pleasure, or what else is dear or tender; your fame will find
wings to ^ly with. This will gain you deserving Suitors. Portion may woo a
worlding; Proportion a youthful Wanton; but it is Virtue that wins the heart
of discretion.

Surely, I have seldom known any make this esteem of honor, and dye a
contemptible beggar. Such as have been prodigal of it, have felt the misery
of it; whereas, a chaste mind has ever had something to succor and support
it. Thus you see what this inward beauty is, which if you enjoy, you sit far
above the reach of Calumny; age cannot taint it, nor youth tempt it. It is the
Estimation within you, that so confines you, as you hate that place which gives
opportunity, that person which makes importunity his agent to lay siege to your
Chastity.

Now we are to descend to the second branch, wherein we are to show you how
this Estimation, which is your highest prize, may be discerned to be real;
which is not gathered by the first appearance, but a serious and constant
trial.

IN Philosophy, a man begins with experience, and then with belief; but in
Divinity, we must first begin in faith, and then proceed to knowledge. True
it is, that the Sun, Moon, and Stars become subject to vanity; yet charity
bids me believe, that there are many beauteous and resplendent Stars in this
our Firmament, many fresh fragrant Roses in this our enclosed Garden of Albion,
who have preserved their beauty without touch, their honor without taint.
Where, if vanity did touch them, yet did it not so seize on them, as to
disfigure or transform them. You ( noble Gentlewomen) are those Stars, whose
glory can never be eclipsed, so long as your Estimation lives unstained; you
are those fragrant Roses, whose beauty cannot be tainted, so long as your
stalk of honor grows untouched. Now, to the end that your luster many not
be like to that of the Gloworme, How Estimation may be discerned to be real.
nor rotten wood, which is merely imaginary, compared with that is real; you
are not to make fair and glorious pretenses, purposely to gull the world, and
cast a mist before the eyes of bleered judgments. You may find maskes to
shroud your face; but no shroud to enskreane you from the eye of Heaven. No,
you are to be really, what you appear outwardly. These that walk in the
Clouds, though they deceive others much, yet they deceive themselves most.
Observe then this rule of direction; it will accomplish you more then any
outward ornament that Art can bestow on you; Be indeed what you desire to be
thought. Are you Virgins? dedicate those inward Temples of yours to chastity;
abstain from all corrupt society; inure your hands to works of piety, your
tongues to words of modesty. Let not a straid look tax you of lightness, nor
a desire of gadding impeach you of wantonness. The way to win an husband is
not to woo him, but to be wooed by him. Let him come to you, not you to him.
Proferred ware is not worth the buying. Your states are too pure, to be set at
sale; too happy, to be weary of them. So long as you live as you are, so your
minds be pure, you cannot possibly be poor. You have that within you, will
enrich you, so you conform your minds to your means. In the discourse of
virtues, and true estimate of them, none was ever held more excellent then that
which is found in chaste youth. You are Conquerours in that, wherein the
greatest Conquerours have failed. Your chaste paths are not traced with
wandering desires; your private Chambers arras'd with amorous passions; you
spinne not out the tedious night in Ah mee's.

Your repast finds no hinderance in digestion; your harmless repose no
love-sicke distraction. Others you may command; by none commanded. Others will
vow their service unto you; while you are from all servitude freed. Live then
worthy the freedom of so noble a Condition; for your Virgin state wants
nothing that may enlarge her freedom. Again, are you Wives? you have attained
an honorable state; and by it made partakers of that individuate union, where
one soul rules two hearts, and one heart dwells in two bodies. You cannot
suffer in that, wherein you have not one share. Grief by your Consort is
allayed; joy by partaking with him is augmented. You have now taken upon you to
become Secretaries to others as well as your selves; but being one and the same
with your selves, do not betray their trust, to whose trust you have
recommended your selves. Imagine now (to recall to memory an ancient Custom)
that you have broken the axletree of your Coach at your door; you must be no
more straglers. These walking Burses and moveable Exchanges, sort not with the
constancy of your Condition. You must now intend the growth and proficience of
those Olive branches about your table. Like a curious and continuate builder,
you must ever address your selves to one work or other. From their infancy to
their youth. from their youth to their maturer growth. For the first, I know
well that distich to be most true: A mother to be Nurse, that is great and
fair,
Is now held base: True Mothers they be rare.


But far was it from those ancient heroicke Ladies, to think this to be
either a disgrace to their place, or a blemish to their beauty. Their names are
by aged Annals memorized, and shall by these of ours be revived. Such were
Cornelia, the mother of Gracchus, and Vetruria of Coriolanus; who became
examples of goodness and chastity; Educating their children which they had
brought up from their own breasts, with the milk of morality.

The like did Portia the wife of Brutus; Cleobula the daughter of Cleobulus,
one of the seven Sages of Greece; Sulpitia the wife of Calenus, who not only
instructed her children which she had tenderly nursed, with excellent precepts
while she lived, but left sundry memorable instructions, as Legacies or
Mothers blessings to them, when she dyed. Hortensia, the excellent daughter of
a most eloquent Orator, deserved no less fame, for her motherly care in
nursing and breeding, her ability in copious and serious discoursing, her
gravity in composing and digesting such golden sentences, as she afterward
recommended to the perusal of her surviving Children. Edesia borne at
Alexandria, far excelled others in profundity of learning, and piety of
living; she was admired by such as lived in her time: performing the office of
a Nurse in her childrens infancy, of a Guardian in their minority, of a Sage
Counselor in their maturity.

Paulina the wife of Seneca, as she was excellently seasoned with the precepts
of her husband, so she surceas'd not from commending them to the practice of
those children she had by her husband. Whence it was, that Seneca bemoaned the
ignorance of his mother, for that she had not so exactly observed the precepts
of his Father: by reflecting upon his Paulina, who was so serious an observer
and improver of the Directions of her husband. What shall I speak of Theano,
the daughter of Metapontus? Phemone, who was first that ever composed heroicke
verse? Corinnathia, who exceeded the Poet Pindarus in her curious and artfull
measures; and contending flue several times with him for the Garland?
Argentaria Pollia, the wife of Lucan; whom she is reported to have assisted in
those his high and heroicke composures? Zenobia the Queen of Palmira, who
learned both the Greek and Latin tongue, and compiled an Excellent History;
approving her self no less a constant wife to her husband, then a nursing
Mother to her children? Theodosia the younger daughter of the virtuous and
victorious Theodosius; no less renowned for her learning and other exquisite
endowments of mind, than by being inaugurated with an imperial title, to
which she was afterward advanced. The Centons of Homer she composed, and
into one volume reduced, which to her surviving glory were after published.
Diodorus Logicus his five daughters, all which excelled in learning and
chastity, and left memorials of their motherly care to their posterity.

These were tender Nurses, careful Mothers, reverend Matrons. Or to give them
that title which antiquity has bestowed on them; they were in so dark and
cloudy a time, patterns of piety, presidents of purity, champions of chastity,
mirrours of modesty, jewels of integrity: Women (to use Plutarchs words) so
devoted to contemplating, as they conceived no delight in dancing; yet could
not contemplation estrange them from performing such proper offices as did
concern them. They knew what it was to obey; that it was not fit for an
inferior member to command the head, nor for them to soveraignize over their
husbands. What had sometimes been taught them by their Mothers, they now
carefully recommend to the serious review of their Daughters: Sen-in Octov.
Wives with obedience husbands should subdue,
For by this means they will be subdued to you.


Thus learned they the duty of a wife, before they aspired to that title:
conform your selves to their examples: the cloud which kept them from a full
view of their condition, is in respect of you, dispersed; your eyes are
cleared, not with any Pagan error filmed. Be then in this your Christian
conjugall Pilgrimage so conformed, that as with increase of days, so with
approvement of deserts you may be confirmed.

Again, are you widows? you deserve much honor, if you be so indeed. This
name both from the Greek and Latin has received one consonant Etymology;
deprived or destitute. Great difference then is there betwixt those widows who
live alone, and retire themselves from public concourse, and those which
frequent the company of men. For a widow to love society, albeit her intentions
relish nothing but sobriety, gives speedy wings to spreading infamy. Saint
Hierom writing to Eustachia, gives her this counsel; If thou shall find any
question in Scripture, harder then thou can well resolved; demand
satisfaction from such an one, who is of a most approved life, ripe age; that
by the integrity of his person, thou may be secured from the least
aspersion: for in popular concourse and Court-resorts there is no place for
widows: for in such meetings she exposes her honor to danger, which above
all others she ought incomparably to tender. Yea, but, will you object, admit
our inheritance, family, fortunes, and all lie a bleeding, may we not make
recourse to public Courts, for redress of our public wrongs? What of all
this? Do not complain that you are desolate or alone. Modesty affects
silence and secrecy; a chaste woman solitariness and privacy. If you have
business with the Judge of any Court, and you much fear the power of your
adversary, employ all your care to this end, that your faith may be grounded
in those promises of Christ: Your Lord makes intercession for you, rendering
right judgment to the Orphane, and righteousness unto the widow. Besides, ye
have Courts for righting Widows and redressing Orphans; where those very
Impreze's wrought in their Cushions, cannot choose but be like so many
representative Hieroglyphics or useful Memorialls of Justice, to render to
your just complaints and injurious pressures convenient solace.

This inestimable inheritance of Chastity is incomparably more to be esteemed,
and with greater care preserved by Widows then Wives: albeit, by these neither
to be neglected, but highly valued. Out of that ancient experience which time
has taught them, their own observations informed them, and the reverence of
their condition put upon them; they are to instruct others in the practice of
piety; reclaim others from the paths of folly, and with a virtuous convoy
guide them to glory. It would less become them to trick and trim themselves
gaudily or gorgeously, then young girls, whose beauty and outward ornament is
the hope and anchor-hold of their preferment: for by these do they their
husbands seek, and hope in time to get what they seek. Whereas, it were much
more commendable for widows neither to seek them, nor, being offered, to
accept them: lest enforced by necessity, or won by importunacy, or giving way
to their frailty, they make exchange of their happy estate for a continuate
scene of misery. A widow ought to pray fervently, to exercise works of
devotion frequently, that the benefit of her prayer may redound to her
effectually and fruitfully; and not return back from the throne of God drily
or emptily. For I would (according to Menanders opinion) have a widow not only
to demean her self chastely and honestly, but likewise to give examples of
her blameless life to such as hear her instructions attentively. For she
ought to be as a Glass to young Maids, wherein they may discern their crimes.

Now I hold her a chaste Widow, who though she have opportunity to do it, and
be suited by importunity unto it, yet will not suffer her breast to harbor an
unchaste thought, or consent unto it. In that Country where I was borne (says
Lud. Vives) we usually term such widows the greatest associates and
assistants of vices, whose too much delicacy in bringing up their children,
makes them oft-times depraved, and to all inordinate liberty addicted.
Wherefore, I approve well of their course, who recommend the care of their
children to some discreet and well-disposed person. For such is the too tender
affection of mothers toward their children, and so much are they blinded with
the love of them, as they think they treat them too roughly, albeit they
embrace them never so tenderly.

Saint Hierome writing unto Salvina, says; The chastity of a woman is frail
and fading, like a flower quickly perishing and vading, with the least gust or
blast of adverse Fortune failing, if not falling: especially, where her age is
apt for vice, and the authority of her husband wants to afford her advice; from
whose assistance, her honor derives her best succor and supportance. Who, if
she have a great family, many things are required of her, and to be found in
her, to minister supply to the necessity of time, and use of affairs, wherein
she stands interessed. Requisite therefore it were, that she made choice of
some one discreetly ripe both in years and inward gifts, by whose honest
integrity her family might be better managed, with more diligence attended,
and to the woman less occasion of disgrace objected.

For I have known very many women, who, albeit they spent their days
continually within their own doors, yet have fallen into reproach, either by
some persons observing them, or of their own families disposed by them; for
suffering their servants go abroad too neatly, arguing thereby a neglect of
their family: so as the handmaids pride brought her Mistress into suspicion of
contemning her honor. Which proceeded, as may be probably gathered, from the
subtilty of some quick Conceits, imagining that the Maids knowledge of her
Mistress lightness (to purchase her secrecy and connivence) advanced her to
such neatness.

Sure it is, that an honest woman, who^e fame is her highest prize, requires
nothing else, desires nothing else, than to satisfy her husbands bequest,
though dead: honoring him with a due Commemoration and admiration of his
virtues: for the lives of those that dye, consist in the memory of those that
live. So did Anthonia the daughter of Marc. Anthony, and wife to Drusus:
leading all the remainder of her life with her stepmother, and reteining
always the remembrance of her dead husband. The like did Livia, who left both
her house and land, that she might dwell under one roof with Noemia: fearing,
perhaps, lest the Maids of her family growing too lasciviously wanton and
inordinate, might by their lightness prejudice her honor, which she
incomparably valued above any treasure.

See you not here by our discourse ( Gentlewomen) what excellent Lights darted
out from those dark times! Estimation was their best portion; nothing of
equal prize unto it choycest Virtues were their. Ornaments, which they
preserved with such constancy, as fear of death could not deprive them of
them, though after death they had scarce the least glimpse of immortality.

Thus have we traced over these three Conditions, which we have stored with
precepts, strengthened with examples, sweetened with choycest sentences; that
this real Estimation, whereof we treat, might be discerned; and that
Superficial Esteem, whereon we are now to insist, discovered.

MAny desire to appear most to the eye, How Estimation may be discerned to be
superficial.
what they are least in heart. They have learned artfully to gull the world
with apparances; and deceive the time, wherein they are Maskers, with vizards
and semblances. These can enforce a smile, to persuade you of their affability;
counterfeit a blush, to paint out their modesty; walk alone, to express their
love to privacy; keep their houses, to publish them provident purveyors for
their family; receive strangers, to demonstrate their love to hospitality.
Their speech is minced, their pace measured, their whole posture so cunningly
composed, as one would imagine them terrestrial Saints at least, whereas they
are nothing less than what they most appear. Some you shall observe so
demure, as in their Salutes they forbear to express that freedom of Curtsie,
which civil custom exacts of them. Those true Trojan Dames, to pacify their
incensed husbands, could find a lip to procure them love, and supple their
contracted look. Whereas, these civilized Dames, either out of a reservancy of
state, or desire to be observed, scorn to be so familiarly demeaned; as if
they renounced antiquity, and sought by all means, that such Customs as plead
prescription, might be reversed. Their Lip must be their Cheek; which as
it reteines a better tincture, so many times a sweeter savor.

At these, the Poet no less pleasingly than deservedly glanced in this Sonnet:
Tell me what is Beauty? Skin;
Pure to the eye, but poor within.
What Is a kiss of that pure fair?
But Loves Lure, or Adons snaire.
Nectar-balme did Adon sippe
Not from Venus cheek but lip.
Why should then Loves beauty seek,
To change lip unto her cheek?


All which he elegantly clozeth in opposition to himself, with these
continuate Stanza's: Cheek shall I check, because I may not taste it?
No; Nature rather; who to the eye so placed it,
As none can view it, but he must draw near it;
O make the Chart familiar, or else tear it!


To puchase improvement of esteem by these means, were to swim against the
stream. Discretion cannot approve of that for good, which self opinion or
singularity only makes good. These are but Superficial shows, which procure
more contempt than repute, more derision than ground of esteem. It is not a
civil habit, a demure look, a staid gate that deserves this report, unless
all these be seconded with a resolved soul, and a religious heart. Those who
dedicate themselves to the service of virtue, prefer the pith before the
rind, substance before appearance. What can be safe, will these say with
Lucretius, to any woman, if she prostitute her honor, or make it common? Good
women, as they labor to avoid all occasion of scandal, so much more any act
that may give breath to scandal. Civil they are in heart and habit; Constant
in the profession of virtue.

For others, they imitate the Whoorish Woman, who wipes her mouth, and says,
Who sees me? So they carry themselves charily, they care not how little
chastely. There is none looks through the Chinke to see them, none in presence
to hear them; freely therefore may they commit, what shall afterward shame
them. Let me then direct my Speech to these whited walls, who make pretenses
their best attendants, immaske their Impudence with the Veil of darkness.

Tell me, ye deluded daughters, is there any darkness so thick and
palpable, that the piercing eye of heaven cannot spy you through it? O, if ye
hope by sinning secretly to sin securely, you shall be forced to say unto
your God, as Ahab says unto Elijah: Have hou found me, O mine Enemy? Nay, O
God terrible and dreadful, thou have found me. And then let me ask you in
the same terms that the young Gallant in Erasmus asked his wanton Mistress:
Are you not ashamed to do that in the sight of God and before his holy Angels,
which you are ashamed to do in the sight of men? Sins may be without danger
for a time, but never without fear. Stand then as in the presence of God:
redeem the time you have lost; love that which you have hitherto loathed;
loath that which you have hitherto loved. Know that these Superficial
Complementors, are hypocritical Courtiers; these formal Damazens, professed
Curtezans. You must not hold Religion to be mere Complement. I will not say,
but the bleered eye of humane reason may be taken with these; and conceive
them real, which are only Superficial: But the All-seeing eye cannot be
deceived; he sees not as man sees. Neither distance of place, nor resemblance
of that Object, whereon his eye is fixed, can cause him to mistake. The bowels
of the Earth are unto him as the Surface; be it your resolve to compose your
selves, ever as in his presence: considering, how in chastising you he does
but justice, and in sparing you he shows his patience.

Would you then be Courtiers, graced in the highest Court? Throw away
whatsoever is Superficial; and entertain what will make you Divinely real.
It is not seeming goodness that will bring you to the fountain of all
goodness. The Fig Tree brought forth leaves, yet because it yielded no
fruit, it was cursed. Do ye blossom? So does every Hypocrite. Do ye bring
forth fruits? So does a Christian. What is it to purchase Estimation on earth,
and lose it in heaven? This will sleep in dust, but that never. Your highest
task should be how to promote Gods honor, and to esteem all things else a
slavish and servile labor. Thus by seeming what you are, and really expressing
what you seem, you shall purchase that esteem with God and good men, which is
real, by shunning ostentation, which would set such a vading gloss on all
your actions, as they will seem merely Superficial.

A Discreet Commander will take no less care in manning and mannaging the Fort
he has won, How Estimation may be impregnably preserved.
than in winning it. It is a constant maxim; There is no less difficulty in
keeping than getting. Some are more able to get a victory, than skillful to use
it; Others have more art to use it, than courage to atchieve it; few or none so
accomplished, as propitiously to win it, and prudently to wear it.

We are now to suppose, that you (virtuous Ladies) to whom we address this
Labor, are victoriously seated in the Fort of honor, where beauty cannot be
planted, but it must be attempted. But so constantly gracious are your
resolves, that though it be assaulted, it can never be soiled; attempted but
never attainted. This you desire, and to this you hope to aspire. In the Port
or entrance of every Castle, City, or Cittadell, there uses some Percullas to
be in readiness, to frustrate the Enemies assault, and keep him from entry.
The like must you prepare, if you desire to have your honor secured, your
daring enemy repelled, and a glorious conquest purchased. And what must this
Spiritual Engine be, but a religious Constancy, to resist temptation; and all
the better to subdue it, to shun the occasion? I do not admit of any Parlies
over your walls; they give new breath to the beleaguer, and oft-times makes a
prey of the beleagured. If the assault be hot, devotion best fortifies the
hold. One Christian aspiration breathes comfort to the besieged, and promises
relief when she is most straightned. Of all arrows these which are darted by
the spirit of zeal, wound the enemy most, and procure the Archer best rest.
And that in all assaults whatsoever, plotted or practiced by so malicious a
Tempter.

Lactantius shows, Lactant. lib. 2. divin. ins^it. cap. 16.
that in his days, among many other examples of the weakness of Idolatry, in
the presence of Christianity, a silly Servingman that was a Christian,
following his Master into a certain Temple of Idols; the gods cried out, That
nothing could be well done, as long as that Christian was in presence. E^s^b.
l. 5. de prap. Evang.
The like records Eusebius of Dioclesian, the Emperor, who going to Apollo
for an Oracle; received answer; That the just men were the cause that he could
say nothing. Which just men Apollo's Priest interpreted to be meant ironically
of Christians: and thereupon Dioclesian began his most cruel and fierce
persecution in Eusebius days. Sozomines also writes, that Julian th'Apostata
endeavoring with many sacrifices and conjurations to draw an answer from Apollo
Daphnaus, in a famous place called Daphne, in the Suburbs of Antioch:
understood at last by the Oracle, that the bones of S. Babylas the Martyr, that
lay near to the place, were the impediment why that god could not speak. And
thereupon, Julian presently caused the same body to be removed. And finally,
hereof it proceeded, that in all sacrifices, conjurations, and other mysteries
of the Gentiles, Lucian. in Alex.
there was brought in that phrase recorded by scoffing Lucian; Exeant
Christiani; Let Christians depart: for that, while they were present, nothing
could be well accomplished.

Hence collect the force of a Christians presence; it extinguisheth the flame
of a Pagan sacrifice. Zealous thoughts, servent desires, devout affections will
suffer no diabolical assault to surprise you. Christian constancy will so arm
you; pious motions so inflame you; thoughts of heaven so transport you;
contempt of the world so weane you; as no object of delight can draw you from
contemplating him that made you. It will not be amiss, if now and then you
reflect on the constancy and resolution of ancient Heathens, who so highly
prized their honor, as it was their highest scorn to give way to an injurious
Usurper.

Camnia wife to Synattus survives to this day, as a Mirror of feminine
constancy; whom one Synoris, a man of greater authority then he, loved; and
making no small means to obtain her love, yet all in vain, he supposed the
readiest way for the effecting his desires, to be the murdering of her husband:
which he performed. This act of horror was no sooner executed, and by the robe
of his authority shrouded, then he renewed his suit, to which she seemingly
assented: but being solemnly come into the Temple of Diana, for celebrating
those Nuptial rites, she had a Potion ready, which she drank to Synoris:
wherewith they were both poisoned, to revenge her husbands death. Chiomara,
wife of Orgiagon, a petty king of that Province, upon discomfiture of the
Gallo-Graecians, being ravished by a Roman Captain, gave a memorable example
of Conjugall virtue; for she cut off the fellows head from his shoulders, and
escaping from her guard, L. Flor. lib. 2. cap. 11.
brought it to her Lord and husband. More then feminine was the resolution of
Epicharia, a Libertine of Rome, who made privy to a conspiracy against Nero,
to free her native mother of such a Monster, would not disclose the plotters
thereof, though tormented with exquisitest tortures. Near resemblance had
Leena's name with her Leonine nature, who being Conspirator against the Tyrant
Hyppeas, and nothing aghast at the death of her friends (though torn with
extremest torments) would not reveal her partners, but bit in sunder her own
tongue, and spit it in the Tyrants face. Or to instance you in subjects less
Tragical, but for constancy every way equal.

Armeniae, a noble Lady, being bidden to King Cyrus wedding, went thither with
her husband. At night, when they were returned home; her husband asked her, how
she liked the Bridegroom; whether she thought him to be a fair and
beautiful Prince or no? Truth, says she, I know not: for all the while I was
forth, I cast mine eyes upon no other, but they self. An excellent
Commandresse was this Lady of her affections: and no less imitable was she,
whom we are to instance next; for her modest and bashful covering of her
husbands infirmities. One of Hero's enemies reproaching him with a stinking
breath; went home and questioned his wife, why she told him not thereof: who
answered, She thought all men had the same savor.

Without question, there is nothing that adds more true glory to a woman, or
better preserves her esteem, then to retain a constancy in the quality or
disposition of her estate. Be she young or old, let her fame live ever fresh;
and like green Bays, most flourishing, when the winter of adversity is most
nipping. Virtue cannot exercise her own strength, nor express her own worth
without an Opposite. Spices send forth the sweetest smell, when they are most
bruised; and Palms spread the broadest, when they are soarest pressed.
Resolution without an assailant, would, in time, become effeminate. Yet, I must
tell you, it is dangerous to tempt either youth or age with motives of fancy,
or to give least way to a promising opportunity. You shall find secret
assacinates enough to undermine you, you need little to become your own
betrayers.

I have heard of a noble Lady in my time, whose descent and desert equally
proclaim her worth, so tender of the esteem of her honor, as she held it
scarce safe to receive any Letter from a great Personage, whose reputation was
touched by rumor. This was the way to preserve her honor impregnably, and to
rear it above the reach of Calumny. Neither are you to be cantelous only of
your Estimation in subjects of love and affection: but even in your domesticke
affairs, which trench upon your providence or expense. Your discretions in
these are brought to the Stage. Let not profuseness draw you to spend, where
honest providence bids you spare; nor niggardliness cause you to spare, where
reputation bids you spend. She deserves not to be governesse of an house, who
wants discretion to moderate her expense. Let her reflect upon her progeny,
intend her charge, and provide for her family. A good wife is compared to a
wise Merchant, who brings his traffic from a far. Now, a wise Merchant will
not have his Oar in every man's Boat, but will seriously address his care to
his own. Busy women would make ill Snayles, and worse house-wives; straglers
will never become good housekeepers.

To cloze this branch: so compose your affections at home and abroad, as
providence may express you care and charge in the one; a grave and reserved
reverence preserve your esteem in the other. As your lives are lines of
direction to your selves, so should they be arguments of instruction unto
others. Be you planted in what state soever, let your good report be your
greatest stake for ever: so may you reap what your virtues have deserved, and
keep your Estimation impregnably preserved.

NOne can preserve what he loves, How Estimation may be irreparably lost.
by mixing it with the society of that he loathes. The Ivye while it winds and
wreathes it self about the Plant, with an envious consumption decays the sap.
If you be companions to Ostridges, you shall favor of the wilderness.
Socrates called Envy an impostume of the soul: so may every corrupt affection
be properly termed. Vices love neighborhood, which, like infectious maladies,
do ever most hurt, when they draw nearest the heart.

There is nothing (Gentlewomen) that brings your Honor to a more desperate
hazard, then giving reins to your own desires. These must you subdue to the
sovereignty of reason, if you expect rest in your inward mansion. What better
fruits then ignominy may carnal liberty produce? When you make the Theater
your chiefest place of repose; phantasticke gallants, who never yet converst
with virtue, your choicest consorts; delicious viands, servants to your
liquorish appetites; what conclusion may we expect from such dangerous
premises? When modesty puts off her veil, and vanity begins to ruffle it in
sin; when chaste desires are chased out a breath, and lightness pleads
prescription; when vermillion has laid so deep a color on an impudent skin,
as it cannot blush with sense of her own shame; when Estimation becomes a word
of Complement, or carelessly worn like some over-cast raiment, valued as
painted Pageants do gilded Puppets, only for show? What prodigy fuller of
wonder, then to see a woman thus transformed from nature? Her face is not her
own, note her complexion; her eye is not her own, note her straid motion; her
habit is not her own, eye her strange fashion. Whilst loose wears imply
light works; and thin cobweb covers promise free admittance to all sensual
lovers. Yea, which is more, she holds it no shame to glory in sin, nor to
court vice in her own livery; all which she maintains to be complements of
gentility. Thus vice is ever in fashion, and keeps her gradation till she
aspire to the height of her building. She begins with conceit, seconds it with
consent, strengthens it with delight, and incorporates it with custom.

One of this rank have I oft-times observed tracing the streets of this
flourishing City; who, as one weary of her sex, forbore not to unwoman her
self, by assuming not only a virile habit, but a virago's heart. Quarrels
she would not stick to bind upon any fresh water Soldier, whose late
induction to the siege of Gallants, had not sufficiently informed him in that
posture. Nothing desired she more then to give affronts in public places,
which she did with that contempt, as the disgrace she aspersed on others, was
her sole content. Places of frequent were her Rendevou; where her imperious
tongue run descant on every subject ministered; her self she usually engaged
for a Second, upon least occasion offered. Now could these courses any way
choose but cause that to be irreparably lost, which by any modest woman should
be incomparably loved? Tell me, were not his spirit armor of proof, who
durst encounter with so courageous an Amazon? or enter nuptial lists with such
a feminine Myrmidon? Surely, these, as they labor to purchase them opinion of
esteem, by their unwomanly expressions of valor, so they eclypse their own
fame, and by these irregular affronts, detract highly from their essentialst
honor. Such may gain them observance, but never esteem.

Take heed then, lest public rumor brand you. Scandal is more apt to
disperse what is ill; then Opinion is to retain what is good. When the world
is once possessed of your shame; many deserving actions of piety can hardly wipe
off that stain. Esaus birthright was temporal, yet once lost, many tears
could not regaine it; your souls honor is a birthright spiritual, which
once lost, many tedious taskes shall not redeem it. Let your estimation be by
you so tenderly loved, as you will rather choose to loath life, then
irreparably lose that, which is the sweetest Consort of humane life.

The absolute end, whereto Estimation aspires, and wherein it cheerfully rests.
THere is nothing which works not for some end, wherein it may rest and repose.
Long before that glorious Light we now enjoy, did the very Heathens, who had
no knowledge of a future being, rejoice highly in the practice of Moral
virtues, and performing such commendable offices as might purchase them
deserved honor, living; and eternally memorize them dying.

This might be illustrated by several instances in Maids, Wives, and Widows.
For the first; those Locrian Virgins deserve our memory; whose custom it was,
yearly to be sent to Troy: which use continued for the space of a thousand
years; yet was it never heard, that any of those Virgins were ever deflowred.
Who can likewise pass over in silence those seven Milesian Virgins; who, at
such time as the Gauls raved and raged every where, subjecting all to fire and
faggot, deprived themselves of life, lest hostile force should deprive them of
their honor? With what praises also may we worthily advance those daughters of
Scedasus of Leuctra, a Town situate in the Region of Boetia; who having in
their fathers absence, hospitably received two young men, by whom, made drunk
with wine, they were that night defloured: conceiving a mutual sorrow for
their lost Virginity, became resolute actors in their own Tragedy? Aristomenes
of Messana, when in those public feasts called Hyacinthia, he had surprised
fifteen Virgins, with the soldiers which attempted their dishonor,
straightly commanding them to forbear fron^ using any such violence: whose
Command when they refused to obey, he caused them to be slain; redeeming
those Virgins with a huge sum of gold. Afterward, these Virgins hearing that
this Aristomenet was accused about the death of one of those men, whom he had
commanded to be slain; they would not return into their own native Country,
till such time as, prostrating themselves before the feet of the Judge, with
their prayers and tears, they had delivered from bonds the defender of their
honor.

Yea, An English Amazon.
to draw nearer home, and instance this Maiden-constancy in one of our own; I
have heard of a notable spirited Girl, within the walls of this City; who,
albeit she frequented places of public Concourse boldly, discoursed freely,
expressed her self in all assayes forwardly; yet so tender was she of
preserving her honor, that being on a time suited by a young Cavaliero, who
was so taken with the height of her spirit, wherewith she was endowed, as he
preferred it before the beauty of an amorous face, wherewith she was but
meanly enriched. She presently apprehending the looseness of his desires,
seemingly condescended: so she might be furnished and appointed, and the
business with that secrecy carried, as no occasion of suspicion might be
probably grounded. This answer-cheer'd our young Gallant; winged with hope to
enjoy, what his wild desires did so much affect. A Coach is provided; all
things prepared; the very place appointed where they shall meet, to hasten
their light journey: which, for more privacy, must be the Country. Time and
place they observed; but before she would mount her Coach, calling him aside,
she tells him, how she had vowed never to consent to any man in that kind, till
she had first tried his metal in the field. Draw he must, or she will
disgrace him; in which combat, instead of a more amorous Conflict, she disarmed
him, and with a kick, wished him ever after to be more wary how he attempted a
Maidens honor.

For the second, excellent was the answer of those Lacedemonian wives; who,
being immodestly suited, made this reply: Surely, we should give way to your
request, but this you sue for is not in our power to grant: for when we were
maids, we were to be disposed of by our parents; and now being wives, by our
husbands. At such time as the Inhabitants of Tire came to Lacedemon; suspecting
them to be Spies, they threw them into prison; whose wives, having got leave
to visit and comfort them in their captivity, changed garments with them, and
according to their Countries guise, veiled their faces, by which means the men
escaped, leaving their wives restrained: Plutarch.
which deeply perplexed all the Lacedaemonians. No less conjugall love showed
Alcestra to her Admetus; Laodimia to her Prothesilaus; Panthia to her Susius;
Artemisia to her Mausolus; Zenobia to her Oedonatus.

These were good wives, which Zenophon calls the highest grounds of humane
felicity. Nothing being more amiable then an honest woman, says Theognis;
nothing conferring more joy to man, says sententious Xistus.

For the third, what singular mirrors of viduall continency, and matron-like
modesty were Cornelia, Vetruria, Livia, and that most Christian widow Salnina,
to whom Saint Hierome directed many sweet and comfortable Epistles. These you
might have found attired in grave funeral garments, (as memorials of their
deceased husbands) of modest behavior, reverend presence, publishing to the
world a contempt of the world, in their outward appearance.

Now, what may you suppose did those Pagan Ladies hold to be the absolute end,
whereto this tender care of their Estimation chiefly aspired, and wherein it
cheerfully rested? It was not riches, nor any such temporal respect: for these
they contemned, so their honor might be preserved. No; there was implanted in
them an innate desire of Moral goodness; mixed with an honest ambition, ^o to
advance their esteem during life, that they might become examples unto others
of a good Moral life, and perpetuate their memories after death.

Your ambition (Ladies) must mount higher, because your Conversation is
heavenlier. It is immortality you aspire to; a lower Orb cannot hold you;
nothing else may confine you. Be it then your highest Estimation to honor
him, who is the horn of your salvation: The Crown of your hope, the staff of
your help, the tower of your defense, the hope of your solace. Let not a
moment of deluding vanity, deprive you of the hope of eternity. Your voyage is
short; your hazard great. Many difficulties encounter you in the way; address
your selves therefore in the way, to some good work. Let Patience teach you
how to suffer, Devotion sweeten your encounter, Estimation crown you with
succeeding honor.

THE ENGLISH GENTLEVVOMAN.
Argument.
Fancy^s is to be with Deliberation grounded; with Constancy retained: Wanton
Fancy is a wandering phrenzy; How it may be checked, if too wild; How cheered,
if too cool; An attemperament of both.

FANCY.
FANCY is an affection privily received in by the Eye, Observe. 6.
and speedily conveyed to the Heart. The Eye is the harbinger, but the Heart is
the harbourer. Fancy is to be with deliberation grounded.
Love conceived at first sight, seldom lasts long. Deliberation must lead it,
or else it is mis-guided. Look before you like, is a good rule; but to like at
first Look makes an house of mis-rule. Is he of hansome personage whom you
love? His proportion is a moving Object to your eye, but his portion (it may
be) will not agree with your state. Again, admit he have both these;
proportion to purchase your esteem, and portion to maintain your estate: his
breast is not transparent; his disposition may be crooked; and that will cast
down all that was before affected. Themistocles being demanded by a Nobleman
of Greece, whether he had rather marry his daughter to one rich and evil, or
one poor and good; made this answer: I had rather have a man without money,
than money without a man. Whence it was, that Portia, the younger daughter of
Portius Cato, being asked when she would betake her self to an husband,
replied; When I find one that seeks me, not mine.

Witty was that young Gentlewomans answer to an inconsiderate Suitor: who with
much instancy solicited the father for the affection of his daughter; whereto
having at last consented, and the Covenants of marriage concluded; this
indiscreet wooer unseasonably imparts his mind to the daughter; who made
strange with it, saying, She never heard of any such matter: Yea but, replied
he, I have made your father herewith acquainted, and be has already
consented: And you may marry him too, answered she, for you must hold me
excused.

There is no time that exacts more modesty of any woman, than in her time of
sniting; a shamefast red then best commends her, and the movingst Orator that
speaks for her. Like Venus silver Dove, she is ever brouzing on the palm of
peace; while her cheek betrays her love, more then her tongue. So as Virgil,
the very Prince of our Latin Poets, when he should bring in King Latinus
privately conferring with his wife Amata, and Turnus, to whom in nuptial bands
he was to espouse his daughter: he brings in the young maid weeping,
blushing, and silent. Whence is employed, that it becomes not a Maid to speak
of marriage in her parents presence, for that were small argument of modesty or
shamefastness. There is a pretty pleasing kind of wooing, drawn from a
conceived but concealed Fancy; which, in my opinion, suits well with these
amorous younglins: they could wish with all their hearts to be ever in the
presence of those they love, so they might not be seen by those they love.
Might they choose, they would converse with them freely, consort with them
friendly, and impart their truest thoughts fully; yet would they not have their
bashful loves find discovery. They would be seen, yet seem obscured; love,
but not, disclose it; see whom they love, but not be eyed. This the Poet in
the person of a Shepherdess neatly displayeth: Phillis to willowes, like a
cunning flyer,
Flies, yet she fears her Shepherd should not spy her.


Now, in this Subject of Fancy, as there is nothing more dangerous than
entertaining it without due and deliberate advice: so there is nothing grows
more generally fatal to the indiscreet Lover than by grounding affection on
outward respects, without relation to that inward fair, which only makes the
Object of Fancy full of beauty, and presents every day as a Marriage-day to the
party: by performing the office of a princely combiner of beauty and majesty
together. Neither affluence of estate, potency of friends, nor highness of
descent can attemper the grief of a loathed bed. These may play upon the
Fantasy, but never give satisfaction to the Fancy. Wherefore (Gentlewomen) to
the end you may show your selves discreetest in that, which requires your
discretion most, discuss with your selves the purity of love, the quality of
your lover; ever reflecting on those best deserving endowments of his, which
either make him worthy or unworthy your love. Affection, though it enter in by
the narrow cranny of the Eye, it shoots at the heart; which, unless it be
seasoned by judgment, it can not deserve so fair a title. A discreet eye will
not be taken with a smooth skin; it is not the rind but the mind that is
her Adamant.

Iustina a Roman Maid, no less nobly descended, than notably accomplished,
being married to one more rich than wise, exclaimed against her fate, that
folly should hale her to so loathed a bed. And good reason had she to repine,
when his groundless jealousy made her a tragic spectacle of misery before
her time. For seeing her white neck, that object begot in him presently an
argument of suspect, which he seconded with revenge, to vent the fury of his
nature, and publish to the world the weakness of his temper. Let deliberation
then be the Scale, wherein you may weigh Love in an equal poize. There be
many high and consequent Circumstances, which a discreet woman will not only
discourse but discuss, before she entertain so mysterious and honorable
estate. Disparity in descent, fortunes, friends, with other like respects, many
times beget distraction of minds. Whence it was, that Pittacus of Mitylene,
being entreated by a young man, to afford him his best advice, in the Choice of
two wives tendered him, whether he should marry; the one whereof was equal to
himself both in birth and wealth; the other surpassing him in both; Wished him
to go along the streets of the City, where children use to play, and there
observe what they did advise him. Truth is, inequality in these, procures
distaste; but where there is a difference in the seazure of disposure of the
heart, (which should be the firmest and strongest Cement to unite affection)
there arises the greatest hazard. Thence is it, Suspicion works upon every
light and frivolous subject; while the other party hunts after opportunity, to
surfeit on forbidden fruit, and give her suspicious Mate just ground of
jealousy. Feed he may his indigested humor in a jealous pasture, and vow
revenge when he shall find an apt subject, mean time he becomes invisibly
gulled, while he deludes himself with painted shadows.

-- No Jealousy can ever that prevent;
Whereas two parties once be full content.
Several I know, Hieron. cont. Ruffin.
are the effects of love, as are the dispositions of those that love. Livia
made quick dispatch of her husband, because she loved him too little: Lucilia
of hers, because she loved him too much. Phoedra fancied Theseus less than
she should, but young Hippolytus more than he would. Which effects are
usually produced, when either disparity of years breed dislike; or obscurity
of descent begets contempt; or inequality of fortunes, discontent. Deliberate
then before you marry, and thus expostulate with your selves touching his
Condition, whom you are to marry "Is he young? I will bear with his youth,
till better experience bring him to the knowledge of man. My usage shall be
more easy, than to weane him from what he affects, by extremity. Youth will
have his swinge; his own discretion will bring him home; at least, time will
reclaim him; he shall not find me put on a cloudy brow, or entertain his
freer course with a scowle. I must conform my self to him, confirm my love
in him, and so demean me toward him, that Conjugall duty mixed with all
affability many win him.

"Again, Is he old; His age shall beget in me more reverence; his words
shall be as so many aged and time-improved precepts to inform me; his actions
as so many directions to guide me; his rebukes as so many friendly admonitions
to reclaim me; his bed I will honor, no unchaste thought shall defile it;
his Counsel I will keep, no foreign breast shall partake it. I will be a
staff to him in his age, to support him; an eye to direct him; an hand to help
him; his Substance I will not scatter on a youthful Lover: but serve him
still, whom I have vowed to honor.

"Again, Is he rich? Much good may it do him; this shall not make me proud;
my desire shall be, he may employ it for his best advantage; I will move him
to communicate unto the needy, that his riches may make him truly happy. It is
a miserable state that starves the owner. I will persuade him to enjoy his
own, and so avoid baseness; to reserve a provident care for his own, and
shun profuseness.

"Again, Is he poor? His poverty shall make me rich; there is no want, where
there wants no content. This I shall enjoy in him, and with him; which the
world could not afford me, lived I without him. It has been an old Maxim;
that as poverty goes in at one door, love goes out at the other; and love
without harbor, falls into a cold and aguish distemper: but this rule shall
never direct my thoughts; should poverty enthrall me, it shall never appall me;
my affection shall counterpoize all affliction: No adversity can divide me
from him, to whom my vowed faith has individually ti'd me. "In a word, Is he
wife? He shall be my Thales. Is he foolish? I will by all means cover his
weakness: As I am now made one with him, so will I have mine equal share in
any aspersion that shall be thrown on him.

Thus if you expostulate, your Christian constant resolves shall make you truly
fortunate. Your Fancy is on deliberation grounded; which promises such
success, as your Marriage-dayes shall never fear the bitter encounter of
untimely repentance, nor the curelesse anguish of an afflicted Conscience.

Fancy is to be with constancy retained.
THe selfsame rule which Augustus was said to observe in his choice and
constant retention of friends, are you, Gentlewomen, to apply to your selves in
the choice of your second-selves. He was slow in entertaining, but most
constant in reteining. Favorites are not to be worn like favors: now in your
hat, or about your wrist, and presently out of request. Which to prevent,
entertain none to lodge near your heart, that may harbor in his breast ought
worthy your hate. Those two Motto's I would have you incessantly to remember;
for the useful application of them may highly conduce to your honor. The one
is that of Caia Tranquilla, which she ever used to her royal Spouse Caius
Tarquinius Priscus; Where thou art Caius, I am Caia. The other, that of Ruth
unto Naomi; Whither thou go, I will go: and where thou dwell, I will
dwell.

There is no greater argument of lightness, then to affect the acquaintance of
strangers, and to entertain variety of Suites. These, as they distract the
eye, so they infect the heart. Constant you cannot be where you profess, so
long as you affect change. Vows deliberately advised, and religiously
grounded, are not to be dispensed with. But say, you never vowed: have you made
outward professions of love, and entertained a good opinion of that object in
your heart? Again, are you resolved, that his affection is real toward you?
That his protests, though delivered by his mouth, are engraven in his heart?
Let not so much good love be lost; insult not over him whom unfeigned affection
has vowed your servant: Let Wolves and Beasts be cruel in their kinds,
But Women meek, and have relenting minds.


It were to much incredulity in you to distrust, where you never found just
cause of distaste. Yea, but you will again object; We are already by your
own Observations sufficiently instructed, that Fancy is to be with
deliberation grounded, that love lightly laid on, lasts not long. Should we
then affect before we find ground of respect? Should we entertain a
Rhetorical Lover, whose protests are formal Complements, and whose promises
are gilded pills, which cover much bitterness? No, I would not have you so
credulous, lest your Nuptial day become ominous. Make true trial and
experiment of his Constancy, who tenders his service to you. Sift him, if you
can find any branne in him. Task him, before you take him. Yet let these be
sweetly tempred with lenity; Let them not be Taskes of insuperable difficulty.
This were tyrannize, where you should love. This was Omphales fault to make her
faithful servant, a servile slave. Alas! shall he fare the worse because he
loves you? This would induce others, who take notice of your cruelty, to loath
you. And make your discarded Lover, surprised with an amorous distemper, to
reply, as Absalom to (...), Is this thy kindness (...) ^hy friend? My counsel
is, that, as it will be useful for you to deliberate, before you take so much
as the least Notions of an affectionate Servant; yea, and to second that
deliberation with some probable proof or trial, that he is truly constant:
so it will be a grateful office in you, to retain him in your favor with a
gracious respect; to countenance the improvement of his constancy with a
cheerful and amiable aspect: to banish all clouds of seeming discontent, and
to give him some modest expressions of the increase of your good Conceit
toward him. Let this be done, till Hymen make you individually one Then, and
never till then, may Love enjoy her full freedom. She stands priviledg'd by a
sacred rite to taste that fruit, which before was forbidden. Mutual respects,
like so many diametrall lines, pointing all to one Center, are then directed to
one exquisite object, the purity of love; which produces this admirable
effect: it makes one soul rule two hearts, and one heart dwell in two bodies.
Now, I would have you, when your desires are drawn to this period, to become
so taken with the love of your choice, as to interpret whatsoever he shall
do, ever to the best sense. It were little enough that you retained a good
opinion of him, who stands in so many several engagements obliged for you.
Should your riot bring him into debt, his restraint must make you free. Durance
must be his suit, while better stuff makes you a Coat. He must content
himself with restraint, to give you content: let nothing discontent you more
then to entertain him with contempt. Yea, what Conscience is there in it, but
he should receive and affable and amiable respect from you; seeing, if your
Conscience be no Conformalist, he must pay for you?

These respects should perpetually tie you, to honor him, who becomes so
legally tied for you. Requite these then with constancy, and retain this
ensuing Example ever in your memory. Theogena, wife to Agathocles, showed
admirable constancy in her husbands greatest misery, showing her self most his
own, when he was relinquisht and forsaken of his own; clozing her resolution
with this noble Conclusion: She had not only betaken her self to be his
Companion in prosperity, but in all fortunes that should befall him.

Conform your selves to this Mirror, and it will reform in you many a
dangerous error. Thus if you live, thus if you love; honor cannot choose but
accompany you living, much comfort attend you loving, and a virtuous memory
embalme you dying.

Wanton Fancy is a wandering Phrenzie.
WAnton Love seldom or never promises good success; the effect cannot be
good, when the object is ill. Sense must be the blind Lantern to guide her,
while she rambles in the street: for Reason, she leaves her sleeping with the
Constable. What devices she has to purchase her a moment of penitential
pleasure? Her eye looks, and by it the sense of her mind is averted; her ear
hears, and by it the intention of her heart is perverted; her smell breathes,
and by it her thoughts are hindered; her mouth speaks, and by it others are
deceived; by touch, her heat of desire upon every small occasion is stirred.
Never raged Alcydes on Mount Oeta, nor Orlando for his Angelica, more then
these Vtopian lovers, for their imaginary shadows. There is a kind of Spider
bred in Pulia, called Tar^nd^l^, which being of a diverse nature, causes
diverse effects; some to dance, some to sing, others to weep, or watch, or
sweat. The soveraignest cure it admits of, is Music; while the Patient by
dancing, or some other vehement exercise of that sort, expulseth the poison,
and gives passage to his pores of respiration. Many like Creatures there be of
a malignant nature, but none comparable to a distempered Lover.

Now, that we may use the method of Art; to cure the effect, is to take away
the cause: my purpose shall be first to discover those incendiaries of foments
of this inordinate passion, or intoxicating poison; secondly, the effects
arising from them; lastly, the cure or remedy of them.

For the first, we may very properly reduce the prime grounds of this wanton
fancy, or wandering phrenzie to a Catalogue included in these two verses: 1
Sloth, 2 Words, 3 Books, 4 Eyes, 5 Consorts, and 6 luscious fare,
The lures of lust, and stains of honor are.


One every of which particulars to insist, would enlarge this branch too much;
we will only point at them and so leave them. For the first, sententious
Seneca says, he had rather endure the utmost of fortunes extremity, then
subject himself to Sloth or Sensuality. For it is this only which makes of
men, women; of women, beasts; of beasts, monsters. This then is to be shunned,
if the reward of virtue be to be shared. Secondly, Words corrupt the
disposition; they set an edge or gloss on depraved Liberty: making that member
offend most, when it should beee employed in profiting most. The tongue is more
effectual then any Letter; let it be then so employed, as it may improve the
hearer. Thirdly, Books treating of light subjects, are Nurseries of
wantonness: they instruct the loose Reader to become naught; whereas before,
touching naughtiness he knew naught. A story of the rape of Ganimedes, or of
light Lais in Eurypides, are their daily Lectures. Plato's Divine Philosophy,
or Dicearchus pious Precepts of Morality, must veil to Alcaeus, or Anacrons
wanton Poesy. Venus and Adonis are unfitting Consorts for a Ladies bosom.
Remove them timely from you, if they ever had entertainment by you, lest, like
the Snake in the fable, they annoy you. Fourthly, Eyes are those Windows by
which death enters; your inward house cannot shine, unless these be shut;
Objects they have of more beauty to take them, then these sights of vanity,
which miserably taint them. Eve looked on the fruit before she coveted,
coveting she tasted, tasting she perished. Thus aspiring to the knowledge of
good and evil, became to her and her posterity evil. The Eye is a Living
glass, but if we make it a false glass, it will neither represent us truly,
nor discover our blemishes freely; but make that seem fair which is odious
and ugly. By this means, may good objects become Eye-sores unto us, which, if
clearly viewed, would like a sovereign Eyebright, restore sight unto us.
Fifthly, Consorts are thieves of time, they will rob you of opportunity, the
best treasure time can afford you, if you suffer them to incroach on you and
abuse you. Choose such then for your Consorts, of whom you may have assured
hope, that they will either better you, or be bettered by you. Choose such,
whom you may admire both when you see them and hear them: when you see their
living Doctrine, and hear their wholesome instruction. Lastly, Luscious fare is
the fuel of every inordinate concupiscence. Nothing so much feeds it, nor
insensates the understanding by delighting in it. By restraint of this, you
shall learn to moderate your desires. Whence you may rejoice, yet in him, who
is your joy, if you can live sparingly, and embrace the means that may
chastise in you all sensuality: for by your spare life is lust extinguished,
virtue nourished, the mind strengthened, the understanding to heavenly things
raised. Yea, abstinence avails much for preserving health of body and length
of life. Eccles. 37.30

Arist. de reg. Princ.


Whence it is said: He that dieteth himself, prolongeth life. Which the
profound Stagyrian confirms in these words: To abstain from riot and
superfluity, is the soveraign'st prescription or physic for the body.

Now to descend to the second branch of our division in this Observation; we
might here enumerate those many odious and inhumane effects, which have and do
daily arise from the violence of this Wanton fancy or Wandering phrenzy; and
what tragic events it has in all times produced: but they would seem
relations too full of horror to your modest and timorous Natures. Only let me
tell you, if you desire to be satisfied in subjects of that kind, our Italian
Stories will afford you variety: Where indiscreet Love clozeth her doleful
Scene with so miserable an Exit, as no Pencill can express any picture to more
life, then an historical line has drawn out the web of their miseries. So
as, that ancient Adage might seem verefied: That from slaves and miserable
people God has taken away the one half of their understanding.

Now, to cure this desperate malady (though to you the cure, I hope, be
needless, being free from all such violent distempers;) the best and
soveraign'st receipt is to fortify the weakness of your sex with strength of
resolution; that, with incessant devotion. Be not too liberal in the
bestowing of your favors; nor too familiar in public converse. Presume not
too much on the strength of a weak Fort. Make a Contract with your eyes not to
wander abroad, lest they be caught in coming home. Treat not of love too
freely; play not wagges with the blind boy; If Cupid then be blind, how blind
are ye, That will be caught by one that cannot see?
he has a dangerous aim, though he has no eyes, Sport not with him, that
may hurt you; play not with him, that would play on you. Your sports will turn
to an ill jest, when you are wounded in earnest: the Fly may be then your
Emblem: So long the foolish Fly plays with the flame,
Till her light wings are cinged in the same.


Fly to an higher Sphere: you are yet untouched; this wandering phrenzy has
never yet surpised you; prevent the means, and it shall never invade you. Be
not such foes to your selves, as to purchase your own disquiet. Examples you
have of all sorts, both to allure and deter you. Pure love admits no stain.
Such a fancy is never incident to a phrenzy. If ever then you entertain any
Love, let it be such as brings with it a virtuous solace; for all others,
howsoever they may seem to promise some perfunctory delight, they ever cast up
their last account with repentance.

How Fancy may be checked, if too wild.
WHen a man bleeds at the nose, and through abundance of blood is brought in
danger (...) blood in his arm, to turn the course of the blood another way.
If love issue out in too violent a stream, it is to be cooled by a temperate
expostulation with Fancy: or else by fixing our eye upon some more attractive
object, divert the course of that madding passion. Expostulate with Fancy, thus
you may, safely and freely: How is it with me? Me thinks, it fares otherwise
then it has done formerly. A strange distemper I find in my mind; and it might
seem to resemble Love, if I knew the nature of it. Love! Can virgin-modesty
return that accent, and not blush? Yes; why not? If the Object I affect be
worthy loving. And if not, what then? Is not the Lover ever blinded with
affection toward his beloved? He, who may seem a Thersites to another, may be
a Paris in mine eye. Were he poor as Irus, Fancy makes him dearer to me,
then the wealth of Croesus. Yea, but a little advice would do well. Art thou
persuaded that this Non-parallell, thou thus affectest, has dedicated his
service only to thee? Yes; his protests have confirmed him mine. Besides, his
continual presence seconds what he protests: That hour is tedious, wherein
he sees me not; those pleasures odious, which my presence accompanies not. His
eye is ever fixed on me; his sole discourse is to me. What I affect he
embraces with delight: what I dis-relish, he entertaines with distaste.

These, I must confess, ( Gentlewoman) are promising arguments of unfeigned
love: yet may all these err, and consequently leave you in a miserable Error.
Your True-love may prove a Jason or a Theseus, and leave you in the briars for
all your confidence. You say, his protests have confirmed him yours; he has
attested heaven to bear record of his love. Alas of Credulity! Take heed he
play not the part of that ridiculous Actor in Smyrna, who pronouncing, O
heaven! pointed with his finger to the ground. Or like that namelesse Lover,
who soliciting a Gentlewomans affection with abundance of amorous Rhetoric,
concluded with this Emphaticall protest; that she was the only Mistress of
his thoughts: which conclusion being overheard by one to whom not long before
upon like protests he had engaged his faith; she replied, D^^ not believe
him, Gentlewoman; the selfsame Arbor where you now are, might witness that
he has made the very like protests unto me, many times before.

Trialls in affairs of this nature have ever a truer touch than protests. It
is easy for beauty to extort a vow, or a temporary protest; which many times
is as soon forgot as made. Let not these then work on your Credulity.

There be, I know (and so all be that are truly generous) who rather than
they would infringe their faith, would engage their life. But all are not of
that noble temper. Others there be, who can tip their glozing tongues with
Rhetorical protests, purposely to gull a credulous Creature, for the purchase
of an unlawful pleasure; which obtained, they leave them to bemoane their lost
honor. With more safety therefore may you suspect, than too rashly affect. It
will not be amiss for you to read him, before you choose him. As thus; Has
his fair carriage got him estimation where he lives? Has he never inured
his tongue to play Hypocrite with his heart; nor made Ceremonial protests to
purchase a light Mistress? Has he kept a fair quarter, and been ever
tender of his untainted honor? Has he never boasted of young Gentlewomans
favors, nor run descant on their kindness? Has he kept himself on even
board with all the world, and preserved his patrimony from engagement? Has he
ever since he vowed himself your servant, solely devoted himself yours, and
not immix'd his affection with foreign beauties? Choose him, he well deserves
your choice; in which choice, let this be your impreze; My choice admits no
change.

To be short; the blessing which Boaz pronounced upon Ruth, shall like a
honey-dew distill daily from the lips of your husband: Blessed be thou of the
Lord, my Spouse; thou have showed more goodness in the latter end, than at thy
beginning, in as much as thou followest not young men, were they poor or rich.
Contrariwise, where you find no such demeriting respects in him, who makes love
unto you; Check your wild Fancy by time, lest a remediless Check attend
your Choice.

Covertly knew that unfortunate Lady how to paint out her grief, the extent
whereof her tongue-tide passion could not relate; When like a fruitful vine,
she had brought forth many fair and promising branches to a debaucht husband,
by whose profuser course, her hopes which she had stored in her numerous
progeny, perished, and her self through grief irrecoverably wasted; she
wrote these pensive lines with a Diamond in her Chamber Window, to give a
living shadow to her lasting sorrow.

Up to the Window sprung the spreading Vine,
The dangling Apricocke, and Eglantine;
Since when, that vine and branches too were found,
Shred from their root, laid sprawling on the ground.
It is not so hard to give comfortable counsel to the sorrowful, as to find
a fit season when to give it. I would have you, whose more noble parts promise
much comfort to your families, give such attention to seasonable counsel, as
you may prevent all ensuing occasions of sorrow. It is the condition of an
inconsiderate person, who never foresees his fall, to cloze the issue of his
misfortunes with this improvident conclusion; I would never have thought that
this should have thus come to pass; Sen. de Tranq. an.
I never dreamed of this Event. It will be more useful and beneficial to
you, to check your wild Fancy, if any such seize upon you, than to give way
unto it, and consequently undo you. Repentance comes too late at
Marriage-night. Affairs of such weight and consequence are not to be
entertained without due advice, nor seconded with rashness. In one word; have
you played a little too long with the flame? Have you given too free access to
your desertlesse lover? Have you suffered your heart not only to think of
him, but with more intimate respect to harbor him? Lodge him no longer in that
room; it deserves a far better guest. I will not hear you, if you reply,
and say; This is a Task of impossibility. Continuance of time, with
discontinuance of his presence, will easily effect it. Mean time, fix your
eye upon some more deserving object. Revenge your self of that Conceit, that
shall a-fresh present him to you. So shall the wildness of your Fancy be
checked; your halfe-lost liberty regained; and your affection afterward
planted, where it may be better acquitted; there seated, where it may be more
sweetly seasoned.

THere be Haggards of that wild Nature, How Fancy may be chee^ed if too cold.
as they will by no means be reclaimed; Neither Love nor fear will cause them
stoop to any Lure. Emblemes these are to such wayward Girls, whose inflexible
natures will neither be wooed nor won at any rate. These had rather dye for
love, than be deemed to love. Their hearts are smeer'd over with Salamanders
oil, and will admit no heat. They may entertain Suitors, but it is with that
coldness of affection, as the longer they resort, the lesser is their hope.
They may boast more of the multiplicity of their Suitors, than their Suitors
can of any probability to be speeders. As it chanced sometime in a Contest
betwixt two Maids, who comparing one with the other their descents, friends,
and Suitors: Make no comparison with me, replied the one to the other, for I
must tell thee, I have more Suitors than thou have friends; More shameless you
(answered the other) unless you mean to set up an house of good fellowship.
These unsociable Natures, who many times defer making their choice, till age
bring them to contempt, and excludes them from all choice; Or, Danae-like, live
immured in their Chamber, till their Fort be undermined by some golden Pioner;
detract much from the relenting disposition of their Sex. It is their honor
to be wooed and won. To be discreet in their choice, and to entertain their
choice without Change. Of such I speak, who have not dedicated their days to
Virginity, which is such a Condition, as it aspires to an Angelical
perfection. Good, (says venerable Bede) is conjugall chastity, better is
viduall continency, but best is the perfection of Virginity. Yea, Virginity
exceeds the condition of humane nature, being that, by which man resembles an
Angelical Creature. We read likewise, that the Unicorn, when he can be
taken by no force nor subtle Engine, will rest and repose in the Lap of a
Virgin.

To those only I direct my discourse, who have a mind to take themselves unto
the world, and to entertain their Lover: but it is with such coolness, as it
drives their dispassionate Sweetheart into strange extremes. And this
proceeds commonly from an overweening Conceit, which these dainty Damsels have
of their own worth: with the apprehension whereof they become so infinitely
taken, as they can find none worthy their choice. Of this disdainefull opinion
was the unhappy Gentlewoman, who after many fair fortunes tendered, Suitors of
deserving quality rejected, made her incestuous brother her licentious Lover.

A crime detestable even to Barbarians and bruit beasts. Insomuch as it is
reported of the Cam^ll, that they usually hood-winke him, when at any time they
bring his mother unto him; which act he no sooner knows, then he tramples her
under his feet, and kicks her to death with his heels: so hateful is Incest
even to bruit beasts, whose native instinct abhors such obscene commixtures.
You, whose discreet affections have cast anchor, by making choice of some
deserving Lover; afflict him not with needless delays; if he merit your
choice, one day is too long to defer him; if undeserving, tax your own
indiscretion so rashly to entertain him.

Is it bashful modesty that withholds you? I commend it; it well becomes you.
Chastity cannot express it self in a fairer Character, then in blushing lines
of loving shamefastness. Is it consent of friends that detaines you? I approve
that too; These rites are best accomplished, when they are with consent and
consort of friends solemnized. But if the ground of your delay trench either
upon some future expectance of better fortunes; or indifferency of affection in
respect of your Choice: the issue cannot possibly prove well, being built upon
such weak grounds. For, to insist cursorily upon either of these two; Shall a
deceiving hope of preferment dispossess him of your heart, whom personal
deserts make worthy of your love? Look to it; Such fortunes cannot purchase
you content, which are got with an aged husbands contempt. It shows a servile
nature to cashiere a faithful Lover, because he is poorer; and to prefer
another less desertfull, because he is richer. This inconstancy cannot
succeed well, because the foundation is grounded ill.

Again, are you indifferent or Lukewarm in affection; in respect of your
choice? for shames sake what do you make of love? Do you use it like a toy or
tire to put off or on as you like? Must it resemble the fashion? This day in
request, and next day out of date? This, indeed, is such a cool and
easie-tempered Love, as it will never mad you; yet, trust me, it may well
delude you. Fancy will not so be played with. You will object, I imagine, your
stomachs are too queasie to digest Love. Why then did you ever seem so
greedily to feed on that, which your stomachs now cannot well digest? Have you
surfeited on the substance? Lay that aside for a while, and bestow your eye on
the Picture. Such impressions have sharpened the dull affections of many Lovers.

Alexander being much in love with Apelles, as one highly rapt with the
exquisiteness of his art, proposed him that Mcdell for a task, which he, of
all others, affected most; commanding him on a time to paint Campaspe, a
beautiful woman, naked; which Apelles having done, such impression wrought the
Picture in his affection, as Apelles fell in love with her; which Alexander
perceiving, gave him her. It is incredible, what rare effects were sometimes
drawn from a Morian-Picture, being only hung up in a Ladies Chamber. If such
impressive motives of affection draw life from a Picture, what may be
conceived by the Substance? Oris Apollo writes that the Egyptians, when they
would describe the Heart, and fit her with a proper Emblem, paint the bird
Ibis: because they think that no Creature, for proportion of the body, has so
great an heart as the Ibis has.

It is the Bird of love must be the Emblem of your heart. It is neither
picture nor posture can content her. Much less these inferior pictures, which
we call moneys: which are so far from satisfying the affection, as they are
only for the Mold or Worldling: whose grosser thoughts never yet aspired to
the knowledge of loves definition. As then, the precious stone Diacletes,
though it have many rare and excellent soveraignties in it, yet it loses them
all, if it be put in a dead man's mouth: so Love, though it be a subject so
pure, as none of a more refined nature; so firm, as none of a more holding
temper; so hot, as none of a more lasting fervor: yet becomes her splendor
darkened, her vigor weakened, her fervor cooled, when she is in a cold breast
entertained. Resemble, rather, the Iuniper-tree, whose coal is the hottest,
and whose shadow is the coolest: be hot in your affection, but cool in your
passion. If you find any thing which cools love in you, remove it; if any
thing which urges passion, quench it: contrariwise, feed in you loves heat;
but repress in you all passionate hate. Take into your more serious thoughts,
a view of his deserts whom you affect: increase the conceit of them by
supposing more than he expresses. The imagination of Love is strong, and
works admirable effects in a willing subject. Yet in all this, let no one
straid thought wrong your Maiden-modesty so much, as to suggest to you a
strain of light-nesse. Other Closet-treaties you may entertain safely and
freely, without touch of modesty. As to think of the honor of that State, to
which you are approaching; the mutual Comfort from that mysterious union
arising; how griefs will be attempered by one another suffering; how joys
will be augmented by one another sharing. These thoughts cannot but well
become you; nor otherwise choose than with a pure affection inflame you; nor
receive less than free acceptance from you.

Thus may that Love, which seemed before to have been as chilled, by these
modest motives be cheered. That day no black Cloud should by right sit on
your fair brow; no cold dampe seize on your heart. You have got one whom a
sacred gage has made yours; with a cheerful requital render your self his.
This cannot choose but highly please the pure eye of heaven, to see that
Mystery so sweetly solemnized, which was honored by Christ, with his first
Miracle on Earth.

IN this last branch of our Observation, An attemperament o^ both.
we are to propose an attemperament of both those indisposed Fancies before
mentioned, and deservedly taxed. First, the wildenesse of the one; secondly,
the coolness of the other: by seasoning them both with an indifferent temper.

In a Vine, wild and luxurious branches are to be pruned, that such as are
free and kindly may be better cherished. In the spiritual field of your
heart, is never to be expected any fruitful increase of virtues, till there
be weeded out of it all the thorns of vices. The difference betwixt a wise and
wild Love, is this: the one ever deliberates before it love; the other loves
before it deliberate. The first question that she asks, who wisely loves; Is
he, who is here recommended to my choice, of good repute? Is he rich in the
endowments of his mind? Next question she asks, are of a lower siege: May
his personage give content? Are his fortunes such, as may not beget in love a
contempt? Thus begins she that loves wisely, with goods inward, and ends
with outward; whereas, she that loves wildly, begins with outward, and ends,
or else never remembers the inward: Is he, you tender to me, of promising
personage? Is he neat in his clothes? Complete in his his dress? Can he
Court me in good words? and perfume them with sweet protests? Can he usher me
gracefully in the street? and in very pace express a reserved state? Next
question she asks, must be near the same verge: Is he rich in Manors? Has
not fortune made him a younger brother? Can he, to buy himself honor, pawn
the Long-acre? May his swelling means furnish me of Coach, Caroach, and daily
fit me for some Exchange trifles? I have a months mind to see the man! He
cannot but deserve my love. Wherein she says well, for in very deed he could
deserve little else. Now as the former, seldom bestows her self, but where
she finds content; so the latter, seldom or never, but either she with her
Choice, or her Choice with her falls into contempt. The reason is, this wild
Girl never cares for more than to be married. If she may but see that day,
it accomplisheth her content: though she have but one Comicall day all her
life. Yea, it is as well as can be expected from her hands, if she attain
that style without some apparent soil. Such as these I could wish, to prevent
the worst, they were married betime, lest they mar themselves before time.
Albeit, moderate restraint, seasonable advice (presupposing some seeds of grace
to work on) have wrought singular effects in many of these wilde-ones, who
afterward became grave and modest Matrons.

To you then, kind-hearts, am I to recommend some necessary cautions, which
carefully observed, may make you wiser than you thought of; and cause you have
a tender care of that, which before you had never mind of. Your breasts are
unlocked, your tongues untied; you cannot love, but you must show it; nor
conceive a kind thought, but you must tell it. The Index of your hearts you
carry both in your tongues and eyes; for shame, learn silence in the one, and
secrecy in the other. Will you give power to an insulting Lover, to triumph
over your weakness; or, which is worse, to work on the opportunity of your
lightness? Do not; rather ram up those portells which betray you to your
enemy, and prevent his entry by your vigilance. Keep home and stray not, lest
by gadding abroad, you incur Dinahs fate. You have Consorts of your own sex
to pass time withal; their society will teach you to forget, what is better
forgot than kept. Let not a straid thought betray your innocence. Check your
madding Fancy, and if it use resistance, curb it with restraint. It will do
excellently well, if you forbear to resort to places of public meeting; till
you have drawn up and sealed a Covenant with your eyes, to see naught that
they may not lawfully covet. These, when they wander, they breed in the heart a
dangerous distemper. Lastly, address your employment ever to something that is
good; so shall your fantasy find naught to work upon that is ill. This shall
afford you more liberty, than the whole worlds freedom can afford you.

Now to you, Coy ones, whom either coldness of nature has benumbed, or
coyness has made subtle to dissemble it. You can look and like, and turn
another way, where you like most. No object of love can take you, till it
overtake you. Be not wise too much. True affection cannot endure such
dissimulation. Divide not him, whom you love, into such extremes: you may be
modest, and spare a great deal of this Coyness; It is the rule of Charity to
do as you would be done to. Now, would it content you to be entertained with
disdain, where your deserts merit acceptance? Rectify this then in your
selves, which you would not have done by another to your selves. It is an ill
requital, to recompense fancy with contempt, or constant love with disdain.
This were to incur ingratitude, a vice so odious, as no age could find ever
ought more uncivilly impious. I do not move you to be too open-hearted; or if
so, not too liberally to express it: this were no discovery of fancy, but
folly. So conceal and smoothly palliate your love, as your lover may not
despair of all hope to obtain your love. Indifferent Curtsies you may show
without lightness, and receive them too in lieu of thankfulness. I leave it
to your discretion to distinguish times and places; for these may either
improve or impair the opportunity of such like Curtsies.

Do not immure your beauties, as if a jealousy of your own weakness had
necessitated this restraint. There can be no Conquest, where there is no
Contest. Converse with love; conceit with your selves whom you could like. This
your cooler temper may admit, and still retain that liberty which is fit.

Falconers use many means to make their Hawks sharp; they begin with short
flights, till weathring bring them to endure longer. Pigmalions image received
not life in all parts at once; first, it took warmth, after that, vital
motion. Is love cool in you? let a kindly warmth heat that coldness. Is Love
dull in you? let a lively agility quicken that dullness. Is love coy in you?
let a lovely affability supple that coyness: So, in short time, you may have a
full relish of loves sweetness.

Now we come to the attemperament of these; wherein we are to extract out of
grosser metals some pure Oar, which we must refine, before it can give any
true beauty to this specious palace of love. Draw near then, and attend to
what of necessity you must observe; if ever you mean to deserve HER love, whom
you are in Civility bound to serve.

In Sicilia there is a fountain called Fons Solis, Pemp. Mela.
out of which at Midday, when the Sun is nearest, flows cold water; at
Midnight, when the Sun is farthest off, flows hot water. This should be
the lively Emblem of your state (Gentlewomen:) who, now after those cooler
vapors of your frozen affection dispersed, those lumpish and indisposed humors
dispelled, and those queasie risings of your seeming coyness dispossessed;
have felt that chaste amorous fire burn in you, which will make you of
shamefaste Maids, modest Matrons. When the heat of passion is at Midday, I
mean his full height, with those to whom faith has engaged you, and love,
before the hostage of that faith, confirmed you; then are you to resemble the
quality of that fountain, An Explanation of the Emblem.
by flowing with cold water of discretion and sweet temper, to allay that heat;
lest it weaken those you love, by giving way to passion, which patience cannot
choose but loath. Again, when heat is farthest off, and providence begins to
labor of a lethargy; when servants remit their care, neglect their charge, and
the whole family grow out of order, through the coldness of a remiss Master;
resemble then that fountain, by flowing with hot water; win and weane these
whom love and loyalty have made yours, with warm conjugall tears, to
compassionate their neglected estate, and by timely prevention to avert the
fate of improvident husbands.

Or thus, Another proper application of this Emblem.
if you please, may you make your selves gracious Emblemes of that fountain:
Does the Sun shine at Midday, and in his fullest height on you? Do the beams
of prosperity reflect brightly on you? Flow with cold water; allay this your
heat and height of prosperity, with some cooling thoughts of adversity, lest
prosperity make you forget both the Author of it, and in the end how to bestow
it. Again, does the Sun shine farthest off you? Does not one small beameling
of prosperous success cheer you? Flow with hot water; vanquish adversity with
resolution of temper. Desist not from labor, because fortune seconds not your
endeavor. To conclude, as your wild fancy (if you were ever surpised of any)
is now rectified; your coolness heatned; your coyness banished; so conform
your selves to them, whom one heart has made one with you, as no cloud of
adversity may look so black, no beam of prosperity shine so clear, wherein
you may not with an equal embrace of both estates, bear your share.

THE ENGLISH GENTLEVVOMAN.
Argument.
Gentility is derived from our Ancestors to us, but soon blanched, if not
revived by us; Virtue the best Coat; A shamefaste red, the best color to
deblazon that Coat; Gentility is not known by what we wear, but what we are;
There are native seeds of goodness sown in generous bloods by lineall
succession; How these may be ripened by instruction.

GENTILITY.
GENTILITY consists not so much in a lineall deblazon of Arms, Observe. 7.
as personal expression of virtues. Gentility is derived from our Ancestors to
us, but soon blanched, if not revived by us.
Yea, there is no Ornament like virtue, to give true beauty to descent. What is
it to be descended great? to retein the privilege of our blood, to be ranked
highest in an Heralds book? when our lives cannot add one line to the
memorable records of our Ancestors? There should be no day without a line, if
we desire to preserve in us the honor of our Line. Those Odours then deserve
highest honors, that beautify us living, and preserve our memory dying.
Should we call to mind all those our Ancestors, who for so many preceding ages
have gone before us; and whose memory now sleeps in the dust; we should,
perchance, find in every one of them some eminent quality or other, if a true
survey of their deserving actions could be made known unto us; yea, we
should understand, that many of them held it their highest grace, to imitate
their Predecessors in some excellent virtue; the practice whereof they esteemed
more prayse-worthy, than the bare title of Gentility. Now, what just reproof
might we deserve, if neither those patterns, which our Ancestors had, nor the
virtuous examples of our Ancestors themselves, can persuade us to be their
followers? Their blood streams through our veins; why should not their
virtues shine in our lives? Their mortality we carry about with us; but that
which made them immortally happy, we retain not in us. Their Gentility we
claim; the privileges they had by it, we retain. Mean time, where is that
in us, that may truly Gentilize us, and design us theirs? What a poor thing
is it to boast of, that our blood is nobler, our descent higher? Tell me, can
any one prescribe before Adam? And what shall he find in that first Ancestor
of his, but red clay? The matter whereof he was made, it was no better; nor
can we suppose our mortar to be purer. He most emphatically described our
Genealogy, who cried, Earth, Earth, Earth: Earth by Creation, Condition,
Dissolution. No less fully understood he the quality of his Composition, with
the root from whence he took his beginning, who called Earth his Mother;
Worms his Brethren and Sisters. His kinsfolks he could not much boast of,
they were such inferior Creatures; no Strutters in the street, but despicable
Creepers.

Let me now reflect upon you, Gentlewomen, whose generous birth should be
adorned with virtuous worth, and so make you moving Objects of imitation both
in life and death.

Are you nobly descended? Ennoble that descent with true desert. Do not think
that the privilege of greatness, can be any subterfuge to guiltiness. Your
more ascending honor requires more than a Common luster. In places of public
resort you challenge precedence, and it is granted you. Shall the highest place
have the least inward grace? No; let not a word fall from you, that may
unbeseeme you. Others are silent when you discourse; let it be worth their
attention; lest a presumption of your own worth draw you into some frivolous
excursion. There is not an accent which you utter, a sentence you deliver, any
motion in your carriage or gesture, which others eye not, and eying assume not.
Your retinue is great; your family gracious; your actions should be the life
of the one, and line of direction to the other. To see a light Lady descending
from a noble Family, is a Spectacle of more spreading infamy, than any subject
of inferior quality. I cannot approve of this Apish kind of formality, which
many of our better sort use; it detracts from their descent, to make
affectation their Tutresse. They were freeborn; nothing then that is servile
can become them. It is nothing to retain the favor or feature of your
Ancestors, and to estrange you from that which truly dignified your Ancestors.

Virtues have more living colors, and are seconded with more lasting honors
than any outward beauties. You deceive your selves, if you think that honor
received her first life from descent; no, It was demerit that made descent
capable of honor. A Pedigree argues your Gentility; but had not some deserving
action been, you had never attained to any noble Pedigree. For Gentility is
not to be measured by antiquity of time, but precedence in worth. If brackish
or troubled water seldom come from a pure Spring; wild and unsavory fruit
from a good tree; whence is it, that noble Predecessors, whose pure blood was
never corrupted with any odious stain, should bring forth such degenerating
scions? Surely, this generally proceeds from the too much liberty that is
granted to our youth; whose inclinations, though otherwise good and equally
disposed, are usually by Custom, which becomes a Second nature, miserably
depraved. Society they affect, and this infects them; repair to public places
they admit, and this corrupts them. Those eminent examples which their Noble
Progenitors left them, become buried with them. They comply with the time;
Virtue (they say) can hardly subsist, where Vice is in highest request. What
though Plato advise them to make choice of the best way of living, which may
be easily effected by assiduate use and daily custom: they have learned to
invert his rule, by affecting that custom most, which tends to the practice of
virtue least. Besides, there is another reason which may be probably alleged,
why generous descents become so much corrupted; and virtuous Parents by vicious
Children so frequently seconded. Our Nobler women, though in other respects
truly imitable, and for their virtuous Conversation admirable, come short in
one peculiar duty, which even Nature exacts of them, and which being duly
perfom'd, would doubtlesly, no less enable and ennoble them who are descended
from them, than any particular, were it never so powerful, that could inform
them. These which are mothers by generation, are seldom their Nursing-mothers
by education. No marvel then, if they degenerate, when they partake of the
natures of other women. Though their own mothers blood stream through their
veins, a strangers milk must feed them, which makes them participate of their
nature, as they are fed with their substance. Wheresoever the Nurses milk is
received, the Nurses manners are likewise retained. Whence it was, that
Chrysippus expressly commanded that the very best and wisest Nurses should be
made choice of; that what good blood had infused, might not by ill milk be
infected. It was the joint advice both of Plutarch and Phavorine, that a mother
should be her childrens Nurse: because, commonly, with the milk of the Nurse,
they suck the quality or condition of her life. Yea, according to an ancient
Decree, women were bound to nurse their own children, and not to have any
other women (unless necessity enforced them) to nurse them.

Let this then be rectified; ye, whose Noble descents have made you eminent
in the eye of the world, and whom Gods blessing has made fruitful Mothers, to
bring forth a fair and hopeful increase unto the world; nurse them with your
own milk: this will express in you a motherly care to them, and beget in
them a greater measure of child-like love to you. Your care, the more it is
parentall, will exact of them a love more faithful and filial. Nurse them, I
say, with the milk of your own breasts to feed them; with the milk of your
own lives to inform them. So shall their actions prove them to be your
Successors; when they shall not only derive their blood from you, but on this
Theater of humane frailty, shall publish themselves to be true representers of
you. For in vain is your blood to them derived, if your memory by their
virtues be not revived. Give them then that which may make them yours.
Goodness may be blamed, but her succeeding memory can never be blanched.
Thus shall you not only show your selves worthy of that house, from whence you
came, but after your period on earth, be received into a more glorious house
in time to come.

IT is not the Nobility of descent, but of virtues, that makes any one a
graceful and acceptable Servitour in the Court of heaven. Houses are
distinguished by Coats and Crests; but these are dignified by something else.

In Heraldry, those are ever held to be the best Coats, that are deblazoned
with least charge. Virtue the best Coat.
Consequently, then must virtue needs be the best Coat. She requires the
least charge; in her attire, she is not sumptuous; in her fare, delicious; nor
in her retinue (the more is the pity) numerous. She confines her desires upon
earth within a strait Circumference; a very small portion of that metal will
content her. Her desires are only there seated, where they may be satisfied.
She sees none so great in the Court, as may deserve her envy; none so rich in
the City, as may beget in her an earthly desire; none so reposed in the
Country, as to induce her to change her state. She is infinitely happy, in
that she aims at no other happiness, than where it is to be found. Ambition
may display her Pie-colour'd flagge; but she will never get virtue to be her
follower: Her desires are pitched upon a far more transcendent honor, than
these State-corrivals on earth can ere afford her; or by their competition take
from her. Pleasure may cast out her Lure, but virtue is so high a flyer, as
she scorns to stoop to ought unworthy of her; it pleases her to contemplate
that on earth, which she is to enjoy in heaven. These feathers in the air,
are Objects undeserving her care. Profit may seek to undermine her; but all
her policy cannot work on virtues constancy. Content is her Crown; Contempt
of the world, her care; what wordlings seek, she shuns; whence it is, that
her beauty, in the darkest Night of adversity, shines. In a word, she is an
absolute Commandresse of her self; and easy is it to have that Command, where
no turbulent passions labor to contend.

Far otherwise is it with those, who be they never so generously descended,
popularly graced, nor powerfully guarded, yet being not adorned with this
Crest, distinguished by this Coat, they can neither enjoy freedom within, nor
safety without.

Lewis, the eleventh had a conceit, which, no doubt, proceeded from his
melancholicke and indisposed humor, that every thing did stink about him: all
the odoriferous perfumes, or fragrant savours they could get, would not ease
him, but still he smelled a silthy stink. So fares it with them, whose
corrupt hearts, like musty vessels, not thoroughly seasoned with virtue, send
forth no other smell than what is most distastefull to a pure and well-disposed
mind. Now, there be many, who make an outward semblance of conscience; and
promise to the world apparent arguments of their uprightness; whose inward
Cells, like corrupt Charnell-houses, afford nothing but filthiness. Yea,
these, to make the world more confident of their sanctity, will not stick to
condemn themselves, dis-value their own worth, and rank them amongst the
unworthiest that breath on earth. Yet, though they disprayse themselves before
others, they cannot endure to be dispraysed by others. Whereof we read one
excellent example to this purpose: There was a certain woman, who had taken
her self to a Cloyster-life, and seemed very devo^t; so as she usually said
to her Confessor, who came often unto her, to hear her Confession, and partake
of her Devotion: Good father, pray unto the Lord for me; for I am a woman so
evil, yea, even so utterly naught, as I much fear lest the Lord punish others
for my sins. Upon this, the Priest out of a discreet zeal, desired to try
whether there were in her the foundation of true humility or no. Next time
therefore, that she uttered the like words unto him, saying; That she was the
very worst of all women; the Priest forwith answered: I have often times at
many bands heard thus much of thee before this. Whereat she being presently
incensed, replied: You lie in your throat: And whosoever has told you, or
reports such things of me, are all liars. To attemper which immoderate
passion, the Priest humbly returned her this answer: Now I perceive thy pride
and hypocrisy; for as much as thou speak that of thy self, which thou
disdainest any other should speak of thee. And this is no sign of true
humility, but of inward pride and gross hypocrisy.

These dissembled, be they never so assiduate, semblances, are no colors for
Virtues crest, They must be dyed in grain, or they will not hold. These, who
express modesty in their outward carriage, are good examples to those that
consort with them; yet if their private Parler be a witness of their
dishonor, they deface the figure of goodness in themselves. Virtue consists
not in seeming but performing, nor piety in appearing but practicing. What is
it to be outwardly retired from the world, and inwardly affianced to the
world? How are those women in Turkey affected, that most part of the year come
not abroad? Those Italian and Spanish Dames, that are mewed up like Hawks, and
locked up by their jealous husbands? This is such an enforced restraint, as it
many times begets loose desires in the restrained. It is the prevention of
occasion that crowns us. More prayse-worthy were those women of Sio, could
they confine their actions within the bounds of modesty, than these restrained
Libertines. For those Island Women, as they are the beautifull'st Dames of all
the Greeks, so have they more liberty granted by their avaricious husbands,
than all the Dames in Greece. For their wives prostitution is their promotion.
So as, when they see any stranger or promising factor arrive, they will
presently demand if he would have a Mistress: which, for want of better supply,
they mercenarily tender him in the person of their own wives: so willing are
they to wear the lasting Badge of infamy, for base lucre or commodity.

It is not then an enforced moderation of our affections, that deserves the
style of goodness. We are to enjoy freedom in our desires, and over those a
noble Conquest, if we merit the name of virtuous.

Come then, Gentlewomen, you see what Coat will honor your House most. Other
Coats may be blanched by corruption of blood; or blemished by some other
occurrent: but this is so pure as it will admit of no stain. Fantastical and
false prophecies may be ominously advanced, published, and dispersed, upon
Arms, Fields, Beasts, or Badges, against which our Laws have ordained
necessary provisions. But no Augur, Seer or Southsayer can by any such
groundless Divination, detract from the constant beauty or splendour of his Coat.

Soveraignizing Saladine, after he had made himself a terror to many potent
Princes, by making them his Subjects, who never till then knew what subjection
meant; after he had achieved so many prosperous victories, taken in so many
flourishing Provinces, and attained the highest degree of an imperial
greatness; being surprised by so mortal and fatal a malady, as he despaired
of recovery: called his Chiefetaine or General before him, and bad him haste
away to the great City Damascus, and there in the midst of that populous City,
to fix his shrouding-sheete upon a Spear, and display it like a banner, with
these words; This is all that Souldan Saladine has left of all his Ensigns!
This, the remainder of all his victories! How happy had that Emperor been, if
after so many memorable exploits done by him living, so many imperial trophies
of his dispersed victories erected by him breathing, he had reserved this Coat
to have memoriz'd him dying?

Dorcas Coats were brought forth and shown, after she departed. So live, that
your best Coats, which are your virtues, may give testimony of you, when Earth
shall receive you. Let not your Gentility become blasted with infamy; nor your
Noble families labor of that scarcity, as not to give virtue all hospitality.
Divinely sung our Modern Poet: To be of generous blood and Parents borne,
And have no generous virtues, is a scorn.


Let it be your highest scorn, to stoop to any base thought. It is not
priority nor precedence of place, but propriety and proficiency in grace that
makes an honorable Soul. That Cloth is of most worth that wears best; and
that fashion of most esteem that holds longest in request. Virtue is right.
Sempiternam for wear; and of that complete fashion, as with Christian women it
grows never out of date. Make choice of this stuff then to suite you, of this
Coat to gentilize you. All others are but conterseits in comparison of her;
whose property it is to honor those that serve her; harbor those that fly
for refuge to her; and to reward those who constantly stand in defense of her
honor. There is nothing can wound you, being thus armed; nothing ill-beseeme
you, being thus adorned; nothing disparage you, being thus honored: Heraldry
finds a Coat for your house, but Virtue finds honor to grace your person.
Retain those divine impressions of goodness in you, that may truly ennoble
you: display your gentility by such a Coat, as may best distinguish your
family; so shall you live and dye with honor, and survive their fame, whose
only glory it was to enjoy fortunes favor.

PAinters are curious in the choice of their colors, lest their Art become
blemished through those decayed colors, wherewith their Pictures are
pourtrayed. Some are opinion, that the receipt of Painting or Coloring the
substance of glass through, is utterly lost; neither that these late
succeeding times can regaine, as yet, that mysterious perfection. Far more is
it to be doubted lest virtue, which we have proved by infallible arguments to
be the best Coat, want her true color, and consequently become deprived of
her chief luster. Some Pictures, I know, will do well in white; yet it is
color that gives them life. Beauty never darts more love to the eye, not with
quicker convoy directs it to the heart, then when it displayes her guiltless
shame in a crimson blush. There is one flower to be loved of women, which is
the chiefest flower in all their garden; Nazian. A shamefaste red the best
Color to deblazon virtues Coat.
and this is a good red, which is shamefastness. These standing colors are
slow wooers to discreet Lovers. Virtues Coat then is best beblazoned when a
shamefast red breathes upon it.

Protogenes tables, wherein Baccbus was painted, and all his furious Bacchanals
to life displayed, moved King Demetrius to such admiration, during his siege of
the City Rhodes, that where he might have consumed the City with fire, and
buried the glory thereof in ashes, would not for the preciousnesse of that
table: so as, protracting time by staying to bid them battle, won not the
City at all. If a livelesse Picture could enforce such affection in a knowing
Commander, what effects may we think will a living substance produce? Truth
is, there is such sweet and amiable correspondence betwixt virtuous beauty, and
shamefaste modesty, as the one cannot subsist without the others society. Not a
light passage can want the attendance of a blush, whilst modesty is in
presence. Yea, though she be not conscious of any conceit, that might beget
in her face a shamefaste blush; out of a modest Compassion she will not stick
to blush, when she observes ought in another deserving blame. Her ears glow
at any light report; which, lest they should grow too credulous, she fortifies
with reason, to oppose the too easy entrance of suspicion. She partakes of no
resemblance less than that of the Chamelon, whose natural property it is to
represent all Colors save white. She is a mild and moderate interpreter of
others actions; but a serious Censor of her own. Light discourses, which tend
rather to the depraving of the Hearer, than ministering any useful subject to
an attentive Observer, she excludes; uncivil Complement she abhorres; what
only is modest she approves; and seconds her approvement with a graceful
smile. She holds an infected mind to be more dangerous than an infected
house: such Company she shunnes, on whom the rays of virtue seldom or never
shine. There is not that Condition, be it never so mean, which she cannot
with cheerfulness entertain: so as, she holds outward poverty the best
enricher of an inward family. Her desires are so equally poyzed, as she
neither seeks more than she enjoyes, nor wants freedom to dispose of what
she enjoyes. Honor she affects, yet with no such eagerness, as to hazard
the loss of a dearer honor, for so uncertain a purchase. Friends and
favorites she admits, and with that constancy, as it neither repents her of
accepting, nor them of tendering such virtuous fruits of amity.

Here you have her, Gentlewomen, who will tell you, and in her self exemplify
what she tells you; that modesty is the choycest ornament that can adorn you.
Now if you purpose to trace her path, or conform your selves to her line; you
must work on your affections, to embrace what she loves, and reject
whatsoever she loathes. Are you conversant at any time with such protesting
servants, as make deep Oaths mere Complements; and whose tongues are witty
Orators in running descant on a wanton Tale? These are such Consorts as Modesty
would be loath to converse with. She can never endure any of these discourses
without an angry blush. Should you delight in these, you should quickly hear
her out of a virtuous passion, cry out with the Poet: O Age! most of our women
know not now,
What' it is to blush, till painting tell them how.


Again, should you entertain in your naked bosoms, what some wantons have
too much affected, light amorous Poems; perusing them with no less Content,
than if they had been purposely penned to work on your Conceit; this cannot
stand with your modesty: These may corrupt you, but never rectify what is
wandering in you. Suffer not a wanton passage to play on your fantasy. Sin
would never enter in upon you, if she found but a preparation of resistance in
you. Tell me, what a sweet grace conferres it on you, to mix your salutes with
modest blushes, and entertain your Suitors with a shamefaste bashfulnesse!
Sure I am, where love is discreetly grounded, this cannot choose but be an
especial motive to affection. There may be, I grant, such wild lovers, who
prefer the loose love of an inconstant Phaedra, before the chaste embraces of
a continent Antiope: but their indiscreet choice is ever seconded with a
fearful cloze. Those, who esteem more of a painted cheek, than a native
blush, shall find all their imaginary happiness resolved to a painted bliss.
It is Modesty and not Beauty which makes the husband happy. Would you then
deserve the title of Chaste Virgins, constant Wives, modest Matrons? While you
are ranked amongst the first, converse not privately with a wanton thought;
send not forth a wandering eye to fetch in a Sweetheart. Dis-value not your
own worth so much, as to woo others to become your Suitors: This would be a
means rather to depresse love, than increase it; impair love, than improve
it. If you be worthy winning, you cannot choose but be worthy wooing. Mean
time, let not a straid look betray your too forward love; nor a light conceit
tax you of deserved reproof. Dye your cheeks with a Rosy blush, when you
hear ought that may detract from the modesty of your Sex. Be as silent as
the night; your best Rhetoric consists in maiden blushes, and bashful
smiles; which will work more powerfully on a Lovers heart, than a Rhetorical
tongue, be it never so curiously tipped with Art.

For the second rank, you know how strict a duty is imposed on you; now are
you not to converse with strange love, or suffer any other person have the
least share in your affection. To Court love, or use any Complement, purposely
to win a private favorite, would detract as much from your honor, as for a
Soldier to fly from his Captain, and adhere to a stranger. He has invested
you in himself, and engaged himself yours by a sacred vow, which death only
may reverse: the dispersed loves which you enterteined before, must now be
reduced to one, and that but one, by whose mutual choice two are individually
made one. A heart divided cannot live; no more can the heat of divided love.
You are now so far from entertaining any stranger; as you have vowed with
your heart, not to enter so much as any treaty with an unjust intruder. It is
dangerous to converse with a professed foe, whose drift it is to undermine you;
and such an one is every loose lover, who labors with the licentious art of
adulterous Oratory, to deprive you of that inestimable gemme, which of all
others, most adornes you.

For you that are Matrons, ripeness of years has enjoined you to bid a
lasting adieu to the vanities of youth. Now are you set as examples of gravity,
for others to imitate.

It were dotage in you now to begin to love, when your decay in Nature tells
you, it is not long you are to live. You have hitherto performed your parts
with a genercus approvement of your actions, fail not in the conclusion. This
small remainder of your declining pilgrimage, should be wholly dedicated to
the practice of goodness; that your pious end may second your virtuous
beginning. The Sun shines ever brighter at his setting than rising; so should
your life appear better at your departing than entering.

It were incomparably beneficial for you, now in this your Exit, to have your
affections seated in heaven, before you depart from earth: leaving some
memorable examples of your wel-spent life, which may eternize you after this
life.

This will make your names flourish; and cause others in a virtuous emulation
of your actions, to retain your memory in their lives. To be brief, be you
of what Condition soever, either in respect of your age or state; there is
nothing can better become you than a modest shamefastness: which consists
either in averting your ear from your own praise; or withdrawing your
presence from dishonest or uncivil discourse; or rejecting an importunate
Suitor, whose too inconsiderate entertainment might question your honor. I
have noted in some women a kind of zealous and devout passion, when they
chanced but to hear any light or wanton communication; they could not hold but
reprove them for their impudence, and amidst their reproof, to adorn the Rosy
Circlets of their cheeks with a blushing shamefastness. Surely, this
expressed a singular modesty in them; which I would have you ( Gentlewomen) in
a serious imitation of them, to represent in your selves. It will happen, many
times, that you cannot choose but encounter with some frontlesse Buffouns,
petulant Pasquills, whose highest strain of obscene wit, is to justify some
fabulous story, or repeat an uncivil Tale; which you are to entertain with
such disgust, as these odious Relaters may gather by your Countenance, how much
you distaste such uncivil discourse. For it is a sweet kind of evincing
sin, to discountenance it with a modest shame.

Thus shall you make your very frown an ingenuous Index of your incorrupt
heart: and to add one line more unto your Honor, display the Character of
your guiltless shame in a Maiden blush, a Virgin-colour.

SEverus the Emperor would have majesty preserved by a virtuous disposing of
the desire, Gentility is not known by what we wear, but what we are.
not by a curious effeminacy in attire. For, as we cannot account him for
less then a fool, who prizeth his horse by the faddle, and trappings that
hang about him, more then by the worth that is in him: so is he most foolish,
who values the man by the worth of his Clothes, rather then those inward parts
that do accomplish him.

How many formal Gallants shall we observe, whose only value consists in
putting on their clothes neatly; wearing their Cloaks before them, as if they
would forgo them; or bestow them upon some Pandor to usher their mushrom
Gentility to a house of light Society: with whom, if you should converse, you
might easily find Aesops, painted seuls, fairly promising, O age ^ no cover
now fit for our mold, But Plush, Shag, Velvet, Tissue, Cloth of Gold.
but weakly performing? The greatest Obliquity these can find in our age, is
the too careless observance of fashions; which our neat formalists have no
great cause to tax for an error, seeing affectation in the choice of fashion
is this ages humor. The golden apple was given to the fairest, not the finest;
the golden Tripode, neither to the fairest nor finest, but wisest. For might
the fairest have obtained it, Alcibiades, being the daintiest and best favored
Boy in all Athens, might by right have challenged it. Again, might the finest
have enjoyed it, the Lydian Croesus, being richer in attire than any of his
time, might have pleaded for it. Of whom it is said, that Solon of Salamine
came to visit him; not to admire him, as simple people did, whose judgments
most commonly were placed in their eyes: but to reprove him for his vanity, an
apt subject for Philosophy; and weane him from that which threatened ruin to
his State. This delicate Prince had that learned Sage no sooner found decked
and adorned with the choicest Ornaments, and seated on an high Throne, than he
encountered that grave Philosopher with this vain question: demanding of him,
Whether he had ever seen a more glorious sight? To whom Solon right gravely
answered; Yes, quoth he, I have seen House-cocks, Phesants, and Peacocks: And
these were graced with a natural beauty; whereas yours is but a borrowed
glory, which must veil to time, and shake hands, ere it be long, with
mortality.

To these that fabulous Story of the Persian Prince Crysalus may be properly
applied, and personally resembled; who, with his pye-colour'd Reteiners,
presenting themselves at Jupiters marriage like painted fools, became
transformed into plumed fowls. Truth is, should we judge of men's worths by
their outward wear, or distinguish Gentility by a fashionable attire, we
should err more in judgment, then a blind man in his first discovery of
colors. What eminent Ladies are recorded in the continuate histories of fame;
whose esteem took first breath, not from what they wore, but what they were?
It was not their aim to strike a stupid Beholder into admiration with a
phantasticke habit, nor allure an humorous Lover with a conceited complement.

Calcagninus Apol. marg.
Our simple Elders knew not what it was,
To set their face, or court a Looking-glass.
It was their highest task to correct those errors that were in them: by
which means they became so inwardly lovely, as none truly knew them, that
could do less than entirely love them. Surely, there is no state that suites
so sitly with Gentility, as the low, but loyal attendance of humility. Aug.
This is she, who (as she is rightly defined) is the Princess of virtues,
the conqueresse of vices, the mirror of virginity, the choicest harbor or
repose for the blessed trinity. She considers, how he, by whom our corrupt
blood was restored, our unvaluable losses repaired, and our primitive
nakedness compassionately covered, was not with a Diadem crowned, nor in a
stately bed couched; yea, scarcely rather with one poor coat covered: which
he wore not as an ornament to his body, to bestow on it trimnesse, but for
necessity to cover his nakedness. What a poverty is it then for you, whose
ancient descent promises something extraordinary in you, to have nothing to
boast of, save only a gilded outside? It was Necessity that invented Clothes
for you; now were it fit to pride you in that, which deprived you of your prime
beauty? You shall observe in many of our grave Matrons, with what indifferency
they attire themselves. Their inward ornaments are their chiefest care; their
renewing and repairing of them, their highest cure. They have found such choice
flowers, as they afford more spiritual delight to the soul, than any visible
flowers or odours do to the smell. And what are these, but divine and moral
precepts, sovereign instructions; which have taught them how to contemn
earth, conquer death, and aspire unto eternity? These by a continued custom or
frequent converse with heavenly things, cannot now conceive any object to be
worthy their beholding on earth. Fashions may be worn about them, but little
observed by them. The WEDDING GARMENT is their desired raiment. This they make
ready for the Nuptial day; the meditation whereof so transports them, as
nothing below heaven can possess them. It is not beauty which they prize; for
they daily and duly consider the Prophets words; Joel. 1.
All faces shall gather blackness. Again, they remember the threats which God
denounces upon beautiful, but sinful Niniveh, Nahum. 3.
I will discover thy skirts upon thy face. This makes them seriously to
consider the dangerous quality of sin, and to apply Ninivehs salve to their
sore: that wine of Angels, the tears of repentance. Which, howsoever it is, as
one wittily observes, Every man's medicine; an universal Antidote, that makes
many a Mithridates venture on poison: yet works it not this banefull effect
with these; for their affections are so sweetly tempered, their hearts so truly
tendered, as they make not Repentance security to delinquents: They well
remember that Aphorism of spiritual Physic: As he that sins in hope of
remission, feeds distemperature to seek a Physician; so he that repents with
a purpose of sinning, shall find an eternal place to repent in. These, who
thus belull themselves in the downe-beds of security, labor of an irreparable
Lethargy. They make bold to sin, as if they were sure to repent. But the
medicine was made for the wound, not the wound for the medicine. We must not
suffer our selves voluntarily to be wounded, in hope we have to be cured: but
prevent the means, that we may atteine a more glorious end. The choicest
receipt, the chiefest antidote then is to prevent the means or occasion of
sin; which if at any time we commit, to infuse the balm of repentance into
it; which seasonably applied, may minister a sovereign salve to our sore, so
we intend our care to so consequent a cure.

Come then, Gentlewomen, begin now at last to reflect on your own worth.
Understand, that Gentility is not known by what you wear, but what you are.
Bern.
Consider, in what member soever your Creator is most offended, in that shall
every sinner be most tormented. Remember, how the time shall come (and then
shall your time be no time) when the Moath shall be your underlining, and the
Worm your covering. Trimm^ your selves then with an inward beauty; that a
glorious Bridegroom may receive you. Fashion your selves to his image, whom
you represent. That Fashion only, will extend the date of time, and crown you
with immortality after time. These, who have their judgments in their eyes,
may admire you for your Clothes; but those, who have their eyes in their heads,
will only prize you by your inward worth. Were it not a poor Ensign of
Gentility, to hang up a phantasticke fashion to memorize your vanity after
death? So live, that you may ever live in the memory of the good. It will not
redound much to your honor, to have observed the fashions of the time, but to
have redeemed your time; to have dedicated your selves to the practice of
virtue all your time; to have been Mirrors of modesty to your succeeding sex;
to have dis-valued the fruitless flourish of fading vanity, for the promising
hopes of a blessed eternity. O Eternity, eternity! let this ever emphatically
sound in your memory; Supply then that in you, which bleered judgments expect
without you. You challenge precedence in place, express your selves worthy of
that place. Virtue will make you far more honored, than any garish habit can
make you admired. The one is a Spectacle of derision, the other of true and
generous approbation. This you shall do, if you season your desires with
discretion; if you temper your excursive thoughts, and bring them home with a
serious meditation of your approaching dissolution. It is said of the Palm
tree, that when it grows dry and fruitless, they use to apply ashes to the
root of it, and it forthwith recovers: that the peaceful Palms of your
virtuous minds may flourish ever; that their branches may ever blossom and
never wither; apply unto their roots the ashes of mortification; renew them
with some sweet and sovereign meditation. That when you shall return to your
mother Earth, those that succeed you may collect how you lived while you were
on Earth: by making these living actions of your Gentility, happy Precursors to
your state of glory.

These are native seeds of goodness sown in generous bloods by lineall
succession.
Fountains are best distinguished by their waters, Trees by their fruits, and
Generous bloods by their actions. There are inbred seeds of goodness (says
the Philosopher) in every good man: and these will find time to express
themselves.

It was David's testimony of himself: From my youth up have I loved thy Law. An
excellent prerogative given him, and with no less diligence improved by him.
Now these Native seeds, as they are different, so are the fruits which come of
them, variously disposed. Some have a relish of true and generous bounty;
wherein they show that noble freedom to their own, in their liberality
toward others: as their very actions declare unto the world, their command and
sovereignty over the things of this world. Others discover their noble
disposition, by their notable pity and compassion; These will estrange
themselves from no man's misery. If they cannot succor him, they will suffer
with him. Their bosoms are ever open with pitiful Zenocrates, to receive a
distressed one. Over a vanquished foe they scorn to insult; or upon a dejected
one to triumph. They have tears to partake with the afflicted; and real
expressions of joy to share with the relieved. Others show apparent arguments
of their singular moderation; abstemious are these in their dishes; temperate
in their Companies; moderate in their desires. These wonder at the rioters of
this time; how they consume their days in sensuality and uncleanness Their
account is far more straight; their expense more strait; but their liberty of
mind of an higher strain. Clothes they wear, but with that decency, as
curiosity cannot tax them; meats they partake, but with that temperance, as
delicacy cannot tempt them. Others from their Cradle, become brave sparks of
valor; their very Childhood promises undoubted tokens of succeeding honor.
These cannot endure braves nor affronts. Generous resolution has stamped such
deep impressions in their heroicke minds, as fame is their aim; which they
hunt after, with such constancy of spirit, as danger can neither amate them,
nor difficulty avert them from their resolves. Others are endued with a
natural pregnancy of wit; to whom no occasion is sooner offered, than some
dainty expression must second it. Others with more solidity of judgment,
though of less present conceit. And these are such, as generally employ
themselves in State-affaires; wherein Experience, purchased by an useful
expense, of time, does so ripen them, as the Public State takes notice of
them, and recompenceth their care with honors conferred on them.

These and many other excellent endowments shall we observed to be lineally
derived from Ancestors to their Successors; which, as they retain a near
resemblance of their persons, so they represent their Actions: so powerful is
nature in bestowing her distinct Offices on every creature, wherein they
generally partake of their disposition as well as outward feature: whence the
Poet; Stout men and good are sprung from stout and good,
Horses and steeres retain their parents blood.


Yet see the iniquity of time! It fares oft-times with those who are endowed
with these virtues, to be most traduced, where their more noble and eminent
parts are to be highliest honored. Which, as it was a maine error in former
ages, so descends it to these present times. When Rome was in her glory, this
eclipsed her light, by detracting from their demerits most, whose free-bred
virtues deserved of their Country best. Sundry Families she had, famous for
their virtues, which by a depraved and mis-interpreting Censure, became branded
with undeserved aspersions. If the Piso's were frugall, they were held
parcimonious; if the Metelli devout, they were superstitious; if the Appii
strict, they were rigorous; if the Manlii affable, they were ambitious; the
Laelii, if wise, they were dangerous; the Publicolae, popular, by being
courteous. But with good and well-disposed persons, virtue is never out of
favor, though it be never so much impeached by a traducing censure.

Thus you have heard, Gentlewomen, what virtues have lineally and by blood
descended from Parents to their Children; what especial inward graces usually
attend some especial families, which no less memorize them, than those native
honors which are conferred on them. Now, to select such as sort best with your
sex and condition; in my opinion there is none that ennobles you higher, or
makes you more gracious in the eye of the beholder than Modesty, which was the
greatest advancer of many Roman families. This is that virtue, which expresses
you to be women; this is that, which makes you honored amongst women. Chains
and Carkenets, Jewels and Habiliments may be valued; but this Ornament is of
that high estimate, as it is not to be prized. Now, there is nothing that will
cause this to appear more precious unto you, next to the testimony of a good
Conscience within you, with an ardent desire of promoting his glory who made
you, than a reflection to your Family which bred you; whose honor to preserve,
as it is your especial duty, so no object of profit or pleasure, no attractive
Lure of deceiving honor should remove this opinion from you: To be high borne
and basely minded, is to ingraffe bastard slippes in a noble stock. Branches
of a crooked and inflexible quality, highly degenerate from true Gentility.
High and heroicke virtues become great houses. For, as they were first made
great by being good, so should they by surceasing from being good, lose their
title of being great. If by abusing the liberty of time, you detract from your
Ancestors fame, you lie a blemish on his shrine; which, though it touch not
him, yet it taints you who represent him.

This, no doubt, was that Noble Lady right mindful of, when on a time being
solicited by a powerful Suitor, who wooed her first in person, and after in a
wanton Rhetorical Letter; she, as one tender of her honor, and perceiving
that the scope of his suit tended to her dishonor, answered his fruitless
sollicitancy in this sort, with great modesty: Should I condescend to your
Suit, I should not only derogate from the honor of my present state, dis-value
that which I hold most dear, make my self a subject of contempt to every
ear, but asperse that infamy on my family, which would bear record of my
inconstancy. O what would the next age report of me, that I should so far
degenerate from those that bred me? No; poverty may enter in at my gate, but
dishonor shall never lodge in mine heart. Reserve these promises of honor for
such, as prize them above their honor: That generous blood which distreames
through my veins, shall sooner be dried, than it shall be for any hope of
advancement ingloriously stained.

Such singular resolves many of our Albion Ladies, questionless, even at this
day retain; who, rather than they would incur the least dishonor, or
occasion suspicion by their too free entertain of light Suitors, would confine
themselves to their Chambers, and debar themselves of public recourse.
Seeing then, that there are native Seeds of goodness sown in generous bloods
by lineall succession; which even in their first infancy give fair promises of
their inward beauty; express your selves Daughters worthy such virtuous
Mothers. Emulation of goodness in great persons is honorable. Their Pictures
you hang up, that their memories may live with you. Enjoy their virtues too,
and their memories shall live fresher in you. All memorials, being materials,
be they never so durable, are subject to frailty; only these precious monuments
of your virtues survive time, and breath eternity. You spring from a noble
Seminary; let those seeds of goodness which are sown in your youth, come to
that ripeness in your age, that as in piety you imitated others, so you may
become Presidents unto others; as you were here seasoned with grace, a good
report may follow you to your grave. All which by instruction only may be
effected, as in our next branch shall be more pregnantly proved.

HE cannot choose but live well, who conformes himself to that he hears. How
these native seeds of goodness may be ripened by instruction.
Good instructors are such faithful Monitors, as they will advise what is most
fitting, not what is best pleasing. And these are to be entertained with such
endeered respect, as their speeches, be they never so tart, should not incense
us, nor their reproves, be they never so free, distaste us.

Though Clitus open rebukes cost him his life, his free and friendly reproof
expressed his love; so as Alexander could never sufficiently bemone his loss.
Those Native seeds of goodness, whereof we formerly treated, be they in our
infancy never so plentifully diffused, yet in time they would grow rank and
wild, unless they were by seasonable instruction ripened. Now, Gentlewomen,
there be no Tutresses fitter to perfect this excellent work in you, than
those who were the secondary instruments of being unto you; Neither can those,
who are derived from you, become better instructed than by you. Your love, I
confess, will be more indulgent, yet your care so much the more incessant.
Their dispositions are best known unto you; if motherly affection then will
give way to discretion, who more fit to mold them than you? Preceding times may
afford you variety of examples in this kind.

Cornelia instructed hers in all piety; Portia hers in exemplary grounds of
chastity; Sulpitia hers in precepts of conjugall unity; Edesia hers in learning
and morality; Paulina hers in memorials of shamefaste modesty. These, though
Heathens, were excellent informers of youth; so as their Children were more
bound to them for their breeding than bearing, nurturing than nursing. Besides,
there is an inbred filial fear in Children to their Parents, which will beget
in them more attention in hearing, and retention in holding what they hear.
Now, there is no instruction more moving, Greg. in 38. Eva^g.
than the example of your living. By that Line of yours, are they to conform
their own. Take heed then, lest by the dampe of your life, you darken both
their glory and your own. I might propose unto you books of instruction,
which might minister arguments plenteously in this kind: but so short is the
memory in reteining what it reads, yea so distracted is the mind in observing
what it reads, that, as it fares with our natural face in a glass, from which
the glass is no sooner removed, than the resemblance of it is abolished; even
so, the book is no sooner left out of the hand, than the Contents are leapt
out of the heart. Yet, to the end you may not be unprovided of such Tracts as
may enable you for instruction, and prepare you to encounter with tentation; I
will recount such unto you, as may best accomodate you for the one, and
fortify you against the other. A brief enumeration, serious dicussion, and
judicious election of sundry ancient fathers with other moral Authors.


Learned Vives in his instruction of a Christian woman, recommends unto them
these glorious Lights of the Church, S. Hierom, Cyprian, Augustine, Ambrose,
Hilary, Gregory; annexing unto them those moral Philosophers, Plato, Cicero,
Seneca, etc. Of which, severally to deliver my opinion, it is this:

Than S. Hierom none more gravely copious, as may appear by those pithy and
effectual Epistles of his, directed to those noble Ladies, Marcella, Demetria,
Laeta, Furia, etc. wherein he uses singular exhortations, invincible arguments,
persuasive reasons, sweet similitudes, and forcive examples. Modesty is the
subject he commends unto them; decency in apparel he approves in them; to a
moderate restraint of liberty he enjoynes them; to an exemplary holiness he
exhorts them; and with sweet and comfortable promises of an incorruptible
reward he leaves them.

Than S. Cyprian, none more devoutly serverous; in his reproves he shows
mildness; in his treaties a passionate sweetness; he winnes the sinner by
inducing reasons; he strengthens the soul mightily against temptations; he
proposes an excellent way of moderating the affections; he applies sovereign
receipts to soveraignizing passions: and concludes with that sober and discreet
temper, as with a Divine insinuation he wooes, winnes, and weanes the sinner,
and in a spiritual tie unites him to his Redeemer.

Than S. Augustine, none more profoundly judicious, more judiciously zealous;
pithy are his directions, powerful his instructions: in his Meditations he is
moving; in his Soliloquies inwardly piercing; in his Manual comfortably
clozing. Amongst all those Conflicts in our Christian warfare, he holds none
sharper than our Combat with Chastity. He applies means how we may resist,
resisting vanquish; and by our Christian victory, receive Crowns of eternal
glory. That Conquest, he holds, deserves small honor, which is achieved
without Encounter. In a Divine rapsodie drawn, as it were, from himself, he
shows what should be done by us. Earth is no object fit to entertain our
eye; nor her deluding melody our ear: He exhorts us therefore to leave Earth
now while we live, that leaving Earth for altogether, we may enjoy our best
Love.

Than S. Ambrose, none more Divinely plenteous; sweetly serious are his
instructions; enforcing are his reasons: he speaks home to the sinner; whom
he no sooner finds wounded for sin, than he applies a Spiritual salve to
cure his sin. Many grave sentences are in his Offices methodically couched;
singular directions to guide every Christian in his Spiritual Pathway, are
there delivered. Like an expert Physician, he first gathers the nature or
quality of your distemper, and then ministers soule-salving receipts to restore
you to your right temper. He shows you how in your very motion, gesture, and
pace you are to observe modesty: concluding that nothing can afford true
comfort to a sojourning soul, but practice of piety.

Than S. Hilary, none more fully sententious; he discovers the occasion of our
corruption familiarly; advises us with many passionate and teare-swolne lines
to provide for our inward family; he proposes us a reward, if we contemn
Earth; he threatens us with the Law, if we contemn life. Sundry moving and
effectual Lessons he recommends to the perusal of women of all ranks, ages,
and conditions. Tenderly he compassionates the case of a sinner; passionately
treats he of those torments which shall last for ever: with prayers and tears
he sollicits them that have gone astray, to return; those that are already
returned, to go no more astray. He concludes with an useful Exhortation to
sorrow for sin, promising them, forth of that Storehouse of Comforts,
contained in the Gospel, for this their momentaine sorrow, an incessant joy in
Sion.

Than S. Gregory, none more highly mysterious, nor contemplatively glorious;
Divinely moral are his Morals; full of heavenly comforts are his instructions;
he walks in an higher way than others trace, yet with that humility, as there
is not a cloze from him, but it discloseth in him a love of meekness,
lowliness, and piety. With proper and elegant similitudes are his works
adorned; with choice sentences, as with so many select flowers, neatly
garnished; in a word, he is sweetly substantial, and substantially sweet. He
reprehends the times gravely; commends the practice of virtue gracefully. With
an holy zeal he reproves the remissness of the Ministry. Directions he gives
unto women, to have an especial care of modesty: concluding, that the love of
this life should not so possess us, as to deprive us of that inheritance which
might eternally bless us. In good minds he holds poverty the portresse of
humility: accounting those Evils or Adversities, which do here press us, to
be the Cords which draw us unto God who made us.

Touching those three Philosophers, this is my conceit of them; wherein none can
otherwise choose than concur with me, that shall seriously read, and sincerely
scanne them: Than Plato, none more divinely Philosophical; Than Cicero, more
philosophically Rhetorical; Than Seneca, more sagely Moral.

But for as much as it is not given to most of you to be Linguists, albeit
many of their works be translated in your mother tongue, you may converse
with sundry English Authors, whose excellent instructions will sufficiently
store you in all points; and, if usefully applied, confer no small benefit to
your understanding. I shall not need particularly to name them to you, because
I doubt not, but you have made choice of such faithful Reteiners and virtuous
Bosome-friends, constantly to accompany you. Neither, indeed, are books only
necessary; conference will singularly improve your knowledge; but that is not
altogether so convenient nor decent for your sex in public places. So as, I
much condemn their opinion, who hold no means so fitting to bring their
daughters to audacity, as a frequent consort with Company. This, in time,
begets in them rather impudence than boldness.

It was held a touch to a Maid to be seen talking with any one in a public
place. But in private Nurseries, which may be properly termed your household
Academies, it will suit well with your honors to treat and enter into
Conference one with another; or in such places, where your own sex is only
conversant. For such indiscreet Mothers, who usually trim and deck their
daughters, to send them forth to Shows, Meetings, or Enterludes, they anoint
havin with oil, that it may burn the better. But much more blameworthy be
those, who take them along to Tavernes and gossippings; which Education a
little time will bring into custom, and make modesty a stranger to her self.
For above all things (says the Philosopher) ought young Girls to be kept
from Ebriety: Arist^t. Pol. 7.
which he confirms with this reason: It is good, says he, for young men and
maids to be kept from wine, lest such become afterward protest drunkards,
profuse rioters, and prodigal exposers of their honor: the maine occasion
whereof, are their parents, by means of their ill instruction, and worse
example.

It is the very first instruction that takes the deepest impression; how
necessary then is it for you, Gentlewomen, whose sex is the Emblem of
weakness, and whose best resolves are oft-times weakened by youthful
promises, to furnish your blooming youth with wholesome instructions: and so to
improve them, that they may increase in vigor, as you do in stature? This
your sex exacts of you; this your present estate requires of you; and this
shall easily be effected by you, if having (as is to be presupposed) discreet
and religious Mothers, you submit your selves in all humble obedience to their
direction. For as it is very hard for any one to know how to command, unless
she know first how to obey; so will it be unto you to perform the office of a
Mother, if you never knew the duty of a daughter. Strict and severe may those
Commands seem to your youth, which riper age will easily digest. Again, you
that are Mothers, become patterns of modesty unto your daughters. Your living
actions are the lines of their direction. While they are under your command,
the error is yours, not theirs, if they go astray. Their honor should be one
of the principall'st things you are to tender; neither can it be blemished,
without some touch to your Credit. I have known some inconsiderate mothers,
and those none of the lowest rank or quality, who, either out of a confidence
they had of their daughters good carriage, or drawn with the hopes of some rich
Suitors to advance their marriage, have usually given too free way to
opportunity, which brought upon their daughters names a spreading infamy.

Your instructions will do well with them, till society deprave them: divert
then the occasion, so shall your daughters, be they never so poor, have good,
portions of reputation. Suffer not then those who partake of your image, to
lose their best beauty. Sigh then if they be soyled, for their shame must be
on you aspersed.

Grace is a pure balm, and consequently requires a pure and sound vessel. In
vain is it infused, if the vessel be not whole and found to preserve it. It
must be pure, that what is infused into it, be not polluted; it must be
sound, that what is poured into it, be not effused, and it must be deep, that
it may be more capacious in receiving of what is infused into it. Look then
to your own actions; these must inform them; Look to your own examples,
these must confirm them. Without you they cannot perish; with you they may.
What will you do with the rest that is left, when you see a part of your self
lost?

The Harpie has the face of a man, but a Bird so cruel by nature, as when
she is an hungry, she will assault any man and kill him: After which bloody
repast, she becomes thirsty, so as, going to the River to quench it, she sees
her own face; and recalling to mind how it resembles him whom she flew, she
conceives such grief, as she dies therewith. If your Education or instruction
deprave those who derive their beginning from you, the resemblance of this
story may have proper relation unto you. But if your pious examples enable
them, their proficiency in virtue shall ennoble you; your comforts shall be
multiplied in them; your hopes seconded by them; and, to your ever-living
fames, the memory of your virtues preserved by them.

Let not that adage prove true, in respect of your Charge: The most precious
things have ever the most pernicious Keepers. Nothing more precious than a
Virgins honor; it were shame for the mother to prove a Tarpeian or treacherous
keeper. That Conceit was elegantly expressed by the Emperor Charles the fifth,
in his instructions to the King his son; That Fortune had somewhat of the
nature of a woman; that if she be too much wooed, she is the farther off.
But I hope I shall not find that averseness in you. I have wooed you in
words; express your selves won by the testimony of your works. I would not
follow the indiscretion of Empericks, which minister the same medicines to all
Patients; I know well, that such Physic as agrees with age, would not agree
with the hot constitution of youth: To either sort therefore have I applied my
several receipts: and to both, do I address my conclusion.

Let the whole progress of your Conversation be a continued Line of
instruction; Let the mother discharge her office in commanding, and that
without too much rigor or indulgence; Let the daughter perform her duty in
obeying, with all faithful and filial observance: So shall honor grace you
here, and glory crown you there with an heavenly inheritance.

THE ENGLISH GENTLEVVOMAN.
Argument.
Honor is painted, when it is not with virtue powdered; No cloth takes such
deep tincture, as the cloth of honor; Honorable personages should be
presidents of goodness; Virtue or vice, wether soever takes hold first,
reteines a deeper impression in honor, than any lower subject; That, virtue
may receive the first impression by means of an inbred noble disposition,
seconded by helps of Education; Which reduced to habit, aspires to perfection.

HONOR.
PRomotion discovers what men be, Observe. 8.
but true Honor shows what they should be. That is fed with a desire of being
great; this is inflamed with a noble emulation of being good. It is a miserable
thing to observe what brave and heroicke Spirits, whose resolutions neither
danger could amate, nor any disaster perplexe, have been madded with an
ambitious quest after Honor; what difficulties they incountred; what
oppositions they suffered; what intricate pas^ages and provinces they
entertained! Corrivals they could not want in their rising; nor Envyers of
their greatness in their settling; nor Spectators to rejoice at their setting.
Rough and menacing was the Sea, on which they sailed; dangerous and sheluy the
ways, by which they passed; yea, full of disquiets was the Port, at which they
arrived. Nay, which is worse, in what sinister and indiscreet paths would they
walk; upon what strange plots and projectments would they work; how
discontentedly and disconsolately, with Themistocles, would they walk, till
they attained their end; which, many times, brought them to an untimely end? So
quickly is poor man deluded with this shady picture of greatness, as he will
not stick to engage for it his hopes of quietness.

Honor is painted, when it is not with virtue poudred.
But these be not those Eminent Personages, of whom I am now to treat: for such
men's honor is merely painted, because it is not with virtue poudred. Moral
Philosophy, much more our Christian theory, could never hold that for deserving
greatness, which had not near relation to goodness. Those only they esteemed
worthy honor, who did not seek it, much less buy it, but were sought by it.
Such as knew not what it was to admire the purple, nor fawn on a rising
favorite; but interveined their actions with the precious Oar of Divinest
virtues. Such as had attained to a singular Command or sovereignty of their
affections: so as they had learned to say, as Chilo answered his brother, We
know how to suffer injuries; so do not these fiery and furious spirits. It is
a poor expression of greatness, to exercise it in revenge; or in triumphing
over inferiors; or countenancing unjust actions. These detract from honor;
neither can their memory live long, who makes authority a Sanctuary to wrong.
Know then, (noble Gentlewomen) that your Honor, be it never so eminent; your
Descent, be it never so ancient; lose both their beauty and antiquity, if
virtue have not in you a peculiar sovereignty. Be your wanton fancy painted and
trimmed in never so demure or hypocritical disguise; Be your ambition or
Courtly aspiring never so shrouded with gilded shadows of humility; Be your
unbounded desire of revenge never so smoothly colored with the seeming
remission of an impressive injury: In a word, should you never walk so
covertly in a Cloud; nor never so cunningly with a dainty kind of dissembling
gull the world; all this will not avayle you. When your bodies shall come to be
shrouded, then shall all your actions be uncased. Rumor then will I take more
liberty to discover unto the world, what you did in it. Show me that deepest
dissembler, who retired himself most from the knowledge of man, and came not
to discovery, for all his secrecy, to the eyes of man.

Many you have known and heard of that were great, but failing in being good,
were their pretenses never so specious, did not their memory rot? Iezabel was
more eminent in titles than Abigal; but less glorious in her fame. Such a
poor piece of painted stuff is that adulterate honor, which from virtue
receives not her full luster. When the subtle Spider shall weave her curious
web over your Monuments; when those beauteous structures of yours shall he
dissolved; when all your titular glory shall be obscured; when those fading
honors, on which you relied, and with which you stood surprised, shall be
estranged; and you from this goodly low Theater of earth translated; it shall
be then demanded of you, not how eminent you were in greatness, but how
servent in actions of goodness. While your skins then are with choycest
Odours perfumed, let your souls be with purest virtues poudred. Now for
virtue, would you know how to define her, that you may more eagerly desire to
become her reteiner? Or would you have her described, that you may thence
collect how well she deserves to be observed? Hear the Poet; Virtue in
greatest danger is most shown,
And though oppressed, is never overthrown.


Such a noble resolved temper ever accompanies virtue, as no prosperous
success can ever transport her, nor any adverse occurent deject her. She
feeds not on the ayrie breath of vulgar applause: her sole ambition is to
aspire to an inward greatness; to be truly honorable in the title of
goodness. Great attendance, punctual observance, stately retinues are not the
objects she eyes: she loves to be known what she is, by that constant
testimony which is in her, rather than by any outward ornament, much less
formal complement, that may apishly suit her.

Would you enter then (Gentlewomen) into a more serious survey of your selves?
Would you rightly understand wherein your persons deserve honor, or how you
may be eternally honored by your Maker? Tender your service to virtue; avoid
what is hurtful; admit what is helpful. Sacrifice not a vain hour to the
Altar of vanity. Employ your time in exercises of piety. Dedicate your days to
the advancement of Gods glory. A Soul solely dedicated to Gods honor, is the
best spiritual Cloister. See not that poor soul in want, which your noble
compassion will not relieve. Have you friends? hold them dear unto you, if
dear in the eye of virtue; otherwise, discard them, for you shall be more
stained by them, than strengthened in them. Have you foes? if vicious, they
deserve ever to be held so; but if they affect goodness, prize them above the
value of your highest fawning friends: who, as they are mere observers of the
time, prefer your fortunes with which you are enriched, or honors to which
you are advanced, or some other by-respect secretly aimed, before those
essential parts which are in you, and truly ennoble you.

Are you of esteem in the State? become powerful Petitioners for the poor
man's sake: prefer his suite: entertain a compassionate respect of his
wrongs: labor his relief; and do this, not for the eyes of men, but of God;
who, as he sees secretly, will reward you openly.

Again, Have you such as malign your honor? their aspersions cannot touch
you; He that made you, has made you strong enough to despise them, and with a
patient smile, or careless neglect to flight them. Those that are good, can
have none but those that are evil to be their foes. The sweet smell of your
virtues has already dispersed themselves; your memory is without the reach of
infamy: live then secure, while your virtues shine so pure. Retain a true and
unenforc'd humility in you; so shall honor appear more gracefully in you.
Imitate not those suddenrising gourds of greatness, who have no sooner
attained the titles of Ladies, than this report makes them put on a new port;
old acquaintance must be forgot; scorn must sit on their brows; and a
contemptuous disdain on their lips. Though their mold be but the same, they
would feign change themselves into another mold. These are such as deserve not
your knowledge; though they be by their titles honored, their titles by their
ignoble actions become blemished. Let them therefore study making of a face;
composing of their ga^e; preserving of their vain pomp; with an unbeseeming
port: while your Contemplation shall fix it self on no other object, than
that true expressive end of honor: which is, to retain a Christian humility
in your state; a noble Compassion in your eye; an affable sweetness in your
discourse; and exquisite practice of goodness in your whole life. To
dis-esteeme virtue, and hug that painted Idol of titular honor, is to
contemn the Instrument, and foolishly to prize the Case or Cover. Be ye never
so eminent, ye are but painted Trunks, if virtue be not resident. Let her then
not only be resident but president over all your actions; so shall you not
only live but dye with honor; by leaving that succeeding memory of your
virtues behind you, that time may here eternize you, when time to eternity
shall change you. For as salt to every subject, whereto it is applied, gives a
savor; so gives virtue the sweetest relish unto honor.

No cloth takes such deep tincture, as the Cloth of honor.
CLoth dyed in grain reteines ever the deepest color; but none of deeper dye
than the Cloth of Honor. If it be but with the least blemish tinct, it can
never wipe off that taint. Spots in white are soonest discerned, and errors in
great personages, whose actions should be whites for inferiors to shoot at,
are quickliest discovered. True Coral needs no color; no more needs true
Honor any exterior luster. When Parasius, that exquisite Painter was to take
a Counterfeit of Hellen, he drew her with her head-attire loose; and being
demanded the reason, answered, She was loose.

Be your actions never so darkely shrouded, nor your amorous encounters
cunningly carried; there will be ever some private Pencill to pourtray them,
some quicke-sighted eye to display them. Loves enterview betwixt Cleopatra and
Mark Anthony, promised to it self as much secure freedom as fading fancy
could tender; yet the last Scene clozed all those Comicke passages with a
Tragic conclusion.

No pleasure can be constant, unless it afford inward content; nor can it
minister content, unless it be on virtue grounded. Honor then must choose for
her self such a Consort, as she may not be ashamed to have chosen. A
vigilant Circumspection should attend her; resembling in this particular, the
watchful Crane, whose wary eye ever fears, and by a timely fear prevents
surprizall. Now, there is nothing that asperseth a deeper stain upon the Cloth
of Honor, than too much attention unto Sycophants. These are they, which
transport Honor above her self, by bringing her to a vain and odious
idolizing of her self. These will not suffer their Trencher-patronesse to
reflect on her self, nor to enter into a private treaty with mortality. Those
be too sour and severe Tractates for greatness. Death is to be thought on
with these, when nothing else is to be thought on. O what pernicious Consorts
be these for noble Personages? Antisthenes said truly of them, Praestat (...)
quam (...) incidere: for Ravens seed only on dead Carcasses, but flatterers
upon living men.

O banish these your Portells! Let not your loose Tyre-women, while they trim
you without, soil you within. You shall find their Oratory, a continued Scene
of Sycophancy. These will infuse a poisonous juice into your too credulous
ears: and the more to delude you with selfe-idolatry, tell you how such a
dressing infinitely becomes you; such love-spots enamour young Gallants of you;
how those rivells of contemptible age are estranged from you. Give no Ear to
such enchanting airs; They do but this to enlarge their vailes. Their glozing
will labor your confusion. They will make you forgetful of your being, and
consequently deprive you of your well-being. Every fool (says Menander) will
be taken with arrogance and applause; whereas the judiciously wise account it
their highest happiness, to meditate of the means how to prevent their
highest unhappiness. It is a miserable thing in a man* to make himself a
beast, by forgetting himself to be a man: Which usually comes to pass, when
we propose before our bleered and deluded eyes the glorious Spectacles of this
Theater of vanity, but never seriously meditate of our own frailty, nor of the
excellency of that Supreme beauty, which makes the enjoyer absolutely happy.

That Mot of the Athenians to Pompey the Great, Thou art so much a God, as thou
acknowledgest thy self to be a man, was no ill saying: for at the least to be
an excellent man, is to confess himself to be a man. Violets, though they
grow low and near the earth, smell sweetest; and Honor appears the fullest
of beauty, when she is humblest. Alas! what are titles worth, when deserts are
wanting? The best signal of descent, is distinguished by desert. Antiochus was
at one time saluted both (...) and (...), a glorious Prince, and a furious
Tyrant. So s^itting is the applause of the vulgar, as it never conferres on the
subject it approves or applauds, any permanent Honor. It is miserable (says
the Poet) to rely on another fame; but worse, to beg fame from them that are
infamous. Horac^.
It is praise worthy to be by some dis-praysed; yea, virtuous actions, should
they be by vicious persons commended, would rather lose of their luster, than
become any way improved. To be cheerful in adversity, humble in prosperity,
and in both to show a temperate equality, is worthy praise, and deserves Honor
for a prize. Yet, should these be but only pretenses to gull the world, or
delude the simple admirer, they would in time unmaske themselves, and display
their counterfeit insides with shame to the world. False and adulterate colors
will not hold, nor virtuous semblances long retain the esteem they have. We
have ever held them for most ridiculous, who follow the fashion, and were never
yet in fashion. And such are all those Counterfeit followers of virtue, who
pretend fairly, but fall off foulely. These may be properly, in my opinion,
compared to our new counterfeit stuffes; which, as at first they are made best,
so do they wear best at first. Your Cloth, Gentlewomen, must be of another
nap: it must not be the best a far off. Flowers, Edgings, Laces, and Borders
do beautify the outward attire, but add no grace to the inward man. Now,
that Cloth is the best, which strinks the least.

Do any extremities encounter you? Let the innocence of your untainted minds
cheer you? Does disgrace or infamy press you? You have a Cloud of witnesses
within you, that can bear testimony of you, and for you. That person needs not
fear any foe, that has within him such an incomparable friend. There was
never any yet so happy, as to be wholly freed from adversity, and never feel
any gusts of affliction. Trials of patience are sweet encounters; by a mind
rightly-resolved, they are with more delight than distaste entertained: Which,
as they come not unexpected, so are they no less cheerfully received.

It is the argument of a generous spirit, to express his highness most, when
the world accounts of him least. Honor, if truly grounded, can look in the
face of terror, and never be amated. Her device deserved approvement, who in
the portraiture she made for her self, directed her eye to the picture of
virtue, and pointing thereat with her singer, used this Imprezza: That picture
is my posture. Truth is, she that makes virtue her object, cannot but make
every earthly thing her subject. Yea, there is nothing she wears, which she
makes not a moral use of to better her self. Her very attire puts her in
mind of what she was before she needed it; and how breach of obedience
necessitated her to wear it. She will not therefore pride her self in her
shame, nor glorify her self in the cover of sin. She cannot eye her self
with any self-love, seeing she lost her self by affecting that which she
ought not to love. Her head-tyre puts her in mind of the helmet of salvation;
her stomacher, of the breast plate of righteousness; her partle, of the shield
of faith; her very shoes, of the sandals of peace. In this Tabernacle of
earth, she is every day nearer her port of rest; for her discourse is ever
seasoned with discretion, winged with devotion, and graced by her own
conversation.

She is none of these, who are Saints in their tongues, but Devils in their
lives: She propounds naught fit to be done, which she confirms not with her
own action. Again, for her actions, she is free from public scandal, as
her whole life is a golden rule of direction, a continued precept of
instruction. In a word, she considers from whence she came; her descent was
noble, and this she graceth with noble virtues. Her house must receive no
dishonor from her, but an ample testimony of a deserving successor.

Let this Idaea, Gentlewomen, be your Pattern. Pure is the Cloth you wear;
let no stain of yours blemish it; no Moath of deserved detraction eat into it.
Many of your Sex, though highly borne, have so blemished the honor of that
house from whence they came, and corrupted that noble blood from which they
sprung, as their memory rots, yet their infamy lives. Again, others there have
been, who though obscurely borne, yet by those eminent virtues which did
adorn them, those Divine parts which did truly ennoble them, they became
enlightners of their obscurity, filling Annals with their glorious memory.
Imitate these; relinquish those. Honor is not worth receiving, unless it be
entertained by one that is deserving: yea, how many have incurred disgrace by
dis-esteeming virtue, when they were advanced to highness of place? Nay, how
many while they lived obscure, lived secure, and preserved their good names,
who afterward, by becoming great, lost that private esteem which before they
possessed? So hard it is to encounter with Honor, and every way return a saver.

Seeing then no Cloth takes such deep tincture as the Cloth of Honor, let no
vicious aspersion spot it, no corrupt affection stain it; lest, by being once
blemished, it bring that Honor into contempt, which before you retained.

Honorable Personages should be Presidents of goodness.
LAnd-markes are usually erected for direction of the Mariner, and Magistrates
elected for instruction of the inferior. The keele of man's life being ever
more laden with vanity than verity, and more chilled with the bitter gusts of
affliction, then cheered with the soule-solacing drops of true consolation, is
ever tossed with contrary winds: neither, without the help of some expert
Pilot, can poor deluded man arrive safely at the Port where he would be.
Pride transports him, avarice infects him, riot corrupts him, sensuality
secures him, anger distempers him, envy consumes him, idleness duls him. Thus
becomes he piece-meale divided from himself, because he reflects not with a
pure and impartial eye upon himself. What great need stands he in then of
direction in this maze of misery, Epicter.
vale of vanity? He portraid him well, who in the description of him, styled
him a story of calamity, a statue of infelicity. He is frail in resisting,
prone to falling, slow in rising. Examples then were useful, to conduct him in
his Iournall. And who more fit to be these Presidents, than such whom an
honorable descent that ennobled, or Princes favor advanced? It is not for
these to entertain any servile or degenerate affection, nor to harbor one
mutinous thought against the sovereignty of reason. To be a Lady of honor is
more then titular. She is only eminent, who makes every action of her life a
virtuous president. Goodness must be infused in her blood, that descent may
partake of desert. Now, there be three especial objects, upon which they are
to reflect: Charity, Chastity, Humility.

An honorable mind is best shown in her Liberal and compassionate
exhibition to such, whose necessities require relief. Yea, she loves those
best, to whom these arguments of bounty are in highest measure expressed. She
averts not her ear from the needy beggar, she will show him all favor for
his image or feature. She holds it an unbeseeming state, to entertain a sour
look, where noble pity should beget in her a compassionate love. She is so
daily and duly inured to works of mercy, as she joys in no object more than
occasion of bounty. She considers (and this she Divinely applies unto her
self) how naught but vanity is to be attributed to them, retain they never
so much earthly glory on them, who dwell in houses of clay, whose foundation is
in the dust, which are crushed before the Moath. Job. 4.19.
Silken vanity cannot delude her, nor any opinionate conceit of her own estate
transport her. Her mind is not subject to wavering, nor her walk to wandering.
Be her life long, her goodness becomes improved* be it short, her desires
are crowned. Neither reserves she the gleanings for him, that is Master of the
Harvest. Poverty, appear it never so despicable to her eye, it conveyes
compassion to her heart. She gives Alms of the best, for his sake whom she
loves best. Her piety is such, as she prefers her Almes-basket before her
Cabinet. A miserable mind she hates; for she conceives how nothing can be
better worth enjoying, than a liberal desire of disposing: which she
expresses with that cheerful alacrity, as it inhanceth the value of her
bounty. Thus she lives in a free and absolute command of what she enjoyes;
with an hand no less open than her heart; that action might second her pious
intention.

Neither is the true Nobility of her mind less discerned by her love to
Chastity. Pure be her thoughts, and unstained. The Sanctuary of her heart is
solely dedicated to her Maker; it can find no room for an inordinate affection
to lodge in. She knows not how to throw out her love^attracting Lures; nor to
expose the glorious beauty of her soul to shame. A moments stain must not
blemish her state. She will not therefore give her eye leave to wander, lest
it should betray her Honor to a treacherous intruder. How weak prove those
assaults, which her homebred enemies prepare against her? Her look must be
set on a purer Object than vanity: She will not eye it, lest she should be
taken by it. Her Discourse must be of a better subject than vanity: She will
not treat of it, lest she should be engaged to it. Her thoughts are not
admitted to entertain vanity: They must not conceit it, lest they should be
deceived by it. Occasions wisely she foresees, timely prevents, and
consequently enjoyes true freedom of mind. You shall not see her consume the
precious oil of her Lamp, the light of her life, in unseasonable
reere-bankets, unprofitable visits, or wanton treaties. Those will she not
admit of for companions, who are prodigal of their Honor. These she reproves
with a mild spirit, laboring to reclaim them with an ingenuous tender of her
virtuous compassion toward them. None she more distastes than these Brokers
or Breakers of licentious bargains: She excludes them the List of all civil
society. How cautelous she is, lest suspicion should tax her? Outwardly,
therefore, she expresses, what she inwardly professes. That honorable
blood which she from her Predecessors received, till death surprise her, will
she leave untainted.

Neither is there ought she hates more than pride, nor scorns more than
disdain. She rightly considers how her days are mensurable, being but a span
long, which implies her brevity; and miserable, being altogether vanity. She
disclaymes that state which consists in scornful looks; A sweet and affable
Countenance she ever bears: The honor she enjoyes makes her humbler; and
the praises which are given her, work in her thoughts no distemper. So far is
she from affecting the pomp of this world, as it grows contemptible to her
higher-mounting thoughts. A fair and well-seeming retinue she ever keeps
about her: but none of these must be Sycophants, with their oily tongues to
delude her; neither must any, who clothes his Countenance with scorn, attend
her. She observes on what steep and dangerous grounds ambition walks. Her
sleeps are sweter, her content higher, her thoughts heavenlier. It is one of
her greatest wonders, that any one should be so rest of understanding, as to
forget what infirm ground he stands on. The purest Creature, be she never
so absolute in her feature, is of no richer temper than Earth, our
Common-mother. She is wiser than to prefer a poor handful of red Earth
before her choycest treasure. Though her deserts merit honor, she
dis-esteemes her own deservings: being highly valued by all but her self.
Thus she prepares her self daily for what she must go to. Her last day is
her every days memorial. Lower may her body be, when interred; but lower
cannot her mind be, than at this instant. So well has she attained the
Knowledge of her self, as she acknowledges all to be frail, but none
frailer than her self.

Here, Gentlewomen, have ye heard in what especial Objects you are to be
Honorable Presidents. You shine brighter in your Orb than lesser Stars. The
beams of your reflecting virtues must admit of no Eclipse. A thousand eyes
will gaze on you, should they observe this in you. Choice and select are the
societies you frequent; where you see variety of fashions: imitate not the
newest, but neatest.

Let not an action proceed from you, which is not exemplary good. These that
are followers of your persons, will be followers likewise of your lives. You
may weane them from vice, win them to virtue, and make them your constant
followers in the serious practice of piety. Let your virtues cloth them
within, as their veiles do without. They deserve not their wage, who desist
from imitating you in actions of worth. Your private family is a familiar
Nursery; Plants of all sorts are there bestowed. Cheer and cherish those that
be tender; but curb and correct those that be of wilder temper. Free and
fruitful Scions cannot be improved, till the luxurious branches be pruned.
But above all things, take especial care that those vices spread not in you,
which are censured by you. You are Soveraignesses in your families: neither
extend your hand too much to rigor; neither contract it by showing too much
remissness or favor. Let neither virtue pass unrewarded, nor vice, if it grow
domineering, pass unreproved. Foul enormities must admit of no Privileges.
No; should you, by a due examination of your selves, find any bosome-sinne
secretly lurking, any subtle familiar privately incroaching, any distempred
affection dangerously mutining; be your own Censors. Be not too indulgent in
the favoring of your selves. Proficients you cannot be in the School of
virtue, unless you timely prevent the overspreading growth of vice. Let not
your Sun, the light of your soul be darkened; let not your Spring, the fount
of your virtues be troubled; Let not your Fame, the perfume of your Honor be
impaired. As you are generous by descent, be gracious by desert. Presidents
are more powerful than Precepts: These only lead, those draw. Be examples of
goodness, that you may be heirs of happiness. The style you enjoy, the state
you retain, the statues which after you may remain, are but glorious trophies
of fading frailty. Virtues are more permanent Monuments than all these; these
are those sweet flowers that shall adorn you living, impall you dying, and
crown you with comfort at your departing. Lastly, as you were honorable
Personages on Earth, where you were Presidents of goodness; so shall you be
glorious Citizens in heaven, where you are to be Participants of all
happiness.

WHere Virtue ^s sown in a noble Seed-plot, manured and fructisied by good
Discipline, Virtue or vice whether soever takes hold first, reteines a deeper
impression in honor, than any lower subject.
strengthened by Example, and adorned with those more graceful parts, which
accomplish the subject wherein virtue is seated; what bickrings of fortune will
it sustain? What conflicts in the necessities of nature will it cheerfully
encounter? Her spirit is raised above any inferior pitch: Yea, the habit of
goodness has wrought such divine impressions in her soul who is thus
disposed; as society may improve her, but cannot corrupt her; because a zealous
affection to virtue does possess her.

You shall ever observe these, whom Nobility of blood has advanced, to retain
some seeds or semblances of their progenitors; which are so impressive in them,
as no occurrent, be it never so violent, can estrange these from them. Here
you shall see a native affability, or singular art of winning affection, to one
naturally derived. There in another such a rough and unseasonable austerity, as
her very countenance is the resemblance of a Malevola. Some from their infancy
have retained such a sweet and pleasing candor, as they could cover anger with
a cheerful smile, and attemper passion with a graceful blush. Besides, they
had the gift to expostulate with their discontents, and by applying seasonable
receipts to their wounds, free themselves from falling into any desperate
extremes. Others would rather dye, then suffer the expressions of their
Passions to dye. For affronts, as their spirits could not bear them, so did
their actions discover them, and make them objects of derision to such as
observed them. And whence proceeds all this? Surely, from the very first relish
of our humors; Aristot. 3. de anima.
when that unwrought Table of youth becomes furnished with choice characters;
and the Subject begins to affect what is engraven in them; by continuance of
time they become so habituate, as no art can make them adulterate. Sempronia
was too light in her youth, to be staid in her age. Fulvia gave too much way
to her passion in her youth, to attemper it in her age. Zantippe was too shrewd
a maid, to become a quiet wife. What Nature has not effected in us, may by
industry be facilitated in us, so we begin to work while the wax is soft. O
Gentlewomen, how many, whose excellent endowments deserve admiration, either by
selfe-opinion have become transported, or by giving loose reins to passion,
have miserably wandered, or by inveying against others more deserving parts,
have wittingly transgressed? By which means, they become spectacles of
contempt, who otherwise by their conceiving discourse might have given occasion
of content. It is too true, that the liberty of greatness is such, as it is
more apt to find fuel to feed the humor of vice, then to minister any
useful ingredience for the recovery of virtue. Great minds are many times
sick of great maladies, which by soothing parasites become insensible, and
consequently incurable. Vice in a poor habit never reteines that majesty,
which it displayes in a richer robe. Is it so? Reflect then upon your selves;
if vice seem so specious, what will virtue do: (though all your virtues be
but indeed specious vices.) Believe it, if you cherish virtue in your minority,
she will perform the office of a faithful guardian. The widows tears shall
be very few, for she will find justice to redress her: the Orphans cries
shall not be so loud, she will find compassion to cheer her. The State
shall not exclaim of surfeits, for temperance shall shield her: nor the Church
of coldness, for zeal shall inflame her: What a sweet consort is an unison of
virtues to the ear of a divine soul! All other Music is dis-rellishing,
because it works not on the affection.

Now would you know whence it comes, that virtue or vice, whethersoever takes
hold first, reteines a deeper impression in Honor, than in any lower subject?
The reason is evident: As in their state or condition they are more eminent, so
is their representative example in others more inherent. Do these honorable
personages then love virtue? they are virtuous molds unto their followers: they
shall find in their shadows what they express in themselves. Iulia could not
be loose, when Lucretia was so chaste: she saw that in her Mistress which
deserved love, and to that she conformed the line of her life. To consort at
unseasonable hours with loose lovers, or to entertain light discourse to
beguile time, was no authenticke doctrine in her Mistress family: no day was
without her task, no night without her peculiar employment. There is no
question, but the prime years of this noble Lady were seasoned with such
exquisite instructions, as what her youth had received; were not in her riper
years to be abolished. First, motions have deep impressions: especially,
when they become seconded by examples of authority, whose very persons impose
on their Pupils a resistlesse necessity. The estimate of Honor, with those who
are truly honorable, is at too high a rate to engage it self to the hazard of
disgrace, for any temporary profit or delight. Their only profit is to become
proficients in the practice of Virtue; Their highest delight, to subdue their
delights to the obedience of reason, for the love of virtue. Such as these, are
to be accounted only Noble; for their desires are so, which they ever ennoble
with deserving actions. For tell me, can any one whose judgment is not
blinded, or inward light not wholly blemished, esteem that Person for
honorable, whose Outside only magnifies it self in a poakt head, a poland
sleeve, and a Protean body? No; these are but outward badges of their inward
vanity. These have too much coare at their heart, to be of sound health. If
they have no other expressions to deblaze their Honor, they are rather objects
of Contempt than State, be they never so glorious to the eye of our vulgar.

It has been (and I could wish it were not to this day continued) an usual
form of breeding, with some more eminent Persons, to have their Children
practice a kind of state from their infancy; which, indeed, being truly
defined, was a phantasticke supercilious garb, which discovered more pride
than deserved praise. Neither could these so easily relinquish in their age,
what was commended to them in their youth. For such as commonly attended their
persons, extolled whatsoever they saw by them, or in them expressed; such is
the misery of greatness that if it be not an exact Censor and reprover of her
own vanity; They shall find approvers of it by those odious professors of
sycophancy, whose glozing condition has been the ruin of many a noble
family. For what may be the usual dialect of these Tame-Beasts to their
bounteous Benefactors, those prodigal disbursers of their fathers providence,
but this parasiticall parley? It would well become you, to be rarely seen,
reservedly affable; to retain state in your pace, awe in your face, scorn in
your eye, a storm in your brow, with a graceful contempt in all your
carriage. An excellent direction to purchase hate! These followers are not for
your Honor. The way to divert their strain, is to affect what they distaste.
You cannot want vicious Libertines to second you in a sensual course, if your
own disposition stand so affected. Calphurnia could not be good, when
Messalina was so naught. Your lives, as they are lines to your selves, so
should they be lights unto others. Are you modest? It will beget a love of
modesty through all your family. Not one who owes their observance to you, but
will admire this virtue in you, and practice it in themselves, because they see
it so highly valued by you. Again, Lightness, or any irregularity in you
whatsoever, will not redound only to your own, but your whole families
dishonor. Which opinion once possessed, your honor receives such a mortal
wound, as no continuation of time (so lasting is the record of infamy) may
perfectly cure it: which seems confirmed by our modern Poet: Search all thy
books, and thou shall find therein,
That Honor is more hard to hold than win.


How cautelous then ought you to be of that, which preserves your well being?
Many nobly descended, are sufficiently instructed, how to retain their state,
what place to take, by remembering whence they came; mean time, they forget
whence they came first. O consider how this Speciosior pulvis, this more
specious or seemingly precious dust of yours, is but dust! Vice will but
varnish it; it is virtue that will richly e^ammell it. Your birth rather
restraines than improves your liberty; your sex should detract from it self,
were it estranged from modesty; your beauty, honor, and all, are servants to
time; or worse, if bestowed ^n vanity. Let virtue retain such deep impression
in you, as no vicious affection may seize on you. Occasions are dangerous
persuasions: prevent therefore the mean, that you may attain a more glorious
end. That only deserves your love, which shall make you for ever live. Virtue,
if you love her and live with her, by becoming your survivor, will crown your
happy memory with succeeding honor.

That virtue may receive the first impression by means of an inbred noble
disposition, seconded by helps of Education.
IT is usually observed, that Hawks of one Ayrie, are not of one nature; Some
are more metall'd, others more lazy. As in Birds, so in all other Creatures.
Livia and Iulia, Angustus his daughters, were sisters, but of different
natures. Some there are, who even from their infancy have such excellent seeds
of native goodness sown in them, as their dispositions cannot relish ought
that is irregular. In arguments of discourse, they are moderate; in Company
temperate; in their resolves constant; in their desires continent; in their
whole course or carriage absolute. Others naturally so perverse, that, like our
These are described to life in the person of an humurous fantastic, in this
pleasant Epigram: She that must eat her breakfast in her bed, And is til neon
in trimming of her head, And sits at table like a maiden* Bride, And talks all
day of nothing but of pride: God may do much in mercy for to save her, But
what a case is he in that shall have her?
humorous Ladies, they can affect naught that others love, nor relish ought
that others like. The byas of their fancy runs still on the fashion; their
tongue a voluble Engine of feminine passion; their resolves full of uncertainty
and alteration. The whole Interlude of their life a continued Act of
femallfollies. It were hard to win these to the love of virtue, or those to
delight in vice. This might easily be illustrated by diverse memorable
instances, personated in such, who, from their very Cradle, became seriously
devoted to a religious privacy, supplying their want of books, wherein they
were merely ignorant, with a devout and constant meditation of Gods works,
wherein they employed their whole study.

Industrious were their hands in laboring, and bounteous were they in
bestowing. A native compassion lodged in their hearts, which they expressed in
their charitable works. Hospitality to the stranger and needy beggar, was
their highest honor. Suffer they would the height of all extremes, ere they
would suffer the desolate to want relief. So strongly were their affections
fortified against the assaults of an imperious Lover; as death was to them a
cheerful object to preserve their high-priz'd honor. Such singular effects as
these, have been usually produced by an innate noble disposition; so as, some
of these whom we have here cursorily shadowed, were endowed with such virile
spirits, as they stickt not to spit in the face of tyranny; others were not
abashed to This was formerly instanced in that memorable example of Spirituals.
disfigure their own beauty, lest it should become an adulterers booty. In
these had virtue taken such deep impression, as nothing could deeply touch
them, but what trenched on their reputation. Though by nature they were
timorous, and inconstant, resolution had so prepared them, as they became
discreetly valiant; looking death in the face without fear, and embracing her
stroke as a favor. Do you admire this in them? Imitate them, and you shall
be no less by succeeding times honored, than these in ours admired. Conceive
your life to be an intricate Labyrinth of affliction; the very anvill, whereon
the heavy hammer of misery incessantly beats. Reflect on your birth; and you
shall perceive how you give the world a good morrow with grief; Look at your
death; how you bid the world good night with a groan. Joy then cannot be long
lasting, when you are daily taking leave of the place where you live; which
now, though living, you are leaving. Besides, no continued hope of comfort can
be expected, where fear presents her self an inseparable attendant.

Fear has command over subject and over King,
Fear has no Phere, seare's an imperious thing.
To allay which fear, address your selves to that most, which may give you
occasion of fearing least. And what may that receipt be? A mind purely refined
from the corruption of this infectious time. Meditate therefore of that never
fading beauty that is within you. Labor to preserve it from the injury of all
incroaching Assailants. If your flesh with any painted flourish of light
Rhetoric woo her, timely prevent her before she win her. If the world
with her Lure of honor, command, or the like, seek to draw her; reclaim her,
lest vanity surprise her. If her professed Enemy labor to undermine her, make
known his long-profest enmity unto her, that a vigilant circumspection may
arm her. Admit your dispositions become sometimes averse from the practice of
that which you should most affect; divert the Current of them. You love
liberty; confine it to moderate restraint. You affect honor, curb it with a
serious meditation of your own frailty. You desire to gather; sow your bread
upon the water: Charity will bring you quickly to a better temper. You admire
gorgeous attire; remember the occasion how you first became clothed: had not
sin been, these poor habiliments had never needed. Does delicate fare
delight you? Consider how it is the greatest misery to pamper that delicately,
or cherish it with delicacy that is your mortal and professed enemy. Do wanton
consorts work on your fancy? Cure, betime, this dangerous phrenzy. Avert your
eye, lest it infect your heart: Converse with reason, and avoid nothing more
than occasion. Do you find your affections troubled, or to passion stirred?
Retire a little from your selves; attemper that boiling heat which works so
violently on you; and in the end, resolve thus; It will redound more to our
honor to bridle anger, than to engage our discretions by giving reins to our
distemper. Can you not see your Neighbors field flourish without an Envious
Eye? Of all others, expulse this soonest; because of all others, it partakes of
the Devil the nearest. As you are commanded to love him as your selves, so
with not that evil unto him, which you would not have to fall upon your
selves. Lastly, do you find a remissness in you to any employment that is
good? Shake off this natural dullness, Tob. 4.15.
and inflame your affections with a Divine ferventnesse. You have hitherto
been slow in doing good, show that in doing ill. Mean time, with the wings of
holy and heavenly desires, mount from earth to heaven; plant your affections
above, though your pilgrim dimensions be here below. Which the better to
facilitate, retain ever in your memory this devout Memorial or Meditation:
Bern.
Think whence you came, and be ashamed; where you are, and be aggrieved;
where you go to, and be affrighted.

Every way wherein you walk, as it is full of snares, so should it be full of
eyes. Those two roots of inordinate fear, and inordinate love, have brought
many to the brinke of misery, by plunging their minds in the puddles of
vanity. Look about you; snares you shall find within you, snares without you.
Snares on your right hand, and those deceitful; Prosperity in affairs
temporal. In which, such persons are usually taken and surprised, by whom the
benefits of God are abused. As the Rich, when he bestows his wealth in
attiring himself sumptuously; the Mighty, in oppressing the needy; the Amorous
or Lovely, in giving others occasion to be taken with their beauty: Whence the
Lord by the mouth of his Prophet: Thou have made thy beauty abominable. Snares
likewise on your Left hand, and those fearful; Adversity in affairs in
temporal. In which the poor, infirm and afflicted are entangled and
miserably inthralled: who by suffering affliction impatiently, curse God, their
Neighbors, and themselves in their adversity: Whence that Divine and devout
Father says: In affliction the wicked detest God, and blaspheme him; Aug. lib.
1. de Civit. Dei.
but the godly pray unto him, and praise him.

Now, virtuous Gentlewomen, whose titles do not so much transport you as your
love to goodness does inflame you; may you hence observe, how noble and
generous dispositions, which, indeed, are properly defined equal or temperate
disposers of the affections, have and do ever receive the first impressions of
virtue; which are with constancy retained, as they were cheerfully received.
Express then this Nobility of your well-disposed natures in affecting what is
good. Vice throws her aspersions on no subject so much as on Honor.
Relinquish then rather all state, than it should retain the least stain. Much
is promised by your disposition; and no less by your Discipline or Education.
Your well-seasoned youth was never known to that rudeness, which more rural
or servile states were bred in. Second these rising hopes of inward happiness.
You are fruitlesly great, if you be not fruitfully good. Every moment wafts
you nearer your haven; let every action draw you nearer heaven. If you fear at
any time to wander, Religious fear will be your Conductor. If you doubt the
issue of your Encounter, steadfast patienc^ will be your Encourager. If you
distrust your own strength, you are securer; humility will crown you with
honor, and direct you to an happy harbor. As inbred noble dispositions have
then enriched you, which by helps of Education are seconded in you, profess
your selves lovers of virtue by your affections, advancers of virtue by your
actions, that as honor attends your persons, fame may crown your names,
felicity your souls.

WHat remains then, to perfect this absolute Masterpiece of honor; but that
ye reduce to habit, Virtue reduced to habit, aspires to perfection.
and consequently to their best improvement, these initiate seeds of goodness
sown in your native disposition, grown by succession, and ripened through
Education? Now are ye in the way, and daily nearer the end of your work. Your
unconfined souls must ever be aspiring, till they come to their perfection.
There is nothing under heaven, that can satisfy a soul created for heaven.
Are you Virgins? Let your Virgin-Lamps be fed with the Oil of Charity. Be
ready before the Bridegroom call you; yea, call on him before he call you. Let
not your Virgin-vayles be vayles for vices. Entertain not a light thought,
lest by degrees it spread to a sin. In suffering Ismael to play with you,
though her sport seem in jest, your ruin will prove in earnest. Eye not that
Object, which may enthrall you; hear not that Subject, which may corrupt you;
relish not that Delight, which may deprave you; admit not of that Conceit,
which may delude you.

Retort a light discourse with a Maiden-blush; Candida virgin is miscuit ora
rosis.
it argues a spotless soul. He well described a Virgins prime beauty, who
displayed it in shamefaste modesty. Let your good name be such a precious
ointment as you would not spill it for a world.

Are you Matrons? Enlarge your selves by instruction unto the younger; this is
the office of a Reverend Mother. Derive some portion of that knowledge unto
others, which you fruitfully received from others. Your lives must be their
lines. Every action of yours is exemplar; take heed then, it lead not into
error. As you are ripe in years, so appear rich in hours. Remember not a
sin without a sigh; nor a toy without a tear. There is no sin more odious,
because none more insolently glorious, than to remember sins committed with
joy, and apprehend them with delight. Your families should be virtues
Nurseries, wherein your selves are to be Governesses and Presidents of
goodness. Aug. in Epist.
Here you are to teach your children in the trade of their ways, Prove. 22.6.
that when they are old, they may not depart from them.

Briefly, Are you young or old? Esteem no life sweeter, then when every day
improves you and makes you better: Then when every Task tastes of goodness,
to advance your Honor. Delights, as they may moderately cheer you, so let
them not play too much on your fancy, lest they take you: Be not commanded by
them, but command them. The only means to weane you from them, or make you
more indifferent for them, is to fix your affections on those which do
infinitely surpass them. There is no comparison betwixt a Palace and a Prison:
neither betwixt finite and infinite is there any Proportion. O how happy were
you, if with spiritual eyes you might once behold, how the Princes go before,
joining with the Singers, and in the midst, young Damsels dancing!

The way to contemplate these, and consort with these, is to meditate of
heaven, which enjoys all these. Here no pleasure, be it never so promising;
no delight, be it never so relishing; no recreation, be it never so
refreshing; but, though it cheer you in the beginning, it cloyes you in the
end. Last day, you were at Court; where revels, reere-bankets, shows, and
solemnities, were objects to your Eyes, Ears, and Tastes: but all these are
vanished. This day, you Coach to the Exchange; where you see all kind of
vanities set at sale, that may any way soil a deluded soul: but the night
clozeth the day, which makes them shut up shop, and then all those vanities are
shrouded. Next day, you go to a Play; wherein you expect some new Scene of
mirth, or some State-action lively presented: but the last Exit, your impreze
of frailty, dismisseth you, and then all those artfull presentiments, which gave
so much content, are removed. Thus you run in a maze, while you lay the Scene
of your Mirth on Earth. Recollect then your divided thoughts; seat there the
delight of your mind, where you may find a continued Mirth. Earth is too low a
Stage for an Act of that Majesty; and too straight to give your best guest
content within her Mud-wals of misery. Let not one hour pass by you, which is
not well past. Every day requires his due; every hour her proper hire.

Consider, how the eyes of heaven are upon you; how that generous stem, from
whence you were derived, expects much from you. The former injoynes you, upon
hope of a future reward, to be more cautelous; The latter, as you tender the
honor of your house, to be virtuous. Besides, know (Noble Ladies) that all
the port or state-magnificence which this inferior Globe can afford you,
clozeth ever with more discomfort than content, be your persons never so
seemingly happy, nor happily secure, that do enjoy them. Yea, how happy had
many Eminent personages been, had they never been taken with this Shadow of
happiness? Conclude then, for this conclusion will beseem you, and in your
highest ascent of honor incomparably secure you: Honor is virtues harbor;
only those
Styled great, are virtues friends, and vices foes.


That glorious Light of the Church, an industrious Searcher and judicious
Censor of Antiquities, S. Augustine, says, That anciently the Romans
worshipped Virtue and Honor for gods. Whence it was, that they built two
Temples, which were so seated, as none could enter the Temple of Honor,
unless he had first passed through the Temple of Virtue: to signify that
none was to be honored, unless by some Virtue he had first deserved it. The
Moral admits no other exposition than its own expression. For Honor, none
should be so daring bold as to woo her, till by passing through Virtues
Temple, he get admittance unto her.

If you desire to be great, let it be your height of ambition to aspire to
honor in the Court of Virtue. Where the lowest cannot be less than a Lady of
Honor, because the lowest of her actions correspond with Honor. Such a
service were no servitude but a solace. Admit, that sometimes you affected
foreign fashions, now let foreign Nations admire your virtues. Perchance, the
delicacy of your nature, or misery of a long prescribed custom will not so
easily at the first be wholly weaned, from what it has for so many years
affected. Use than an easy restraint at the first; withdraw your affections
from vanity by degrees; reserve some select hours for private Devotion; check
your fancies when they dote on ought that may distract you. The first Encounter
will be hardest; Time will bring you to that absolute sovereignty over your
passions, as you shall find a singular calmness in your affections. For the
Winds of your passions shall no sooner cease, then that vast boundless Sea of
your distempered affections shall become calm. What a brave Salique State
shall you then enjoy within your own Commonwealth? Vigilance becomes Warden
of your Cinque Ports; not an invasive forrainer dare approach, while she with
watchful eyes waits at the Port. All your followers, are virtues favorites.
Piety guides you in your ways; Charity in your works. Your Progenitors
deserved due praise, but you surpass them all. Thus shall you revive the ashes
of your families, and confer on them surviving memories. But, it is the
evening crowns the day; sufficient it is not to diffuse some few reflecting
beamelings of your virtues, at your first rising, and darken them with a cloud
of vices at your setting. As your days are more in number, so must they be
every day better. What availes it the Mariner to have taken his Compass
wisely, to have shunned rocks and places of danger warily, and at last to
run on some shelfe, when he should now arrive at the Bay where he would
be? Rocks are ever nearest the shore, and most tentations nearest your end.
If you resolve then to come off fairly, prepare your selves for some encounter
daily; observe your exercise of devotion duly; resist assaults constantly;
that you may gain a glorious victory. This is all the Combat that is of you
desired; wherein many of your Sex have nobly deserved. Stoutly have they
combated, and sweetly have they conquered. Emulate their virtues, imitate their
lives, and enjoy their loves. So may you with that Pattern of patience dye in
your own Nests, and multiply your days as the Sand: So may your virtues,
which shone so brightly in these Courts of Earth, appear most glorious in
those Courts of Heaven. So may these scattered flowers of your fading beauty,
be supplied with fresh flowers of an incorruptible beauty: yea, the King
himself shall take pleasure in your beauty; who will come like a glorious
Prince out of his Palace of royal honor, to grace you; like a Specious Spouse
out of his Nuptial Chamber, to embrace you. Mean time, fear not death, but
smile on him in his entry; for he is a guide to the good, to conduct them to
glory. Conclude your resolves with that blessed Saint; in hope no less
confident, than in heart penitent: We have not lived so in the world, Ambros.
that we are ashamed to live longer to please God: and yet again, we are not
afraid to dye, because we have a good Lord. Short is your race, near is your
rest: Only, let the less of earth be your gain, the love of God your goal;
and Angelical perfection, to which your constant practice of piety and all
Christian duties have so long aspired, your Crown.

The fear of the Lord is a pleasant Garden of blessing, there is nothing so
beautiful as it is,

Eccles. 40.27. Trin-uni Deo omnis gloria.
A Gentlewoman,
IS her own Tyrewsman; one that wears her own face; and whose complexion is
her own. Her Iournals lie not for the Exchange, needless visits, nor
Reere-bankets. Shows and presentiments she viewes with a civil admiration;
wherein her harmless desire is, rather to see than be seen. She hates
nothing so much as entering parley with an immodest Suitor. Retire from occasions
draws her to her Arbor: where the sole object of her thoughts is her Maker.
Her eyes she holds her professed foes, if they send forth one loose look;
tears must sue out their pardon, or no hope of reconciliation. Her resort to
the Court, is for occasion, not fashion: where her demeanor ever gives
augmentation to her honor. Her winning modesty becomes so powerful a
Petitioner, as she ever returns a prevailing Suitor. During her abode in the
City, she neither wears the Street, nor wearies her self with her Coach: Her
Chamber is her Tyring-roome, where she bethinks her how she may play her part
on the worlds Theater; that she may gain applause of her heavenly Spectators.
Her constant reside is in the Country; where hospitality proclaims her inbred
affection to works of piety. All which she exercises with that privacy, as
they will witness for her, she fears nothing more than vainglory. In her
house she performs the office of a Mistress, no imperious Governesse. She
knows when to put on a smooth brow, and to cherish industry with moderate
bounty. Her discreet providence makes her family look with a cheerful
countenance: Her posterity cannot choose but prosper, being nursed by so
natural a mother. The open field she makes her Gallery; her Laborers, her
living Pictures; which, though she finds mere Pictures, hanging on, rather
than laboring, Passion transports her not above her self, nor forces her to
the least expression unworthy of her self: she passes by them with a modest
reproof, which works in them a deeper impression, than any fiery or furious
passion: Her Neighbors she daily wooes and winnes: which she effects with
such innocent affability, as none can justly tax her of flattery. An Over-seer
for the poor she appoints her self, wherein she exceeds all those that are
chosen by the Parish. She takes a Survey daily and duly of them, and, without
any charge to the Hamlet, relieves them. She desires not to have the esteem of
any She-clarke; she had rather be approved by her living, than learning: And
has ever preferred a sound professant before a profound disputant. A president
of piety she expresses her self in her family, which she so instructs by
her own life, as virtue becomes the object of their love. Her task she sets
her self daily, which she performs duly: Her own remissness, (if any such
be) she reproves by so much more than others, as she knows her own life to
be more exemplary than others. Some Books she reads, and those powerful to
stir up devotion and fervor to prayer; others she reads, and those useful
for direction of her household affairs. Herbals she peruseth, which she
seconds with conference: and by degrees so improves her knowledge, as her
cautesous care perfits many a dangerous cure. In all which, she turns her
ear from her own praise: humbling her self lowest in heart, though descent
rank her highest in place. She affects nothing more than mildness; distastes
nothing more than harshnesse. Prosperity could never work so upon her
thoughts, as to transport her; nor adversity so weaken her well-resolved
temper, as to amate her. Though she tender her family; extend her care to her
posterity; her highest aim is the practice of piety. Her discretion has
enabled her to distinguish of times: whereby she informs her self when she
should be provident and frugall, when bounteous and liberal. Her gate is not
more open than is her heart; where she holds the poorest her richest guests.
She thinks that day wholly lost, wherein she does not one good work at
least. She is no busie-body, nor was ever, unless it were about her family,
needle, or Sampler. She holds that day the swetest, which in actions of
goodness is the fruitfull'st. Like a good Merchant, she brings her
merchandise afar, and yet she travels not far for it; She ^its at the
Stern, steeres the Rudder of her state, and frees it from hazard when driven
to a strait. Her Husband she acknowledges her head; whom to oppose, were to
mutine against her Leader, and consequently show her self an unruly member. If
he be intemperate, she wooes and winnes him with love; and, in time, weanes
and reclaimes him from his irregular life. So conformable is she to his
opinion, both in points of Religion, and arguments of providence; as the
Exchequer must be no Sponge to her husbands purse through her conscience. Yet
makes she Conscience her gain; and in that blessed commerce, Humility her
guide, Heaven her goal. Her household she makes her Commonweal; wherein not
any from the highest to the lowest of her feminine government, but knows
their peculiar office and employment: to which they address themselves (so
highly they honor her they serve) with more love than fear. She becomes
Promoter, I mean of no office to wrong her Country, but the tender care of a
mother in behalf of her well-educated progeny; to which the world no sooner
gives entertainment, than she begins to enable them for their advancement.
Markets she seldom visits, nor any place of freer Concourse: for she finds
when her eyes are abroad, her thoughts are estranged from home. Would you take
a fuller view of her? Draw nearer; Observe her even in these which some of her
sex esteem least, with how generous a beauty she adornes her self most.

APPAREL she wears; and sighs when she remembers her Sex. She wonders how
that fig-leafe, Habit, should be so strangely altered. How this Ensign of
original sin should be so quaintly slasht, and indented. What pains sin
takes to display her shame! Her garment is of another cut. Though she cannot
rectify this broad-spreading malady, the corruption of this age must not draw
her to that vanity. She knows the use of APPAREL, which she would be loath
to invert. Ordained it was, to keep in natural heat, and to keep out cold:
this she observes with a graceful presence, making this her Impreze: Comely,
not Gaudy.

BEHAVIOR she sets out with a civil expression, without much art or
affectation. There is nothing which does not infinitely become her. In places
of resort, she is so highly admired, as those which observe her, could be
well content to serve her. She is generous in all; Not a Look but gives Life to
Love; and that so virtuously disposed, as not a light thought can distract it.
Her very motion is a moving direction; She never learned to tinkle with her
feet, to wander with her eyes, to stain her spotless honor with a painted
blush. All she does is her own; All her own does incomparably please; which
she clozeth with this impreze: Loving Modesty is a Living Beauty.

COMPLEMENT she admits, but not that which this Age affects; she preferres
Substance before mere Formality. Pith before the Rind, Performance before
Ceremony. She distastes nothing so much as that Court fustian; which, in her
e^teeme, is quite out of fashion* your Servants Servant. She cannot protest in
jest, nor profess what she means not in earnest. She cares not for this
Rhetorical varnish, it makes a good cause suspicious; her desire is to
express her self in action more than discourse. That COMPLEMENT which
consists in congies, cringies, and salutes, dis-rellisheth her palate most: it
tastes too much of the Caske; for the rest she is secure, so her actions be
really pure; her self completely honest. Thus she sums up her days, makes
virtue her praise, this her Impreze: Civil Complement, my best Accomplishment.

DECENCY is her native Livery; though she make no shadow of it, her own
shadow is not more individuate. In her attire she is not so sumptuous as
seemly, not so costly as comely; in her discourse she delivers her mind not
so amply as fully, nor so quickly as freely; in her whole course she
expresses her inward beauty. Her Glass is not half so useful to her self,
as the glass of her life is to others. Whatsoever is worn by her, receives a
singular grace from her. Her fashion is never out of request; though more
constant in it, than the Age would admit. She lives to bring time into some
better t^^e: this is her task in every place; this is that which crowns her
with peace; while she devises this for her impreze: Virgin-Decency is Virtues
Livery.

ESTIMATION is that precious odor which gives sweetness to her honor. Dye
had she rather with it, than enjoy an Empire and live without it. It is the
Goal of all her Actions. The Crown of all her Labors. Poverty she holds an
incomparable blessing, so her name be enriched by ESTIMATION: No lead Fly can
corrupt that Ointment. Happy needs must be her State, that preserves this
without Stain. This she feeds not with the juice of vainglory; nor seeks to
augment it with a fabulous story. Many have purchased praise in Oily lines,
that never merited applause all their lives. Her desire is to be, rather than
seem; lest seeming to be what she is not, she gull the world; but her self
most, by playing the counterfeit. Resolute is she in this her Impreze: My
prize is her own praise.

FANCY she entertaines with a cheerful but chaste bosom. Though Love be
blind, her love has eyes. No less faithful is she in reteining, than
doubtful in entertaining. Protests are dangerous Lures to credulous Lovers,
but her FANCY is too staid to stoop unto them. She can love well, but lest
she should repent soon, and that too late, she will try before she trust,
have some reason to like before she love. She holds that FANCY a Frenzy,
which is only led by Sense. She makes Reason her Guide, that Content may be
her Goal. Long time she debates with Love, before ever she give Love her
heart; which done, she confirms the bargain with her hand. Her Constancy
she displayes in this Impreze: My Choice admits no change.

GENTILITY is not her boast, but that which dignifies that title most. Titles
from Ancestors derived, and by their Successors actions not revived, She holds
degenerously usurped. Virtue is her soveraignesse; in whose service to live and
die she holds the absolutest happiness. Gentry she thinks best graced by
affability: To be surly, derogates as much from her worth, as baseness from
Nobility of birth. Her Lineage is best distinguished by her Crest, her worth by
her self. Her desert gives life to her descent. Not an action comes from her,
but excellently becomes her. She ever reflects on the House from whence she
came, whose antiquity she ennobles with numerous expressions of piety; from
the rising height of which increase, she draws this Christian Impreze: Desert
Crowns Descent.

HONOR she deserves more than desires; This she may admit, but not admire.
Weak she holds that foundation of HONOR, where virtue is not a supporter.
That antic portrature of State must needs decline, where piety bears not up
the train. The more HONOR that is conferred on her, makes her the humbler;
she clothes not her Look with a disdainful scorn, nor clouds her brow with
an imperious frown. Far more esteems she the title of goodness than
greatness. She holds nothing more worthy of her approving, than a daily
drawing nearer to Perfection, by her virtuous living. Her whole Pilgrimage is
nothing else than to show unto the world what is most requisite for a great
Personage. In a word, shall we take a re-view of her Noble carriage in each of
our Observances? For the first, she is fashionably neat; for the second,
formally discreet; for the third, civilly complete; for the fourth, amiably
decent; for the fifth, precious in repute; for the sixth, affectionately
constant; for the seventh, generously accommodated; for the eighth, honorably
accomplished. Whence it is, that she impalls her diuinall race with this
imperial Impreze: Honor is Virtues Harbor.

Go on, then, she may with Honor, seeing the King in her beauty takes such
pleasure. A Divine presage of promising goodness was her infancy; A continuate
practice of piety was her youth and maturity; The cloze of her Pilgrimage a
calm passage from frailty to felicity. Longer would the earth keep her, but
so should she be kept from that which she values far better. Her Husband
cannot stay long behind, seeing his better part is gone before.

FINIS.
APPENDIX UPON A FORMER supposed Impression of this TITLE.
DUring my late and long abode in the Country, I was advertised by a friend
from the Universitie, that my ENGLISH GENTLEMAN was matched in the City. Which
report did not a little perplexe me; that one so tenderly nursed, carefully
nurtured, and by the testimony of all such as did judiciously know him,
absolutely accomplished, should without his Fathers consent, become tide, whom
a generous Liberty had made free. Besides all this, I was infinitely troubled
with the fear of his Choice. For, thought I, should he now be married to some
Young-roisting-minx, who never knew what providence meant, but intended more
the tricking and trimming of her self, than decking or dressing of her Soul;
who makes it her sole task, to sacrifice the Morning to her Glass, the
Midday to the Stage, the Evening to a Light Consort or recre-banket; and so
spin out her time in a sensual surfeit; how would this distemper him, and
consequently dis-rellish them, who treasured up their hopes in him! This begot
in me diverse resolves, which were seconded with a fresh fally of doubts and
fears. Sometimes I resolved, if the Match were not already concluded, nor the
rites solemnized, to forbid the baines lest it should be his bane, so rashly
to contract, before he had his parents consent. But I feared, lest this might
have the selfsame issue, which that cashiered Soldier had, who having
bestowed seven years and more in service with the States; and now returning
home; and coming on a Holiday to the Parish church where he was borne, he
might hear the baines of matrimony published betwixt one who bare his own
wives name, and another, to whom she was to be espoused, as he rightly
conceived. So as, impatient of farther delay, he forbad the baines; but to no
purpose; for though she bare her name, she was not his wife whom he heard
published; for his own wife was long before, to the Curate of the Parish
solemnly contracted. All this while recollecting my senses, and adding spirit
to my resolves, I began a fresh thus to expostulate with my self: Admit this
Young Gentleman were married, and by his Choice disparaged; were it not in the
compass of our Laws to redress it? Yes; for, thought I, her carriage will
not be so fair, but one may take advantage of it; and consequently procure a
divorce by it. Or, should her circumspect levity be such, as none could
discover it, nor tax her demeanure for it, yet presumptions and Probabilities,
exemplified with fat fees, would bring her to a discovery, and in short time
produce a Nullity. Records upon due search, (had they not of late either
subtilely or tumultuously been defaced) I needed little doubt, but they would
furnish me with Eminent instances of this kind; which being feelingly pressed,
would become very prevalent before a Conceiving Court. Besides, I might justly
insert this in the course of my pleading, as a sufficient ground or motive to
Separation; pregnant proof I have of a precontract betwixt this ENGLISH
GENTLEWOMAN and HIM; which marriage, though it were not solemnized with an
external rite, yet by mutual consent was it confirmed, and reciprocally
plighted with a ceremonious entergage of hand and heart. But I held it fittest,
to address my course to the place, before I resolved of the material points
of my pleas. And first to confer with my Gentleman himself, that I might
understand by him how he stood affected; and whether his own relation would
confirm, what erring report had so constantly bruited. But to my comfort, as I
left him, so I found him; of too discreet a temper, to be taken with any such
counterfeit Creature. Such reports, he ingenuously confessed, there were
dispersed; But what am I (said he) by these disparaged? My untainted honor is
neither improved nor impeached by rumor. He builds weakly, who reares his
foundation on the opinion of the vulgar. Have you ever seen me so lightly
enamoured, as to prefer either face or habit, before a deserving Spirit. Did
you ever injoyne me that moral Embassy, which I have not faithfully
performed? Or imposed on me that task, being noble and generous, which I have
not carefully discharged? Were your eyes ever witnesses of any loose or light
affection, to which I too pliably inclined? Or have you at any time observed
me so lightly credulous, as constantly to affect what was transitively
commended? Have you ever known me sacrifice my Lamp to the Idol of an
undeserving love? Or melted into passion, to display the least impression of
that love? Or flattered that Love with any forced hyperbole, or passionate
line? Or with folded arms past over a tedious hour, with an amorous
redoubling of A Mees? How fares it then, you should so rashly conceit, what
prejudicate report had so lightly dispersed? No, believe it; had it been my
unhappy fate, to have engaged my faith to such a stain; or darkened my
discretion with such a foil; or interchang'd my present happy estate, with
such a blemish of her Sex; I would have razed out my TITLE, and exposed my
self a contemptible Subject to all people. Besides all this, I verily think,
I should have turned true Courtier, and made it my perpetual Progress, never
to lie with her.

This did not a little revive me, to hear him so constantly express himself:
Being therefore thus freed, from what I feared, I desired nothing more than to
search out the occasion of this fear. Where I perceived, that a Mercenarie A
Frisking Fro, freighted hither in a Florentine Frigot.
Meretrician, who had taken upon her the state and style of Gentlewoman, with
more impudence than became her sex, had challenged acquaintance of my
Gentleman; which, though his Modesty did distaste, his Civility would not
altogether reject, but permitted her like a thing of Sale, to lie apart from
him on the open Stall. This propinquity of lying, or contiguity of lodging,
begot a groundless probability of their Loving. But how far his affection
was estranged from her, shall appear by the entertainment he gave to this
Gentlewoman, whom we here tender; upon whose arrival, he expressed the true
ground of his affection, after this manner:

With a chaste Embrace of true Conjugall love, you are welcome. Let it not amate
you, nor lessen my former esteem with you, in that Report has blazed me
forgetful of you, by preferring an undeserving Choice before you. Fame were
not her self, if all the grounds of her reports were truth. Indeed, if either
Titles could have drawn me, or Mercenarie respects seaz'd on me, I had bin
neither yours nor mine own; for in being less than yours, I could not
possibly have been mine own. But tell me, my virtuous Choice, did you ever
know me either taken with Titles, or deluded with Shows? Here is one indeed,
who intrusively, and with less modesty than became her Sex, pressed my
acquaintance; but could her forwardness work upon my affection, or leave with
it the least retentive impression? No; should I choose again, as now my Choice
admits no Change, I should equally prize the love of a Wench too forward, and
of one too froward: and entertain them both with that indifferent respect, as
neither the forwardness of the one, should beget in me a desire of winning,
nor the frowardness of the other, move me to spin out my time in fruitless
wooing. Indeed, I was seated in a warmer clime than where you resided. The
South was my seat, while the North was your nest; yet could not that Clime
make me discontinue my claim. Cool is that love which either air can
distemper, or distance of place dissever, or any disastrous occurrent alter.
You know what pledge I left you; nor did I ever since, engage it to any but
you. Never shall you find me any such Paphlagonian Partridge, as to have two
hearts. It is not title but substance, I affect. Your Virtues were my first
motives of affection; I did not eye your Descent, though nobly eminent; nor
those outward accomplishments of yours incomparably excellent; nor your
Fortunes, in a worldings eye highly consequent. These I confess, might produce
rare effects, in such, whose conceits only work on outward objects. Mine eye
was fixed in an higher Spheere; Spheered in a more glorious Orb. What I
observed in you, did so enamour me, as I preferred that inward fair, which did
so truly grace you, far above those outward ornaments which did
superficially adorn you. Could you imagine then, that a foreign beauty could
engage me, or a simpring civilized thing, whose best habilliments were
borrowed, and whose very complexion, like a Be in a box, preserved, should so
weane me from what I deservingly fancied; as to become affianced to her, whose
exposed liberty had made her publicly suspected? No; I never distinguished
true merit by any of these: Being such weak supports, as should any one rely
on them, they would fail them, if not fall under them. But mildly tempered
shall my construction be of my dear Loves suspect. I persuade my self, it was
a surpassing affection that first begot this Conceit: which now sweetly allayed
and attempered by reason, will admit of no such fear; seeing discreet fancy
cannot dispense with faith, nor that faith incline to any separation, till
enforced by an inevitable fate.

With these and such like amorous regreets, mixed with other variety of choice
discourse, they entertained time; while she, now safely seaz'd of him she
solely loved, and in whom her desires were fully cloz'd; importunatly sought
rather, out of an apprehension of love than fear, (as what Creature more
impatient of a Corrivall, or more solicitous of revenge in the quest of love
than a woman) to know the true ground of that report, which rumor had
dispersed; that any other should be interessed in his love, whom so constant
and continuate an affection had confirmed hers. Wherein he fully resolved her,
by relating unto her, how amongst other impertinent Pasquils, usually foisted,
and wherewith public Presses are frequently farced, which begets in our age
such a surfeite, as more learned labors become dis-rellished, and the
surquedry of wit only affected; a young Gentlewoman, whose ungenerous parts
scarcely deserved that title, had by a secret or surreptitious claim made
challenge unto him, but never durst to that day profess any such thing
publicly before him; which he so slighted, as his thoughts never deigned to
stoop to so low a lure; having long before, on a purer Object fixed his love,
and to her sacred shrine sacrificed the remains of his life.

This relation so cleared her from the least thought of suspicion, as it added
now strength to her already-sufficiently strengthened affection. Equally
communicated became their joys, sociably attempered became their griefs: No
sorrow could work so violently, nor break forth so passionately, which the
sweet union and communion of their concording minds, could not qualify; No
Solace could transport them so highly, nor seize on them so hotly, wherein with
joint affections they did not partake mutually, and which, with a virtuous
temper they allayed not mildly. Thus were they individually plighted, thus are
they inseparably placed, mutually pleased, immutably planted, equally solaced,
and now to the public view of the world, solemnly united.

Imagine then, if at any time you encounter with the Impression of any former
Labor bearing this TITLE, that'tis but the Embrio of his brain, whose
Mercenarie profession it is to divulge any Corkie Subject, that may promise but
the least hope of profit; resembling that ancient Pantotipe of Amsterdam; who
publicly protested, that he could be well contented, that the Turkish
Alcaron were Universally professed, so the privilege of it might be to him
and his Assigns solely granted.

For this Appendix, it was occasionally writ upon the report of publishing a
Subject bearing this Title: which, belike, hearing of the coming forth of a
more Deserving Consort, has been discreetly silenced, or by neglect of Time,
in obscure privacy retired. Now if any such Amphibium, after so long diving
shall appear venting, let it receive what it deserves to have, timely
suppression.

For such Readers, as are rather taken with Titles than Substance, and become
miserably enamoured on a beauteous Frontispi^e; I would request of them this
favor, to spare their labor of perusing more than the Title Page, which will
serve well enough for their Classick discourse of Authors; for these, it is
their highest honor, to furnish their useless memories, with Scholies and
Catalogues of unread Authors; and to tax them too of some egregious errors,
although these Subjects mount far above the pitch of their Critic Censures.
In a word, let our Gentleman with this his incomparable Choice be compared, and
you shall find them equally matched, affectionately mated, and both for
Ornament and Substance completely graced.

So I commend you to the Perusal and Parallel of these; which if you truly
imitate, be ye of what Sex or state soever, they will make you truly
commendable, and crown your ripened age with honor.

EMBLEM.
SOme hold these Observations to be long,
Some more judicious, hold them to be short,
Thus are they censured be they right or wrong;
What should we then make Censure but a sport,
Since good or bad, wee're never the better for it?
Which to attemper, I should think it best,
" Virtue were Censor in each Authors breast.
A Compendious Table; wherein the Principal points contained in this Book,
are with no less Brevity than Perspicuity, Propriety than Facility couched.
APPAREL. Observat. 1.
OF the necessity of Apparel. Page 271. Primitive purity exempted us from
these necessities; Original impurity subjected us to these necessities page
273. Apparel keeps the body warm two ways: first by keeping in the natural
heat: 2. By keeping out accidental cold. page 272. These benefits are
inverted by phantasticke Fashions late introduced: where attires are not made
to keep cold out, but to bring cold in. page 272. and 273. Of the use of
Apparel. 273. To makes this use good, Modesty must be our guide, Virtuous
thoughts our guard; so shall Heaven be our goal. ibid. A me^^^rable instance
of a Religious woman; expressing what Divine use she made in the eying of her
Apparel. ibid. The habit of the mind may be best discerned by the carriage
of the body; the Disposition of the body, by the habit. page 274. The
Constancy of the Heathen, in reteining their ancient Country fashion; and
immutably observing the habit of their own Nation. ibid. Habit is to be
used as an Ornament of decency; without the least Border or Edging of Vanity.
page 275. Directions, how to dispose the Senses; and that Reason must keep
Sentinel, lest they become Sensual. ibid. The preciousnesse of time; whereof,
a Moment is our portion; nor has the Commandingst Emperor a larger
proportion. ibid. How contemptible a thing is Man, if he erect not his
thoughts above man! ibid. Of the abuse of Apparel. ibid. More time spent how
to abuse time, and corupt licentious youth; then how to address employment to
qualify the distractions of the one, or to rectify the distempers of the
other. page 276. This illustrated by instances in three several places. City,
Court, and Country: And accommodated, with Observations proper to every
Subject. ibid. The Task of a virtuous Mirror, and a true Lady of Honor,
expressed; and to all Ladies, as a President of goodness, zealously
recommended. page 277. The life of a mere Libertine instanced and displayed
with a relation of those desperate Conclusions to which she adhered. ibid. How
the use of Apparel may be inverted to abuse: either by Delicacy, or
Superfinity. page 277. Reproof touching Apparel, originally occasioned from
four respects: 1. Sumptuousness. And that confirmed by a memorable example.
2. Softness. And that confirmed by a memorable example. 3. Strangeness. And
that reproveable in these 3. particulars: 4. Superfluousnesse. And that
reproveable in these 3. particulars:
Variety. ibid. Immensity. ibid. Vanity. ibid.
All which are interveined with sundry instances of various delight. page 277.
and 278 etc. A disswasion from Delicacy of Apparel, by reflecting on the
Emblem of humane frailty, the model of our mortality. Which continuate
Subject is stored with a select variety of divine and humane observations. page
279. and 280. Superfluity of Apparel condemned; the Fashion-mongers answered:
clozing that Branch, with a devout Admonition and personal application from
divine BASILE extracted, and usefully applied. page 281. and 282. That Apparel
most comely, which conferres on the wearer, most native beauty, and most honor
on her Country. page 283. Habit is a custom; yet it is our custom to change
our Habit. ibid. Each Country reteines a fashion of her own, save our own.
ibid. Ours an extraction or confection of all, which makes us Ieered at by all.
ibid. Gregory the Great being highly taken with the comely feature of the
English; said, It was great pity that those Angles should not, in disposition
as well as proportion, resemble Angels. ibid. Phantasticke fashions are no
motives of affection to discreet Lovers. page 284. Discretion will be more
taken with Modesty, than Vanity; and Humility, than Vainglory. ibid. The
World is our Stage, our Life an Act; The Tyring-house, where we bestowed such
care, cost and curiosity, must be shut up, when our Night approaches, and
strips us of these robes of our mortality. Without Virtue, all humane glory is
a vading beauty ibid.
BEHAVIOR. Observat. 2.
Behavior reflects on three particulars. Action. Page 286. Affection. Page
286. Passion. Page 286.
Virtue is the life of Action, Action the life of man. ibid. In this Subject
some are employed (but remissely) to the purpose. Others are employed to no
purpose. Others sleep out their mind in security. Others creep and cringe
into an Apish formality. None of these direct the bent of their actions, to the
Object of true Glory. ibid. A woman's honor is of higher esteem than to be
thus disvalued. Light occasions are many times grounds of deep aspersions.
Actions are to be seasoned with discretion, seconded by direction, strengthened
with instruction, lest too much rashness bring the undertaker to destruction.
ibid. A brief Commemoration of diverse noble women, who as they were honorable
by descent, so were they memorable for desert. Parallels to the best men for
conversation, though weak in sex, nature and condition. page 287. An
exhortation to young Gentlewomen, to conform themselves to such imitable
patterns: concluding with that excellent instruction addressed by St. HIEROM
to that holy Virgin DEMETRIAS; commending nothing so much unto her as industry,
the better to inure her in the practice of Piety. Hier. ad Demet. ibid.
Nothing requires more discretion than affection. page 288. One can never truly
love and not be wise: which directly opposes PLATO'S opinion. ibid. Nothing
more impatient of delay than Love: Nothing of more different passion: with an
exact relation of their distinct operation. ibid. Love is neither to be too
subtly colored, nor too simply discovered. If too hot, the violence of it is
best rebated by absence; if too cool it is to be quickened with more frequent
conference, and assiduate presence. page 289. Passion never works more
fearful effects, then when it streams from Jealousy: verified by a tragic
Example in our own I Will and time occurring, and to succeeding times surviving.
ibid. Remedies to appease anger, and every passionate distemper. page 290. and
291. * The discommodities which arise from Passion; the benefits which redound
from attempering it. * Greg. Moral. lib. 5. cap. 31. ibid. etc. An useful
Exhortation, to this temperate Moderation. page 292 How a Gentlewoman is to
behave her self in Company. ibid. Modesty and Mildness hold sweetest
correspondence in all societies. page 293 Chastity is an enclosed Garden; and
by no licentious foot to be entered. ibid. Other vices are discomfited by
fight, Lust only defeated by f^ight. Aug. lib. de honestate mulieris. page 294
We may be in security, so long as we are sequestered from society. ibid. We are
to subject affection to the soveraigntie of reason. ibid. How a Gentlewoman is
to behave her self in Privacie. ibid. Patterns of singular devotion
recommended to her imitation. page 295, and 296. Meditation being a Key to open
the Morning, a lock to close the Evening, should be a Gentlewomans bosom
companion. ibid. Gentlewoman, without much reservancie, are not to frequent
public places of Society. page 297 Instances of such, as being discreetly
reserved, accommodated their persons to public affairs, and became improved
by them. page 298 A judicious recollection of such who intend time, and such
who mispend time: clozing with the relation of sundry fearful Examples, to
deter loose livers from the like securenesse. page 299 and 300 That Behavior
most approved, which is clearest from affectation freed. ibid. Virtues Habit
and Behavior is free and not affected; native and not traduced. page 301 An
accurate distinction or dijudication betwixt an enforced and unaffected
Behavior. ibid. A Gentlewoman is so to behave her self, that to^ much
curiosity tax her not of pride, nor too much Majesty of State. page 302
COMPLEMENT. (...) 3.
COmplement defined. Page ^^^ With what (...) retained their form of
Complement. ibid. and 304 Different g^^^es proper to distinct places. ibid. A
(...) betwixt real and (...) Complemen^. ibid. A deserving commendation of
(...) English Ladies, in their unaffected way of Complement. ibid. and 305. How
Complement may be corrupted. ibid. A descr^pti^n of am^rous (...), with a just
repre^se of their (...) Hyperbolees. page 306 The Complement (...) by some
great ones, were but mere C^nting among Beggars. page 307 How Complement (...)
be refined. ibid. Civility is the best and most refined Complement that may be.
page 308 Civility is never out of fashion (...) deserving admiration. page 309
It is Society that gives us, or takes from us our Security. page 30^ Wherein
Complement may be admitted, as mainely consequent. page 309 The Court is the
Beacon of the State; the Seat or School of Complement. ibid. As Courtiers are
Objects to many Eyes; so should their Actions be Platformes to many Lives. page
310 Corrivalship in a light C^r^^zans love, has deprived many a hopeful
G^ntleman of his dearest life. ibid. In Contests of love, it is hard to
determine whether the Agent or Patient suffer in me. ibid. Wherein Complement
may be omitted, as merely impertinent. page 311 Apish formalists, or
Complementall actors dis-esteeme those three principal faculties of the
Understanding. Discourse. Distinction. Election.
Singular Directions, how to accommodate them in all these. ibid. and 312. What
Complement gives best accomplishment. ibid. Sensual Curtezans are their own
Furies. page 313. A good Christian the compleatest Courtier: Virtue the
Ornament, which gives Complement the best accomplishment. ibid.
DECENCY. Observat. 4.
DEcency recommended as requisite, in four distinct Subjects: Gate. Page 315.
Look. Page 315. Speech. Page 315. Habit. Page 315.

GATE.
It is no hard thing to gather the disposition of our heart, by the dimension
of our Gate. ibid. Though our Feet be here below, our Faith should be above.
page 317. No path of pleasure should draw us from those joys which last for
ever. ibid.
LOOK.
A wanton Eye is the truest Evidence of a wandering mind: Our Eye becomes the
sense of sorrow, because the sense of sin. ibid. An Unclean Eye the
Messenger of an unclean heart. ibid. Distinct Objects proposed to Eyes
diversely affected. ibid. By looking upward, the more we look, we shall like;
the longer we live, we shall love. page 318.
SPEECH.
Without Speech can no society subsist. ibid. Excellent rules for propriety of
discourse. page 319. and 320. A deliberate apprehension begot by serious
attention, is to go ever before discourse. ibid. What Subject suites best for
a Gentlewomans discourse. ibid. A pleasant answer of mellifluous BERNARD,
applied to all forward Shee-church discoursers. ibid. Silence in a Woman, is a
moving Rhetoric. ibid.
HABIT.
There is nothing which moves us more to pride it in sin, than that which was
first given us to cover our shame. page 320. Sumptuousness of the Habit
deserves not so much reprehension, as Phantasticknesse of the Habit, in respect
of the form of fashion. page 321. Decency is a civil Gentlewomans choycest
livery, which sets her forth before all embroidery. ibid. Time is too precious
to be made a Pageant or Morris on. ibid. A brief but most useful application
of those four proceeding Subjects. page 322. Decency, the attractivest motive
of Affection. ibid. Nothing convayes more affection to the heart, than Decency
in the Object we affect. ibid. In this age, the best shot to be discharged is a
Tavern reckoning, the best Alarm carousing, and the most absolute March
reeling. ibid. No Habit so decent, as what is native and properly habituate.
page 323. Where Virtue is not directresse in our choice, our inconstant minds
are ever prone to change. ibid. Nothing should give us Content, but what is
decent. ibid. Decency the smoothest path that leads to perfection. page 323.
The only way to be Complete, is to be decent. 324. An adumbration of that
glory, reserved for those that affect Decency. ibid. A virtuous Exemplarie life
crowns the Soul with eternal rest. ibid.
ESTIMATION. Observe. 5.
EStimation, a Gentlewomans highest prize. page 327. The loss of Estimation
makes the richest Merchant an irreparable Bankrupt. ibid. Fame, the sweetest
flower that ever grew near the border of Time. ibid. A continuation of sundry
eminent personages; puissant in arms, continent in desires; and absolute
Commanders of their own affections. page 328, 329. Greece and Rome were no
less honored for PENELOPES and LUCRETIA'S Constancy; than for ULYSSES
wisdom, or COLLATINES loyalty. ibid. Portion may woe a Wordling; Proportion a
youthful wanton; but it is virtue that wins the heart of discretion. page 329.
A select improvement of our Albion Ladies. page 330. How Estimation may be
discerned to be real. ibid. Instructions of singular use for Maids, Wives,
and Widows: illustrated with proper instances in each kind. The way to win
an Husband is not to woo him, but to be wooed by him. page 330, 331. Mothers
the fittingst Nurses of their own children; seconded by examples in all ages.
page 331, 332. etc. A Mistress of a family many times taxed for her Handmaides
delicacy: instanced and illustrated copiously. page 334 The lives of the dying,
consist in the memory of the living. ibid. How Estimation may be discerned to
be superficial. page 335. Many desire to appear most to the eye, what they
are least in heart. ibid. The first occasion of kissing the lip: with a free
reproof of our late but too neat introduced custom of kissing the cheek,
elegantly shadowed in a Sonnet. ibid. Discretion cannot approve of that for
good, which selfe-opinion or singularity only makes good. ibid. Those who
dedicate themselves to the service of Virtue, prefer the pith before the
rind, substance before appearance. page 336 A (...) wanton Women. ibid. Sins
may (...) but never without fear. ibid. Superficial Complementors, are
hypocritical Courtiers. ibid. Directions how to be gracious Courtiers in the
highest Court. ibid. How Estimation may be impregnably preserved. page 337. Of
all arrows, those which are darted by the spirit of zeal wound the enemy
most, and procure the Archer best rest: confirmed by sundry notable examples.
ibid. and 338 None can walk safely, that walks not religiously. ibid. A
reflection upon the constancy and resolution of Heathens, r^^^mmended to the
imitation of Christian wom^n. ibid. Virtue cannot exercise her own strength,
nor express her own worth without an Opposite. ibid. An instance in a noble
Lady. page 339 A direction in the cloze. ibid. How Estimation may be
irreparably lost. ibid. The * Ivy while it is winding, decays the plant, with
which it is wreathing. * Ilices hederae, agiles horae conficiunt. ibid. An
instance of a Citie-Virago. page 340 An use of this instance. ibid. The
absolute end, whereunto Estimation aspires, and wherein it cheerfully rests.
ibid. This confirmed by sundry examples; and one most remarkable of our own.
ibid. and 341 etc. An application to these Ladies of our own. page 342.
FANCY. Observat. 6.
FAncy, is to be with deliberation grounded. page 343 The Eye is Fancies
harbinger, but the heart is her harbor. ibid. Directions for settling and
disposing our affection. page 344 Loves purity is to be discussed, before it be
entertained. ibid. Not the rind but the mind it Discretions Ad^^^ant. ibid.
The misery of jealousy debla^^n^d and exemplified. ibid. Singular resolves for
a Conjugall (...). page 345. and 346 Fancy is to be with constancy retained.
p^g. 346 Two memorable Mottoes recommended. ibid. The waywardness of some
women justly reproved, and how that humor may be rectified. page 347 The
admirable purity and efficacy of Love. ibid. Memorable examples of Conjugall
Constancy and Continency. Which constancy or rather pertinacious Fancy might be
instanced in that Hartfordshire widow; who, though l^ft deeply engaged by her
Husband, was strongly solicited by sundry eminent Suitors: all which she
rejected, making choice of a d^b^u^ht Spend-thrift; And, though much disswaided
by her friends, she declined not her affection, Saying ever, He was good enough
to lie in a ^ayle; which she perform, for the very same day they were married,
Her Bridegroom was arrested and committed to Prison, where she accommodates
him with all necessaries, but never to this hour admits him the enjoyment of
her person. page 34^ An exhortation tending to the imitation of such famous
Presidents. ibid. Wanton Fancy is a wandering ^renzy. ibid. Wanton Love, seldom
or never, promises good success: Covertly shadowed in the instance of a
wretchlesse Lady; who, though an hoary dye had discolored her hair, and
ripenes of years had summoned her to her (...), yet so far was she estranged
from (...), as her brothell-bed chased with (...) broaths, became an
^arbouresse to three ^^^dinous Consorts night by night. To this fury of loose
Fancy, as she prostituted her honor, so wheresoever she struck a^ch^r, ill
success did ever accompany her. ibid. The inc^ndiaries or soments of this
inordinate passion, to six particulars reduced, all which are in one distich
includ^d. ibid. The odious and inhumane effects in all (...) the violence of
this Wanton fancy, or Wandering frenzy. page 349. Sovereign receipts to cure
this desperate malady. page 350 What kind of affection deserves a Gentlewoman^
election. ibid. How Fancy may be checked, if too wild; confirmed by a
Philosophical demonstration or Physical experiments. ibid. A pleasant and
pit^y expostulation with fancy. ibid. A disswasion from too much credulity to
the light protests of deceiving fancy: confirmed by a modern example. page 351
A Gentlewoman may with more safety suspect, than too rashly affect. ibid. A
discreet resolution upon terms of affection, seconded with the promise of an
assured blessing. ibid. The secret impression, and passionate expression of an
unfortunate Lady in the relation of her misery. ibid. and 352 It is not so hard
to give comfortable counsel to the sorrowful, as to find a fit season when
to give it. ibid. Consideration, a necessary guide to affection. Ibid.
Repentance comes too late at Marriage night. Ibid. How Fancy may be cheered if
too cold. ibid. The incomparable honor of a Virgin-condition. page 353 The
hate of Iu^est with brute Beasts. ibid. The Bird of Love, the Emblem of a
Lovers heart. page 354 Moneys are inferior pictures to true Lovers. ibid. The
absolute end of a conjugall State. ibid. An attemperament of both those
indisposed Fancies before mentioned. page 355 The difference betwixt a wise and
wild Love, consists in this: the one ever deliberate^ before it love; the
other loves before it deliberate. ibid. Necessary Cautions for all
kind-hearted Gentlewomen. ibid. and 356. The like for all coy or coole-affected
Gentlewomen. ibid. A sweet attemperament of both these humors: with an apt
Emblem explained and properly applied, to such, as are with either of these
humors distempered. page 357
GENTILITY. Observat. 7.
GEntility, is derived from our Ancestors to us, but soon blanched, if not
revived by us. page 359 A persuasion to the imitation of our Ancestors virtues.
page 360 There was nothing mortal about them but their bodies, and those were
too frail Cabonets for such rich eminences to lodge in: whereas, there is
nothing but frailties about ours, for loose and licentious love to lie in.
ibid. Those Odours deserve highest honors, that beautify us living, and
preserve our memory dying. ibid. To see a light Lady descending from a noble
Family, is a Spectacle of more spreading infamy, than any Subject of inferior
quality. ibid. Gentility, is not to be measured by antiquity of time, but
precedence in worth. ibid. The reason why generous descents become so much
corrupted; and virtuous Parents by vicious Children so frequently disparged.
ibid. and 361 Mothers, the naturallest Nurses: confirmed by precept, custom,
and example. page ibid. * Supra page 331, and 332 An effectual persuasion to
that duty. ibid. Virtue the best Coat. page 362 Heraldry proves virtues Coat to
be the best, because deblazoned with least charge. Virtue is no admiring lover
of ought that is below her. page 362 The misery of this age, in sumptuousness
of attire. ibid. A notable example of hypocritical piety. page 363. Sins
prevention, is to prevent the Occasion. ibid. A Shamefaste red the best color
to deblazon virtues Coat. page 365 Gentlewomen are to reflect more on their
inward worth, than on their outward wear. page 367 The honor of Humility.
page 368 A glorious approvall of modest Matrons. page 369 It will not redound
much to a Gentlewomans honor, to have observed the fashions of the time, but
with a discreet Contempt or civil neglect of fashion, to have redeemed her
time. page 370 Living actions of true Gentility, happy Precursors to the State
of Glory. ibid. There are native seeds of goodness, sown in generous bloods
by lineall succession: variously instanced. ibid. and 371 Those who are with
the choycest virtues endowed, become often times, most traduced. ibid. There is
no one virtue which makes a Gentlewoman more gracious in the eye of her
beholder, than Modesty, the greatest advancer of many ancient family. ibid. To
be high borne and basely minded, is to ingraft bastard suppes in a noble
stock. page 372 High and Heroicke virtues become great Houses: confirmed by
the resolution of a noble Lady, in rejecting the powerful solicitancy of a
Sensual Suitor. ibid. Emulation of goodness in great Persons is honorable.
ibid. How these native seeds of goodness may be ripened by instruction. page
373 No Tutresses sitter to perfect this excellent work in Gentlewomen, than
those who were the secondarie instruments of their being: strengthened by
example and reason. ibid. A select Choice and recommendation of sundry books
of instruction, to the perusal of our English Gentlewoman. ibid. A brief
enumeration, serious discussion, and judicious election of sundry ancient
Fathers, with other moral Authors. ibid. and 374 etc. English translations,
the lights of Ladies, but Dampes of Scholars. page 375 Private Nurseries,
household Academies. ibid. The first instruction takes the deepest Impression;
with an useful application to every condition. page 376. Necessary directions
highly conducing to the good report and repute of Maids and Matrons. ibid. The
most precious things have ever the most pernicious Keepers. Nothing more
precious, than a Virgins honor; it were a shame for the Mother for any base
lucre, to prove a treacherous Keeper. ibid. The whole progress of a
Gentlewomans conversation should be a continued line of direction: to which
line he confines his observation. page 377
HONOR. Observat. 8.
PRomotion discovers what men be, but true Honor shows what they should be.
page 379 Honor is painted, when it is not with virtue poudred. page 380 Moral
Philosophy, nor Christian Theory, could ever hold that for deserving
greatness, which had not near relation to goodness. ibid. Their memory
cannot live long, who make Authority a Sanctuary to wrong. ibid. Virtue
defined, and by it true Gentility with the honor of an ancient family
expressed. page 381 An accurate connection with a personal application of the
preceding Subjects, to all Gentlewomen. ibid. and 382 Be women never so
eminent, they are but painted Trunkes, if virtue be not resident. ibid. Virtue
should not only be resident but president over all their actions. ibid. No
Cloth takes such deep tincture, as the Cloth of Honor. ibid. No Pleasure can
be constant, unless it afford inward content. ibid. There is nothing asperseth
a deeper stain upon the Cloth of Honor, than too much attention unto
Sycophants. ibid. Sovereign receipts against the poison of flattery; with a
serious exhortation to the entertainment of humility, patience, constancy, and
every generous virtue. ibid. and 383 Violets, though they grow low and near
the earth, smell sweetest: and Honor appears the fullest of beauty, when she
is humblest. ibid. Honor, if truly grounded, can look in the face of terror,
and never be amated. page 384 She that makes virtue her object, cannot but make
every earthly thing her Subject. ibid. Honors imprezza and Pasture. ibid.
Honors complete armor, dress, and portraiture. ibid. HER Description, with
motives to her imitation. ibid. A brief but useful application. ibid.
Honorable Personages should be Presidents of goodness. ibid. LANDMARKES are
usually erected for direction of the Mariner, and Magistrates elected for
instruction of the inferior. ibid. The world, a Maze of Misery, a vale of
vanity. Page 385 Man, a story of calamity, a statue of infelicity. Page 385 To
be a Lady of Honor, is more than titular. ibid. Three especial Objects, upon
which Honorable personages are to reflect: Charity. Page ibid. Chastity.
Page ibid. Humility. Page ibid.
A most accurate and serious discourse on each particular Object. page 385, and
386 The very last day to an honorable Christian, is every days memorial.
ibid. The actions of Noble Personages, like sweet odours, diffuse themselves by
imitation to their followers. page 387 Those that are followers of their
persons, will be followers likewise of their lives. ibid. Their private family
is a familiar Nursery. ibid. Foul enormities must admit of no Privileges:
Eminent Persons are to be their own Censors. ibid. An excellent application,
by way of Exhortation to all such honorable Censors. ibid. Virtues are more
permanent Monuments, than Statues, styles, trophies, or obeliskes. ibid. Virtue
or Vice, whethersoever takes hold first, reteines a deeper impression in
honor, than any lower Subject. ibid. In these, whom Nobility of blood has
advanced, be ever some seeds or semblances of their Progenitors retained. ibid.
This confirmed by Philosophical reason and example; President and Precept.
page 288 Great minds are many times sick of great maladies: how this by
timely prevention may be seasonably cured. ibid. The efficient cause, why
Virtue or Vice, whethersoever takes hold first, reteines a deeper impression in
Honor, than in any lower Subject; illustrated by instance. ibid. First Motions
have deep impressions; first Notions firm retentions. page 389 The greatest
profit of Honorable personages, is to become Proficients in the practice of
virtue; Their highest delight, to subdue their delights to the obedience of
reason, for the love of virtue. ibid. The Corruption of time has introduced
that deformity of fashion, as it asperseth on our formal imitators much
imputation. ibid. Where Youth is initiated in affectation of State, it partakes
in age of too much Pride. ibid. The humor, temper, and danger of our
Tame-Beasts, or State-Parasites. ibid. A reservancy of State in Pace, face, and
every Posture, recommended by an insinuating Faune, to a Phantasticke Gallant.
ibid. Sycophancy the ruin of many a Noble family. ibid. An election of honest
and discreet followers. ibid. Gentlewomens lives, as they are lives to
themselves, so should they be lights unto others. ibid. For Popular honor,
Vice will but varnish it; it is Virtue that will richly enammell it. Singular
motives to Mortification. page 390 That Virtue may receive the first
impression, by means of an inbred noble disposition, seconded by helps of
Education. ibid. A pleasant Epigram alluding to all humerous Ladies. Marg. page
ibid. A Choice recollection and expression of such virtues as sort and suit
with the condition of our noblest Ladies: with Cautions to attemper them in all
extremes: by an useful reflection upon all the Senses; and those Commanding
passions, which domineere most over the Senses. ibid. and 391 A Singular
Meditation for recollection of our affections. page 391 and 392. Vice throws
her aspersions o^ no Subject, so much as on Honor. ibid A fruitful
application to all young Gentlewomen, for regulating their dispositions, and
bow to make them true inheritrices of Honor. ibid. Virtue reduced to habit,
aspires to perfection. page 393 There is nothing under heaven, that can
satisfy a Soul created for heaven. ibid. Exquisite directions for Virgins,
Wives, and Widows. ibid. and 394 We are to esteem no life sweeter, than when
every day improves us and makes us better. ibid. A divine Contemplation,
reflecting upon our mutabilitie on Earth, our immortality in Heaven. ibid. and
395 A Review of our Ladies Court and City solace. ibid. Recreations run a
Maze, while they lay their Scene of Mirth on Earth. ibid. A Twofold
consideration full of sweet and select consolation. ibid. How happy many
Eminent Personages had been, had they never been taken with this Shadow of
happiness. ibid. No passage to the Temple of * Honor, but through the Temple
of Virtue. * HONOR virtutis praemium; VIRTUS honoris pretium. ibid. If
Gentlewomen desire to be great, let it be their height of ambition to aspire to
honor in the Court of virtue. ibid. What a brave Salique State shall
Gentlewomen enjoy, when vigilance becomes Warden of their Cinque Ports? page
395 Perseverance is the Crown of goodness. ibid. A constant resolution, the
Diadem of a Christian in her dissolution. ibid. A Character, entitled; A
Gentlewoman; wherein such an One is described, whose desert answers her
descent; whose actions truly ennoble her self: with a brief touch or review
of all his Observations; Which are shown to be Objects of her love,
improvements of her life. An Appendix, upon a former supposed impression of
this Title; wherein the Authors fears are suggested, discussed, and resolved:
and his complete ENGLISH GENTLEWOMAN to as complete a GENTLEMAN espoused. Where
they rejoice, like two tender Turtles, in their mutual triumph of Love and
Honor, jointly combined.
FINIS.
WHat may be wished in Widow, Wife or Maid,
Is in our Frontispice to life portraid:
Who seeks for more, may thus much understand,
She takes that feature from an Higher hand.

Upon the Errata.
TO describe an ENGLISH GENTLEVVOMAN without an Error, were a glozing palpable
Error; And to free her more than an ENGLISH GENTLEMAN of Error, were to incur
a prejudicate Censure. Of both which, without farther apology, the Press has
saved me a labor: Yet reflect upon the weakness of her Sex, (whose purest
Self dignifies her Sex) and the Subject will injoyne thee to hold it thine
highest honor, to salve her Error with an ingenuous Candor. So may thou
vindicate the Author, and by being a virtuous Lover, gain a most deserving
Mistresses favor.

PRELUM. Crimen Authors patiuntur omnes. PRAELIUM.

TYPUS. Crimen Authors patiuntur omnes. CIPPUS.

Errata In the ENGLISH GENTLEWOMAN.
PAge 273. Flora nec Veris Speciosi fora Viridariis Punicis amaeniora.
line 27. for Eber, read Ebor. page 274. l. 12. f. mortality, r. morality. page
276. l. 19. f. Balcone, r. Belcone. page 347. l. ult. f. and, r. an. page 349.
l. 8. f. Anacrons, r. Anacreons. page 361. l. 29. f. Phavorius, r. Phavorinus.
page 383. l. 41. f. strinks, r. shrinks.

HAd Woman, Man's choice succor, never been Sinner,
Pure as She Is fair, She Would had no Error in her:
Now, humble Soul, her Error to descrye,
She still reteines the Apple in her eye.

A LADIES LOVE-LECTVRE: COMPOSED, AND FROM THE CHOICEST FLOWERS OF Divinity
and Humanity Culled, and Compiled: As it has been by sundry Personages of
eminent quality, upon sight of some Copies dispersed, modestly importuned: To
the memory of that Sexes honor; for whose sweet sakes he originally addressed
this Labor.

BY RI. BRATHVVAIT Esquire.

(...).

LONDON, Printed by JOHN DAVVSON, 1641.

TO THAT ABSOLVTE OWNER AND HONOR OF DISCREET FANCY, Mris. ELIZABETH WESTBY.
Mistress,
REceive here with a Book, the real abstract of your self. For in it, when
you have read it, do but converse with your own thoughts, and you shall find
your self portrayed. Phidias could never with all his art, present a
Masterpiece of such beauty, as virtue can do in drawing her line, and
bestowing on it a modest blush to enliven fancy. These Idaea's are Englands
Cynthia's.

You were sometimes pleased to peruse your self shadowed in my Elegiack Poem;
require this for a more lasting and living Emblem.

Now, as to wish you what you already have, I need not: so to wish you more
then you already have, I cannot: unless some new choice might accomplish his
happiness that should attain it. Goodness is such a Dower, as no Maid can
bring with her a better Portion; nor no Widow enfeffe herself in a fairer
Iointure. May you ever shine in these, which make a woman most eminent: while
you leave me infinitely joying in enjoying the Title of

Your affectionate Servant, RI. BRATHVVAIT.

THE STATIONER TO THE READER.
AT the instancy of sundry persons of quality, to my knowledge, was this our
Author induced to publish this Epitome; Extracted from the choicest flowers of
fancy: But in such a compendious method and manner, as it may abide the test
of the severest Censor; seeing all such light passages, taking life from the
too loose Pens of Ariosto, Tasso, Baccace, Rheginus, Alcaeus, etc. are here
omitted: lest the modest ears of those Beauties, at whose request and to whose
bequest this Epitome or Love-enlectured Lady, was addressed, might be offended
by such affected levitie. Entertain it as thou shall reap profit by it:
Farewell.

A LADIES LOVE-LECTVRE: STORED With all variety of ingenious Morality:
Extracted from the choicest flowers of Philosophy, Poesy, ancient and modern
History. And now published At the instancy of sundry persons of quality.
Ovos conspicui lumina Phoebi. The excellency of Women in their Creation.
SECTION I.
HOwsoever that divine Plato, whose very infancy presaged many fair
expressions of his future maturity; definitely professed,

that he had, amongst many other blessings which the Gods had bestowed on him,
greatest cause of all others to give them thanks for three things: First was,
for that they had made him a reasonable Creature, and no Beast: Second was, for
civilizing him a Grecian, and no Barbarian: Thirdly, in making him a Man, and
no Woman: yet did he sometimes ingenuously confess the necessity of them in
winding up all his humane felicity in these four particulars;

So I may have (said he) eyes to read, my mind to conceive what I read, my
memory to conserve what I have conceived and read, and a woman to serve me at
my need; should adversity assail me, it should not foil me; should an
immerited disgrace lie heavy on me, it should not amate me; should my endeared
friends forsake me, by enjoying my self thus in mine own family; I should
laugh at the braves of fortune; account reproach my repute: and partake in the
free society of so sweet and select a friend within me, as no cloud without
me could perplex me.

Here was a brave Philosophical resolution! He could see naught on earth, that
could divert his thoughts from the contemplation of Heaven; provided, that he
enjoyed that on earth, which made his earth seem a second Heaven.

Some are of opinion, indeed, that he had perused the Mosaicall Law, and that
he bestowed much time in it, during his reside with his dear friend Phocion in
Cilicia. No marvel then, if he found there the excellency of their Creation:
with their primary office or designation. Being made helps for man: and so
intimate to man, as she took her mould from man, as man his model from mold.

Yea, but she was made of a rib, will some say, and that implide a crooked
condition. No; but rather thus, A rib is bending, which presupposed her pliable
disposition. And if that ancient Philosophical Maxim hold good: "That the
temperature of the soul follows the temperature of the body; we must
necessarily conclude, that, as their outward temperature and composure is more
delicate: so their inward affections must be more purely refined. No violent
passion so predominant, which their mild temper cannot moderate; provided, that
they be seasoned with grace, which makes them proficients in all spiritual
growth. For a quick unsanctified wit is a mere pery for the Devil: whereas
wits accompanied with humility, make their privatest Soliloquies to converse
with actions of glory.

These, and only these retain in memory the object and end of their creation.
And as those affectionate Sabines called their wives their Penates, their
Household Gods, through that incomparable comfort they conceived in them, and
benefits they derived from them: So are these Domi-portae, Damae-portae,
delitiae horti, as that witty Epigrammatist was sometimes pleased to enstile
them, the choicest Sociates of humane Solace: So as; if the world were to be
held a Wilderness without society, it might justly despair of that comfort
without their company. Whence it is, that the wise man concludes; Without a
woman would the house mourn.

When that Delphick Oracle had told that flourishing and* victorious state;
that her many triumphs and trophies should not secure her; nor her numerous
ports so enrich her; nor that confidence she reposed in her powerful Allies
privilege her: For the very beautifull'st City she had, her sole magnificent
Metropolis, whose present glory aspired to the Clouds, should labor of her
own providence, and interre her honor in the dust; if they did not by
sprinkling the purest dust that earth could afford, upon their profaned
Altars, expiate her guilt, and appease their wrath. A strong and serious
consultation being forthwith taken; they advised amongst themselves which might
be the purest and most precious dust; but so many men, so many minds. For the
Earth-worme, who made Gold his God, and that Dust his Deity: held none to be
purer then the soil or dust of gold. Others held, that none was purer then the
dust of that Copper whereof the Athenians had made the pictures of the two
Tyrants, Armodius and Aristogyton: because their death gave life to the state;
their dust recovered their countries fame. Others held Ebonie, because the most
continuate Monument of humane memory, and monumentall Emblem of his
mortality. Others held Ivorie, because an Emblematicall Metal of purity.
While one, whose opinion was delivered last, though his judgment appeared
best, freely imparted himself to them, taxing them all of error.

For, says he, it is not the powder, dust or ashes of any material shrine
that can be possibly any way propitious to the gods: as the enormitie of our
losses has incensed them, so must the ashes of some living sacrifice appease
them. My opinion then is positively this: The ashes of some undefiled virgin
must be sprinkled on their Altar, if we mean to preserve our state and honor.

This experience has confirmed long since so highly useful, as we may read
what eminent states had perished; how their glory had been to dust reduced;
nay, their very names in oblivion closed, and with dishonor clothed, had not
the fury of the incensed gods been pacified, and by offertories of this nature
attoned. This might be instanced in those sacrifices of Iphigenia, Hesyone,
Mariana, with many others: whose living memory raised it self from dust, in so
free and voluntary offering themselves to the stake, to deliver their
endangered state; confirming their country-love with the loss of their dearest
life. Search then no further, ye Conscript Fathers, how to appease their
wrath; Virgin ashes cannot but be the purest dust of Earth. Whose sacred vows,
as they are dedicated to Vesta, who cannot admit her Temple to be profaned by
any impure touch: So has she conferred such an excellent privilege on a
virgin state; as the fierce untamed Unicorn, when nothing can bring him to
subjection, nor attemper the madding fury of his disposition: as if he had
quite put off his nature, and assumed another temper, he will be content mildly
to sleep in the lap of a Virgin; and in eying her, allay his passion.

With joint voice and vote all the Ephori inclined to his opinion: which so
well appeased those divine furies, as their state, before by the Oracle so
highly menaced, became secured; their Altars, which were before profaned,
purged: and those pollutions, whereof their City labored, clearly expiated.

These poetical Fictions, though they easily pass by the ear, yet they
convey by a moral application, an Emphaticall impression to the heart. For
hence might be divinely concluded: There is nothing comparably precious to a
continent soul: Nothing of so pure nor precious esteem, as a virgin state.
And that a woman, being the weaker vessel, when she either in her
virgin-condition remains constant, or in her conjugall state loyal, she so
much more inlargeth her glory, as her Sex or condition partakes more of
frailty.

But to divert from these; eye her in the Excellency of her Creation you shall
find her in her quality, an helper; in her society, a comforter; in the
perplexities of her consort, a counselor; and in all these, a sharer. Had her
beauty no other imbellishment, it were a moving object to entertain a loving
consort: But when inward ornaments accomplish that beauty, what a sweet
perpetual harmony runs descant on their society? This makes a private
family an earthly paradise. No frayes within, no fears without: no illimited
passion raging either within or without. The reason is, she discreetly
considers for what end she was created: and addresseth the whole course of her
affairs to accomplish that for which she was created. In eying her self in
the glass, she admires not her own beauty; but his goodness, who bestowed
on her so graceful an image of Fancy not to win others unto lightness, but
to waine others by her example from the paths of looseness; and by her
pattern of piety, decline them from vanity, by chalking them forth a way to
conduct them to happiness.

SECTION II. Their imitable virtues, illustrated with examples.
NO discourse more prevalent to goodness, then what is illustrated by
examples. On dark nights the least star shows her glory: which if it darted
forth his luster by day, would not be discovered so easily. Then is goodness
most improved, when the indisposition of the time does least approve it. Those
four Cardinal virtues, whereon all others have and hold a necessary
dependence; are compared by that devout and divine father, Saint Ambrose, to
those four rivers which issued from the four borders of the Garden of
Paradise: And of these imitable virtues, we shall find women such
incomparable professors, as their actions deserve imitation and admiration.

How prudently did Artemisia and Zenobia, Thomyris and Penthisilea demean
themselves in the mannagement of their affairs whether public or private!
They might worthily take up the saying of that discreet contemplative Roman:
"they were never less alone, then when alone. For these when they were left to
themselves, they were not left either less feared or loved. These held up
their states so wisely; disposed of their counsels so discreetly; governed
their people with fear and love so equally: mannaging all their actions with
those prudentiall grounds of policy; as their Allies loved them, their enemies
feared them: none about them, but did honor them, desiring nothing more then
to enter into a firm and inviolable league with them.

So just likewise they were in all affairs of judicature; that if those days
were accounted happy wherein Basil the Emperor of Constantinople lived (and
worthily might they be so esteemed) for that whenever he came to his
judgment seat, he neither found party to accuse, nor defendant to answer: no
less memorable were those Halcyon days of theirs; when litigious Appellants
were so handled, that if they commenced any suite without just ground, they
were to pay to the Defendant double costs, to the public state a mulct, and
receive a personal disgrace: being disabled ever after to bear any public
office, or be employed in any Military or Civil state-service.

Worthy indeed, of high commendations was the answer of that invincible
Alexander to his Mother, who transported with passion (as what humane condition
but subject to such affections) being desirous to execute an innocent
harmless man, the better to prevail with him, and the more impressively to
work on him, remembered him that herself for the space of nine months had
carried him in her womb, fed him with the substance of her self, and for that
reason he must not say her nay. Ask (says he) good mother, some other gift of
me: The loss of a man's life can be recompensed with no benefit. And no less
wisely did the Emperesse admonish her husband; when, without ever examining or
discussing the quality of the crime, he was ready to pronounce the judgment
of death upon a delinquent; who, for ought he knew, might appear innocent. O,
quoth she, leave your game at Tables, and look into the Tables of Moses, and
you will find how unjust it is to execute before you examine, to condemn
before you advise.

So temperate too, were many eminent women both ancient and modern, as they
dis-relished nothing more than inconsiderate passion. That discreet and
well-composed speech of Architas is much commended, who being angry with one of
his Hindes, said, O how would I have beaten thee, had I not been angry with
thee! And no less deserving approvement was that noble Ladies assertion: "So
far aliened hitherto have my thoughts been from any predominant distemper,
as I have chused rather to give way unto death; then an indiscreet anger.
Whence it was, that noble Biscoy, no less happy in his wives virtues, then his
many victories; avouched: That though he had foiled all his assailants, he
could never yet foil his wives patience. Whereas, that girl was quit of all
other humor, whom, when her husband found her one day, all off the hinges;
demanded of her, what had displeased her? answered, because she saw nothing
that could displease her.

What excellent tempers many of their Sex have shown, if we would insist on
examples, or enlarge our discourse with variety of instances; we might find
both our Greek and Roman Annals stored with such choice and select flowers, as
we should more easily find arguments of admiration than imitation. For many of
these acted the parts of rare Philosophers: knowing how to be silent in
prosperity, patient in adversity, in neither of these to show a distempered
quality; in either of these to express motive arguments of Philosophy. In
their discourse, they could argue without bitterness; in their habit, go
neately without niceness; in the whole manage of their affairs, live purely
without affectednesse.

Tell me, says one, with whom thou conversest, and I will tell thee who thou
art. This made them cautious with whom they consorted; lest others conversation
might make them suspected. Those light examples of Iulia, Posthumia, and
Semphronia deterred them from conversing with any that might corrupt them.
These had not only perused but practiced that Arabian Proverb: "To shut their
five windows, that their house might give light. These windows were their
senses; which, when they become most opened, the house of the mind becomes most
darkened. These therefore, must be closed, that their inner house may be
cleared. And this has our Christian Philosophy in an exacter manner and
fuller measure taught us: Bern.
As fire and water will not sort well together: no more will heavenly and
earthly delights ever strike in one harbor. These have drawn their
resolutions to this period, Anselm.
and happy they in so glorious period: If the flames of hell were on the one
side, and sin on the other side, they would rather lie in those flames then
sin.

Nor have their Sex shown less excellence in their fortitude of spirit:
preferring their fame before life; their honor before the utmost extremes of
death, danger or disaster.

This that Epicaria, a Roman libertine, and a vindicator of Romes liberty;
This that Leaena, that courageous revenger of Hippeas tyranny confirmed; when
no torments could amate them; no objects of terror or torture amaze them: when
the one chus'd rather to spit out her tongue, then spite her country by
disclosing the revengers of her wrong; the other to be torn by wild beasts,
then make that tender bosom of her native country, a receipt for tame beasts.
Here were virile spirits clothed with womanly habits. Their minds were better
composed, then to give way to an effeminate passion, when they beheld their
indeared Country suffer in her reputation.

Thus did their noble Sex show Prudence without singularity; Justice without
partiality; Temperance with modesty; Fortitude in those amicable expressions
to their country.

SECTION III. Their moderation of passion.
ALthough we have discoursed of this subject before, in our treaty of
Temperance: yet to amplify this point; we shall find, that there is no
passion, whereto by reason of our humane frailty we are most inclined, which
we shall not observe by imitable Mirrors of this Sex to be strangely
attempered, nay subdued.

And first, to begin with what works strongliest upon our weak conditions:
Revenge; which may reflect, by a proper and genuine division upon these three
distinct objects, Life, Fame, Fortunes.

For the first, how bravely could that Noble Spartan Lady, when she was staged
upon the Scaffold, to receive the stroke of death, becken to her injurious
Accuser; with a mild and graceful aspect advertise him of the wrongs he had
done her: wishing him to lay his hand on his heart, and make his peace
seasonably with the Gods! For my life, quoth she, as it is of little use to
the State, so I less prize it in regard I can benefit my Country smally by it.
Trust me, I pity more the indangering of your inward peace, then the loss of
my life. This may be redeemed by an Elysian freedom; yours never to be
prevented but by perpetual sorrowing. Indeed I lose my friends, but these are
without me. But you should have a nearer friend within you, from whose sweet
amity and amiable familiarity if you should once sever, (hear the last
breathing words of a dying woman) you are lost for ever.

So easily did she remit that wrong which cost her life.

With what moderation did that triumphant Thomyris bear the death of her
son! A feminine passion could not extract from her well-tempered eyes one
tear: nor from her resolved heart one sigh. She knows how to shadow passion
with a cloud; and immaske the design of a future revenge with the whitest
veil. She chooses rather to perish in her self, then do ought unworthy of
herself. She could put on a countenance of content, when she heard how her
son had paid to nature her debt, though in a reflection to his youth, before
his time. I was his mother, and he is now returned to her, who is mother to us
both. If I loved him too much while he lived with me, I will make satisfaction
for that error, by bemoaning his loss the less, now when he has left me.

But I find her moderation in this object, amongst all others most
imparallel'd; which I the rather here insert, because she was a rare Phoenix
both in our time and clime: A woman nobly descended, richly endowed, which by
her practice of piety and works of mercy became highly improved.

She, when she understood how passionately and disconsolately her noble Husband
took the death of his daughter whom he infinitely loved; (for her promising
infancy gave apparent arguments of succeeding maturitie: (made it one of her
constant'st taskes to allay his passion; and by playing the part of a faithful
and discreet Consort, expostulates with the grounds of his immoderate sorrow in
this manner:

How is it Sir, that your wisdom should thus forget it self? Is it any newer
thing to dye then to be borne? Are we here placed to survive fate? Or here
planted to plead a privilege against death? Is our daughter gone to any other
place, then where all our predecessors have gone to? Yea, but you will say,
She died in her blooming youth; before the infirmities of a decrepit age came
upon her! The more was she bound to her Maker. The fewer her years, the
lesser her cares, the fewer her tears. Take upon you then something more of
man; and partake less of woman. These comforts which I make bold to apply to
you, might be more seemingly derived to me by you.

To grieve for that which is remediless, argues weakness; and not to prevent
what admits a probability of cure, implies carelessness. Let us neither be too
effeminatly weak in the one; nor too securely remiss in the other: so may we
cure the one with patience, and redeem the other by a timely diligence.

For the next Object reflecting upon their Fame: Nicetas says plainly, No
punishment so grievous as shame. And Nazianzen yet more expressly; Better were
a man dye right-out, than still live in reproach and shame. Ajax being ready to
dispatch himself, used these as his last words; No grief does so cut the
heart of a generous and magnanimous spirit, as shame and reproach.

For a man to live or dye is natural: Ambros. Epist. 70.
but for a man to live in shame and contempt, and to be made a laughing-stocke
of his enemies, is such a matter as no well-bred and noble-minded man, that
has any courage or stomach in him, can ever digest it. And yet
bravely-spirited Leonida, slighted those Assailants of her fame with no less
dis-respect then her foes sought to blemish it. I am more confident of my fame,
said she, then to suspect how any light tongue should impeach it.

Nor was that virtuous Clareana less resolute, who directing her speech to her
Accusers; told them; her fame was so far distanced beyond the reach of their
impeaching; as it ingenuously pitied the weakness of their detraction. This
confirmed the resolution of that noble patron; who occasionally used these
words in a grave and great assembly:

No woman's fame could privilege it self from a dangerous ^aint, if it were in
hazard to suffer or lose it self by a poisonous tongue.

For the last but least, which is Fortune: Many Heroicke spirits have we had of
this Sex, who so far dis-esteemed this outward rind, (for no other title
would they daigne to bestow on it) as one of them freely professed: "What
matter is it, whether I be rich or poor, so my mind be pure? And these
instances are not so rare, but we may find another of the same sex, to second
so virtuous and accomplished a sister. The poorest thing on earth, is to suffer
ones enlivened thoughts to be fixed on earth. And we have a third to make up a
consort. She is of a weak command, who submits her thoughts to the command of
fortune. And this a Quaternion of brave resolved spirits expressed, in
delivering the nobleness of their thoughts in these proper imprezes; which
with their Diamonds they left writ in the panes of their own chamber windows:
The device of the first was this: It is not in the power of fate,
To weaken a contented state.
And the second scorns to fall short of her resolution: Fortune may sundry
Engines find,
But none to raze a noble mind.
The third in contempt of Fortune, inlargeth this subject: Should Fortune me
distress,
My mind would be no less.
The fourth, to show her affection true Toutch, attests her constancy in this:
Fate may remove
Life, but not love.


Thus have we shown their spritely tempers in their contempt of all
oppositions that might assail or assault them: Life they slighted, being in
competition with honor. Fame, though it was too high a prize to lose, yet
being not conscious to themselves of any stain, they neglected with a
graceful scorn the irregular liberty of a loose tongue. And for Fortunes,
they stood so indifferent, as they held Content their Crown; and that Crown
the absolutest imbellishment of an infranchis'd mind.

SECTION IIII. Their continency in assaults.
NOble spirits cannot choose but prefer that most, which incomparably adornes
them most. Though the Case give an outward beauty to the Instrument; yet it is
the Instrument gives the harmony to the Case, or all were out of case. Now if
creatures, who never were endowed with Reason: and whose highest desires
confined themselves to Sense, so much abhorred a community in the use of their
Sex, or an incestuous commixture of Seed in their generations of one kind: How
much more, those, who have captivated their Sense to Reason, and known what it
was to give reins to unbounded liberty; or slave their inward freedom to the
weakly recompensed service of vanity? For man, who as he is the noblest
creature, and accomplished best with those choicest ornaments of grace to
beautify so Princely a feature: so is he to discover some impressions of the
dignity of his nature, by living so on earth, as after earth he may live for
ever.

O how hateful it is, for a Beast to be liker Man, then Man to himself! For
Beast to partake of Man, while Man partakes no less of Beast!

Lust, says that Ambrosian Father, is detestable to brute beasts and Savages.
The loving Turtle forsakes her Laune, Ambros. lib. 1. de Abrahamo.
and dis-esteemes life, when she has lost her love. On no green branch will
she perch; no cheerful air will she breath; no new confort will she
entertain. A retired melancholy is her affected melody: Privacy is her
mansion; remotest shades close best with her disposition.

The Porphyrio, or Purple Cout, cannot endure to repair to his nest, after
that he finds it stained with an adulterous foot: yet so loving is he to his
own, as he scorns to take any unworthy revenge of his Make, but by an
incessant passion of continued grief, to weave out the web of his woes, and so
dispatch himself.

It is reported of the Camel, that they usually hood-winke him, when at any
time they bring his mother unto him: which act (observe this incestuous hate)
he no sooner knows, then he tramples her under his feet, and kickes her to
death with his heels. So egregiously hateful is incest, even to brute Beasts,
whose native instinct abhorres such obscene commixtures.

Nay, to present to your eyes the spleenefull disposition of some creatures;
who, to revenge their abused Loves, have retained a memory above their
quality, to expedite their intended tragedy. This might be instanced in that
memorable example of Crathis; who dwelling in the town of Sybaris, so
monstrously, and unnaturally raged in the heat of immoderate lust; as on a
time neglecting all humanity, to extinguish the violent flames of his bestiall
affection, came to a She-Goate, and coupled with her: which, the He-Goate as
one seeing, yet reserving revenge for a fitter time, found the said Crathis one
day fast asleep: upon presentment of which opportunity, to revenge the injury
of his corrupted love, and revenge the horror of his detested lust, he
presently fell upon him, and mall'd him to death with his horns.

By these, you shall collect, how Myrrha never looks better, then when Mya
stands beside her: and how the preciousest Gems show ever in the darkest places
their fairest luster.

Ladies we have here, who are so far from a light assent, as they scorn to
admit a weak assault: Sir T. O.
which confirms the judgment of that nobly-accomplish'd, though unfortunate
Gentleman: In part to blame is she that has been tried,
He comes too near, that comes to be denide.


This that noble minded Lady Armenia expressed; who being solemnly invited to
King Cyrus wedding, went thither with her husband. At night when those royal
rites had been solemnized, and they returned, her husband asked her, how she
liked the Bridegroom, whether upon perusal of him she thought him to be a
fair and beautiful Prince or no? Truth, says she, I know not: for all the
while I was forth, I cast mine eyes upon none other, but upon thy self.

Those receiving portells of her Senses, were shut against all foreign
intruders: She had made a moral league with her loyal eyes, to fix on no
unlawful beauty; lest her surprised eye might engage her to folly.

Nor could these hold it to stand with their repute, either to hear, or
conceive ought that might worthily trench upon their husbands fame, or redound
to his reproach.

One of Hiero's enemies, finding nothing else in him, whereby he might revile
him, or asperse disgrace upon him; reproaching him with a stinking breath: went
home and questioned his wife why she told him not thereof? who answered, she
thought all men had the like savor.

This confirms that Maxim of divine Plato: The lover is ever blinded with
affection toward his beloved.

But to enlighten the beauty of this Subject with one exquisite and
imparallel'd example, for all; bestow your eyes upon Chiomara, wife of
Orgiagon, a petty King of that Province, upon discomfiture of the
Gallo-Gracians, being ravished by a Roman Captain, gave a memorable pattern
of conjugall virtue, and sponsall continency: for She cut off the fellows head
from his shoulders, and escaping from her Guard, brought it to her Lord and
Husband.

We might enlarge this discourse by illustrious examples derived from the
continence of those Dalmatian and Sabine Ladies: who preferred their honor
before life; holding nothing in more contempt then loose love. That Princely
care which Darius wife and his daughters had to preserve their highly-valued
honor: and how much their care was cherished by that universal Conqueror.

And though youth matched with age, oft-times begets distracted thoughts, yet
might we produce instances, not only in the survey of foreign States; but
even within our native borders: how fresh-blooming youth, unequally affianced
to hoary age, has borne it self so free from scandal, that, though they might
profess themselves vestall Virgins at the funeral of their Husbands; yet so
cautious were they to decline shame, as their modest thoughts scorned to
incline to a prohibited embrace of sin. Albeit, I must ever cloze in opinion
with the Poet: There Is nothing does more dully move
In fancies Orb, then aged love.


Age then, with an ingenuous acknowledgement of his own strength, should not
fully such prime redolent blossoms with an earthy touch.

Yet if old age must dote (as it is too common)
That age suits better with the man then woman.
Thus have you heard how continent this weaker Sex has been in their assaults:
how constant in their resolves: how ready to encounter with the extremes of
death and danger, rather then impaune that incomparable gage of their honor.
Love was the line by which they were directed; Fame the aim to which they
aspired: and Honor the center wherein they closed.

SECTION V. Their modesty in Countenance, Habit, and expression of affection.
IT is true; "Nothing deserves less credit then the Look. Yet in candid and
ingenuous natures, it appears much otherwise. For these cannot disguise their
Countenance with a counterfeit appearance. These are they, who make their face
an Index to their mind. They cannot walk in the clouds with Tibur^ia: nor
adulterate their cheeks with a false blush; nor cast forth taking lures from
their eyes. These are what they seem: and, as to seem less then they are;
would tax them of weakness: so to seem more then they are; would evince them
of arrogance. To avoid then these two hazzards: they desire to have their
thoughts legible in their eyes. These be far distanced from the conceit of
that wanton: who, with a presuming confidence affirmed: That she could catch
more with her eyes, then others could with their embraces.

But such as these, are such professed Traders in the merchandise of honor; as
they merit no esteem in the eye of goodness: For as these cloth their
actions with habiliments of splendid sin: so they close, for most part, their
light spun Scene with apparent shame. These then, we resolve to leave behind
us: addressing our pen to such virtuous patterns as are ranked before us:
And such, whose modest countenance scorns to entertain the least
acquaintance, either with scorn or too much smoothness; lest the one might
imply pride, the other lightness. These cannot endure to partake of their
despicable condition, who can show an open-house, but retain a shut
countenance. They have hospitality in the one, as well as the other: and to a
virtuous Lover, have ever in readiness a prepared harbor.

I cannot remember, said that modest Matron; that I have suffered mine eyes to
stray from me: nor to hunt after foreign Suitors, to bring them home to me. I
have not eyed that face, since I was married, which could either so take me, as
to prefer it before his, who had best title to me; nor so delude me, as to
beget in my thoughts a glowing fancy; and so corrupt me, by admiring a strange
beauty.

No doubt, but that princely Surveyor of his daughters dispositions, Augustus;
could gather well enough by Iulias light looks, as well as her loose Consorts,
what received freest entertainment in her heart: as he might, to his comfort,
collect what virtuous thoughts accompanied his Livia, by observing those staid
looks and modest countenance, which bestowed an incomparable addition on her
virgin beauty.

Piety, as it receives scandal from the countenance; and Chastity treason
from the eye, by conveying treacherous thoughts to the heart: so Modesty runs
many times on hazard by the outward habit.

All gorgeous attire is held the attire of sin. Being such as is either worn
above our rank; or by a garish and fantastic effeminacy, to introduce that
broad spreading Tetter of vanity, or loosenes of folly into the State.

That simple old woman, belulled with a sleepy zeal, had a mind to go to the
Church, purposely to take a nap: and many of our dainty ones, desire nothing
more, then to go to the Temple, to present to a deluded eye a new dress. O
the frenzy of humane vanity, when the Sanctuary cannot plead privilege from
this self admiring Idolatry! It is a true position; As to lust makes one a
sinner, so he falls into the same List who has a desire to be lusted after.
Modesty then, as it is the decent'st dress for a Virgin, much more for a
reverend Matron; whose demure look; unaffected gate; civil habit should
return a president unto others; how to conform themselves to the time without
affectation: and how to demean themselves in the whole progress of their
life, as may deserve a virtuous imitation.

These, as they retain a loyal heart: so they affect a civil habit. They
have no lures for light eyes. These mould their course to the example of that
religious-noble widow: Who, after the death of her truly honored and endeared
Lord, could neither in the habit of her person; nor furniture of her Chamber,
admit of any other color, but the Sable livery of a Mourner. And being one day
demanded by a complete Courtier; whose sense consisted most in sent, why she
would not put off that sullen-cloudy habit; seeing it was high time for her
rather to think of a new choice, then still to confine herself to that
disconsolate recluse.

O Sir, replied she, though my Husbands Funerals were long since solemnized on
earth: yet shall they be ever in solemnizing with me so long as I am on earth.
This habit, me thinks, so infinitely becomes me; as I should not look like my
self should I put any other on me. Neither can I hold this funeral room a
disconsolate Recluse, Cogitate quotidie moriturum, and nunquam de s^cundis
nuptiis cogitabis. Hier. Tom. 1. ep. ad Furn. p. 85.
as you please to style it: for, trust me Sir, I conceive more absolute comfort
in it, by remembering his person whom sometimes I enjoyed in it: then if all
that various affluence of your courtly pleasures should accompany it; for by
inthralling my self to these, I should become less my self, by depriving my
widow-thoughts of those Soule-solacing soliloquies, and sweet aspirations I
enjoy in it.

Excellent was the Answer of that Heroic Stranger; who being asked why she
addressed not herself to the habit of our country: Because, quoth she, I can
find no constancy in the habit of your country: you affect foreign fashions
so much, as it implies you dis-affect your own: why should I then accommodate
my self to yours, who have none of your own?

The way then to preserve opinion is, in our choice of habit, to admire no
selfe-affected fashion. We have choicer ornaments to beautify us, then those
whose outward splendor highly detracts from that inward beauty which should
truly accomplish us.

Now, in our Expression of affection; which requires a great measure of
discretion; we shall find a rare temperance in the feminine Sex. These could
shadow their reserved loves with a discreet secrecy: and with an absolute
command of what soveraignizeth most over that Sex, decline apparent grounds of
jealousy. That modest Mytilene confidently maintained: That she had rather
cease to live, then surcease to love: yet would she rather in exile live, then
discover her exiled love.

It argues, indeed, a modest policy, to reserve our affections to our selves;
yet not so long, as to deprive us of the means to enjoy those whom we love
equally as our selves.

Delay gives way to Corrivalls: Fabius Maximus, indeed, won by delaying, but
delay seldom speeds so well in our Assay of loving: and yet, to see a
declining Chrone, who had lived long enough to number her days; and whose aged
furrows had returned a numerous Arithmeticke of expended years; play the
wanton in a love-sicke expression, could not choose but beget more sensible
motives of derision then affection. Vt laqueariae pulsant inertia, Feles aniles
ineunt consortia, O vos lepiduli pereunt Acredulae, Alta nam coeli vela
ruentia. Eheu! Antipodes mutarunt oras, Nos illis, nobis tribuere suas.
This suites well with that old prediction: When age casts her slough, and
takes on her youth,
When old chrones breed young bones and are swelling,
The Antipodes here, and we to their sphere,
Must both in a year change our dwelling.


There be other inducements too, which are of force to re-tardate affection:
and these are such holding Remora's, as we cannot possibly sail fairly, nor
arrive safely, nor partake the f^uition of our hopes freely, nor enjoy our
freedom fully, so long as these distance us from the object of our fancy. I
would be, said that discreet Lover, individually ti'd to thee, but that one tie
divides me from thee. And what was this, but that lineall tie of
consanguinitie, which restrained them from the tie of conjugall fancy? This
legal tie of honor, that Amorist more elegantly expressed in this manner: Had
you the beauty of Helena, the presence of Cleopatra, the spirit of
Penthisilea, those endowments of Zenobia, those fortunes of Nicaula, the
majesty of Sophonisba, those melting kisses, moving embraces of Myrrha; And
that my own fancy should make choice of you for my Bride, yet have we^ a
Mother that would forbid the banes.

That sacred bond of the Church, divided him from his choice. Love must hold a
distance, where devotion will not admit of the alliance.

In this Expression of affection; what may seem boldness in the woman; may
comply well with the quality of the man. If there were bashfulnesse on both
sides, love might hold a perpetual progress, and to her Palace of pleasure,
never be admitted to have access. Yet to veil both with more modesty, and
Phidias-like, draw a more artfull curtain to shroud fancy with more reserved
privacy; Lovers use to supply this expression with the office of their pen:
which, as it cannot blush, so it can usually more amply enlarge it self by
writing; then the perplexed Secretary may in modesty do by discoursing. And to
return a president of this (because Subjects of this nature are best graced,
when grounded on examples) I shall here propose the conceit of one, who both
for state, style and subject may well deserve, not only your approbation but
imitation in this kind.

Lines used to be those lights, A presidentall Love-letter.
which gave direction and access to the seat of love. But where constancy of
affection seconds a profession of Zeal; that Mistress was accounted too
remorselesse; who entertained not his suite with a promising smile, and
confirmed not that smile with a pleasing consent. Honors, fortunes, all, have
been already prostrate. Your self made the sole object, without the least
reflex to any by-respect. Nothing could be proposed, that might render you
satisfaction, which was not embraced with a firm and loyal affection.

To close with your desires, was the crown of my content. This was my highest
ambition. For, had present fortunes power to have withdrawn me, or
possibility to have over-wrought me, or the fair and free tenders of
powerful Allies to have prevailed with me* believe it, Dearest, I might long
before this time have fixed and planted my choice on an object of fancy: But
how selectly and sincerely I have reserved my self for you, since those ample
demonstrances of that graceful and affectionate favor received from you, I
will appeal to any candid or equal relatour in the world. O spin then no
longer time! Mutual be our consents, as they expect mutually immutable joys.
Tell me, Dear one, were it not better to be fixed then daily removing? Fix on
your own condition. Though your affable and humble nature, which highly
improves your honor, may beget in you this incomparable temper; if you would
please but to recollect your discreeter and more compose^ thoughts, you should
find great distinction betwixt this fixed and that your present unsettled
condition. This may suite well with some disposition, but me thinks it should
not poize evenly in the scale of your discretion. Some may, happily, feed their
hopes with A day will come; now were it not more happiness to you, to see that
day shine upon your own: wherein the world may have cause to bless you, both
Church and commonwealth be improved by you, and your self amply partake in
those living comforts, which derive their birth and breath from you?

Let me receive one line, for a link to combine this love. As it shall
infinitely transport me in the perusal, so it shall incomparably solace you in
the happy consummation of that nuptial, which shall confirm me,

Legally and loyally yours.


Thus you see what expressions deliver themselves with most modesty, when the
pen becomes their Secretary. And how unbeseeming an Orator Love is, when she
wooes with too bold a face. Hence you may collect; what beauty accompanies a
bashful look; what an attractive fancy to a modest eye, derives it self from
a civil dress: And how entire love is best expressed, when with crimson blushes
most deprest. These beget in a discreet temper more favor, then a leering
look, a wanton habit, or light expression shall ever recover.

SECTION VI. Their violence upon such as were Corrivalls in their choice.
HIs judicious observation closes equally with our experience; who said: "The
best things becoming ill, ever prove worst. An evil man is the worst of all
creatures; an evil Christian the worst of all men; an evil professor the
worst of all Christians.

A woman, though she be a delicate creature, and, in her own proper condition,
of a sweet nature; yet in one respect she may be resembled to the Juniper,
which once kindled, will hardly be quenched.

No fury to be compared to the anger of a woman; which is aggravated or
attempered according to the quality of the wrong wherewith she holds herself
injuried.

It is said of the River Or Himellaz a rivet of high esteem with the Sabines,
called Ismene.
Himetus; that it distreames or divides it self into two Channells: which send
forth waters of different natures. The one is sweet and pleasing: the other
brackish and dis-relishing. We may properly apply this divided Current to our
present subject: by imagining a woman to this River; as she is compared in an
higher Hieroglyphick, and of a more enlivened nature. And in this Allusion, let
us conceive these two Channells variously streaming, to those two distinct
affections soveraignizing over her, and in her severally working. These two
similizing or discording passions shall borrow the names of Love and Hate. In
both which we may properly call most of our women Silla's daughters; then whom
none ever showed more love to his friend, nor more hate to his enemy. And to
discourse more amply of these; we shall find some kind hearts dispatch their
husbands by loving too much: others, mere Antipodes to the former, by loving
them too little: This might be instanced in Lucia and Lucilla; Livia and Iulia.
Two of these never held themselves so happy, as when their husbands were in
presence; the other two ever held nuptial love at such a distance; as they
were never more discontented then when they were present. Dark seemed the
house when their husbands were in it: O noxlonga! Hor.
cleared was that Cloud, when their husbands had left it. Whereas those two
other loyal Dames, expressed themselves true Theogena's; who so tendered her
Agathocles, as she showed admirable constancy, in her husbands greatest
misery: professing her self most his own, when he was relinquished, and
forsaken of his own.

But this revenge, whereon we insist in this Section; proceeds for most part
from grounded jealousy, or too exuberant fancy: which will admit willingly of
no Corrivall; but if it do, the issue generally becomes tragical. Our Italian
Theaters have at all times reeked with these bloody issues; which both in those
Admirable Histories, long since published: and in that subject entitled, Gods
revenge against Murder; lately revived, and as I conceive from the former
partly extracted, are copiously handled. Ancient times had their hands imbrued
in these crimes. Their dye was as deep; though their fact seemed less, in
regard they were not so conscientious of what they did. Hippolytus was
guiltlesly murdered by a woman. Hercules poisoned by a woman. Candaules
poniarded by means of a woman. Yet examine these in a direct line, and you
shall find all these perishing through too much love. They could not inflict
that torment upon their Lovers, which they themselves would not suffer, by
designing themselves their own Tormentors. Though Phaedra's love to Hippolytus
were incestuously grounded; and that unlawful heat so impetuously enforced,
as it could not be restrained, till it was with blood assuaged: yet her self
became the sacrifice to expiate her love-sicke malice. And for Deianira, how
constant she was in her affection: how loyal in her love: how inviolable her
vow: the Tragedian will return you a fair account: and acquit her of all
suspicion, by the discovery she made unto Nessus, of her affection. That shirt
which was given her by treacherous Nessus, was intended to increase, as she
thought, a more vehement love in her Hercules. Lastly, for Candaules wife, her
shameful, and too naked discovery unto Gyges, justly exposed his person to
those miseries which he suffered: for the injury done to her modesty, was the
only occasion to hasten his tragedy.

Now, I must confess, we have had in all ages savage Monsters, as well as
civil Matrons. And these of Messalina's race; who would not stick to quench
the heat of their lust in the Actors blood.

Others no less cruel, but in their affections more loyal. And these had
Servants, but they could not endure to have them reteiners to many Mistresses.
This begot tears in their eyes, but stings in their hearts. Too much love
quickened their revenge. Wronged Fancy transformed it self into a fury. This
may confirm that passionate admiration of that Heroic Tragedian: How sharply
stings a woman's discontent!


Now there is no inducement more motive to give wings to this passion, then
matches contracted with di^taste: proceeding either from disp^rity of years,
or descent: which many times works sundry distractions: and begets several
beds before their honey month be well ended. When Maids are deep struck in
years, be their fortunes never so promising, their alliance strengthening, or
the beauty of their inward parts deserving; they are commonly courted by
youthful fancy, with a neglectfull contempt.

Their rivell'd skin merits not a light amorous touch: nor their rugged brows
deepe-indented with aged furrows, a graceful look. And the like may be said
of our stale Batchelors; who are so long in choosing, and so singular in their
affecting; as their affection falls into a neglect; their declining persons into
a contempt. To these may that Similitude be not altogether improperly applied:
One having liberty given him to go through a whole Wood, to make choice of the
best staff he could find; provided, that he chused it in his going on, but not
in his returning back; taking his course, and with a curious eye observing
where he might fit himself best: he found many fair and straight plants
that might serve his turn: but these would not content him; on he goes still,
expecting better: till coming to the end of the Wood, he found none but
crooked ones to supply his choice, and of those no great change. Then, but too
late, he repented him of his too-much singularity, in neglecting the
opportunity of choosing what might give him content: and in submitting himself
to a choice, which, in respect of those he refused, might deserve contempt.

Thus have we discovered the grounds of those tragic straits, which unhappy
Lovers have fallen into: either by matching where they did not love; or by being
jealouse over those whom they did too much love; or by conceiving a mortal
hate toward those, who were Corrivals in their love. Which cruelty, as it
proceeded from jealousy; so that jealousy sprung many times from the
disloyalty of those inconstant servants, to whom they bore such intimate fancy:
as may appear more amply in this their ensuing Apology.

SECTION VII. Their modest Defense.
YOu have heard what cruel creatures, those fatal effects of jealousy, and
Corrivalry, have made of the sweetest, and softest natures. And yet let not
these relations lay such deep tinctures, or aspersi^ns on that weaker Sex: as
if blind affection had so inthralled reason to sense; that there were no place
left for their modest Defense. Cruelty indeed, admits no Apology: yet when too
impressive a fancy occasions this cruelty, it merits rather the title of a
distracted frenzy, then an affected cruelty. Many of these were inflamed with
such heat of love: as the Catastrophe closed as well with the loss of their
own life, as the life of their friends. Yea, could they have forgotten the
injury done them by the disloyalty of their Servants: they could willingly have
dispensed with that breach of faith: and expiated their guilt, with the
hapless embrace of their own fate: Truth is, their impatience was too great,
to expostulate with reason: which drove them into this fury, or frenzy of
passion. And this that noble, but unfortunate Crescentia witnessed; when after
such time as she had set her affection on a disloyal Servant: and by her
means, fortunes and favors, had highly advanced him: finding her love so
meanly requited, as a strange Mistress became entertained, where her fancy
should have been solely lodged: another, and she a light Curtezan, harbored,
where she should have been honored: she burst forth into these extremes:
the issue whereof sealed the period of her love, with the forfeiture of her
life.

O my Demetrius, were it not in restraint; and who did enlarge thee? Were It not
hopeless of fortunes; and who advanced thee? Were It not engaged to the
opposition of a powerful foe; and who atton'd thee? Nay, were it not grown
contemptible in the eyes of the lowest; and who restored thee? Were not thy
dejected fortunes so far distanced from hope of relief, as not the least
beameling of comfort afforded thee redress? Where was thy Sabina then to
befriend thee? No, no, Demetrius, her light affection took first grounding
from thy fortune, as thy fortune received birth from my too hasty loving, and
too easy believing of so unthankefull a Servant. Yet shall it appear to the
World; that though my Love first issued from the Source of folly: yet even in
that there appeared a loyal constancy; which, as it shall weave up the web of
my fate; so shall it bear record to posterity of thy unjust breach of faith.
But spinne forth no more protractive hours, unhappy Gratiana, in expostulating
with his breach: or to no purpose, in wasting thy tedious breath. May my
premature end, occasioned by my too credulous trust, become a caveat to all my
sex, to retain more esteem of their fame, and to be more careful whom they
trust. My indiscreet love brought me to ruin before my time: may my example
be a Memorial to aftertimes, to prevent their ruin derived from such
means: and closing their hopes with such fearful ends.

Nor was her hand less ready to execute, then her tongue was to dispute. For
with these words, she closed her amorous woes: Farewell Demetrius; and redeem
the injury thou have done to me, in expressing thy constancy to Sabina's
beauty. My best wishes shall attend thee: though thy subtilty did first wind
me, then by surprising my honor, wound me; and wounding, unthankefully leave
me.

But to divert from these memorable, though miserable instances of constancy;
with the wrongs they suffered by their too light credulity: we will now
descend to such particulars, wherein these censorious Timonists (whose poor
degenerate spirits are ever delighted most in detracting from women, or
aspersing some unworthy disgrace upon their sex;) usurp this liberty, to lay
upon their purest reputes a lasting infamy. We shall in every place hear
calumnious tongues too lavish in this error, and inveighing against them in
this manner: What vice is there extant, which is not in the practice of women
frequent? If vanity were lost, where were it to be found, but in their light
bosoms? The forbidden fruit is ever in their eye: and ever dangling in their
desire. Whatsoever is prohibited, is by them most affected: whatsoever by
Obedience enjoined, scornefully neglected. If young, they are lascivious: if
old, they are covetous. Their whole life a Comedy of errors: their formal
feature a fardell of fashions. Alas poor Girls! Have you no Defense against
such viperous tongues? When you desire to go neat, or, according to your
rank, to hold your place; you are termed proud, or ambitious. If frugall, you
are covetous. If you discover your wrongs, you are malicious. If with
admiration you chance to eye the fullness of another estate, you are envious.
If you be sparing in your dishes, you are penurious: if choice in your dishes,
you are delitious. If you innocently converse with a youthful neighbor, you
are straight lascivious: If you keep home, you are lazy, or unsociably
censorious: If you walk abroad, you are too liberal of your honor, and to
light eyes suspicious. Nay, they will not stick to press this Argument yet a
little further: If Goddesses themselves were wantons: what may we think of
the Handmaids of those Goddesses? Dircetis that great Goddess of Ascalon,
could be inflamed with love to a youth, who sacrificed to her: and gratify his
Oblation with a sensual affection: yea, and close her loose love with as base
a conception. It Is true; the Fable reports so much: yet if we may give credit
to the authority of a Poet: we shall find this Goddess resolving her eyes to
tears: And, as one highly ashamed of her incontinency, exposing that
adulterate Brat to the Desert: abandoning the society of that light amorous
youth: and to make the Scene more fully tragical, throwing her self down
into a Lake, bounding upon Ascalon: To confirm unto the world, that if her
stain were great, her sorrow was no less. The Harbinger of the morn, could
not so soon usher in these roseat Consorts of the ensuing day: as this deluded
Goddess (If we may grace her with such a title) offered her penitential
tears to her polluted Shrine: her pleasure could not be so great, but her
torture was more.

Yea, but these feminine Critics will say; It is not enough for the youth of
their sex to glory in their growth of vanity: but even those old Maquarella's;
whose very earthly breath divines their approaching return to earth: as if
they had perused Aesons Herball, and freely partak't of his Receipts: must
assume a graceful presence of youth; and fill up their irreparable decays
with Art-beauty: by new plaistring those crazy buildings, which had long since
fallen into the Lord Paramounts hand, for want of repair.

Alas, is this all? If the weaker sex deserve such reproof, in their desire
to cover their rivals: or smoothing those rugged deformities, which their
decline in nature has laid on them: what may we think of those old Seniors,
whose eyes have been long since incased; and whose constant aches in their
bones, have been above all other Prognostications approved: and yet these can
veil their reverend age with an artfull Peri-wigge: and court a light Piece
with as much vain Rhetoric, as if their Winter had been metamorphos'd into
a Spring: and their silver-haires into downy blossoms! That old Blade had, no
doubt, green thoughts; who coming to a Barber to be trimmed: and being asked
by his complete Trimmer, after what fashion he would wear his beard whether
he would look amiable to his friend; or terrible to his foe; or point vice to
his apparel? This ancient Fashion-favorite answered him, that he would (in
regard of the rarity of the cut) be trimmed point-vice to his apparel. Which
this nimble Snap did; and that to a hair, till he had not left him one hair,
to work on: This rivell'd Scaledrake, having seen himself in the Glass,
durst hardly acknowledge his own face: but terribly distempered he was to see
himself so strangely disfigured (which indeed might have been prevented, if a
sleepy distemper had not belulled him while he was trimmed.) Howsoever, seeing
himself a stranger to himself, he fell into a terrible quarter with his
roguish Trimmer: asking him in a choleric manner, how he durst to abuse his
face? Excuse me, Reverend Sir, said the Barber; I am but a naked Trimmer, but
your worship was the Director: you told me, that you would be trimmed
point-vice to your apparel; and I have observed your direction: for I have
left your face as haire-bare, as your coat was threadbare; and that was
point-vice to your apparel.

The next objection you can press against them, is this: They are covetous.
But tell me, can you find in all their sex such a Midas, as to with the very
meat he eat, to be turned into gold? or such a passionate incompetible
revenger, as with Silla, never to forgive, nor forget the injury done him by an
offender? or such a marrow-eating envious Tetter, as Ctesiphon, who macerated
himself in the prosperity of an other? or such an Idolater of honor, as
Themistocles, who could not sleep for the ambition he bore to those triumphs
of Miltiades? or such a Glutton, as Cambletes, who dreaming he had devoured
his wife; as before, no dainties could assuage his hunger, he became his own
executioner, for fear of dishonor? or such a Catamite, as that Bithinian; who
was a woman for all men; and a man for all women: an equal agent or patient to
satisfy nature? or such a lazy lollard as Margites was; who never dug,
ploughed, nor sowed, nor ever did any good all his life long in the least
weight or measure: but slept out his time in a sluggish, and useless manner?

But some will again object; None can deny but they are light in their
favors; changeable in their fancies: The posies of their Love-rings, ever hold
check with this Impreze: " Our choice admits a change. No, no; you shall find
their disposition of a more choice and constant temper. For should they imitate
our wanton free-natur'd youths, who having lately entered Loves-lists, and
brought some shreads of their fathers unnecessary providence to pass the
Alienation office; you might find them accommodated with Myriads of amorous
servants. Of which number that wanton Wooer, and lavish Lover, might be well
accounted, who gloried in the multitude of his Mistresses, and boasted of his
fits and fancies; resolving to be a Servant to many, Me nova turba petit, Licet
una puella recessit, Et mihi vota premunt, Quae violanda negant. Sijtite vos
Nimphae, Vix tanta licentia zonae, Vni nuptus ero, Sufficit una viro.
but a Consort to one: Though one has left me, I Have fresh storc enough,
And all these press me to perform my vow.
Content you Girls, I me for one or none,
One wench at once, will be enough for one.


Whereas, even that amorous Curtezan of Venice, whose embraces appeared more
mercenary, then complied with her honor, could protest, though she had many
Servants, her sole solace was in one Favorites service: stoop she might to
the lure of many: incline she could not, but to the love of one.

It Is true, an impudent woman may woo man: and if confidence dictated that it
was loyalty, which caused modesty so far transgress, she that should thus
woe, could not choose but win; for such Oratory could not but be prevalent,
where bashful fancy became Oratrix, and was predominant.

As men woo women, might women woo men,
For one watch now, there would be ten.
This that Stage-wit expressed in his enforced conceit, betwixt Ecco and
Narcissus: This woe to man, shall henceforth be no Woman,
Since woe to man is now become a Woo-man.


Sometimes indeed, it was more curiously then usefully, more subtly then
fruitfully demanded; why a woman might not as properly woo man, as man woman:
And that Arabicke resolution, retrived from the very depth of imagination, with
much ingenuity assoiled this question. Wooing, said that Arabian, was but a
lovely seeking: now we seek not for that we have, but what we have not. It
is more proper then for the man, in this loves quest, to seek for what he has
lost; then for the woman to seek for what she already has. The man he has
lost his rib, and he seeks after her that has it. Mean time it were folly in
her to seek it, when she has it. It is for him then to seek it; who, though
he may not have it: yet he seeks to enjoy her who has it.

Again, will some say: but why were all the Furies women; those three fatal
Sisters women; those Circean Witches women; those enchanting Sirens women? Did
not the first imply their cruelty? The second their implacability? The third
their impiety? The fourth their subtilty? And with these you might insert that
late Chimera of the German Hog-fac'd Gentlewoman of Wirkham: all alike probably
true, and credibly built upon equal grounds. But to answer these prodigies of
nature; Tell me, ye Critic Cavallieres, who have surely got a stroke over
shins with some French faggot, or you would never thus inveigh against so
exquisite a subject; why were all the Muses women; all the Sibyls women; those
watchful Hesperides women; those Nine-Worthies, so lately memoriz'd, women?

Surcease then, and close with me in their modest Defense; If you see in them
any lightness, impute that to their weakness. Again, if you see in them that
composedness, which best becomes them: account that in them a real goodness.
Sweet sociable souls they are, when Grace conducts them. The path they walk
in, is chalked forth by modesty: the track they pursue, is the practice of
piety: where the period of so graceful a Scene, closes ever with felicity.

None ever but those proud Pharisees, who used to wear philacteries, and
Ceremonial philanties on their brows and elbowes, were known to wink at the
approach of women: And may such wink still; who, though they have sealed eyes,
they may have seeing hearts. For though desire come in by the Windows: yet
some men's Windows may seem to be shut, when the doors of their desires are
open. Fancy may play the wanton within, while Modesty seems to play the Jailer
without.

Thus have you heard their Modest Defense: and how calumnious pens and tongues
are ever most versed in traducing innocence. Where if a woman be demure, she is
taxt of coyness; if courteous, she is taxt of lightness; Affability and
Disdain equally engage her to a rigid censure: yet for all this, pure minds
cannot be so amated: nor goodness, which reteines with her an inseparable
witness, so eclypsed. The Sun appears in his fullest beauty, when he
breaks forth of a cloud. So virtue, when she has dispelled those malignant
vapors which interposed her, shows her self then in her clearest feature.
This in those divine Apothegms, which even in their greatest extremes they
composed, may fully appear, as you shall hear in our ensuing Section
hereafter.

SECTION VIII. Their witty Aphorisms, Apothegms, and Answers.
FRom these, no doubt, but the best principles of humane Learning have derived
their being and beginning. But as the best fruits are soonest corrupted, the
earliest bloomes quickliest blasted; so have our choicest Maxims of this nature
lost much of their luster, by being diverted from that Object whereat they
aimed. Pure Rils should not be so corrupted, by giving way to such troubled or
brackish Inlets as dis-relish the purest water, in making it quite degenerate
from its own primitive nature.

Some Aphorisms there be (if they may merit that style) which lose much of
their state, and detract too much from their light, by their too weak
discovery of an Anacreonticke strain; which generally makes obscene Pasquils
of serious Apothegms. But these are not worth our observation: It shall be our
task, to avoid distaste; by laying before you those witty Aphorisms,
Apothegms, and Answers; the perusal whereof may afford both delight and
profit; the one to cheer you, the other to store you: whenever any occasion
of such discourse shall be ministered to you.

That noble Lady, though her descent and fortunes might fix her above an
inferior Sphere, showed excellent arguments of a composed temper, and an
humble nature in this resolution: As my descent exacts of me a tender eye to my
reputation: so should my example be a president to others of imitation. For
those, who commit any unseemely act in a public presence, do as much as lie
in them, to murder those who take observance of them. My gate shall not publish
me proud: nor my habit fantastic: For I find nothing in me, worthy such
idolatry.

That Sicilian Matron closed her content with an incomparable contempt of the
World; who publicly protested, That she could eye nothing in this Theater of
earth, that might seem worthy to entertain so divine a Guest as her soul.
And as of a finite to an infinite, there was no proportion: so it was
impossible, that the circumference of earth should confine that infinite beauty
of the soul to her dimensions.

That modern Mirror of true nobility expressed her self a brave Soveraignesse
over her affections: who held it the greatest derogation to feminine honor, to
discover the least distemper in subjects of anger. When I take a serious
survey, said she, of mine own infirmity: and re-collect daily what cause I
give my Maker to be angry with me: I am half ashamed to express my passion of
anger to any. Can he forbear me who made me; and cannot I forbear them who
are equal in their creation with me? Cannot poor dust contain it self in
patience with dust, when he can show his gracious patience to ambitious dust,
who made all of dust?

No less composedness of Spirit did that heroic Parisian discover in her
desire to see others flourish without repining: Yea, wishing with that divine
Moral; That all envious persons had their ears and eyes seated in all Cities,
that with others prosperities, being the proper objects which they most
maligned, these, in the survey of them, might be more tormented. Nor is that
noble attestation of hers to be here omitted; deserving so well in lasting
Characters with the point of a Diamond to be inscribed.

I do not see my Neighbors field flourish, but I wish it were more fruitful;
nor any one honored, but I wish it amplifi'd, if the person be desertfull; nor
any of my sex beautiful, but I conceive joy in so fair a feature, being
inwardly graceful. It is an argument of a servile quality, to dart an envious
eye on another prosperity. If he be rich, and worthy of what he possesses,
much good may it do him; If unworthy of what he enjoys; it were a malicious
pity to envy him, having within him what will undo him. He is already seized
of such a Marrow-eating Tetter, as this festred Ulcer needs no other torture.

A good proficient in the School of virtue, had that Theban Lady proved; who
held nothing so precious as a continent Soul: vowing withal; That, should
she find in her bosom a thought of incontinence; if it were possible, she
would estrange her self from an harbor of such lightness. Neither could that
breast retain any impression of shame, that could present a sacrifice of love
to any, but her husbands shrine: Clozing her resolves with this divine impreze:
As my hand has confirmed the gift of my heart: so shall the loyalty of my
heart confirm the testimony of my hand.

When that princely Dame of Ferrara, had heard of those luscious and licentious
feasts of Domenico Silvio, that Italian Cleopatra; Good God (said she) has not
the flesh foments enough, but it must be provoked, to the utter ruin of that
divine part which should command it? This is not to withdraw fuel from a
flaming desire, but to feed it: and by feeding, famish that injuried Guest
which suffers for it.

Alas! woman is not so strong, as to have all means diverted, by which her
modesty might be preserved: and to unrivet all those operative secrecies of
Art, by which their Forts of honor may be betrayed. The wanton Idumite is
already too stirring; she needs no fresh fuel to feed her affection.

It is strange, said the pious Edessa, that we should so cast about by Sea and
Land to feed those, who will feed upon us: and to throw forth baits to those,
who mean to make a prey of us.

I never fare better, said that sage abstemious Lady, then when I seem to fare
worst. Abstinence is such a choice receipt, as it will admit of no sensual
deceit. What can delude me, so long as I make my appetite subject to Reasons
sovereignty.

There is no day so tedious, said that discreet Consort, to a grave Senator,
as that which is made a stranger to any task. That Sun shall not shine on me:
nor that place entertain me, which shall not receive some argument of life
from me. For better were it for me by dying to cease from living: then by
living unprofitably to be ever dying. For my part, in all this continued
Chesse-game of our life, I shall ever hold him or her the greatest looser, who
riots forth the rich treasure of time in fruitless pleasure: for, as the
deepest stain to an active spirit is Sloth; so the greatest grief that can
befall an improving man, is his loss of time.

It is rare likewise to observe what excellent Rules they not only delivered
unto others; but what they themselves retained, that their own exemplary life
might publish to the world, they taught not others what themselves neglected:
nor imparted by way of precept unto others those Lessons which they slighted.

As the very best of Gods creatures, Arist. 1. Pol.
in the opinion of that wise Stagyrite, is that man who enjoyes himself in the
execution of what is legal and just: So the very worst of his creatures is
that man, who divides himself from what is lawful or just. What incomparable
creatures these feminine Mirrors have shown themselves, even in these offices
of judicature, would this brief Epitome give me leave, I could here amply
illustrate with many, both ancient and modern Instances: where you might find
some even reproving their Emperors for remissness of justice, in showing too
much lenity: or taxing their severity of justice, in their inflicting on easy
delinquents too much cruelty. With instances of this sort our Roman and Greek
Annals are so plentuously stored, as this Subject shall little need to be
further illustrated. Amb.
This is most certain; as the prime intention may be properly said to give a
name to the work: for the very best work scarcely merits the title of a moral
action, being not accompanied by a pure intention: So with what pure intentions
many of these Heroic Ladies beautified their noble actions, may be easily
confirmed by many memorable Acts by them achieved; and with that modesty, as
they could not well endure to have their names recorded in the performance of
those pious works and sacred structures; which, as they were dedicated to
devotion; so were they sincerely erected, without the least tincture of
vainglory, or heat of ambition. And well might many of their pious resolves
cloze in such conclusions: when they so divinely considered, Aug. in lib. de
Spiritu and anima.
how they entered this life with the society of a tear; how they past over
this life in labor and care; and how they were to end this life with grief
and fear. This made them cautious not only of their actions, how they were
performed; but of their thoughts, how they stood affected: as likewise of their
words, how they were delivered. This moved them to observe that excellent
discipline in the regiment of their tongue, which that experienced Professor so
discreetly recommended. There is a time, wherein we are to speak nothing: and
there is a time, Hugo de disciplina mona.
wherein we are to speak something: but there is no time wherein we are to
speak all things. Rightly did these observe, and seriously did these retain,
what they had received: By the very speech which is delivered, may we gather
how the mind stands affected. Neither can evil communication become a
Christian. Isid. Ib. Sidonius in Epistolari. Oscula, verba, libri, vaga lumina
mensa, sodales.

Mentibus intactis tela fuere necis.




And whereas Youth it self is ever interested in most dangerous hazards; they
took a course to restrain youth, lest their light youth might beget a sad
age. In a word, these observed those perilous motives to sin, and therefore
wisely stopped their ears to the Sirens song: Kisses, Words, Books, Light-eyes,
Cates, merry Mates,
Make chastest minds to open fancies gates.


Thus have we in a succinct manner, to their surviving honor presented
testimonies of their ability and piety in their Aphorisms, Apothegms, and witty
Answers: wherein they discovered an admirable promptness of wit, preparedness
of mind, and depth of judgment. But we are now to descend from these golden
sayings which they uttered, to those glorious Works which they composed. In
which their memory shall be crowned: And with which our Epitome, or
Love-Lecture in Morality, clozed.

SECTION IX. Their eminent Labors; And how they were Assistants in the
exquisitest Works that have been formerly composed, either for History or
Poesy.
Zeal of goodness is such a glorious ambition, as it can never be too
aspiring. And in this, many eminent and heroic spirits of their sex showed
themselves worthy Corrivals. Where we shall find some excellently versed in
History. Others in rare compositions, to give a rich luster unto Poetry. Others
far above the delicacy of their sex, in the profound search of Philosophy.
Others no less useful in compiling Moral Precepts, properly conducing to an
Economy. Various patterns we might here produce in each of these; examples of
such mysterious Learning, and high contemplation, as their memory deserves no
less admiration, then their piety imitation. For professors, and rich
improvers of their knowledge in those precious treasures of Time, History, and
Antiquity, we shall find a princely Zenobia, and a sage Cleobula. For
affecters, and happy enrichers of Poesy, a spritely Corinnathia, and a
Pharsalian Pollia. For serious searchers of profound secrets in Philosophy, a
Theoretick Theano, and a divine Diotima: a woman, who was so famous a
Philosopher, Diotima (...). Iovis gloria: Such was her divine Etymon.
that both Socrates and Plato went to hear her Lectures. And for moral
Precepts, and Rules of Economy, a lovely Sulpitia, and a stately Edesia.
Prompt were their wits, rich their fancies, and so bravely composed their
affections, as those who enjoyed them, might hold themselves so far as humane
happiness extended, truly beatifi'd by them.

One chancing pleasantly to repeat, in the presence of his wife, that old
assertion; How, of all inferior blessings, the very summary of them might be
comprised in this threefold dimension: 1. To have a wife of his own choosing.
2. To have an Orchard of his own planting. 3. To have a Child of his own
begetting. But what answered his Wife to this supposed Abstract of all humane
happiness? Truly, said she, if you had not done the first, you had never
been my husband. And if you have not done the second, you are the worser
husband. But should you conceive the least suspicion of the third, I should
account you unworthy the name of a husband. Truth is, such sweet Consorts as
we have here in this Section described; and with whose virtues those very
monumentall statues which enshrined them, are perfumed: confine not the period
of their love to a honey-moneth. Their delights are more perpetuate, because
with goodness beautified. For skin-beauty returns but a sickly appetite to
Fancy. Whatsoever reteines in it self a proclivity of decaying or declining,
cannot conceive much felicity in the enjoying. For though the present Object
delight, one poor fit of a Fever will darken those attractive rays of
content: and enforce the late enjoyer to distaste that most, which his
bleere-ey'd judgment did so causelessly admire. Whereas these, whose interior
beauty begets to their happy Consorts a permanent fancy; have been ever
reputed the choicest Companions to ^ray with, to Play with, to Converse or
Commerce with. Every of which we shall illustrate by personal instances

Gregory in his Dialogues writes, that his Aunt Trasilla being dead, was found
to have her elbowes as hard as horn: which hardness she got by leaning to a
deske, at which she used to pray. The like writes Hierome of Asella, Hier. de
la^d. Asella epist. 15.
who, though confined to the straight compass of a Cell, enjoyed the whole
circuit of Heaven.

But lest we might fall into the heresy of the Euchitae (a thing I must
confess little to be feared, seeing the knees of devotion every where so
benumbed) who professed to do nothing else but pray: because the Apostle
exhorts us to pray continually. So that professing to pray, and to do
nothing else, in effect they did nothing less: seeing, as Theodoret reports
of them, They did nothing for the most part but sleep. Whereas in Basils
judgment, a prayer should be filled not with Syllables, or good words, so much
as good works. Now I say, lest women should become so wholly contemplative, as
wholly to forget the office of being active: We shall present to you such, who
are no less apt Consorts to play with, then devout Supplicants to pray with.
Right wisely knew that Empress how to play her Irish game, who admonished her
husband, that the life of a man was more to be valued, then a throw at dice.
The loss of a life was to be recompensed with no benefit. Aelian.
When the game is ended, a new game may supply it: but when a life is
forfeited, once deprived, it cannot be restored.

An excellent direction, and worthy our Observation in our form of play, was
that princely feminine caution: In game play fair, and do not swear,
Slight hope of gain, scorn thoughts of fear.


The brave resolution of that noble Gamester, discovered no less masculine
temper; who, to prepare her self against the braves of fortune, fortified her
well-composed Spirit with this Antidote: Should a black Cloud sit on my Fate,
Impendeat fat is nubes opaca mei^, Discutiet men's nubes patiendo leves.

I can with patience slight her hate.


Nor were some of these inimitable Femals, only fitting Consorts for subjects
of Devotion, to pray with; nor only pleasing Companions for Scenes of
Recreation, to play with: But moving sociats for arguments of Communication, to
commerce and converse with. Those Tyrian and Sidonian women might confirm
their propriety and expeditenesse in the way of Commerce: with our daily
experience of discourse with creatures of that sex in treaties of Converse.

It seems those three gentlemen, as if they had been Trium-viri in their
fruition of this happiness, could return sufficient arguments of their
Mistresses abilities in this kind: While one making choice of this Posy,
expressed the absoluteness of his choice in the neatness and elegancy of her
discourse; which he recommended to the impressure of his Diamond in a Window:
My choice is one, whose accents bear such weight,
As all discourses else to me seem light.


These lines when another Gentleman had perused; as one who conceived himself
no less enriched by his choice; seconds the former in this manner, by
engraving this Impreze to his Mistress honor: Single's my choice, yet with
her cheered am I,
As if that single conference were many.


The third nothing short in his Conceit, of the like beauty, and for subjects
of Discourse no less moving in the care of Fancy, to publish to the world that
he tendered his deserving Mistress no less affection, with a more enlivened
or mounting invention, closed his opinion he retained of her in this
commendation: My Consort's single, yet when she is by me,
Me thinks the Spheres in Warbling Quires draw nigh me.


Sir Fra: Bacon.
Such as these may we well hold, with that eminent Statist, for old men's
Nurses, and young men's Mistresses. Should their youthful prime entertain by
an enforced injunction a frosty Consort: their virtuous temper is such, as
their enforced choice must admit no change. Euryala was never more obsequious
to tender Ithacus, then these will express themselves to their decrepit
husbands. Their disparity in years must not beget in their affections any
disloyalty of thoughts. Though they be young Brides, they will perform the
offices of old Nurses. Their care must extend it self, instead of amorous
embraces, to preserve health in their declining husbands: which they address
themselves to with no less alacrity, then if they had been matched to persons
of more vigorous quality. These have made a league with their eyes; that they
shall be no betrayers of their hearts. As it was their doom to marry
unequally, and to bestow their Virgin youth on mere patients engaged to each
infirmity: so they have vowed solely to observe them; constantly to love them;
peaceably to live with them: and amidst all overtures so to bear with their
infirmities, as no peevish humor of age shall distemper them: nor any
groundless jealousy suggest to their revenge an opportunity to wrong them.
And this their Observance must not proceed from any by-respect; as many
cautelous younglings do; who usully accommodate themselves to their perverse
husbands humor, with hope of a day to come after. Their affections are pure
without dissembling; their care constant without projecting; their desires
addressed to please without humoring.

Others we shall find of their sex, fit to be young-mens Mistresses; And
these no less modestly pleasing, then virtuously affecting: These can stand
upon their points without apish niceness: and hold their distance without a
squeamish preciseness.

They can love without fonding; ingratiate themselves without fauning: Neat
they desire to go without phantasticknesse; Sweetly can they converse without
affectednesse; These hold it a feminine madness to pride themselves in that,
which stripped their Predecessors of their purest state. These reflect upon Eve
with a teare-swolne eye; and in a retired contemplation, and recollected
affection, present her Image to their well-composed thoughts: And this they
make their Diarie to the end it may work upon their imaginations more
effectually. O was not Eve created in her will free and innocent; in her reason
sage and prudent; in her command strong and potent? And what deprived her of so
blessed a condition, but an indisposed heat of ambition? Had her thoughts
confined themselves to the lists of her present state, she had never thrown
upon her posterity such a surviving stain. O had she been content with what
she was, her sex had never been so miserable as it is. Her ambition became
our perdition: Her pride our ruin. They sigh to see their sex so vainly
magnified; to hear them with Titles of Worthies dignified; to have their
Portratures in such magnificent manner beautified; These they slight with more
religious contempt, then ever the victorious Vtican did the erection of his
statue; being no embellishment, as he accounted it, to the essence of virtue.

Well deserving a succeeding memory was that Motto: I did never in any thing to
my self arrogate, In nullo unguam arrego, in quo mihi non derogo.
wherein I did not from my self derogate. And such is the modesty of these
patterns of piety, as they cannot endure to have their commendable actions too
much observed, or publicly applauded, lest by hearing themselves praised, they
might incur vainglory, and so become deluded.

Their constant nuptial Impreses, or Loves loyal Posies were these: Chaste
faith enstiles me Spouse. Casta fides Sponsam me fe^ent --. Manus colo, thor^s
Sponso. Vid. Var.
"A Hand for my Wheel, a
Bed for my Spouse. "Where thou art Caius, I am Caia.
I love, I live, and yet I give that to my Love by which I live.
To live and have no heart were strange, yet have I none but by exchange.
Death may contract my life* but not my love.


Such as these famous Mirrors shall we occasionally encounter withal, in our
Readings: Who, though they were Ethnicks borne, retained in them such
impressions of moral goodness: as their memory left an Annall to posterity;
being so much more to be admired, in regard those times wherein they
flourished, were with mists of pagan ignorance clouded.

These desired to do well, and not to be applauded; to advance virtues, and
not to have their names recorded: nor their amiable features with glorious
Frontispices impaled. To improve goodness by humility, was their highest pitch
of glory. This their sundry excellent fancies confirmed; their elegant labors
discovered; whereof though many have suffered Oblivion through the injury of
time, and want of that incomparable help of the Press, the benefit whereof
we enjoy: yet shall we find by the testimony of our approvedst Authors, that
many of these women, which for brevity sake we have only shadowed, have been
assistants to the highest and most enlivened Composures that ever derived birth
or breath from Helicon. Besides other Historical Relations, whose memory, time
shall sooner expire in her self, then obscure. Turn over those mysterious
volumes of the Sibyls; those accurate airs of Corinnathia, that incomparable
Corrivall to the Poet Pindarus; those Emathian raptures of Argentaria, that
happy Consort, and assistant to the heroic Lucan. Neither need we travel
abroad in pursuit of foreign Instances We have not only formerly enjoyed,
but even in these times are we seized of many eminent and deserving women, and
in addition to their honor, no^ly descended, who rightly merit the style
bestowed on them; The WITS. And these have the happiness to judge of a
well-composed line; to breath spirit in invention; to correct the indisposure
of a Scene; to collect probably (a work I must confess of greatest
difficulty) what may best comply with the humor of the time, or suite best
with the propriety of Court-Maske, or public Stage. Others we have, who, by
the help of our numerous Translations, can read a Lecture upon Homers Iliads,
and with that exactness, as if with Dares Phrygius, they had been personally
interessed in that tragic service. Others singularly versed in tongues; and
all these with such modesty managed, as if their many tongues had made them
tongue-ti'd: and with a sweet composed silence so incomparably graced them, as
if in others presence they had made exchange of their Elocution with Attention.

Let me then address my Discourse to you, who make it your task to detract
from this sex. Some of you have I heard traduce them, in laying such injurious
aspersions as these upon them: Women, of all others, are to be esteemed the
improvidentst Governesses of their Cinque Ports. They pervert the use of their
five Senses, by engaging them to sensual ends. Ears they have, and these make
them Eve-droppers. Eyes they have, and these make them Tempters. Smells they
have, and these are compounded of Love-pouders. Tastes they have, and these
return them Rioters. Touches they have, and the^e render them free Embracers.
Their feet make them Gadders; all their faculties, irregular li^ers. If old,
their rivell'd furrows make them sullen; If young, their taking beauties make
them wanton. If rich, they are haughty; If poor, they turn naughty. Every
thing must live, and poverty cooles the hotest love. That Adage proves ever
true: Love when it wants harbor, falls many times into a Fever. Besides, what a
misery it is to be matched to such an one, as affects nothing more then
fashion? Such an one, who reserves more unfeigned adoration to her Glass; then
to the prime Maker of the Object of that Glass. The tender love she bears to
her Tyre-woman, makes her forgetful of the duty she ought to tender to her
Husband. To such as these, Husbands become mere Shelters: those names they
bear, serve only for sk^^anes to salve their wives honors.

Again, how pitifully discontented will some of these Spotted beauties
appear; when they see a dress they affect, which their parents care, or
husbands cost will not procure. Lie down and die they must instantly, there is
no remedy: Women they are not of this world, if they may not enjoy the loosest
vanities of the world. But well did those two Conceits cloze, and in Creatures
of this pettish and perverse humor ingeniously meet: While one, having had his
handful, no doubt, of such a wild one, wrote these two lines with his Diamond
in the Chamber Window of his discontented peat:

Maids that will die because they are lightly crossed,
May grieve their parents, but themselves the most.
The other answered him in the same key, though in a more general tone:

By Vixons that will dye for being crossed,
Their Country gains far more then she has lost.


Thus do these feminine Critics, Since to tax women's errors it is so common,
What may my Book look for in praise of women?
whose best of Elocution is detraction, labor to vilify that sex, without
whose being they had never been. But imputing the ground of their immeriting
spleen to some hard fortune they have suffered in the choice of their wanton,
wilful, or unsociable Mistresses: or from their disdainefull repulse, which
might probably beget in them this pitiful reproof; We will leave these to
feed and fat themselves with the seldome-thriving food of their distemper; and
address this our clozing discourse to you, who are those pious patterns of
feminine honor; for whose sakes, not only in the maine Subject more fully
amplified, but even in this Epitome more briefly contracted, we have bestowed
our oil and labor.

Ye worthy Women, who have no other device but the dress of virtue to
beautify your Frontispice; ye, who give a graceful accomplishment to those
three incomparable Ornaments of a Woman, Complexion, Favor, and Behavior: for
the first* it is your own, and not borrowed; for the second, it is ever with a
second look improved; And for the third, it is every way without Affectation
accomplished. Ye, I say, whose living actions become so exemplar, as they are
Directories unto others how to live at distance from error; shall be ever
Patronesses to these lines, as these lines shall be Relators of your virtues.
Ye retain in your memory those mysterious Emblemes of your Creation; ye find
that you were made of man; but not of his head, as to be his Imperial; nor of
his foot, as to be his vassal; but of his ribbe, to be his equal. Ye were
given him for Helps, not to spend his estate; but to partake with him in every
estate in his comforts to augment them, in his discomforts to allay them. The
fantastic habits of the time have no power to delude you; price nor prayer to
corrupt you; much less to dissease him of your fancy, who by right enjoyes
you. As in your Creation you are excellent; so in your imitable virtues
eminent. As in your passion moderate; so in assaults continent. As in
Countenance, Habit, and Expression of your affection modest; so, forth of
loyal zeal to those you love, and with whom you account it your highest
happiness to live, to those who are Corrivals in your choice, violent: Albeit,
with a modest defense may that violence, proceeding from an exuberance of
affection, be sweetened. As your witty Aphorisms, Apothegms, and Answers have
confirmed you seriously pregnant; so have your eminent Labors published you
integriously diligent. And in each of these Subjects, contracted in one entire
individual Model, have I portrayed your worth: which, so long as you hold
correspondence with virtue, shall become the continued Annall of my pen; and in
your noble acceptance, account it a sufficient Guerdon for my pains.

FINIS.
The Contents, Disposition, and Order of this LADIES LOVE-LECTVRE.
SECT. 1.
HE treats of the Excellency of Women in their Creation. Plato's opinion
touching Women. The Story of the Delphicke Oracle: with the explication and
application of it. Nothing comparably precious to a continent Soul. Eye a
Woman in the excellency of her Creation; She is found in her quality, an
Helper; in her Society, a Comforter; in the perplexities of her Consort, a
Counselor: and in all these, a Sharer.
SECT. 2.
THeir imitable virtues, illustrated with examples: And confirmed to be most
eminent patterns in their practice and profession of the four Cardinal
Virtues. These compared, by an apt resemblance, to those four Rivers streaming
forth of Paradise. The way to sin, is to open to occasion, and let temptation
come in. The five Senses are those Cinque ports, which being well guarded, this
little World, MAN, may remain secured.
SECT. 3.
THeir Moderation of Passion in Motives to Revenge, properly reflecting upon
these three distinct Subjects: Life. With admirable Instances in each of these:
and with dainty Motto's or Imprezes to imbellish these. Fame. With admirable
Instances in each of these: and with dainty Motto's or Imprezes to imbellish
these. Fortunes. With admirable Instances in each of these: and with dainty
Motto's or Imprezes to imbellish these.

SECT. 4.
THeir Continency in assaults. Sundry Historical Emblemes of Beasts and Birds,
illustrating this Subject. How an unaffected reservancy suites best with
Conjugall Fancy. Age becomes rather an object of pity, then fancy to the eye of
youth.
SECT. 5.
THeir Modesty, in Countenance, Habit, and Expression of affection. Candid
thoughts are ever most legible in the eyes. Piety receives scandal from the
Countenance; and Chastity, treason from the Eye, by conveighing treacherous
thoughts to the heart. Imitation of foreign Habits, begets in us a dis-esteeme
with Forrainers. More advantage in dispatch then delay. Delay gives way to
Corrivals. Fancy, when it falls remiss in pursuit, it produces cold fruit. A
Pleasant old prophecy of aged fancy. A Presidentall Love-letter.
SECT. 6.
THeir violence upon such as were Corrivals in their Choice. A parallel betwixt
the River Himetus and the disposition of a woman: with the reasons of this
Allusion. A Woman's disposition bounds upon two extremes: Boundless Love. Or
Endless Hate. No receipt more sovereign then the one;
No deceit more subtle then the other.

One of the best policies in a Christian, is to delude a wily wanton: and
decline the fury of a jealous woman. Disparity of Years, Fortunes, or Descent,
ever begets in the Parties married most discontent. A Similitude suiting well
with the temper of a stale Batchler.
SECT. 7.
THeir modest Defense. Though Cruelty admit no Apology: yet when too impressive
a fancy occasions this Cruelty, it merits rather the title of a distracted
phrensy, then an affected Cruelty. Love, when it falls into these Extremes, is
more apt to expostulate with Passion then Reason. A memorable Example in this
kind. Degenerate and creeping spirits are ever promptest to tax the weaker
sex of errors. Their censorious Objections retorted, and with a merry story
requited. Women's Inventions discover no such lightness in their Love-Imprezes
and Poesies, as more masculine spirits usually do in their devices. An
Arabicke resolution to this Question: Why a woman might not as properly woo
man, as man woman? None but proud Pharisees were ever known to wink at the
approach of women: And these, though they had sealed eyes, they had seeing and
stealing hearts.
SECT. 8.
THeir witty Aphorisms, Apothegms and Answers. Obscene Pasquils detract from
the style and state of serious Aphorisms. These divine and Moral Aphorisms
were not only delivered by them, but personated in them: in their Humility,
Contentment, Charity, Patience, Continency, Abstinence and Industry. Their
excellent Rules delivered unto others, for the better regiment of their
thoughts, words, and works.
SECT. 9.
THeir Eminent Labors; and how they were Assistants in the exquisitest Works
that have been formerly composed, either for History, or Poesy. And all this
ennobled by memorable patterns and Professors in all ages: where zeal of
goodness was such a glorious Ambition, as it could never be too aspiring. The
discreet Reply of a wife to her husbands assertion: "How all inferior
blessings were comprised in this threefold dimension: 1. To have a wife of his
own choosing; 2. To have an Orchard of his own planting. 3. To have a child of
his own begetting.
Nuptial delights are more perpetuate, because with goodness dignified.
Whatsoever reteines in it self a proclivity to declining, cannot conceive much
felicity in the enjoying: Whereas these, On goodness, not on greatness cast
their care,
^Shee's truly noble that is Virtues heir.
Consorts inwardly beautified, are the choicest Companions for Closet. Casket.
Carpet.
And this authorized with ancient and modern instances. The ingenious contest
of three Gentlemen, touching their fruition of happiness in their choice; with
answers to each others Imprezes. Discreet women sort themselves to their
choice, in each condition: whether they be Old-mens Nurses, or Young-mens
Mistresses. Though they be young Brides, they will perform the offices of old
Nurses. And being young-mens Mistresses, they can show a modest freedom
without squeamish preciseness. Their pleasant Love-posies to their loyal
Consorts. No Learning shows more luster, then when enshrined in the bosom of
a woman. No Eloquence leaves a deeper Impressure, then when delivered by the
tongue of a Woman. Their Silence an implying Eloquence. Their Defense in the
disposition of every Sense, to the improvement of their honor, against the
opposition of every Critic feminine Censor. He addresseth his Conclusion to
all such worthy women, whose virtuous lives promise a glorious Evening. And
with a recollection of every Subject formerly handled, recommends them to their
useful Observance: His Labors to their graceful Acceptance.
A Sonnet.
LADIES, ye, that would be fair,
I a Cerusse can prepare
Will make you clearer then the air,
It Is such choice and precious ware.
Hold your purse, it costs you naught,
It Is in no shop to be bought,
Worth an Empire, seldom sought,
Being from Elysium brought.
Have ye rivels in your face,
Want ye love-spots for a grace,
Want ye borders, edging, lace,
Favor, feature, posture, pace?
Would ye ever be in fashion,
Vye inventions with our Nation,
In your Treaties move compassion,
Suite your persons to occasion?
Would ye make Affection fly
From your love-attractive eye,
To intrance the Standers by,
Wishing there to live and dye?
Would ye fix in Fancies Sphere,
Or enjoy your only Dear,
And no sly Corrivall fear,
Apt to undermine you there.
Would ye feed on such choice food
As enliveneth the blood,
Purging ill, infusing good,
"A rare Conserve for Woman-hood?
Would ye Courtly measures tread
On the flowry-checker'd Mead,
Would ye no Love-powders need,
Would ye in your seed succeed?
Would ye love and feel no heat
That may wrong chaste Delia's Seat,
Would ye in rich language treat,
Without Envy become great?
Here is ONE will make you fit
Both for Lineament and Wit,
As ye cannot choose but hit
The Mark that may accomplish it.
Here is ONE will fancy move,
And such a Tyre-woman prove
In the Discipline of love,
As never was such a Turtle-dove.
Poor she is, yet is she pure,
VERTVE her name, her only lure
A constant care, a careful cure
To make her loyal Lovers sure.
" This it is will cheer your amorous brains like Nectar,
" And crown you happy Scholars in Loves-Lecture.
THE TURTLES TRIVMPH; PRESENTED IN A SVPPLEMENT: HIGHLY CONDVCING to an useful
Application, and graceful Reconciliation of the two former Subjects.

Continued by Ri. Brathwait, Esquire.

LONDON, Printed by John Dawson.

INTENTISSIMO VIRO, PVBLICAE SALVTIS STVDIOSISSIMO, IOHANNI BANKS MILITI;
ATTVRNATO AVGVSTISSIMI REGIS GENERALI: R. B.

PARNASSIDVM HVMILLIMVS; OBSERVANTIAE VESTRAE DEDITISSIMVS, HEROINAM HANC
CORONIDEM, LEGALI IVGO, SPONSALI VOTO, GENIALI THORO, CONJVNCTAM. D. D. D.

A SVPPLEMENT, HIGHLY CONDVCING to an useful Application, and graceful
Reconciliation of the two former Subjects.
LOng time have these two affectionate Consorts been divided; now at last it
is their happiness to become united: To confirm their Loves, which they have
vowed to remain inviolably firm, to their expired Lives; we are to propose
such necessary Observances, as may prevent all occasion of distrust, and divert
all grounds of future distrust. We are then in this useful Connection; first to
treat of Conjugall Offices, Sen.
being inherent, as that grave Moral tells us, betwixt Husband and Wife, Wife
and Husband. Secondly, Arist.
of Parentall Offices, being subsequent, as that profound Stagyrite teaches,
of Parents to their Children, and Children to their Parents. Thirdly, Anax.
of Domestic Offices, being Concomitant, as that sound Stoicke reasons,
being of Masters to their Servants, and Servants to their Masters. Fourthly, of
Neighbourly Offices, being reciprocally dependent, as that excellent Politic
concludes, Montan.
being mutual civil Offices, or Courtesies, betwixt Neighbor and Neighbor.
In all which distinct Subjects, our purpose is, with such brevity, and
perspicuity, to deliver our useful directions, that in this very Breviarie may
be laid down the Rules of an entire Oeconomie: Which, being perused with
attention, and seconded with retention, may not only prevent all occasion of
dissension at home, but all division abroad. For, be the Sea never so troubled,
there is good hope, that the groaning ship may be better secured, when Wisdom
and Moderation perform the offices of a Pilot, and with a vigilant eye, steers
her against all occurrents.

Of Conjugall Offices.
Prove. 18.22.
IT was the saying of the Wisest of Kings: He that finds a Wife, finds a
good thing, and receives favor of the Lord. And that he might more
emphatically express the incomparable estimate of a good Wife, and how far in
the Scale of judgment, she is to be preferred before substance, riches, or any
worldly inheritance; to render them the more proper, and genuine distinction,
he returns them not only a distinct gradation, but also a different
derivation: Prove. 19.14.
House and riches are the inheritance of the Fathers: but a prud^nt Wife
comes of the Lord. In what high estimation are you then, Gentlemen, to hold
discreet women? And what happiness may you be said to enjoy in casting your
lots in so fair a field, so fruitful a ground? The saying of Caia, wife to
Caius Tarquinius. Vid. Plu^.
Where you are Caius, she will be Caia, such is her constancy. Where you are
Agathocles, she will be Theogena; yours in prosperity and adversity. Fullness
of fortunes cannot transport her, nor any indigence dej^ct her.

She cannot endure to admit of that Italian Proverb for Orthodoxall, which
they hold for a Tenet so general; When Love wants harbor, it drives Love into
a fever.


No; so she may live, where she enjoyes her love, she is rich enough how
soever she live.

Now, what mutual offices are required, that love so freely tendered, may be
requited! Humanity, says the Philosopher, exacts love for love. But love her
you cannot, Arist. Eth.
if you mix your love with any, or fix it on any, wherein she partakes not.
Let it then be your care, that she only have the Monopoly of your love. Let her
Bed be undefiled, your Vow inviolate; remembering ever that divine Maxim: To
break a Spo^full Vow's an odious sin;
Conjugalem fidem violare nefas, nuptialem thorum venerari a^cus.
To keepe't unstained, h'as still an honor bin,


And, to observe this Lesson better; conceive with your self, how ill you
should digest her, if she should wrong you in the same sort. It is an apparent
Argument of honest Wisdom (said that ancient Sage) to module an other by our
own measure. For to impose heavy burdens on others, Thales Miles.
and never to partake of them; to injoyne taskes on others, and not to share in
them, argues an indulgency in respect of our selves, our inhumanity unto
others. Entertain this Fellow-helper then which you have received, and to
whom, by a sacred Nuptial tie (recorded in Heaven, solemnized on Earth, and
confirmed by the mutual gages of two individually united hearts) you stand
affianced, with an affectionate continence; knowing, how an heart divided
cannot live, nor a divided fancy truly love. For, as there is nothing so
precious as a continent soul: so is there nothing more odious, than a Nuptial
Bed stained with an adulterate soil.

Ambros. lib. 1. de Abraham.
That devout Father, Saint Ambrose, can tell you, that it is a Crime detestable
to Savages and Barbarians; how much more to be excluded from the practice of
Christians. The very Birds of the air can retain a memory of a dishonored
love; witness the Porphyrio, who, as the Natural Historian reports, Aeli^n.
in not. hist. Alcia^. in Emblem.
no sooner finds another too familiar a sharer in her love, then she despaires
any longer to live: Her Nest she leaves desolate, and in her distasted life she
becomes so disconsolate, as being so injuriously abused by her endearedst
friend, she chooses grief to be her only Associate to accompany her to her
Grave.

How passionately takes the loving Turtle the loss, This you may the better
retain, by engraving in the window of your Bedchamber with thas noble
Fl^rentine, this Impreze, to make you more tender of your nuptial honor:
Emblema est (...) theri. Ier. 5.8.
or dereliction of her beloved? She will brouze on no green herb; sit upon no
flourishing sprig; nor entertain any new love. She frequents the retired
Laune; where throbs and dis-passionate threnes become her choycest melody;
sighs, griefs and groans, her Widows obsequy. Receive these loyal Emblemes
of constant fancy, in the precious Storehouse of your memory; ever making use
of these moral Readings, that if creatures, directed only by sense, scorn to
be sensual, much more purity should that soul retain, which is rational.

How mournfully did that prophetical Dove express his pious zeal, and devout
compassion in the discovery of this sin, a great dishonor to the house of
Sion! In the morning every one neighs after his Neighbors wife. Nay, observe
how he seconds it, that the brutish nature of this sin might be fuller
displayed; In the morning they are as fed horses: Thus were they sated and
surfeited in their sensual delights, making the pleasures of sin their
gain, and the torments of Hell their goal. Shall we close this with the
positive Conclusion, Heb. 13.4.
of that Vessel of Election? Marriage is honorable among all, and the Bed
undefiled: but Whore-mongers and Adulterers God will judge. Or with that
passionate expostulation of the Prophet, in the person of God himself against
this sin, with the numerous Professors of this sin? How should I spare thee
for this? thy Children have forsaken me, Ier. 5.7.
and sworn by them that are no gods: though I fed them to the full, yet they
committed Adultery, and assembled themselves by companies in the Harlots
houses. But to use the words of that elegant Moral, It is the least of our
fear but to find more rich treasure in your Tents, more pious graces in your
Pavillions; your descent promises largely to your family; that as your
Predecessors virtues were as Signals, or Land-markes to their posterity: so
you, walking in the same paths, might derive the like streamlings of goodness
unto yours. An ancient Family, says that excellent Ethick, retains ever some
beame-lings transcending others: And as a genuine modesty is for most part an
Attendant to Ingenuity; so are generous Graces those constant'st Consorts,
Optima semper ingenia, quaedam ge^^^^a comitatur modestia.
which hold in equipage with true Gentry.

That solid Cinick, hearing how a young Gallant, descending from the order of
the Ephori, became hatefully debaucht, preferred his suite, and in it humbly
begged this loose Rioters estate: The whole Synod wondering much, how, and on
what grounds that wise Dog (for so they were pleased to style him) preferred
his suite; seeing the Gentleman was neither distracted, nor any way so disabled
but he might well enough manage that estate was left him: O conscript Fathers,
said he, know you not how this profuse fool has forfeited all that estate he
had by his Ancestors, by discovering his own Bastardy, in degenerating from
his Ancestors virtues? Has he not made his Family a Brothell: and exposed his
Wives honor to a lascivious Duel? He has not only stained his house, in
becoming so enormiously ill; but in depraving others, who might have become,
had not his example made them ill, ingenuously good. Strip him then of all
without him, who has already stripped himself of all graces within him. Trust
me, Fathers, we have none here that will bemoane his loss; but those whom
even goodness loathes to look upon; and whose very lives make Athens a
L^th-stow of pollution. And such Mourners have all Prodigals; nor do these
weep to lose him, but by his loss to lose that estate which did supply them.
Give me him then, good Senators; I shall become his trusty faithful Guardian,
and keep him short enough to consort with a Wanton.

Now to decline the just reproof of such jeering Cinicks; nay, the distaste of
all good men; (for men of honest quality can never relish any thing better than
actions of Piety:) be it your highest terrestrial pleasure, to tender her,
whom you ought to honor: to estrange from your thoughts those injurious
embraces of an usurping Lover. And remember ever Lisimachus Song; the memory
whereof will preserve that pure splendour and beauty of your soul from an
eternal stain. The pleasure of fornication is short, but the punishment of
the fornicator is long. One days dalliance exacts many years of repentance.
Imprint in your retentive memories the excellent interrogation of that choice
Mirror of Chastity; Pattern of presidentall Piety: How shall I do this
wickedness, and sin against God? Genesis 39.9.
He chused rather to lose his Coat, than his Honor. Opportunity could not
tempt him, nor Importunity taint him: Price, prayer, power became al weak in
power, to surprise a disposition so resolutely pure. Be his Pattern your
President, his President the Pattern for you to imitate.

Nor is this Conjugall Office, or Duty restrained only to this limitation. As
your affection is to be constantly continent to their Bed: so are you to be
affably pleasant at Board. I have observed a strange kind of imperious and
domineering sovereignty in some Husbands; who held it a great posture of State
to insult over their wives: Nay, to be marvellously discontented with what
dishes soever were served; to catch at offense, and to relish nothing better,
than to discountenance those, whose desires were levelled only to please. But
this argued in them a perverseness of disposition; resembling that
ill-condition'd Aglataidas, who was never better pleased, then with displeasing
others: nor ever relished any dish better than what was distasted by others. Or
like that strangely tempered Demophon, who used to sweat in the shade, and
shake for cold in the sun. Now I could wish to these, if their wives
affability cannot in time reclaim them; that their lots had been thrown in
more rugged grounds: For had these been matched with our Zantippe's, Iulia's,
Lucilla's, or Faustina's; no doubt, but they would have addressed the best of
their endeavors as much to please, as their perverse humors are now to
displease. Then they would have studied Apologies purposely to divert the
furious torrent of their displeasure; Tali conjugio fruor, ut, sive foris
egrediar, sive revertar, quicquidevenerit libentissime patior, and patiendo
vinco citius quam vincor.

Vid. Licost. Apotheg.


and for the purchase of one poor smile, engaged themselves to an Herculean
labor.

It was a singular Philosophical use, which that wise Socrates made of his
wives shrewdeness: Whether I go abroad (said he) or I return home, I am fenced
with the armor of patience against whatsoever shall come. He had so freely
fed upon the herb of Patience, as nothing could distemper him, how violent
soever the assault were that encountered him: yea, those bickerings he grapled
with at home, made him better prepared to entertain all encounters abroad: So
as, with Mithridates, he had so well fortified his virile spirits, with
sovereign Receipts, against the invasive power of all poison, as he could
perform the part of a true Philosopher, in smiling upon affliction; and
receiving all distastes with so composed a brow, as he wondered much how any
motives of anger should in an intellectual soul beget the least distemper.

For, whosoever he be that in resemblance of this Moral Mirror of admirable
patience, can in Prosperity be silent, and not transported; in Adversity,
patient, and not amated; in neither of these distempered; in either of these
Philosophically composed; scorns to engage his more airy thoughts, to an
un-manly passion: having already sphear'd them in an higher mansion.

In the very same Scene, Gentlemen, are you interessed; wherein should you fall
short, or in the least measure defective: Most part of all our Spectators eyes
are fixed on you, whose censure will prove as quick sighted, as your error;
accounting you unworthy those brave parts bestowed on you, because mis-acted by
you.

Entertain these then, to whom you are espoused, with a free, and no servile
affection. Waine them from passion, if at any time they become engaged to any,
rather with a pleasing smile, then a daring frown: for the former partakes
more of an awful sovereignty, then cheerful fancy. The way to preserve in any
family a sweet consorting, and concording harmony, is never to have the Master
and Mistress of the house, at one time angry. Let the sweetness of the one
allay the sharpness of the other.

It was an excellent resolution, which that Laconian Lady ever retained: My
Husbands frown shall be a Beam to disperse my Cloud, which cannot choose but
beget in him a cheerful reflexe, seeing I make discontent a stranger to my
heart for his sake.

Now there is one thing, Gentlemen, which I am to annex to what I have formerly
delivered; which, being carefully remembered, and cautiously practiced, cannot
choose but highly improve this Conjugall Love; without which, your unconsociable
communion were but an hellish life: And it is this. Are you conceited, that
she whom you have married, is endowed with a sufficient measure of discretion
to govern a Family: and without just exception can propose to her self, with
those recommended to her charge, rules of good Huswifery? Do not intermixe
your care with her charge. The disposal of a Daery, is more proper for a
Mistress than a Master of a Family. Strong and manly Offices become the Man;
soft and delicate the Woman. Nor is there any intrusion less beseeming then
this; nor ought that more exasperates the spirit of a woman, then to have her
care suspected, or her charge interposed by her Husband; either through a
jealousy of her care, neglect of her charge, or disability to manage any such
charge. Those two honest Rural Lovers, though their estates were but mean,
their quality obscure, their place of habitation poor; yet knew they how to
distinguish their cares, by a fit addressement of themselves to their peculiar
charge. Meleand. in Bast.

Palemon. ad caulam, Calatea ad colum.


Palemon was not to meddle with his Galatea's Spindle; nor Galatea with her
Palemon's Hook: Distinct persons, distinct offices.

Besides, it is a derogation from Gentry to converse too much with a Daery.
Other employments do far better become him: and persued with a discreet
care; may more improve him, then to intermedle in such inferior offices;
which, as they suite meanly with him, so they decline him from the care of what
may more properly become him, and more amply profit him.

There was nothing which aliened the affections of those Assyrians, more from
their effeminate King, then his too familiar conversing, and manual employing
of himself in the use and exercise of his needle; weaving of Purple; and
inuring himself to such feminine Offices, as held no correspondence with the
quality of a Prince, nor the entertainment of any generous Subject: Plutarch.
Licosth. Macrob.
For if Agesilaus deserved to be in some sort condemned, for stooping to so low
and unprincely a pleasure, as riding on Cock-horse with his children; which
employed only a tender parentall affection: much more deserve such to be highly
censured, who debase themselves in such servile, and un-virile Offices, as
detract from the honor of their place, and occasion many times Domestic
distaste.

In a word, Gentlemen, as you have more generous employments to retain you,
more improving cares and studies to entertain you: so have you more imitable
Patterns to propose unto you, what may infinitely become you. Eagle spirits
cannot stoop to low lures. Reflect upon your family; and by your fair
examples, inform your Posterity. Leave to your noble Consorts, the care and
charge of what best suits with their sex: Employ your selves in what may better
correspond with your state. Different hands mixed in these, will rather redound
to your prejudice, then profit; disparagement, then credit. As you have made
your choice, recommend to that choice her peculiar charge: this will heighten
the opinion of your discretion, and raise an addition to her care.

Thus if you shall demean your selves to your well-disposed Consorts; you
shall find them ready, with chaste and cheerful bosoms, to receive you; with
affable, and affectionate looks to entertain you; with sweet innocent smiles
to enchaine you: For, so constantly united unto you shall be their love, as
they will hold it their highest terrestrial happiness, there to plant where
you love: your danger shall become their greatest terror; your safety their
gracefullest honor. For, as it shall be the fullest period of their joy to
enjoy you: so shall it be accounted by them their dis-passionatest Scene of
grief to forgo you. Nor shall you need any other Monument to memorize their
love, then those sweet joys they conceive in your life, those sincere tears
they sacrifice at your death.

NOw to you, Gentlewomen, are we to address our discourse. You have heard what
Conjugall Offices are to be tendered to you: The offices of a wife to her
husband.
and we must now lay down such peculiar offices, as are to be rendered by you.

For Husbands, we have furnished you with such choice, as their persons
accommodated with fair, and generous qualities, admit no change. Be you the
same in affection, which they express themselves in a votive and loyal
profession. Let me tell you, though you be the weaker sex; yet that weakness
must not give the least privilege to any stain. The Roman Ladies were so
far from giving occasion, as they usually estranged themselves from places of
suspicion. Now, the only means to secure you, is so to fortify those parts
within you, as no dangerous Pioner may betray you, nor engage your safety to
the assaults of a glozing enemy. We have many English Proverbs, both pithy and
pregnant, but for your use none so consequent, as that Arabian Adage: Shut your
windows without, Obs^ruantur fenestrae, ut luceat dom^s.
that your house may shine within. It is related (for ancient Annals would have
no memorable action, were it either to the fame or infamy of the Agent,
shrouded) that Tarpeia betrayed the gates of the Capitol to the enemy, only
upon promise, that they should throw her the Bracelets, which they wore on
their left arms; which they accordingly performed, throwing also their Targets
(to counterpoize those Ornaments) wherewith she was pressed to death. It is
true indeed, Price, Prayer, and Power are dangerous Assailants to Forts of
fancy: But to rebaite the force of these, hold Price at such a distance, where
it holds in Competition with your honor, as it deserves not to be admitted
into the scale, where a generous spirit is Commander. And for Prayer, though it
be a persuasive Orator, yet must it be put to silence, when it is abused, and
made an Agent to corrupt Honor. Lastly, for Power, that resolute Megara may
give you a brave Lesson in her tragic constant Expression: Whom Power can
quell, she knows not how to dye.
No; Sen in Herc. Fur.
as Price is too servile a Solicitor to procure love in any loyal Lover; so is
Prayer too uncivil an Orator to work any impression in Arguments of Honor:
And for Power, it is a poor grounded fancy that will yield her Fort up, when
she may keep it, to so intrusive an Usurper. Now, there is no way better to
remain safe from such Impairers, and Impeachers of Honor, then to avoid
conversing with them. Corrupt society is a dangerous Introduction to any inward
Malady.

Posthumia could not be taxed more for her Immodesty, then Semphronia or Iulia
were for consorting with light company. It is to be supposed, you are now
fixed, Macrob.
because espoused: You must then keep your eyes at home; not like those
Lamiae, whose custom was to incase them in a box; for so they might remain
uselesly shut to the necessitated care of your family; but from opening them to
any light Objects of Vanity. Dinah had not erred, had she not strayed: nor had
she strayed, had her eyes been restrained.

We may imagine that noble Lady Armenia, when she was invited, with her
Husband, to the solemnizing of those princely Nuptials of magnificent Cyrus,
that she might have seen many goodly, and amiable personages, pleasing and
attractive Objects: such as wanton eyes would have taken infinite delight in:
But how sixth was her outward eye on him solely, to whom she stood engaged by an
inward tie, may appear by that discreet modest answer, which she returned her
Husband: who at night when they were come home, demanded of her (it may be out
of a causeless jealousy, which he conceived of her) how she liked that
princely Bridegroom, whether she thought him not to be a fair, and beautiful
Prince, or no? and what personage in all that brave assembly rendered the most
graceful presence to her eye? Truth, says she, I know not: for all the while
I was forth, I cast mine eyes upon no other but thy self. Habitus mentis in
corporu statu cernitur. Gestus corporis indicat qualitatem mentis.

Vid. Gre. in Mor. Bern. in Epist.

Aug. in Confess.

Nazian.


This was an excellent pattern to imitate! When no Object could so take her
eye, as to convey the least impression of deluding fancy to her heart. There is
small doubt, but those experimental Maxims hold constantly current: That the
very state and composure of the mind is to be seen in the carriage and posture
of the body: And that by the gesture and composition of the body, is to be
discovered the quality, and disposition of the mind. So as, were one as cunning
in his carriage, as Tiberius was in his; who could walk in the Clouds to his
friends; and with pretended glozes delude his foes: Or as subtle, as that
Apostate Julian, whom Gregory Nazianzen called a Chamelion, because he could
change himself into all shapes and colors: or as crafty as Herod Antipas,
that cunning Fox, who could ingratiate himself with his foes, for his own
ends: yet in the secretst, and subtilest carriage of all these, we shall ever
find by the outward gesture, Luke 13.32.
some probable appearance of the inward temper.

Ambition cannot walk so privately, nor retire her self from the eyes of men
so cunningly, nor deceive a weak eye so much with a seeming Humility: but some
action or other will draw out to life his Anatomy, Themistocles may walk in
the night, and have none but the Moon and Stars to be his Spectators; yet for
all this, there be such observing Spies and Pioners within him, as the night
cannot be so dark, nor his retired thoughts so close, but humane eyes may see
him; and discover too the necessity of his walk: for they find by his
discontented look, and ambitious gate, that Miltiades triumph will not suffer
him to sleep: So as, no sooner do his inward thoughts betray him, then his
outward eyes display him: Every trifling action becomes his Discoverer; every
weak passion or broken fancy breaths forth the quality of his distemper.

Let me, Gentlewomen, return again to you, and make such useful Application
of these, as may improve you: Stand your minds affected to public assemblies,
or private visits? Do these Enterludes, or pastimes of the time delight you?
Begin you to dis-affect a Country life, and with a night persuasive Rhetoric,
to incline the affections of your easy Husbands to plant in the City; and to
leave their ancient Mannor-houses, sometimes memorable for Hospitality? Trust
me, these are no promising Arguments of Modesty. Plants transplanted do
seldom prosper: and Beauty exposed to all hazards, highly endangers the
preservation of Honor: In urbe maxima confluunt vitia.

Bona consortia, vita solatia.


Cities and places of great confluence have brought to composed minds much
prejudice; especially, where a Recession or Diversion from employment leaves
the mind to talk with it self, without bestowing it self on any useful
design, public or private. Nay, by estranging her acquaintance from good
company, whose advice might assist her; whose precepts might inform her; and
whose pleasing harmless discourse might delight her. And in exchange of such
friendly Consorts, entertain society with light fantastic spirits, from whom
no other profit can be derived, then what Vanity has suggested, and the
conceit of a deluded fancy hatched. O how many have preserved their reputes
untouched, their names unquestioned, their fames unblemished, during their
reside in the Country, who, by entering acquaintance with light fashions, and
loose Consorts, incurred much infamy! But as it is not the Place, but Grace,
which works most effectually with the soul; be it your care to intend your
inward cure: your pretense for the City may be physic; but if that physic of
your bodies, beget in your minds an infirmity; it had been much better for you
to have retained still those sickly bodies, you had in the Country, then by so
dangerous a recovery to labor of a far worser malady in the City.

Petrarch. de remed. utriusque fortunae. Caro quo agilior, Anima debilior:
Anima quo sortior* Caro infirmior. In Pandect.
That sententious Petrarch could say, It made no great matter, how the outward
house (alluding to the body) fared, so the inward house (alluding to the soul)
flourished: how the outward subsisted, so the inward were supported: Yea, we
shall observe how the decay, or decrease of the one, becomes many times the
repair and increase of the other. For too much agility of body, begets now and
then a debility in the soul. Restrain then your eyes from those outward
Objects, which may any way darken the Prospect of your inward house.

It is one of our especial cares in our Architecture, that our houses be
pleasantly seated; and to fair prospects dilated. And we hold it an
unneighbourly Office, Hippol. de Collib.
that any one whose contignate dwelling boundeth or butteth near us, should
upon any new superstructure, or late erected story darken the light of our
windows: This must not be endured; the Questmon must be informed, the wrong
done us must be aggravated; nothing omitted, to have the injury of our
Lesser-lights reformed, and our unsufferable wrongs (as we immeritedly account
them) redressed. Mean time, any ill disposed Neighbor, any vicious or
distempered Intruder, may at will and pleasure incroach upon the liberty of our
higher Rooms, these glorious structures of our souls.

Pride may damp and darken our Lights, by over-topping them; Avarice may stop
and straiten our Lights, by soiling them; Riot may close and clot up our
Lights, by cloying them; Lust may raze and deface our Lights, by peeping and
peering through them; Wrath may bruise and break down our Lights, by assailing
them; Envy may obscure, nay immure our Lights by interposing them: And Sloth,
like a more fruitless then harmless weed, may blanch and blemish our Lights
by over-spreading them.

Come then, Ladies, let me become your watchful Bel-man, Hang out your Lights.
The night you walk in is very dark; and dangerous be those Assailants, to
the Court of Honor, which encounter you. Lay aside those Love-sports, which
your deluded fancies dictate to you, and falsely tell you, that they infinitely
become you. Lay aside, I say, those numerous Love-sport trifles, distinguished
by these idolatrous titles: your favor, your Fancy, your Complexion, your
Affection, your Dasie, Pancy, Mirrha, Venus, and Phoebe. O exchange these
Love-babies with divine graces! This will incomparably become you, and make you
amiable in his sight, who made you. Suffer not your eyes to wander; but fix
upon that Center, where all Mortality must of necessity take harbor:
Obserantur aedes, quo interiores splendeant seeds.

Quae unius cellulae clausa angustiis, latitudine coeli fruebatur.

Her. de laud. Asellae; Epist. 15.


Obstruite quinque fenestras, ut luceat domus.


Saint Hierome gives this excellent testimony of that devout Woman, Asella;
who being confined to a Cell, enjoyed the whole circumference of Heaven. Though
I do not limit you to a Cell, I would have your thoughts confined to one Orb;
seeing they cannot be circumscribed by any limit but Heaven.

Thus far have I addressed my discourse to you, for composing your
affections, and contriving your fancy to your Choice, whose election admits no
Change: I am now to caution you, and that briefly of a dangerous Guest, which
like the Snake in the Fable, many times disturbs the quiet of a whole house:
And this is violent and distempered passion. The indiscreet fury of some Wives
have made Prodigals of frugall men: Yea, those who never knew what a loose or
debauched course meant; nor were much addicted to any liberty, became uncivil,
and irregular by their Wives fury. And howsoever I can by no means approve
this aversion from goodness in the Man, yet must I highly condemn the
impatience of the Woman, who abused so much the temper and good nature of the
Man.

Entertain you then no acquaintance with these sprightly Virag^'s, whose only
sweet temper is ever to be out of temper. Let not a frown sit on your brow,
nor a spark of fury dart from your eye; nor one syllable of harsh language
from your tongue. Soft words mitigate wrath; Observe this rule then, it will so
prepare you against all suffering; as you shall taste an incomparable
sweetness in your suffering; rejoicing most in that encounter, wherein you
seemed most to suffer. Give no place to wrath, but give place to your Husbands
in time of their wrath. The only way to allay passion, is to calm it with an
expostulation. This that bravely composed Roman Lady, made excellent use of;
who when she found her Husband quite off the hinges; affecting nothing more;
then to catch at offense; with a sweet countenance, and pleasing language, she
entered into a fair treaty with him after this manner. A discreet loving
Treaty, betwixt a Wife and her Husband: reco^mended to the constant practice of
affectionate Consorts.
O my dear Quintianus, whence may these distempers grow? you had a Iuliana, I
must confess, a Consort well deserving your choice; and because your now
espoused Chariclea supplies her place, does it repent you of your change? And
yet, me thinks, should you recollect your self, and in an equal scale weigh
your Chariclea's love, you would hold it an ungrateful guerdon, to requite her
loyal love with a distastefull look. Your first choice was fair,
incomparably fair, of a graceful presence, persuasive language! It is
confessed. Yet knew this Abstract of perfection, to break forth into passion.
But she knew her own worth, so as passion lodging in such a Subject, might
admit an easy dispensation; and make that Eagerness appear a Virtue in her;
whereas even Mildness, seated in so imperfect a Piece as my self, may present
it self like a Vice, being shrouded with so mean a Cover! Believe it Sir, as
Nature has bestowed little on me, to make me proud; relinquish me for ever, if
my respect to honor shall not supply those defects of a more exquisite
feature: your anger shall not beget in me the least distemper; but, if at any
time I be moved, it shall be, because you are discontented. Have you occasion
to rejoice? I shall increase it. Have you cause to grieve? I shall allay it.
Should you in any extremity suffer, I should desire nothing more then to become
your sharer. Many, very many might you have had, more rich in portion, more
choice in proportion, but never any more true in her affection. In one word; as
there is no office in Chariclea, which shall not bestow it self to Quintianus
honor, during life: so may it be Quintianus goodness to accept the loyal
sacrifice of her devoutest love.

This Conjugall protest wrought so impressive an effect in her too passionate
Husband; as, recollecting his dis-joynted affections, he became so truly
inamoured of his Choice, as the conceit of her imparallel'd virtues estranged
his resolves, not only from the least apprehension of a future Change: but
fairly attemper'd in him all Motives of choler; so as, it was rare to find in
him upon any occasion whatsoever, any appearance of distemper, much less of
any inconsiderate anger. There is no doubt but grounds of distaste may be
easily suggested; especially, where either Jealousy, arising from an
exuberance of fancy; or an intended desire to displease, works upon the
conceit of the party. But admit, Gentlewomen, your eyes and ears were so
strongly possessed of your injuried Bed, as you may visibly perceive a breach and
violation of that faith, which by a sacred vote, should in reason and religion
have admitted no blemish unto death: yet if you shall find a relenting
disposition in them, do not aggravate your wrongs by too bitter an expression
of them. The confession of a wrong should beget in you an indulgent smile; yea,
though a modest shame could not brook to make too open a discovery of what
looseness of folly had committed; yet, though never so covertly shrouded,
being with a resolved contrition closed, and not hypocritically clothed, it
deserves to be ingenuously remitted. This might be in him instanced, who
desirous by a line to discover the irregularity of his life, brought in a
livelesse Monument to witness unto the world the relenting guilt of a
sorrowful delinquent.

This Babe had proved one of our Wits, Primitias prolis teneas Botolphia seeds;

Ingenio pollens, palladis art potens; Prae s^ciis docilis, puerilibus Argus
in annis:

Ast Spurii stirpes obtinuere leves. Vid. Remains of a greater work. Aug.


no doubt,
But Bastard-slips do seldom take deep root:
Botolph, prepare for this small corpse a shrine;
The crime, believe it, was not his but mine.
But time would sooner fail me, then this subject scantle me; I must not
enlarge my self too much, lest I deceive your trust. One thing I am to advise
you of, which observed, may prevent many occasions of distaste, which are
usually ministered. As I formerly advertised your Husbands, not to intermedle in
those feminine employments, which concern your charge: so be it your modesty
to decline from those interesses, which properly admit their care. It is an
hateful thing, says that devout Father, to see a Man practice the Spindle,
and a Woman to handle the Spear. You have peculiar offices equally designed;
let them not be improperly mixed. That Roman was much condemned for imparting
secrets of state to his wife; but his wife was more publicly taxed for laying
down grounds how to rectify the state to her Husband. This is a presuming
evil, and too largely spreading, said that Cinick, to be cured, till
self-conceit, by a timely reproof, be rebaited. Humility is the way to
prevent it: for though Pride be a dangerous mate to accompany man: yet it is
never so domineering, as when it pleads for Sovereignty in a woman's mind.
Remember then that divine Mandat; it will be a means to calm it: Genesis 3.16.
Thy desire shall be subject to thine Husband, and he shall rule over thee.
Which subjection, as it implies a distinct condition, so it begets in every
family an harmonious order, or disposition: If there be danger in civil
Wars, Victi victoresque in lachrymas fusi.

Cadmaea victoria.


there can be no great security in Domestic Brauls: where both the Conqueror,
and Conquered, become equally endammaged. Do not contest then for precedence,
since the divine Law has given your Consort the priority. And in one word, to
the end you may appear more amiable in his sight who made you; and in his
choice, for whom he made you; retain in memory that divine Lesson, for it
prescribes you a perfect Rule of Direction, (...). Ambros. li. 1. de offic. ca.
18.
how to behave you selves in your whole course or conversation: In your very
motion, gesture, and gate, observe Modesty; it will infinitely become you, and
attract a kind of reverend esteem in those who eye you.

This will make your Husbands to second what a Noble Gentleman sometimes
pronounced in testimony of his good fortune, and approvement of his choice:
Who, as it was long before he married, so did much happiness crown his
expectance, after such time as he was espoused. I thank God (said he) that I
abandoned my conceit, and thus embraced an honorable state. As I was long time
in choosing, I shall be longer ere my thoughts incline to a changing. As
increase of Posterity put me upon the one, so shall my vowed fidelity divert me
from the other. Her condition, whom I have taken, does so suite me, as I
should make my self unworthy such a choice, should I engage my desires to any
foreign fancy. Vndeserving is he of a worthy one, who intangles his affections
with more then one.

This is the way then, Gentlewomen, to ingratiate your selves in their bosoms
with whom you live, and whom only you are entirely to love; to make a contract
betwixt your eyes and hearts, when at any time you go abroad, or are admitted
to any necessary visit: that your eyes may not become treacherous Tarpeia's to
your hearts. Nor suffer any intrusive thought to enter, that may incroach upon
your honor. For it is no less error to have a desire to be sought by others,
then to seek after others. To cast out deluding eyes, and, like subtle
Falconers, with light deceiving lures, to seize on amorous fools; which
howsoever it imparadise them, it cannot choose but highly disparage you. For
speaking eyes are such dangerous Orators, that though they allure others to
folly, they ever engage themselves most to apparent misery.

But your discreet moderation has taught you a better Lesson; your thoughts
are impatient, in giving reins to any such diversion. One Sun is but for one
Sphere; one Diadem for one Head; and one Conjugall Embrace for one Bed; this
best becomes you, this crowns you. This, as it confirms your loyal love,
while you are living: so will it leave a memory of your goodness at your
dying: Vxorem vivam amare voluptas est, defunctam religio.
For, as to love a Wife while she lives, is a pleasing fancy; so to retain the
memory of a Wife when she dies, is an act of Piety. Thus having sufficiently
treated of this Conjugall Office, which deserves pre-eminence, because
dignified by a primitive Ordinance: we purpose now to descend to our second
Observance, wherein we are briefly to recommend to your candid Judgments, the
distinct qualities of Parentall and Filial Offices.

Observe. 2.
Of Parentall Offices.
A Parentall care reflects properly upon two distinct Objects.
PArents, as they bear a natural love to those they get, so are they to have
an innate care in providing for those they have got. Which parentall care
properly reflects upon two Objects: Internal, External: Internal, the better
to enable and prepare them for the happy fruition of things eternal;
External, to accommodate them in a way of livelihood, lest they should become
indigent, or necessitous in things temporal: The former has proper relation
to nurture; Arist. in Eth.
the latter to such necessaries, as conduce to the conservation of nature. For
the first, it is an excellent Lesson, which the Wiseman gives: Prove. 22.6.
Teach a Child in the trade of his way, and when he is old, he will not depart
from it. We say, vessels keep a savor of their first liquor: As cloth dyed
in grain reteines his prime tincture. How cautious then should Parents be of
their Childrens nurture? If we should take a re-view of preceding Ages, we
might find with what diligence and intentive care, the very ancient Pagans
provided Schoolmasters for their Children; not only to instruct them in
Principles of learning, but discipline of living. Yea, even our most ancient
and eminent Princes, (so much was Sovereignty enamoured on Philosophy, men of
highest quality on moral Piety) retained ever some Philosophers to their
Familiars: Vid. Plutarch. Trog. Pomp. Macrob. in aturn Stobae. Appian. Alex.
Patere.
as Alexander, Aristotle; ^arius, Herodetus; Augustus, ^iso; Pompeius, Plauto;
Titus, Pl^ni^; Adrian, Secundus; Trajan, Plutarch; Anthonius, Apollonius;
Theodosius, Clandinus; S^v^rus, Fabatus. And there were not only employed in
their own conference: but in composing and delivering Precepts, or rules of
Instruction to their Children: you then, Parents, who retain in you better
grounded hopes, then airy thoughts of Elysian fields; you, I say, who treasure
great hopes in your Posterity, and with a provident eye labor to improve their
estates, by advancing them to places of dignity: Be it your primary care, to
enrich them inwardly; that they may know how to manage an estate, How a
Prodigals profu^enes^e abuses his parents providence.
before they come to be Masters of an estate: Many have lept into fair and
full fortunes, conferred on them by their Parents Providence; who, as they kn^w
little how their too careful Fathers got it; so with as much indifference they
dispatched themselves of it.

Education, which is a second nature, had given them no better nurture, then to
follow feathers in the air; their best of Philosophy was Hunting or Falconry.
And more excusable had it been, if they had to closed: But corruption of
manners stripped them of all their Manors: forty entertaining those Consorts of
death, loose Pandars, or light Parasites, they exhaulted those streaming
treasures, and exuberant fortunes, in one year, which many years ac^ompanied
with watchful ^ares, had to ^^lici^ously gathered. Nor is it indeed a thing
possible, that young Gentlemen, who are mounted to high e^^stes, attended by
numerous Reteiners; supplied with variety of pleasures; but indigent in these
mental treasures, should devote themselves without some miraculous
inspiration, to any studious employments Learning, With such transported
spirits as these, divine airs are accounted choice Canto's only for dull ears.

Our ignorant gentry estrangeth Philosophy from their society.

The reason why young Gentlemen are not in learning delighted is because they
are not in principles of learning sufficiently grounded

Vid. Petrarch.


as it was a stranger to them in their youthful minority; so the very thought
of it begets a fastidious averseness to their memory.

Books are for retired spirits; but soon tired would their spirits be, to be
so retired. Divine fancies, they hold I remiticall frenzies. Such Studies must
never make them lean: for they profess themselves Aliens to all Stories, but
Legends of Love. O what a word of disgrace in these Novices ears, is the title
of a Scholar? And to estrange themselves the better from such pedanticall
Consorts, they have resolved already, never to entertain any such for their
Follower or Ret^iner, that holds least correspondence with a Philosopher.

The reason is, as their Parents indulgence would not suffer them to l^arne
when they were young: so now they hold themselves too old to learn.

To prevent this malady (too Epidemicall in most places) be it your principal
care to prepare such Tutors for them, as may instruct them in the Principles of
divine and humane Learning: And by their incessant diligence, so enable them,
as they may taste a sweetness in those Sciences they have learned. For the
only reason of his neglect, or remissness in Arguments of Knowledge, is
their deficience in Knowledge. For did they but understand the sweetness of
Learning, they would prefer the incomparable delight of one hours study,
before a myriad of hours employed in vanity. That brave Picene had arrived, no
doubt, at this port; who, though his Descent was noble, his Revenues ample, and
his Objects of pleasure many; yet he ingenuously protested, that the least
grain of Philosophy, which either his Tutors industry, or his own sedulity
had purchased him, was of more weight in his scale, than all the revenues that
were left him. Truth is, as youth is most docile to learn, so it is many times
most facile to err. And because diverse and sundry are the dispositions, with
which our Masters are to encounter: so there is required in them; a free and
plenteous measure of discretion, to the end they may accommodate their
discipline to every ones disposition. The highest point of discretion in a
Schoolmaster, is to find out the disposition of his Scholar.
Some natures they shall find sweet and affable; others rough and intractable.
Some apt to get, and no less apt to forget; others flow to get, but apt to
retain. Some to be won by an apple; others to be taught by the rod. And in
these discoveries* I should with Parents rather to recommend the Scrutinie to
their Masters; then by too much indulgency to interesse themselves. He deserves
not to be a Master, whose discretion applies not it self to the disposition of
his Scholar. Neither is our discourse only restrained to Arguments of
Learning. I am not ignorant how children descending from one root, may differ
in the quality of their mind. Some are not capable at School, who may show
themselves sufficient for a trade. As you then shall find your children
disposed, be it your care to have them so bestowed: as neither your too much
indulgence may decline their improvement: nor your too remiss care beget in
them a neglect of their advancement. For youth, as it may become depraved by
too much cockring, so may it be nipped in the bud, and consequently too much
discouraged, by too rigid a curbing.

Be it then your prime care to lay a fair foundation: and to give them such
accomplishment by a generous Education, as their very posture may confirm them
branches of honor: Scorning to appear in that design, that may in the least
manner derogate from their place, or lay a blemish on their blood. If thou
be Cato's son, said that brave Roman, do nothing unworthy of Cato's
Father. This Pattern, but in a more divine imitation, should all children
retain in their memory: to prove unto the world, that they are true native
Scienes derived from such a Family: from whence, as they received their birth,
so they labor to improve it by presenting good examples upon this Theater of
earth.

O if inconsiderate youth did but know, what precious time it bestows in
trifling vanity; Inconsiderate youth accounts the fruitless expense of time a
mere pastime.
as in dedicating those first hours of the day, in crisping those wanton
love-lockes; in cerussing and repairing a decayed beauty, by idolatrizing
themselves in the reflection of a flattering Glass; by composing an adulterate
countenance, purposely to induce fancy; and, like wanton Dalilah, to rob
deluded man of his strength by their lascivious folly! Again, how it bestows
the afternoon in needless visits, Immodest Objects, light presentiments; but
scarcely reserves one minute, after so many mis-spended hours, for works of
devotion! O, I say, would youth but lay these to his heart, and cloze the
period of his thoughts with this short expostulation: O what have I done! He
would return no doubt with the poor penitent Prodigal, and acknowledge his
sin; He would feed no longer on the husks of vanity; nor go astray, any
more in those bypath of folly. He would return, I say, with the Turtle,
truly mourning; bestow the remainder of his days in repenting: and desire no
longer to live after he desisted from that pious resolution, which had so
wholly possessed him, as it had left no hope for vanity to seize on him. Now to
perfect this good work, let it be the especial care of Parents, to educate
their children religiously, to season their infancy with Principles of Piety.
For there is nothing that makes elther youth or age more wavering in points of
Religion (next temporary respects, which too often times cool divine effects)
then ignorance in the grounds of Religion. Now, as it is the office of Parents
to plant them in it: so is it their duty to suffer no temporal respect to
decline them from it. It was that learned Fathers resolution; (...) sen^x
ten^io ^idem, in qu^ (...) s^m Hier. ad Pammach. and Ocean de e^ror. Orig.
I will hold that faith now when I am old, which I was nursed in when I was
young.

There is more beauty in our Christian truth, then ever appeared in Helen of
Greece. This moved that victorious Emperor Constantine the Great, to protest,
what his princely constancy had ever expressed, that he preferred his happiness
in being a Member of Christ's Church, before his being the Head of an Empire.
Seeing that the privileges of faith are of larger extent, then the Confines of
an Empire; and of that inestimable price, as no treasure is to be compared to
her: it becomes every sincere Professor, to desire rather to suffer, ^.
then so incomparable a Princess should suffer in her honor: nay, rather to
perish by speaking, then that Truth should perish for want of a Speaker.

Having thus laid down the foundation, whereon the first hopes of Youth are to
be grounded; with such eminent graces, wherewith it is to be seasoned: and such
consequent Principles of Religion, wherein necessarily it is to be confirmed:
We are now to descend to our secondary Parentall care; which as it is not to
precede the former, so is it not to be neglected in a proportionable measure
and order. The soul indeed, as it is of a more precious substance then the
body, so ought their cares to be of a distinct quality. This the Poet intimated
elegantly: Less is the loss of Fortune then of Fame, Levius es^ dispendium
sert^^ae quam famae, famae quam anim^. Chrysol. L^^^^t.

More of a Soul then of a glorious Name.


Diverse then, and of distinct nature be these different cares: wherein Parents
are to be so much the more cautious, in regard their too anxious and immoderate
cares, may become highly noxious. O how many by doing too much for their
Children, have undone their Children! Be it then your especial aim, in these
temporal cares, to improve your means by honest ways. A Revenue got with
honesty, is a thriving portion to Posterity: whereas, Estates built on rapine,
or the ruin of others, what shallow foundations have such Fabrics, being many
times no sooner raised, then razed! These illegitimate Patrimonies, as that
grave Moral styled them, seldom survive an age: for the macerating cares of
an exacting Father, treasure their hopes most commonly on a prodigal
Successor. Howsoever then, that Apostolical admonition is ever to be
remembered; and by a discreet Providence to be seconded: If there be any that
provideth not for his own, 1 Timothy 5.8.
and namely for them of his Household, be denies the faith, and is worse then
an Iufidell: yet let a religious fear ever accompany this care. Gods honor
must be in the first place; or there can be no peace in any place. Now to
advance his honor, and obtain favor in the presence of our best Master, let
not the provision for a Family, nor improvement of a Posterity make you remiss
in your care of eternity. Be owners of your own; seek not to reap, what you
have not sown. Scorn to be Intruders in another right; or, in the confidence
of your power, to crush your inferior; or to grind the face of the poor, by
working on his necessity who flies to you for succor; or by removing buttals,
to enlarge your boundiers; or by any means, to surprise others, to inhance
your injurious Co^ers. The Partridge (says Ambrose) makes her a nest of stolen
eggs, which she has not laid, but as soon as the birds are hatched, the true
Mother calls them all away from their thievish Step-dame: This may be the proper
Emblem of the covetous and cruel man, Incubat auro. Such incroaching Brooders
be all unconscionable Misers, who sit hatching those golden eggs (to use the
words of the Apologue) which they never lay, Talis substantia non est stabilis;
aut ipsis invenientibus est peritura, aut a malis haeredibus es^ dissipanda.
Chrysostom. in Matthew.
but, to their grief, must be stripped by the true owners, of what they so
immoderately love. For the Oppressors wealth is like Achans Wedge: Turnus Belt:
Dagons house broke Dagons neck; and all usurping Possessors are to expect the
like fate.

Gnipho the Usurer (as Lucian feigneth) lies in Hell lamenting his miserable
estate, that one Rodochares; an incestuous Prodigal did on earth consume his
goods wastfully in the su^feits of pleasure, which he with care, and unjust
means had scraped together. The way to decline these laments, and prevent
those infernal tears; is with discretion to moderate your cares and fears.
Let not an unjust nor injurious thought seize on you* nor a desire to improve
your selves by another ruin surprise you; Let not a Widows tear, nor an
Orphans shreeke bear record against you* These have shrill voices, and will
find an Avenger: One who has a Bottle to preserve the tears of the one, as a
precious Elixir; and an Ear to compassionate the cries of the other, like an
indulgent Father: The way then in these temporal cares, to make you happy
Parents, is with that indifferency to value gold, as to make Godliness your
chiefest gaint: To prefer the approvement of equity, before the improvement
of a posterity; To rejoice more in honest poverty, than in those swelling
titles of iniquity. For believe it, that little Commonweal of man cannot
choose, but enjoy much quietness, where Conscience becomes Soveraignesse, and
receives Pre-eminence.

Now, there is one error that I have observed in Parents, which were well to
be rectified: it is too generally spreading, and consequently exacts the more
expedite prevention. It shall be our care to prescribe a cure: which if it
admit a cure, it shall amply recompense our care.

Many, too many make it their prime aim, their principal care in preferring
their Children, to fix upon Inheritance, or Portion. Their sons must marry
with C^^cires, and so join land to land. A survey of their estates with whom
they intend to match, must precede all inducements of love. Grounds of fancy
must be ranked in the second siege. Proportion is to veil to Portion. Real
affection to a rich Possession. It was only hope of Promotion, that preferred
this loves motion. Were those inward Ornaments of this great Inheretrix never
so meanly accoutred, being thus encountered, and with such rare fortunes
embellished, they must be above their estimate valued: there is not so much as
the least question made of the young Gentleman's love. The Parents choice must
admit no change. Mean time, what miseries have attended such enforced
Marriages, every age can afford variety of doleful Instances: Where an union
of hands begot a disunion of hearts. The reason might be this; indirect
affections seldom receive a blessing. They invert the use of marriage, who
make Portion Directrice of Affection: Fancy subordinate to Fortune. Love is not
to be made such a Page of: Be it then your office to examine the affection of
your Child, before you engage their persons to an enforced choice. Though a
good fortune be not to be rejected, yet is a good liking betwixt the parties to
be preferred. In a word, let virtue be the aim: and the Marriage-day cannot
choose but cloze with a glorious Even.

In bestowing likewise your younger Children upon Trades, you are to be very
circumspect in the choice of their Masters, with the quality of their
professions. Ingenuous natures suite not well with rigid Masters. Neither are
tender, Vide Plut. vid. Var. Macrob. in Sa^^^.
or delicate constitutions for toyling ^or sinnewy professions. This was
especially observed by the ancient Romans, which made them exquisite Artists in
those manual mysteries.

We have here in this our flourishing Island many Staple Trades; wherein, as it
is no derogation for our Gentry to interesse their younger Children; so by Gods
blessing, and their good endeavor, they become many times so well improved, as
they need not obsequiously ingratiate themselves to any inferior favor, nor
rely on a pentionary supply, or any necessitated succor, being able by a
civil remonstrance to render courtesy for courtesy to their elder Brother.

Neither can I approve the Indulgence of such Parents, whose too tender
affection toward their Children, declines them from all hopes or helps of
preferment in this kind. Birds we see, after such time as they have brought
forth their young ones, will not for ever foster them under their wings. They
must be sent abroad to provide themselves food to releeve them, to build them
nests to receive them, and fitting mates to consort them. And must these be
wiser in their generation, than those nobler Creatures, who partake of Reason?
These observe the means by which they are directed to conserving ends.

Now, would you have these means defined; they are properly styled, the way by
which we are directed, to that scope or mark, at which we aimed. As you are
then by nature their parents, be it your care to raise them means of
supportance. Media vi^ pe^ere? via dirigitur, qua ad^^ctam ^endi^ur.

Fodere nondum didicerunt, and mendicare crabuerunt* fures igitur non cai^s
vident qu^m cum iis currunt, and (...) adulteris portione ponunt.

Ista ne generosa cers^amus vitia, quae antiquae (...) detraxerunt auspicia?
Pandect.


As they had from you their being, let them receive from you grounds of
subsistence. Let not your delicacy estrange their spirits from Industry; lest
by too much hugging them, with the Ape in the Fable, you stifle them. Send them
then forth into the world, that as you have educated them, so you may reap the
fruit of your provisionall care, by their improvement. For, trust me, highly
are such parents to be condemned, who leave their estates so perplexed, as they
recommend the livelihood of the Younger, to the remiss consideration, or
doubtful commiseration of the Elder. For these, many times, entertain such
profuse Followers, as their vast and unbounded riot begets a neglect in them,
toward such as were recommended to them, by making Servants of their Brothers,
and Brothers of their Parasites. Besides, the charge of Annuities, as they
exhaust the estate of the Elder, making him live all his time like an ancient
descendible Beggar; so it begets an irregular course in the Younger: who,
either falling short in receipt of his annual allowance, or exceeding his
bounds, ingageth his perishing hopes to some desperate action, which in the end
spins to a full length, the thread of his ruin. So many fearful examples,
both ancient and modern, present themselves daily upon the Stage of our State,
as they need no further illustration in this kind. That Maxim holds ever
authentic: Brethren are ever kindest one to another, when they are least
beholding one to another. Assign then to every one their peculiar portion,
which will become such a firm Cement or ligament to their affection; as their
mutual supplies may produce reciprocal ties: by which harmonious freedom, or
propriety of living; one may enjoy the others society, without the least
conceit of a too tedious beholding.

In the disposing too of your estates, let me advise you not to neglect
opportunity of doing good to your own, now while it is in your power to
dispose of your own. Many by deferring the settling of their estates to their
death, become abridged of their intents, by being prevented with the inopinate
arrest of death: and so leave their distracted estates to be determined by
Lawyers, who being sed with fat fees, make fools of your intended heirs:
leaving them after many an humbly complaining to bemoane their lean fortunes,
when they fall into consideration how their extracted estates, by those
numerous Suite atoms, are resolved into papers: And how their long practice in
a litigious kind of Alchimy, by a precious pragmaticall powder, has reduced all
their Chymicall fortunes into the Remains of a greater Work, the Elixir of
poverty.

Parents are to dispose of their estates now while they stand seized of
estates: lest their decease alter the intention of their estates.
Sickness is a sufficient burden of it self: disburden then your selves, by
disposing of your estates before sickness comes: not by dis-possessing your
selves of them, for so you may give others power over you; but by a discre^t
and deliberate disposure of them, that temporal cares may less entangle you,
when sickness shall surprise you: and your inward house be set in such order,
as your composed Souls may receive rest to your comfort, and Gods honor.

Thus far have we enlarged our discourse, in laying before you the care
which you are to have in spiritual affairs, for improving your Children in
that best knowledge, which may truly enable them for their highest inheritance:
as likewise how you are in a conscionable provision to address your inferior
care for their temporal subsistence. In which two respects, as you shall
perform the office of prudent and affectionate Parents: so shall those rich
treasures, which you Deposit in succeeding hopes of your Children, crown your
silver hairs with incomparable comfort: For as this religious care was
sincerely discharged by you: so shall you receive those filial Offices from
yours, as may amply recompense your care; and, as you shall now hear, return
to their Labourer a deserving hire.

The offices of Children to their Parents.
YOu have heard what is required of Parents to their Children; their incessant
cares; jealous fears; and these intermixed with such doubtful hopes, as not
one hour without a corroding care; nor a promising hope without a threatening
fear. It was observed in Augustus, that so long as his two daughters Iulia and
Livia were in his presence, he could never return any expression to his
Council with much resolvednesse. His mind was not fixed upon an Answer, but
upon his daughters behavior. Where he collected by the company they frequented
how their affections were inclined. If Iulia converse with a Ruffian, it
becomes no less a sting to her fathers heart, then a stain to his daughters
reputation. Whereas if Livia enter into discourse with any grave Senator; this
pleasing object redounds equally to his solace, as well as her honor.

Now to recompense these numerous cares and anxious fears, which become
constant companions to Parents hearts, let Children return a grateful
remonstrance of their duty and zeal in these three distinct respects.

First, Children are bound to render unto their parents expressions of their
duty and zeal in 3 respects. OBEDIENCE. Ecclus. 7.27.28.
in tendering them the sacrifice of Obedience; Secondly, in performing that
filial office with all reverence. Thirdly, in affording them, if necessity
should thereto enforce them, their best supportance. Of these we shall take
occasion to treat severally, and with that perspicuity, as the very youngest
and rawest in these offices, may understand his peculiar duty.

It was an excellent admonition of that son of Sirach; Honor thy Father from
thy whole heart, and forget not the sorrows of thy Mother. Which admonition in
the next ensuing Verse he strengthens with this Emphaticall remembrance:
Remember that thou wast borne of them, and how can thou recompense them the
things that they have done for thee. This confirms that Maxim of the
Stagyrite: Magistris, di^s and Parentibus non (...) reddi equivalens. Arist.
Eth 9.
To our Masters, our Gods and Parents can never be rendered an equivalence. And
if that divine rule hold, that the obedience we exhibit to our Superiors, we
even exhibit to God himself, who is the Lord paramount, and in whose presence
the highest Potentates are inferiors; what superiority in a degree of such
propinquity exacts of us a more filial duty? whence it was, that blessed
Basil falling into a serious contemplation of this tender native affection,
Parents nostros vt propria viscera d^ligamus. Basil.

M^retur caecitatis suae subire supplicium, qui parentum vultus torvo visu
respexit, and elatis oculis laeserit pietar^^. Greg.


affirms; That we are bound to love our Parents as our own proper bowels.
So as he well deserves, says Saint Gregory, to be punished with blindness,
which looks upon his Parents with a louring countenance, or with proud eyes
offends the Piety of his natural Parents.

Can thou look (said that excellent Moral) upon those who brought thee
forth into the world with a contemptuous eye, as if they were not worthy to
live in the world? Must those who bred thee, breed a distaste in thee? Art thou
by being a man of place, ashamed of thy birth, which gave thee a being upon
Earth? Must thine honor so degenerate from nature, as nature must veil to
honor; and make the affluence of a fading state to soveraignize over her? Are
these arguments of Obedience, when creditors become debtors, and Parents
servants to their Children.

As every family is a private Sovereignty; so ought there to be a disposition,
Sicut membra capiti, liberi et servi patri familiae. Elench.
order, or apt symmetry in every member of that family. The Members are
Ministers unto the Head: so are Children and Servants to the Master of the
House. Should the least Member surcease to minister, the Head could not choose
but infinitely suffer. Now, how unnatural be those Tendrells, how adulterate
those Scienes, which decline from that Stem which gave them growth; from that
parentall Stock, which rendered them their first birth?

The Philosopher, indeed, gives a reason why Parents love their Children more,
Parents pius diligunt fa^es quam e converso, eo quod magis sciunt parents
quam filij, quod ab iis sunt geniti. Arist. Eth. 8.
then Children their Parents: and why they know more then those Children that
derive their being from them: because, says he; as water is the purest which
flows from the Fountain Head the nearest; so that love which descends from
the Original root is ever the dearest: and for as much as true love is ever
grounded upon knowledge, for otherwise it merits rather the title of folly then
fancy; in regard Parents know us better to be theirs, then we our selves know
us to be theirs: so much more as their knowledge is surer, so much is their
parentall affection purer. Rarius ascendit, descendit gratius (...), Quae
patres paeris non retulere suis. Salv.
Whence the Poet delivers this for a known experiment.

Nature does often descend, but seldom mount,
Parents areeres fall short in their account.
But if Children would consider how they have received their native being from
them: again, those incessant cares which attend them: with those promising
hopes which they have treasured in them, they would hold it one of the highest
taskes, and noblest Acts of piety, to be employed in those offices of filial
duty; and to perform them with all alacrity. Besides, do Children desire a
blessing? The Honor which they render unto their Parents is confir^ed with a
promise. Nor is any Commandment ratified with a stronger Assumpsit. Length of
days is promised, which implies an abridgement of time to such as neglect it.
Nay, that I may press this Argument a little further, by recounting those
benefits which arise from parentall honor: we shall generally observe, how
that dis-regard to obedience, which Children show toward their Parents, ^s
fully requited by the Disobedience of their Children, when they come to be
Parents.

Illud expectandum est a nobis, quod praestitimus nostris. Panorm.
For what more may you expect from yours, then what you tendered unto yours? You
may collect hence what singular blessings are from Obedience derived: Again,
what discomforts even to Posterity are from disobedience occasioned. The one
proposes a long life; the other implies a short life. The one conferrs a
comfort on us in our posterity; the other a myriad of afflictions in our
progeny. Nor can that Child be of ^a ingenuous nature, who with a free and
uncoacted embrace addresseth not his best endeavors to advance this Honor.
Let him but respect upon his parents tenderness, and he cannot choose but
highly tax himself of unthankefulnesse; should he suffer the neglect of one
hour in returning the obedientiall sacrifice of a Child to his Father. Neither
is any time to be exempted from so pious a task. For as their tender and
vigilant eye has been from infancy to years of more maturity ever intentively
fixed, that their hopes might be improved, and their comforts ^n that
improvement numerously augmented; so ought it to be the delightful'st study to
their posterity, to crown their Parents white hairs with comfort; and in
imitation of that ve^tuous Corinthian, to recollect themselves, by considering
what might give their Parents most content: Quicquid parenti placuisse vivo
senserit, eo etiam mortuo praestare non desi^it. Pater^.

O quam parva fuis tenero placuere parenti. Parvula in nostris misuere noble.


and with all cheerfulness to perform that for them, even after their death,
which they conceived could not choose but content them in their life.

Alas, so indulgent are most Parents, and so easily contented, as the very
least offices of duty performed by their Children, transport them above
comparison.

When Children in Obedience play their part,
They drop young blood into an aged heart.
Nay, I may truly affirm of this precious plant of filial Obedience, what our
ancient Poets sometimes wrote of that Aesonian herb, or what the ever living
Homer reported of his Moli; that it has power to restore nature, and beget an
amiable complexion in the Professor. Hom. in Iliad.
For a good life attracts to the countenance (says the Ethick) expressive
Characters of love.

Now should you more curiously then necessarily enquire after the extent of
this Obedience; Vita spectabilis, vultus amabilis, Vita enormis, forma deformis.
as, wherein it is to be exercised, and to what bounds confined: take this for
a positive Rule; that in whatsoever shall not be repugnant to the express will
of God, there is required this Observance: yea, even in matters of
indifference, it is far safer to oppose your own wills, then distaste your
Parents. It was an excellent saying of Saint Gregory; Greg.
He that would not offend in things unlawful, must often abridge himself in
things lawful. The way to infuse more native heat in this Obedience, is to
show an alacrity of obeying, even in Subjects of indifference; for a
remissness in these cannot but argue a probable coolness in those of higher
consequence. And, as the command of a discreet Father will injoyne his Child
nothing but what may comply equally with piety and reason: so will a dutiful
Child submit himself to his Fathers command, without the least unbeseeming
debate or expostulation.

Thus from these Premises may we draw this infallible Conclusion: The fruits
of obedience* as they have relation, both to Children and Parents.
Would you enjoy length of days, glad hours, or a succeeding comfort in
yours? Answer their aged hopes who have treasured their provisionall cares for
you; bring not their silver hairs with sorrow to their Grave: but return them
such arguments of proficience in every promising Grace; that your sincere and
unfeigned Obedience, may not be only a surviving comfort to your Parents, but a
continual Feast to your own Conscience.

Neither are you to perform these offices of Obedience, REVERENCE.
with a regardlesse affection, or without due Reverence. For, as God would have
those who are Laborers in his Vineyard, to do their work with
cheerfulness: so is it his will that natural Children return all offices of
duty, and filial Obedience with humility and reverence. Prove. 16.31.
Age is a crown of glory, when it is found in the way of righteousness. And
this closes well with that saying of the Preacher: The crown of old men, is
to have much experience, Ecclus 25.6.
and the fear of God is their glory. But admit they were such, whom native
Obedience injoynes you to reverence: as the nearer to their Grave, the further
from knowledge: the nearer to earth, the more glued to earth: yet for all this,
in lawful things are you not to alien your thoughts of obedience from them:
but as you derived your being from them, so with a sensible compassion of their
infirmities, with the veil of piety to cover their nakedness. It is true
indeed what that sententious Moral sometimes observed: Quare nihil turpiu^
est, quam grandis natu senex, qui nullum aliud argumentum, quo se probet diu
vixisse quam aetatem.

Sen. de Tranq. an.


There is no sight more unseemely then an old man, who having lived long,
reteines no other argument of his age then his years. This moved Curious
Dentatus to conclude so positively, Malle esse se quam vivere mortuum. Ib.
that he had rather be dead, then live as one dead. Neither indeed is age to
be measured by years but hours. Many are old in years, who are young in
hours: Many old in hours, who are young in years. For time is of such
unvaluable estimate, that if it be not employed to improvement, it becomes a
detriment to the Accomptant. No object more distastefull (said that divine
Moral) then an Nihil seen elementario turpius. Sen. Nihil dialectico seen
deformius. Petrarch.
Elementary Old Man: No subject of discourse more hateful (said witty
Petrarch) then a d dialecticall Old Man. A logical age, howsoever it appear
copious in words; it seldom becomes plenteous in works. Free discoursers in
Philosophy, are often the slowest proficients in the practick part of Philosophy.
Whereas, it is better to be a Truant at School, then in the practice of life.
For, as it is better to know little; and practice much; then to know much, and
practice little: So it is a more useful knowledge, to learn the art of
living, then of learning. For many with their learning have gone into Hell:
whereas none, were they never so simple, but by living well have gained Heaven.
It is an excellent Caution indeed, Ecclus 25.3.
and well deserving our deep Impression: If thou have gathered nothing in thy
youth, what can thou find in thine age? Put sufficient it is not to gather,
but to make use of that experimental treasure. Medicines deposited afford
small benefit to the Patient: nor are Talents to be buried: nor our Lights
under a bushel shrouded. Knowledge cannot be usefully active, unless it be
communicative. Howsoever, then, Age in respect of her ancient livery with those
aged Emblemes of her antiquity exact reverence: yet deserves it most honor
when those gray hairs are beautified with knowledge. Ecclus 25.4, 5.
Oh, how pleasant a thing is it, when gray headed men minister judgment, and
when the Elders can give good counsel! Oh, how comely a thing is wisdom unto
aged men, and understanding an^ prudency to men of honor! This no doubt, as it
begets them esteem amongst their Equals: so it highly improves their reverence
with Inferiors. For, foolish age, though it should be exempted from derision;
yet such is the levity of time, and piercing eye of youthful observation, as
age becomes censured by youth; whereas youth ought rather to interpret the
best, then detract in the least from the reverence of age.

Omne peccatum incurabilius est in seen, quam in juvene. Holgot. sup. li. Sap.
It is too true, that every obliquity, be it either of higher or lower quality,
is more incurable in age, then youth. The reason is, Age becomes more
insensible of what it has committed, and grows more indurate through an
accustomed habit: whereas, though an unconfined heat of youth drive the other
into folly: an ability of conceit brings them to an apprehension of what they
have done: and consequently to a recollection of themselves, to reform what
they have mis-done.

Now, the way how to improve this reverence in Parents to their Children, and
Magistrates to their Inferiors; is to express such patterns of piety in the
whole course of their life, as the very shadows reflecting from such Mirrors
may produce an awful reverence, zeal, and love in their Observers: with a
zealous desire of imitation in their Successors. This, no doubt, begot a pious
emulation in our Predecessors toward those, whose actions being of ancient
record, induced them to trace those steps wherein they had walked: and with
much constancy to profess those virtues, which they had found in them so
highly approved. Others lives became their lines; lines to direct them by their
Copy: lights to conduct them to an higher pitch of true Nobility.

Quanto senes sunt morti viciniores: tanto debent esse puriores. In decret.
did. 86.
It is a Rule worthy inscription on the ancient Wardrobe of Age: Old men, by how
much they are unto death nearer, by so much more ought they to be purer. This
will attract unto them duty in their life; and eternity after death.

Now, Gentlemen, that you may better observe this Reverence, addressed to those
to whom you owe all Obedience: be it far from you to debate or dispute their
commands: It suites not well with the duty of a Child to expostulate with a
Father; especially, in moral respects: where the quality or nature of the
command discovers no Opposition to the Law divine. Be never in their presence
without a pious fear, and awful reverence. Interrupt them not in their
discourse: neither prefer your own opinion before their advise. It tastes of
an ill condition to stand upon conditions with a Father, upon proposals of
means or exhibitions. But much more distastefull to contest in terms; as if
the memory of nature were lost in you, and all acquaintance with piety
estranged from you. This it was which moved that dis-passionate Theban, to take
up his unseasoned Son in this manner: putting him in mind of his neglect,
even of civil duty; which the better to remember, he lays before him his
uncivile demeanor in this severe Character.

An Alehouse seems by your Apology an excellent Receipt for a Malcontent.
I am sorry you have lost the Principles of more divine Philosophy. You might
recall to mind those Attick Studies, wherein you were sometimes versed; those
Academick Colleagues, with whom you discoursed: A Memorial of these might have
better qualified this humor; by reducing your troubled affections to a clearer
temper. But my hopes now are to be resolved into prayers: for as yet there can
appear small hope, where your Morning Sacrifice is offered to Smoke: Tune
Aurorae filius, nepenthiacis Salamancae fumis, primas Aurorae horas offeres?
a sweet perfume for an intended Convert!

You seem to press your Father to a performance of promise; God bless you! I
see plainly your pen must necessarily make that Maxim good: -- Where there is
a want in the practice of piety, it must needs beget a neglect of Duty, nay of
Civility. I could wish that you would be as ready to reform: the errors of
your life, as I to perform the Offices of a fatherly love: So speedily does
love descend, so slowly does it ascend.

To conclude all in one, -- I must tell you, to condition with a Father, argues
no good condition in a Son. But let the wisest Consort you consult with
advise you, E tabernis vestri proruant Rhetores.
and with their Tap-Rhetorick surprise you; you shall find that I have power to
proportion means to every ones merit. From which resolution, neither shall
affection draw me, nor power overawe me: So as, if you expect from me a
Patrimony, exercise Piety.

Be what you seem^, or prove the same you vow,
We have dissembling practisers enough.
Thus have you heard the course of a profuse Son, with the resolution of a
dis-consolate Father. Collect hence what discontents accompany the one: what
distractions conscionably may attend the other Children reflect constant cares,
but uncertain comforts. Cares are proper attributes to Parents: Comforts,
those fruits, after a long Seed-plot of cares, the sole Harvest they reap. It
is true, Parents are to dispense with discomforts in their Children; and
receive them as familiar Guests to lodge with them: But what heavy fates attend
such Children, as exemplarily present this condition! Welcome Guests you cannot
be to your father in heaven, who make your inferior cares such unwelcome
Guests to him on earth.

I have found in some Children a serious inquisition after their Fathers
years: so as, if they could possibly have contracted with the Register, to
enlarge his aged Character, he could not want an ample Fee for so grateful a
labor. Such as these would ride in their Fathers saddle before their time. But
trust me, few of these Lap-wing hopes or loose-pinion'd desires, but they cloze
in a fatal Catastrophe: and as their ill-grounded hopes were scean'd in
prodigality, so they end tragically in an Act of misery.

Let it be your honor to reverence their gray hairs, and with wishes of pious
zeal to rejoice in their length of days: For this it is will bring an
happiness to your age; and beget a reverend obedience in yours, as you in all
piety offered like Sacrifice unto yours. For take this for a constant position;
A constant position observable in disobedient Children.
You shall seldom see any Prodigals falling short of these inherent Offices of
duty, but if they live to have a progeny, they receive the like discomforts
from their posterity. Nay, I have known very few such Vnnaturalists, who
desired their Fathers death, in hope to enjoy his Land; that ever enjoyed much
comfort in possession of that Land: For as these murder their Parents in their
hearts, so they are many times stifled in the fruition of their hopes: Tasting
more aloes of discontent in their enjoying: then ever they did sweetness in
their expecting.

Prove. 17.25.
Consider then the excellency of that divine Proverb: A foolish Son is a grief
unto his Father, and a heaviness to her that bare him. Now, less then foolish
you cannot be, so long as dis-obedience hales you to ruin: For your folly
becomes an abridger of your days: or an ingager of your years to many
dis-consolate cares: Inverting that by making it a cursing, which by preserving
it in his own purity, might have been an incomparable blessing. Remember then
that golden sentence, and let it retain a fair Character in the signature of
your conscience: Childrens children are the crown of the Elders: Prove. 17.6.
and the glory of the Children are their Fathers.

As you are their Crown, so let them be your glory. Let every day wherein you
live, produce a testimony of your unfeigned duty, your entire love. This shall
be a means to accumulate Gods blessings on you: and leave patterns of piety,
to such as shall succeed you, with a Sacrifice of like Obedience to please you,
and in the memory of their virtues deservingly to praise you.

Thus by performing the religious task of sincere Obedience, you cannot choose
but seasonably afford them your Supportance, to whom you tendered such entire
Reverence.

SVPPORTANCE.
Should Children forget their duty to those that bred them; or neglect all such
pious offices as properly become them. Should those native impressions be
wholly razed in them, which, as shadows to their bodies, should individually
attend them. Should humanity lose his name, or piety relinquish her nature: yet
might these, even by fixing on sensible creatures, find such moving objects, as
the very parentall affection which these inferior Emblemes bear to those that
gave them being, could not choose but strike in them a glowing shame, and
present to their weak memory, the neglect of their necessitated duty.

It is said of the Cranes, that when their Parents have moulted their feathers,
Plin. in Not. Hist. Aelian. Sambuc. in Emblem. Paradin.
their young ones seek about for all such necessaries as may relieve them,
till such time as their aged Parents recover their feathers; or by death leave
them. Likewise to show how we ought to succor and support our Parents when
they grow aged, may be instanced in the tender affection of the Storke: whereof
we read, that when the Storkes grow old, their affectionate brood take up
their Parents upon their own wings, and set them in their nests, and like
tender Infants place them in their own bosom; where they nurse and nusle
them, affording them all supportance that may any way accommodate them. Soli
vultures parents fame mori permittunt. Ib.
Nay, of all the birds in the air, the Vultur only suffers his Parents to
perish with hunger; which discovers his ravenous and odious nature.

It is most true what an ancient Father sometimes observed: should we bestow
on them whatsoever we could possibly confer on them, yet could we not do
that which they have done for us, Quam vis plurima (...) reddidima, rursus
tamen eos generare non possumus. Ci^il.
beget them. How tender then should we be of their supporting, from whom we
receive the source of our being.

It is written of the Tiger, though a beast of a savage and truculent nature,
that when they take away the young one, they set looking Glasses, or some
transparent models in the way to stay the pursuit of the she Tiger; wherein
seeing her self represented by reflection of the Glass, she there solaceth her
self with the conceit of her own form, while the Hunters make way for
escape. Whence we may take a view of the tender affection of the savagest
Creature to her Cubs in an imaginary reflection on their feature. These
unfeignedly love those who came from them; and no doubt by a secret instinct of
nature, are equally requited by a thankful remonstrance returned to them:
Admoverunt labiis Tigrides ubera, and lacte sugunt Nutricis ilia.
and shall the Parthian Tiger retain more impressive Characters of a tender
nature, then the most noble and rational Creature? You heard before, how when
the old Storke through age becomes naked of feathers; destitute of all
personal supply or succor: when her life becomes tedious unto her, through
those infirmities of age which attend her; yet she receives comfort from
those, who derived their being from her: Basil. Homil. 8. and 9.
She is fed by her brood, and carried by them from place to place upon their
wings.

So was aged Anchises carried by his pious Aeneas: and so should all Children
do to their distressed Parents. Valor. Max.
Valerius relates an excellent example, wherein he shows how we ought by so
imitable a pattern to succor and support our Parents when they are in
necessity; which he commends unto us in this admirable story: There was
sometimes a certain noble Woman of high descent and parentage, who being
adjudged to dye for some foul offense, yet in respect of her Family the Judge
decreed she should not dye publicly; but be shut up in prison, and so dye for
hunger. But her tenderhearted Daughter being then married, having got leave of
the Judge that she might daily visit her Mother, a dis-consolate prisoner, but
before she were admitted to her, to be carefully searched that she brought no
relief unto her: So as, being in that manner prevented to afford her such
comfort or repast as she desired (behold how wittily natural affection became
provided) she pulled forth her own breasts, and with her milk nourished her
Mother. And when the Judge wondered how she could so long subsist, being
deprived of all means of relief; having at last heard what her Daughter had
done unto her Mother, being moved with compassion, and the unexemplary piety of
her affection, he restored the Mother to her Daughter.

Now shall Pagans express better the piety of Christians, then Christians the
humanity of Pagans? Shall a beameling show more splendour, then the Son it
self, whose reflection affords that luster? A glimmering at the best had but
these Ethnicks, and that only darting from the light of nature: whereas we
enjoy the Sun in his Meridian glory; being adorned with an inward beauty:
expecting no Elysia^ f^^lds, but those essential joys of Eternity. As our
hopes are higher; our expectance surer, our grounded assurance firmer: let our
affections appear purer; our actions in the practice of piety clearer.

It was an excellent commendation which that Monument bore in her front to the
memory of that virtuous Matron, Constantia, the Lady Lucie: A true performer of
all duties to Husband, Parents, Children, Friends. In the first, expressing
conjugall constancy; in the second, filial piety; in the third, natural
propinquity; in the fourth, reciprocal courtesy. Now, of these, some have
maintained that no office was more obliging, then that of a Child to his
Parent, confirming their affection with this reason: In the loss of a Wife,
The gradual respects of love and duty.
one may redeem that loss with the marrying of another: In the loss of a
Child, one may repair that loss in the generation of another: And in the
loss of a Friend, one may recover that loss by the purchase of another: But
should we forgo a Father or a Mother, we cannot possibly restore that loss
with the supply of another.

Howsoever I stand doubtful of the authentic validity of this opinion: seeing
we are expressly enjoined to leave Father and Mother for our Wife: which
parentall dereliction implies, that Man is to adhere to his Wife in the nearest
tie of affection; no doubt but we are by the Law of Nature, nay by the
definite command of our Maker, rather to surcease from living, then from
supporting those from whom we received our being. Our breeding was their care;
let our care bestow it self on their succor. Let not a wish proceed from our
heart to accelerate their end: Though a wish extend not to an act, yet it
breaths too much inhumanity to work upon so native a part. Man should be of a
more noble and malleable a temper, then to partake of the nature of a Viper.

Donec ab Insulae finibus removeantur, languentem agentes vitam, emori non
poterint.
It is reported, that toward the North-west part of Ireland, there is an Island
so temperate, or by some miraculous influence so endowed, as when any
Inhabitant there becomes worn with age; or so enfeebled, as their life becomes
an affliction: so tedious their hours; so fastidious their years; their
Children or Friends must remove them out of that place, before they can dye.
Whether there be any such enlivening I Will or no, I shall leave to the credit of
the Relater: but I much fear me, there be many remorcelesse Friends, and
graceless Children, who would find ready hands to remove those eye-sores from
that Island; long before such times as any such decrepit age seized on them:
desiring rather to enjoy their present fortunes then the presence of their
persons. But such premature hopes resolve themselves into weak helps: for
where Sons are sick of the Father, or Daughters of the Mother, they
generally decrease no less in the prosperity of their estate, then quality of
their nature. Be it then your care to provide for their necessity; to support
them in their misery; and cheerfully return them all such offices of piety,
as may relieve their age, and consequently improve your comfort in a surviving
posterity.

And so we descend briefly to those Domestic Offices, wherein the Servant is
to express himself with all diligence and reverence to his Master; as
likewise in what manner every Master is to demean himself toward his
Servant, in a grateful and ample measure to requite his endeavor. Wherein, as
they merit precedence, we are first to treat of the Offices of a Master: and in
the second place of those duties of a Servant to his Master, which are ever to
be rendered with competent honor.

Of Domestic Offices.
EVery private Family is a little City; The Offices of Masters to their
^ervants Bern. Med. 3.
wherein if there should be no order, nor harmony, that distracted government
would beget a private Anarchy. It were a great abuse (said that Mellifluous
Bernard) for the Mistress to play the Handmaid; the Handmaid and Mistress: yet
as the eyes of the Handmaid should be upon the eyes of her Mistress; so must
not the eyes of the Mistress be estranged from the eyes of her Handmaid. As
there is a deputative charge recommended to the one: so should there be a
supervisive care in the other. Now, as Masters challenge to themselves a power
to command: so are they to have discretion in knowing what they command. In
some cases, Servants may more conscionably dis-obey, then obey the commands of
their Masters. Joseph would not engage his honor, by prostituting his chaste
thoughts to a prohibited pleasure, for the loss of a light Mistress favor.
Lawful things only, as they are by Masters to be commanded; so are they with
all alacrity by Servants to be obeyed.

Now to walk in such a fair a smooth path of commanding; as neither the
Master may err in the exhibition of his commands: nor the Servant show
himself remiss in observing what is commanded: the Master is to decline two
extremes; the neglect whereof many times begets either a contempt or hate in
the Master: an insolence or remissness in the Servant. Two extremes to be
avoided, whereby this Domestic Obedience may be better observed.
These are Leuity and Severity: for as the one makes the Servant more insolent:
so the other makes the Master more hated. The Wiseman, indeed, proposes a
Rule how Masters are to command: and in what manner they are to demean
themselves to their Servants: which he expresses to life in these words: He
that delicately brings up his Servant from youth, at length he will be even
as his Son. Whence he infers, That too much delicacy or familiarity with
ones servant begets a contempt. This makes him quite forget his servile
condition: and strangely infuseth into him an overweening conceit of his own
abilities: Prove. 29.21.
which begets in him such a malapertnesse, as in short time his perverse
disposition confi^mes the Wise-mans assertion: Prove. 19.19.
He will not be chastised with words: though he understand, yet he will not
answer. It is dangerous then, to make a Copesmate of our Inferior. You are
then to observe a Mean in this; neither to insensate them by too much
indulgency: nor decline their affections from you by too much severity. That
indiscreet act of Vedius Pollio could deserve no less then an extreme
censure; who, as one stripped of humane nature, could so intemperately tyrannize
over his Servants, as to cause one to be cast into a Fish Pond for breaking a
Glass, What an excellent rigid Master would this man have been for our
lascivious and spritely Gallants, who cannot present an Health to their britle
Venus, without the breach of a Venice Glass?

Now, there be many Masters, who with Zimri, by seeking their Servants, lose
themselves. These are so glued to the world, as they verily think the world has
not enough mould to give every one an handful. They never look upon the
wheel (for such Emblemes are far from them) which in its motion has ever the
least part or portion of all his proportion upon the ground. Earth receives the
least part of it; whereas earth enjoyes the most of their heart. These, though
they retain the title of Masters, are in their condition poorer then the
lowest of their Servants. No servant meaner then a parcimonious Master.
For in those comforts or complies of nature, they partake the least share.
Their sleeps are distracted; their unseasonable repasts undigested: their
clothes sordidly or broakishly suited. So as, such miserable wretches as these,
who are only rich in having, but poor in enjoying, want no Character to
discover the quality of their slimy nature, but that Epitaph or Inscription
which was addressed for one of the like temper, and in this manner: Vid.
Lucian. in Sat.
Here lies he who had stock and store,
Had flocks in the field, had corn o'th floor,
Had Goats within, and Gates at's door,
Had all Ashore, yet dyed poor.
I vow by fate, a wondrous feate,
That such a Mate should dye for meat.


It is far better to possess little, and enjoy it: then by possessing much,
to be estranged from the enjoyment of it. These, as they are ever their own
Tormentors: so they for most part leave few Mourners, but fat Executors. I have
observed many of these rigid and severe Masters, suited with the very sluggisht
and sloathfull'st Servants. Such, as though they pretended diligence in their
Masters sight, it was, but eye-service at the best: For their Masters absence
gave them an easy dispensation with Conscience. Their seeming labor must then
turn loyterer; their late distempered rest into a shady repose or plenteous
repast. Such as these will be the aptest for taking up those words of that
malapert Servant in the Gospel: Luke 12.45.
My Master does defer his coming. He resolves therefore to take advantage
of time; and to play the Commander in the absence of his Master. Where, like an
imperious Censor, he begins to smite the servants, and maidens, and to eat,
and drink, and to be drunken. These are many times the fruits of parcimonious
Masters: who, by tasking their Servants too strictly: or by deteining from them
what they are to render them in equity; either make them dissolute, or some
other way desperate: whereof we have such daily examples, as their too
insulting command have brought many timorous Servants to a fearful end. The
like may be spoken of domineering Mistresses; who make their correction of
their Maids, their sole recreation. And these for most part, are of that
tenacious nature, as they will not afford a competence to their Family, but
engage themselves to famine amidst of plenty. These, as they live without love,
so they generally dye without tears. Their excessive care to advance a
posterity, as it exposed them to an indiscreet parcimony; so it ever closed
their memory with an incompassionate Elegy. This that injuried Melissa in the
Poet expressed; who, having long time served where she little profited, and
now freed of her sharp Mistress Drusilla, by death attached; resolved to revive
her Mistresses memory, Lacrymans amoris Epicaedium; vel Heroinum Elegium. Farn.
in Epig.
one no less decrepit in mind then body, in this Loves Lachrymae, or her
Ladies Elegy: Ladies tell me, you that shine
In the fancy of the time,
Would you live when you do feel
Maladies from head to heel?
Rugged wrinkles on that brow
Whiter once then Ida's snow;
Many rivels, beamlings few
Where the Rose and Lily grew;
When those dangling'trosses shall
In a timely Autumn fall;
When that breath shall Earth partake,
Which was once Ambrosiack;
When those pearled Cordons shed
Leave your mouths unpeopled;
When your nose and chin shall meet,
Balmy Palm has lost her heat;
When those weake-supporting feet
Fail in traversing the street?
If Death pleasing be to such,
Why should frailty then think much,
When like Grass she is cut down
For others good, and for her own?
Let not a tear then dim your eye,
When you see your Mother dye.
She only to her Mother goes
Where for a while she must repose,
Till her united parts shall sing
A glorious Paean to her King;
Or to Dis, I know not which,
Who made her poor by being rich:
" For ready Entrance who will deny her,
" That has the Keys of Angels by her!


But let us decline our course from these parcimonious natures; being such as
make themselves most miserable in having: by enjoying least what they have in
possessing: And in brief deliver the true Character of a deserving Master.
Which we shall not presume to commend unto you, as a Pattern, or Model drawn
from the Engine of our own conceit: being already so exactly presented to
life, by that glorious Convert, and excellent Vessel of Election in these
words: Colos. 4.1.
Ye Masters, do unto your servants, that which is just, and equal, knowing
that ye also have a Master in Heaven. And to attemper the inclemency of stern
and implacable Masters, whose highest glory it is domineere over their
Servants, he uses this exhortation: Ephesians. 4.9.
Put away threatening; for know that even your Master also is in Heaven, neither
is there respect of persons with him.

Now to observe this golden mean in your Command; neither bear your selves so
indulgent, as your remissness may probably beget a neglect in your Servant:
for so by remitting your care, might you occasion him to difert, or omit his
charge: nor cruel; for your distemper may discourage a well composed nature,
and make him weary of his employments for so severe and rigid a Master. Be it
your care, that neither your remissness make him slight you, nor your to
much strictness bring him to hate you: So shall your graceful demeanor
deserve the choice of such a Servant, as I am now to present unto you: whose
service shall be to your solace: and whose behavior shall ever conduce to your
profit and honor.

The duty of Servants to their Masters.
NOw, as you have heard those distinct Offices of Masters to their Servants:
You, who are in all lawful things to obey your Masters, recollect what
especial duties import you: and how you stand obliged, both by divine and
humane Law to perform conscionably, what you are enjoined to observe legally.
And to express your selves the better in the performance of this duty, let not
such taskes nor employments as are enjoined you, be done perfunctorily or
remissely, but cheerfully, and with all alacrity. Observe the direction of that
sage Moral: That labor loses a great part of its honor, that is done in a
secure or drowsy manner.

Vid. Laert.
A Servant, to render himself truly obedient, must have agility of hand, and
alacrity of heart. Many by repining have lost their penny in the Evening. And
know ye, that as a curse is denounced on that Master, who defraudeth his
Servant of his wages: so can no blessing redound unto that Servant, who
defraudeth his Master of his work. It was the Apostles exhortation, and it
well deserves your attention: Servants be obedient unto them that are your
Masters according to the flesh, with fear and trembling, in singleness of
your hearts as unto Christ. Ephesians. 6.5.
Whence you may collect, how pretenses of obedience without reverence and
sincerenesse can purchase no acceptance. Let it be your principal care to
retain a memory of your highest Master: by which you shall learn to perform
those offices to his honor, which are recommended to your charge; and in the
evening of your service, amply remunerate your care. Jacob, because he did the
duty of a careful servant, The duty of a servant to his Master, will make a
servant an happy Master.
became a Master of dutiful Servants.

He shall never know well how to command, that has not learned first how to
obey. Obedience is a thankful Sacrifice: Neither can he well express it to
his invisible Maker, who has not endeavored to render it to his visible
Master. You know well what is commended and committed to you: discharge your
place with discretion; it will improve your Masters affection; confirm his
good opinion; and confer a blessing on your fortune. A discreet servant shall
have rule over a lewd son. Do you observe this honor? As you tender then
your reputation, let your service be ever seasoned with discretion. Let not
your labors be to the eyes of men; seeing you are in his sight, whose eyes are
upon all the Children of men. Let not your Masters presence be the sole motive
to your diligence: but when he is farthest divided from you, address your
employments as if he were present with you. Let no wandering thoughts distract
you: as you are seated in a vocation, you must not suffer it to admit of the
least distraction. This has made too many Laborers mighty Loiterers, by
suffering their thoughts to wander amidst those interesses of their labor.
Think how many are made slaves of servants: This cannot choose but sweeten your
task, in conceiving that extreme servitude which others taste. Tunc nostra
magis clarescunt bona, cu^ fuerint praesentibus comparata malis.
Let not an indiscreet word pass from you: know how you are to serve. Let your
speech then suite with the condition of a servant. A malapert answer may
exasperate the passion of the most indulgent Master. But above all things
observe this Caveat: Guild not over your errors with glozing excuses. To
defend an error, is the way to confirm you in error. Nor is there any hope
of his reclayming, who either stands in justification of his offense, or with a
frontlesse boldness labors to approve it, either by a palliated excuse, or
apparent defense. For in this case, says the Civilian, the mere defense
equals the quality of the offense. Now to divert all occasions of wandering,
Gothofred. de corp. Iur. Civil. Casel. de jure civili Julius Pacius in Analysi.
Theoph. Instit. Fabrot. Inter. Vid. Plut. in Mor. Ovid. in Met. Arist. in Eth.
be it your care to assign every distinct hour his peculiar task. There is
no rust that consumes iron so much, as Sloth enfeebles or effeminates the
spirit. Idleness makes of Men Women, of Women Beasts, of Beasts Monsters. Let
it not then be said of you, what was sometimes spoken of Margites; that he
never plowed, nor dug, nor did any thing all his life long that might tend
unto goodness. Such as these are wholly unprofitable to the world. Furnished
with Ericthous bowels, but Philoxenus hands: for howsoever they are less then
Pigmies at their work, yet at their meat they are more then men. I would have
these Patrons and Patterns of Idleness used, as Zeno handled his servant
Bruso; who being taken with theft, and alleging for himself that it was his
destiny to steal (so apt are the most irregular to weave excuses) his Master
shaped him as ready an answer, and thy destiny to be beaten. The Crab-fish,
Emblematicall Hieroglyphics of Sloth.
(when as the Oyster does open her self) by a politic instinct casts a
stone into her shell; by which means being not able to shut her self again,
she becomes a prey unto the Crab. The Fathers by a proper allusion apply this
unto the Devil; when he finds men gaping and idle, he casts into them
some stone of temptation, whereby he works their overthrow and ruin. The
sloathfull man is the Devils shop; there he works, ever most busy when men
are lazy; ever intentivest when men are securest. For as man's extremity is
Gods opportunity, such is his piety: So the Devils opportunity is man's
security, such is his policy. You are to know then, that Health comes not
from the Clouds without seeking, nor Wealth from the Clods without digging. The
Earth begun from her former fertility to fail, when Adam begun to fall. It
needed not then such culture, as it afterward required to make it fruitful.
Had Adam never transgrest, Adam no sooner became sinful, then the Earth
unfruitful.
he had never received that strict command of eating his bread in the sweat of
his brows. Eden was then a native fruitful Garden: but Adams sin altered
the soil. As you are then enjoined, and by a strict Covenant tied; neglect no
time wherein you may in a conscionable way render unto your Master an useful
account of your employment. And as this is required at your hands; so let this
be done with cheerful hearts. For where alacrity accompanies any good, or
pious action, it argues a sincere previous intention: which indeed, is the
Crown of every action. For good actions may be ill done, either by being
corrupted in their doing, or by being not intended before they were done. You
are then to perform your labors with singleness of heart; which affords an
high approvement to every act. There is one thing more, which you are carefully
to prevent: for as the error is more general, so it requires a timely
diversion, lest habit begin to slight the quality of the offense, through an
inurement or continuance of practice.

I have observed many Servants to hold this opinion: that if their care extend
it self to what is committed to their charge; they are not bound in conscience
to look any further: The Charge of their Fellow Servants holds no relation
with them: They do what is enjoined them, and this (as they erroneously
pretend) may sufficiently discharge them. It is true, indeed, as the world
goes, such Servants may be well received into the list of careful Reteiners,
who address their labor to what is peculiarly enjoined them by their Masters:
But if they should duly consider the office of a faithful Servant: their care
would dilate it self to an higher extent. For that Servant cannot love his
Master sincerely, nor perform those offices which are required of him
effectually, It is not sufficient for a Servant to intend his own peculiar
charge, unless he admonish others of the neglect of their care. Vid. Arist.
in Polit. Zenophon in Cyro. ped.
unless he retain a cautious and vigilant eye toward his Fellows care, and
to their neglects prescribe a cure.

Yet not so, as by an insinuating way, so to ingratiate themselves in their
Masters favors, as by private whisperings or suggestions to lay a disgrace
upon their Fellow Servants. This is neither an act of duty; nor any such office
as may hold coherence with charity. For her Rule is, to do as you would be
done unto. But if you apparently perceive that those who are in Family with
you, neglect their charge, or profusely dissipate your Masters goods; you are
not in conscience bound to be their Secretaries. For when no admonitions will
reclaim them, corrasives instead of cordials must be applied to them.

Thus have you heard what you are to do, and what you are to decline. Much is
expected from you, because much is committed to you. Remit not your care; but
reflect on your heavenly Master, in whose presence you ever are. Begin the
actions of every day with a memorial of piety: so shall you prosper better in
the performance of those offices in your Family. And so we descend to our last
Observation* which strikes Anchor upon those neighbourly Offices, which we are
to do mutually one to another.

Observe. 4.
Of Neighbourly Offices.
Our daily experience and hourly Observance may sufficiently inform us; that,
as our Speech is the bond or artery of humane society: Oration vinculum humanae
societat iis Societas solatium animae peregrinantis. Vid Cic. Hippol. Casiman.
so is humane society; an especial solace in this vale of misery. That rough
Philosopher, who gloried more in his contempt of the world, then others did in
enjoying the fullness of it, though he naturally affected retirednes, yet could
he not choose but apprehend a great happiness to consist in the mutual enjoyment
of one another neighborhood. This moved him to return that answer to one,
who entreated his resolution touching a parcel of ground which he was to
purchase, with the conveniences which accomodated it: Before thou become
purchaser, inquire first who shall be thy Neighbor.

Laert. in vit. Diog.
An ill Neighbor makes an unhappy Farmer: Neither can the purchase be dear,
who has a friendly Neighbor at his door. It was the Wisemans positive
assertion: He that despises his neighbor is destitute of wisdom. Prove.
11.12.
Now, to preserve this neighbourly union: that as propinquity of place has
joined them, so a sweet harmony of minds may ever accompany them: you are
first to know in what especial offices this neighbourly amity is to be
exercised What proper Objects it reflects upon. That knowing how and in what
particulars it consists, you may neither decline from the Object at which it
aims, nor become defective in performing those proper Offices which it
requires. Arist. in Eth. Melanct. Fonseca. Pererius.


Our Ethics will tell you, that these Neighbourly offices, whereof we are
here to treat, either pitch upon arguments of Discourse, and Communication; or
upon Action and Negotiation; or Pastime and Recreation.

And first for matters of Discourse; DISCOVRSE. LIFE.
wherein you are to be so cautious, as nothing proceed from you as may either
engage his Life, fame, or Substance; nor put your selves upon so desperate an
hazard, as by your too free and enlarged discourse, to empaune your freedom
under another girdle. Which obvious peril that you may the better decline;
beware of these four precipices: Four cautions in matters of discourse, to be
avoided; that all grounds of distaste may be better directed.
For many by too securely failing upon the Maine, have perished in their too
much security, and through too much confidence lost themselves irrecoverably.

First then, play not too much the part of an egregious Traveller, by telling
marvailes, nor of too pragmaticall a Sophister, by pressing reasonings; nor of
too tart a Critic, by detracting from others merits; nor too arrogant an
Opinionist, by making Comparisons.

The first may erroneously dictate to your deluded thoughts that you are
admired, when indeed you shall find your selves to be pitifully jeered.

The second may persuade you that you are scholastically approved; when you are
in the test of him that hears you, pedantically censured.

The third may hold you in hand that you are with resolution against all
opposition armed; whereas your too liberal censure makes you hated.

The Last, though it like you best, can never be more by others distasted,
then when by your selves most relished.

We usually say, we may speak any thing safely, under the Rose. But this
proverb is to retain a discreet restriction. The Rose is an Emblem of
Charity; which so long as we make our Object, we may speak safely, because
our discourse is seasoned with a pious reservancy. But no place can secure us,
be it never so retired, unless the Subject of our discourse be so seasoned.

Think then before you speak, that an irrevocable word beget not in you too
untimely a repentance for what you have spoke. Many, too many, will rather
loose their friend then their jest. But these are dangerous to consort with: A
jest unseasonably uttered has occasioned too many an indiscreet Buffoun much
loss, and irreparably divided them from others love. There is no greater
deliberation then to be taken in any passage of this life, then in our choice
of acquaintance: Many have perished by being too credulously confident of the
privacy or fidelity of those they consorted with. Catiline had never been so
unexemplarily mischievous, had he not so daily consulted and consorted with a
Cethegus. Now in arguments of Discourse, as you are to address your Scope
according to the quality of the person, or necessity of his occasion with whom
you converse: Three particulars observable in arguments of Discourse.
so three particulars are mainely observable in treaties of this nature:
verity, vtility, modesty.

By the first, we are taught to deliver nothing upon trust or fabulous report,
but what is infallibly true and integrious. By the second, not to insist upon
impertinences, but to press upon that Subject which is useful and commodious.
Vid. Epict. Enchirid.
By the third, to decline too much vehemence in arguments of discourse; for
this argues a disposition arrogant and impetuous. For these with that daring
Epicurean Velleius, are so confident and peremptory in matter of argument, as
not a period must be delivered, but they expect it should be for a Maxim
received. And herein they err most, because they hold themselves secure from
erring. To be brief, in Subjects of discourse; let it be your care to
regulate your speech to the direction of that Ambrosiack father; Ambrose in
Offic.
whose advice is, that there be weight in our words, sense in our speech,
gravity in our discourse. Which observed, neither shall your Hearer be
tediously cloyed, nor any impropriety discovered; but by means of this
communicative discourse become so mutually interessed and improved, as the
Evening may return a fair account of whatsoever has been delivered.

ACTION.
Secondly, as these Neighbourly Offices may pitch upon Action or Negotiation; be
it ever your prime ground, Observe. 1.
(as I have elsewhere observed) to do as you would be done unto: you would
not have your trust deceived: Delude your Neighbor with fair pretenses. Let
your contracts be just without circumvention; your intentions clear without
collusion. Suffer with your Neighbor, as if it were in your own particular.
Comfort him when you shall find him perplexed; relieve him when you shall find
any way necessitated.

Now in directions of comfort, it is not so hard to give comfortable counsel
to the sorrowful, as to find a fit season when to give it. Make choice then
of an opportunate hour, wherein the office of an affectionate Neighbor may be
performed; and the action to which it is addressed, cheerfully seconded.

Here he insists upon those three particular subjects, wherein these
Neighbourly Offices are to be exercised.
Tell me, Is he brought upon the stage for his Life? Perform the part of a
constant Damon to your distressed Pitheas. Bring him off if it lie in your
power: especially, if his innocence merit your defense. Solicit his cause;
labor to free him from tyrannizing foes. It is a work of piety, and reteines
the highest place in those living Annals of amity. Again, comfort him in the
loss of those he loved. Attemper his grief with seasonable advice. So
compassionate his tears, that they may find a sympathy in your eyes, and an
antidote in your discourse.

It was no less divinely then wittily said of Epictetus the Philosopher, who
going forth one day, LIFE. FAME. SVBSTANCE.
and seeing a woman weeping that had broken her pitcher; and the next day
meeting another woman weeping for that she had lost her Son: Yesterday I saw
tears shed over a broken pitcher; and to day tears shed over one for paying
his debt to nature.

Heri vidifra gilem frangi; hodie video mortalem mori. Epict.
Sociable and seasonable counsel in these, as it effectually works upon the
patient, so is it an argument of a pious disposition in the Agent. You desire
comfort in these cloudy days of your affliction! Minister the like solace upon
every occasion: So shall others be stirred up to afford you the like receipt in
your greatest strait: the like remedy in your pressingst extremity.

FAME.
In the second place, you are to tender his good name. For Fame and Honor is
such a precious odor, as it survives man: and reteines the memory of his
actions in a lasting Shrine of glory or shame: These are Monuments which cannot
perish. Touch, Ieat, Marble, Ivorie, are all of them materials of Mortality:
Whereas a precious fame survives such perishing metals, and makes perpetuity
her Trophey. The Righteous shall be ever in remembrance: but the memory of the
wicked shall rot. As it is palpable flattery then to bestow an adulterate
beauty upon immeriting actions: so is it an act of impiety to detract from the
repute of deserving persons. This moved devout Hierome to conclude: To lay upon
good men an aspersion, admits not easily a pardon. This were to discourage
virtue, and to imbolden vice. Be it then your especial care to value his
honor with whom you familiarly consort. Non facilis est venia, prava dixisse
de rectis.

Ecclus 19.10.


Such a pure stole as an undefiled fame may admit no stain. To observe this,
let the Preachers advice, be your impreze: If thou have heard a word against
thy neighbor, let it die with thee, and be sure, it will not burst thee.

Now in the choice of those with whom you desire to be intimate, as you are to
try before you trust, prove before you approve; so having once confirmed them
yours, let their fame be equally precious to you as your own. First for your
Choice, let them be such as you may rest confident that you may either better
them, or be bettered by them.

It was the advice of a Learned Moral, and the wisest may reserve an attentive
ear for such useful counsel: Be not too easy in entertaining, but be
constant in reteining. For the former, as it may tax you of levity; so the
latter cannot choose but accuse you of much inconstancy. If he deserve your
love, tender his fame as your own life. If it be your opinion of him, that he
deserves not to be so enlisted; use more freedom to him in trifles, then in
what may appear more consequent. It was the expression of a divine Father to
his affectionate friend: Ambros. Offic. 3.
Tuus sum totus. But before such time as his pious discretion admitted of any
such Subscription, by a more serious examen and discussion of his parts, he had
found him worthy his affection: Amor transanimat in rem amatam.
That Maxim is true: Love transanimates into the thing loved. They who truly
love, fix on no Object with more desire, then on that wherein they see their
friends desire to cloze. Hearts so really devoted, cannot possibly be divided.
For as Aristotle says, Friendship is one soul which rules two hearts, and
one heart which dwells in two bodies. How is it possible then that such an
amicable union should admit of the least division? For these sweet musical
airs of entire affection, never suite well with those warbling measures which
consist of divisions: (...).
For Friendship implies an Equality; nay, it is more Platonically spheared, and
infers a Community.

Now there are five degrees of Civil Society; 1. Is of one Family; 2. Of one
City. Five degrees of civil society. Frieg. in prim. Offic. Cic.
3. Of Neighborhood or Propinquity. 4. Of Amity. 5. Of one Country.


All which produce effects in a several manner, according to their Contiguity,
Analogy or Order. (...).
Albeit, that Society which derives it self from the lineall tie of blood,
challenges to it self the highest Prerogative.

Now, I must not prescribe you what Neighbors you are to have, but how to
demean your selves with those you have. And of these, none are held more
dangerous, then such as are either superciliously insolent, or furiously
impatient.

For the former, that Poet pourtrayes him to life in these his lofty and
enlivened measures: whose proper similies so nearly allude unto him, as I
cannot omit him.

Like to the bending shoulders of our Anticks,
Who seem as they would supported the foundation
Of an imperious Structure, when God wot
Those arched cielings, rafters, beams and all
Would fe^le the weight of their grandeure, and decline
To mouldred Earth, had they no firmer Ground-workes
To buttresse their rare Fabric: -- So did the Fly
In The Fable glory, that she raised the dust
Those Spoke-wheeles fanned; -- Thus though sense forbid it,
A Selfe-opinion ever thinks she did it.
Neither be our impatient and violent spirits less incommodious in Neighbourly
Offices. For with these, the least trespass is of such high quality and
nature, as it must admit no Arbitrator. Archita's milky Dove must not build in
their Lovure. It were a task of difficulty to consort with these neighbourly:
and yet a moderate and well-composed temper may not only attemper such an
humor, but bring his Neighbor to a recollection of himself, Vid. Plut. in
Moral.
and consequently to an acknowledgement of his error. These effects wrought
Socrates, Stilpho, and that Tarentine Archita's in theirs: and the like Elixir
may you extract from yours, if you seasonably apply your advice after the heat
of their passion, and so by degrees bring them to enter treaty with reason. By
which means you shall win them, by waining them from what did most unman them.

Now, there is no better Office in the opinion of our soundest Moralists, that
can be expressed by one Neighbor to another, Arist. in Eth. Sen. in Epist.
Boet. Bern.
then in moving him to peace, if he be contentious: and exhorting him to
patience, if he be furious. Where two meek men meet together, their conference
(says Mellifluous Bernard) is sweet and profitable: where one man is meek, it
is commodious: where neither, it proves pernicious.

Hi necis Artifices, Ph^lari^, Phereclusque Perillu^,

Quae texunt aliis, poena fuere suis.

Dum vult esse praedo. fit praeda. Aug.


For the contentious person, as he spins subtle webs to entangle others: for
the most part (with that Grecian Shipwright Phereclus) he becomes a prey unto
others. It is said, that Law, Logic, and the Switzers may be hired to fight
for any one: Sure I am it holds with these factious men, whose disposition
holds ever in opposition with peace: And can find a Fee for a Lawyer, when they
can scarce find a farthing for a Dinner. These make their whole life a
continued suite; till they have brought such an irrecoverable Consumption to
their estate, as they leave no other inheritance to their posterity, then the
Remains of a greater work, reversions of poverty. I must confess such
litigious Tetters are dangerous Neighbors: for as they scorn to take wrong,
so for most part they are as unwilling to do any one right. Yet a discreet
temperate Neighbor may work much good upon such an indisposed Nature.

Vid. Plut. Macrob. Strom.
It is said Agltaidas, that he was a man of that surly and crooked disposition;
as he dis-relished nothing more then the purchase of others affections. His
only aim was to disturb others peace: and detract from others praise. Yet,
behold, how this rough piece, of a surly Saturnine became affable; of a cloudy
Critic, indifferently sociable, by a neighbourly consorting with those, whose
propinquity of place, and familiarity of speech wrought strongly upon his
spirit!

Now, there is another Office in you requisite, and to your Neighbor
expedient: And that is to afford your comfort by a seasonable exhortation of
him to patience. If you find him dejected by receiving a legal censure
otherwise then he expected, or, as he conceives, deserved: by which he holds
himself so highly disparaged, as he is ever harping upon that sentence of
Nicetas; Nicet.
"No punishment so grievous as shame: Or that expression of Nazianzene, which
reteines a more impressive stamp; Nazian.
Better were a man dye right out, then ever live in reproach and shame: Or that
dis-consolate speech of Ajax, who being ready to dispatch himself, Homer. in
in Odys.
and with a desperate hand to divert the current of a maturer fate, used these
as his last words; No grief does so cut the heart of a generous and
magnanimous man, as reproach and shame: Oh then defer no time, but seasonably
apply your task by infusing into his breathing wounds some balmy comfort, such
as that Cordial was of a divine Poet: Nulla tam tristis sit in orb nubes,
Quam nequit constans relevare pectus;
Nulla cordati Scrinio Clientis
Ansa querelis.
No Cloud so dusky ever yet appeared,
Which by minds armed was not quickly cleared;
Never Suit to the bosom of a Spirit cheered
Sadly resounded.


Again, should you find him afflicted with sickness, which he increases
with a fruitless impatience; wishing a present period to his days, that so
death might impose an end to his griefs. Suffer him not so to waste his
Spirits; nor to dishonor him who is the searcher of Spirits; but apply some
sovereign receipt or other to allay his distemper, which uncured might
endanger him for ever. Exhort him to possess his soul in patience: and to
supply this absence of outward comforts with the sweet relishing ingredients of
some mental or spiritual solace.

Ingenious Petrarch could say, Petrarch. de remed. vtriusque fort.
Be not afraid though the out-house, (meaning the body,) be shaken, so the
soul, the Guest of the body, fare well. And he closed his resolution, in a
serious dimension, who sung: He that has health of mind, Cui men's sana fuit
quid in orb requireret vltra.

Men's cujusque virum format, vt ille Scyphum.


what has he not?
It Is the mind that moulds the man, as man a pot.


Lastly, do you find him perplexed for loss of some dear friend, whose
loyal affection retained in him such a deep impression, as nothing could
operate in him more grounded sorrow, then such an amicable division? Allay his
grief with divine and humane reasons: Tell him how that very friend which he
so much bemones, is gone before him, not lost by him. This their division will
beget a more merry meeting. Let him not then offend God by lamenting, for that
which he cannot recall by sorrowing: nor suffer his too earthly wishes for his
own peculiar end, to wish so much harm to his endeared friend as to make
exchange of his seat and state of immortality, with a vale of tears and
misery. Admit he dyed young; and that his very prime hopes confirmd the
opinions of all that knew him, that a few maturer years would have so
accomplished him, as his private friends might not only have rejoiced in him,
but the public state derived much improvement from him. His hopeful youth
should rather be an occasion of joy then grief. Prianus, quo diutius vixit,
magis flevit. Ille Troilo ditior in annis: Troilus Priamo foelicior in
lachrymis.

Reg. Epicaed. Quanto mayor fuit amor in possidendo, tanto gravior erit dolor
in amittendo.


Though Priam was more numerous in years, yet Troilus was more penurious in
tears. The more days, the more griefs. No matter, whether our days be short
or many, so those hours we live be improved and employed to Gods glory.

But leaving these, admit you should find him sorrowing for such a Subject, as
deserves no wise man's tears: as for the loss of his goods. These tears
proceed from despicable Spirits, and such whose desires are fixed on earth. So
that, as their love was great in possessing them, so their grief must needs be
great in forgoing them. Many old and decrepit persons; to whom even Nature
promises an hourly dissolution; become most subject to these indiscreet
tears: For with that sottish Roman, they can sooner weep for the loss of a
Lamprey, then for the very nearest and dearest in their Family. At such as
these, that Moral glanced pleasantly who said: Those tears of all others are
most base, Nullae sunt lachrymae indigniores iis tandem quae a discrimine
jumenti sunt orientes.
which proceed from the loss of a beast. And these though their grounds of
grief appear least, yet many times their impatience breaks forth most.
Fearful oaths and imprecations are the accustomablest airs or accents which
they breath. These you are to chastise, and in such a manner and measure, as
they may by recollection of themselves, agnise their error, and repeat, what
that divine Poet sometimes writ, to impresse in them the more terror: A domo
domini perperam jurantis, nunquam recedit ira tonantis.
That house which is inured to swear,
Gods judgments will fall heavy there.


These, as they are inordinate in their holding, so are they most impatient in
their losing. And it commonly sareth with these men as it does with the
Sea-Eagle; Cum far quod cepit nequeat, in gargitem demergitur.

Pittacus apud Laert.


who by seeking to hold what she has taken, is drench't down into the gulf,
from which she can never be taken.

It was the saying of sage Pittacus, that the Gods themselves could not oppose
what might necessarily occur: Sure I am, it is a vain and impious reluctance
to gainsay whatsoever God in his sacred-secret decree has ordained. His
sanctions are not as man's, they admit no repeal. What availes it then these to
repine, or discover such apparent arguments of their impatience, when they
labor but to reverse what cannot be revoked, to anull that which must not be
repealed? Exhort them then to suffer with patience, what their impatience
cannot cure: and to scorn such servile tears, which relish so weakly of
discretion, as they merit more scorn then compassion.

Now, there is another kind of more kind-hearted men, who though in the whole
progress of their life, they expressed a competent providence; being neither
so frugall as to spare where reputation bad them spend* nor so prodigal as to
spend where honest providence bad them spare. Yet these, even in the shore,
when they are taking their farewell of earth, having observed how their
children, in whom their hopes were treasured, become profuse rioters, set the
hoope an end, and turn Spend-thrifts too: and so close their virile providence
with an aged negligence: sprinkling their hoairy hairs with youthful
conceits: and singing merrily with the Latian Lyrick: Our children spend, Vt
proles dispersit opes, spargamus and omnes.

A S^nious juvenes efficiendo leves.


and we will turn spenders too,
And, though Old-men, do as our young men do.


This I must ingeniously confess is an unseemly sight: That old men when
years have seized on them, and their native faculties begin to fail them;
should in so debaucht a manner make those discontents which they conceive from
their children, the grounds of their distemper. For as the adage holds it
prodigious for youth to represent age; Seni invenescere ludibrium Inveni
senescere prodigium. Inventus et Aetas varias agans Scaenas.

Quanto propinquior sepulchro, tanto porrectior in desiderio.

Quanto minus suppetit, tanto magis appetit.

In viribus deficiens, et in cupiditatibus proficiens.


so is it ridiculous for age to personate youth. But for decrepit age, as it is
for most part unnatural to be prodigal, so is it an argument of indiscretion
for it to be too penuriously frugall. For to see one who cannot have the least
hope of living long, to be in his earthly desires so strong; to be so few in
the hopes of his succeeding years, and so full of fruitless desires and
cares, what sight more unseemly? what spectacle more uncomely? That man,
deluded man, when strength fails him; all those certain forerunners of an
approaching dissolution summon him: and the thirsty hope of his dry-ey'd
executors makes them weary of him; that then I say, his eager pursuit of
possessing more (when as he already possesses more then he can well enjoy)
should so surprise him, discovers an infinite measure of madness: for, as it
divides his affections from the object of heaven, so it makes him unwilling to
return to earth, when his gellied blood, his enfeebled faculties, and that poor
mouldred remainder of his declining cottage, as they have made earth weary of
him, so should they make him desirous to return to Earth.

Now, as you cannot express a more Christian neighbourly Office, then in your
private Arbours, to converse with these Groundlings; and acquaint them with the
hopes of another life; and the fears of a second death: so even with all such
as neighbor near you, when at any time you shall perceive any predominant
irregular affection over-swaying reason in them: Sicut lux sive ignis non
melius accenditur quam ignem igni applicande: fic servi dei non melius
inflammantur quam simul habitando. Serm-in Octav. Pas.
to afford your best advice to reclaim them; by which means as you may win
them, so may you win favor with the Highest by your so discreet, pious and
seasonable endeavor to waine them. For as comfortable cordials are useful to
such as be disconsolate: So are more sharp medicinable corrasives helpefull to
such whom a long custom of delinquency has made indurate. And so I briefly
descend to the pleasant'st, neither altogether the unprofitablest neighbourly
Office, which we formerly, according to the distribution, of our Ethics,
proposed; which particular office, discreetly moderated, cannot but redound
with much mutual content to the parties so lovingly and neighbourly interessed.

It is a received tenet; RECREATION.
Apollo's bow must not hold ever bent,
And once a year his laughter gives content.


There is none so intentively serious, Ludo et j^co vti licet ficut somno et
quiet. Cic.
unless he be wholly drenched in mundane cares: or fastened to the privacy of
a studious life: but he will reserve an hour to recreate his over-tyred
spirits with his friend. Yet says that Flower of Roman Oratory, we are in
these to use a restriction, lest of our recreation we make a profession. We
are to make use of it, as of our sleep or rest: to cheer us, not to dull us.
If we lie too long grovelling in it, we become stupid and insensate by it. This
makes me recall to mind that pleasant Dialogue betwixt a Tutor and his Pupil;
whom when his Tutor found lying a bed at nine of the Clock; he chid him,
telling him that five hours were sufficient to lie in bed for necessity: and
seven for recreation: And truly, said his Pupil, I thought good to make use of
both; for I have lain twelve: So as, Tutor, you cannot justly blame me, having
observed both mine hours of recreation and necessity. Now in Subjects of this
nature, we shall find such variety; as they cannot choose but afford us
delight, and that in a pleasing satiety. For these extend equally to the
exercises both of body and mind. To the mind, to reason or contemplate: To the
body, to practice or operate. The one being no less apt, (to use the words of
that witty Centurist) to handle his book, then the other his ball: The one his
Pen, the other his Pike. For the former of these, that neighbourly Farmer
writing to his honest friend and Farrier, upon his Herald labor, exercised
his wit in a recreative way after this manner. Parthen. in Miscell. marg.

A Blacksmith, and a Writer! it is a strain,
Well hammered forth by the Anvill of the brain.
Each period is a nail, that well bestows
This praise on the Author: "he has won his Shoes.
He needs no Belloes to disperse his fame,
Each Stroke returns an accent of his name.
With common cates he does not cloy your gorge;
Nay, what is rare, He works without a Forge.
Admit you have broke, or lost your Arms, retain
This man, he will bring them to their use again.
Nay, read till you be gravelled, I Will assure you,
Repair but to this Farrier, he will cure you.
One Smelt shall serve for all; the more I read,
The more, me thinks, He hits the nail o'th head.
So as I vow by the Crown of Polihymnie,
More learned smoke never steam'd from Lemnian chimny:
Whose wel-composed Bulk for state and style,
Needs not the help of any Vice or File:
For the more one looks, the more it would amaze one,
To see a Mulciber a Coat deblazon:
Succeeding years shall say, when these times pass,
That never Horse-leach such an Herald was:
And Stationer too will wish, if it roundly sell;
"Many such Smiths were in his Israel.
Such harmless pleasing passages as these, do not only delight the fancy;
but remain as pledges of neighbourly love and amity: whereas such light
strains or jeering wits, as run descant on the same of their Neighbor: they
may perhaps please themselves, but they cannot choose but dis-relish any
well-disposed Hearer. For true ingenuity can never hold equi-page or relation
with love of infamy or detraction. The dangers arising from opinionate wits.
That wit reteines the best state, which frees it self from others stain.
Whereas, the too fat and fertile Soiles of exuberant wits, for want of due
culture, grow wild with weeds, and return to their Master a fruitless crop
for all his labor.

To divert from these; there is an other recreation more commonly used, then
worthily approved: because the too free scope given to the use, has brought it
into an abuse. I mean their too assiduate familiar-neighbourly meetings;
which, though they imply love, yet they cloze too often in violent extremes, The
unexpected effects of frequent meetings.
and apparent issues of hate. Frequent meetings and long sittings cannot choose
but produce unexpected effects; Especially seeing, that even the best tempered
spirits, and sweet composed natures daily lose themselves by tasting too freely
of Circes cups: and of disceet Antenors, become intemperate Elpenors: Entering
those enchanted Cells like Lambs, but going forth like Lions. Neither (as I have
often observed) did these distempers arise from any love they bore to the Cup,
but their Companion: or some other attractive Motive, which lengthneth the
shots, and makes the merry-madding hour seem short. This that pleasant
Pasquill daintily shadowed: An handsome Hostess needs not keep true score,
A smile will cause her Guests stay one night more;
She shows no curt'sies, but they must requite them,
While every kiss she lends, makes up an Item.


Many misspent hours have these occasions produced; which upon a more
serious, and indeed temperate consideration could not but be repented: For upon
discussing expense of Time and Coin; how frivolous, if not noxious delights,
begot a neglect in the former, then which nothing more precious: and a
needless dis-respect of the latter, then which nothing more profusely foolish:
these could not choose but tax themselves of ignorance in the one, and
improvidence in the other: Such Consorts as these, can neither make good
Husbands for Wives; good Companions for Neighbors; good Masters of a Meney;
nor trusty Friends to any. For the first, that Lydian Maid discovered her
resolution fully, and imparted her mind freely, in her distaste to a Mate of
this society: I Would rather dye Maid, Virgineam citius vitam agam, Simias apud
inferos ^raham.

Sponsum quam obrium in thal^mum admittam.


and lead Apes in Hell,
Then wed an Inmate of Silenus Cell.


For the second, how can they perform the Office of a Neighbor, whose
distempered brain cannot distinguish a Neighbor from a Stranger? For the
third, how were it possible that they should be discreet Masters over others,
who have not the discretion to be Masters of themselves? For the last, how
should they be trusty to any, when intemperance has betrayed the trust of every
faculty, and unriveted that golden Claspe of the memory, which should have
retained (like a sure Recluse or Storehouse) the bowell of every secrecy?

In your deportments then of this nature; as your reserved hours admit of
moderate recreation, to allay the weight or grandeure of more serious
business, make it only as a pastime, not as a continued task of passing time.
Flies, when they play with the Candle, never leave it, till their wings are
singed by it. Habit, as it is precious in the practice of virtue; so it grows
pernicious in the exercise of vice. Observe then these circumstances in these
inferior actions of delight. 1. With whom you consort. Circumstances
observable in all inferior actions of delight.
2. For what end you consort. 3. To observe a mean, whereby you may attain
the end, for which you consort.

Now, to give an useful touch in each of these: That excellent Moral can
inform you: The way to safety is to retire your selves from company: but
seeing humane society admits, nay injoynes it; you are to make choice of such
as may improve your knowledge by it. Seneca.
All good fellows are not good men. You are then to be no less cautious in
your choice of company; then you would be of those you consort with, in a
contagious or pestilentiall City: Ib.
The way to infect all, is to mix the sick with the whole. The means to avoid
this malady, is to make piety your directresse in the course and choice of your
society. Secondly, you are to consider for what end you consort. Not to ravell
out time, as if no account were to be given of it: but to bestow it upon some
useful discourse; such as may improve the Hearer, and return this testimony
of you to the discreetest ear, that you come not thither to be time-spenders,
but Improvers of your Talents to your selves and others. Thirdly, you are to
observe a mean, whereby you may attain the end. Distemper is an ill Manager
of any business. This (as has been shown in his Introduction to the first
Observance) will prevent all occasion of distaste, and divert all grounds of
future distrust.

He winds up the Series of his discourse, with a repetition and useful
application of every particular branch.


And in the course or passage of occasions to admit any unnecessary diversion,
mainely troubles the current, or inlet of occasion. Avoid both these: Let
neither your bloods be inflamed through distemper: nor your occasions diverted
by any irregular or indisposed humor. So shall these amicable intercourses of
yours, not only redound to the benefit of the Hearer: but return into your
own bosoms with much profit and honor.

Now to take our work out of the Loome; you may remember how in this our last
Observance, we told you that these Neighbourly Offices, either pitched upon
Arguments of Discourse and Communication; or upon Action and Negotiation; or
Pastime and Recreation: in the pursuit or agitation whereof, you were to be
cautelous of the Life, Fame, or Substance of such with whom you stood
interessed. Of all which, with no less brevity then perspicuity we have so
far treated, as nothing now remains to be further handled or discussed, save
only Substance; which being in the estimate of opinion the least, we have
reserved for the last. We shall briefly descend to that too; that nothing may
be omitted wherein your knowledge may be improved, and these mutual Offices
better performed; which even in humane society are necessarily to be preserved.

Vid. Plut. in Moral.
Touching this then, a better moral Direction you cannot receive, then from
that well contented and rightly tempered Tarentine: who protested that he
never saw his Neighbors field flourish, but he rejoiced in the fecundity of
it, as if it had been his own. His welfare made him smile. His success
caused him to give thanks to the gods, as if that success had redounded to
his own goods.

This well-disposed Ethick had not an evil eye. He knew not how to repine or
murmr when his Neighbor did prosper. Be you of the like mind. As it is an
Angelical virtue, to rejoice at another good: so is it a Diabolical Vice,
Anselme.
to repine at another gain. Let not your eye be evil, because another's
good. Be it your salutation, when you pass by them, in your devoutest prayers
to bless them: saying, "God speed you, We wish you good luck, May you prosper
in your labor to his glory whom you honor. This salutation was by the ancient
Latians used, as it is even to this day by us retained: Sit Deus vestris al^
laboribus;
Sit Deus vestris aura laboribus;
Sit Deus costis s^ctus amoribus;
Sit Deus gratio portus ho^^ribus.

These if you duly observe; when you see your Neighbors field look fat, (to
use the saying of that wise Cinick) it will not make your cheeks look lean.
That marrow-eating envy cannot grind you, because your neighbors prosperous
success does infinitely cheer you. You will not stumble on his meere-stone, nor
remove his Buttoll to enlarge your own, because you tender his welfare equally
as your own. His loss must not procure your curse: because your best wishes
ever cloze with his success. Let us draw in our Sails, and contract all in
one. Would you, Gentlemen, in your reflection upon Conjugall Offices, perform
the duty of good Husbands? Ephesians. 5.25. Eccles. 9.9.
Love your Wives, even as Christ loved the Church, and gave himself for it.
And rejoice with those whom you have loved. Observe likewise that mutual
office and benevolence betwixt them and you: and let none partake in your love,
but those who are affianced to you. The Wife has not the power of her own
body, 1 Cor. 7.4.
but the Husband: and likewise also the Husband has not the power of his own
body, but the Wife. This mutual interest thus confined, should make your
hearts the more individually united. Perform then the Office of good Elkanahs,
1 Samuel 1.5. etc.
loving Husbands: so may you find in your Wives, the like mutual affections.
And ye Wives, who are thus happily espoused, render a fair requital unto
them, in whose esteem you are so much endeared. Tit. 2.5. 1 Timothy 2.12.
Be discreet, chaste, keeping at home, good, and subject unto your Husbands;
usurp no authority over them, but be in silence. This Conjugall Office, by a
sweet introduced habit, will become a Solace.

Secondly, touching Parentall Offices; As ye children are to obey your Parents
in the Lord, Ephesians. 6* 1.4.
for this is right: So are ye Fathers not to provoke your Children to wrath:
but bring them up in instruction, and information of the Lord.

Thirdly, for Domestic Offices; As ye Servants, are to be obedient unto them
that are your Masters; Tit. 2.9.
pleasing them in all things, not answering again: So ye Masters, do the
same things unto them, putting away threatening. This in every private Family
will beget a sweet consorting harmony.

Lastly, in Neighbourly Offices; As ye Neighbors are to please one another in
that that is good to edification; Romans 15.2. 1 Cor. 10.24.
Let no man seek his own, but every man another wealth.

These Offices thus performed, what can be less expected then such a sweet
union of minds and affections; as these two Consorts here combined, and to one
volume reduced, cannot in their loves be more firmly cemented, then they
harmoniously joined? Be it then your care to preserve this fair contexture;
trust me, it will confer on your Family, where virtue gives the best beauty,
more true honor, then the easie-resolving varnish of fortunes, or whatsoever
may outwardly accommodate you. For in the Survey of these, He concludes this
Supplement with a brief relation of the benefit of every particular Subject.
you shall find such a fair provision, as it may prepare you to be loyal
Lovers, discreet Fathers, just Masters, friendly Neighbors: and which is above
all, such absolute Commanders of your own affections, as should all those
occurrents which encounter mortality, oppose you, they could not surprise you,
because a pious resolution has reer'd her counter-mure to secure you. This
Task I shall account happy, so it may redound to your profit, Gods glory.

FINIS.
A Tablet reflecting upon this SVPPLEMENT.
A Preamble, branching it self into a brief Analysis of the whole Tract. page
1.
Of Conjugall Offices. page 6. OBSERVAT. 1.
The excellent saying of Caia, wife to Caius Tarquinius. ibid. The noble
Florentines Impreze, which he caused to be engraven for a Nuptial Emblem.
page 7 Conjugall Offices are not to be disorderly mixed. Palaemon, si Caulam
negligat, Galataeam faciet indigentem: Galataea, si Colum deserat, Palaemonem
faciet insipientem. p. 9.
The Offices of a Wife to her Husband. page 10
Wonderful Examples of Piety and Mortification. p. 13 A discreet loving Treaty
betwixt a Wife and her Husband, recommended to the constant practice of all
affectionate Censorts. p. 14 Offenses ingenuously acknowledged, are with
conjugall piety and pity to be pardoned: and this locally instanced. p. 15
Of Parentall Offices. p. 16. OBSERVAT. 2.
A Parentall care reflects properly upon two distinct Objects: Internal.
External.
The one to educate them in Principles of Religion: the other to accommodate
them for a Vocation. p. 16. 17. etc. The highest point of discretion in a
Schoolmasters, is to find out the disposition of his Scholar. p. 18
Inconsiderate youth accounts the fruitless expense of time, a mere pastime.
ib. Parents are to dispose of their estates now, while they stand seized of
estates, lest their decease alter the intention of their estates. p. 22
The Offices of Children to their Parents. ibid.
Children are bound to render unto their Parents expressions of their duty and
zeal, in three respects: Obedience. p. 23. etc. Reverence. p. 23. etc.
Supportance. p. 23. etc.
The fruits of Obedience, as they have relation both to Children and Parents.
p. 25 The Admonition of an incensed Father to a disobedient Son. p. 27 A
constant position observable in disobedient Children. p. 28. The graduall
respects of love and duty. p. 30
Of Domestic Offices. p. 31. OBSERVAT. 3.
The Offices of Masters to their Servants. ibid. Two extremes or perilous
Poles to be avoided, whereby this Domestic Obedience may be better observed:
Lenity. p. ibid. Severity. p. ibid.
No Servant meaner then a Parcimonious Master. p. 32. The duty of Servants to
their Masters. p. 34 The duty of a Servant to his Master, will make a Servant
an happy Master. ibid. Emblematicall Hieroglyphics of sloth. p. 35 Adam no
sooner became sinful, then the earth unfruitful. ibid. It is not sufficient
for a Servant to intend his own peculiar charge, unless he admonish others of
the neglect of their care. p. 36
Of Neighbourly Offices. p. ibid. OBSERVAT. 4.
All Neighbourly Offices pitch upon three particulars: Arguments of Discourse
or Communication. p. 36. etc. Arguments of Action and Negotiation. p. 36. etc.
Arguments of Pastime and Recreation. p. 36. etc.
Four cautions in matters of Discourse to be avoided; that all grounds of
distaste may be better diverted. Telling marvailes. p. 37 Pressing reasonings.
p. 37 Lessening others merits. p. 37 Making comparisons. p. 37
Three particulars observable in arguments of Discourse: Verity. ibid. Vtility.
ibid. Modesty. ibid.
Three peculiar Subjects, wherein these Neighbourly Offices are to be
exercised: LIFE. p. 38 FAME. p. 38 SVBSTANCE. p. 38
Five degrees of civil society: 1 Of one Family. p. 39 2 Of one City. p. 39 3
Of Neighborhood or Propinquity. p. 39 4 Of Amity. p. 39 5 Of one Country. p.
39
The dangers arising from opinionate wits. p. 44. The unexpected events of
frequent meetings. p. 45* Circumstances observable in all inferior actions of
delight: 1 With whom we consort. p. 46 2 For what end we consort. p. 46 3 The
mean, p. 46
whereby we may attain the end for which we consort. HE winds up the Series
of his discourse, with a repetition, and useful application of every
particular branch. ibid. The usual salutation by the ancient Lations observed,
and as it is to this day by us retained. p. 47 HE concludes this Supplement,
with a brief relation of the benefit of every particular Subject. ibid.
A Conclusive POEM contracting all these Subjects in one.
BY Him, who steers the stern of every State,
Inspires our Muse, informs us how to write,
That Palm of peace, that day which knows no date,
That Sole-all-seeing, and surveying sight,
That wings our faith, and cheers us when we fight:
" By His sweet influence was this begun
" With whom it ends, and so my Work is done.
To you then, ENGLISH GENTLEMEN; to whom
Our first part is addressed: -- Bestow your care
To act what may Gentility become;
That as ye in your Fathers Fortunes share,
Your Virtues may proclaim whose Sons ye were.
" It Is this will leave your Names more eminent
" Then Honor, fading Favor, or Descent.
Next, to you ENGLISH LADIES; who express
A native beauty in each act ye do,
Let good resolves prepare your morning dress,
And think on Heaven when wanton Suitors woo,
Or on those Mates ye stand affianc'd to.
" Fame is a precious odor, whose least grain
" Once shed, is hardly gathered up again.
LADIES LOVE LECTVRE to you have I read,
Where ye such fresh-choice-fragrant flowers may cull
As ye no other Ornaments shall need;
Fill then your Iv'ry-azur'd bosoms full,
Never any such did Atalanta pull.
" Prove useful Readers then, and, if ye err,
" Condemn me for a careless Lecturer.
Lastly, I Have cloz'd all in a SVPPLEMENT,
Where modest terms describe the art of love,
Which to the rest gives such Embellishment,
It Is styled the TRIVMPH of the TVRTLE-DOVE,
Whose reall-loyall Emblemes if ye prove,
" I shall not choose but like where ere I look,
" And for your sakes make bold to kiss the Book.
FINIS.
FOR THE MOST VIRTUOUS, AND Nobly-Accomplisht LADY, THE RIGHT HONORABLE,
ELIZABETH, (DOWAGER) COUNTESS of STRAFFORD; HIGHLY EMINENT IN THE SKALE OF THE
SERIOUS'T, AND SERENEST JUDGMENTS, FOR HER PIOUS CONSERVATION OF THE LIVING
MEMORY OF Her most Absolute CONSORT.

A CHARACTER OF HONOR.
TO write of Honor, and not amply, according to Honors Character, were a
derogation to her: and to write exactly, would require a more expert and
judicious Artist, then every rude Myson to take in hand a subject of such
consequence; But virtue, as she is best adorned when least garnished with
external colors: so Honor is most lively when she seems most naked of
Rhetorical Varnish. The best Moralls have ever portrayed Justice by a scale,
poyzing every action duly, discussing every ambiguity thoroughly, without
fixing of her eye on the object of Majesty commanding, or of Amity (with more
easy means) persuading; They have deciphered Fortitude, not by Thrasoe boast,
or a precipitate opposing her self to all dangers without mature judgment to
foresee, and resolution to prevent the iminency of all occurrents: which made
Homer dilate upon the essence of true Fotitude, represented in Hector, as an
Archytipe no less imitable, then for mannagement in all Assaies admirable: He
brings him in dehorting his brother Paris, from his inconsiderate purpose: with
this good caveat. It becomes us not to take Arms upon every sensual
respect, but to ground the motion of war upon a cause honestly moving. To be
brief, there should be no virtue which should not rather-character her self,
by her own purity, then be displaied by a curious or affective style; which
rather detracts then augments those perfect and unstained ornaments wherewith
she is endued: and that which Cicero speaks of the office of an Orator,
censuring that Speech as most vicious, which seems most curious; may I speak
of Honor, whose dependence is of Virtue: only illustrated in her self,
because her essence gives to her more eminence than the polished styles of the
best Rhetoricians could ever effect. But I will descend into the particular
discourse of truly honorable: What they should be that arrogate that Name, and
what they are that merit it. Honor relisheth best, when highliest descended:
not boasting with Lycas in the Tragedy of noble Ancestors, but of inward
virtues; making their minds the purest mansions of Nobility; their virtues,
the Symbolls of their d^scent and progeny. For what is it to challenge
precedencie by our Ancestors, being made Noble by them, whom our own actions
perchance, makes as ignoble? I can approve that disposition of Alexander the
best; who rather wished his Fathers exploits (though not in e^vy) to be
obscured, whereby his own memorable achievements might purchase him glory,
not by relation had to the prowess of his Father, but his own demerits; yet
not with a too listening ear of attention, hearing his warlike designs above
truth praised: but more willing to do, then hear of his doings. For hearing
Aristobulus on a time commending his memorable acts far above truth in his
writings, He threw the book into the river, as he was sailing over Hydaspis,
saying, he was almost moved to send Aristobulus after.

For this I have always observed in an honorable mind: no popular conceit
can transport her above her Shpaere; She cannot endure a temporizing Humorist,
that feeds on the air of his own applause; but like a wise Ithacus commits
the sails of his prudent and provident affections to be disposed by Virtue,
stopping his ear at the Incantations of the voice-alluring Siren, or
cup-attracting Cyrce. An honorable man stereth his Ship with no Stern of
Ambition, but with a temperate opinion of himself and his own Actions:
referring the whole current and passage of his intentions, purposes and
endeavors to his Countries welfare: whose safety he preferres before his own:
wishing rather death with a good opinion of his country, then immerited honors
with her detriment. The Truly Honorable will accept of no honors but such as
her deserts challenge: nor those neither, if not obtruded. This moved many of
the Ancient Heroes, whose acts deserve no less memory, then their life's did
glory, to expose themselves to all perils, whereby their names might be
recorded in the Annalls of Fame: leaving not only Statues or Monuments of what
they have been, but by the exact representation of their virtues, what they
are; for even the Pagans reserved a place of honor and celebrity to such as
had either exempted their Country from the servitude of her enemy, or had
augmented her glory by the voluntary resignation of their lives. Such were the
memorable Annalls of the Decii, Curtii, Bruti. Many of the worthy mannagers of
State in former times, desired to have no statues to be erected in their glory,
rather making their own virtues the liveliest records of their memory; the
reason whereof may be conceived or at least conjectured) by those occurrents
which even happened in their times: being pursued by that public foe to virtue
and all virtuous intendments, Envy: which (marrow-eating locust) attended the
worthiest personages that then breathed. Caesar had a Pompey, Pompey a
Septimius: Philotas his Perdiccas, Perdiccas his Pausanias, Antigonus his
Pharnaees, Tigranes his Tiridates.
African a Marius, Eschines a Demosthenes, Cicero a Cethegus. This might move,
and that not without just cause, that Column of justice, Lacedemons glory,
virtuous Agesilaus, to erect no statue in his honor, lest his life's Ideome
after death should be no less contemned, then he was in his life envied: In
meum honorem simulachra erigi non cupio, ea enim magis gloriam detrahunt quam
augent: in hoc autem humili thoro fama mea ab aliorum invidia maxim aliena
est: I desire to have no statue nor curious monument erected in mine honor:
they rather diminish than propagate our Glory; my Fame is least envied in this
low and dejected Bed of earth. Poor Prince, shall thy Name, which has spread
it self by so many victories atchived so many conquests purchased, non sine
sanguine and sudore, shall they fear to be vanquished or suppressed by times
anatomy, cankred envy, that never knew what Honor meant, but by corrupting
honor? O then how vain be those Trophies which are hung in honor of those
Heroes of former times! What avails it Cyrus of the translated Monarchy from
the Medes to the Persians? or for Alexander to have reduced the whole world
into one Monarchy? or Caesar so far to have dispersed his glory, making his
motto -- Veni, Vidi, Veci? The envenomed breath of one serpentine spirit can
consume, so great and happy virtues, which once aspired to that height, that
eminence, as they enstyled their possessors truly Heroical; making Flaccus
axiom no less true to demonstrate our declining memory, then to describe our
Times mortality: Quo pius Encas, quo Tullus dives and Ancus?
Pulvis and umbra sumus. --


Dust and ashes indeed; yet such, as albeit the slimy substance of the
external man rest immured and incaged in the Bowels of earth; yet there is an
aethereall, an heavenly aspiring beauty which cannot be depressed with the
terrene and massy weight of earths interior center -- alta petit, nec cessat,
quoad altissima perringit. It hovereth higher, as a Bird far removed from her
native repose, till it arrive at those Elysian Fields of true immortality,
where her expected habitation is possessed -- even the mansion of heavenly
Syon. Hence therefore may those carnal and epicureall men, who have wallowed
in all mundane delights, drunk deep of the sensual Lethe of their security,
be confounded with shame; who relinquishing the offered time of grace, expose
themselves to the Brothells of sin and impiety, forgetting all respect of
honor, as Corvinus Messala did his own Name -- and when they behold the
admired and most resplendent honors of our Time, either to decline by some in
auspicious accident, or cut by the common Sith of Fate, compare their
contaminate lives with their refined virtues. They are gone, and who will now
remember them? They were pillars of the state, while they lived, but now the
state is altered; where be all the fruits of their fruitless cares?
the harvest of so industrious labors? where is that great attendance which
gained them observation in the eye of the world? our state is now more happy,
we breath not on others breaths* yet receive no less content by our riot; we
are not publicly observed, and yet observe no less repute by private
attendance; we live merrily; and dye without the least perturbation, anguish or
pensive distraction of a mind surcharged with care, over-ballanced with
distress: ^e think not of ample inheritances, nor make others riot in our
funerals: cast and caute vivunt, qui aliorum quadra non vivunt, says the
Comic; and we may believe him. Our privacy gains us a retired liberty; rest
is not purchased by honor, nor the date of our time protracted by the
ambicious wings of preferment. Thus will the Sileni of our time descant upon
honors ruin, interpreting life, virtues best reward: when no less distaste is
conceived by the truly virtuous, of these distempered humors, which proceed
from the cachexie or evil disposition of our minds, then that renowned
Philosopher Heraclitus did by the vanity of Ephesus, or Diogenes by the vain
and fruitless rarities of Synope. For He is truly Honorable, who employeth
his oil, the faculties of his soul, so to his Countries avail, that he may
attain a more glorious seat, in his Country Supernall.

Neither are we to hold the ornaments of Honor only derivative from their
Princes favor. We have seen many eminent in their eye, whose actions have
thrown a worthy Odium upon their Persons,
by abusing the grace bestowed on them: and bringing a fatal and fearful
combustion upon the State by their ambition, or appetite of revenge: or some
other indirect aim; as all ages can present instances, and these of our own,
to our grief, even in these our late distractions.

And though Families of high extraction and innate honor might be held
worthiest to fit at the Stern, and to manage the highest affairs of State;
yet have Princes suffered in their too much confidence: and fallen under their
umbrage, by whom in their greatest extremes, they ought to have been
supported. And to enlarge our Observations in this particular; whence is it to
be thought, that this degeneration arises? Is it from corruption of blood, or
of time? We shall find a decay or defection in both: Effeminacy or Delicacy
being generally Nursers of our Gentry: which cannot choose but make Plants
sprung from eminent Descents look unlike themselves. So as, where Honor and
Valor with other decoring endowments, should close in competition with one
another: Education, which is a second Nature, intervenes and tells them, that
their Breeding never schooled them in any such notions. Former times might
find Seminaries for such abilities: but a long continued peace and fullness of
Fortunes have made the exercise of those abilities useless.

But shall we proceed a little further, and unrip the occasion or ground of
this malady? we shall render it briefly and truly.

Plat. in Repub. Zenoph. in Cyro. paed.
Let us suppose a Prince (as in a Platonic Idaea) seated in his Chair of
State; and in a full Assembly as in his Senat-house: where Persons of quality
and such as are elected for the benefit and indemnity of their Country appear
Assistants. And in this Grand Convene, Proposalls of high concern are debated:
but clearly carried by the Plebeian Party; as in our Roman Annalls, we may
find sundry Presidents. Whence is it, I say, that the Candidates and those of
nobler extraction should veil to the Lower: and to their Princes prejudice and
regal privilege* subscribe to their decretalls? Is it weakness or personal
interest, that begets in them this remissness? No; not wholly from weakness;
though their judgments be not of the first sight, but their facility in
subscribing to inferior Votes, is grounded upon three respects. Popularity;
Self Ends and Pusillanimity. The reasons you shall hear thus discussed.

It was well observed by a Statesman in our time; whose travells had
sufficiently read unto him, how Plebeian votes were ever for crying up liberty
of Subjects; and subjection of Sovereigns: that nothing was more dangerous to
a State government, then this popular overswaying power: being ever
over-clowded with discontents: and picking quarrels at the present Government,
were it never so prudently managed, nor peaceably administered. Innovation is
the posture of State, they aim at: which, though it introduce with it many
fearful consequences; they will choose rather to smile on their own
approaching ruin; then admit that State or Condition be it never so calm nor
serene, so long as they hold it incapable of a Change.

Now would you know the cause why these Plebeian votes pass for current; and
receive no opposition? We are to understand, how Highest Families are not ever
endued with the pregnant'st wits, nor percivest judgments. They find subtle
groundlings, who, though they came but the other day from Cart and never looked
so high as into the glorious Horizons of a Court; yet they have found the way
how to over-wit those perfumed ingenuities: who ravell out time in their
Court-dialect: and by intending more the trim then the dress; spoil the
pursuit of their arguments: and give easy way to their rural Opponents: who,
though less neat, hold more to Substance: and win ground upon those
State-popinja^es, by taking advantage upon their impertinencies. But to omit
these; for all of them retain not a savor of this Cask; there is another
bait, which these Lordly Lobsters usually nibble at; being a politic design,
as they conceit it; the apprehension whereof (though it expire like an airy
fancy) has great influence over them. And what is this illusion, but a popular
opinion? Their desire is to feed on vulgar air; the steame whereof for most
part choakes them. They have heard perchance, of some Persons, who by suffrage
of the people, and their applause, have swollen great in the opinion of the
State: and sometimes by being borne upon their shoulders, have attained the
highest pitch of Command. They observe, how the fame of men's actions receives
more life from popular opinion, than any other Instrument of State. These be
they who rubricate their own fancy: preferring a singular Opinion before a
Consistory.
And in this they canonize their own fancies, by applying that rapsody of the
Poet, to the imaginary extension of their spreading shadows: Quam pulchrum est
digito monstrari, and dicier hic est?


As the Theater, whereon they act their mimick-tyming parts, are hung about
with the Arras of vanity: so their prime care is to woo and ingratiate their
Spectators, and by winning in upon their affections, to purchase their applause
in the Cloze of their Actions. But as we commonly note, that Bystanders see
more then the Gamesters; so fares it with these deluding Changelings. For by
laboring to please those of inferior judgments, these Mechanics below the
Stage; they lose themselves in the opinion of these serious and mature Censors;
those Gallant Gallery wits (to pass by those Feminine Boxes, where pregnancie
even in Criticisme, oft-times transcends the quality of their sex) who can
discover their defects; for so enlivened are their judgments, and so far
distanced from a popular verge, where conceit, like a restrained vassal, is
tied to the demension of the Object they look on, and no further; as they know
well how to distinguish betwixt a Roscius and a Lysias. Popularity is an
affected kind of Action; which the higher it mounts, it ever lesseneth it
self the more in the eye of judgment.

Surely would Honor equally Balance her own worth, and enter into a serious
consideration with its own extraction; she would blush at nothing more, then
in suffering her self to be deluded with such a phanatick shadow of fruitless
glory: which (though it promise much) is ever failing in her reality of
performance: and not only failing the expectance; but drawing the too
credulous Believer into a dangerous precipice; from which no thread, were it
never so curiously spun by the artfull or subtle hand of an Ariadne, may ever
free him. It is prevention that is the life of Policy; but if opportunity be
not taken by the foretoppe; He fails in his pursuit of prevention, by
neglecting the season. Let Honor beware of aspiring, or raising herself one
Story higher, either by indirect ways, or weak hopes; both which She shall
find, like so many Egyptian Reeds, rather piercing than strengthening her in
her Progress, or Ascent to Greatness in her pursuit of popular fame; which
seldom or never accompanied the merit of any action: but observes the issue,
and upon that success grounds the basis of their opinion. Honor should
derogate much from her true native value, in entertaining such flitting and fly
blown Followers; who act nothing with alacrity but innovation, faction and
disloyalty.

Thus far you have heard what strong influence this Popular Froath has upon
Adulterate Honor; which, as it retains a Glo-worme Light, so it deceives
others with its false splendour, and makes the pursuers of it most unfortunate.
We shall little need to strengthen this Assertion with Instances: our own
Chronicles may afford us variety, without ranging further.

Now to the second Motive; wherein we shall lay open unto you, how powerfully
Self Ends operate upon this painted Greatness. Their Revenues are such
Landmarks, as they direct their course by them. These make them conclude
positively, though poorly for Persons of descent and quality: Si mihi res
constet, Satis est; quo publica flerem?
Non alia pendet compage nostra domus.


Public safety is the lightest feather in their Skale. So they may riot and
play the sensual Libertines in the free and undisturbed enjoyment of their
own; they hold the Game well played to their advantage. No defection of
Subjects; no alteration of Government, no decrease of Commerce, no hostile
invasion by a surreptitious Nation; can work much upon their Affections: or
resolve their adamantine temper to a compassionate tear, The wheel of their
Fortune holds a constant course, amidst these inconstant and vertiginous
wheelings of the State. And this is enough for them.

Now to preserve these, and stand at distance, like priviledg'd Persons,
secured from exception or opposition; they ever have an intentive eye upon the
stronger Party. And these they follow with a servile reverence.

How happy had it been for these Moaths of Honor to have been Soldiers of
Fortune, or younger Brothers, or persons of inferior quality; that the
lowness of their condition might have freed them from the pursuit of such
dishonorable Self Ends. The Maxim is true: O quam multi foeliciores fuissent,
si minus possedissent! whereas, a spirit clothed with true habilliments of
honor, will rather suffer all extremes; then admit an injurious or
disgraceful bargain in the sale or prostitution of his honor.

Sext. Aurel.
The Historian returns us the relation of a foolish Emperor; who, when news
came unto him, that Rome was taken; He imagining it to be his Hen which he
called Roma, fell into a violent passion, and torrent of tears for the loss of
his Bird. I cannot more properly resemble them then to this brainsick Prince;
who preferred so contemptible a Creature before the Surprise of his own Person,
and the ruin of his Empire. Tears have easy issues and avenues that break
forth upon such inconsiderable trifles. And this, even in this last Scean and
Catastrophee of our imbroyled State, (as some of our traducing Critics blanch
it) might we find instanced in sundry Persons of note; whose actions, in
parallel lines directly tended to this Center. For although they beheld
Spectacles of grief every where numerously presented, the No Government but may
present the Face of a Commonwealth; So long as good Laws be regents, and
Subjects real in their Obedience.

Principes tyrannidem gravitis exercent quam Optimates; ni optimi sint
Principes. Bodin. de Repub.


Face of their Country changed; those whom they held in time of peace
deservingly honored, and in relation to themselves most indeared; stripped of
what they justly enjoyed: and for their honest Principles, exposed to the
weight of an injurious and Malignant Censure; yet some of these, whose ripe and
mellow years, besides the distractions of the time, might have taught them a
more useful lesson; never, or very coldly applied the sundry traverses of
others misfortunes to their own condition. Their Connivence and Concurrence
with those Eminent Votaries, who bore the sway, and made their Wills, their
Laws; would (as they hoped) secure their Persons and States. But they found
their ill-grounded confidence mere foolishness. The umbrage of that A fair
Conquest cannot properly rceive the Style of Usu^pation. Paraeus.
usurped greatness, whereon they relied, could not supersede that guiltiness,
which their actions, though with much privacy carried, had casually incurred.

It was the least of their care, and took the lowest place in their
apprehension of grief, to see a late-flourishing State much envyed by foreign
Nations (being such a Storehouse of all necessary provision, and an enclosed
Garden of selected delicacies) to see, I say, so choice and well-cultuated a
Soil, soyled with perfidious feet, and made a wild This by inversion, was
sometimes the complaint of the Peers, against the Boores of France, occasioned
upon their late distractions.
Forest for rational Brutes. This they lightly resented; it begot no qualme
in them to see the State quite turned off the hinges: so they remained secure
by hugging the Constitutions of a Which Corruption arises not wholly from the
indisposure of a State; but distemper of Mind.
Corrupted State; and by virtue of that protection, were not in fear to be
turned out of their own Houses.

Thus have you heard how strait-lac'd these selfe-interested Personages are,
and have been ever to their own ends; being deterred from opposition, or
speaking in defense of their Country or ancient-regall privileges in time of
danger for fear of loss; or through some other servile respects, by being
over-awed with number, a great derogation to Persons of Honor.

We are now to descend to the last, but lowest Staire; wherein we shall find
how these declining spirits retardate their flight in the pursuit of honorable
actions, through Pusillanimity. So as, none would hold them, by seriously
reflecting on them, but for such a Broad as had been hatched from the Eggs of
those Paphlagonian Partridges; Aelian.
which our Naturallists report to have no hearts.

Neither be our Neuters much better: who, like those Salmacian Sharks have two
hearts; for these can skrew their posture to the time, and become serviceable
shadows to any commands; presenting hope of advantage or assurance to their
present condition.

These Cinnamon-curtaine Lordings, who sacrifice more devotion to their Glass
and Complexion, then any noble design, or virile action; being schooled only
in the discipline of Complement, and Frenchifide wholly in Ducks, Cringes and
Congies; These, I say, having left their Fathers Houses, (ancient Monuments of
Hospitality) have resolved, (for so their Effeminate course proclaims) neither
to increase nor preserve the Honor of them. The Camp has ever held an
antipathy to the Curtain. Loyalty, or what address soever, look it never so
fixtly upon Honor, cannot gentilize their Humor. Their growth professes them
mere State-Sycamours; all for shade, naught for fruit. Or such as the witty
Emblematist portray'd under the notion of Galeati Lepoares, who would be in the
Van at a Feast, but in the Reere at a Fray; These men's resolutions are not to
endanger their persons upon any rate. To obtain a Victory without hazard, and
partake a rich spoil without blood, is the height of their ambition: and the
utmost pitch of their valor.

To see a Kingdom at Stake, or a Prince acting his last tragic Scene on a
Stage; is not so much as resented by them. Pusillanimity has begot in them such
a strange kind of Charity (if it may without offense assume that name) as they
can look upon the innovated deformity of a State; violation of Laws and
liberties, profanation of divine honor, or whatsoever is most odious to
humanity, without a thought of revenge: or aim to redress. Were Honor to be
purchased in their days by the sword; how slowly would it be conferred: how
weakly merited? Such is the metal of these partiall-guilt pieces of
Sophisticated Honor: it cannot endure the touch.

Yet we shall observe in many of these, military promises: presentiments of
valor: but wherein consist they? In surly and supercilious Looks to their
over awed followers: or affronts to disgraced favorites: but these Lions
within verge of the Court, appear ever Lambs in the Camp. They bless them
from the report of a Cannon, as from a stroke of Thunder. Youth inured to a
Canopy, is not so easily disciplined in a course of Soldiery.

It was the saying of Epaminondas; That he could not fiddle, but he knew how to
make a small village a glorious City. Whereas these, whose Character we return
in this place, are just Antipodes to his harmony. A Chest of Viols, or a set of
Lutes, is the only brave military Fyle wherein they desire to be inlisted.

If this be the Those were held in the Roman account worthy of Honor, who,
without any relative extraction acquired it by their Valor.

Var. de Antiq. Romans

Velleius de mor Gent. Val. in C. de Fort. Viger. de Milit. Arist. in Polit.
Polyb.


Badge of Honor, let feminine delicacy arrogate to it self, the style of
Valor. But these be dull-pallid colors in the Annals of Heraldry: and deserve
no other deblazonry (to beget a glowing blush in their successors) then lines
blanched with infamy.

Let us here then in the Cloze of our Character, present these Advertisements
to Honor; that she may know how and in what posture to preserve her State
cleared from the opinion of a deceiving luster: by appearing more
really-gracefull, then poorely-popular. To complete this Work, it will conduce
highly to her advantage, to be a constant professor of fidelity; in the first
place to Sovereignty. And next in all offices of Amity. An affable smile gives
an excellent grace to the countenance of Honor. Amicitia nunquam minore
acquirenda est dispendio quam Clementia. Clemency gains most with least cost.
In her express of bounty, or works of Charity, let Discretion be her Almoner:
By an indisposed liberallity, many have lost more then they have won. In
Actions of valor, Honor should be rather resolute than daring: and in nothing
more confident then in the maintenance of a good Cause. For Habit; more comely
then gaudy, is the nearest livery: being to be known better by what we are,
then what we wear. For Diet; delicacy should be a stranger to her palate. These
Olia's of our Time have brought an Odium upon our State. Lastly, a princely
command or composure of Her Affections, will return Her absolute in all.

FINIS.

