Mercurius Britanicus, OR The English Intelligencer.

A Tragic-Comedy, AT PARIS.

Acted with great Applause.

Printed in the year, 1641.

The Scene Smyrna. The Persons.
1. Euthymius Two familiar friends. 2. Theocritus Two familiar friends. 3.
Heraclitus Two Philosophers. 4. Democritus Two Philosophers. 5. Aegon
Rustickes. 6. Althaea Rustickes. 7. Claudius 8. Cratippus 9. Craticius 10.
Vigetius, his Ghost feebly appearing. 11. Trivius 12. Curvus Acillus 13.
Ioachinus, his ghost dreadfully appearing. 14. Hortensius, appearing amiably.
15. Antrivius, appearing friendly. 16. Damocles Penal Judges, 17. Gliciscus
Horologus Penal Judges, 18. Chrysomitris Penal Judges, 19. Brundusius. Penal
Judges, 20. Primiachus A Committer. 21. Chambrensis A Committer. 22. Manilius A
Committer. 23. Perdiccas A Committer. 24. Euchrystus, Clearke of the Court. 25.
Roderigo, Porter. 26. Arietus Citizens of Smyrna. 27. Priscilla Citizens of
Smyrna. Chor. Of vulgar people Chor. Of Parliament men.
The Censure of the Judges: OR, THE COURT CVRE.
ACT THE FIRST.
Euthimius. Theocritus. Euthym. MY good friend Theocritus; whether away so
speedily?


Theoc. Know you not what is this day done in that excellent School of Virtue
and literature, that most flourishing, and just Consistory of Peers and
Commons?


Euthim. Private employments, have made me a mere stranger to public
affairs. Pray, what is it?


Theoc. Know my Euthimius, that this day the Judges must undergo Judgment,
those Conscript Fathers whose purple we once adored are now sick of a
Judicial Fever, by reason of their corrupt sentence given; to the greivance
of the Subject, and favor of their Prince.


Euthym. Alas! In what a state are we, when Judges must render an account of
their actions upon earth before Judges?


Theoc. Believe me Euthymus, they must; nor will they escape the Gallows, if
they give not very good satisfaction to that Honorable and grave assembly nor
will they easily so do: For it is generally said that they were the very
fountain of all the tears and tumults of this languishing Island.


Euthym. Let them all dye, if they have abused the seat of Judgment; it is
much better that one perish then an unity: a luxurious branch, then a fruitful
vine, some kind of mercy is cruelty; by whose remissness or burden rather,
every diseased commonwealth is afflicted: This have I always said, and this
renowned Island has found it too true by experience: to spare the evil, is an
endammagement to the good. But what are these?


Enter Heraclitus and Democritus. Theoc. If I should directly express their
conditions, I should show you diverse gestures arising from the self same
affection. They are two Philosophers that ieere and weep at the passages of
the World. He, Heraclitus plays the part of a compassionate man, he is (...)
with tears, and no sooner sees then sighs at the vanities of men; But the
other, Democritus derides the age; and scoffeth men's general folly; setting up
this Motto over his door.

Miserum me video, and rideo;
Infelicem servideo, (...) invideo
I see my own misery and laugh at it; I see thy misery and envy it not. But
many there are who do outwardly rejoice, but inwardly sigh: they laugh and
caroll with their mouths, but lament and condole with their hearts. This may
you soon perceive by their enterchange of discourse.


Herach My good Democritus, what is the reason that thou laughest?


Democ. Because thou weepest; for what can thou find in this (...) Theater
of the world, which is worthy thy smallest tear? where servants are made
Lords, Lords servants; the Masters head is cut off, the servant rises up, and
(...) into his place wives bewail the funeral of their (...) tears and
offering leap into their graves; and yet before one worm has entered into the
winding (...) or before the flowers are withered wherewith the course was
garnished, they entertain new affections and (...)


Herac. These things (...) tear from my eyes: but what besides, Democritus?


Democ. What besides do thou ask? Get thee (...), and thou shall every where
find the spectacles of derision. This man is honored in the sight of his
Prince; enjoys his delights, stretches upon beds of yvory, and is (...) with
honors, as with burden; he seeks nothing, but he acquires it, he (...), but
he obtaines it; all men that sees his estate admires him, and esteems him the
happiest man upon the earth: in the mean while one small cloud obsoureth all
these false beams in a day, ye in a minute of an hour, his Prime leaves him,
his glory departs like a dream; and his Atlas who carried such heaps, such
mountains of honor upon his shoulders, has his exit with reproach; hah, hah,
hah. Yet no sooner has this Hero suffered an inrevocable fate; but he is wished
alive again by them, who in his life and glory prosecuted him with extremest
violence: They hate him alive; lament his dead, and with pious tears desire
his restriction: but great (...) heads are sooner taken off, then set on
again. In these times it is is more security to be a foot then a wise man;
for a wise man's head is a subject for the axe, the fool keeps his upon his
shoulders* will you hear more?


Herac. Proceed, dear Democritus; these conceits are not more pleasant to
thee then my tears ate to me.


Democ. Weep child, weep, and that thou may seem the more idle in it, see
how parents live penuriously that they may make their sons prodigal the
sooner; yet how they make them selves deptors to nature that they may riot the
more licentiously: walk on, into this most stately City, look about thee,
thou shall see windows opened and paintd faces looking out, inviting thee with
their looks. Thou shall find althings saleable in Troinovant; the dainty dames
will untie thy purse strings with a busse: out goes the husband, in comes the
friend; hah, hah, hah. Thou shall find some that resign their offices least
they should loose them; others leaving their nest, that thy and their young may
not perish, others that abounded through rapine miserably exhausted; others
adorned with others feathers, that have cast their own. Here thou shall see
Cobblers and hucksters that rise out of old shoes and panniers, beating the
Pulpit, and broaching new doctrines, as if they were Regij Professores, and
held by the rabble to be most profound Divinity: yea, I cannot wash my hands but
me thinks I see the soapy effigies of Brunfield in the Basin* nor can I go
down into a celler, but I find the lively statue of Master Abell; yea I
cannot, untie my shoe, but I call to mind that patent for Leather and deride
it; For men now truly seem turned into trees bringing forth spacious
branches, but fruits of vanity: in a word all the world is full of fools, and
ridiculous in the eyes of Democritus.


Herac. It is a vile disposition to joy in the discommodityes of others.


Democ. True; but hence it is that I laugh so much, because all things are
cumbred with their own discommodity.


Herac. In the mean while, they become noxious unto them.


Democ. And justly, my Heraclitus; for who if he were wise would not forsake
an house of clay to come unto an heavenly dominion* But these mad men place
their Elysium upon earth, little regarding the future that they may enjoy the
present. They demolish, build up, they provide clothes for moths and edifices
for the wind. They no sooner perceive the hook of honor, then they greedily
swallow it; that sticks in their throats, and they are worthily taken* Nor
do these things rage only in greener minds; for although (as says that
Sicilian) It is a prodigy for a young man to be old, ridiculous for an old man
to be young; yet you may see the hoary Elders of this land, that have a foot in
the grave, and by their age should have wisdom, or at the least authority and
reverence, plunged into most heinous crimes; so that it may truly be said of
them, they grow as old in vices as in years.


Herac. You speak strangely.


Democ. But very truly of these old doges. The wolf will sooner change his
hair then his heart: the wool will not easily loose its first color, nor the
vessel its first favor.


Herac. But my hope is that you will find none in this whole Island so
wickedly and wretchedly doting, as to prefer worldly wealth before Elysian
happiness.


Democ. Go on and proceed my doefull Heraclitus, in your madness, are there
not many I pray of that (...) opinion* that would rather loose their pants in
Paradise then in Paris. The Judges can (...) those venerable and conscript
Fathers, who are this very day in trial for their lives.


Herac. Alas! The Judges.


Democ. I, the Judges. Therefore let us both go thither: for we shall there
hear many things proportionable to thy tears and convenient for my laughter.


Herac. I will go very willingly; where if I hear Judgment turned into
Whi^^^^ed, I shall with my tears lament those unhappie Fathers; yea I shall
transform my self wholly into a Niche.


Democ. Go on fool, go; hah, hah, hah. The whole world is diseased; as many
Monopolies as inhabitants; hah, hah, hah. Exeunt.


Theoc. Let us follow them, Euthymius: There is room for good stoore of
company.


Euthym. I scare, Theocritus that we shall not be admitted, because we are no
members of that Honorable Assembly.


Theoc. Let not that trouble you, there is none that has good locks and good
clothes, but he shall have entrance I warrant you; but who are these?


Enter Aegon, and Althea. Euthym. They seem to be of the Country by their
simple discourse. Just us listen to them; for I suspect but little cunning in
their coats, they will talk much about matters of State, and their rudeness
will procure us good sport.


Aegon. News Althea, I have a whole dicker of news for thee.


Alth. What is that my small friend.


Aegon. I will tell thee a secret, my honey: we shall have a trienniall
Parliament, every year.


Alth. What is that trienniall? Does it belong to the keeping of sheep or
goats, stopping of gaps, or greasing of sheep tell me pray?


Aegon. Let that suffice, love, that we shall have this good Trienniall. As for
my part I must needs confess, I know not whether Trienniall be man or woman.
But this I know, that for the report of it in the country, we past all the
night in making bon-fires and playing the good fellow.


Alth. Fie, fie: That Word does very much trouble me. This husband of mine,
being sometime an University man, and now a Grasier, promised that he would
perform his good will to me every third year, and I kindly gave him thanks,
not knowing that he would do it but once every third year.


Aegon. I am old, what can thou look for from me? But come let us go near
the Parliament door, for there are great businesses to day concerning the
Judges.


Alth. What shall they be hanged.


Aegon. I know not, but they are in such danger, that as they say their
breeches make buttons.


Alth. What shall we do there? such matters are not fit for us; they are to
high for our simple capacities.


Aegon. Let us go however; if we hear nothing, we will devise something, to
make them wonder at in the Country. Exeunt.


Theoc. Let us be as desirous to hear, since all flock thither let us hasten
and join our selves to their company. A common evil should be heard with
common indignation.


Euthym. Go on we willingly will bestow the pains.


The second Act.
The door being opened, the Curtain drawn, Euchrifin Clerk of the Court
brings out the brakes; calls the Judge by name, reads their inditments;
after which Primiachus Cambrensis and Manilius, by turns; object unto them; to
whom the Judges in like manner make their Answer. Enter the Ghost of Coriolanus
without an head. O Let Astrea still bear sway
In this high Court. Thus does he pray.
Who here once got the laurel wreath
Now cut off by untimely death.
Give Justice not forgetting grace
Be not too mild, nor to severe;
Those that deserves a Judges place,
Know how to punish and to spare
Oil is not still to be inful'd
In green wounds Balsum's to be used.
Let King, and Kingdom still aspire
This Coriolanus does desire.
From whom the peoples direful rage
Nor the black rod, the axe, the stage
Of blood, nor the grime face of death
Could ever draw one panting breath.
See how he lives in's funeral
More happy in a wretched fall;
For now he reigns beyond the sky
with Demigods in company.
"Farewell all that earth ere gave
"Death is my gain, my rest the grave. Exit.
Chor. What prodigyes appears within this place;
Yet full of pious admonitions.
which with on voice, one vote, one hand, one motion
We all will execute -- but these things* pass from whence they came -- you
officers proceed.


Euch. Ho, Roderigo, bring for your prisoners


Rod. Who shall be brought first*


Primach. Let them be brought in order, as they gave in their answers.
Ignorance of order confounds the form of Justice. wherefore let us first
begin with the first; proceeding from the Junior to the senior Judges* as they
have particularly offended, let them particularly receive their trial. They
shall find us far more attentive and upright Judges, then they have showed
themselves in the case of shipping.


Euchris. Porter bring Claudius to the bar, hold up your hand Claudius: Thou
art endited by the name of Claudius, that in Hilary term 1637. Contrary so the
peace of the common wealth, the liberty of the subject, and the testimony of
thy own conscience, not having God before thine eyes, thou did Traitorously,
Maliciously and wickedly, give sentence for shipmoney without evident
necessity, due and payable to the King, in whose power it was solely to Judge
of his necessity. Speak Claudius, art thou guilty of the crime for which thou
stand indicted.


Clau. I confess I have been somewhat erroneous in mine office; but all men
know I have continued in it but a short time* wherefore as my impeachments are
the fewer, so I hope your censure will be the more propitious.


Cambr. This conduces little to your defense; for if you had been in it
longer, and governed that seat it is probable, your offenses had been
multiplied, it was your general crime, and you must expect a general
punishment.


Democ. Ho, Chacon hire the servants; thou will have work sufficient; here is
a press of fat Judges coming; hah, hah, hah.


Clerk. Claudius stand aside Roder, bring Cratippus to the bar: hold up thy
hand Cratippus* Thou art indicted by the name of Cratippus, that in Hillary
Term 1637. thou did contrary to the peace of the commonweal, the liberty of
the subject, and the testimony of thine own conscience, traitorously,
maliciously, and wickedly give sentence for ship money, due and payable to the
King without evident necessity, whereof the King has had power solely to
judge, speak Cratippus art thou guilty of the crime for which thou art endited.


Democ. Hoe has an ox in's mouth, as says the Proverb, or a cup in his
throat, he cannot speak a word.


Manil. O Cratippus, break not thy silence, hold thy peace desist and blush.
Nor would any thing have become you better if you had done so always: but a
pious blush is an unwonted punishment for such offenders, we have heard that
you were ever addicted to fordid lucre, pinching your self to augment you
gain. No unjust occasion of getting could pass you, wherefore there is no
reason you should pass unpunisht. For whom have you in this company, whom in
this honored round that will rise up in your defense and vindicate your
uniustice? on or none, you had one but much unlike you, your brother
Hortensius, who religiously sat with you on the same bench, but differed
from your affections; for his opinion in this case of Ship-mony was consonant
to Curvus, Acililius. These two respected not Writs of ease, nor the thundering
threats of that fugative Chrysomitris, they preferred the odor of a good name
before titles of honor, which glory of fame he that neglects, is most
cruel: wherefore although Hortensius be now dead, he has left such a memory
to posterity, that monuments of marble, brass, and Ivory will sooner decay
then his renown amongst his Countrymen.


Cratip. I deny not but that I am guilty, and desire the favor of this high
Court; otherwise as our sentence was alike, let one boat carry us away
together: I would speak more, but am hindered with the quinsie.


Democ. In reason they should possess all Anticyra, our Ancesters judged a
little house to be a commonweal, but these have contracted the whole
commonweal into their own house, yea a little corner of their house.


Herac. O the deplorable misery of wretched man!


Democ. These things deserve not a tear; I willingly permit them to be mad:
for see how deservedly Cratippus is punished; he has sold his tongue so long
for money, that he has not enough left to ask pardon for his life; hah, hah,
hah.


Clerk. Call Corticeus to the bar: hold up thy hand Corticeus, thou art
indicted by the name of Corticeus, for that in Hillarie Term, Anno Dom. 1637.
thou did contrary to the peace of the Commonweal, the liberty of the
subject, and the testimony of thine own conscience, not having God before
thine eyes, traitorously, maliciously, and wickedly given sentence for Shipmony
to be paid unto the King without evident necessity, whereof he had sole power
to Judge; speak Corticeus, art thou guilty of what thou stand indicted.


Cortic. Not guilty.


Clerk. Thou art found guilty, help thee God.


Camb. We have much to say unto you Curticeus: you have eloquence sufficient,
but wisdom too little. There was no man more readier to speak law, yea to
wrest it, and like a nose of wax compose it to any form. But what avail
these natural parts, this happiness of wit and genius? It is difficult to
swim at first without help: you began to fly abroad like an unfledged Lapwing
with your shell upon your head, In your Circuit especially in the Dutchey of
Lancaster, at which time that worthy Gentleman Master Farringdon was Sheriff,
you exercised your tyrany, showing, your loftiness in all places, to your no
small hatred for other sins wait upon evil works that they may be done: but
pride waits on good works that they perish.

He that flowed with a thousand virtues, lost his happiness through
arrogance, other vices by the presence of God, only Pride opposes it self
against him. Yea, with what audaciousnesse and insolence did you maintain this
exploded case of Ship-mony, as if you only had the Monopoly of wit and reason?
wherefore as every one shows himself more obstinate in a crime, the more
severely is he to be censured.

If Schism deserve punishment, Heresy merits hell.


Cortic. I call Heaven to witness, I should have lived and dyed in that
opinion were I not contradicted by the Authority of this grave consistory, for
we read so many books, collections, statutes and Annals that if we were
licensed to argue, we could support this our opinion with good reasons and
conclusions.


Camb. Give place; we have already examined your reasons and arguments.


Democ. Of what use I marvel, is eloquence, when a man shall end his life in a
string?


Clar. Ho Porter, where is Vigetius?


Rod. We have no such man.


Prim. But such an one we had, who easily assenting to his brother Corticeus
opinion, never did stick unto him in any thing, but in this sentence of
Shipmony. He always feigned himself not well if he were to make an
argument. And when he entered into it (having lost his reasons very happily in
the street) no man ever offended with greater brevity: and in this only he
has shown himself wise, that he has prevented our censure by death.

Wherefore it may be said Vigetius his Ghost with a weak gesture appears and
vanishes. of him that he was once Green, and Flourished, he was descended
from an ancient house, and for this was to be commended that he sought rather
to keep his ancient Patrimony then to increase it.


Democ. Many men show themselves wiser by dying then by living: hah, hah, hah.


Clerk. In peace let him go: bring Trivius to the bar, hold up your hand:
Trivius, Thou art indicted by the name of Trivius, that in Michaelmas Term
1638. thou did contrary to the peace of the Commonweal, the liberty of the
subject, and the testimony of thine own conscience, not having the fear of
God before thy eyes, traitorously, maliciously, and wickedly give sentence for
Ship Money payable to the King without evident necessity, whereof he himself
was the sole Judge. Speak Trivius, art thou guilty of the crime for which thou
stand endited?


Manil. Why are you silent, will you be pressed?


Democ. He has pressed many a rich widow, what if he be now pressed himself:
hah, hah, hah.


Trivi. I have little for the present to say in my defense.


Manil. Nor ever will you have more; be silent and hear: This is a man whom no
Lawyer exceeded in riches, yet non is more ignorant in the laws; he is
brought at last into public, to make himself a Synonoma to his name. For
although there is no contending with Ghosts, yet we determine to portrait this
snake, and deliniate this prodigy of men in his right colors, and with such
brevity as may be least irksome to the hearers.


Democ. Let us stand up and see their painted Gorgons head.


Man. This Trivius a true trivial Trivius, a man satiated with widows, but
widowed of goodness, of of a strong and sinewy body rather then a witty and
ingenuous heart, having good success in his suits sucked more marrow from
other men's relicts, then ever he received by the poor practice of his
profession. He speaks much with little discretion, and having his brains in
his tongue, will utter an ocean of words without the least drop of reason.


Trib. You have painted me to an hair, worthy Manilius, I confess I am
altogether ignorant of the laws, and as blind men are wont to do, I easily
subscribed to the opinion and judgment of my brothers: wherefore my ignorance
desires pardon, and cries that you should spare him whom God will spare as
being an INNOCENT.


Manil. You devised a redier answer for me Trivius then any defense for your
self: ignorance excuses a tanto, not a toto: you had a good example before,
namely Antrivius deceased, and sleeping in peace, who as his pen witnesses
being sick on his bed, would assent to no such opinion. But you adoring your
money not only in the Image, but in the rust; preferred your dross before your
peace of conscience, wherefore as you have milkt your widows, so let the
exchequer milk you of all that you have.


Democ. Very good! the Goat must now be milkt. This Ignoramus paies the price
of his Ignorance, one day takes away what many years have gathered; and the
exchequer draines the fortunes of so many wives, hah, hah, hah.


Herac. Human affairs never succeed well where divine service is neglected.


Clerk. Let Trivius be taken away and kept close prisoner, least he escape;
and Roderigo keep your hand close, lest by his stolen merchandise he procure
his liberty.


Prim. To speak of you most honored Curvus Acilius, your constancy and
integrity has with a beam of the Sun described you a father of your
country, the star of the Court, and a true Son of justice, and have left you
a memory to posterity which shall never be extinguished by the injury of time
or forgetfulness: for you have utterly conquered all envy, and in this last
date of your age have erected a statue in the Courts of the living, whereunto
no better Epitaph can be added, then Sacred to the memory of Curvus Acilius.


Democ. O how much does this Trivius differ from Acilius? the one as he
singularly knew the laws, so he rightly despensed them, the other neither
dispensed them nor knew them.


Herac. In this negligent and retchlesse age, vices like grass in pits are
wont to spring out men's laziness from whence we find it true, that evils
are much more incurable in the old then in the young.


Democ. Yet if old men would more diligently measure their hour as much as
they are nearer death, they should live more uprightly. But now there is such
corruption of life, that men do never more love the earth, then when thy
should leave it; never less regard heaven, then when they should go thither:
Hold my sides least I burst with laughter, young men grow old, and old men
young; hah, hah, hah.


Clerk. Bring forth Ioachimus.


Rod. He is departed his own prison before he was committed to our custody.


Camb. He is dead, and is beholding unto death; for although he were a very
subtle Lawyer, in his cunning and intricate arguments, and showed himself a
true Tytides, who wavering Ioachimus Ghost wavering with dreadful motion
appears, and vanishes. this way and that, doubted whether to join with
Hector or Achilles, saying, whom to fly I know, whom to follow I know not; yet
the more severely was he to be punished because he was so industrious to
dissemble and corrupt the truth.


Democ. But the fates have taken him out of your hands; and by dying in time he
prevented an untimely death.


Clerk. Bring forth Hortensius.


Rod. He was never committed to our custody.


Manil. Thou say true, Roderigo, he was a man of such unstained life* that
he showed himself truly worthy both in life and death: wherefore the memory
of so his just and upright Hortensius Ghost with an amiable countenance
appears and vanishes. a man is to be lamented with perpetual Elegye: for
he deservedly got the name of an honest Judge and a poor studient: in which
title he might glory more then in the Empire of the World. -- He Conquered
envy by his virtues, and won honor in his death.


Herac. With what pious sentences are good men's tombs to be engraven?


Democ. From hence proceed those Adagyes. Every evil man is a fool, no evil
man is happy. A wise man is every where at home: none but a fool can be
banished.


Herac, He truly travelleth from home, my Democ. who enjoys not himself.


Manil. Let him depart, and serve for a good example.


Clerk. Call forth Antrivius.


Rodo. He was called forth long since.


Clerk. Where appeared he? Antrivius his ghost with a lovely countenance
appears and vanishes.


Rodo. Where he arrived, he is far enough free from our our hands or manicles.


Prim. By what authority?


Rodo. By the command of a crabbed and imperious noble man, who having waited a
while at the prison door, swore he would enter, or break off the hinges. He
was of so fierce and terrible aspect, that I gave him way for fear; and as
soon as I delivered my prisoner, he caught him by the hair and vanished


Camb. No man can resist an inevitable fate. But if that man had lived unto
these days, his sentence had been so upright in this dispute, that he had
been freed and made an happy end of his long-wearied age. Let him sleep in
peace, as he flourished in the light; and the more he flourished for being the
less contentious in his cases.


Democ. It Is best to speak well of the dead; but if he had not been so sickly
of body, perchance he had not been so sound in mind.


Herac. You say true Democritus; for sickness afflicts the body, but cures
the soul.


Democ. What mad men are those in the mean while, who being healthy in body,
are diseased in their mind?


Clerk. Sergeant, bring Damocles to the bar, hold up your hand: Damocles,
Thou art indicted by the name of Damocles that in Hilary Term 1638. thou
did contrary to the peace of the Commonweal, the liberty of the subject,
and the testimony of thine own conscience, not having the fear of God before
thy eyes, traitorously, maliciously, and wickedly give sentence for Ship Money
payable to the King, without evident necessity, whereof he himself was the
sole Judge* Speak Damocles, art thou guilty of the crime for which thou art
endited.


Dam. I confess I am not altogether guilty nor innocent: for he that will
exactly scan over my arguments: he shall find me disagreeing from the opion of
my brothers: for I did not possitively say that such a revenue was due;
wherefore as our sentence was more moderate, so I hope your censure will be
more mild. Our arguments were defended and mained by diverse good circumstances.
Let it be your goodness to favor my age, which long since had a discharge,
and is now miserably tired with cares and sorrows.


Prim. O Damocles, you cannot so escape; notwithstanding your condition is
deplorable: for in many causes you have got a good report: you never sold your
breath, and if your clients cause were good and honest, you constantly pleaded
it; yea, as we are informed, you have little at home, but wants and debts
abroad; from whence we esteem your poverty, your justice, these things may
perchance procure your mitigation, but no absolute freedom.


Herac. O poor Judge, will not thine indignity get thee off?


Democ. Hold your peace; this fool deserves the greatest punishment of all;
for having flourished so many years amongst us, and having so many occasions
of gain as baits hanging before him, like an ill cook, he could not so much
as lick his fingers; hah, hah, hah.


Camb. We have sufficiently scoured this Lernean lake, let us now proceed
unto other ranks; and I fear we shall find as many snakes in other dens. But
that we may the better cleanse these Augean stables, and there may be no room
for impudence or ignorance: as for Gliciscus, who held the place of a cipher
having little learning and less law, as he was clock keeper to the Judges,
so we doom him to the keeping of a clock-hoase. He has little understanding,
and therefore should the more gently be dealt withal.


Democ With what an asses ear he hearkens to it.


Clerk. Does it please you that we shall proceed unto others?


Prim. By all means, that they may be joined in their punishment, as they
were linckt together in the crime.


Clerk. Ho, sir Knight of the black rod, bring forth Chrysomitris.


Rodo. He has made an escape.


Manil. Wither I pray?


Rodo. He is fled into another Country, and has left his nest lest he should
be taken in it; and ever since that time they say he has rousted in France.


Manil. O what madness possessed him, how lively does that saving point out
Chrysomitris, that evil counsel is still worse to the Counselor.


Rodo. Leaving now his consultar dignity it is said he follows the wars,
and that lately upon an injury offered him he disarmed his enemy, showing
himself as able a soldier as an eloquent Rhetorician.


Camb. How many excellent gifts has nature bestowed on him; which if they had
been seasoned with humility and grace, they had made him completely famous.
But to proud men no burden is more dangerous then honor: they so easily
change their conditions, that they will not know their friends and acquaintance.
These tumors of the world prick on their minds with such a strange kind of
fury, that they make themselves hated by their familiers and others: wherefore
an office is best aquired by a Magistrate; nor is it better bestowed on any
then on him who seeks it not at all, or very coldly. This he well advised who
said: let it be given to him that denies it, and denied to him that excepts
it. But long let this Chrysomitris nest in a foreign nation before he be
recalled. We have enough of such saluters already: we have too tenderly
cherished such ominous birds; let them leave our coasts and return no more
least they destroy the mother that nourished them. But that we may comprise
all in one, and never did any man show himself more ungrateful then this


Chrysomitris. For notwithstanding his infinite engagements, he imputed his
crimes unto his Prince; whereas a constant and resolute mind would sooner
endured a thousand deaths, yea (like that heroicke spirit that lately suffered)
would with a cheerful look retort the threats of inexorable fate, then cast
the least aspersion upon a Prince so well deserving. But let him pass with his
eloquence, then whom never was Judge more unjust, never a Lord keeper more
corrupt nor more poor, no Soliciter more impure and more importunate: In the
mean while lest we be reckoned in their number who have eloquent tongues,
but corrupt hearts, let us discourse of every thing propounded unto us not so
curiously as faithfully and discreetly, not so exactly as justly and rightfully.


Democ. O miserable happiness! splendid servitude! he has lost his fame,
fortune, voice, countenance, nest and nation in the twinkling of an eye.


Herac. O the snowey balls of honor, apt to be resolved with the least
intemperate heat of mind. But what is he who walks with such stately and
haughty gesture?


Democ. He is one that had an excellent opinion in the commonweal before had
his office; but when he had gotten it no man more unhappily lost it. His
advancement so much changed his disposition. In sum he was a good Lawer, a
bad Judge.


Clerk. Call Brundusius to the bar. Hold up thy hand Brundusius, Thou art
indicted by the name of Brundusius, that in Trinity Term. 1638. Thou did
against the peace of the common weal, the liberty of the Subject, and the
testimony of thine own conscience: not having God before thine eyes
traitorously, and wickedly given sentence for ship money, to be paid to our
Lord the King, without evident necessity, whereof it was in his sole power to
Judge. Speak Brundusius art thou guilty of the crime whereof thou art endited.


Prim. Master Speaker I pray give me leave a little, for this Brundunsius is
more strictly to be handled. This I will confidently aver, that no man has
deserved worse, of the Commonweal: when all men esteemed him the maine
defendor of Justice, he expressed himself her most vowed enemy, to the
reproach of his name, and corruption of his conscience. He saw and fell with
open eyes: he knew the right and did the wrong; and therefore his ruin is
deserved. For if he had been ignorant of the laws, as Trivius, he might have
had some color of excuse, but to give sentence against the most certain rule,
of his own knowledge, O prodigy!


Brund. I ingeniously confess, and no less desire best of favor, that partly
by the threats, partly by the flatteries of Chrisomitris, I gave that unheard
of sentence of ship money. For Chrysomitris, who as you know had a most
fortunate art in the way of perswation, told me that unless I gave that
judgment for the King, I should loose mine honor: and suffer a writ of Ease
to my extreme disgrace.


Prim. O the follys of aged avarice! Should you prefer Writs of ease before
ease of Conscience? should you be the more prone, unto the earth, by how much
you are nearer to your ends? to have one foot in the grave, and a mind coveting
the world? O if you would consider how little would suffice nature, and of that
little, how small a portion would content old age, your care for earthly things
would be abated, and your desires would be wholly fixed upon heaven, for you who
were so eminent in the studies of the Law, are most severely to be punished,
especially having so clear, so excellent a mirror as Curvus Acilius, a man of
extreme age, but a vigourous mind, an inviolate conscience. Him you had for an
example; but (although your steps were Curva vestigia) refusing to follow
Curvus, you have turned the right into oblique, you know you well knew (to the
aggravation of your censure, those golden sentences of Periander, most worthy
your memory, that nothing must be done for moneys sake, and that favor is an
enemy to Judgment. For Judgment fails where it becomes matter of affection.
Too much love and too much hatred pervert the truth. Nor did Ioachimus lately
deceased deserve any less; but by paying his debt to nature, the destinies
have made him their perpetual debtor. For though he were intricall and knotty
in his arguments, yet this Oedipus with his riddles, the Fates had not
prevented, had involved himself in a Gregorian knot.


Democ. Its shameful for an old man to play the knave, hah, hah, hah.


Herac. And this for the most part happens when old men place their happiness
upon earth.


Prim. But let us withdraw, that with more mature counsel we may proportion
our sentence to every man's offense. Exeunt.


Enter Arietus and Priscilla, Citizens of Smyrna. Herac. Whether flock these
press of women?


Democ. Thou may easily conjecture by their habits: they are citizens wives,
delicate ducks, who come hither to hear Judgment past upon the Judges.


Herac. Alas can their tender ears hear these things without tears.


Democ. Think you all are composed of your tenderness? you are far out; these
are women of a more coragious spirit: For they can with dry eyes or at lest
counterfeitly wet, bid farewell to their husbands iourneying to the nether
world; yea they can see them laid in their graves with a sower look, but a
merry heart, and before the funeral tapers are extinguished, entertain new
fires in their minds.


Herac. But I wonder why they they come here more this day then on any other.


Democ. Know you not the cause? the former were days of examination, but this
of final judgment, and you know women do always love execution more then
judgment.


Prisc. I will go in, for if Capreolus the Courtier sit in the house I am
certain he will soon give me entrance as I have often given unto him.


Ariet. Pish, pish, my little mouse, my honey, what will thou do in the Court.


Prisc. What will I do in the Court? hold you peace Arietus, hold your peace
Cornelius: you and I are not friends if I have not not a standing in the Court.


Ariet. In good troth you shall not have a standing with the Courtier in his
own place.


Prisc. But I have had and will have, my small friend if you anger me.


Ariet. God forbid my cony, that such a blot should be cast upon my family,
such a mark upon my forehead.


Prisc. Why so? do you think your self the first man of the row.


Ariet. By no means, yet I would not willingly wear my nightcap after the
new city fashion, with broad ears, nor sleep with my pillow stuffed with
shavings of horn.


Prisc. Let not this trouble you, you may sooner foresee your fortune then
prevent it, if such ensigns be your destiny, withstand it not; it is vain to
strive against your destiny.


Ariet. O headstrong licentiousnes! am not I descended of the Arietarian stock,
the most ancient Cornelian family of the city?


Prisc. What then, there is no family so worshipful but it is subject to this
fate. But I pray what avail these trifles? ho, Titillus, Titillus.


Ariet. What would you have with Titillus, that lacivious Courtier.


Prisc. That I may have entrance the sooner.


Ariet. It will be hardly granted, in these public assemblies there is no
place for women.


Prisc. Why not for women? as if we were not capeable enough! they shall
find, yea they know that we are capable. I will get up where I may bertter see
and hear.


Ariet. What would thou see and hear? whether my cony does thy mind carry
thee?


Prisc. I greatly desire to see the Judges, for they say (and I would know the
truth) that they have no more beard upon their chins, then an ape has tail.


Ariet. They will appear subtle enough without hair: but they are shaven that
they may seem the more terrible in their places.


Prisc. I like these young men with soft downy chins. I love not these old men
whose hair is like prickly bristles, what are these.


Ariet. The Judges whom thou so much longest to see.


Prisc. Alas what cold husbands would they make, they have perpetual I sickles
upon their beards.


Areit. Hold thy peace my Leveret; since thou art come hither and gotten into a
place, hear what will become of them.


Prisc. Let them be hanged, it shall never trouble me. I scarcely think they
are of the masculine gender. They are neutralls, traitorous beasts, enemies of
generation. Let them perish with their Judgments.


Ariet. Holy my sweet duck, least thou be noted.


Prisc. Pish, they are blind and deaf, and can neither see nor hear me, they.


Act the third.
The Curtain drawn, enter the Chosen Speakers the Judges, Euchrisis, Clerk of
the Court, Roderigo, Sergent. Clerk. Ho, Rodorigo, bring forth your Prosoners.


Democ. What ague fits they have gotten, hah, hah, hah.


Manil. Stand forth, stand forth, Sir Judges of a miserable condition. You have
not denied but that you are guilty of the crime for which you are indicted; Nor
can you produce any defense of your desperate cause, which is worthy our
hearing: you know, you well know that a Judge is to be judged in none of those
things, which he is provided to judge in another. In which, I say, how
wretchedly have you erred? For you were Judges, and censurers of the self same
crime, whereof you were the Authors. For a Judge to take a bribe, was a
capital thing; But if so great and so heavy a sentence was pronouced for one
fault, and that extending but to a particular subject, what punishment must be
inflicted on them, who have been so iniurous to the subjects, of a whole
flourishing Island; by making the Prince suspicious of his subjects: the
Subjects of their Prince; by declaring new opinions against the evident
testimonys of their consciences; by perturbing the Halcyon days of a peaceful
king, and an obedient state; yea by bringing all according to their power, into
flames and ashes; If such a fire whereof you were the true Incendiarys, do not
deserve death, what it better deserves I cannot tell. The law was first
ordained to be a public benefit; but by you it is made the very plague of the
common weal; You have all very well acted the part of Midas: Being
Commissaryes of trust between Prince and people, which you should not violate
for threatenings, friends, entreaties nor rewards; you being intised by the
bail of avarice, or stricken with a Panick fear, have left Justice naked; and
wretchedly neglected your consciences, which testified against you. And so
through lucre or terror, being blinded in your understanding, you have
provided your selves true ministers of Midas.


Omnes. Mercy, mercy, most renowned Gentlemen?


Them. Hey day, they are enforced to use their neck verse which the so often
put others unto: Lord have mercy upon you.


Manil. With the same measure that you measure to others shall it be measured
to you again.


Herac. Alas they will not have the least hope, if they have the same
recompense of measure.


Manil. Observe and hear what I shall say: I believe that in leisure hours,
you have read how the Germans having been rather conquered then subject by
their good leading of Drusus, as soon as he was dead, trusting upon their
strength began to hate the lust and insolence of varus Quinctilius, and how
easily they became victors. Which short conflict being ended, like Barbarians
as they were, they showed themselves most savage, and tirranous conquerours:
Nor in that extreme cruelty, did they show themselves more implacable toward
any condition, then to men of the co^sulare dignity, thinking that through
their eloquent and vendible tongues, the Romans had first beleagued them, and
brought the^ to that calamity. Varus prosecuts them with the same mind and fate
of Paulus at Cannae, never was greater slaughter in fields and woods, never
more intolerable insultatio^, but especially toward those that pleaded causes.
Some of their eyes pulled out, others hands cut off, one's mouth they sewed up,
first cutting out his tongue, which a Barbarian holding in his hand said, at
length; viper desist from hissing, you should likewise call to mind Manius
Acilius; that unsatisfied gulf of briberie, and principal Ambassador of the
Romans, whom Mithridates with great contempt, compelled to ride upon an ass,
until he came unto Pergamus, where he commanded Elixar of gold to be thrust
into his mouth, intimating that the Romans were to much given to briberys, and
had tongues, too eloquent in evil speaking. Alexander Severus the greatest
enemy of flatterers, commanded that Turinus one of his courtiers; should be
tied to a stake in the market place, and smothered to death with smoke, having
a crier proclaiming by him. Let him perish with smoke, that sold smoke: For it
is better (to use Antisthenes words) to fall amongst crows, then Parasites;
amongst crows to be devoured dead, then amongst Parasites to be devoured
living. Therefore it will be an argument of wisdom, for us to deal with you,
who has brought such plagues upon the commonweal, and disturbed our peace by
your slanderous judgments, as Philip King of Macedon, did with two of his
subjects, men of vile conditions; he commanded one to fly from Macedon, and the
other to follow him, which being done, his country was purged of such noxious
sicophants: both departed but neitheir of them returned.


Brun. It is the part of goodness, to save when it may destroy, rather then to
destroy when it might have spared.


Manil. He that spares the evil, hurts the good: listen now to your utmost
sentence. As you have made the laws like spiders webs, and have tossed this
commonweal like a poor bark, with the storms and winds of your opinions,
you shall have no residence within this Island: get you therefore packing. For
this is your definitive censure to those fortunate Islands, which are called the
Irish sands. For there if you are poisonous you cannot live long but if you
resolve to chang your conditions as well as your hair, you shall in those
Islands have a temperate air, and so wholesome for your bodies, that you will
scarcely die, unless the world be so loathsome to you, or you unto the world!
that you would wish rather to die then live, yea you shall have so much time
given you through the temperatenesse of the air, that your ensuing hours may
redeem, what you have formerly spent amiss. This sentence is irrevocable; make
no delays, we have provided you a ship but without cable, stern, sail yard or
anchors, the (fatal semblance of your government,) to be known by these
characters.


The Parliament censure, the boat of Charon. Judges. It is as evil to sail in
old age, as is in the winter.


Prim. There is no punishment grievous where there is so much company.


Democ. Soon let them go but never return. Now raise the Court, the old men
have their doom Let Justice sit here in the judges room.


Act the fourth.
Enter a Chorus of common people. Chor. Speak Master Prinner, for your whole
flock; for you are the oracle of our conventicle.


Democ. Hah, hah, hah, Ogregious flock of sheep', a drove of asses. -- now
hell has opened his mouth, corn out you generation of vipers.


Chor. Speak Master Prinner speak.


Prin. Know all men by these presents, dearley beloved men and brethren, that
of us who maintain the truth compassionate the blindness of the times, burn in
zeal of heart, and contend for the reformation of religion, three things are
principally required.


Democ. What sport will this lunaticke correctour of religion, make us? hah,
hah, hah.


Prin. First that there be no order in the Church: secondly, that all rites
ceremonies, preistly garments, Instruments of Music be abolished in the
Church. Thirdly, that there be no form of common prayer.


Herac. O how these doting fellows, would make the Church to be headless.


Democ. Peace, and hear. Lord, with what pricked up ears these round heads
harken to their orator Prinner and admire in hearing him.


Prin. But if it seem good to your wisdom, that the Church should have such
degrees of higher and lower, we will have the Governors to be lay Elders. To
which dignity, we think non more fit, nor generally able to be chosen, then
our venerable brethren, the cobbler, the basket maker; and button maker, (whom
although that Demicaster maker in Greens rents contended with, yet he easily
excelled in efficacy of doctrine and won the victory) being men of mean
learning, but wonderfully inspired. But chiefly we will, that you command
Francis Helioke, henceforth to distinguish that Apochryphall name of Bishop,
with an asteriske, amongst the absolete words to perpetual remembrance. But as
for the first Article of our complaint; as we would have no order in the
church, so (to come unto the 2. we abhor all rites and ceremonys; because
whatsoever is ancient we judge to be untrue, we disallow Priestly ornaments as
well in the Presbytery, as lawne sleeves in a Bishop; we esteem the Surplesse
as the smock of the whore of Babylon, and the cope as Egyptian embroydery:
These Idolatrous Priests in their linen appear to us like Ghosts coming out
of a Church yard. As for instruments of music we esteem them as profane
Babalonish tabers, yea we cannot truly love our own members because they are
called organs.


Democ. These fellows should rather be sent to Bridewell, then the reformation
of Religion.


Prin. As for the third article of our complaint: we will have no form of
common prayer: no not the Lords Prayer; for it shows a diffidence of the
Spirit: wherefore we neither will have praying nor preaching Ministers to be
provided, but to speak extempore, that they may express the efficacy of the
spirit: Turners Creed and his gloss concerning the communion of the Saints,
we very well appove: and to comprehend all in general. Whatsoever is new so it
be ours we like, whatsoever is ancient though it be confirmed by a thousand
counsels we reject.


Perdic. Hear ye mad men, that old but fatal Rhyme which we once heard in
Brytany.

Tacke tent to my saw my sons three
Rob. Will. and Dave.
Keep well your Pater and your Ave
And if you you mind your fathers reed
Stand close to your auld Creed.
But for my daughter Gillion,
I wad she were well bolted with a bridle
That leaves her warke to play the Clarke
And lets her whele stand Idle.
For it sawes not for she ministers
Farriers nor furriers
To descant on the Bible.

Chorus. Parle we have heard your complaints, men and brethren with that
greater attention, then they have demerited. As for Bishops we have left them
but a dead and naked name, but we thought it fitter to cut off their vices then
their offices. Desist at length from your dotages; whatsoever may commodiously
be done, and may be convenient to the peace of the Church; that you must
especially provide for. If not the beams or at least the motes must be removed
from your darkened eyes. They have no charity in them, who love not the
unanimity of the Church; go, get you home, and follow your business. Let it
be our parts to take care for the common good of our Prince, people and
Country.


Exeunt. FINIS.
Epilogus.
IT is determined by the Aedils the Mistress of public Plays, that the next
day (by Jove's permission) the fifth Act shall be acted upon Tyber, I should say
Tyburne, by a new society of Abalmites.

Vive le Roi.


