THE MYSTERY OF THE True Ministry UNVAILED, As it was to be before, under, and
shall be after Antichrists Time, AND The unlawfulness of the Call of the now
MINISTRY.

By a Witness of the Gospel, JOHN BRAIN.

JEREM. 51.9. We would have healed Babylon, but she is not healed; forsake her,
and let us go every one into his own Country, etc. Verse. 10. The Lord has
brought forth our Righteousness; come, let us declare in Zion the Work of the
Lord. Printed at London, and are to be sold in Pope's Head Alley. 1649.

To the Supreme Authority of the Nation, the Commons assembled in PARLIAMENT.
RIGHT HONORABLE,
I Am bold in Jesus Christ to present you with this ensuing Treatise, as a part
of the Council of God, witnessing in the Lord unto you, That the Work you have
to do for the House of God, is far above your and the worlds present
apprehensions; the true Church being no way to be restored, until you (whose
work J hope it is) have made desolate the false Church, Rev. 17.16. who before
made desolate the true Church, Rev. 11 2. so that in all you do less then the
making of it desolate, you come short of fulfilling the Mind of God, and
occasion the delay of your own deliverance, and the Kingdoms Peace, to do which
God will enforce you, and not give you rest until it be done, (yea, and all) be
it what, or whomsoever: they that hinder it will be removed out of the way, God
will spare no man, any thing herein; be ye therefore instructed, ye that be
Judges of the Earth, and kiss the Son lest he be angry, and ye perish from the
way, when his wrath is kindled but a little, that ye may in this his day of
wrath find favor with the Lord, that ye may live in his sight, and behold his
salvation ready to be revealed; which is the desire and fervent prayer of

Your Servant in the Gospel John Brayn.
25 May, 1649.
THE MYSTERY OF THE True Ministry UNVAILED, etc.
THe blessed and only wise God, to the magnifying of his most glorious Name,
has in the prophetical History of the beloved Disciple John set forth the
Churches several changes, from that time the Apocalips was written to the end
of the world.

1. He speaks to the Churches in the time of their Visibility, in which time he
lived, as in Chap. 1.2, and 3. in which time the Ministry thereof are Angel
Ministers, or true Church-Ministry, Chap. 1.20. who are admonished by the
Spirit of Prophecy of Gods depriving the Churches of the use of them for their
Apostasy, Rev. 2.5. and 3.16. intimated in taking away the Candlestick of the
Ephesian Church.

Now on this follows the sealing up of the Book as a Judgment to the wicked
world, so that the Scriptures are in a manner taken from the world with the
Church-Ministry, Rev. 5.2.

2. The next estate follows hereupon, is, the Churches driving into the
Wilderness, or hid estate, Antichrist having demolished the frame,
Constitution, public Ministry, and Ordinances, as they were set up in the
Primitive Church by the Apostles, and set up other of his own, called the
abomination of desolation set up in the holy place.

1. This is set out Chap. 12. from verse. 1. to verse. 5. where the Church is in
its Visibility: Verse 6. sets out its Invisibility in its flight into the
Wilderness.

2. This flight into the Wilderness is discovered more significantly to us,
Chap. 11. verse 2. where the Gentiles are said to tread underfoot the holy City
42 months; here by the holy City cannot be meant the City of Jerusalem, it is
more then 1600 year since that was destroyed, and lies so; but the Church is
here intended, who must be trod underfoot by the Heathens (for so the Nations
are, though they are baptized, and call themselves Christians under the present
Administrations) during which time of 1260 years, God ordained his Elect, being
without Church-Constitution to be ministered unto man otherway then formerly,
which way of Administration was either common, or more especial.

1. The common way of teaching was by the Ministry of those which the Scripture
calls the two Witnesses, Chap. 12.6. who are to feed the Church during its
Wilderness Estate. Now the manner how they feed the Church is set down, Chap.
11.3. and then because that the Ordination of Antichrist was unlawful, God is
said to give them to prophecy, that is, (...) power to teach against the terror
and threats of Antichrist, and authority to do it in Christ's Name during that
time for the edification of the Elect.

2. To these God in a more especial manner within this time of 1260 day
prophetically years, raises up seven eminent men in several ages, who serve to
restore the Church of Christ by degrees, and destroy the Church of Antichrist:
These are spoken of, Rev. 8.2. which seven Angels are as the Prophets raised up
to the Jewish Church, and added to their ordinary Ministry, by whom God
revealed something more of himself then the former world knew: so these opened
the seven Seals of the sealed Book, each one bringing something of the hid
Gospel to light until all were revealed, and so each one pouring out his Vial
on the false Church until it were destroyed, Rev. 10.7, 8. and 16.17, 19.

Now these in an eminent manner, God having eminent matters to do by them, are
said to have their trumps from God, that is, their Ministry and Call thereunto:
and it is very remarkable, that both Witnesses and Angels are said to have
their authority from God. Antichrist would give none to these to Minister by,
or rather indeed could not, it being an abomination to take it from her, nor
did they need it, God giving it them, nor would God use Antichrists authority
herein.

1. These Witnesses were not two particular men, as some dream, but a few
Witnesses raised up of God successively to instruct the Elect, and to manifest
Antichrists delusions in the several ages of the predicted time, under part
whereof we live, some of them being one while in France, as in Waldoe; others
in Bohemia, as in Thabor; others in England at other time, as in John Wicklief.

2. Nor were they the Magistrate and Minister, as some conceive, from the Types
they are drawn from, as Moses and Aaron, Zerubbabel and Joshuah.

1. These were to feed the Church, and so may ye say does the Christian
Magistrate, but more these feeds it by prophecy, which is not ordinarily proper
to the Magistrate to do.

2. They were in sackcloth still under persecution all these times for the
truth, as the Waldenses by Papists, Nonconformists by Bishops, Independents by
Presbyters. Now the Magistrates of these times were not brought to sackcloth.

3. To witness to Christ is usually applied to Ministers, but not Magistrates.
The Scripture mentions two sorts of Witnesses, the one ordinary, the other
extraordinary; That that qualified the extraordinary, was, that he was testis
occulatus, 1 John 1.1. they telling men what they saw of Christ in word and
deed while he was with them in the flesh, 1 Pet. 5.1.

The ordinary Witness is either a sufferer for Christ, or a believer in Christ,
discovering to others the knowledge of Salvation by Jesus Christ, which God by
his Spirit has manifested unto him.

Object. Some of the Witnesses were ordained by the Popish Ministry.

Resp. 1. That was before they were called by God to witness, else they would
not have received ordination from them.

2. They witnessed not by that Ordination.

That which constituted the ministering Witness here spoken of is set down Rev.
19.10. I am (...) thy fellow servant, and of thy brethren that have the witness
of Jesus, for the witness of Jesus is the Spirit of Prophecy: So that where God
did, for this time of the Churches desolation, give the Spirit of Prophecy,
there was witness sufficiently qualified thus; about 1160 Valdus of Lions, a
rich man on the sudden death of one in company with him brought him to read the
Scriptures, and teach it his family, and after many of the poor, in so much
that he became a famous light in that dark time of the world, and did more good
then a thousand ordained Ministers have done since without any Ordination. And
one John Claydon about the year 1415. had this as an Article by the Bishops
exhibited against him, (taken out of a book that was called The Lanthorn of
Light,) That he held the Bishops License, for a man to preach the Word of God
is the Character of the Beast. Vide Fox, Acts and Mon.

Now, that this sufficiently did constitute the witness for this Ministry
during this time, I commend this to your consideration:

1. That they were to minister no more then God by his Spirit gave them an
inward power to do, which was to prophecy.

2. The Scripture mentions not that they had authority given them to administer
the Sacraments as the Apostles had, Mat. 28. ver. ult. and therefore they had
none, nor durst not administer them.

3. Nor during their Ministry were they to be administered, they being not to
constitute any Church, nor was their visible Church to be constituted by them.

4. Nor are the Sacraments to be administered but in a true constituted Church,
which are never mentioned in all the History of the Church, but after Babels
fall, Rev. 18.2. and the Call of the Saints out of her, Verse. 4. and the
Marriage of the Lamb, which was the Restoration of the Church to her primitive
Constitution, Rev. 19.7. then Verse 9 follows, Blessed are they which are
called to the Marriage Supper of the Lamb: so that before the Marriage or
Church-Constitution is, to be no Supper by any allowance of Jesus Christ at all.

5. There being no true constituted visible Church, there was not that power
left in any rightly to elect or ordain any to the public places of the
Gospel Ministry, nor will be while the Witnesses time is, until God send him
whom he will send to restore it.

5. I grant that if a right constituted Church were in being, that then none
may presume to teach by his gifts, without the Church call, when that that is
lawful is to be had: but until that time come, Gods giving to prophecy is
sufficient authority without any present call, it being Antichristian.

Applic. Consider I pray, to what height of abomination the Sacraments have
been put unto, it being worshipped as God cast into Tibur to stop the raging of
the Seas; said to be really the body and blood of Christ by transubstantiation,
and then the error of consubstantiation came up, and was made to bring death,
which was given for to minister life to the Saints, the Cup kept from the
Lay People as they call them, and how since under Episcopacy and Presbitery,
communicated to unbelievers carnal and evil minded men, yea, profane and
wicked, to the offense of godly minded men.

2. How has the Sacrament of Baptism been administered Nationally with
Doctrines that corrupted the minds of men, as if in it their sins were washed
away, and that by this, they come to be members of Christ and of his Church:
which state is no other nor no better then the condemned World.

3. Hence God, foreseeing to what abomination in this time the Sacraments by
Antichrist would be put unto, did in the time of this Churches hiding, as he
did with the Jews in the time of their being in the wilderness, dispense with
his Ordinance, they being not circumcised: we also during this time being not
baptized, are accepted Baptism, being that visible Ordinance did only
accompany the estate of the visible Church; which is yet hid, and mainly served
to its constitution.

4. The Ministry of the Witnesses and their Authority, is only to endure while
the Church is unconstituted, and differs from the Church constituted Ministry
in time, in call, in Ministry and office, they being but VVitnesses only, and
not Gospel Ministers, as Church-ministers.

5. God calling them [my Two VVitnesses] shows that he did approve of them
and their Ministry during that time, and that there were no other Ministers in
all the world, but these God did allow of or own at all amongst the National
Ministry, which were multitudes.

6. As one of these I now Minister.

7. If the Witnesses had not authority to administer the Sacraments, then no
other Ministry during their time of ministry, have or had in all the world.

8. As they had not authority to baptize, so consequentially they had no
authority to constitute a Church, nor have any yet received it, as I think, as
it shall be given.

The Third Change, from its Desolate estate, to its Restoration again.

Which shall be done by him, spoken of Rev. 18. Ver. 1. who comes on the fall
of Babel Rev. 17.6. and calls men out, Cap. 18.4. celebrates the Marriage of
the Lamb, Rev. 17.19. administers the Sacrament of the Lords Supper, Ver. 9. by
whom the Church is adorned with Ministry and Ordinances as a Bride prepared for
her Husband, Rev. 21.2. For all these, there is not mention made of any other
Church-ministring Angel but this aforesaid.

That this Truth may appear more clearly true, I shall commend to your
consideration these succeeding Conclusions drawn from Mat. 21.15. The Baptism
of John, whence was it, from Heaven or of men?

Christ's teaching ver. 23. occasioned the Priests and Elders of the People to
question him (saying,) by what authority do thou these things, and who gave
thee this authority? (which proves)

1. That Teachers ought not to teach without authority.

2. This Authority should be lawful, Romans 10.15;

3. Men may lawfully inquire into Teachers authority, (yea; and ought to do it)
that they may see ground to obey that that is lawful, and reject that that is
unlawful.

4. The Priests had good ground to move the question to Jesus Christ,

1. Christ being of the Tribe of Judah and not Levi, by the Ceremonial Law
could not teach publicly, Heb. 7.14. Nor had Moses said any thing of any
Priest should rise out of that Tribe.

2. They had the overseeing of the Ministry during their time committed to them.

3. If they had not authority to teach; the People were not to hear, but to
avoid them.

Now Christ answers their Question, not by an answer, but by proposing another
question to them to answer; which question, concerns not himself, but the
Baptist: nor does it concern teaching, but baptizing; in which the authority of
the Baptist, for his baptizing, is employed, though not expressed by a Dilemma.

1. In the words (from Heaven) that is, whether it were immediately from God,
and so be extraordinary.

2. In the words (or of men) that is, whether it were by an ordinary call from
men, according to Church Constitution or not?

1. Which proves that all public ministerial Acts, whether preaching or
baptizing, ought not to be executed without authority from God mediate or
immediate.

2. All Authority delegated of God to man, is comprehended under one of these.

The Baptists authority was from God extraordinary.

1. He did that the Legal Priests did not, hence was he called the Baptist, as
being the first ever did that ministerial Act; hence now, was he himself
baptized as Mat. 3.14. I have need to be baptized of thee. 2. Mat. 11.13. The
Law (that is, the legal Ministry) and the Prophets were until John: Now in
that they ceased in John, it proves he was none of them, nor did they
acknowledge him.

Now that John's Authority was from Heaven, though he did no Miracle, Ioh:
10.41. (...) is clear, a way by which, God again will restore the true
Church-Ministry into the world.

1. It was prayed from Heaven without a sign by the Prophets predictions Mal.
4.5. and confirmed by Christ, Mat. 11.14. This is Elias which was for to come,
if ye will receive him.

2. Esa. 40.3. Mat. 3.3. This is he was spoken of by the Prophet Esaiah: These
very predictions were Miracles themselves, and so he needed none for
confirmation.

Conclusion is, That God, because has foretold in the Scripture that he will
send one to restore the fallen Church and the Church Ministry. He will not do it
by miracles, but leave men to the Word to be directed to receive him that is to
do it, when he that shall do it is sent therefore.

That we may receive him when he comes consider:

1. He is that Elias which is to come: There are two persons spoken of by
Christ under that name, Mat. 17.11, Elias shall first come, which is that that
is to come, so much looked for of the Jews, and neglected of us: And then verse.
12. Elias is already come, etc. which was John the Baptist. Now how, and by
what he is to be known, is by Malachi set down cap. 4, 5. said here by Christ,
to restore all things: O how welcome should he be to us!

2. Rev. 18.1. His glory is said to lighten the earth, so that he cannot be hid.

3. He comes after the desolation of Antichrist so soon, that it is his work to
publish the fall of Babel: I may more abundantly describe him, but this
suffices.

2. Conclusion: In that God in this Angel sends authority from Heaven:

1. It proves there is no ordinary Authority in the world left either that is
lawful or sufficient.

2. There being now no new Administration or Priesthood to be at all, it
shows the present is unclean, and not to be made use of; as was done in the
Legal Ministry, which was put an end unto, changed, or swallowed up in the
Evangelical.

The ordinary authority in Scripture is called by the name of Moses Chair,
which is that succession the Priests proved their Ministry from Moses by, Mat.
23.3. to which Christ alludes in the illative (therefore,) Therefore whatever
they bid you observe; that is, because they sit in Moses Chair, inferring, that
if they had not sit in Moses Chair, there were no tie on the people to hear
them, nor no authority in that Ministry to teach them.

1 Conclusion: That as the Priests were to prove their Call to the then
Ministry from Moses, which had the extraordinary Call; so are we to prove our
ordinary Call to the Ministry to be derived successively to us from the
Apostles, who had the immediate or extraordinary Call from Christ.

2 Conclusion is, That the succession must be true, and in a true constituted
Church, which Rome claims, though falsely, in Peter's Chair, which indeed once
was Paul's, but never Peter's, Vid. Zanch. cap. 19.4 Praecep.

Now our succession being no lawful nor true Ministers, these Queries;

1. Whether any ministerial act do^^ by that Ministry be Evangelically
authoritative?

2. (...) in what Authority shows not all Authority is sufficient to minister
by some, may be false and counterfeit, as Antichrists is, or none is.

3. On the demand in the text, Who gave you this authority, must be answered.

1. Either that it is from Rome:

2. Or by succession of a Gospel Church-Ministry set up in this Kingdom.

Reason. I know that Text, Heb. 6.4. will not allow any man to take this honor
(in the Church) to himself, unless he be called of God as Aaron was.

For the clearing of which Scripture, observe these things:

1. That in the Church ordinarily none can minister without authority from the
Church; for here he speaks to a Church, and of Church-administrations.

2. It is bounded by an exception, unless (extraordinarily) he be called of God.

3. This Call he reduces to Aaron, and not the Apostles, though Aaron were a
minister of the Law, which not without a mystery prophetically shows any
thing.

1. That some unlawfully would take this honor to themselves.

2. That God has ordained under the Gospel to call some as Aaron was by Moses,
that is, God will have the Magistrate set up that Ministry he has appointed to
restore the Church by.

Applic. 1. Such a thing must be revealed in the Word to be, or the Magistrate
cannot do it, Moses not doing but by command, as in this and elsewhere.

2. If such a thing be not to be accomplished, how vain were this exception if
made of such a thing as is not to be under the Gospel at all.

That Ordination from Rome is not to be proved Evangelical.

1. Antichrist is said to sit in the Temple of God as God, 2 These. 2.4. and how
as God, but in his authoritative giving Commission to the Ministry of his false
Church, setting up Laws and appointing the Administrations in his false Church
to be according to his and not the Will of Jesus Christ.

2. If succession from ^^me be truly Evangelical, how can the Church be said to
be hid, yea that bloody harlot made her to be hid to the world.

3. God in his Word has declared Antichrist to be the fallen star, Rev. 9.11.
Therefore we cannot prove our Ministry thence, unless we will prove one
abomination by another; yea, he is the murderer, not the Minister of the
Saints; and shall we prove our Ministry from this Jezabel.

2. Succession cannot be proved true from any other Church.

1. If in all the world the Church were but hid three years and a half,
Succession could not be proved, how then if it be hid 1260 years? for how can
it be said to be hid, when Succession of Ministry can be proved for time,
place, and persons?

2. Against those that endeavor to prove their Call from a succession of
Ministry set up in this Kingdom in Lucius time, I have proved at large in my
Treatise called The Resurrection of fallen Churches, that there was never any
true constituted Church in this Kingdom, and then no true Ministry or
Succession to be proved hence at all.

And were it granted a true Gospel Church was set up in the Land in Lucius
time, or before, and that ever since there have been faithful Teachers in the
Land?

1. For many years they have been but of the two Witnesses, whose Ordination of
those that were ordained, was as corrupt as the Popish Priests, nor did they
minister in a Churchway.

2. Nor was Ordination exercised by them, but the Popish Hierarchy, who solely
exercised the Authority of Church-administrations in public.

3. Nor were their Societies formally and publicly distinguished from the
Popish Societies until Luthers time.

4. Had they the power of Ordination, it must be according to that power
ordained them, which was Antichristian.

Object. We had Ordination from Luther one of the seven Angels, who had his
trump from God, and was prophesied of before, and so had authority to restore
the Ministry.

1. We of this Kingdom cannot plead this.

2. Could we: Yet Luther not changing the Church to its right Constitution, nor
erecting the Gospel Ministry, what ever his Call was, the ordinary succession
of such as succeeded him could not be Evangelical.

3. Nor was the Restoration of the Churches fallen estate given to him to do,
it being not to be until the flesh of Antichrist be eat, and her Antichristian
policy burned, 1 Cor. 3.15. and she made desolate, that is, her Ministry took
from her, Rev. 17.16. Now Luther came, as it were, at the beginning, or in a
visible manner seemed to begin these things, the fulfilling whereof is reserved
for him who, as another Luther, shall lighten the world, but with a clearer and
more exceeding glory, and none else but he to whom it is given may do it at all.

Quest. If a peoples electing a Minister be not authority sufficient to
qualify him for all ministerial duties?

Resp. 1. Election is the Peoples Interest.

2. Ordination is properly the true Church Presbyteries Interest.

3. These two are distinct things, and proper to several persons, one of which
is not to destroy the other, nor can one sufficiently qualify a man without
the other.

4. Though God has given the Church, as a Church, the power of Election, yet a
company of men in what other state soever, have not this power belonging to, or
residing in them; for if they had, how is then God said to give it to the
Church.

5. Now as none have power to elect out of Church-society, so Elders ordinarily
have no power to ordain any that are not thus elected by a people of and in a
Church constituted Estate.

Applic. To Ministers, I beseech you, in all humility for Gods Glory, and your
own Peace in the day of Account, see if the Odinances of God may be administered
without a Call; if so, what need a Call, or Paul's so often pleading for it? and
whether an Antichristian Call be not worse then none, when we rule in Gods
House by the authority of his Adversary? how intolerable a thing were this to
be admitted in our own houses.

Illustration. As Nehem. 7.67. the Priests and Levites sought their Register
amongst those that were recounted by Genealogy, but it was not found, therefore
were they, as polluted, put from the Priesthood, which if all Churches that
cannot prove their true and lawful successions were so dealt withal, where
would there be a Church or Church-Minister?

And it is observable, that the Lord having set apart a particular Tribe for
the Ministry of the Levitical Priesthood, succession served to continue them,
their Corruptions not destroying their ministry: It is otherways now under the
Gospel.

2. If the Administrations in the corrupt Church of Corinth were but hay, wood
or stuble 1 Cor. 3.12. what are ours, now administered, but their like, being as
far below those administered in the true Church, in a right way, as stuble is to
precious Stones and Pearls.

Object. We had Ordination neither from Pope nor Bishops but from Presbitery.

Resp. Presbitery is a stream from that Fountain which in no wise cannot be
purer then the rest of that Hierarchy.

Appl. to the People. Attend to what the Spirit says unto you. 1 Thessalonians. 5.12.
that those ye are to obey ought to be over you in the Lord, Acts 20.22. and the
holy Spirit is to make them Overseers: So that where these are not, the bonds
of Government and Authority in teaching are destroyed, there being no Power or
Authority to be acknowledged in the Church, but what is of Jesus Christ: Jer.
23.21. and 29.9. God does condemn the false Prophets for going and he did not
send them: And in that 23. Jer. 21. God puts sending before speaking, as
distinct things; in which they began to err.

Appl. To Magistrates: Consider the time you are in, even at the period of
Antichrists allotted time; and it will show you clearly what God is doing, and
what you are to do: if y^^ go against Gods will and work, you will be broken
to pieces as others have been before you: you will no longer prosper then ye
walk in his way: and know, Gods device is against Babel, Jer. 51.11.29. which
he will bring about to be done, though against your wills, yea against your
selves: The Lord in mercy be a light unto you, and through your darkness guide
you and preserve you, to see the hoped for salvation of God in the Land, Ruth
4.11. and the Lord make you do worthily in Ephrata and famous in Bethlehem.

Now in that Christ says, Mat. 13.52. Every Scribe instructed to the Kingdom
of Heaven brings forth of his Treasury new things and old: I Commend to you,
for Confirmation of the aforesaid particulars, the 54. Cap. of the Proph. Esa.
In which these several estates of the Gentile Church are clearly held out,
with its estate before it was a Church.

1. Its estate before it was a Church, is set out in Ver. 1. by not bearing and
not travailing with child, called desolate, which estate can no way be applied
to the Jewish Church.

2. This farther cleared, in that this estate of the Gentiles is opposed to the
Jews, they being the married Wife, signifying their Church estate as opposed
to the Gentiles desolate Condition.

The 2. Estate of the Gentiels after calling, is their married Estate under the
Gospel in the Apostles time.

1. From ver. 1. where the multitude of Children she then should have are even
more then the married Wife.

2. On this God promises the Church great increase to betide her under that
estate, ver. 2. where her Seed shall inherit the Gentiles, and shall make the
desolate Cities be inhabited; Desolation being the estate God calls the world
by, when without Communion with the Lord Jesus in the fellowship of the Gospel:
Hence Antichrist for destroying the Gospel Church Constitution, is called the
abomination that makes desolate, she having made the world desolate as it was
before Christ.

Ver. 4. The holy Spirit tells her of her youth, which time followed shortly on
her Conversion, when she apostatized and fell from her first Love, adulterating
the ways of God, and in the end fell to Idolatry, by which the marriage Bond
came to be broken.

Object. The time of her youth was before Conversion, a time which precedes
Marriage.

Resp. The Time before Conversion was a desolate Time, and she desolate in that
time, which is not accounted of with God at all: and ver. 6. plainly proves
this time of youth, was time of marriage, for she is there plainly called a
wife of youth.

The 3. estate is an estate of Widowhood, ver. 4.

1. Which proves her once to have been the wife of Christ before, or how could
she be said to be now a Widow?

2. This Widow-hood is expressly set down how it came to be brought upon her,
and that is, she was a forsaken woman, her Husband had left her; And now
desiring to be again admitted to be the Lords Spouse, she is rejected and
refused, as not meet, as in ver. 6.

3. This estate, is that estate that we have been in since the fall of the
Gospel Church.

4. Ver. 7. Proves it, where the Lord is brought in, saying, for a little
moment have I forsaken thee: 1260 years in Eternity are lost, as a moment is in
the worlds thousands of years; or as drop of water is lost that falls into the
great Seas.

The fourth Estate is her second Restoration, in which Christ takes the
Gentile Church again to himself, which is that we look for, and is now
immediately to come.

1. As in Verse 5. in which Christ again puts the Church upon the looking on
him as her Husband.

2. Verse 6. holds out the means how he assumes her to himself again, and that
is giving her Call, Rev. 18.4.

3. Her condition at this time of Calling is excellently set forth, she is then
grieved in spirit for lack of her Husband, and for her former dishonoring of
him; yea, she is in a forsaken Estate, having a multitude of enemies, and no
friends, Rev. 16.14. and so knows not what to do for lack of Christ.

4. The way God has to bring her to be his Wife after Calling, is set out by
the word (...) by gathering Members into a Church-Society, which work God is
said to do (...) the words are both in the plural, as that the greatness of all
mercies is included in the Lords taking of the Church to himself again, and
proves the Church shall yet have abundance of sweet experience of Jesus Christ's
Love unto her above all other days or times past.

5. Observe the order things are set down in by God, as first Calling, upon
which follows gathering, and the mercies mentioned, Hosea 2.19, 20, 21, 22.
are thereupon made good.

6. Verse. 9. God gives the promise Genesis 9.11. to the Church for assurance, his
wrath should no more rest on her, to which water God alludes, Rev. 21.1.
saying, There shall be no more Sea; which proves Isaiah to mind the fame
things, time, and people with John.

7. This Scripture agrees with John's in many things, to be fulfilled now among
the Gentiles, as the departure of the hills, and the removing of the mountains,
spoken of Rev. 6.14. and 16.14. in which worldly greatness, that our
impediments to this great work are so removed as never was to be in any age as
now, v. 10.

8. In this Verse. 10. after these are removed, and not before, the means by
which the Gospel Call may be effectual to us, is set down, and that is by
binding Christ to us, and us to Christ by a Covenant, which is the marriage
knot.

9. Verse. 11. sets out the estate of the Gentiles with all exactness, before
this Marriage time, they are afflicted, tossed with tempest, and not comforted,
as our estate at this day does abundantly witness, when God begins to comfort
her in her Church estate to be, he being now about to build the Gospel Temple
according to that of John, Rev. 11.1. In which consider.

1. He speaks of laying the very foundations which he would not do (if any
foundations,) that is, if any true Church were now in being, Verse. 11.

2. God faith he will make her Windows (that is, her Ministers) of Agates,
which God by an extraordinary way comes to make again, as in Verse. 12.

3. He will make her gates of Carbuncles, which shows that God would again now
come to restore the way of Church-admission to its Membership, which
Antichrist, like another Sampson, had carried away, as he the gates of Gaza.

Applic. That none of the stones mentioned, but the Saphir stones, which are
the foundation stones, which signify the Apostles are not of those in Rev. 21.
or in Aarons breast, which show this was the Gentile Church, and not the Jews in
this place.

2. In that he says, he would lay the foundations, make gates and windows, he
shows the desolation of the Church to be otherways then is now thought on.

Verse. 13. he says, All her children shall be taught of God: In my Treatise of
the Resurrection of fallen Churches see my Exposition of Heb: 8.10, 11. which
accords with the Gospel estate only.

Verse. 13.14. He comforts her in the peace she should enjoy after her Churches
Constitution, and none before, in that Magistrates were wise, and would be
warned of God herein.

Verse. 14. In Righteousness she shall be established, to which 2 Pet. 3.13.
alludes in his new heaven, and new earth.

Verse. 15.16, 17. God tells her what would come on her before these things were
fulfilled, as that the enemies would gather together, Rev. 16.14. not by God,
but the frogs, who should fall for her sake, Rev. 3.9, and 12.8, 9. and then
with what they should come against her, with the Smiths instruments of War, and
with false accusations from their deceitful tongue, calling the Saints
Schismatics, Heretics, Deceivers, etc.

It remains I should prove this against the common received Expositions, but
think it needless, only thus generally men understand here by the Jewish Church
only, not the Gentiles, which the word Married wife, set down in the beginning
by way of opposition to the desolate Church, is a sufficient conviction of it
self to prove the contrary, and that the Scripture as before applied concerns
us, our peace and way to true happiness, if the Lord give us grace to embrace
it, which only can secure us from the desolation and misery so eagerly pursues
us, which the Lord in this sweet and saving way of mercy deliver us from, for
his Glory, and his Names sake. Amen.

FINIS.

