A FORM of Sound WORDS, OR, A Brief Family-Catechisme, Containing the Chief
Heads of CHRISTIAN RELIGION. (Fitted for the weakest Capacities.) Together with
some Arguments against ATHEISM.

By J. B. a Minister of the Church of England

Psalm. 119.124. Deal with thy Servant according to thy Mercy, and Teach me thy
Statutes.

2 Timothy 3.16. From a Child thou have known the holy Scriptures, which are able
to make thee wise unto Salvation, through Faith which is in Christ Jesus.

LONDON, Printed for Jonathan Robinson, at the Golden Lion in St. Paul's
Churchyard, 1682.

TO THE READER.
Christian Reader,
AS it has been observed in War, That small Shot has commonly done more
Mischief than great. So I think (in the Christian Warfare) that small Books,
especially Catechismes have done more good, than larger ones, for the most
part: For as many that have most need of them, have but little money to lay out
on books, and but little time to read them: So I believe They are the less apt
to concern themselves with them when they see they are any thing large.
Wherefore I have studied Brevity herein; And do satisfy my self the more with
it, because I judge, as that Most Reverend Man of God, That a few Articles of
Religion may be of that weight that they may be sufficient to make a man wise
to Salvation. Bishop usher.
See his excellent Sermon on Ephesians. 4.13. (p. 16.) of whose Judgment it were
easy to show many others of the Lords Worthies Prima ista pauca credibilia,
etc. uti Doctiss. Davenant. in Adhortat. pro pace Eccles.
to have been.

It is needless for me to enlarge in this place, and no less vain to make an
Apology for my self: for as herein I desire not to displease any, so I am
confident I do no man wrong by this Paper, And am not without hopes that it may
do good to some.

Reader, If Thou art one that can spare a little Money, I would Request Thee to
bestow a few of these Papers, or some others that are better, upon thy poor
Neighbors, for their Souls good; and, if thou art a Householder, to make use of
some such for the good of them that are under thy Charge.

I have no more to add but my Wishes of thy Spiritual Welfare, and to desire
Thee to beg the Blessing of The God of all Grace upon all the means of Grace
that are afforded us.

For whose sake I am, Thy ready Servant, J. Brandon.

A FAMILY CATECHISM.
WHereas thou have a God to serve, (as at the End of this Paper is plainly
proved) and seeing thou shall shortly have done with all this World; and can
have no hopes of a better World hereafter, unless thou do serve him truly
Here; I would therefore know

Quest. What is the Rule according to which thou art to serve Him?

Answ. The Holy Scripture is that Rule.

Q. Where does that appear?

A. Isa. 8.20. To the law, and to the Testimony; if they speak not according to
this word, it is because there is no light in them. Gal. 6.16. As many as walk
according to this Rule, peace be upon them.

Q. How far forth can the Scripture instruct us?

A. It it able to make wise to Salvation. 2 Timothy 3.16.

Q. How does it so?

A. By teaching us to know our selves and our God.

Q. What does the Scriptures teach us of our selves?

A. That we are fallen from that Holy State in which Mankind was made, and are
become sinful, and subject to the wrath of God through Sin.

Q. How so?

A. Adam (though he was made upright, as it is written, God made man upright,
Eccl. 7.29.) turned from the Holy Commandment given unto Him, and did eat of
for-bidden Fruit, Genesis 2.16, 17. compared with Genesis 3.13. And so became a
Sinner.

Q. But why must his posterity be (...) he himself was a sinner, may no^ (...)
came of him be without sin?

A. No. He had Children after (...) likeness, Genesis 5.3. And who can bring a
(...) thing out of an unclean, Job 14.4.

Q. Are all men become sinful?

A. Yes. Who can say, My Heart is clean, I am pure from my Sin, Prove. 20.9. If
we say we have no sin we deceive our selves, 1 John 1.8.

Q. What are men therefore in their Natural State?

A. Children of wrath, Ephesians. 2.3. We were by Nature Children of wrath even as
others.

Q. What does sin make the sinner worthy of?

A. The wages of sin is Death, Romans 6.25. where it is to be noted, That this is
not spoken of any particular gross Sin only, but of sin as such, and therefore
of every sin. And the Death which the Apostle speaks of, includes Eternal Death
or Damnation. It being such a Death as is opposed to Eternal Life, in that
Verse.

Q. Does not this make all sins Equal? for if every sin makes a man worthy of
Damnation, what can be said more of the greatest sins, than is said of the
least?

A. No. This does not take away the differences or degrees of sin, for though all
Sin deserve Damnation, (that is, Condemnation from God) yet greater sins
deserve the greater Damnation; as we read of some, that they should receive the
greater Damnation, because they devoured Widow's Houses, and for a pretense
made long Prayers. Matthew. 23.14.

Q. Is it not strange, That Sin should make a man worthy of so great a Misery?

A. No. No wonder at all; because it is committed against so great a God, being
an Offense, and Dishonor to him, and a Transgression of his Law, Romans 2.23.
Jam. 3.2. 1 John 3.4.

Q. May a man therefore be ruined everlastingly for the first sin he is guilty
of?

A. Yes doubtless, and would be so indeed, if God should enter into Judgment
with him for it, and show him no favor.

Q. Can you show any Examples from Scripture to confirm this?

A. Yes, The Angels (many of them) though greater in Power than Man, yet were
ruined for their first Sin against God.

2 Pet. 2.4. God spared not the Angels that sinned but cast them down to Hell.
And therefore that He has not dealt so with all Mankind, is to be ascribed to
His mere Mercy.

Q. Sin being so great an Evil, because it is an offense against God; Tell me
therefore what God is?

A. God is a Spirit, Uncreated, Unchangable, from Everlasting to Everlasting,
Most Holy and Wise, Just and Merciful, True and Powerful; being in all Places,
and seeing all things at once.

First, God is not a Bodily Substance, but a Spiritual Substance, Joh. 4.24.
says Christ himself, God is a Spirit.

Q. What can you gather from thence?

A. Thence I gather three things especially,

1. That God must be worshipped in Spirit and in Truth, that we must glorify
God with our Spirits (or Souls) as well as with our Bodies, thinking Highly
and Honorably of him, as well as speaking so.

2. That it is Vain and Ridiculous as well as impious to make any Picture or
Image of God: for no Image can be like a Spirit: let men make something like
their Souls before they undertake to make the likeness of their God.

3. That they are Fools, or worse than such, that will not believe there is a
God, because they never saw Him; For a Spirit, as such, cannot be seen.

Secondly, God is a Spirit Uncreated; for it is He that is the Creator. In the
Beginning God created the Heaven and the Earth. Genesis 1.1.

Q. What learn you from that?

A. Thus much: That the Creatures received all their perfection from God, but
he received none from them.

Thirdly, God is Unchangeable; Mal. 3.6. I the Lord change not. Jam. 1.17. With
him is no variableness, nor shadow of turning.

Q. What learn you from hence?

A. 1. That we should be constant in the way of Religion and Obedience; For all
those Attributes of his, (his Greatness and Goodness and the rest) that should
engage us to his Service and encourage us in it, are the same at all times.

2. That we should possess our selves in Patience, and not be discontented at
any changes we meet with in the World: for God on whom all our Happiness
depends is still the same; as able to help us, and as ready to receive us, if
we return unto him, as ever he was.

Fourthly, God is Eternal, Isa. 40.28. The Everlasting God faints not neither
is weary, Psalm. 90.2. From everlasting to everlasting thou art God.

Q. What do you gather from that?

A. 1. That All Creatures are as nothing in Comparison of Him; for they had
their beginning, and could not continue but by his Power and Providence.

2. That God has an Eternity to do all his works in, That he can punish the
wicked with Everlasting punishment, and give his Servants Everlasting Joy.

Fifthly, God is most Holy: Exodus 15.11. Glorious in Holiness. Isa. 6.3. Holy,
holy, holy, is the Lord of Hosts.

Q. What Gather you from this?

A. 1. That he is holy in all his works, and cannot be the Author or approver
of any Sin.

2. That an unholy Person is not fit to enjoy Him in Heaven.

3. That we must be Holy because the Lord our God is holy. 1 Pet. 1.16.

Sixthly, God is most Wise. Jer. 10.12. By his wisdom he established the world.
And, His Understanding is infinite, Psalm. 147.5.

Q. What may we gather from it?

A. 1. That God knows what is best for us in the world.

2. That he alone can give us the true wisdom; and

3. That it is our wisest course to do as he commands us in his Holy Word. The
fear of the Lord that is wisdom, and to depart from Evil is understanding, Job
28.28.

Seventhly, God is most Just. Isa. 45.20. A just God and a Savior. Psalm.
92.15. The Lord is upright, and there is no unrighteousness in Him.

Q. What can you conclude from it?

A. 1. That he will do no unjustice himself nor approve of it in his Creatures.
The Righteous Lord loves righteousness, Psalm. 11.7. And will punish the wicked
for their iniquity, Isa. 13.11.

2. That He will judge the told in Righteousness, Psalm. 9.8.

3. That the unrighteous shall not inherit the Kingdom of God. 1 Cor. 6.9.

Eighthly, God is Merciful Exodus 34.6. The Lord God Merciful and Gracious. Ephesians.
2.4. God who is rich in mercy.

Q. What learn you from that?

A. Several things: 1. That we must seek to him in our trouble, whether should
Men flee for help in Misery, but to Him who is the God of all Mercy? Psalm.
50.15. God says, Call upon me in the time of Trouble.

2. That they are utterly inexcusable that refuse to serve a Merciful God.

3. That we must be Merciful, because our Father in Heaven is Merciful. Luke
6.36.

Ninthly, God is most True. Exodus 34.6. Abundant in Goodness and Truth. A God
that cannot Lie. Titus 1.2.

Q. What do you gather thence?

A. 1. That All is true that his Word tells us, and that therefore his
Threatenings against the wicked, and his Promises to the godly shall be
accomplished in time (in that way as they are made.)

2. That He is a Lover of Truth, and that Lying Lips are an abomination to Him.
Prove. 12.22.

Tenthly, God is most Powerful. 2. Cor. 6.18. Says the Lord Almighty. 1.
Chron. 29.19. In thy Hand is all Power and Might.

Q. What follows from this?

A. 1. That we are safe enough if God defend us, whatsoever dangers we may be
in.

2. That he can deliver us out of the greatest Distresses, and make a way for
us to Escape, when we can see no way for it.

3. That All out States and Concerns are in his hand: He is able to save and to
destroy. Jam. 4.13.

Eleventhly, God is present in all Places. VVhither shall I flee from thy
Presence, Psalm. 139.7. And Jer. 23.24. Do not I fill Heaven and Earth says the
Lord?

Q. What do you gather from thence?

A. 1. That no place can secure us from his Displeasure, if we provoke him by
wicked Courses.

2. That if we serve and please him (in the main) we may be assured that we
have a Friend at hand wherever we be, that is every way sufficient for us.

3. That seeing we cannot flee from him, we have no way left for our safety,
but to return unto him in true Obedience, and to beg his Mercy, Protection and
Salvation.

Twelfthly, God sees all things at once. Job 28.24. He looks unto the Ends
of the Earth, He sees under the whole Heaven. Heb. 4.13. All things are open
unto his Eyes with whom we have to do.

Q. What do you infer from hence?

A. That he is acquainted with all our ways, Psalm. 139.3. and that therefore we
are concerned to take heed to our ways, and Rule our selves according to his
Word. Psalm. 119.9.

2. That it is a folly for Men to hide their Sins by lies or excuses, or any
other ways.

3. That we want for Encouragement in secret Duties: We can do no good so
privately but our God takes notice of it: He can see his Servants in secret,
and will (one day through his Mercy) reward them openly, Matthew. 6.6.

Q. God being such a God as you have now said and proved, What can you most
easily conclude from it?

A. I conclude from Hence, that He is a glorious God indeed, and has none like
unto him; that he is every way fit to be the Ruler of Heaven and Earth, the
Disposer of all Things, the Judge of all Men, the Revenger of Wickedness, the
Rewarder of VVelldoing, the Portion and Felicity of all his Servants.

Q. God being so great and glorious, Is it not enough that we Love and Honor
Him? If we do so, what matter is it how we behave our selves as to our
Neighbors or our Governors, or how we stand affected toward Them?

A. No, We must keep a good Conscience toward Men also; in Acts 14.16. Paul
did exercise himself thereunto, to have a Conscience void of offense toward
God, and toward Men. Our Savior also teaches us to do as we would be done by,
Matthew. 7.12. So, 1 John 4.21. This Commandment we have of him, that he who
loves God should love his Brother also.

And for the other, St. Paul tells Christians they must needs be subject, not
only for wrath but also for Conscience sake, Romans 13.5.

St. Peter also joins together Fear God and Honor the King, 1 Pet. 2.17. that
none may think he does the one as he ought, while he refuses to do the other.

Q. Having told me from Scripture what God is, tell me also who is God?

A. The Father, and the Son, and the Holy Ghost, Mat. 28.19. Go (says Christ
to his Apostles) Teach all Nations, baptizing them in the name of the Father,
and of the Son, and of the Holy Ghost.

Q. How does this prove Each of them to be true and very God?

A. It proves it unanswerably and plainly too: For,

1. We are obliged to worship and serve (in a Religious Manner) Him in whose
Name we are Rightly Baptized. And therefore St. Paul would not have it be
thought that he Baptized any in his own Name, 1 Cor. 1.15.

2. Faith and Baptism are Joined together Ephesians. 4.5. But we are to believe in
None but God, therefore not to be Baptized in the Name of any but God.

3. Baptism (truly so called) is but one; as it is said in the same Text. But
if either of those Persons were a mere Creature, there would be two sorts of
Baptism.

For, It Is confessed by all Christians, that the Father of our Lord Jesus
Christ is true and very God; As Christ himself said, I thank thee O Father,
Lord of Heaven and Earth, Matthew. 11.25.

Now, If the Son of the Father, Christ himself, or the Holy Ghost, were but a
Creature, then the Baptizing in the Name of of those three, would bring in
(apparently) Two Baptismes (vastly different also) One in the Name of God, the
other in the Name of a mere Creature.

And if either of those Persons be but a Creature, our Lord in commanding the
Apostles to Baptize in the Name of his Father, and of himself, and of the Holy
Ghost, should command them to Baptize (in the same manner and at the same time)
in the (...) the glorious God, and a mere Creature; and so should give the same
glory to the one as to the other therein; than which what can ever be imagined
more wickedly absurd and unreasonable.

Q. What Scriptures are there that do prove particularly the Godhead of the Son?

A. Very many, and amongst them these two. Romans 9.5. The Apostle speaking of
Christ, says, He is over all God blessed for ever. Joh. 20.28. The Apostle
says unto him, My Lord and my God.

Q. What places prove the Holy Ghost to be true and very God?

A. Amongst others, these two especially, 1 Cor. 2.10. The Spirit searches all
things, even the deep things of God: Now (...) deep things of God, is a Word
that extends to all things in God, His Nature, Attributes, Purposes and
Providence, (for there is no Exception or Limitation added) so to seurch them,
is thoroughly to know and understand them. As God's infallible knowledge of what
is in Man, is called in Scripture his searching the Heart. Thus the Spirit (the
Holy Ghost so called) searches all things, yea the deep things of God; which
certainly no Creatures are able to do: In respect of them, that of Paul is ever
true, That God's Judgments are unsearchable and his ways past finding out. Romans
11.33.

So in Isa. 6.8, 9. What the Lord God said to the Prophet, the Apostle applies
to the Holy Ghost, saying, Well spoke the Holy Ghost by Esaias the Prophet,
Acts 28.25. And that very expression is a clear proof, for it was God that
spoke by the Prophets, Jer. 1.9. I have put my words in thy mouth. Therefore
the Holy Ghost is God also, of the same substance with the Father and the Son.

Q. Then there should seem to be three Gods; and why can it be said there is
but one God, when each of these three Persons is God?

A. They are three Persons, and yet but one God, because one and the same
Divine Nature is in each of them: which appears by this that the sarne Divine
Honor is to be given to each of them: for we are to Baptize in the Name of
each of them; and we are unchangeably engaged to the Religious worship and
service of him in whose Name we are to be Baptized; and therefore St. Paul
abhorred the thoughts of Baptizeing any in his own Name, 1 Cor. 1.15.

And as Scripture tells us, (which Reason it self may inform us of) that there
is One God (or but one God, as there is but one Mediator Christ Jesus) 1 Timothy
2.5.

So it assures us that each of these Persons is true and very God, so that both
are certainly true.

Q. But how can this be? we cannot conceive so strange a thing?

A. It Is true indeed, this Doctrine of the Trinity is the Highest Mystery in
holy Story; And it were no Mystery at all if we were able to comprehend it, and
conceive the manner of it. Yet we have Reason to believe what Scripture tells
us, though it be that which is above the reach of humane Reason. As we may safely
believe that the Dead shall be raised to Life (because of Scripture Testimony,
Joh. 5.28. All that are in the Graves shall hear Christ's Voice, and come forth)
Though we cannot conceive the manner of the Refurrection, nor answer all
curious questions that may be made about it.

Q. What is the Rule and Pattern of Prayer?

A. The Lords Prayer. After this manner Pray ye, etc. in Matthew. 6.9.

Q. Is it therefore only a Rule of Prayer?

A. No, it is also a Prayer it self and to be used as such. For our Savior
says thus, Luke 11.2. when ye Pray, say, Our Father etc. that is, Say these
words.

Q. Is it lawful to pray in a Form, or to use the same Expressions in Prayer,
over and over?

A. Yes. For the Lord's Prayer is such a Form, and is to be used in those very
expressions to the World's End. Say, Our Father, and so forth. And Christ's
Example is beyond exception herein, He prayed the third time saying the same
words, (Matthew. 26.44.) So Mark 14.39. And again He went away and prayed
speaking the same words. Surely he had the Spirit indeed, and could as easily
have prayed in other words, if it had been better so to do.

Q. But what need we pray; for God knows our wants without our Prayers, and
what he gives us, he gives for his own goodness sake and not for our Prayer's
sake.

A. Yes, we must pray for all that, because he has commanded us to Pray; Psalm.
50.15. Call upon me. Isa. 55.6. Seek ye the Lord while he may be found. He is a
God that hears Prayer, Psalm. 65.2. Ask and ye shall have, Matthew. 7.7. (that
is, in Gods due time.) And though he had promised Mercies to his People yet for
those things he would be sought unto, Ezekiel. 36, 37.

Q. How many Sacraments are mentioned for Christians to partake of?

A. Two only: Baptism, and the Lords Supper.

Q. May Baptism be administered in the Name of a mere Creature?

A. No. For we are by Baptisine Consecrated to the Holy Worship and Service of
Him, in whose Name we are Baptized. Wherefore Paul abhorred that any should
think he Baptized in his own Name. 1 Cor. 1.13, 14, 15.

Q. May Infants be Baptized?

A. Yes. For the command to Baptize the Nations, makes for it: for the word
[Nations] includes Infants: They therefore (being of professing Parents) may
be Baptized, Matthew. 28.19. And though Teaching be mentioned also, yet that
affords no Reason to the contrary. For though Infants be not capable of being
taught, yet they are capable of being consecrated to God by Baptism.

Q. Why and how should Christians partake of the Lords Supper?

A. For Christ's command sake and in Remembrance of Him, Luke 22.19.

Q. What must they do on that occasion?

A. As they must rely in Christ for Acceptance, and beg acceptance for his
sake; so they must be in Charity with Men, and endeavor to renew their
Repentance, and Resolutions of Obedience: For they do in a special manner draw
near unto Christ therein, who has given us the best Example of good Living,
and the greatest engagements and encouragements to it. And of these things
aforesaid we must Examine our selves, 1 Cor. 11.28.

Q. But is the Bread in the Sacrament, the real and substantial Body of Christ?
or is Christ present therewith or therein, as to his Bodily presence?

A. No certainly. Christ is not now to be seen by us in Heaven much less on
Earth. Ye see him not, says St. Peter twice in a Verse, 1 Pet. 1.8. But if the
Sacramental bread were the very Body of Christ, we should see Him as often as
we see That.

2. We see the Bread, to be for substance Bread indeed, and nothing else: And
Scripture does not require us to believe any thing to be other than what we see
it to be. The Disciples had not (nor did they need to have) any better proof,
of Lazarus his being raised from the dead, than this: that they saw him Alive,
after he had been Dead.

Q. But how does Christ then say, [This is My Body.

A. It is spoken Figuratively; that is, it is his Body Sacramentally; a Sign,
Token, Representation, and Memorial of it, as the Apostle says [ That Rock was
Christ, 1 Cor. 10.4.] yet no man thinks therefore that Christ was really a
Rock, much less that particular Rock mentioned by Moses in Exodus 17.

Q. Who is Christ?

A. The only begotten Son of God, even the Father, John 1.18. Jesus Christ the
Son of the Father, in 2 Epist. John the 3 verse.

Q. What a Son is He?

A. He is such a Son as is true and very God, of the same Substance with his
Father. Heb. 1.8. Unto the Son he says, thy Throne O God, is for ever and
ever. And all must honor the Son even as they honor the Father, John 5.23.

Q. What is Christ.

A. Christ is God and Man at once; Romans 9.5. Of whom came Christ according to
the Flesh who is over all God blessed for ever, and in 1 Timothy 3.16. He that was
believed on in the world and received up into glory, (which can be none but
Christ) is said to be God manifested in the Flesh. And in Matthew. 1. we read of
his Birth, And the Angel said to the Virgin Mary, that she should bring forth a
Son, and his Name should be called Jesus, Matthew. 1.21, 23.

Q. Why did the Son of God became Man?

A. Jesus Christ came into the World to save Sinners: 1 Timothy 1.15.

Q. But why should he become Man for the saving of Sinners?

A. Because he was to save them in a way of suffering for them. He came to
redeem them from the curse of the Law, being made himself a Curse for them,
Gal. 3.13. He came to give his Life a Ransom for many: Matthew. 20.28. as St.
Peter also says, Christ suffered for Sins, the just for the unjust, that he
might bring us to God, 1 Pet. 3.18

And the Prophet foretold that the Savior of Mankind should be true man, and
be born of a Virgin, which was fulfilled in Christ. Isa. 7.14. compared with
Matthew. 1.23.

Q. What may we learn from these things?

A. 1. That Man was fallen into a dreadful Depth of Misery by Sin; seeing he
has need of such a mighty Savior to deliver him from the guilt and punishment
thereof.

2. That our own works and services are not sufficient to save us: for then
what need of Christ to save us through the merit of his Sufferings.

3. That Christ having done and suffered so much for Sinners, therefore
Returning Sinners, fleeing to him for Mercy, shall be sure to find it for his
sake: He himself says, whosoever comes unto me, I will in no wise cast out;
Joh. 6.37.

Q. But why would Christ become subject to Death, and such extreme Sorrows, for
Sinners sake?

A. It was his Love that moved him thus to suffer for them; He loved us, and
gave himself for us an Offering and a Sacrifice as we read in Ephesians. 5.2.

Q. But how could it be Just, that Christ should suffer so great Miseries; for
he being free from evil of Sin, (Holy, Harmless, Undefiled, in Heb. 7.) did not
deserve any evil of Suffering?

A. Very sure; since Christ was such an one, he could deserve no Suffering; and
therefore could not justly be exposed to such Sufferings upon his own Account;
he became therefore a Sufferer upon the Account of Sinners; undertaking for
them, and offering himself as the great High Priest of his Church and People,
Ephesians. 5.2. He gave himself for us, an Offering and a Sacrifice. Heb. 7.26. Such
a High Priest became us as is Holy, Harmless, Undefiled, and in 1 Pet. 3.18.
Christ suffered for Sins, The just for the unjust.

Q. But was it not a wrong to Him to be such a Sufferer?

A. He suffered indeed wrongfully from Men, because he deserved not those Evils
which they laid upon by crucifying him, by reproaching him and the like that
we read of in the Gospel. But it was no wrong to be exposed thereto by the
appointment of his Heavenly Father: who was infinitely Just and Holy, and yet
delivered Him (to punishment that is) for our offenses: as in Rom 4.25. And as
he came to do the will of God his Father, Lo, I come to do thy will, Heb. 10.9.
So it was his own will to suffer for sinners, and he came for that purpose into
the World. The Son of man, said Christ of himself, came to give his Life a
Ransom for many, Matthew. 20.28.

Q. What may this teach us?

A. 1. It may teach us, that Christ was the great Example of Lowliness and
Love; and to think nothing too much to do for his glory, whose Loving Kindness
moved him to stoop so Low, and suffer so much for the sake and Salvation of
Sinners.

2. It may assure us, that Christ who in his abundant Love, came to seek and to
save lost Sinners (and to save them in a way of suffering) will not think Scorn
of them when they Humbly and Penitently seek Him.

3. And especially it should move us to think often of Heaven, and to Thirst
for that blessed place, where we may better understand Christ's wonderful Love,
and give him the glory thereof for evermore, saying with those in Rev. 5.
Blessing and Honor and Glory and Power be unto him that sits on the Throne,
and to the Lamb for ever and ever.

Q. How often did Christ offer up himself a Sacrifice for Sin?

A. He did so but once (on the Cross, when he gave his Life a Ransom for many)
For so the Apostle tells us saying, He needed not daily to offer up Sacrifice,
for this he did once, when he offered up himself, Heb. 7.27. So Heb. 9.28.
Christ was once offered to bear the Sins of many.

Q. What may this teach us?

A. 1. It may teach us the Horrible Folly and Impiety of the Popish Religion,
in the Principal part and service of it; The Mass (as they call it) wherein
they pretend to offer up Christ as a Real proper and propitiatory Sacrifice for
sin. Whereas Christ's offering is past long since; and it was but once, says
the Apostle in those places. But if Christ be really offered as a Sacrifice for
Sin, so often as their Masses are used, he may be offered many times, yea, ten
Thousand times ten Thousand. For there may be Multitudes of Masses in the same
Hour. And there is no Reason why the Apostle's [once should be should be
thought to signify so many thousand times; and as little, that we should think
it means any more than once indeed.

2. It may teach us the Excellency and sufficiency of Christ's Sacrifice since
it need be offered but once: as the Repetition of the other Sacrifices showed
the Imperfection of them.

Q But how could Christ's Death and Sacrifice be sufficient for the Sins of so
many, seeing he dyed but once and offered himself but once?

A. Yes very well: for as he bore the utmost Misery, even the curse of the Law
for Sin, Gal. 3.13. So he that bare it was a Person of Infinite Excellency,
being the Son of God, whom all the Angels of Heaven Worship, and, in a word,
very God of the same Substance with his Father, 1 John 5.20. Heb. 1.6. and
therefore it was more for Christ himself to Dye and be a Sacrifice for Men's
Sins, than for all the Angels of heaven to do so (if such a thing had been
possible.

And accordingly his Love (which was especially discovered in his Dying and
offering himself, He loved us, and gave himself for us, Ephesians. 5.2.) I say, this
Love of his toward sinners is said to be such as passes Knowledge, that is
all created Knowledge. (so that the most enlarged Understandings of Men or
Angels are not able fully to conceive, or comprehend it. Ephesians. 3.19.)

Q. What must a Christian do when he has done Amiss, especially in any gross
manner to the Dishonor of his holy Profession?

Must he think to make God any amends by doing Better afterward? or hope to
make an atonement for himself, and Reconcile himself to God, by performing of
Duties, or enduring (voluntarily) any Sufferings or Hardships?

A. No by no means: these are vain Imaginations, and proceed from Pride, and
Ignorance of Christ, and his Sacrifice. It Is true indeed, They must Repent of
their sins (and must of their greatest) and resolves by God's help to Reform
what is amiss; Repent and turn from your Transgressions, Ezekiel. 18.30. They must
take care of their Duties (in the main) and call Christ their Lord to little
purpose, if they do not take care to do as he commands them. They must also
submit themselves to God, in the affliction that he lays upon them. Jam. 4.7.

But withal (and above all) they must in this Case have Recourse unto Christ,
and flee unto him (in all Humility) by Faith and Prayer, as the Rock of their
Salvation, and the Refuge of a guilty Soul: beseeching their Heavenly Father to
apply unto them the Infinite Merit of that All-sufficient Sacrifice which his
Son Christ Jesus has offered: Beging mercy and acceptance for his Namesake in
whom he is always well pleased, Mat. 3.17. For it is only through him that we
can be accepted, Ephesians. 1.6. and He is the propitiation for our Sins, 1 John 2.2.
and He is the Lamb of God that takes away the Sin of the World, Joh. 1.29. (in
way of Sacrifice, he means, so as to remove the condemning Power of it from
Penitent and Believing Sinners.

Q. By what may Sinners be made Righteous in the sight of God?

A. By Christ's Obedience imputed to them, Romans 5.19. By the Obedience of one
(speaking of Christ) shall many be made righteous.

Q. Why did not Christ remain under the power of Death.

A. It was impossible that he should be holden of it; Acts 2.24. As the
Scripture tells us, that he was the Son of God whom Angels worship, and
therefore the Lord of Life and Death; So his Resurrection is told us as plainly
as his Dying. It is Christ that died, yea rather that is Risen again, Romans
8.34. and in 1 Cor. 15.3. He rose again the third day according to the
Scriptures.

Q. What Use is his Resurrection of?

A. 1. It is of use to confirm us in the Belief of that Satisfactory Sacrifice,
which in Dying he offered for the Sins of Men. What greater Testimony of
acceptance could God the Father give than by Raising him from the Dead
(especially as it was a Resurrection to Glory, and in order to his Ascension
into Heaven) Acts 3.15. Ye killed the Lord of Life whom God has raised from
the Dead, whereof we are witnesses. See Acts 4.10.

2. It serves to assure us of the Truth of that Religion and Doctrine, which
Christ has Preached himself, and appointed his Apostles to preach to the
World. For it is certain if Christ had not been a true Preacher he should not
have been raised from the dead, to propagate and confirm his Doctrine: God
never did Honor any Deceiver in such a Manner; And if he should, it would lay
the World under a necessity being deceived by him; which may not be thought of
the God of Truth and Holiness.

3. It serves to confirm the Doctrine of the Resurrection of the Dead at the
appointed time. For if the dead Rise not (or not at all) then is not Christ
raised, 1 Cor. 15, 16. He arose as the Head of his Church, and therefore his
People shall be raised in due time: Christ the first Fruits, afterward they
that are Christ's at his coming. 1 Cor. 15.23.

Q. How did Christ (after his Resurrection) Ascend into Heaven? was it only in
Mind and Affection?

A. No; He ascended properly, so as to pass from Earth to Heaven indeed.

Q. Where is that proved?

A. Among many Scriptures, in these two, Mark 16.19. After the Lord had spoken
to them, he was received up into Heaven (received from the place he was before
in, into another place even Heaven) Luke 24.50. While he blessed them, he was
parted from them, and received up into Heaven.

Q. How is it said by him, Matthew. 28.20. I am with you always, if he be gone
from Earth to Heaven?

A. Yes very well: for though he be gone into Heaven (and so has left the Earth)
in Respect of his Bodily Presence, (as he said in the Gospel, the poor ye have
always with you, but me ye have not always) yet in Respect of his Divine
Presence, he was always with his People; and cannot be absent from any place
seeing he upholds all things; Heb. 1.3.

Q. What may these things serve for?

A. 1. They serve to confute the Papists, that say, the Body of Christ is
really and properly present in their Sacrament. Now Christ's Body is in Heaven,
he is ascended thither in that Respect. And when he comes from it, he shall
come so as he went; that is, so as to be seen of men, Acts 1.10, 11. But he
shall not so come till the Day of Judgment-. Jesus Christ, who shall judge the
quick and the dead at his appearing, 2 Timothy 4.1.

2. To confound the Atheists that mock at Heaven, as if it were an idle Fancy:
But let them say what they please, and use their Wits to wrong their Souls, yet
we may safely think that to be a Real place, and a happy place too, into which
our blessed Lord is really ascended.

3. To teach Christians to look beyond this present World, and raise their
Thoughts to the things above, thirsting far a nearer communion with Christ, and
to see the place where his Honor dwells.

Q. But (considering how many Enemies poor Christians may meet with) was it not
ill for them, that their Savior should leave the world?

A. No, not at all; For as he would have them here to live by Faith, and not by
Sight; so his care of them is as great now, as when he lived on Earth: he is
the same yesterday, to day and for ever, Heb. 13.8. and in John 16.7. he says,
it is expedient for you, that I go away. Yea it was for their great advantage,
and on their account, that he went to Heaven; For he says in John 14.2. I go
to prepare a place for you. And that Text in Heb. 9. is a wonderful ground of
Comfort to all Godly Christians, where he tells them, ( ver. 24.) that Christ
is gone into Heaven it self, now to appear in the presence of God for them.

Q. Shall Christ continue always in Heaven, whereto he is ascended?

A. No; He shall come again to Judge the World: 2 Cor. 5.10. We shall all stand
before the Judgment Seat of Christ, Matthew. 25.31. The Son of man shall come in
his Glory, and all the Holy Angels with Him. And then shall he sit upon the
Throne of his Glory, and before him shall be gathered all Nations.

2 Timothy 4.1. -- before the Lord Jesus Christ who shall judge the quick and the
dead, at his appearing. Behold he comes with Clouds, and every Eye shall see
him. Rev. 1.7.

Q. According to what shall men then be judged?

A. According to their works. Behold I come quickly, and my Reward is with me,
to give to every man according as his work shall be. Rev. 22.12.

Q. But men's works, are some good and some bad, (in the best Men) and the best
have done evil, as well as good in Gods sight; shall they therefore be rewarded
then for their good works, and be punished also for their sins?

A. No. There shall then be no such Mixture of good and evil upon them; but
they shall be altogether Happy, or Miserable, and be adjudg'd to Everlasting
Life (or Happiness) or else to everlasting punishment, Matthew. 25.46.

Q. How then is it said that Christ will give every man according to his work?

A. By [work] understand not a particular work, but his ordinary way and
Course, and the main Scope of his Conversation; whereby he is in the Main, a
worker of Iniquity or a worker of a Righteousness, and shows himself to be a
godly or ungodly Man: In which sense the Prophet seems to speak, when he
says [the work of Righteousness shall be peace] or end in peace.

Q. Can any thing be so closely carried, as to escape the Eye and Judgment of
Christ?

A. No; For God shall judge the secret Things of men by Jesus Christ; as St.
Paul says, Romans 2.16.

Q. Shall the sins of good Christians be discovered to the world at Judgment.

A. No. For all their Trespasses were forgiven in this life, Col. 2.13. and if
God forgive them in this life, Men have nothing to do with them in the life to
come. Yea so far shall they be from having any Reproach for sin at Christ's
coming, that they shall appear with him in Glory, Col. 3.4.

Q. Should Christ's true Servants be afraid of the Day of Judgment?

A. No; For the Judge is their Advocate; and his appearing is called, The
blessed Hope, (because they shall then enjoy the happiness they hope for
according to the Scriptures.) Tit. 2.13. 1 John 2.1.

Q. But what if through some Temptations of the Devil, and snares of the world,
they should fall away, and fall off from all Grace and Religion, would not the
Day of Judgment prove a Day of Perdition unto them?

A. It Is little to the purpose what the Day of Judgment might prove to them in
such a Case: For such a thing is not to be supposed; they shall not utterly
fall from Grace, and Perish by any means whatsoever. For God will confirm them
to the end, that they may be blameless at the Day of Christ, 1 Cor. 1.8. and in
1 Pet. 2.25. Christ is called the [Shepherd] of their Souls. A word that
imports a special and particular care of them; and therefore sure, he will
not suffer them to go so far astray as to perish at last.

Q. What will Christ say to the Rightcous at that Day?

A. He will say to them, Come ye blessed of my Father, inherit the Kingdom
prepared for you. Matthew. 25.34.

Q. What to the Wicked?

A. Depart from me ye cursed into everlasting Fire, Matthew. 25.41.

Q. Shall these sentences be certainly executed accordingly?

A. Yes; For those shall go away into everlasting punishment, and the Righteous
into Life Eternal, as we read expressly, Matthew. 25, 46.

Q. Shall the Righteous obtain that Happiness by their own deservings?

A. No. For they were sinners before, and were by nature Children of wrath,
Ephesians. 2.3. But Christ has merited for them, and for his sake it is given them.
The gift of God (...) Eternal Life through Jesus Christ, Romans 6.2^.

Q. Do the wicked deserve such punishment?

A. Yes; that Eternal Death of mis^^ is the Wages of Sin, Romans 6.23.

Q. But how can it be just to punish Everlastingly for the offenses of a little
time?

A. We read it shall be so with the wicked and Impenitent. They shall go away
into everlasting punishment. And if God will have it so; it is certainly just
that it should be so (whether we can see the Equity of it or not) the Righteous
God will act like himself, and may as soon cease to be a God, as lay any unjust
punishment upon a Creature, whether for ever, or for one Hour.

Q. But what considerations may be urged for the clearing of it?

A. These following (amongst many others.)

1. That the wicked shall dye a corporal Death no more after the Day of
Judgment. Those of them that were dead so many ages since, shall then be raised
to Life, and so continue for ever and ever. The Dead (that is, all the Dead)
shall be raised incorruptible, in 1 Cor. 15.52. But the wicked shall not have
an incorruptible state in Joy, therefore certainly in punishment.

2. The Desert of an Offense, as to punishment, is not to be measured by the
shortness of the Time in which it was committed. An offense against a King
committed in a Minute, may deserve perpetual Imprisonment, and death.

3. God, that Sin offends, is a God of Infinite and Eternal Majesty and
Excellency.

4. God is not bound to be reconciled to Offenders, nor bound to pardon their
offenses at any time, therefore he may justly punish them at all times, or for
ever.

[Of this the Reader may see more in my Book, entitled, Everlasting Fire no
Fancy. Cap. 1. Sect. 3. page 19.]

Q. But will not the Terror of the Lord against the wicked, in that Day, strike
Terror into the Hearts of the Righteous?

A. If it do, it shall not be overlong: nor shall be at all, in any Miserable
Sense or Manner; For they shall see themselves safe in the Arms of his love,
before the dreadful Sentence shall be passed upon the wicked: yea they shall
meet Christ with peace, when he is coming in the higher Regions; St. Paul tells
us, in 1 These. 4.17, that they shall be caught up together, to meet the Lord in
the Air. O wondrous word indeed! Thrice Happy are they that shall partake of
that Relicity. And when once they have That, they shall soon have all the
privileges of Heaven, and be for Ever with the Lord, (1 These. 4.17.) For which
inexplicable Blessedness, the Father of Mercies fit us, more and more, for His
Son Christ Jesus sake;

To whom be Glory for Evermore.
The Lord's Prayer.
OUr Father which art in Heaven, hallowed be thy Name. Thy Kingdom come. Thy
Will be done, on Earth as it is in Heaven. Give us this Day our Daily Bread.
And forgive us our Debts as we forgive our Debtors. And lead us not into
Temptation, but deliver us from Evil: for thine is the Kingdom, and the Power
and the Glory for ever and ever, Amen.

The Creed.
I Believe in God the Father Almighty, Maker of Heaven and Earth: And in Jesus
Christ his only Son our Lord, which was conceived by the Holy Ghost, born of
the Virgin Mary, suffered under Pontius Pilate, was Crucified, Dead and Buried,
he descended into Hell, the third Day he arose again from the Dead, he ascended
into Heaven, and sits on the right hand of God the Father Almighty, from
whence he shall come to judge both the quick and the dead: I believe in the
Holy Ghost, the Holy Catholic Church, the Communion of Saints, the Forgiveness
of Sins, the Resurrection of the Body, and the Life Everlasting, Amen.

The Ten Commandments.
Exodus XX.
GOD spoke all these words, saying, I am the Lord thy God which brought thee
out of the Land of Egypt, out of the House of Bondage.

I. Thou shall have no other Gods before me.

II. Thou shall not make unto thee any graven image, or any likeness of any
thing that is in heaven above, or that is in the earth beneath, or that is in
the water under the earth; thou shall not bow down thy self to them, nor serve
them; For I the Lord thy God am a jealous God, visiting the iniquity of the
Fathers upon the Children; unto the third and fourth Generation of them that
hate me: and showing mercy unto thousands of them that love me and keep my
Commandments.

III. Thou shall not take the Name of the Lord thy God in vain, for the Lord
will not hold him guiltless that takes his Name in vain.

IV. Remember the Sabbath day to keep it holy; six days shall thou labor and
do all thy work; but the seventh day is the Sabbath of the Lord thy God, in it
thou shall not do any work, thou, nor thy son, nor thy Daughter, thy
manservant, nor thy maidservant, nor thy cattle, nor the Stranger that is
within thy Gates: For in six days the Lord made Heaven and Earth, the Sea, and
all that in them is; and rested the seventh day, wherefore the Lord blessed the
Sabbath day, and hallowed it.

V. Honor thy Father and thy Mother, that thy days may be long upon the Land
which the Lord thy God gives thee.

VI. Thou shall not Kill.

VII. Thou shall not commit Adultery.

VIII. Thou shall not Steal.

IX. Thou shall not bear false witness against thy Neigbbour.

X. Thou shall not covet thy Neighbors house, thou shall not covet thy
Neighbors wife, nor his manservant, nor his maidservant, his Ox, nor his
Ass, nor anything that is thy Neighbors.

Proofs that there is a God.
AND now, good Reader, I am to make good my word in the beginning of this
Writing; and if Solomon himself would sometimes apply his Heart to know the
wickedness of Folly, ( Eccl. 7.) sure it cannot be below me or my Betters, to
spend some thoughts about the madness of those miserable Fools that say in
their Hearts, there is no God. And I fear there are too many that are not much
ashamed to say so with their Lips (in effect and consequentially at least,
where they do not say so expressly and directly) as if they had been instructed
by the Malmesbury-Man, or thought that his Leviathan had devoured Religion, or
overturned it by main Force.

The Folly of such I shall make manifest by proving these two particulars.

1. That none can be sure that there is no God.

2. That a Man of sober Reason may be sure that there is a God.

1. That none can assure us that there is no God. For whence should they be
sure of such a thing; Religion cannot be pretended to teach them so (for all
Religion is grounded upon the Notion of a God) nor can they be assured of it by
Reason; For those that believed there is a God (and forsake all Worldly
Comforts in Hope of that happiness after death which none but a God can give;
as the Martyrs in all Ages) yet had Reason as well as others, and great
Learning also; and the subtilest Atheists as yet have not showed half so much
of any kind of Learning as many of those that are followers of Godliness.

I confess some few men of Ingenuity have been Atheistical: a curious Wit was
sometimes so, and would delight himself in disputing against Religion: so vain
a thing is the the best thing without Grace. But before he dyed, he was most
happily humbled for it, and wished he had spent his Days in a Prison, rather
than to have dishonored his good God, as he had done: and at length (as a
mighty Monument of Divine Mercy) he experienced the comforts of that good way
which before he so much despised and opposed [see the Sermon preached at the
Earl of Rochester's Funeral.]

2. If a man tell us seriously that he believes there is no God; I would fain
know how such a Man can in reason be believed by us? For if he be of that
persuasion, we can never be assured that he means Honestly unto us, or makes
Conscience of Deceiving us.

But secondly, a sober mind may be easily assured, that there is a God indeed;
on these following grounds (amongst many others that might be named.)

1. Either all things are things made, or else there is something which was not
made, and by whose power the other things were made. The first can never be
said with any show of Reason: For if all things (in general) were things made,
then there must be something that made them; and so there should be something
besides and beyond the number of [all things] which is impossible.

But (on the other side) if they grant that there is something that was not
made (as they must grant this, if they deny the other) then they do in effect
grant that there is a God. For that Being that is beholding to none above it
for its Being, is the very same we call [God] or in the Prophets words. The
Everlasting God the Creator of the Ends of the Earth.

2. It is very necessary for the world to believe that there is a God; (yea
such a God as the Scripture tells us of, that is the Maker and Judge of Men,
that loves Righteousness and hates Iniquity, and is acquainted with all their
ways) I say it is very needful for men to believe that there is such a God to
take notice of them. Therefore there is such a God indeed --, that must needs
follow (upon that supposal:) For certainly it is not necessary that the world
in all Ages and in all places should believe a Lie; He that can think that a
Lie is so needful for men generally to believe, will think there is no
Necessity of being True; and so will as little deserve to be trusted for his
Honesty, as to be admired for his Wit.

So then, it is plain.

A Lie is not necessary to be believed in the world; therefore it must needs be
true that there is a God: (and such a God as was said before) for it is highly
necessary that men should believe there is such an one.

For if they believe that there is none, they will believe they are bound in
Conscience to do any thing that is Evil; seeing Conscience has to do with God
in the first place, and with none other but for his sake; I have lived in all
good Conscience before God, says the Apostle, Acts 23.1. And if a Man should
but once declare that he is of such principles as move him to make Conscience
of nothing, He need say nothing more to prove than He is full of mischief and
thoroughly fitted for every evil work. Thus we have seen that it is necessary
for men to believe there is a God; and that it is not necessary to Believe a
Lie.

Therefore there is a God, and the belief thereof is the belief of a Truth.

3. If there be no God, then all that the Scripture tells us of God, as to his
Majesty, Might and Mercy, our Duties to him, and Dependence upon him, and all
things relating thereto for this world and the world to come, are but so many
Lies and Cheats upon Mankind. But we are sure these are not Lies; for then
Falsehood should be the ground of all true goodness in the world, and afford the
greatest engagement to it, and encouragment in it, as the Scriptures
confessedly do; And so no man should have any Real Reason for well-doing until
he be deceived into it, by a belief of those Commands and Promises and Rewards
which have nothing of Real weight and truth; And he that can believe an Atheist
that should say [A Lie is the Foundation of all good living] may also, with as
good warrant believe a Fool; if he should tell him, that a Dunghill is like the
Sun, and would seem as Bright if it were but as far off, as the Sun is.

4. There could be nothing of Sin or Duty, Good or Evil (or as Moralists call
it, Virtue or Vice) if there were not a God to Require the one, and to forbid
the other. But we are well assured that there is such a thing as good and evil;
and the Atheists themselves will not count it any absurdity to call a faithful
Servant a good Servant, and an unfaithful Servant a bad Servant.

Now let us but consider whence it is that any thing is really good, or matter
of Duty. For Example, to live Soberly and deal justly: why is it indeed a good
thing, or a matter of Duty so to do? Surely it is not so because of men's
Opinions; for if we should live in a place where were Men generally so wicked
as to have no good opinion of Justice and sobriety, yet they would be the same
things still, and of the same excellency, as it is plain in it self. Nor is it a
good thing (or a Duty) to deal justly or to live soberly because men are
pleased or profited in the world by our doing so; For what if most of those men
that take notice of it, or are concerned at it (as to their profit or
approbation) should dye; yet that would not make Justice and Sobriety to be
less our Duties than they were before.

For if there were but three Men left alive in a whole Country, yet it would
be every ones Duty to be a sober man himself, and a Just man toward the other
two (and it could never be proved that men ought to be just toward many, if
they ought not also to be just toward a Few.)

Nor is it a Man's Duty to deal Justly (only or chiefly) because Men's Laws
require him so to do. For if he had been living before those Laws of the Land
were made, yet just dealing would have been his Duty, and unjust dealing his
fault; as any Man of sober Reason will grant. And no wise man did ever make
Laws to engage men to deal justly, that thereby he might make it a Duty upon
them so to do: but rather that he might bring them to that which they were
bound in Duty to do, whether he had made a Law for it or not. What remains
therefore as the true ground and Reason why Sobriety and Justice should be good
things indeed and Duties indeed, but this, that there is a God that requires us
to practice them?

Which also is, if possible, more clearly to be seen in the Nature of Sin.

For Instance; for a Man to make Malicious Lies of his Neighbors that never
did him wrong: This all sober-minded men will confess is a great Evil, Sin, or
Fault (call it what you please) Now it must be thus evil or sinful, either
because it is contrary to some changeable Good, or to some unchangeable Good.
(For if it be not contrary to good, it would not be evil truly so called.)

If it be thus Evil because it is contrary to an unchangeable Good, then there
is an unchangeable good, and therefore a God. And that it is not Evil, only or
chiefly, because it is contrary to a changeable good, is very plain: For such
malicious Lies are unchangeably Evil and hateful things, and cannot be made
good or harmless by any means, or ends whatsoever. (And if one should tell us
that such vile things may be allowable at sometimes and in some Cases, I doubt
not but we should think him to be a wicked Fellow at all times.) Thus we have
seen that such Sins are unchangeably Evil and Hateful Things.

(And if they were not so, a man might commit them, and be never the more to
blame for it, which is impossible.)

And we have no more Reason to think that any Sin can have an unchangeable Evil
in it, as it is contrary to, or committed against, a changeable Being; than to
think a Building may be safe and sure while it stands upon an unsound
Foundation.

5. And especially, observe good Reader, the wonderful works of Mercy and
Judgment that have been showed in the world, which as plainly declare a God to
whom Mercy and Judgment belongs, as a curious Building discovers that there
was some understanding Agent that employed himself about it.

1. Works of Mercy that have been showed upon Men, and the wondrous supports
and comforts that good Men have had in the world (especially in Times of
persecution for the gospel sake) are no small proofs of a Divine Power and
Goodness as the Author and giver of them.

Besides many Mavelous Deliverances that are mentioned in Scripture, as of
the Israelites from Pharaoh and his Host, by a way made for them in the Red
Sea, whereby they went in the midst of the Sea upon dry ground; Exodus 14.22. And
that of Daniel from the Lions, and the three Worthies from the Fiery Furnace
(in the 3d. and 6th. Chapters of Daniel) which Josephus the Jew makes mention
of in his Antiquities, (and would not have any to look upon as incredible
Matters) I say besides these and many more mighty Deliverances mentioned in
Scripture, and Humane History.

Those that our Land has had experience of from time to time (and especially
of late Time) are so strange and great, so signal and so seasonable, that He
who cannot, or will not acknowledge them for the Effects of a Divine
Providence, is fitter to be called a Block than a Man, and may be thought to
have a Plot against all True Religion in the World.

And what shall we think of that happy Victory over the Fears of Death which
many Good Men have had in the World?

How manifest was this in those worthies of the Lord, that with Caleb followed
him fully, and wore the Crown of Martyrdom in Q. Mary's Days.

Dr. Tailor told his friends, that he thanked God, that he had no fears of
Death upon him after he was condemned to be burned.

Rawlins White, a poor Fisherman, that went crooked by Age and weakness, and
was naturally of a Sad and Melancholy Disposition, when he was going to dye for
the Truth of Christ that he had professed, went upright to the Fire, and had
his Countenance filled with Cheerfulness and Joy.

W. Carver (a mean man also, and one that could not read well till he was
persecuted for living well) had the same Spirit of Power and Peace in the like
Condition, saying a little before his Death, -- Lord have Mercy upon me; into
thy Hands I commit my Spirit, and my Soul rejoices in thee.

(Surely one Hour of such Joy is more worth than an Age of worldly mirth)

Mr. Laurence Saunders a faithful Minister, called upon his Friends to Rejoice
with him; and having prayed he rose up, and took the Stake in his Arms saying
[Welcom Cross of Christ, welcome Everlasting Life!]

Mr. Thomas Hawks a Gentleman of Note in that time, told his Friends, that he
would give them a Token, by which they should see, that it was no such grievous
thing to be burned for God's Cause, as men were apt to think. And accordingly
when he had been in the Flame a considerable time, his speech was taken from
him, his Skin drawn together, and his fingers most of them consumed, so that
the People thought he had been dead; on a sudden he lifted up his hands above
his Head, and clapped them together three Times, in a most Joyful and
Triumphant manner. At which the Protestants rejoiced much, and gave great
thanks to the God of all Comfort.

Mr. Bainham also told them, that the Fire was not painful to him, but pleasant
as a Bed of Roses.

So that famous Martyr Bishop Farrar, when a Friend seemed to be very much
troubled that he should suffer such a painful death, declared, He was not
concerned for it; and had an Assurance that he should not so much as shrink
from the Fire, saying [If you see me stir in the Fire, Believe not my Doctrine.]

Many others also, who dyed in their Beds, have been Eminent Instances of
Victory over the Fears of Death.

O Lord, (said B. Jewel a little before his Death) break off all delays, and
suffer thy Servant to come unto thee.

Mr. Robert Bolton (on his Deathbed) being desired by one, that as he had
discovered to others the Comforts of Christ, he would also tell them what he
felt in his own Soul.

He answered [Alas! I now want Breath to speak: Yet to give you satisfaction, I
am by the wonderful Mercies of God as full of Comfort as my heart can hold; and
feel nothing in my Soul but Christ, with whom I do infinitely desire to be.

He that sees his house as light for many hours time as ever he saw it in all
his Life, will easily believe that this light came from the Fountain of Light.
So he that well consider's these High and Holy Conquering Comforts that possessed
the Souls of such good Men; (that believed a Judgment, and an everlasting State
hereafter, and lead their lives according to such Principles) I say, He that
duly considers hereof will need no Arguments to prove that such Comforts came
from the Fountain of Goodness, and had a God indeed for their Author. And if I
could as easily assure my self to have such Comforts when I have most need of
them, as I can that those Comforts came from the God of Heaven, I should think
my self a happy Man, though all the World should despise me.

And so I come to the last particular mentioned, even, The works of Judgment
that have been showed in the world; which must needs convince the blindest
Sinners, unless they be as blind as those that will not see. The Lord is known
by the Judgments that he executes, Psalm. 9.16. And I am confident, he that
considers of them with the Reason of a Man, shall not (at the same time) have
ignorance enough to become an Atheist.

Some Examples whereof it will be proper to set down.

1. A Soldier of King Pyrrhus being found dead, and his Dog by him, and could
not be driven from him, the King had notice of it, and caused his Soldiers
that were in those parts, to be brought to the place, and to pass in order (two
and two) by the dead Body; when the Murderers came, the Dog fell upon them with
the greatest fierceness imaginable: upon which they confessed the Murder, and
dyed for it.

Which none can judge to be a story feigned in favor of Christanity, since
it is reported by Plutarch a Heathen Writer, in his Book De solertia Animalium.

Does not this prove, that there is a Supreme Being that takes notice of men's
wickedness, and to whom it belongs to execute wrath for it?

He that can think a Dog should do thus Naturally or by chance, is a Person too
brutish to be disputed with.

Salust also, a Heathen Writer, tells us of Jugurtha, that after the many
Villainies he had committed, and the disturbances he had made, his Mind and
Conscience was so struck with Terrors, that he would go from one Room to
another several times in the Night Season, in a manner utterly unbecoming a
Prince; he durst not trust any man in any place; he feared all, Friends and
Foes, and would look pale at every noise he heard.

From whence the Author, though a Heathen Man (as was said) concludes that
there is a God that observes Men's Actions.

It is not my purpose to mention the Examples of God's Judgments recorded in
Scripture (or Church History) for though those are most considerable in
themselves, yet too many in this Age can make light of these things, supposing
them to be the Politic Inventions of Christians to make their Religion
regarded in the World.

But Arguments to the Eyesight (one would think) may signify something to
these Men; and are such as Mr. Hobbs his Philosophy, will not teach them to
deny or doubt of.

And such they might have had in various Instances.

One having stolen some things (at Reading in Berks) being eating, said, If I
know of them I wish to God this Bit may be my Death. And by that next Bit he
was choked presently and fell down dead in the sight of those that accused him;
and the things were found about him. The Truth of which has had Testimony
enough in that place.

And more lately, An Example beyond exexception was given us in the Year of our
Lord, 1677. one that had stolen a Bible, wished, That if he had done so, his
Hands might Rot off. A few days after this wish, there began to be a Blackness
about his wrists, which turned to a swelling exceeding painful to himself, and
as loathsome and offensive to others, after it broke; at length there came out
worms. And having been a Spectacle of God's just Displeasure to Multitudes
that came to see him for many weeks, his hands did Rot off, and he died a
little time after on the 21. of June 1677. in King's Swinford in Staffordshire;
of which there is a Narrative in print, published by Dr. Simon Ford, with such
concurrent Testimony as no sober man can cavil against. If this does not prove,
that there is a God that took notice of his Stealing, and his wicked Wish
aforesaid, and that God was highly offended thereby, I shall never know what is
a sufficient proof of any thing.

And if any man shall impute this great thing to Fortune or Chance, or to any
thing else than to a Divine power that judges in the Earth, I shall fear he is
one of those who the Devil and Sin has blinded to Destruction.

Thus, Reader, I have proved that an Atheist is a Fool; and if thou art so wise
as to live like a Christian, endeavor to serve thy Lord with Joyfulness of
Heart, whatsoever Sorrows may threaten thee in the World; For his mercy is to
everlasting upon them that fear him. Psalm. 103.17.

Whatsoever changes may be in thy self or others, yet He who is thy Happiness
changes not, Mal. 3.6. If all thy Friends on Earth should forsake thee, yet
thou shall live under the care and compassions of thy Heavenly Father, who will
never leave thee nor forsake thee, Heb. 13.5.

If thou art never so weak, and thy Enemies never so strong, yet thou shall
always have an Infinite Goodness, and Everlasting strength to trust unto.

If all the Streams of Creature Comforts should fail thee at once, yet still
thou shall have a God to enjoy.

To whom be Glory for Evermore.

A Morning Prayer for A Family.
O Most Great and Glorious Lord our God, thy Name alone is Excellent, and thy
Praise above Heaven and Earth: we confess thou art infinitely pure and perfect
in thy Self, and have been abundantly good and gracious toward us: Thy great
goodness has followed us daily, and thy Mercies have been renewed upon us
every Morning; And it is thy goodness alone, O God, that we have awaked in
Comfort and not in Torment. To thee therefore we desire to offer up our Morning
Sacrifice of Prayer and Thanksgiving; And though we are unworthy to offer thee
any Sacrifice. yet we beseech thee, O Lord, Accept of us and our services in
the worthyness of thy Son Jesus Christ the Righteous; for his sake we humbly
pray thee forgive us all our Sins of what number or nature soever against thee,
by Thought, Word or Deed, by Negligence and Ignorance, by Presumption and
Wilfulness; O let thy mercy be magnified in the pardon of them all; And let
them never be charged upon us to our Discouragement in this world, or our
Destruction in the world to come. And O Lord, we pray thee let us not only find
Mercy with thee hereafter, but also let us obtain powerful and effectual grace
to live as becomes thy Servants Here. O turn our Hearts still more unto thee,
and fix our Affections on the things that are Above; and give us Hearts
suitable to those blessed Laws which thou have commanded us to walk in: O Lord
we know thou have the greatest Right unto us, O do thou maintain thy Right
within us: Set up thy Throne in our Souls, and let thine own Arm Rule for thee
there; And graciously subdue every Thought, Affection and Passion that exalts
it self against thy Law. Give us thy Holy Spirit to Sanctify our Natures more
and more, and to instruct us savingly in the Truths of thy Holy Word: Lord help
us so to make it the Rule of our Lives, as that it may be our Comfort at our
Deaths: We know O God, it is not in Man to direct his ways; we pray thee, do
thou undertake the work, and make our ways acceptable to thy Self: To this End,
increase our Knowledge of thee, quicken our Love to thee, and confirm our
Resolutions of serving thee. Help us by Faith to overcome the world, to deny
our selves and our own wills to follow thee.

Lord let thy Mercy Compass us about this day, and preserve us from outward and
Bodily Mischiefs, for thou Lord only make us to dwell in safety: And
especially be pleased to keep us from those things that may be hurtful to our
Souls: O let us not meet with Temptations to dishonor thee, or else give us
Grace and strength to Resist and overcome them. And in the midst of all
oppositions and Hindrances whatsoever, Help us, O God, to look unto thee by
Faith, to wait upon thee by Prayer, and to encourage our Selves (in thy ways)
by the Hope of that Eternal Salvation which thou have assured to them that
truly obey thee.

Be gracious we beseech thee, O Lord, to this sinful Land, and turn thy wrath
away from us, in the Causes of it. Maintain thy true Religion among us, and
grant unto us and our posterity the blessed Liberty of looking into thy perfect
Law, for the Direction and comfort of our precious Souls.

Lord, Bless in a special manner, and with the choicest Blessings our Sovereign
Lord the King (and his Relations and Councils) and grant, That under Him, we
may lead quiet and peaceable Lives in all Godliness and Honesty: Let his Reign
be Prosperous and his Days many, and make True Religion to flourish in his
Time.

Bless our Relations Friends living in the World, Lord give and continue to
them what is needful for this Life, and chiefly what is most needful for the
Life to come. And now also, O our God we desire to Bless thy Holy Name for all
thy Mercies to us, sleeping and waking, throughout all the parts and passages
of our Lives, that we have not this Night slept the sleep of Death; but have
awaked again, because thou, O Lord, have sustained us. O help us still to live
unto thee by whom we live; And let our little time, through thy Mercy and
Grace, prepare us for a Happy Eternity:

And all we beg in the Name, and for the sake of the same, thy Son Jesus Christ
our Lord, who has taught us to pray, saying, Our Father. etc.

An Evening Prayer for a Family.
MOst great and gracious Lord God who have brought us by thy good Providence to
the end of this Day, thou art more than worthy of our evening Sacrifice of
praises and Thanksgiving; And though we are not worthy to lift up our Hands in
thy Name, yet O Father of Mercies accept our Prayers and Services which we
offer up unto thee in the name of thy Son Jesus Christ.

O Lord we must needs Acknowledge we are by Nature Children of wrath: we are
sinful in our Natures and Sinful in our Lives, transgressing thy Law daily, and
do not know how often we have offended: But all our offenses are known unto
thee, who searchest the Hearts, and art acquainted with all our ways. We
confess O God, the least of them, as committed against thy glorious Majesty,
makes us justly liable to thy Wrath and Displeasure for ever more; O then into
what a Depth of Destruction and Misery would all our sins together cast us, if
thou should enter into Judgment with us, and call us to strict Accounts for
them: (even the sinning Angels could not stand in thy sight, How then could we,
in such a Case) But blessed be thy Name, thou have told us that thou art a
Merciful God, and that there is Forgiveness with thee. O be gracious, we
beseech thee, And let that Rich Mercy be showed upon us. O let the whole
multitude of our Sins be blotted out in the greater multitude of thy tender
Compassions.

Remember not any of our offenses against us, but pardon and Accept us, O
Heavenly Father, for the sake of thy Son Jesus Christ, in whom thou art always
well pleased; For his sake we pray thee be Reconciled to us, and show us thy
Salvation. And as we Beg of thee that sin may not ruin us hereafter, so we
beseech thee, O God, Let it not Reign in us here; but do thou vouchsafe to Rule
us by thy Word and Spirit, and so put thy Fear in our Hearts that we may not
grossly depart from thee. O teach us to do the things that please thee, For thou
art our God, and there is none that teaches like thee. In the light of thy
Law, O Lord, let us see light; and know in this our Day the things that most
concern our Everlasting Peace.

Give us such a deep sense of our own sinfulness as may make us prize us prize
thy Christ above all this world, and enable us so to come unto Him as that we
may find in him true Rest for our Souls.

Lord make us to see the vanity of the Earth, the vileness of Sin, the beauty
of Holiness, and the benefit of thy Service; And let our Hearts be in love with
those holy Commandments in keeping of which there is great Reward. And enable
us so to be Followers of Righteousness, as that the Day of our Death may be
unto our Souls a Day of Peace.

And with us, O God, we pray thee be merciful to all thy Afflicted people that
call upon thee; send them help in time of need; And let them find thy peace in
due season, that truly seek thy Mercy and Grace. Be gracious to the Land
wherein we live, Lord forgive the crying Sins of the Nation; O Consult thy own
Compassions, and turn from us those heavy Judgments that we have deserved. And
when the Day of Evil comes upon us, O Remember us in thy goodness. Lord,
mercifully grant to us and our Posterity the purity of thine Ordinances, the
liberty of thy Word and Worship: O let thy Testimonies be our Heritage for
ever: And never leave us in the Hands of those Men, that would hide thy
Commandments from us. And let thy Mercy, O God be magnified upon, and continued
toward thy Servant and our Sovereign that now is over us: Let thy Wisdom be
his Guide, and thy providence his Guard against all his Enemies: Help him to
Rule for thee in Earth, and fit him to Reign with thee in Heaven. Bless, we
pray thee also, our Friends and Relations wheresoever dispersed upon the face
of the Earth: Lord grant them the protections of thy Providence, and call not
for them out of this Life till thy grace has fitted them for a Better.

Let our Enemies also find thy Favor; fit them for thy Mercy and show thy
Mercy upon them.

Bless, O Lord, we pray thee, All that belong to our Family: and make all of
them that are capable of knowing thy Name, to serve thee acceptably, with
Reverence and Godly Fear. And now, O thou powerful preserver of Men, without
whom nothing is able to keep us in safety. we pray thee keep us safe from the
power of Evil Men or Spirits, from Fire, Frights, and all dreadful Dangers
whatsoever.

And now also, O God, we desire to offer up our unfeigned Praise and Thanks for
All the manifold Benefits that we have received at thy merciful Hand. For Food
and Raiment, Rest and Peace, and all those things that are needful for our
Bodies; But especially for all those advantages that are afforded us for our
Soul's good; O help us so to improve them for all purposes of Holiness as that
at the Day of Jesus Christ, we may find Peace, and not be ashamed before Him at
his Coming: And all we humbly beseech at thy Hands, for the same Christ Jesus
sake, in whose blessed Name and Words, we pray as he has taught us, saying,
Our Father which art in Heaven, Hallowed be thy Name. Thy Kingdom come. Thy
Will be done, on Earth as it is in Heaven. Give us this Day our Daily Bread.
And forgive us our Debts as we forgive our Debtors. And lead us not into
Temptation, but deliver us from Evil: for thine is the Kingdom, and the Power
and the Glory for ever and ever, Amen.

O Everlasting Lord most High
Vouchsafe to hear for Jesus' Merit,
And to my Soul do thou draw nigh
By th'Influences of thy Spirit.
Thy Greatness cause me to Adore
Who all my Breath have in thy Hand,
And thine Assistance to implore
That do the Hosts of Heaven command.
And as the Heart that Hunted is
Does for the Streams of water Thirst,
So make me seek the path of Bliss,
And prize the Riches of thy Christ.
Oh fix my Thoughts on things Above
And let my Soul more often Taste
Even here on Earth, by Faith and Love,
The Pleasures that for ever last.
FINIS.

