THE CHIMNEYS SCUFFLE.

Publica fumantes tetigere tributa Caminos, Naribus audacis fastidiosa plebis.

LONDON, Printed in the Year 1662.

THE CHIMNEYS SCUFFLE.
This is no Libel, such as Rogues disperse, But a poor Chimney-Plea in honest
Verse.
DEar Mistress of the Muses, Polihym^y,
Breath Spirit into the Funnel of my Chimney,
That old Mull'd-Sack, Who changed his Name for a Sum of money conditionally
paid him by his Fellow Chimney-Sweepers.
who to such fortunes crept;
And from a Chimney to a Manor lept,
May with our Steemy Consort join in One
Throbbing our Suff rings in a Sooty room.
But whence comes this Complaint? Be pleased to hear;
More's laid upon out Hearths, than they can Bear.
Our Chimney-Sweepers may their Hovels keep,
For now the Owners must their Chimneys Sweep
To lessen their Scrude Tax. -- Turn over thy Book,
Search thy Records, Late'y createa Keeper of the Fower-Records; but his
Fanatic Brain and Fantastic Pea have run such Division, as they will unstrip
him of that Employment.
Cropped Prin, and show why Smoke
Should thus be hoisted: where so many shared,
While Other Smoakers in our State be spared!
The like Smoking Age did never yet appear,
It Is thought we shall turn Aetna the next year:
We Are all in Smoke and Powder: not a Stove
But must our Synods grand Design improve.
Alas poor Chimney-pipes! Say, why should you
Be used thus, who stand but for a Show
In Great men's Kitchins; while your Lords at Court
Act for high Places, of some other Sport:
Presenting there their Pagentry so clear
As if they meant to make it a Theater.
Their Tyre-rooms are alike: and it is common,
Women act there with men, and men with women.
Their Tents removed: the Meniey must resort
By their Lords conduct to the modish Court,
Where his disbanded ancient Family
A Squirrel Lacky, or py-colour'd Page,
Becomes reduced to one bare Livery;
Which may secure his Honor from much wage;
His Vails will do it, or a cashiered Suit
With some Appendices of Fancy to it.
Batts now and Scrich-Owls may keep open house,
While their Lords sated with a Court-Carouse,
Display their loose debauch'ry: yet must they
For their Starved Smoakless Chimneys duly pay
This late enacted Tax: O precious Jewel
That pays the State for Fire-work without Fuel!
And this is just: for These get any day
More by one Suit than thousand Chimneys pay.
Whereas poor Tradesmen who live by their Booth,
Earning no more than serves from hand to mouth,
With all their Stock can scarce pay Scot and Lot,
Eating at night more than the day had got:
These must be Smoked too, though their Chimneys speak
They knew not what Fire meant throughout the Week.
Is this a Parallel, line, or Solon's Law?
That those whose Fortunes are not worth a straw
Should be thus pounc'd to Muminie, and receive
No more Exemption than our Grandees have.
-- Caesar I beg a boon, and it is this
That I may plead in Forma Pauperis
For these wcak Starvelings, who make it their desire
That their Estates may purchase first a Fire
Ere they pay for their Chimneys; and that those
Whose grandeur by our Sufferings daily grows
To such a boundless bottom, as in time
Their daring height will threaten a decline,
May feel Your Princely Lash; and these be many
Who ought well to be smoked as much as any.
For they are such State-Impostons, as their Task
Is to disguise their actions with a Mask
Of Partial-guilt Conformity; and such
As like base Bulloign will not bide the touch,
Being all Coat-Cards, but of that vicious Crew,
Their Hearts are false for all their modish Show.
And I must tell You from the zeal I bear
Unto that Sacred Diadem You wear,
That those Court-Burs who only set their rast
On best-betrust or on Self-interest,
(For that is prime Game at Cards they daily use
For their advantage and Your high abuse,)
Can with a Spanish-Shrug complete their Ends,
And make the world believe they are Caesar's Friends;
Ingratitude concludes them to be those
Whom You reward the most be most Your Foes,
Be not these Courtly Cay-ducks, A Fashion to our Nation unknown though now
disp^^s'd through City, Country, Town.
whose repute
Swollen with ambition of a gaudy Suit,
Or some Outlaudish, gimp-thigh'd Pantalour,
A garb since Adam's. time was rarely known;
Strut all a-long to win the eyes of men,
Who, if discreet, with Scorn dis-value them;
All Sycamours for Shadow; naught for Fruit,
Versed only in a frivolous dispute
Or loose discourse of Hawk, or Hound, or Horse,
Or in pursuit of H, what is ten times worse.
These be those lazy fruitless Droans who thrive
By sucking Honey from Your Princely Hive,
What they never wrought nor duly labored for,
And these may rest securely on the Shore;
While Your endeered Zelots who have lost
Their Fortunes for Your sake are hourly crossed
By adverse Winds: Long have these Starvelings bin
Waiting at the Pool in hope to be taken in,
But some desertlesse Amorists of Fashion,
Though really the Refuse of our Nation,
Must be admitted to the highest place
Not by internal but external Grace.
It Is only Gold-foil that performs the work,
Heavens bless our Court from such a cursed Turk,
For though his partial Presence honor win,
He had no hand in bringing's Sovereign in.
Awake Great Prince, intend your own Affairs,
Let no light Dalilah rob You of Your hairs; Sampsonis Capilli sunt Principis
nervi; qui Pascivis amplexibus, impudicis amoribus debilitari solent, si non
dirimi. Proc.

Those royal nerves should now employed be
In Steering the Rudder of Your Monarchy;
And smoking those Ratouns who make it their aim
To raise their Fortunes though they split their Fame;
Nay, the honor of our Nation; which is tried
Sufficiently at th'Game of Peep and Hide.
Our State's a constant Mask: -- nor can we know
Their faces by their vizors; but they show
Best when they are least discovered: for what good
Can be derived from Those corrupt their blood,
And mould base Heraldry, sprinkling a shame
Upon the degenerate House, from whence they came?
All Is out of Order; Marriage Beds begin
To take a Surfeit and to relish Sin.
Stolen Waters rast the sweetest; Neither Fruits of their own planting, nor
Waters of their own draining, nor Soil of their own improving.
those Fruits too
Which in their proper Soil did never grow,
But by a strange-inoculating hand
Seizing on that which the Owner should command,
Solace their Palates most: -- Actors oth' Stage
Spouse it the best with the Peerage of this Age.
Yet the Spousal holds not: a dispensive Power
Has made his Wife his constant Paramour: Fortis amatorls fit Palma, Corone
labotis, Quo Sponsus thalamum Servat honor Suum. Mancin.

And yet HE loves HER as he loves his Life,
And dearer too then if She were his Wife.
But that we may the sooner make an end,
Let us unto Your Offices descend,
Both great and numerous in Your peaceful State,
And such as make our Officers too fat:
So swollen as they forget what they have bin,
With those brave Places they are seated in.
My Pen never brook'd the Style of Parasite,
The World shall see I Will do each Office right.
And first to Those whom we account the prime, Pastoral Office in the first
place, because the highest prize: and purchased by Renewal of Leases at the
lowest price.

Those Lawn-fleeves of our late reformed time,
Whose boundless height such Privileges give
As if they trench'd on Your Prerogative.
For these are Smoakers too, give them their due,
When we our dormant Leases should renew;
Which might have been prevented in our Land
If you had kept those Leases in Your hand.
Which would have given those mounting Lords content,
And raised fit Pentions for Your indigent
Deserving Friends; who bravely stood their ground
When these Mandilions were not to be found.
Yet those insatiate Herds for all their store
Are in their thoughts as empty as before:
Though Diocesses be of large extent
To thirsty Lungs they are insufficient.
Balaam's Priests could cunningly devise
How to convey their Idol Sacrifice.
This thirst deserves rebuke in Him that preaches,
Cathedral Rabbis should be no Horse-leaches.
And some we have no Leprous gold will touch,
They Are yet thin ^own, may we have many such.
There Is Smoke in Law too, having to much skill
As to drain Water from the Clients Mill.
The one as simple as the other wife,
The Lawyer g^inds and takes the Millers grife.
He Will finger your pretense be ' t right or wrong,
Though the Cause be weak, fat Fees will make it strong.
Had these in Xerxes or Severus days
Sought to enlarge their Fame, or Fortunes raise,
They by Imperial Sentence had been Smoked,
And with Gold molted down their Throat been Chok'd:
For naught in reason could be held more sit,
Than those who sold base Smoke to fall by it:
Shall I draw near Your Court? it will aver
The ranting Courtier Smoaks the Cavalier;
Who though he never fought not ever will,
He can prefer a Suit, and there is his skilp.
Yet this Brisk Gig for all his garish show,
Proves Smoaked by his Damasella too; In they Court of B(...)s (as the Apologua
observes the Elephaunt would not be admitted, because his knees were so
unweldy, they would not bend,

Who near the Lobby or the Back-Stairs waits
To squeeze her Pention from her Brothel Mates:
This brings revenues to the Surgeons Hall,
But Cheats and Courtly Cringes pay for all.
Those in our State he only held for Wisemen
Who are designed Commissioners and Excisemen.
These be those Grand Impostors of our State,
And need not for preferment long to wait,
For they have already feathered well their Nest,
And on Your Subjects ruin set their rest.
These to improve Your Rents, as they pretend,
Become Your Farmers, but observe the end
Of their Employments! it is their only aim
To make a Booty of their Sovereign.
With modest boldness let me tell Your Grace,
That these have cheated You before Your Face,
In prizing the rates of Customs to be such,
When the Annual profit rendered thrice as much.
Now was not this Design persued well,
To take the Kernel and leave You the Shell?
Yet these be Farmers still: Persons of case
Sharing in Your Revennes as they please:
Made to Cajole the State, but do no good
Unless it be to suck the Vital blood
Of Your endeered Subjects, who have served
Both You and Yours; and better far deserved
Than these Cantarides who cleave to the Skin
For the Rivulets of Blood that flow within:
But when their yawning Chaps have drunk up all,
High-swoln with Loyal blood, they are forced to fall.
These too like impudent Suitors lately woo
To be the Farmers of our Chimneys too:
Which by their active undermining wit
They first contrived, by Votes committing it
To a Self-own'd Committee, whose Compact
Brought this Proposol to an express Act:
And though by Act prohibited it be
No Member share in that Proprience,
A trick is found out by their quick-silver'd Brain,
A Dispensation for a future gain.
These raking Rocks when they are on profit Set;
Take all for Fish that comes into their Net.
And these Grandalions of Your own Retenue
Who would be thought to heighten Your Revenue:
And with more fulness of Content instore You
Than any Prince that ever Reigned before You:
Just as that Rebel Parliament professed
To Your late Father in His Sufferings blessed.
Brave Plots; rich Profers! which like Flowers were strewn
Not to refresh the Sense but to delude.
But was this done, my Gracious Liege, for You?
No, though at first sight it might make a show,
As Painted Projects use, to inhance Your Ren^s,
Their Subtle Sconces molded worse intents
Than pur-blin'd Eyes discovered; for they sought
Either by Farming what their Brokage wrought,
Or by their Agents to ingratiate*
Your Smile for whom they did negotiate.
But such base baits You cannot relish, sure,
Those be Your Friends who make You most secure:
Whereas Court-Fawns, those Buffouns of our age
Practice a-long Your HONOR to engage;
Which Princes ever held the precioust Gem
That could enrich a Royal Diadem.
For what is this gilded State but painted Clay
If Spotless Reputation fall away?
May that live still unblemished, and remain
An Individual to my Sovereign,
I Am bold, but it is my Zeal that makes me so,
Who spares to speak he is Your fawning Foe.
Satyrs who lay true tincture on a Crime,
Deserve more praise then Humorists oth' time.
It Is Charity in Him that shows the way,
Or lends his Light to One who goes a stray
A Subject to his Prince is such a Debtor,
The Plainer that He writes, he loves him better.
Into Your Court such Favorites have rushed,
Whose Coats being full of Moats had need be brushed;
It Is true indeed we have Comp^rolors plenty,
But of that Rank there is not one of twenty
Dare execute that Office as, he should,
Nor would He, I Am persuaded, if he could.
The Weeds of others cannot well be mown
By those who have so many of their own:
Their Studies are Lampounds; wherein their aim

States Court-abuses to the Penner's shame;
For there is not any witty Back-stair Wench
But reading jeers them for their want of Sense.
We talk of a strange thing called Reformation,
But where is that Creature to be sound in the Nation!
That Language is Utopian, none of ours,
And has been long time since shut out a doors
As a regardlesse Alien: -- Let us can
And take our Circuit from man to man.
Phanatick, Libertine and Leveller,
Our rigid Presbyterian, who to err
Were held a Prodigy: let us see what peace
Or Reformation any one of these
Can hold forth to us! -- but the other day
John Presbyter was to be packed away
With his Sedicious Spawn: but are they gone
As 'twas enjoined them, forty Miles from Town?
No, no, believe it this was a brute Thunder,
Their swelling Spirits are not so kept under; Whose Arguments, though strongly
seconded, in a late debate were evinced, and those Fiery S^par(...)ts
deservingly silenced. Mean while their Conventicles and Clandestine Assemblies
by their own ^riviledge frequently continued.

For they are repriv'd, their Censure now blown over
And re-estated where they were before:
And now restored, they vapor it afresh
As none might touch their Sanctified Hesh.
Those who supply their Places few draw near them,
And though they preach pure Doctrine none will hear them.
Is this the way to Reformations, say,
When Shepherds who have taught their Flocks to stray
Must be indulged; and though they bring forth Leaves
But no Soul-saving fruit, yet must Lawn-^eeves
Though never so Orthodoxal; be content
With a fraterual shrug to give consent
To these Church-Cattines, whose active pate
Works to reduce us to that forlorn State
Which our Anarchiall Government retained
While the Syracusan Tyrant over us reigned?
Nor can I blame those Magpies if they give
Such freedom to these Zimreys to live;
High forts support the Lower: those who never were
Friends to Church discipline nor the Lords Prayer
Be their GOOD LORDS: and These in such high Grace
As they will cast dirt in any Bishops face;
So bravely raised they are, to Courtly strong

As they will do no right nor suffer wrong:
Nor is it strange that they their Faith dis-own
Who made their Breach of Faith before with Crown.
Grave Presbyterian Patrons, Witness those Hubbuls raised in several Parochial
Churches.
who display
Their Zeal by throwing Common Prayer away
Doomed to a dif^rent Martyrdom, as of late
Was done in flat defiance to the State
And the High Prerogative sole due to You,
As if we had no Native Caesar now:
If this succeed, as't his a fearful Show,
A tragic Epilogue must needs ensue.
We hear of Coiners too, but they are so Greai
As they may safely play the Counterfeit:
Men of meb high descent and brave desert
Scorn to receive their Convoy from a Cart.
The Sun has many Moats, yet who will assay
To take those radiant blemishes away?
They Are glorious Soils: and Those are daring Fools
Who call in question either Art or Tools.
I much commend those Coiners policy
Who stand secured by their Society:
For they on such dependent Statists hing,
They Are priviledg'd from Cap'ring in a string.
But to our Chimney-work! -- This Enterview
Must Catechize us -- Sir, what Chimneys you;
What Hearths, Stoves, Ovens? render us account,
For we are Contractors. and must stand upon it:
Do not deceive your self, return your number,
For you're to suffer if you render under.
The Lash oth' Act shall swinge you with such Strokes
As never shall be cured by John an Oaks
Nor those grave Coif-men, who for either side
In our late Bickerings have their Judgments tried:
And as they well delerv'd, now high advanced,
So well it has unto those Neuters chanced;
Who with such solemn Ceremonial State
In funeral Robes on Bradshaw's Corpse did wait:
And as they drol'd in mournful Habits thither,
It had been well they had been Eathed together.
Small Coal, Small Coal. -- Still, still that Croaking Cry;
I Have stopped up all my Hearths; no Coals will I.
I will not Salamander-like desire
To make mine Habitation in the Fire:
These age-benummed Joints I Will never warm
E're I pay more for Chimneys then my Farm.
Though hoary Winter now draw near at hand
I Will show such due obedience to Command;
With Damocles I Would rather choose to starve
Than lessen his Revenues whom I serve;

Yet let the State excuse me, for Blind Hugh
My Mason closed my Hearth before I knew.
Maduesse has made me senseless of all shame,
Within this Fortnight I from Ped'am came;
Where I my Crack-brain'd Amors did express
As Woers should; Tom to his lucky Bese.
And this contents me, though mad Boys we be,
I Have found a Court grown madder far than we.
My Brain is madling; I am now for Court
For no Suit-quest, I am not monied for it;
But to observe their posture; for we hear
What strange-divining Meteors rusle there.
State-Criticks now our Sprucer Sprigs be grown,
Ready to brush all garments but their own;
Those must be lightly touched, for they allege
Their Acts pretend a Native privilege:
Sphear'd above Censure is their Regiment, An Apish-modish vosture the only
sweet Courtly garb.

Apish or modish it is sufficient
So it be foreign, be it never so gay
Nor garish-gaudy, (...) will find a way
To gain admirers: and with speed prepare
New Fashion-Mongers for a stranger air:
Our Country Artists be such homely Creatures
As they mis-shape the Beauty of their features.
So it bear the Title of Outlandish work,
'Twill give content though molded by a Turk.
There Is naught exact done by an English hand,

No dress complete but from an other Land.
So is the World might think we stare a quarrel
Both with our plundered Language and Apparel.
Thus beggar we our own; not care we much
So we content our Selves* our humour's such.
Here may you see a light py^ colored Jack.
Wear a whole Lordship on his crazy back;
Which his extorting Ancestor conveyed
To Him, who for his death entirely prayed
That he might Pawn his Aores; and engage.
His State to dawb his Lackey and his Page: A gallant Retinue, to travel out
the fagend of a Prodigals Fortune.

Resembsing those to life who nostle here
Learning first to get Clothes, then how to wear,
(To the Mercers Ruin) though a Venial Sin
To cheat a Book who meant to Cozen Him.
Turn over Leaf by Loaf in the Drapers Book,
You Will find his long own Scores as light as Smoke.
Yet is he out of Debt I dare well say,
For He is said to own who means to pay.
But being at last stake what shall he do?
He has no Brains in the World to five unto:
The only way then to evade this Shelf
Is to serve one no wiser than himself,
Some Laptand Lord, who having got no Heirs,
Makes his thoughts Strangers to all thriving Cares.
Now what Supplies accommodate the youth
Of these profusive Sparks, whose Fruitless growth
Has spent it self to atoms? They must look
To be Collectors of our Chimney Smoke, A Cool Coal-Cordial for a Consumptive
Prodigal.

And by their mis-accounting profit bring
Gain to themselves in Cheating of the King.
A bold adventure, yet an usual guize
As may appear by Farmers oth' Excize;
Which in one Instance I shall clearly show,
Though not recorded yet approved true:
The Event so just it highly pleased me
Not in the Act but the Catastrophe.
A Stirring Member of the Parliament
Stored richly with all Blessings save Content,
Became Excifeman; but before he found
The Profit on it, his Patent fell to ground.
I wish all Patentees may have sike hap,
Who draine Revenues from the Ale-wifes Tap.
O brave Design! Struck on a fatal Shelf,
By his own Vote the Exciseman splits himself
But how has this Exciseman born himself!
How has this timing Bird beray'd his Nest!
How has he run his Pinnace on a Shelf!
How has he ruined those deserved best!
Split the Cavalry of their just interest!
Was not this Act a Crime beyond compare
I will not judge, but leave it to the Chair!
But these ambitious thoughts we have at Court
Make hopes of Honor ramble in this sort.
THESE from their Country have such glory gained
By ringing backward they are entertained. Hear this Country Peal, ye Kni^h^s
oth' Shire and Burgesses.

This is my Maxim: they are not Caesar's friends
Who mould their Votes and Acts for private Ends.
All such as loved their Prince have under(...)ood
That they did neither King nor Subject good.
Those to their Sovereign ever prove unjust
Who 'twixt Him and his People breed distrust.
And such, my Liege, or else we hear a Fable,
Receive admittance daily to Your Table,
Who to enlarge the Bounds of their Estate
Will hackney Honor out at any rate.
These be Court-Butterflies, who make a Show
Just as our Lordships Chimneys use to do
In cheating Beggars, making their repair
But find no Warmth nor Crum of Comfort there.

Discretion will not measure true desert
By Apish postures or Outlandish Art.
He only merits the esteem of Greaetnesse
Who Suits his dress without affected neatness.
Your Highness sways three Scepters independing
From Elders numberless by line descending;
Let no Act derogate from that descent
Through hostile force or Subjects discontent.
Clear that Augean Stable; Let no stain
Darken the Splendour of our Charlemain,
Nor his Court-gate: May the Ladies of this time
Be Aemulators of our Katharine
Late come, long wished: whose Princely same shall be
A living Annal to Posterity.
To whose pure judgment, A Princess in Habit and Diet unexemplarily temperate.
then which none more strong
Being Stranger to the World and so Young
Naught can detract more from a knowing Nation
Then making a mere Idol of a Fashion;
Or in resemblance unto -- Speculum sibi fingit Asellus Flumine, quo speciem
complicet ille suam. Farn.
Isis Ass
To sacrifice the Morning to their Glass:
Such atoms of lost honor SHE esteems
For wandering Fancies or Phanatick Dreams:
This Royal Pattern may, no doubt, re-gain

Our Albion Halcyon days and Saturns- Reign.
The World's new-moulded: -- SHE who the other day
Could Chant and Chirp like any Bird in May
Stored with Caresses of the Choicest lort
That Art could purchase from a Foreign Court,
Limn'd so by Natures Pencil, as no part
But gave a wound, where ever it found an heart.
A Fortress and Main-Castle of Defense
Secured from all Assailants saving Sense.
-- But She Is a Convert and a Mirror now
Both in her Carriage and Profession too;
Divorced from strange Embraces: as my Pen
May justly style Her Englands Magdalen.
Wherein She Is to be held of more esteem
In being famed a Convert of the Queen.
And from relapse that She secured might be,
SHE wisely daigns to keep her Company*
But forasmuch as noisome weeds are found
In no Soil more than in our Holy Ground;
And Darkness sometimes takes the Robe of Light,
So as all is not clear that seems white;
Admonish those Lawn Sleeves they grow not proud
But seasonably communicate pure food
To their deputed Flock: Your Grace has carved
Large parts for them, let not their Sheep be starved
For want of nour shment: I Would have them too
Not only stand like Beacons for a show;
Their Church-revenues as they be not small,
'Twere fit for the Poor they built an Hospital;

Which Almes-work so long as they delay, We leave the injurious Usage of one of
these (a Formal Fox, and advanced to oue of our highest Places) to the
ingeuuous Relation of Mr. Cressey, a modest deserving Gentleman.

Let their Revenues for our Chimneys pay.
At least, for Tenths as they precisely stand
For each tenth Chimney let them pay through the Land
Their Leases to that vast advantage rise
They may increase their Pride and Avarice.
The Poor should be their Children during life,
A Diocesan Care their Married Wife.
This would imbellish Miters and enlarge
Their Past^ral pains to edify their Charge.
For the Presbyter, because there cannot be
An Unity 'twixt Him and Monarchy,
For if the Oue rise, the Other needs must fall,
Left of those Sectists be there none at all, Such Phlebotomists as practice
wholly upon the Basi^ica Ven^ for a State-Cure are dangerous Artists: and
fitter far for Jamaica than us.

Silence is not Sufficient: Such Division
Requires strict Exile for the best Physician.
Their Plots are all Phlebotomy, but Yours
By mild indulgence tender easier Cures.
No more; vouchsafe upon our Suit to look,
Our Hearths want Fires; and where is no Fire, no Smoke.
The COURT-CURRIER.
OUr Country was of late with blood imbrew'd,
And in this Age as viciously indew'd,
Impoison'd with base Ingratitude,
Where the Hydra-headed Slavish Multitude
Admires those only who have so much Sense,
As beg a Place with srontlesse impudence:
And by their activ'st Pavourite, ready pence,
And without merit seels for recompense.
These be the th^iving Boys, who at this day
Are taken into the P(...) while others stay.
The Honest CAVALIER.
MAny have here high hopes, Distinguish these by their Cignizances.
but they expire
Before they mount to th'height of their desire.
They Are only wise that have the least to do
Fixing on Flim from whom all Graces slow.
Nothing so sirm that may Affiance give.
Let us only love where we may ever live.
So shall our hopes be crowned, and Saints receive us
Into those Courtly joys shall (...) deceive (...)
never leaves us.
Some find the way who after learn to stray.
The End tries all, the Evening Crowns the Day.
FINIS.

