THE BREAK-NECK OF Presumptuousnesse IN SJNNJNG. Applyable unto the occasions
of these Times.

PSALM. 19. 13. Keep back thy servant also from presumptuous sins, let them
not have dominion over me: then shall I be upright, and innocent from the great
offense.

OXFORD, Printed by Leonard Lichfield, Printer to the UNIVERSITIE. M DC XLIV.

THE BREAK-NECK OF Presumptuousnesse in sinning.
MAT. 4. 6. And he says unto him, If thou be the Son of God cast thy self
down: for it is written, He shall give his Angels charge concerning thee, and
they shall bear thee up in their hands, lest at any time thou dash thy foot
against a stone.


THe first word [And] has relation to the former verse, expressing the place
where Christ was tempted to throw himself down, even the pinnacle of the
Temple, which shows the opportunity, and therein the occasion of this
temptation of casting thy self down. But could this be safe? Yes, says the
Devil, in his hypotheticall reason, If thou be the Son of God. Nevertheless,
suppose the event be safe, yet what for the lawfulness thereof? He shows
Christ a warrant, It is written, He shall give his Angels charge, etc.

The parts of this Text, for more methodicall proceeding, may be thus
contrived: 1. To behold the Combatants who they are, He and Him, namely, the
Devil and Christ. 2. The occasion of this temptation of casting thy self
down, which was the opportunity of the place, the pinnacle of the Temple,
whereunto the copulative particle And does refer us in the words immediately
before. 3. The Reason, For it is written, he has given, etc. Therefore If thou
be the Son of God, cast thy self down. 4. The temptation it self, Cast thy
self down.

1. Combatants Assaylor Devil. Assailed Christ.

1. The Devil throughout all Scripture is in all his properties ever blazoned
with characters (...), that is, of eminency and transcendency in each kind. For
his enmity to Mankind, he is called (...), The enemy, meaning the enemy
beyond all enemies. For falsehood, (...), The traducer. In the former verse, for
wickedness, (...), The evil one. For tempting to sin, Matthew. 4. 3. Adoc.
12. 10.
(...), The Tempter. For accusing those whom he Apoc. 9. 11.
seduces, (...), The Accuser. And lastly, for tormenting whom he accused, (...),
The destroyer. Thus have we before us the lineaments of this tempter from joint
to joint. Next is the Assailed, the Son of God; he, whom the devil
hypothetically seems but only to suspect to be, and afterward catagorically
and professedly proclaims, saying, Mark. 3. 11.
Thou art the Son of God.

A Volume would not suffice to describe Christ in the excellency and
transcendency of his properties, all far exceeding all devilish malice,
falsehood, wickedness, mischievousnesse and whatsoever tyranny in his love,
truth, holiness, mercifulness, and all saving goodness, as finitenesse is
excelled by infinity, and temporal state by eternity. But what is this
concombatant Heb. 12. 2.
unto us? The Apostle tells us, He is the Captain of our Faith, to note, that
there is not any Christian, who can hope for life by him, who does not sight
under his Banner: knowing, that if the Tempter did dare to fall upon our
General, he will be sure to assault his Soldiery* If he struck at the head,
he will not fail to lay at those that are his members, and that it will be our
part accordingly to resist the Devil. And how so? but by Jam^s 4. 7.
withstanding his treachery with wariness, his wickedness with righteousness,
his mischievousnesse with contrary godly zeal and diligence.

Now after the reference to the Tempter, let us, from the relation of the word
[And,] take notice of the occasion of the temptation; which was, as I said, the
opportunity of the place, for the Devil now, as it is in the former verse, had
Christ on the pinnacle of the Temple, And now says unto him. There is no
circumstance belonging to Temptation, wherein the Devil does not show his
policy, as here we see in the choice of the place to begin his temptation,
whilst he has him in the wilderness alone without any second to annimate him.
Next, on the top of a high mountain, that he might more easily take a
compendious view of the whole world; and then, on the pinnacle of the Temple, as
the fittest place to try an experiment by casting himselfdown. But this was an
artificial pinnacle, which occasioneth a consideration of a Moral pinnacle, and
a spiritual casting down in three kinds far more agreeable to our discourse.
First, Devilish, the Devil himself being both actour and author; Actour in
himself, who, because Genesis 3.
he would be equal with the highest, and so a pinnacle, cast himself down into
the lowest hell: Author to others by tempting our first Parents to be like
unto God, which wrought the break-neck of all mankind. The second is a Popish
pinnacle, the man of Rome, appropriating unto himself many titles proper only
to Christ the Son of God, which are set down in Epistles, and Orations
dedicated unto him and published by his Bzovius lib. Pontificatus.
Orator Bzovius of late, as to be called The Oracle of truth, The Anointed
with Unction above his fellows, The Cornerstone, The Celestial Majesty. By
Stapleton, The Divine might, and in the Roman gloss extant yet from diverse
hundred of years, Our Lord God the Pope. You see this pinnacle, and it is the
pinnacle of the Temple, for the Scripture speaking of Antichrist, says, that he
sits 2 These. 2. 3.
in the Temple of God, which is the Church.

But how shall we understand the fall of that pinnacle of Babel? Thus, Rome by
all Expositours, as well Romish as others, is the City which is called Babylon,
and Ribera, Viega in Apoc. 14. 18.
where of it is witnessed by two Jesuits, Ribera and Viega out of the Texts,
that before the coming of Christ, it must, for the Apostasy and Idolatry in
it, be consumed Rhemists Testam. Annot. in Apoc. 17.
with fire, and by the Rhemists, that it shall be the Seat of Antichrist. A
third we may here term a Politic pinnacle, which is a popular applause.
Hereupon was Herod set, when he drew in as his vital breath the vulgar
acclamation, The voice of God and not of Man: and immediately became as you
know, but a lowzie God.

There is no question, but the Devil is as busy now, as ever, to fix
ambitiousnesse in thoughts and affections with men's consent, and it is as sure,
that his endeavor is the casting them down against their Wills. Neither will he
want a reason for his temptation any more, then he does here: which is the next
general point.

Why cast himself down* His Reason.

For it is written, God has given his Angels charge, etc.

Therefore cast thy self down.

In this one reason we have diverse observables. First is the Allegation, It is
written, He has given his Angels charge, etc. By his deceitful lying in
concealing a necessary part thereof. The second, in dealing thus with sacred
Scripture, which makes the lie utterly Sacrilegious. Two others are discerned
in the Devils consequence: one in his pretentions thus: If thou be the Son of
God, etc. to wit, that thereby thou may manifest thy dignity and special
interest thou have in the favor of God: The second in his intention, If thou
be the Son, etc. that by trying conclusions he might work his own
destruction. Let us begin with his lie; It is no news to hear that the Devil
can lie, whom Psalm. 91. 11. John. 8. 4.
Christ thus branded, saying, that he is a liar, and the Father of lies, as if
lying were a property essential unto him, who no sooner heard this question,
Who shall deceive Ahab? 1 Kings 22. 21.
but instantly answered, as if this were an office peculiar unto himself, and
said, I will be a false speaker in the mouth of all Ahabs Prophets. But the
manner of this lying is worth inquiring into. The tenor of the Text which he
cited runs thus; He, namely God, Will give his Angels charge over thee to
keep thee in all thy ways; they shall hold thee up in their hands, that thou
dash not thy foot against a stone. But the Devil omitteth that clause, to keep
thee in all thy ways, whereby is meant the ways of his own revealed
ordinances, as all the Psalms speak, which were directory words, and made
against the Devils temptation of seeking extraordinary, and hazardous ways of
man's own will. He did thereby intend therefore a lying delusion, as many
expositours, Ancient and others have observed: and the Devil being as Christ
has said, the father of lies, every one that lives in the world will
acknowledge, that he has had an innumerable offspring therein. Now, the
manner of lying is twofold, one close, by that equivocation, which is called
mental reservation, which we may call Jesuiticall, because of their more
special profession and practice thereof, instructing every Priest, when he is
examined by a Magistrate, and in danger to be discovered, that being asked, Art
thou a Priest; he may answer slily, I am no Priest, reserving this notion in
his mind, to tell it unto you: Which Jesuiticall art and subtilty in the
Priests answer, we discern here to have been Satanicall in this Devilish
temptation, by his concealment of the former words of the Psalms. As for
example thus, He has given his Angels charge over thee, and not uttering the
next words, In all thy ways, could not but reserve in his mind a purpose of
not telling it unto Christ. For it is impossible, but that he, who omitteth
words, lest they should be told has the same co^ception in his mind. But they
tell it and print it in their books, that this kind of answer by reservation is
no lie. Let us therefore try this out of Gods book. Ananias having sold his
possession for a piece of money, and laid it down at the Apostles feet to be
distributed in common, craftily kept back a part thereof: to whom Saint Peter
said, Why has Satan possessed thy heart to lie to the Holy Ghost? Now, lying
is not without some expression of words, which must have been to this question.
Thou Ananias, have thou sold them that possession but for so much? and he
answering, but for so much, and concealing a part, could not but conceive in
his mind a selling it but for so much for ought that Peter should know; which
as we have heard from Peter himself, came from the Devil, and therefore was as
I said, a Satanicall lie. And I leave it, that I may come to that, which is
open, direct and flat lying, which is commonly practiced amongst men, and may
be called, as Bernard terms every brazen faced sin, Demon meridianus.

We read of distinct and peculiar National sins, as being more predominant
in some countries then others; some branded with the infamy of Drunkenness,
some of Gluttony, some of Venery, and the like, some have become Proverbialls
for lying: whence we have the Graeca fides, the faith (meaning faithlesnesse)
of the Grecians: Punica fides, the faith of the Punicks, and fides Cretensium,
the Cretians faith: to which we may add (if we consider our proficiency in
forging lies in the compass of three years) I speak to our shame) our fides
Anglicana, whether Privata or Publica, exceeding the three former put them all
together, when as still our to morrow does give yesterday the lie. So
epidemical is this leprosy amongst us. I return to the Text, It is written.
So then, this we speak of is used by the devil, in his false allegation of the
said Scripture, aggravating the lie to make it sacrilegious. The devil, says
the Apostle, can translate himself into an Angel of light; this he does most,
whenever under the color of singularity, and of newly devised strictness of
manners and opinions, he seduceth men into new heresies and schisms, as is
taught us Col. 2. 23. But yet can there be any transformation more delusive and
sacrilegious then this, the perverting of the right sense of Scripture, whether
by false glosses, or (and that especially) by abusing the sense of Scriptures
by omission of words and circumstances, which contradict the intention of the
Objectours? upon which point come we now more especially to insist.

Many hours would not suffice to rehearse the many Romish sophistries in this
kind of abusing of Scriptures in every controversy; but I have singled out one
only most pertinent for the present time, which is, their doctrine of Subjects
taking up Arms against Sovereignty for restoring of Religion, and calling it a
just cause, for justifying of their former Irish and now English Popish
Rebellions, which may give you a clear scantling how to judge of the rest.

Thus beginning with this their Maxim, That the power of all Government is
always resident in the people, and therefore for Religions sake, they may make
their Insurrections at pleasure. Their first Scripture is out of the 1 Pet. 2.
13. where speaking of a King, he says he is (...), a creature of man, or
humane creature, which we say is most true, in constituendo, in constituting a
King, or any form of Government. But rege constituto, the King being
constituted and established, the power of Government by the ordinance of God is
in the Governor, and not in the people; and therefore they wittingly conceal
that Peter having said of the creation of a King that it is Humane, adds
presently (he being once authorized) an injunction upon the people, saying,
Submit your selves unto him. How? during their own wills? nay, for he
subjoyneth, for the Lords sake: So that now he is not man's creature, but Gods,
who immediately puts an obligation upon them of obedience unto him. This is
the first point, and for proof of this our Exposition, we have the testimony of
S. Paul, where that which S. Peter called (...), humane creation, he entituleth
it expressly (...), the ordinance of God, Romans 13. 1. and therefore charge
every soul to be subject unto it.

Next, they object, that the governments spoken of by S. Paul, are written to
be (...), powers and authorities: that is, in abstracto, say they, as
Aristocracie, or Democracie, and Monarchy; not Monarchs, or Aristocraticks,
signifying the persons: concealing that, which is also written in the same
place, the word (...), The Rulers, ver. 3. which signifies the persons; and
again, He carries the sword, ver. 4. accordingly Peter most expressly naming
The King: all which have 1 Pet. cap. 2.
been concealed.

But thirdly, they insist, that the power spoken of, as to be obeyed, is to be
a terror to the evil, and a praise to Rom 13 3, 4.
the good. And therefore if a King prove tyrannous, they owe no more
subjection; concealing, that Paul notwithstanding tyranny it self enjoined
subjection, saying, Be subject to the powers that ARE: and you your selves
knowing right well that the principal of the powers that then were, was Nero,
a most monstrous tyrant to his own heathenish subjects, and the siercest
persecutor of Christians for their Religion: yea, not sparing these Apostles
themselves, Peter and Paul, but hunted them even unto martyrdom:
notwithstanding Peter's direct doctrine was to the people, Submit your selves;
and Paul's, be subject; both commanding to pursue civil obedience.

4. Say they, although Peter gives the King the supremacy, yet there is a
power from the people coordinate unto them: but this they speak from themselves
without any Scriptum est, cunningly concealing that which indeed has Scriptum
est, which may discover their false figment: Peter requiring subjection both to
the King, as Supreme, and also to them that are sent from him, as namely, his
Officers: the Law of Relation evincing that Supremacy with coordination is as
true a solaecisme, as is an head equal with its shoulders.

5. They being left forlorn of defense in the New Testament, post back to the
Old, urging Scriptures according to their stale trick of concealment.

1 Reg. 11.
First, alleging for their purpose examples which can neither affirm or deny,
contrary to that known Maxim, A facto ad jus non valet argumentum, but they
stick to that, omitting Gods direct precepts in behalf of Kings commanding
obedience, and forbidding all contempts: although precepts, as all know, be
directories to overruled all examples.

2. For their examples, they instance in the deposing 1 Kings 11. 29. Judges 3.
12.
of Athaliah the Queen, the defection of Jeroboam, and Ehud his killing of King
Eglon, concealing the circumstances there extant, to wit, that the Queen
deposed was an Usurptrix against the Heir of the Crown then living: That
Jeroboam was a manifest rebel against Rehoboam, although for the sin of the
same King expressly permitted by God, and that Eglon was an Alien, tyrannizing
over them, whom it was lawful for an Israelite to kill as an enemy in open
war against them. Thus of Papisticall allegations. But can this make any
thing against our Zelots and Incediaries of these times? Only thus much, that
they in defense of the same conclusion of taking up Arms against Authority, in
case of Religion, depend wholly upon the same Jesuitical and Papistical
principles and practices: excepting two or three additionals, with which the
latter delight themselves, it being the same art of violation of Texts of
Scripture against the rules of due loyalty prescribed by God. The two which I
shall mention shall not be inferior to the former.

It was resolved in an Ecclesiastical Assembly, and published in print for the
justification of an hostile manner of entrance into this Kingdom without
consent of the King, and affirmed, that if the English should deny them free
passage, and victuals for their money, God would be offended with them, as he
had been with the King of Edom, and his Country, in not permitting the
Israelites to pass through their coasts in their journey to the land of
Canaan. The matter is storied, Numb. 20. It is worth your reading. Wherein we
find, that Moses, and all the Host of Israel, came to Kadesh, which was the
borders of Edom, intending to journey through that Kingdom; but concealing,
first, that they did not offer to set a foot within the borders of Edom, before
they had sent Messengers to ask leave of the King thereof: secondly,
concealing that the condition of passing, which they tendered, was to go only
the high way, and that through without delay, or negotiating with the people of
the Land, save only to have water for their money; and again concealing how,
when the King of Edom raised war against the Camp of Israel, and came to
face them, Moses and his Host offered not the least resistance, but, as it is
in the Text, Israel turned away from him. All three circumstances directly
contradictory to the practices that followed.

In another late English Treatise, we may find another allegation of Scripture
much boasted of; which, indeed, if it were sincere, might, so far, as a
Topic place of example could enforce, conclude for justification of Rebellion
in part. For it is written, 2 King. 18. 7. in express terms, Hezekiah King of
Judah rebelled against the King of Assyria. This is the Allegation. Now hearken
we to the omission of words in the same story of the same Chapter, and but the
eleventh verse following. And Hezekiah sent to the King of Assyria, saying, I
have offended, return from me, that which thou put on me, I will bear:
meaning for satisfaction and reparation. O that these glossers would follow his
example in repenting for their rebellion, and that they would recant their
wilful falsifications, which their art of perverting Ephesians. 4. 14.
the Scriptures, is no better then a kind of that (...) condemned by the
Apostle, which we may term, Cogging a Die. It will not be sufficient to detect
these Incendiaries and Trumpeters for Rebellion, except we further pull off the
vizards, wherewith they use to mask themselves by colorable pretenses, that
so the ugliness of their natural visages may more plainly appear.

Their Visards are of these kinds.

1. Aspersions of Jealousy. 2. Name of Religion. 3. Ostentation of Zeal. 4.
Assurance of happiness upon every one slain in the Cause: besides 5. their
plausible Applications of their allegations and other pretenses to the person
of his Majesty, and the present occasions.

1. Aspersions of Jealousy.] It is your common practice to infuse into the
hearts of people an argument of Jealously: but why? because forsooth, his
Majesty uses the help and Arms of Papists, to make him a defender of Popery.
But with what face or forehead? seeing, that you your selves, by the same
argument, may be much more concluded Papisticall, for urging in this cause
against the Kings cause altogether the arguments of Papists: The difference
will be, that Papists yield the assistance only in the name of subjects,
according as God has prescribed: you, contrary to the obligation of subjection
from God, raise an Alarm of War and hostile resistance. We add, that Popish
Arguments do more hurt then their Arms; those fastening only upon the body,
these upon the soul.

2. Religion pretended.] But yet only pretended, against the Article of
Christian Religion, both Ancient and Modern in our Church, which is Loyalty
and Subjection to our Prince. We say, first, that as there is no Article of
Religion concerning Morality, more strictly, commonly and expressly taught in
Scripture, then Loyalty of Subjection to Princes; so was the same Article as
absolutely professed and practiced by the whole Church Christian. Their
profession we have in the Apologies which were written in the name of the
whole Church of Christ, to remove all jealousies of Princes, and conceit of the
least disloyalty, which is made most manifest, and indeed admirable, above all
other professed subjects in the world, by these three contestations. First,
avouching against the Heathen themselves, saying, Est nobis magis Imperator
quam vobis, That is in true sense, We Christians profess more the Right
Imperial, then you do. Another gives the reason, Quia vos conscios tantum
metuit is, nos conscientiam: In effect thus: The Loyalty of your hearts, O you
Heathens, is but only that, which you would be loath any man should know
besides your selves, because but humane, and so far only as your temporal
occasions shall enforce; but we Christians profess subjection to Emperors in
our consciences, and in obedience unto Romans 13. 5.
God, although there were no rod, or sword of Majesty to keep us in awe,
according to the express doctrine of the Apostle. A third, and with him diverse
others, almost in the same terms. Herein does Christian Religion excel all
other, because, touching subjection, their profession is, Occidi potius, quam
occidere, To be killed, in obeying the Civil power, rather then to kill in
making resistance. Their principles we shall point out by and by. According to
this Primitive Church have our English Protestants always protested by their
oath to the Article of Supremacy, by the Church her Article of Subjection it
self, and by her published Homilies, all authorized by the Statutes of the
Kingdom, besides the privileged Books of Protestant Divines against the
Romish principles. We make bold herein to demand of you, First, Why your
Doctrine of Resistance being altogether repugnant to the doctrine of obedience
to Sovereignty, should not be judged a new heresy? Secondly, after you had
taken that Oath, subscribed to that Article, read and allowed of the Homilies,
and consented to the condemnation of former Romish principles, as contradictory
to Orthodox Religion without exception, how you could receive a contrary oath,
and not think that in stead of wholesome meat, you had taken Hen-bane?

3. Ostentation of Zealousnesse in your profession,] Having a great influence
in persons prone to be seduced; yet, we think, you know out of the writings of
Josephus, that there was before his time among the Jews a sect called Zelots,
tumultuous spirits, and of extreme insolency, in disturbing all Orders, as
well Religious as Politic; to whom if you join the Anabaptistical
Separatists, you will acknowledge, that there is a zeal no better then Ignis
fatuus, in animating men to draw the sword, as Peter was precipitate in drawing
his. But whereas your doctrine is rather to resist by active disobedience, then
(as Loyal Subjects) with passive obedience to suffer unjustly; tell us in your
ingenuity, whether sort expresses the greater zeal?

4. Assurance of happiness upon the death in that quarrel.] This the less
true it is, the more damnable it must be to the quarellous, and in it self more
execrable. Sure we are, that the Apostles express words concerning the
resisters of Sovereignty, are, that they shall receive to themselves (...), by
which, both ancient and modern authors, and among these, as well Papists as
Protestants, understood that judgment of God, which is called in the strict
sense damnation, as it is said of unworthy receiving the blessed Sacrament, to
infer an eating and drinking of a man's 1 Cor. 11. 29.
own damnation, and otherwise it cannot be expressed without violence to the
text, wherein the subject is charged to obedience, as it is the Ordinance of
God. Romans 13. as he will answer in conscience to God: where again Subjection
for Conscience sake toward God, is opposite to subjection for wraths sake, and
to the fear of vengeance by the sword of Magistracy: feign would we now know
of our zealots, why did any of their Doctors wrest the word (...) to signify
rather the judgment of man, then of God, if not to lessen the guiltiness of
the party that should resist, wherein the diminishing of guiltiness, cannot
but be a confession thereof in part? for say we pray you: if contrarily, that
which we have under a prohibition against resistance, had been delivered upon a
precept of resisting of power in case of defense of Religion, whether then this
word (...) should not have rung in your ears an utter condemnation, and that
alone might not more clearly have concluded your cause, then all other
Scripture, which could ever possibly be alleged for the defense thereof. The
last point follows.

The application of all your arguments from Scriptures concerning resistance by
Arms against Usurpers, Tyrants, or Enemies to Religion, is by you in this
cause against a King in right and hereditary possession, without contradiction
legal; against a Myrrour of clemency, for deservings of the Kingdom, gracious
above his Predecessors; for Religion established exemplary beyond comparison;
and vowing himself for the preservation thereof. And now then deliberate with
your selves, whether your misparalleling of these examples with our King, be
not a most impious wresting of Holy Scripture, and injurious detraction from
his Majesty. But here I seem to hear some one of you interrupting me with a
non confido: yea, whereas that his engagement is to the whole Kingdom of
Protestants without exception, even as he will be accounted a King, and as he
expects Gods blessing upon himself and his posterity: and yet will ye stand
upon a Non confido? Will you make him a Devil?

After our thus ending the warrantin Scriptum est, it is written, we are to
examine the two consequences thereof. First, If thou be the Son of God, then
cast thy self down, for he has given his Angels charge etc. If thou be the
Son of God: Is this question of the devil devilish also? Could he be ignorant
what Christ was? Yes, why not? Devil, though he be an Angelical spirit, yet is
he a creature of finite apprehension, and his knowledge but experimental, and
that he had not the absolute knowledge thereof in this case (as the most of the
Fathers have thought) our observation may satisfy in terming Christ only
(...), Son of God, which might agree to any regenerate child of God (I have not
this note only from my self) whereas afterward upon full experience of divine
miracles and correspondent prophesies of him, many devils at once at the sight
of his approach unto them, as he was ready to dispossess them out of a man,
all cried out, saying, Thou art (...) the Son of God (...), as the learned
know, by way of excellency and transcendency, betokening the essential and
natural son of God. So then, supposing the Devil spoke to Christ only upon
this intuition of him, as only man, albeit a singular favouret to God above
others, and so peradventure privileged to cast himself down and save himself,
and yet peradventure neither. If he tempts him to make trial with this
intention, his casting himself down upon this temptation, might be his death
and destruction, and yet with this wily (...) and pretense, that this being
warranted by the Scripture of God for his protection, it would greatly redound
to the honor of God. Of both which, as namely the devils malicious intention
and feigned godly pretense, Christ quitteth himself by this one answer of Gods
precept, Thou shall not tempt the Lord thy God: but to try experiments of
extreme dangers by an extraordinary means, where an ordinary way of stepping
down may be had, were contrary to the said Scripture of walking in my ways,
and consequently is a tempting of God, being a transgression of Gods
commandments. These are the two results from the answer of Christ, and may
teach us two lessons useful for our own souls safety all our lives long.

The first is not to try extremely hazardous actions, when safe means may be
had, as we learn by Christ his example in this Text, who afterward likewise
gave us the same document, when the Jews were about to cast him down from a
steep precipice, but he returned back, and went through from among them, safe.
The like conclusion S. Paul taught, when having had a Revelation, that in that
otherwise storm called Euroclydon threatening unavoidable wrack, none in the
ship should perish; yet perceiving the Mariners in their incredulity seeking to
shift for themselves by boat, peremptorily pronounced, saying, Except these
abide in the ship, you cannot be saved, thereby compelling them to return to
their office, and look to their tacklings. Let us conclude. If that Christ
notwithstanding the supposed decree of God of preserving him in the downfall,
did not adventure to try; and if Paul, notwithstanding the revelation of the
general safety, did exact of the Mariners to stay and perform their offices:
We may justly challenge three sorts of wild and infatuated tempters of God.

First, how many having heard of the doctrine of Gods infallible
Predestination, choosing and refusing from all eternity, according to the
pleasure of his will, have thus (I had almost said reasoned) rambled in their
brains? If I be elect, I cannot perish; if not, I cannot but perish: Seeing
therefore saved or not saved they must needs be, I will therefore live after my
hearts lust in the pleasures of sin. We say, that this is a devilish
temptation, and a casting down the soul, without repentance, into the bottom
of hell. Let every one thus tempted but translate his thoughts to the
consideration of his bodily condition, and then will he see his own phrenzie,
seeing that none is so mad, as being upon the top of a high Tower, will resolve
concerning his body, (and God has as absolutely determined concerning body, as
soul) If I shall be preserved, it will be so; if not, it cannot be so: I will
therefore cast my self down headlong, and not rather take the way down,
whence I came up, knowing otherwise, that by this downfall he makes himself
Felo de se in Man's Court, and in Gods Judicature guilty of his own damnation.
Our Theorem therefore is this, That the directions of man's ways are not to
depend upon the secret and unknown decree of God, but upon his precepts
revealed unto us in his Word.

The second sort are the Solifidians and Antinomians in their abuse of the
doctrine of Justification by Faith without works: The one, as if together with
the Papist he reasoned thus against Protestants, You say, Faith justifyeth
without works, therefore you teach, that it is void of works: As much as to
say, Light in the fire does enlighten men without heat, therefore is light in
the fire without all heat; altogether contradictory to the direct Scriptum est
of S. Paul, Gal. 5. 6.
who describing Justification by faith, faith he, Faith which works by love.
So then, a Justifying Faith is a loving, and therefore a living faith. 2.
Repugnant also to S. James, who speaking of a faith void of works, confuteth it
by the most emphaticall way of Interrogation, saying, Can this faith save?
Fully as much as to have said, Impossible, and therefore is the Solifidian
Faith a spiritual break-neck.

The Antinomian takes off Justification by (as he calls it) sole closely
cleaving unto Christ thereby; Thus he slighteth the works of Sanctification,
insisting only upon those terms, that Christ is The only way, and urging
this only way with manifold inculcations: And so indeed he is, if we speak
either of an absolute exemplary way, or else of an effectual meritorious way to
everlasting life. But if we speak of an introductory way prescribed by Christ,
and without which we cannot come to Christ and to salvation, then we are to be
directed to this Scriptum est, concerning the whole course of our
predestination to E ph. 2. 10.
eternal life, saying, We are his, that is, Gods workmanship created to good
works, which he has ordained we should walk in. Do you mark? Good works
ordained to walk in. Plainly showing, first, that good working is a good
walking. Secondly, ordained of God, as the ordinary way, to all that are
predestinate, to be saved; Which gives us this conclusion, that to neglect
good works destinated to attain to predestinate ends, is another desperate
downfall into certain perdition and destruction.

The Anabaptists are the third praecipitates, the revived brood of old
Catharists, who in opinion of* their own sanctity, will not communicate in any
congregation of faithful Professors, wherein there is any mixture of hallowed
and unhallowed men. Which Sect Calvin according to the wisdom of God in him,
did confute Calvinus advers. Anabapt. Qui se ab universa soc* ^^^te Christians
segregant, ne contaminarentur co^um sordibus: porro quid accidit? Dominus cos
cum tam arroganti caepto dissipavit. Hinc ergo moneamur cum sub specie studii
perfectionis imperfectionem nullam tole* are possumus aut in corpore aut in
membris Ecclesiae, tum Diabolum nos tumefacere superbia and Hypocrisi seducere,
ut ad deserendum christ's gregem nos instiget, certo scicus se victoriam
obtinere cum nos inde ^bduxit. Cum enim nusquam alibi sit aut remissio
peccatorum, aut sal^s, tamet si vitae plusquam Angelicae speciem prae nobis
seramus, tamen si tali audacia nos sepa^emus a Christiano coetu, simus Diaboli.
by a manifold Scriptum est out of the History of Gods Book, even from Genesis
to the end of the Apocalypse, showing that there was never any congregation of
any indifferent number of Gods people without mixture of chafe with wheat, and
goats with sheep, and at length gives us his determination, that they who
profess all sanctity, separating themselves from all other Congregations, are
without the Catholic Church, wherein only is remission of sins and
salvation, notwithstanding they would show a more then Angelical form of
Holiness. And therefore, say we, their not continuing in the Church of Christ,
is a manifest consequence of a damnable precipitation.

The second consequence remains. As the devil tempted to presumption by
instigating to dangerous ends in neglect of ordinary means: so did he, by a
Scriptum est, tempt thereunto, by pretense of a good and holy end of honoring
God thereby, as has been said, notwithstanding Christ gives him a shameful
repulse, by this his Scriptum est, Thou shall not tempt, etc. The full Theorem
in this is given by the Apostle, not to do evil that good may come thereby,
which draws me to a doctrine, then which, none is more necessary for these
times, when our pretenses for violent rapines, our Sic volumus imprisonments,
our thirsting after wounds and bloodsheds, as engendered, fomented, fosterd and
enforced by that which is called a Cause, were it never so godly: yet sure we
know, that be as much, as can be said, for a good intent of glorifying God by
unjust means, it cannot but be to the dishonouring of him, whilst it wants
Gods own warrant and Scriptum est: as has been plainly shown; Only we cannot
conceal that this Theorem does draw from us another inference, as our last
conclusion.

The ends of all actions morally, according as the learned know, are the
principal forms, like the forms of creatures dant nomen and esse, making
them good or il, therefore will it directly follow, that, if ill actions for
good ends be condemnable, then good actions for wicked ends much more, and that
such actions may be devilish, the devils themselves have shown by their
address to Christ, which has been alleged; where they made that open and
joint confession of our fundamental Article of Christian faith, saying, Thou
art the Son of God, and again, The Son of the Highest, which they did more
then once. Now none can deny, but the confession it self severed from all evil
circumstances, had been divinely good, but Christ never would endure to hear
Devils preach, though a truth, concerning the Honor of his Godhead, but he put
them to silence, knowing, that the Devil, speak he well or ill, he will be the
Devil still: he either speaking a falsum, a lie, or if truth, yet ad falsum,
to a false and wicked end. Enough of this Doctrine, I come to our citation of
three parties, which may appear, as they shall be summoned.

First are the Pharisaicall Hypocrites boasting of their fasts, and prayers,
and just tythings, but to what end* The Gospel tells us, to have applause of
men, only their long prayers excepted, which were to devour Widows Houses.
Behold their downfall, Woe be unto you! Woe be unto you! Thus does Christ
multiply woes upon them.

2. Romish Pharisees are the next, who pride themselves in the merit of their
works, merits of condignity according to the exact justice of God: which is an
act of Excellence proper to the Son of God, and against that Scriptum est,
Luke 17. 10. When you have done all that is commanded, say, you are
unprofitable servants. And their downfall is elegantly resembled by Pope
Gregory the first and best of that name, and therefore entitled a Saint, who
as he did disclayme all conceit of merit in himself, so did he condemn it in
all others. His simile is this: Eleazar the valiant man of war killed an
Elephant that was coming upon him, but so, that the beast having received his
deadly wound, in his downfall light upon Eleazar and crushed him to death: even
so they, who glory in conquering their vices, are therein conquered, and
subdued themselves, through their opinion of merit.

3. Lastly, to reflect upon our English selves, if it were that our fasts and
prayers were not boasted of, they might be better thought of. But did never any
so before us? Yes, in the Prophet Esaias. the Jews did exprobate God: we have
fasted, and thou see not. But let us see what God says thereunto: you fast
to strife and debate: is this a fast that I have chosen? showing, that God did
abhor it. Prayers we have, and that extraordinary long, beyond all examples
of all times, in whatsoever people of God; whether some of them fish thereby
for Widows houses, they themselves know best, but questionless it is done in
a singularity, if not as Christ spoke of the Pharisaicall, thinking the rather
to be heard of God. As for Alms deeds, I wish they were so visible as to
deserve a questioning the end why? The Acts which are most in sight are
contributions against Rebellious Ireland, and the Popery thereof: and this we
might be persuaded of, if we saw not visibly the bait of their conditions, for
devouring not only houses, but all of those Papists possessions and livedomes
within the Nation. Besides, the like faith here at home devouring in hope the
use of money by public faith, or else, if that should fail, of delinquents
lands. The downfall is infallible, for that, if Goats, which are at Christ's
left hand, because unprofitable creatures, are to receive a terrible doom, much
more Bears, Wolves, Tigers and all Ravenous birds and beasts of prey, who have
yielded to the temptation of the Devil, must be in association with them in
Torment, whereof we have that Scriptum est of Christ, saying, Depart from me ye
wicked into Hell fire, prepared for the Devil and his Angels: from which Lord
deliver us and every one of whom we have spoken, by the merits of Jesus Christ.

FJNJS.

