A SERMON Preached at DUBLIN, upon the 23. of April, 1661, being the day
appointed for his Majesty's CORONATION; With two SPEECHES made in the House of
Peers the 12th. of May, 1661, when the House of Commons presented their SPEAKER.

By the most Reverend Father in God JOHN Lord Archbishop of Armagh, Primate and
Metropolitan of all IRELAND.

DVBLIN, Printed by William Bladen, Anno Domini 1661.

PSALM. 126. V. He that now goes on his way weeping, and bears good seed,
shall doubtless come again with joy, and bring his sheaves with him.
IN the saddest afflictions and blackest storms, that can befall a man in this
world, (give me leave to make this thankful acknowledgment*) there is no
companion or comforter like the Psalms of David. He, that speaks
experimentally, is the best Physician both for soul and body.

Being to speak unto this auditory upon his Majesty's happy restitution, I
fitted and fixed my thoughts to the first Verse of this Psalm, when the Lord
turned again the captivity of Sion, then were we like to them that dream. When
the Lord, not the Lord Cyrus in relation to the Jews, though the edict for
their restitution came out from him, but the Lord of Cyrus, nor the Lords of
Parliament in relation to us, though they helped to lay the foundation of our
present happiness, but the Lord Paramount of Heaven and Earth. When the Lord
turned. In God there is no shadow of turning by change. But with us there is
nothing but turning, and returning, we are all turning shadows upon the old
exchange of this world.

When the Lord turned again the captivity, that is, the Babilonish Captives,
by an ordinary hebraism. So it is said of Christ, he led captivity captive,
that is, those who were captives to Sin and Satan, he reconquered them and made
them to become his own servants; And what were we better then Babilonish
captives, while we sojourned in idolatrous and superstitious Countries?

There are two sorts of captivity, corporal and spiritual; both are bad, but
the latter ten times worse. In a corporal captivity the Tyrants are external,
but in spiritual captivity they are internal, in our bosoms and bowels. There
the stings are sharp, but nothing so sharp as the stings of a guilty
conscience, corporeal Tyrants may dispossess us of our wealth, our life, our
liberty; but spiritual deprive us of our Souls, of Gods image, of eternal
blessedness. There, one or two members do sinful and slavish offices, but here
all our members are weapons of unrighteousness. Corporeal captives have but one
Master, but spiritual captives have many Masters, Pride commands to spend, and
covetuousness to spare Nay the same vice distracts them with contrary commands,
as vainglory forces them at the same time to soar aloft in the air, and yet
to creep beneath upon the earth, to swell inwardly with pride, to crouch to the
meanest persons, to obtain popular applause. Corporal s^aves have hope to
escape by flight, but in spiritual captivity no flight can help us unless we
could fly away from our selves. Lastly, corporal captivity does end with life.
Death is a perfect cure of all humane miseries. But in spiritual captivity
death is but a beginning of slavery, and a shutting of the door of liberty with
the key of eternity.

But can Mountains be led away captives? otherwise what signifies captivity of
Sion? I answer, that as we say, there is more of Mon Martyr at Paris, then
there is of Mon Martyr at Mon Martyr. So it might be truly said, there was
more of Sion carried to Babylon than was left at Sion. First, the Temple
which was the glory of Sion, was demolished, then the Ceremonies, and
Sacrifices, and Ordinances of Sion were abolished. Thirdly, the holy vessels
and garments, and other utensiles and sacred ornaments were exported. Lastly,
the P^iests and Levites, and people of God were all carried away captive.
These were the living Sion, without these Sion was but a dead carcass of it
self. Justly therefore is the captivity of the people of God called the
captivity of Sion.

Then were we, that is, by way of Historical narration, or then we shall be,
by way of prophetical prediction. Either sense may be admitted. Like them that
dream, that is, like those who are betvveen sleeping and waking; the events
were so strange, so unexpected, so incredible, that we doubted whether they
were real events or vain fancies and drowsy imaginations. Others translate
it, like those that are comforted, or like those that are recovered from some
languishing sickness, and restored to their former strength and vigor.

But vvhilest I was making a parallel betvveen the Jevvish captivity, and our
English captivity, and of our deliverance and restitution with theirs, I see
the flovver, which I had designed for the subject of my discourse, cropped away
before my face; this necessitated me to alter my meditations from the first
Verse to the last Verse of this Psalm. The former was more emphatical for the
Jevvish captivity. But the later suites altogether as well with our present
condition. He that now goes on his way weeping and bears forth good seed,
shall doubtless come again with joy, and bring his sheaves with him.

It is not my manner to amuse my hearers much with various lections or
translations. Every language has its proper idiotis^nes, or peculiar forms of
expression, which differ more in sound than in sense. The vvorst reading or
translation is commonly not so ill, as those clashings, and uncharitable
altercations which are about them. Various lections may sometimes bring some
light to the understanding, but they shake that Christian faith which is
radicated in the heart. Break ice in one place, and it will crack in more.
Suffer the truth of sacred writ to be questioned in a word or a syllable, and
you weaken the authority, and lessen the venerable estimation of the whole
text. That which satisfyeth me, and may satisfy any good christian, is this,
that God who has given the holy Scriptures to his Church, to be the key of his
revealed counsels, the anchor of their hope, the evidence of their blessedness,
will not suffer those Scriptures to be so far corrupted in any thing that is
fundamental and necessary, that it can hinder the salvation of his servants.
Take this Text for an instance, that there is no such danger in various
lections or translations, if they be expounded according to the analogy of
faith, and that sense of the Scriptures which the Holy Ghost did give to the
Church, together with the Scriptures.

He that going goes says the original, He that goes on his way says our
translation, or he that goes forth, that is, forth of his house to sow, or
forth of his Country into exile, weeping, or pensive, or sorrowing, And
bears forth good seed, whether we read bears or draws, good seed, or
precious seed, or the sowing seed, or the hopper or seed-basket, is not
material. Shall doubtless come again with joy. The original is, in coming shall
come, that is, shall come without fail. Shall doubtless come again with joy.
This wo^d only seems to me to be translated over flat, and might be rendered
more aptly with a shout of joy, or with joyful acclamations, by allusion to
those harvest dames, which they use in many places, when they bring in the last
load of their harvest with great pomp, and shouts, and acclamations of joy. And
bring his sheaves with him, that is, the increase of his seed, the fruit of his
labor, the reward of his patience.

In the words we may observe a double qualification, The former, he that now
goes on his way weeping, the latter, and bears forth good seed. And a double
prognostic, the former, shall doubtless come again with joy, the latter, and
bring his sheaves with him. We may observe how going forth and coming again,
weeping and shouting for joy, seed and sheaves do answer one another.

And now that we have seen the sense, let us see how fitly these words do agree
to the exile and happy rest^tution of our Sovereign King CHA^LES the second.
First, he went on his way more like indeed some Bode or ordinary messenger then
a great Prince. He went forth of England into France, from France to Holland,
from Holland after some lesser excursions into Scotland, (Fishes and Guests
gain little by long keeping,) where, to speak modestly, he was not entertained
like the hundred and tenth Prince of that family, To give a civil honor to
Gods vicegerent was to idolize the creature. But no honor could be too much at
the same time for a consistory of their own Commissioners. There was nothing to
be heard but the Commissioners of Christ, the Tribunal of Christ, the Scepter
of Christ, the eternal Gospel, Oh partiality, how do thou blind men's eyes!

Before this adventure for Scotland, he had thoughts for Ireland, where the
greatest and best part of the Kingdom did either profess to hold for him, or
desire to return to him, only two Cities did hold out against him, Dublin and
Londonderry, And, if my intelligence do not fail me, those expected only his
own presence to have submitted with more honor and advantage.

Hovvever it was, I did vvish, if it had been Gods will, that he had come
over, that Ireland might have had a signal honor in his restitution then, as
it contributed largely afterward, but God disposes all things sweetly.

From Scotland he went on his way for England. But the iniquity of the Amorites
was not yet full. God had something to do with his rod before he cast it into
the fire, something in Iamaica, something in Ireland, something in Scotland,
something in England it self, to bring the first contrivers of our miseries to
shame and condign punishment by their own power, to prepare and facilitate a
way for his Majesty's restitution, without effusion of blood. God has more
noble means, and fitter opportunities to effect his own designs, than man can
comprehend. We praise thee, O God, we acknowledge thee to be the Lord. That
English voyage, though otherwise unsuccessful, was an happy presage of this
great blessing which we now enjoy, that God who preserved his Majesty so
miraculously then, had some great work to do with him. From England he returned
to France, from France to Germany, from Germany to Flanders, from Flanders to
France back again, thence to Spain, thence to Flanders, thence to Holland, and
so for England, where long, and long, and long may his Crown flourish. Was ever
Sovereign Prince so tossed to and fro, and bandied hither and thither by the
racke^s of a cont^ary fortune? changing his stations as often as the old
Patriarchs did whilst they dwelled in Tents. This was no comfortable life to
be always rolling up and down. Which the next word in my Text implies, that is,
weeping, He that goes on his way weeping.

I may say of weeping, a^ our learned Countriman the Lord Uerulam said of hope,
that it was a good Breakfast, but an ill Supper, Early tears, like the mist
descending, prognosticate a sayr serene day. As April showers bring forth May
flowers. They who prove Benjamin's sons of the right hand, are commonly first
Benonies sons of sorrow. Christ himself did wear a Crown of Thorns before he
obtained a Crown of Glory. Joseph was first clapped up close in a dungeon, where
he ^avv neither Sun, nor Moon, nor Stars for a season, before the Sun, Moon,
and Stars did fall down and worship him, No man can rationally doubt whether
our dread Sovereign d^d ^ow in tears, before he reaped in joy, who considers
sadly what a misery it is, for a great King to be banished from all his
relations, to be thrust out of his native Country, and hereditary Kingdoms,
into the merciless world, to live in want. A French Author of good note relates
with pity and commiseration, the deplorable condition of the Lancastrian
family, being of the blood royal of England, in the Court of CHARLES Duke of
Burgundy. That whereas God and nature had provided so bountifully for all other
creatures, the fowls of the air, and the beasts of the field, that they never
feared the want of food, only men, the best of creatures, and Princes the best
of men, should sometimes not know where to find sustenance for to morrow. A man
may justl^ ^ear want of money, or want of means, or want of friends, but*want
of sorrows and tears he need not fear. Foreign kindred and allies do seldom
contribute much to the wiping away of these tears. Like winter brooks, they
^well with kindeness when one has no need of them, but when they should be
u^eful, they are dried up. And he, that trusts unto them, may expect S. Peter's
lot, when his nets were full, he needed but to beckon to his fellows, and
presently they were all at his elbow, but when he did sing his lachrymae, he
had not one of them to comfort him. Every one is a kinsman to him that is
prosperous, but a friend in need is a friend in deed.

And truly, when I compare our necessary expenses in the long time of our
banishment abroad, with our commings in, I cannot attribute our preservation so
long to anything, but to a secret blessing of Almighty God. He that fed the
Israelites with Manna in a barren wilderness, and preserved their shoes and
their raiment from wearing, and waxing old, He that fed Eliah by Ravens, He
that blessed the poor widows handful of meal, and her cruse of oil, will not
suffer his Servants to die for hunger.

But the cares and troubles of Princes are incomparably greater, and their
wants more pinching than those of private persons. Their Motto may be the
candle, burning with these four letters, A. S. M. C. Aliis Serviens meipsam
contero. In serving others I vvast away my self. Their cares extend to all
their followers, to provide for their necessities as well as for their own.
The sufferings of all their Subjects and Relations do touch them more nearly
than others. Thoughts troubled Nebuchadnezzars head, vvhilest his Subjects
slept securely upon either ear. When the Preacher has but fallen upon the
Martyrdom of our late Sovereign, or those instructions which he left behind
him, how have I seen his Majesty dissolve into tears? that brought to my mind
that of S. Austin, proruperant stumina oculorum meorum acceptabile tuum
sacrificium. The f^oods of mine eyes did break forth an acceptable sacrifice
unto thee O God. This is the first qualification, He that goes on his way
weeping.

The second follows, and brings forth good seed. It is a Metaphore taken from
sowers, What a man sowes that he may certainly expect to reap. But what is the
good seed which our Sovereign did bear forth with him? I answer, first, a good
title, Dieu and son droit, God and his right. There is a (...) error lately
crept into the world, and almost thrust out again, That Dominion is founded in
grace, not in nature, That the wicked have no interest in their possessions or
estates, but are like moths, which make their houses in other men's garments,
That all things belong properly to the elect, Paul, Apollo, Cephas, things
present, things to come, all are theirs, if they be Christ's. Ex his praemissis
necessario sequitur collusio. Admit this once, and then they who take
themselves to be true Israelites, may with a good conscience rob and plunder
the profane Egyptians of this world. Nothing is more hidden than true grace. We
know it not in another, hardly in our selves. Therefore, if grace should give
an interest to possessions, no man's title should be certain, from whence of
necessity must follow an incredible confusion. But our God is a God of order.
Religion neither alters, nor takes away any man's right. Ananias was no Saint,
yet S. Peter told him, that he had a good interest in his estate, was it not
thine own? The truth is, Dominion is founded in nature, not in grace. It was
said to our first parents, immediately upon the creation: Replenish the earth,
and have Dominion, etc. Every son of Adam may challenge an interest in his own
estate by virtue of this concession.

All is yours, says the Scripture, that is, not every individual creature, but
every species, or kind of creatures. All is yours, that is, not by way of
civil possession, but by divine ordination. All things by Gods disposition,
serve for the good of the Church, and help forvvard the salvation of Gods
servants. Or, All is yours, and you are Christ's, that is, you only who are
Christ's, have the sanctified use of the creatures. This is far enough from a
civil possession, far enough from a just title, Such as King CHA^LES had, not
grounded upon a Fana ick exposition of a text of holy Scripture, nor upon the
fickle humors of a giddy multitude, nor upon the traitorous dictates of a
seditious orator, but upon the evident Laws of God, of Nature, of Nations,
and the municipal Laws of these ^ingdoms, upon a radicated succession from
royal progenitors, He himself being the hundred and tenth person of one family,
who has svveyed the Scepter. I do not yet know any Prince in Europe, or in
these parts of the world, that can say the same. A title so clear, as if it
were written with a beam of the Sun, which no true English man in his right
vvitts, did ever yet oppose, but one or two foreign pensioners, maintained on
purpose abroad, to kindle scath fires at home, who gained nothing by the
question, but to render themselves ridiculous.

This was the good seed, which King CHARLES did bear forth with him, A good
title, which though it seemed for a time, to perish under the clods, yet we
see it sprouts up again. A tempest brings Achilles his arms to Ajax's tomb, to
reverse an unjust sentence: And Aaron's rod devou^ed the rods of the
enchanters, to the comfort of all loyal Subjects, and the confusion of all
Egyptian Juglers for ever. This is the first good seed, which King CHARLES did
bear forth with him. A good title.

A second sort of good seed, which King Charles did bear forth with him, was
the testimony of a good conscience, void of offense, toward God, and toward
man. A good conscience is a better proof of innocence, then a thousand
vvitnesses, and will make it self a garland of the lying reports of
Sycophants. When King CHARLES was first chased out of England, his age was not
capable of much guilt, and his only crime was, that (which in truth was his
chiefest glory,) he was the Son of such a Father. Those accursed jealousies and
fears, which the first devisers and spreaders of them, did know assuredly to be
damnable lies, are now vanished. Truth the daughter of time, has discovered
them to all the world, to have been counterfeit shows. They feared an apostasy
to Popery, yet King CHARLES the Father, dyed a glorious Martyr, and King
CHARLES the Son, lives a Noble Confessor of the true faith, professed in the
Church of England, having showed evidently by a thousand proofs, that he is no
such reed shaken with the wind. They complained of tyranny against him, whose
only defect was overmuch goodness, and lenity. Let their high Courts of
Injustice speak* let their black roll of Sequestrators and committee men speak,
let all the great Towns in England, (which they made shambles of good
Christians, and loyal Subjects) speak, let Tredah speak, and that torrent of
loyal blood, which was poured out there, barbarously* upon cold and deliberate
thoughts, like water upon the face of the earth, who were the Tyrants. Cajus
the Emperor, out of a ridiculous affectation to make himself like the Gods,
did assume Mercurie's rod, Apollo's bow and arrows, Mars his sword and shield.
But King CHARLES has ever better ensigns of the Deity, Justice, Mercy, Piety,
and Temperance. These make up the image of God, where these abound, the bird in
the breast sings sweetly. He, who has these may with comfort expect an happy
deliverance from all his troubles. He that goes on his way weeping, and
bears forth this seed with him, shall doubtless come again with joy.

The third sort of good seed, which King Charles did bear forth with him, was a
good Religion. A Religion not reformed tumultuously, according to the brain
sick fancies of an half witted multitude, dancing after the pipe of some
seducing charmer, but soberly, according to the rule of Gods word, (as it has
been evermore, and every where interpreted by the Catholic Church,) and
according to the purest pattern of the primitive times. A Religion, against
which, the greatest adversaries thereof, have no exception, but that it
prefers grace before nature, the written word before uncertain traditions,
and the allsufficient blood of Jesus Christ, before the stained works of mortal
men. A Religion, which is neither garish with superfluous Ceremonies, nor yet
sluttish, and void of all order, decency, and Majesty in the service of God. A
Religion, which is as careful to retein old Articles of faith, as it is averse
from new Articles. The essences of all things do consist in indivisibili. Faith
is ad^lterated, as well by the addition of new Articles, as by the
substraction of old. A Religion, which is not like to perish for want of fit
organs, like those imperfect creatures produced by the Sun upon the banks of
Nilus, but shaped for continuance, The terror of Rome. They fear our
moderation more than the violent opposition of others. The vvatch tovver of the
Evangelical Churches. I have seen many Churches of all sorts of Communions, but
never any, that could diminish that venerable estimation, which I had for my
mother, the Church of England. From her breasts I received my first
nourishment, in her arms I desire to end my days. Blessed be he that blesses
her. This good seed* that is, the Religion of the Church of England, King
CHARLES did bear forth with him. This he brought home with him, without
turning either to the right hand or to the left; And like the Laurel tree, (the
tree of Conquerers*) he gathered strength and vigor, even from opposition,
Crescit sub pondere virtus.

I cannot deny, but that some of us have started aside like broken bovves, out
of despair in this their bitter trial, wherein they have had their goods
plundered, their estates sequestered, their persons imprisoned, their Churches
aliened, wherein they have been divorced from their nearest relations, and
disabled to discharge the duties of their callings to God, wherein ^ome of them
have been slaughtered, others forced to mantain themselves by mechanic
labors, others thrust out of their native Countries, to wan^er like vagabonds,
and exiled beggars up and down the merciless world. But, God be praised, they
are not many. If we compare this with any the like persecution in Europe, you
shall never find, that so few Apostated. As if they had been inspired with the
free spirit of S Chrysostom; will they banish me, the earth is the Lords, and
the fullness thereof. If they cast me ^nt the sea, I will remember Jonas, if
into a fiery ^urnace, the three children, if among the wild beasts, Daniel. If
they stone me, I have S. Stephen for my companion, ^f they behead me, John
Baptist; if they plunder me, naked I came out of my mothers womb, and naked
must I return again. Or with the heroical mind of S. Ambrose, Vultisne ad
vincula me abripere? voluptas est mihi, etc. Will ye hale me to prison? it is a
delight unto me. To death? I will not incircle my self with a guard of trusty
followers, nor lay hold on the altars as a supplyant to save my life, but will
be freel^ offered up for the altars of my God. Spices being brayed in a mortar,
smell more sweetly; so these servants of Christ, being beaten and bruised by
persecu^ors, do yield a more fragrant odor in the noseth^ls of God and man.
The ground of their constancy, next to the goodness of God, was the examples
of our dread Sovereign his courage and perseverance. The example of a great
Prince, is like the great wheel of a clock, which sets all the lesser wheels a
going. This, shall one day Crown his temples with a diadem, more bright than
the beams of the Sun, as far excelling that Crown, which he is to receive this
day, as the radiant splendor of the Sun, does exceed the dim shining of a
glowworm. Then, if Tully, an ^eathen, could say, that the Romans did owe their
victories, and good successes, more to their religious piety, than either to
their numbers, or strength, or policy; why should Christians despair, or doubt,
that King CHARLES, who went on his way weeping, and did bear forth such
precious seed with him, should come again with joy, and bring his sheaves
with him.

The last sort of good seed, which King CHARLES did bear forth with him, was
the prayers and good affections of his Subjects. Tyrants might deprive him of
his other contributions, this they could not deprive him of. If S. Austine did
attribute so much to the prayers and tears of his Mother Monica, what might not
be hoped from the prayers and tears of so many thousands, powered out to God in
private, for their King and Country, Church and Commonwealth, Liberty and
Religion. At a German Diet the Princes fell upon a controversy, which of them
had the best Country* The Palati^e commended his, for the fruitful soil; the
S^xon his, for the silver mines; the Bavarian his, for stately Cities; the Duke
of VVittenberge, in praise of his Country, said only this, that he durst lay
his head in the lap of any Subject throughout his Dominions, either by day, or
by night: fortunati ambo, an happy Prince of an happy people, where that evil
spirit had not walked, which set dissension between Abimelech, and the men of
Sichem. England was not always so happy, when some counterfeit Physicians,
(like the wolf in the sable,) persuaded against her own sense, that she was
sick to death, without all kind of recovery, unless she would put her self
into their hands to be cured. She did so. And what the issue had been, if God
almighty had not looked down upon us from heaven, with an eye of pity, we
have seen. Yet this was but a green sickness fit. When that fit was over, she
threvv away her chalk and coals, which she had eaten in corners, and returned
to eat more healthful food at her Fathers table. Or, it was a short fit of
madness. O Phocion, (said Demades) look to thy self, when the Athenians fall
into their mad fits. And thou Demades, (replied Phocion) look to thy self, when
they return to their right wits* But, God be praised, even vvhilest this
epidemical distemper did rage the most, there were not only seven thousand
in England, but seaventy times seven thousand, who never bovved their knees
to Baal Berith, the God of the Covenant, but continued loyal Subjects, and
orthodox Christians, and were not afraid with the Serpent, to expose their
bodies to the blovvs, and their estates to be a prey to their persecutors, that
they might save their head, first, their spiritual head, that is, Christ;
secondly, their political head, that is, their Sovereign Prince; and lastly,
their ecclesiastical head, or lavvful superiors in the Church. These were the
true Isreal's, who vvrestled with God by their prayers, and prevailed. I have
done with the second qualification, and bears forth good seed. I come now
to the catastrophe: Shall doubtless come again with joy.

Every word in my text proclaims, that there is an interchangeable vicissitude
of all humane affairs. Here we have, going forth and coming again, weeping and
acclamations of joy, sovving and reaping, seed and sheaves. He that goes on
his way weeping, and bears forth good seed, shall doubtless come again with
joy, and bring his sheaves with him. That of Solomon, There is a time for every
thing, a time to plant, and a time to pluck up, a time to build, and a time to
pull down holds in Cities and public ^ocieties, as well as private Families,
and they may set the Moon upon their gates, as well as the old Romans did upon
their shoes, to put them in mind of the unstability of this world. One is,
another was, and a third shall be, even as it pleases God, in whose hand,
there is a chain to lift them up, or let them down at his pleasure. The
greatest Monarchs and Monarchies in the world, in comparison of him, are but
guttae roris antelucani, drops of morning dew, quickly dried up with the heat
of the Sun, or easily dispersed with the least puff of vvind. All places have
their days and nights, their summers and vvinters, their sunshine and storms.
No sublunary thing is stable. The Sun has its eclipses, the Moon its vvaxings
and vvainings, the Sea has its ebbings and flovvings, the elements their
successive changes. Peace and war, sickness and health, plenty and dearth, do
succeed one another. The whole world is a restless vvhirligig, running
violently, sometimes this way, sometimes that way. A reed shaken hither and
thither, with every puff of vvind. A tottering quagmire, vvhereupon it is
impossible to lay a sure foundation: like a sick man, that can take no rest in
his bed, but is continually tossing, and turning from side to side.

Saint Paul does describe our right image, in two metaphors, 4. Ephe. 14. That
we henceforth be no more children, tossed to and fro, and carried about with
every wind of doctrine. The former metaphor is taken from little children. You
may dravv a child any vvhither from his duty, from his interest, from his
engagements, with a fair word, or an apple, or some new fangled toy, or fear of
some bugbear, or promises of golden mountains. So we like children, are easily
led into a fools paradise, not with apples of Eden, but with apples of Sodom,
which turn to dust when they come to be enjoyed. The other metaphor is taken
from a Ship lying at Hull, tossed to and fro, and carried about with every
wind, even ^o do we fluctuate between the broken waves, and contrary billows of
different opinions and desires.

Thus we are changeable in our minds, but we are as changeable in our estates.
Now we abound with wealth, God knows how soon the best of us may be
necessitated to beg an halfpenny of passengers with great Bellisarius. Now
every man's tongue is a silver trumpet to sound out our praises, which perhaps
deserve not to be piped upon an oaten reed. God knows how soon this hosanna may
be changed to crucifige, and we be laden with more unjust calumnies, than ever
was blessed Athanasius. Now we enjoy the sweet sauce of all temporal bessings,
that is, health, God knows how soon sickness may cast us upon our restless
beds, and change our sweet repose into wearisome tossings. God knows how soon
we may be choked with the fumes of a vicious stomach, or d^ovned with
hydropical humors, or burnt up with choleric distempers, or buried alive in
the grave of melancholic imaginations. Now we sit in the beauty of peace,
every man under his own Vine, and his own Fig tree. We know not how soon our
ringing of bells may be changed to roaring of canons. It is the mercy of the
Lord, that these mischiefs do not overwhelm us.

This vicissitude of humane affairs, is necessary to the being of the world.
Beasts would multiply without number, if none were brought to the shambles.
Fishes would fill the Sea, and Fowls the Air, if the greater did not devour
the less, and both serve for the use of man. By nature we are born thicker
into the world, than we die out of the world, every age builds Cities,
Towns, Villages, so, as if God did not sometimes thrust in the sickle of his
justice into the over rank field of this world, and svveep away whole
multitudes by war, or famine, or pestilence, two worlds could not contein
us, ten worlds could not nourish us.

If any place could have pleaded a privilege to exempt it self from this
changeable vicissitude, what rather than Jerusalem? yet it had not one stone
left upon another. Or Capernaum, whose magnificent buildings were lifted up
to Heaven? yet it was cast down to hell. Pliny and Strabo write wonders of
the vvalls of Babylon, yet now it is become a place for ovvles to screech in,
and for satyrs to dance in. And now grass grovvs where once Troy stood. Alas,
wherein can any City or Society place their confidence, to protect them from
this common vicissitude? In navies or Armado's? how easily may they be cast a
way, or dashed in pieces against the rocks: as the Ships of Iehoshaphat
were at Ezeon Geber. Or, in vvalls and fortifications? when the vvalls of
Hiericho fell down at the sound of rams horns, and the shout of an enemy. Or,
in prudent politicians? when God can infatuate the wisdom of the wise, and
turn all their counsels into folly, as he did the counsels of Achitophel* Or,
in numerous armies of experienced Soldiers? when he can fill their hearts
with panical fears, so that ten shall chase an hundred. Or, in leagues and
confederacies? when he can set Ephraim against Manasses, and Manasses against
Ephraim, and both against Judah. Navies, Armies, Garrisons, Counselors,
Confederates, are no more able to prevent this common vicissitude of all humane
affairs, than a shield of paper, to resist the shot of a Canon.

First then, seeing that by the Ordinance of God, there is such a necessary
vicissitude of all things, let us not think vainly to translate this valley of
tears into a paradise of perpetual bliss, or to clip the vvings of prosperity,
that it should never fly away. Eve called her eldest Son Cain, a possession,
and he proved a vagabond. Then as skilful Pilots, whilst the season is
calmest, do provide for a storm, and as good Soldiers do keep a vigilant
centry in the time of truce: so when we have enough, let us remember the time
of hunger, and when we are rich, think upon poverty and need, Eccles. 18. 25.
When we are at home in peace, let us think upon those times, when we hanged
our Harps upon the vvillovvs by the rivers of Babylon: stear the vvorst, and
the best will save it self. Darts, that are foreseen, seldom do any great
hurt. Above all, take heed that thou never boast of to morrow, for thou
know not what a day may bring forth,

Secondly, since there is such a vicissitude of all humane affairs, why should
any man murmr, or repine at his present condition? The murmuring speeches of
men, are like arrovvs shot up in de^yance against Heaven, which always fall
down again upon their own heads. Should we receive good at the hand of God, and
not evil? who can say that his sufferings are equal to his sins? God rewards
many beyond desert, but he never punishes any beyond desert. I know that the
Saints themselves are involved in national judgments, as well as others, as
Hieremy, Ezekiel, Daniel, in the captivity; but it was a blessing to them, not
a punishment. As it were madness for a boatman, to think that by the strength
of his arm and cable, he was able to draw the main rock to his little boat, and
not to pull himself and his little boat to the main rock: So it were a mere
folly for any man to think that by his struggling against the stream of humane
affairs, he should be able to change the course of the world, and to make it
plyant to his desires. It is both pious and prudent to think that to be
evermore best for us, which God sends.

Thirdly, since humane affairs are so mutable, no extremity should make us
despair. When the bricks are doubled, when our miseries are at the highest,
when all the help of man does seem to fail us, then comes Moses to deliver us.
When Pharaoh's Butler had forgotten Joseph, then God remembered him. An U^urer
will trust a Banquerupt upon a pawn. And shall not we trust God almighty with
our deliverance, unless he give us a pawn for performance of his word? Remember
that judgment which fell upon the Samaritan Lord for his infidelity. Though
the Lord (said he) should make windows in Heaven, could this thing be? The Lord
did not make windows in Heaven, yet that thing was, and came to pass at the
time prefixed, but he lived not to enjoy the benefit of it. God has
unimaginable ways to bring his own designs to effect, as we see with wonder
and admiration this day. Thus, as the woman of Canaan did pick comfort out of
the name of a dog: so we may gather hope out of the vanity and vicissitude of
all sublunary things. After darkness we may hope for light, after a tempest for
a calm, after wearisome tossings for sweet repose; when the storm is weathered,
and the black clouds overblown which darkened the face of the sky, and seemed
to take possession of the whole region of the air, and to pierce the very
Heavens, suddenly behold a viciss^tude. As no prosperity is permanent: so no
adversity is perpetual. After exile, comes a Country, after seed time comes
harvest, and after weeping comes joy. He that now goes on his way weeping,
and bea^eth forth good seed, shall doubtless come again with joy.

I told you before, that our translation, which renders it only joy, seems to
me over flat, and short of the original, which signifies a shout, or
acclamation of joy, such as harvest men do use when they b^ing home their
harvest dame, or the last load of their lummers crop, with music, and
feasting, and shouting. If ever this was verifyed in any exiled Prince, who had
gone forth weeping, and came again with joy to his Kingdom and native Country,
it was verifyed in King CHARLES at his happy restitution, and entrance into his
Royal City. I have seen high expressions of joy in foreign parts upon the like
occasion, I see when the King of France that now is, returned to his City of
Paris, after he had been thrust out of it by his own Subjects; but such loud
acclamations, such universal expressions of joy, I did never see or hear, as
were then made to vvelcome in King CHARLES; that as a Father said
hyperbolically of the sin of Adam, that it was an happy fault which obtained
such a redeemer: so we may say in the same sense (and no other,) that it was
an happy exclusion which produced such a restitution.

There remains only one word yet untouched in this part of my text, that is,
doubtless, shall doubtless come again with joy. What then is it so undoubted a
truth, that every one who is thrust out of his right here, shall be restored
with such joyful acclamations? O no, God's judgments in this life are
imperfect, and the dispensations of them are inscrutable, In rebus divinis
magna est caligo, there is a great mist in the ways of God. Gods temporal
promises ought to be understood with an exception of the Cross, unless he see
it to be otherwise expedient for the advancement of his own glory, and the
eternal good of his servants. God punishes some sinners here, to show there
is a just judge, and leaves others unpubished, to show there is a judgment to
come. This truth is affirmed expressly by Solomon. Ecles. 7. 15. All things
have I seen in the days of my vanity, there is a just man that perishes in his
righteousness, and a wicked man that prolongeth his life in his wickedness. And
if we had not plain Scripture for it, the example of our late dread Sovereign
King CHARLES the first, was proof sufficient, who was murdered by his own
Subjects, (that had svvorn allegiance to him,) in his Capital City, before the
gates of his own Palace, in the sight of his own people, in the face of the
sun, under a sormality of Justice. God did see all this then, and does now
require it, require it here in part, but will require it hereafter to the
uttermost farthing, from all those, who had an hand in that crying paricide,
and have not, or shall not wash away the guilt with unfeigned tears. That happy
Martyr is now following the lamb in his whites, and reaps in joy what be did
sovv in tears; And his Son is this day Crowned with his Royal diadem, with the
shouts and acclamations of his Subjects. So true is that of my text, that
either here, or hereafter, or both, He that goes on his way weeping, and
bears forth good seed with him, shall doubtless come again with acclamations
of joy, and bring his sheaves with him.

This brings me to the last clause of my Text, and bring his sheaves with him.
This life is a seed time, whatsoever we sow here, we are sure to reap
hereafter, even to a glass of cold water. As surely as when thou see a man
casting seed out of an hopper, thou may foretell what shall be the crop.
The seed and the sheaves cannot choose but be the same grain. Only the sheaves
are seed multiplied, it may be thirt^ fold, it may be sixty fold, it may be an
hundred fold. So sheaves do signi^y all those advantages which we reap by his
Majesty's restitu^ion.

The first sheaf is Peace, the ne^rer that societies approach to unity, the
farther they are from fear of dissolu^ion* When the Romans did find themselves
in any great peril, they ever submitt^d themselves to one Dictator, as a sacred
anchor, and sure remedy to take away their divisions. His Majesty has not
only stopped up the spring of all our divisions by his just title, but has
purchased our peace by parting with his own just rights, to satisfy the
interests of all parties. Let his example be our pattern, to do whatsoever we
can with justice for the public peace, although it be to our own private
prejudice. The Pythagoreans had a rule to leave no print of the botom of the
cup in the ashes, that is, in reconciliation to re^ein no re^entment of former
quarrels. The d^vided sides of a vvound do meet together in a skarre. And
strange plants by inoculation, do become one tree. It were hard that quarrels
should be immo^tal, or more durable than nature, or that the passions of the
mind should be more maligna^t and difficult to be clo^ed, than the vvounds o^
ulcers of the body, and that no way should be le^t to unite the divided
members of Christ. Does God delight as much in the observation, or not
observation of indifferent Ceremonies, as he does in the love and unity of
brethren, and just obedience to lavvful superiors? or is it his will, that
for a fevv innocent rites established by Law, Kingdoms should swim with
blood, Monarchies be turned upside down, and innocent Christians be brought to
utter beggary? It is a folly to dote so upon the body, as to cherish the sores
and ulcers thereof: or out of hatred to the ulcers to destroy the body. The not
distinguishing betvveen the essences and abu^es of particular Chu^ches, has
been the cause of all our miseries. This is the first sheaf which King CHARLES
brings with him, that is, Peace.

The second sheaf is the opening of our Courts, the restoring of our Laws to
their vigor, and the establishment of Justice among us. What a vvretched
condition was this poor Kingdom in, which neither had Court open, nor Sheri^
legally appointed, nor so much as a (...) of Peace for so long time together?
It was the mercy of God, that the policy and frame of this Kingdom was not
utterly destroyed, and brought to confusion. The Law is like the wrest of a
musical instrument, which puts the jarring strings in tune. It is the balance
of the Commonwealth, which gives the same weight to gold and lead, the rule and
square of justice, the standard and measure of the Kingdom, the foundation of
liberty, the fountain of equity, the life and soul of policy. Parents may leave
a patrimony to their children, but the Law preserves it; Arms may conquer
Kingdoms, but laws establish them. A City may be safe without walls, but never
without Laws. That we eat and sleep in quiet, that our houses are not fired
over our heads, nor our daughters deflowred before our eyes, it is the benefit
of the Laws, without which, we should bite and devour one another, as the
greater fishes do the less. This is the second shea^ which King CHARLES brought
with him, that is, the Laws. A third sheaf is his experience. VVo be to thee O
Land, when thy King is a child, Eccles. 10. 16. That is, a child in
understanding and experience. The inexperience of Reh^boam and his young
counselors quickly destroyed the Kingdom. We use to say, a new Physician must
have a new Church* yard. A new Physician is not more dangerous to the body,
than a new Politician to the state. It is written of Darius, that in opening a
fair Pomegranate, one demanded of him, of what thing he desired so many as
there were kernells in that Pomegranate? He replied, so many Zopyrus's, that
is, prudent and experienced counselors. God be praised, our Darius may be a
Zopyrus to himself, having had that advantage which none of his predecessors
ever had, to have viewed with his own eyes the chiefest of his neighbor
Courts, Kingdoms, and Commonwealths, their Interests, their Laws, and forms of
Government, their strength and weakness, their advantages and disadvantages,
both in War and peace, things of excellent use to a Prince, and may well pass
for a third sheaf. And shall bring his sheaves with him.

A fourth sheaf, and the last, which I shall mention at this time, is Security.
Usurpers are always full of jealousies and fears. The reason is evident, Wisd.
7. 11. VVi^kedness condemned by her own testimony is very timorous, and being
pressed with conscience, always forecasteth grievous things. It was observed
of Richard the third, that after he had murdered his Nephews, and usurped the
Crown, he wore his hand continually upon his Dagger. A plain sign of inward
guilt. When the wise men made this demand, where is he that is born King of the
Jews? Herod was troubled, and all Jerusalem with him. Successor instat,
pellimur, satelles i, ferrum rape, perfunde cunas sanguine. A successor is
come, we are chased away. Go Soldiers, catch your swords, and make the cradles
swim with blood. These inward fears render them cruel and vindictive, and make
them multiply their Soldiers and their guards, wherein their only hope of
safety does consist. These grow chargeable to a Commonwealth, and easily from
Servants turn Masters; From all these burdens and suspicions we are freed by
the restitution of the right Heir. So every way King CHARLES brings his
sheaves with him.

A Prince, as supereminent above others in goodness, as Saul was in stature,
and more adorned with virtues than with his purple. To whose happy
Coronation this day is dedicated. Much may he give, long may he live, a nursing
Father to the Church, a patron to the Commonwealth, a protector to his
friends, a terror to his enemies, an honor and a darling to his Country. Let
the hopes of all those who envy this days happiness, melt away as vvinter
ice, and flow away as unprofitable waters. And long, long may his Crown
flourish, which this day first adorns his temples, until he change that
corruptible Crown with an immarcescible Crown of glory.

When I consider with my self the condition of the most flourishing
Commonvvealths, as Athens, how satall they have for the most part been to
persons of eminent virtues, whereof fevv escaped both banishment and poison, I
cannot but admire our happiness under the best of Monarchies; When I compare
those arts and exactions, which are used in our neighbor Countries, where
the whole esta^e of the Commonwealth goes through the Magistrates hands in
the short compass of a very fevv years. Much good may the mock liberty of their
tongues do them, which their purses pay for. I cannot but proclaim, O happy
England, if thou knew thine own happiness. But neither the time permitts me,
nor my desires invite me to fall upon this subject. I will turn my discourse
into prayers that the great God of Heaven and earth will give his Majesty a
long life, a secure empire, a prudent and faithful Council, a loyal and
obedient people, expert and valiant Armies. Blessed be he that blesses him,
and let every loyal Subject ^ay Amen.

The first Speech by my Lord Primate to the Speak^r of the House of Commons.
SIR,
THe Lords Justices of this Kingdom have graciously heard that relation which
you made unto them from the Honorable House of Commons, touching their
election of You to be their Speaker, together with your modest desire to
decline the place as two heavy for you. They know right well, the great
importance of the place: But they know as well your great ability to discharge
it. Neither do they look upon you as a Child, that has the reins put
seemingly, and for a show into his hands, but as upon an experienced Charioter,
who knows how to discharge all the duties that belong unto his office
dexterously, and without ostentation, and to dispose and direct the hand of
that little one by occult motions of his own, to seem to do that, which in
truth is his own proper work. They know that the Honorable House of Commons is
no little Fly-boat, but a Ship royal of the second magnitude, and the Cargazoon
as rich as the Ship is great. Therefore they have committed the charge of it to
you, as to a skilful Pilot. In sum, the Lords Justices do exhort you to
addecourage and resolution to your modesty and other great parts, that you may
adorn that Province, which by the (...) of that House is committed to your
care. For as the House of Commons have advisedly chosen You their Speaker, so
the Lords Justices, by his Majesty's authority, do as advisedly confirm You
their Speaker.

And now Mr. Speaker, I have one thing more to add, which I am required by the
Lords Justices to impart unto you; That is, that You being by your place an
assistant to the House of Peers, and summoned by writ, to the discharge of that
trust, yet the House of the Lords taking into their serious consideration the
possibility, or rather the probability that some of their assistants might
perhaps be chosen Speaker, to let all the world see, that they are equally
careful of the privileges of both Houses, in order to the common good of the
Kingdom, they passed a Vote this morning, that if any of their assistants
should be chosen Speaker of the House of Commons, they would dispense with him
pro (...) vice, saving allways to the House of the Peers all their just rights
and privileges for the future. So that there remain^ nothing, but that you
gird your self to your Office which is cast upon you from all hands.

The second Speech by my Lord Primate to the Speaker of the House of Commons.
Mr. Speaker,
YOu style this place aptly, a mount of transfiguration, and truly so it is. We
behold the greatest transfiguration here that ever was seen in this Kingdom, on
such a sudden, either in our days, or in the days of our forefathers. A
conversion from the greatest Anarchy, and confusion, to order, and a settled
form of Government. If nothing else did evince it, this change and
transfiguration alone, were able to make good the truth of that old maxim. Res
facile redeunt ad pristinum statum. Things do easily return to their former
condition. Otherwise it were impossible that so much confusion should be
attended with so much order, or the worst of Anarchies, with the best of
Monarchies. It is better to live under the Sicilian Tyrants, or the Roman
(...), o^ the thirty Athenian usurpers, than to live in an Anarchy, where there
is no Government. It is better to live where nothing is lawful, than where all
things are lawful. Better one Tyrant than a thousand. I shall not need to press
this further. Cast but your eyes back to the by passed years, and you will see
this better demonstrated by experience, than it is possible to do it by reason.
But behold a sudden transfiguration. Neither the morning nor the evening
star in the Heavens is more beautiful, than justice and good government upon
earth. To it we owe our prosperity, our liberty, our security, all we are, all
we have, all we can be in this world, without which we should be like Fishes in
the Sea, or Fowls in the Air. The greater devour the less: pisces sic saepe
minutos magnus come; sic aves enecat accipiter. Those innovators and
incendiaries who labor to pull down a settled form of government, are like a
phrenetick person, who takes pains to hew down the bough whereon he himself
does stand, As those two signs, or rather meteors, Castor and Pollux, when
they appear double to seafaring persons, promise serenity and a prosperous
voyage, but when they appear single or divided, they threaten a storm, whether
it be by reason of the densi^y or rarity of the matter, or what other natural
causes, I leave to the Philosophers to determine. So where power and justice do
meet together, it promises prosperi^y and peace, but where they are divided,
power without justice, or justice without power, it prog^osticates a tempest to
a state.

From your mount of transfiguration you show us a King, You House of Commons
behold a King. As Anarchy is the worst of misgovernments, so Mo^archy is the
best of governments, he most ancient, the most universal, the most natural, the
m^st noble, the m^st advantageous form o^ government. I do not deny the (...)
of other forms, but I do altogether deny that any other form is so noble, so
natural, or so much from God. There is one God in the world, a Monarchy; one
soul in the body, a Monarchy; one sun in the Heavens, a Monarchy; one Master in
each family, and one Monarch in each society. It was good counsel, which
Lycurgus gave a mutinous citisen, that would have had him bring a democracy
into the state, that he should try it first how he liked it in his own house,
and suffer his Servants to be his Quartermasters. The silly Bees do teach us
thus much, who know no Law but the Law of nature, yet they have their King. And
that which is much more strange, which I have seen by ocular experience. Take
their King prisoner in a cane, as it is usual to do, and they will feed him
with honey through the nicks and crevises of the cane. So long as you detein
him there, they will never swarm, nor seek for new habitations for themselves.
Remove him and his prison into another hive, and they will all flock after him,
and travail for him. Put a strange King into his cane or prison, and they will
be so far from feeding him, that they will stop up all the holes of the cane
with wax, and starve him for an usurper. How much are the silly Bees more
observant of the Laws of nature, than degenerated men, In sum, the soul of
Sovereign power, which is infused by God into Democracy and Aristocracy, is the
same that it is in Monarchy. But the organ is not the same, nor so apt to
attain the end. But God and nature do always intend that which is best, that
is, Monarchy. And in some cases the existence of Kingly government is from God,
as well as the essence. But God never instituted any other form than
Monarchical. He himself vouchsafed to be King of his people, and gave them
first Moses as a Viceroy, Moses was King in Jesurun. And afterward he gave
them a radicated succession of Kings. No Commonwealth has the like plea for it
self.

And as Monarchical government is the best form of governments, so our English
Monarchy is the best form of Monarchy. By the blessing of God, we live in the
most temperate part of the temperate Zone. And enjoy a government as temperate
as the climate it self. We cannot complain either of two much Sun, or two
little Sun. The beams of Sovereignty are neither so perpendicular over our
heads that they can scorch us, nor yet so oblique but that they are able to
warm us. Should we go about in a madding humor to dissolve a frame of
government, which made our forefathers happy at home, and famous abroad, or
loath our own Manna, and long after the Fleshpots and Onions of Egypt? If we
dote upon foreign polities, it is only because we do not know them. Consult
but with those that do know them, and we will quickly say, our lot is fallen in
a fair ground.

And so from Kings you come to Parliaments, which have evermore had a venerable
esteem in the world, if not under the name of Parliaments, yet under a more
ancient name of Councills, or Conventions. As the inferior orbs do by their
transverse and opposite yet vincible motions, stay and moderate the rapide
force of the primum mobile, or first Sphere: So Parliaments by their Fabian
Counsels do temper and moderate the quick motion of Sovereign power. I speak
not this of any danger that hangs over us. God be praised, we have no such
young Phaetons, but one that has been as much and as long acquainted with
Fabius as with Marcellus, and knows how to use the Buckler as well as the
Sword. But Parliaments have a further advantage than that of Counsel only,
namely in republics to aggravate and unite, and to render the whole society
one political body, and in M^narchies to supply, and second, and execute. Then
the affairs of a Kingdom go prosperously on, when they join one and all in
advancing public designs.

From Parliaments in general, I come to the reasons of summoning this
Parliament in particular. But that is so evident, that he, that runs, may read
it. Yet though it be so obvious, that no man can miss it, or mistake it, and
that it may seem superfluous to do that over again, which has been done so
excellently already by my Lord Chancellor, as one of his Majesty's
representatives: yet for order and method sake, I shall assign three reasons
for convocating this present Parliament.

The first is, discrimination of persons, and distinction of possessions. Me
thinks I am now in one of the fields of Egypt, upon the banks of Nilus,
presently after the inundation of that river, when it is just returning into
the old channel. And all you, that hear me, look like so many measurers that
are here on purpose to give every proprietor his right possession, and to set
them out their true bounds. Never did an inundation of Nilus make a greater
confusion of distinct possessions and interests, than the late Rebellion has
made in Ireland, blending all estates in one confused mass, Kings, Dukes,
Bishops, Knights, and pawns are all confusedly mixed together in one bag. It
were folly, Noble Peers and Patriots, to ask what you do here; As great, as if
one should inquire upon the banks of Nilus what the measurers do there
presently after an in^ndation. It is to fix every man in his proper sta^ion,
wherein he is to serve his King and Country. This is the first end of this
Parliament, the distinction of possessions.

A second reason is that, which is commonly the reason of summoning all
Parliaments, that is, to satisfy the just debts of the Kingdom, and disingage
the public faith. We could not do it, it was impossible. And necessity must
yield to impossibility. But his Majesty has done it for us, and satisfied the
public debts out of his own rights. The time has been, that the public
faith of the Kingdom has been slighted. No man had a public trust, and so no
man could be sued upon a public faith. But King CHARLES has redeemed the
public credit again, by satisfying the public debts; But he satisfyes them
in a Parliamentary way. S. Paul says, that an oath is the end of all strife,
so is a Parliament. For as there lies no appeal from God in the interior
Court. So there lies no appeal from a Parliament in the exterior Court. I
mean, a complete Parliament of King, Lords, and Commons, whose act is the act
of each individual Subject. This is the second reason of calling this
Parliament, to satisfy the public debts of the Kingdom.

A third reason of convocating this Parliament, is the providing for the Army
for the future, without imposing too great a burden either upon the English or
Irish Subject. Two things make a Prince grateful to his people. Easy ears to
hear grievances, and light hands i^ imposing Subsidies. And to speak the truth,
a great part of the dissensions in England have sprung from this source. The
King could not live upon the revenues of his Crown without running into debt,
nor those debts be paid without raising new Monopolies, or imposing new taxes,
as Ship Money, or the like, or parting with some branches of his Prerogative
Royal. Hitherto England has been necessitated to supply the defects of
Ireland, it is to be feared not over willingly. Now it has pleased God to put
into his Majesty's hands an opportunity of advancing his revenue to a
competencie, that Ireland may be able for the future to bea^ its own burden,
without charging either the English or Irish Subject in ordinary cases. And
this opportunity he puts wholly into the hands of his Parliament, as the proper
judge, both to supply the necessities of the Kingdom, and to prevent them.
These are the three reasons of calling this Parliament. 1. The distinguishing
of possessions. 2. The satisfaction of just debts. 3. And the raising the
Revenues of the Crown to a just competency. Lastly, Mr. Speaker, you descend to
the unity of both Houses. His Majesty has done whatsoever has been desired of
him, and is yet ready to do whatsoever can be desired of a gracious Prince. It
is our own faults, our own Frowardness and unseasonable opposition one to
another, if we be not happy. All things preserve themselves by unity, and the
nearer they approach to unity, the farther they are from fear of dissolution.
This lesson old Sillurus taught his Sons by a bundle of rods, whilst they were
tied together, all their conjoined strength could not so much as bend them; but
when the bundle was divided, and every Son had his single rod, they did easily
snap them in sunder. So said he, You my Sons are invincible whilst you
preserve unity, but if you suffer your selves to be divided, you are lost* This
lesson Menenius Agrippa taught his hearers by the welknown apology of the
belly, and the other members, whilst they did nourish unity, and all acted for
the public advantage of the whole body, each member had his share and
dividend in this happiness; but when they began to mutiny and divide interests,
and to weigh their own particular merits too narrowly, and all to grumble at
the belly as an idle, gluttonous, and unprofitable member; they found by costly
experience, that their well and ill fare were inseparably interwoven together,
and that they wounded that member which they maligned through their own sides.
On the other part, disunion is the ready way to destruction. Si colli^imur,
frangimur, if we be beaten one against another, we are both broken in pieces.
It was not the power of Rome, but the divisions and subdivisions of the
Britains, which rendered them an easy prey to their Conquerers. It was not
Philip, but the dissensions of Athens, Thebes and Sparta, that ruined Greece.
It was not Scipio, but the factions of Hanno and Hanniball that destroyed
Carthage. Our own eyes have seen a small handful of confederated Provinces able
to oppose the greatest Monarch in Europe, and were so far from sinking under
the weight of such a war, which had been able to break a back of steel, that
like Palm trees they did grow up under the weight, from distressed orders, to
high and mighty states, or like Moses his bush, not only not consumed, but
sprouting and blossoming in the midst of the flames. This virtue of unanimity,
is that whereupon our Riches, our Honor, our Religion, our Laws, our
Liberties, our King and Country, our Fires and Altars, and all our hopes do
depend.

Hoc opus, hoc s^udium, parvi properemus and ampli,
si patriae volumus, si nobis vivere chari.
The answer of the Lords Justices to Mr* Speakers last propositions.
THat they will be very careful and ready to mantain the House in all the just
liberties and privileges belonging to it. 1. A freedom from arrests for
themselves and their Servants in all cases whereunto the privilege of the
House does extend. 2. Modest and moderate liberty of speech void of all
licen^iousness, which their Lordships are confident that the House is so far
from desiring to have it tolerated, that themselves would be the first and
severest censurer^ of it. 3. Seasonable and free access to their Lordships upon
all occasions.

FINIS.

