A SERMON Preached in the Cathedral Church of YORK: Before hi^ Excellence the
Earl of NEWCASTLE, AND Many of the Prime Nobility and Gentry of the Northern
COUNTIES.

At the Public Thanksgiving to Almighty God for the late great Victory upon
Friday, June 30. 1643,

And the Reducement of the West Parts of Yorkshire to Obedience.

Printed at York by Stephen Bulkley, 1643. By special Command.

To His Excellence, WILLIAM Earl of NEWCASTLE, Viscount Mansfield, Lord Ogle,
Baron of Bolsover, Bothall, and Hepple, Governonr of the Town and County of
Newcastle, General of all His Majesty's Forces in the North Parts of this
Kingdom, and in the Counties of Nottingham, Lincoln, Rutland, Derby, Stafford,
Leicester, Warwick, Northampton, Huntington, Cambridge, Norfolk, Suffolk,
Essex, and Hertford, One of His Majesty's most Honorable Privy Council.
Sir,
THis Sermon is Yours in right of the Author, being first Preached, then
Published by Your special Command. Therefore it flies thither most justly for
Protection, from whence it had a being. But You have yet a nearer Interest in
it from the Subject, (a great Victory gotten with as great hazard of Your own
Person.) We are not so Sacrilegious to rob God of His Glory, Neither are we
so stupid or fanaticall, as to separate the Sword of the Lord and Gideon. So
long as an English Chronicle shall be extant, this Northern Good Friday will
be remembered, to the perpetual Honor of Your Noble Family. In managing Your
great trust (conformably to Your Soverai ne) You have rather expressed His
temper, who would suffer no Man to depart away from him discontented, then the
disposition of Vitellius, who thought no Smell in the World so Sweet. (...)
^^at of a slain Enemy. God grant that (...) to the bad may not prove
accidentally cruelty to the good, Nor Christian pity to spare effusion of
blood, give the ulcer space to turn to a Gangrene, so to make the Cure both
more costly, and more dangerous to the body Politiq^e. He is blind that does
not see how God has blessed His Majesty's Armies beyond probability, and how
all His Forces have almost ever proved Victorious in the Field; Witness for
this County. Seecroft, Tankersley, Yarum, Atherton, etc. Those losses which we
have sustained have been upon surprises, and especially by the negligence of
Scouts. The cold of the Feet strikes quickly up to the Head, And the
carelessenesse of the meanest Officer may endanger the Life of the Greatest.
But it is as superfluous as uncomely for me, like another Phormio, to discourse
to Your Excellence of these things, which are out of mine Element. Accept, I
beseech you, this Mite, as a poor expression of my obedience and gratitude
(two forgotten virtues in this Age) for Your singular favors to my self, And
to the Churches of this Province, which owe to your Protection their present
Liberty to serve God according to their Duty, and the Laws and rites
establ^shed, and to these Northern Counties, which by Your endeavors are
totall^ in a manner freed from the fury of Sedition, which lies now gasping
within the Walls of Hull. God Almighty prosper Your Excellencies Arms, for the
happy reducement of the rest of your great charge to Obedience and Peace, To
the glory of God, the Service of His Majesty, Your own lasting Honor, the
tranquillity of this distracted Kingdom, and the unmas king of all Political
and Ecclesiastical juglers; which is the constant expectation, and shall be
the daily Prayer of

Yarl, July, 18. 1643. Your Excellencies Most Assured And Obliged Servant, JOH:
DERENSIS.

Psalm. 44. Ver. 7. and 8. 7. For I will not Trust in my Bow, it is not my Sword
that shall Help me. 8. But it is Thou that Savest us from our Enemies, and
put them to confusion that hate us.
WE are not met together here to scanne curious Questions, but to Sacrifice
unto God with the Voice of Thanksgiving. Therefore I pass by those doubts in
silence, which concern either the Author of this Psalm, or the occasion
whereupon it was Indicted. Saint Paul applying the 22 verse ( For Thy sake are
we killed all the Day long, Romans 8. 35.
and accounted ss Sheep for the slaughter,) to the sufferings of the Primitive
Christians, is an authenticke Witness that it may be aptly used by us in the
like cases.

We have heard with our Ears, Ver. 1.
O God, our Fathers have told us, Fathers are Domestical Preachers to their
Families. How thou have driven out the Heathen with thy head, how Thou have
destroyed the Nations and cast them out, Ver. 2.
God will have nothing stable in this World but himself. The highest Floods
have the lowest Ebbes: All Nations have their Suns and their Nights: Kingdoms
and Cities have their diseases and deaths, as well as Men: When God is angry,
Momento sit cinis diu silva, A Wood that has been many ages in growing, is
turned to Ashes in an instant. Ver. 3. 4.
For they got not the Land in possession through their own Sword, neither was
it their own Arm that helped them, but Thy right hand, and thine Arm, and the
light of thy countenance: Thy Power, and thy Wisdom, and thy goodness. Has
not the Potter power over his Clay? Or the Mint-master over his Bullion? They
that have great Orchards do cut up some Trees, and plant and transplant
o^^ers, and all for order and profit: Shall no^ God have the same power in the
spacious field of this World? Then if Go^ be the Sovereign Monarch and
disposer of Kingdoms, to whom shall we repair but to Him in all our
extremities? Thou art my King, Ver. 5.
O God, send help unto I^cob. Thou art my King, That Jehov^h is the great King
both of Heaven and Earth, does no more prejudice the rights of Earthly Princes,
then it derogates from the Power of a natural Parent, that his Child should
pr^v, Our Father which art in Heaven, Mitte salutes, or Manda salutes, Send
help, or command help; dictum factum, saying and doing with God is all one,
help and health and victory are His Embassages.

Then follows. Ver. 6.
Through Thee will we overthrowe our Enemies, and in Thy name will we tread
them down that rise up against us. Through Thee, I can do all things (says
Saint Paul) through Christ that strengthens me. But without Him we can do
nothing, especially nothing that is good. No man can say, That Jesus is the
Christ, but by the Holy Ghost. In him we live, we move, and have our being.
Will we overthrow, we will push them down, or we will toss them to and fro, it
is a Metaphor taken from horned Beasts. Every defeat is not an overthrow, but
we will turn them upside down: yea, and trample them under our feet, so as
they shall not be able to rise again: And tread them down, It implies an utter
overthrow; as Elisha said to King Joash, Thou should have s^itte^ them five
or six times till thou had consumed Syr^a. And tread them down that rise up
against us, as dreggs are elevated out of the bo^^^one of a Vessel, (a proper
Phrase for Schismatics and seditious Persons.) Of your selves shall men arise
speaking perverse things: And, Act 20. 30.
in these days rose up Theudas. Act. 5.
But all this must b^ in the name of the Lord, And in thy name we will tread
them down, That is not in an hypocritical pretense of thy name, a frequent way
of deceit, which give occasion to that common saving, In nomia^ Domini incipit
omne malum, All evil begins with the name of the Lord. But thy name, that is,
thy power, and thy blessing, and thy protection, as Saint Peter said, we have
la^oured all night and catched nothing, yet in thy name I will let down the
Net. Nor in the name of our followers or confederates, for vain is the help of
man. Not in the name of our Friends, Friends are like Frogs, which seldom
appear but in a warm Season. No^ in our own name^ like those builder of
Babell, which re^ped con usion for their labor: but In thy name, we will tread
them down that rise an against us.

Therefore he adds, For I will not trust in my Bow, it is not my Sword that
shall help me. He does not say. I will break my B^w and throw away my Sword,
but I will not trust in my Bow. It is not the having of Arm; nor the using of
Arms, but the relying upon our Arms, and placing our confidence in our Arms,
which is forbidden. As our Savior says of Riches, How hardly shall a rich Man
enter into the Kingdom of Heaven? that is one that trusts in his Riches, We
may not Deify our Bow, nor make an Idol of our Sword. The Sword and the Bow
were anciently the Princes of offensive Weapons, the Sword at hand, the Bow a
far off, as Jacob said to Joseph, Genesis 48. 22.
I will give the one portion above thy Brethren; which I took out of the hand
of the Amorite, with my Sword and with my Bow. Among the Egyptians a bended
Bow was the Hieroglyphicke of W^rre, and a Bow broken or unbent did signify a
Cessation of Arms: So we read that the very night that King Attila dyed,
Martianus the Emperor did see Attila's Bow broken, which did betoken that the
Wars were now at an end. God himself is contented sometimes to borrow a
Metaphor from the Bow, to express his own power, He has bent his Bow and made
ready his Arrows. Who has not heard of Asters Bow and his Arrow, which he
sent to King Phillip, with this inscription, After Philippo? a shrewd Message
which cost Philip his Eye. The Parthian Bows were more feared of the Roman
Legions, then all Archimedes Mathematical Instruments. And ou^ English gray
Goose Wing, has been as terrible in former times to our Neighbor Nations.

Next for the Sword. Among the Scythians their greatest Oath was by their
Sword, Am. Mar.
as the Turkish Sultans used to swear by their Cimiters. The Alani had not a
Church, nor a Chapel, nor so much as a Cottage but it had a Sword fastered in
the ground, with barbarous and superstitious Ceremonies, as their Tutelary God.
When God had expelled Adam out of Paradise, it is said that he placed a slaming
Sword at the entrance thereof, to keep the way of the Tree of Life. And our
Savior says of himself, that he came not to send Peace but a Sword. So then
the Bow and the Sword do signify all kind of Arms and Ammunition, and Military
preparations, which serve either at hand ora far off, as Powder, shot,
Gunnes, (which are the successors of Bows,) Pikes, yea, even ships and
Fortes. For I will not trust in my Bow, it is not my Sword that shall help me.
How, not help me? No, not of themselves: as the King of Israel answered the
Woman when she cried out help my Lord O King, 2 King. 6. 26.
so may our Boves and our Swords say unto us, If the Lord do not help thee,
how shall I help thee? All secunda^y, subordinate adjuments how eminent
soever, lose their virtue and efficacy, if God suspend the influence of hi^
Favor. When the first and great Ring is fast, the lesser linkes do draw in
vain: as if a foolish Mariner should think by the strength of his arm, and of
his small cord to draw the maine Rock or Staith to his little boat. It is
even as ridiculous, to think to subject the Power and Providence of God to
humane Preparations. No, no, not so.

But it is thou savest us from Our Enemies. Thou, not our own right hands, we
dare not sacrifice to our own Netts. Thou, no Heathenish Tutelary God, nor
Romish Tutelary Saint, all which are cast down flat to the ground with this
one word, But it is thou. Belus could not save Nineveh, not Juno Carthage, nor
Minerva Athens. Let others choose to themselves what protectors they please,
from among the Societies of mortal Men, or Companyes of Caelestiall Spirits,
as St. James, St. Dennis, St. Mark. But be Thou evermore the Patton and
Protector of our City, of Our Kingdom, Be Thou evermore the General of our
Army, If Thou be with us who can be against us?

Deo javante nil obest livor malus,
Et non juvante nil prodest labor gravis.
If thou give a blessing, envy cannot hurt us, if thou deny a blessing Labor
cannot profit us. But it is thou that savest us, Thou only savest us, thou
always savest us, thou savest us from all dangers both of Body and Soul, Thou
art the Fountain, Salvation is the stream, thou art the Sun, Salvation is the
Beam, thou art the Tree, Salvation is the Fruit. It is thou that savest us
from our Enemies, It was Neroes vain Complaint, that he had neither Friend nor
Enemy, whereas in truth he had none but Enemies, Woe is me my Mother (says
Jeremy,) Jer. 15. 10.
that thou have borne me a Man of contention, I have neither lent nor taken
upon usury, yet every one does curse me. If innocence it self should assume
the sh^pe of a Man, and dwell upon Earth, it would (...) Enemies, rather then a
Man want Enemies, his bosom Friend shall become his Enemy, Inimici hominis
Domestici ej^^, they of a Man's Household prove often hi^ Enemy, ^e^, a M^^ own
self often proves his own greatest Enemy. To rise yet one degree higher, as it
(...) the greatest Cross to want all Crosses, so to (...) E^emies is the
greatest Enmity. Enemies are the ^am n^rs that nail us closer to our God,
Enemies are the bru^h^s that wear away themselves to smite off the dust from
us, enemies are the snuffers that soil themselves to make us burn more
brightly. This is a triple Salvation, when God does not only preserve us from
our Enemies, but also converts their Enmity to our good; and lastly, makes
their opposition to us, to be a means of their own confusion. That Is the last
step in my Text, And put them to consusion that hate us, First to shame and
confusion of Face, this is that in part which the Scripture calls heaping
Coals of Fire upon an Enemies Head, to make his Cheeks glow with shame, and to
scorch him inwardly with the testimony of ^^s own Conscience. But if the Enmity
be grown higher to hearted, that is, to habituated malicious Enmity, so as
there is no more hope of his Conversion or recovery, periisse puto cui pudor
periit, past shame past grace, then follows likewise an higher degree of
Confu^^on, that is utter Ruin and Destruction, And puts them to consusion that
hate us.

Now you have the sense of my Text, I will not shred it any more into little
parcells, Take five Observations which are as pertinent to the time and
occasion, as they flow naturally from the Text.

1. That the People of God shall never want Enemies, and such as hate them in
this World.

2. That therefore it is Wisdom to have in readiness Bows and Swords, that
is, all manner of Military preparations.

3. That when we have store of warlike Provision, yet we must not place our
confidence in our Arms, not make them as Idols: For I will not trust in my Bow.

4. That our only defense from danger is the name of the Lord, our only
dependence ought to be upon our God. But it is Thou.

5. That in lieu of his Protection and our preservation, God expects Vitulos
labiorum, the Calves of our Lips, (as the Prophet Hosea calls them) that is,
a thankful acknowledgement of his favors. This brings my Text home to the
present occasion, For I will not trust in my Bow, it is not my Sword that shall
help me. But it is Thou that savest us from our Enemies, and put them to
confusion that hate us. Of these in Order.

First of the first, That the People of God shall never want Enemies in this
World. Cant. ^. ^.
As a Ltlly among the Thor^es, so is my Love among the Daughters, not only
sure to be pricked, but in danger to be choked with Enem^es. Taulerus Writes
of a devout Matron that had long affected to see her Savior, At las he was
presented to her Eyes like a little Child wrapped in a bundle of Thorns, so
as she could not touch him without b^oody hands, We must pass through many
Enemies to the fruition of Christ. Moses saw a Bush burning, but was not
consumed with the fire, Exodus 3. A right Emb^em of the Church, which flourishes
in a fiery travall, in the midst of Enemies. Behold (says our S^iour) I send
you as Sheep into the midst of wolves. (...). 10. 16.
Novum and inauditum ^ellandi genus, A new and strange kind of Warrefaire,
(says Saint Chrysostom) between a few nnarmed sheep^, and a great number of
ravenous Wolves. Into the midst of Wolves, as if one should cast an handful
of dry reeds or flax into the midst of an ^ot fire to extinguish it. But this
is the Wisdom of God, rather to magnify hi^ power in the protection of his
Servants from their Enemies, then in the preservation of them without Enemies.
Sanguine fundata est (...). sia, sanguine crevit, The Church was planted in
blood, it was watered with blood. What need I reckon up the Persecutions of
David, the blows of Micheas, the Sa^ of Isay, the bonds of John Baptist, the
stones of Steven, the Cross of Peter, the Sword of Paul, the fire of Laurence,
the Exile of Athanasius? Purpurata est terra, etc. the Earth was purpled with
the Blood of the Martyrs, Heaven flourishes with the Cro^ns of the Martyrs,
Churches are adorned to the memory of the Martyrs, the Times are distinguished
by the Birthdayes of the Martyrs, says Saint Austine. And Saint Jerome in an
Epistle to Chromatius witnesses, that in his time there did not occur that
day in the year, wherein five thousand Martyrs had not sealed the truth of
their Religion with their blood, except the Calends of Ja^^ary, when their
malitiou* Enemies were so intent upon their Heathenish So^emnities, that they
neglected the slaughter of the poor Christians, and their hate gave place to
their marth. The Jews were their Enemies, the Heathens were their Enemies,
Heretics and Schismatics were, and still are their Enemies. The Persecution
of the Jews lasted but forty years, that of the Heathens but three hundred
years, this last of Heretics above a thousand years. The Jews sought but one
field, the Heathens ten set Battles, the Heretics have renewed their Forces
above two hundred times. This was the way whereby Christians of old did
disperse the Armies of their Enemies, even by the effusion of their own blood,
This was the way which God ever blessed, The Blood of the Martyrs was the seed
of the Church: But now our Enemies the Incendiaries of the World have found out
a cheaper way to plant their own dreams, which they guild over with the n^me
of truth, a way which Christ never taught, a way which the Church never knew,
even in the blood of Iunocents, by Dagges and Daggers, by Poison and Powder, by
Murders and Massacres, by Tumults and Treasons, by sheathing the Magistrates
sword in his own Bowels. When the Disc^ples did ask our Savior if they
should call for fire from Heaven to destroy those Cities that would not receive
them, He answered, Luke. 9. 55.
Ye know not what Spirit ye are of. But our Brethren in iniquiry whose zeal
is as hot, and yet as dark as Hell it self, can be contented to deface so
many living Images of God, until they make every Village in their Native
Country a shambles of Christians, to introduce their fanaticall conceirs. And
our very Anabaprists whose beginning was like Neroes, made up of Charity and
Meekness, in so much as Trajant said, the best Princes came far short of
the first five years of Neroes Government, who when he was but to sign the
condemnation of a Malefactor, cried our, O utinam etc, I would to God I had
never known a Letter; yet afterward he proved a very Monster of Cruelty: So
they at first were all mercy and Goodness, could not endure a Magistrate from
the King to the Constable, nor a Sword; held all Wars, all Captall
Punishments, all effusion of blood to be u^lawfull, yet are now grown more
bloody then Nero himself, and have died their Garments as deep a Scarlet as
Antichrist. What shall a Man think of such a Religion, but as a School of
Rebellion, a Nursery of Traitors, Genesis 49. 6.
a Mother of all abominations. O my Soul come not thou into their secrets.

The second Consideration is, That since we are sure of Enemies, it is wisdom
to make pr^paration against them, Bows and Swords, that is, ^ll Military
Provision: as a skillful Pilo^e when the Weather is calmest, does prepare for a
Tempest. 2 (...) 12.
Be of good Courage (said Ioab to his Soldier) let ^^pay the Menfor our
People, and for the Cities of our God, and then let the Lord do that which
seems good in his Eyes. His meaning was not that they should go to it with
their Fists, that was to play the Boys, not the Men. The small and peaceable
Company of Christ's Disciples, armed with Innocence and Poverty, Luke 22. 38.
yet had two Swords for their defense. What King (says our Savior) going to
make war against another King, Luke 14. 31.
sits not down and cousulteth, whether he he ab^e with ten thousand to meet
him that comes against him with twen^y thousand? Observe first that he says,
what King? and against another King: Without the consent, or at least the
impl^cir approbation of the Sover igne Magistrate, no M^n can justly take up
public Arms. Our Savior charged Peter to put ^o his sword, Mat. 26. 52.
for all they that take the sword, shall perish by the sword. Why put up his
sword? because he was a private M^n, and They that take the sword, that is,
without the Au^ority of the supreme Magistrate, shall perish by the sword,
Romans 13. 4.
for He bears not the sword in vain. But if p^ivate Persons have power to
raise Arms, he bears the Sword altogether invain. Those places in holy
Scripture which prohibit Christians to resist evil, or to render evil for
evil, are by all Interpreters restrei^ed to private Persons. Why did David
inquire so often what reward should be given to him that killed the Philistine,
yet after his Victory never made Demand of it? But only by this means to gain
a Commission from Saul. This was the cause why Caesar before his march to Rome
did rejoice so much, when Anthony and some of the Tribunes of the People came
into his Army; that being no Monarchy but a Popular State. By all which we may
easily judge what is the condition of our present Rebels. Secondly, we may
observe from these words of our Savior, that even they who have the Power of
Arms invested in them, ought carefully to proportion their prep^rations to
their necessary occasions. Saint Paul did thanke^ully accept of 200 Soldiers,
200 Spearemen and 70 Horse to convoy him to Caesarea, Act. 23. 23.
safe from the insurrection of the Jews. When a Trojan Priest offered to
Alexander to show him Paris his Harp, he desired him rather to show him
Achilles his Spear, the more honorable Iustrument. The Ph^nicians pictured
their Gods like Merchants with great bags and purses, to represent the power of
money: But the Graecians like Soldiers completely armed, to show that all
things are obedient to Arms. The Romans had the Temple of Ianu^ for their
public Armory: and all provident States ever had their Arcenalls or
Storehouses of Ammunition. A Travailers Sword though he be a Coward, yet it is
a discouragement to a These. He that is best provided for defense, shall be
sure to be least assaulted by his Enemies. It was an impertinent question of
Socrates, when he see the strong Gates and Bulwarks of Corinth, whether they
were all Women that inhabited there. So soon as the Israelites were come into
the Land of Canaan Manna ceased, they were then to till the ground for their
lively hood: It is no better then a plain tempting of God, to depend upon
Divine assistence, and neglect ordinary means. It was the error of those
frantic Anabaptists, who instead of sighting, were gaping up toward Heaven
for a Miracle to fall into their mouths, and thought themselves able to catch
all the bullets into their Coatelaps. Indeed the King is forbidden to multiply
Horses to himself, ^ King. 11. 10.
Deuteronomy. 17. 16: yet we know that King David provided spears and shields, and
Solomon his Son provided not only Arms, but Ships, and Chariots, and
Horsemen, without reproof. The Text says, that he had a thousand and four
hundred Chariots, and twelve thousand Horsemen, which he disposed among the
Cities of ^ud^ah, 1 King. 10. 26. The religious King Asa in a time of Peace
builded fenc^d Cities with walls, and Towers, and Gates and Bars, and God
prospered him in it. He provided shields and Bows and Targets and Spears for
580000. men, and accordingly God blessed him against the Ethiopian his huge
Host of a thousand thousand, 2 Chronicles. 14. 8. It i^ not then s^^ply a sin in a
King to multiply his Warlike preparations, but accidentally to place his chief
confidence in them, or by reason of them to lift up his heart above his
Brethren. He that provideth not for his own, and especially for those of his
own House, he h^th deayed the Faith, and is worse then an Infidel, I T^^^. 5.
8. The Commonwealth is the Kings Family, He is the Father of it: Christian
Religion is so far from disobliging him, that it binds him under the pain of
grtevous Sin and the high displeasure of his maker, to provide not only for
the sustentation, but also for the protection of his Subjects. Indeed the
Scripture says she weapons of our warefare are spiritual, that is, our
Christian Warefare with Sin and Satan, but we have another capacity as we
are men, and a Political Warfare, also which requires corporeal Weapons. And
Saint Paul says, We wrestle not with Elesh and Blood, That is not only, not
principally with Flesh and Blood, we have greater Adversaries to cope withal,
even Sin and Satan. Courage then, a Bible and a Bow are ^ot opposite: a man
may be a good Swordman, and yet a good Christian. How often does the Scripture
call them the Wars of the Lord, the Battles of the Lord? How often does it
prescribe Military Rules and Precepts? God styles himself the Captain of the
Lords Host, having his drawn sword in his hand. Josh. 5. 14. Thou teach my
hands to war and my fingers to fight, said David; I hope the Lord takes no
Apprentis^s to teach them a wicked Trade. There is a time for War, and a time
for Peace, Says Solomon, but there is no time for that which is in it self
unlawful. John Baptist bids the Soldiers do violence to no man, accuse no man
falsely, be content with their wages, he does not bid them give over their
Profession. Christ commends the Centurion, that He had not found so great Faith
in Israel. Saint Peter says of Cornelius a Ciptein, that his Prayers and Alms
were had in remembrance in the sight of God. And by Faith the Saints subdued
Kingdoms, waxed valiant in Fight, and turned to flight the Armies of the
Alients. Heb. 11. 33. Religion does not make a Coward, War is the Exercise,
Victory the Reward of Faith. To conclude this point, a Man may with a good
Conscience meet his God with his Arms in his hand, and safely lay down his Life
in a just War. To dye for a Man's Religion, for his King, for his Country, is
a degree of Marryrdome. Dulce and decorum est pr^ Patria (...). Only there are
some Rocks to be avoided, whereof this is one of the most principal, That a
Christian Soldier do not place his confidence in his Arms, which brings me to
my third Observation.

For I will not trust in my Bow, it is not my Sword that shall help me. The
Creatures are Gods Soldiers, and cannot move till he give them the Word. Let
him but suspend his influence, and the most powerful Creatures in the World
become weak. The Lions are not able to open their mouths against Daniel, nor
the fire to sindge one hair of the three Children. Ye have sown much and bring
in little, ye eat but ye have not enough, ye drink but ye are not filled with
drink, ye cloth you but there is no warmth, and he that earneth wages puts it
into a bag with holes, a bottomless purse, Haggai 1. 6. Thus Seed, Meat,
Drink, Clothes, Money, Arms, all Creatures have so much power, and no more,
then God infuseth into them. What Is the reason of all this ^ Read the ninth
Verse, I did blow upon it. It it more easy for God to empty and exinanite all
the Creatures in the World of power, then for a Man to blow away a Feather.
Besides Bread there is the nurritive faculty of Bread, which the Scripture
calls the staff of Bread, without which our Bread is like a lame Creeple
without his staff, who cannot move himself. Psalm. 33. 15 A King is not saved
by the Multitude of a Host, neither is a mighty Man (a Giant) delive^ed by much
strength, a Horse is but a vain thing to save a Man. He does not say a King
cannot protect others, but less, He is not saved himself. There is no
Creature more conducible to safety then an Horse, either for Victory or Flight,
in utrumque paratus, yet without Gods concurrence an Horse is but a vain
thing, or mendacium est equus, An Horse is but a Lie, as Saint Paul says, an
Idol is nothing; an Idol is something, either Gold, or Silver, or Brass, or
Wood, or Stone, So an Horse also has a true subsistence of flesh and blood and
bone: But an Idol is nothing in efficacy, it is nothing in respect of that
which the Idolater does imagine, So an Horse if God withdraw his power is a
Lie, without efficacy, not answerable to the confidence and expectation of his
Rider. What Marveile? when One can chase a thousand, and two put ten thousand
to flight, that want this influence. Deuteronomy. 32. 30. So without Gods blessing, an
horse is a Lie, an Army is a Lie, a walled City is a Lie. The Walls of Ecbatane
were thirty Foot thick, and seventy Foot high, The Walls of Babylon were 50
foot thick and an 100. high, Jerusalem had a triple Wall about it: yet all
these were ovethrowne, and if the Devotion of Pilgrims had not kept a little
Life in Jerusalem they had all become long since deserts for Owls to, scriech
in, and Satyrs to dance in. The like Fortune did Tire run that was deemed
invincible, The Walls of Jerischo fell down with the sound of Trumpets. And
Capernaum which touched the Clouds with its losty Turrets, was cast down to
Hell. When Nicephourus Phocas was building a strong Wall about his Palace, he
heard a voice in the night, O King though thou build thy Wall as high as
Heaven, yet the sin that is within will easily destroy it. The confusion of
Babell, may teach us what is the united strengths and attempts of a World of
Men without the Lord. Obad. 4. Though thou exalt thy self as the Eagle, and
set thy nest among the Stars, thence will I bring thee down, says the Lord.
Then let not the Bow-man trust in his Bow, nor the Swordman in his Sword. Where
Presumption leads the Van, Destruction commonly follows in the Reere. Where
Pride is on Horseback, Shame always sits upon the Crooper. Qui de se presumit
ante prosternitur quam pugnat, said Saint Austine, He that trusts in himself is
fallen already before he fight. Goliath threatened David to give his flesh to
the Fowls of the Air, and the Beasts of the Field, but a little stone taught
him what it was to reckon without his Host. Neb ^chadnezzar vaunted of his
Power, Is not this great Babylon which I have builded, hy my might, for the
Honor of my Majesty? But a voice from Heaven whispered in his ear, Thy
Kingdom is departed from thee, thou must dwell among the Beasts. Julian the
Apostate threatened after his return from the Persian War, to root out the Sect
of the Galileans, but a d^rt, (God knows from what hand, whether from Heaven or
from Man,) learned him another lesson, Vicisti Galilaee, vicisti, Thou have
overcome thou Jesus of Galilee, thou have overcome. Feed this man with bread of
affliction and water of affliction, said Achab of Micheah, until I return
again in Peace; Good, what was the end of this presumption? Notwithstanding all
his disguising himself in the day of Battle, the Arrow found him out, and the
Joints of his harness. There is no Wisdom, nor Understanding, nor Counsel
against the Lord, Prove. 21. 30. It is better therefore to trust in the Lord,
then to put any confidence in Man. That leads me to my fowerth Observation.

But it is thou that savest us from our Enemies, Prove. 18. 10. The name of the
Lord is a strong Tower, the Righteous runs unto it and is safe. And Prove.
21. 31. The Horse is prepared against the day of Battle, but safety (or
Victory) is of the Lord. Paul may Plant, and Apollo may Water, ^ut it is thou
that give the increase. Except the Lord keep the City, the Watchman waketh
but in vain. It was a brave answer of David to Goliath, Thou come to me with
a Sword, and with a Spear, and with a shield, but I come to thee in the name
of the Lord of Hosts, 1 Samuel 17. 45. When an Army of Syrians had begirt
Elysha's City round, his servant cried out, Alas my Master what shall we do?
Fear not (said Elisha) there are more with us, then with them: And praying God
to open the young man's eyes, he see all the Mountains full of Horses and
Charrets of fire round about Elisha, 2. King. 6. 17. So the Angels pitch their
Tents about Gods Children. The godly never want heavenly succour^, though they
cannot be discerned with bodily eyes. The Lord himself is a wall of fire about
them, 2 Zechar. 5. What virtue was there in Moses his Rod to break the hard
Rocks, to divide the red Sea, to change whole Rivers into blood? Or in Shamgars
Good, (an Instrument not made for War,) to slay 600? Or in Sampsons J^w bo^e of
an Ass, to m^ke such heaps upon heaps of caikasses? Or in Elisha's Salt to
sweeten the bitter waters? Or i^ Cl^y and Spittle to open the eyes of the
blind? Or in Peter's shadow to drive away diseases? But it was Thou; It was God
that used these contemp^ible means for the manifestation of his own power, It
was God that added weight to David's little stone, to make it pierce into the
Forehead of Goliath, It was God that added strength to a weak woman's arm to
destroy Ahimelech, It was God that cast Siserah into such a profound sleep, to
give Jahell opportunity for her Hammer and her Nail. But it is Thou; It was
God that made Jeremiah a defenced City, an Iron Pillar, a wall of Brass
against the whole Land, Jer. 1. 18. It is all one with him to save by many or
by few. Though ye had smitten the Army of the Chaldeans (says God) so that
there remained none but wounded men, yet they shall arise up every man in his
Tent, and burn this City with fire, Jer. 37. 10. God can infuse such strength
and vigor into men half dead, that all the power of their Enemies is not able
to resist. What shall we say then? When we have both Bows and Swords let us nor
presume; When we want B^wes and Swords, let us neither disp^^re, nor yet rashly
hazard our selves: The one argues want of Faith, the other is a tempting of
God. Whether we have them, or want them, yet let us say, Some put their trust
in Charrets, and some in Horses, but we will remember the name of the Lord our
God, Psalm. 20. 7. When it was told Leonides that the Persian Arrows did
obscure the Sun, It is well, said he, then we shall fight in the shadow. But
well and well again is he, that fights under the shadow of the Almighty, and
under the covering of his Wings: Life or Death or whatsoever happens, shall
work together for his good. But we are apt to impute all occurrences to
secundary causes; If a sickness seize upon us, we ascribe it to some cold or
distemper, we scarce think of God: We trust him more easily with our Souls,
then with our bodies, or our Estates. And if we do confide in God, it is as an
Usurer trusts a Bankerupt upon a pawn; So long as we have Men and Money and
Arms and Ammunition we trust in God, but we cannot with the Woman of Canaan
pick comfort out of the name of a Dog, nor say with holy Job, Though the Lord
should kill me yet will I trust in him. What is the result of all this? If we
affect prosp^rou^ success, we must place our confidence in God, not in our
Bow, or in our Sword, 2 Chronicles. 13. 18. Judah prevailed against Israel, Because
they relied upon the Lord God of their Fathers. The Israelites had greater
numbers, a better cause, all manner of advantages against the Benjamites, yet
they lost two great Battles, and prevailed not till they sought for Victory
with tears, and humiliation at the hands of God, Judges 20. Whilst Moses lifted
up his hands in Prayer Israel prevayled against Amalech. Bellum tibi imminet O
Balach, says a Father, O Balach thou Son of Zi^por, War is in thy gates,
six hundred thousand armed Israelites are entered into thy confines, And do
t^ou prepare curses in stead of dart^, and Words for We^pons? Doubtless Balach
had heard that Israel moved not a hand against Pharaoh, but the Lord fought for
them, as an H^brew Rabbine did expound this Text unto Origin, Numb. 22. 4, Now
shall this Company lick up all that is round about it, as the Ox licketh up
the Grass of the Field; The Ox licketh up the grass with his Mouth, and cuts
it with his Tongue, as with a sickle, So this People fight with their Lips, and
overcome with their Prayers, When thou buildest a Fort, lay the foundation in
Prayer, When thou purrest on thine armor, buckle it to thee with Prayer. But
God hears not sinners, as one said to a company of Pirates in their
devotions, pray lower, least God hear that ye are passing this way. He that
will pray aright for Victory over his Enemies, must first endeavor to conquer
his own corruptions, He must do his Duty, and refer the success to God, as.
Ioah said, Let us be valiant, and pl^y the Men, and let God do what seems
good in his Eyes, He must not swerve from the straight line of Justice for any
advantage, He must not limit God to any means. There is a story of an Hermit,
That prayed to God sometimes for Rain, sometimes for Fair Weather and God
still granted his request, yet his Garden did not prosper: So going to another
Hermits Cell, he found all his Herbs fair and flourishing; And when he
admired at it, the other Hermit soon resolved the doubt, O Fool, did thou
think thy self to be wiser then God? Such another fellow was Naaman, 2 King.
5. 11. I thought he will come out to me, and call on the name of the Lord, and
strike his hand over the place. If God do not help us just when we please our
selves, and by such means as we approve, we think God has forgotten us. Let
us therefore pray with due submission, and when God has granted our request,
let us give all the glory to Him. But it is Thou, etc.

This is my fifth and last Observation that in lieu of Gods Protection he
exp^cts a thankful acknowledgement from us, It is thou that savest us from
our Enemies, and pu^ test them to confusion that hate us. Why was Goliaths
sword laid up in the Temple? Though it was l^pped up in an Ephod, yet I do not
do^bt but that at solemn times it was to be she^ed to the People, to excite
them to ^ more cheerful Thankesgiving, for Gods gracious deliverance of them
from the Army of the Philistines. Therefore God caused a potfull of Mann^ to be
preserved, that Posterity might see with what food he had fed their
Predecessors. And the Rod of Aaron was so carefully kept to be a memorial of
Gods great deliverances. How devoutly did the Idolaters give thanks to their
Gods of Gold and of Silver, being but supposed Benefactors? much more we to the
God of Heaven and Earth. What thanks did Christ the Son of the living God
give unto his Father, for a dinner of Barley Bread and of broiled Fish? If any
of us be invited forth to a Meal, we hold it uncivility not to return thanks,
much more to God who daily spreads our Table, and fills our cups, yea, who
has preserved to us the Tables and the Cups themselves, and not these only but
our Lands, our Houses, our Goods, our Wives, our Children, our Lives, our
Liberties, our Religion, O sing praises sing praises unto our God, sing praises
sing praises unto our King, who saves us from our Enemies, and puts them to
confusion that hate us.

The skirts of Aarons Garments were compassed with Bells and Pomegrannets.
Pomegrannets are an excellent Fruit and signify Gods blessings; the sound of
the Bells is our thankesgiving. When his Pomegrannets do abound, it is meet our
Bells should sound. After the Lord had taken his rod off from Zachary, and
restored him to the use of his tongue, the first thing that he did was to sing
thanks to his Deliverer, Blessed be the Lord God of Israel, which has visited
and redeemed his People. If God did require the first fruits of the Earth, much
more the first Fruits of the Heart, and of the Soul. This is the end of this
Assembly to return our thanks to the Lord of Hosts for a late victory obtained
in the West parts of this County, by His Majesty's Army under the Conduct of
his Excellence the Earl of Newcastle, against the Lord Fairfax, and the
Northern Rebels. A great victory indeed, whether we look upon so many loyal
Subjects that were redeemed by it, and restored to their Friends, as Isaac was
to Abraham, even from Death to Life: Or whether we look upon the great number
of the Rebels that were slain, (the more the pity) either in the Act, or in
the intention of murder, (I cannot give, I conceive that no man that
understands himself can give a better term to these Arms which are raised
without the approbation of Sovereign Authority,) and so without Gods
extraordinary mercy perished both Bodies and Souls: Or whether we look upon
the great number of Prisoners, the vast proportion of Ordinance, Arms, and
Ammunition which were taken. A great Victory if we respect the place where it
was, in the midst of all their strength, or the time when it was, in the very
height of all their Power, or the Fruits and consequents thereof, the reducing
of a great part of this County of York to Obedience, and the settling and
securing in a manner of all the North Parts of England. A great Victory if we
consider the manner of it, upon all the disadvantages in the World, of ground,
and wind, and preparation, as if God should say from Heaven, I alo^e will have
the glory of this day to my self. Lastly, a great Victory, if we look upon the
speediness of it: as Caesar sometimes writ to the Senate, veni, vidi, vici, I
came, I saw, I overcame, So here what a number of strengths were deserted and
recovered in one day? If the Lord had not been on our side when Men rose up
against us, Or if that Day had succeeded ill, God knows what had become of all
us here present, for our Estates we had been reduced to Beggary, for our Bodies
and Posterityes to slavery, for our Souls to He^e^y, Brownisme, Anabaptisme,
or Familisme, or some other more newly upstart vanity. Therefore once more Sing
praises sing praises unto our God, sing praises sing praises unto our King. Who
has saved us from our Enemies and put them to confusion that hate us.

When we enjoyed Peace and Plenty and Prosperity, we were not sensible of it,
but apt to murmur, We see nothing but this Manna, ready to say militia est
potior, War is better: and it is probable that our fore-p^ssed
unthankefulnesse, is the true cause of our present Sufferings. Now then when
the Cross has opened our eyes, when we find the excellency and the sweetness
of those blessing, by wanting them, which we could not find by enjoying them,
though we were ungrateful for our former health, yet let us bless God who
has put us into so fair a way of recovery from a desperate sickness. And now
let us talk no more of supposed Delays, when we see how God has disposed of
all things to the greater manifestation of hi^ o^n po^er, and the more speedy
expediting of that very Work which we desire. And what know thou O M^n,
whether God did order all things thus for this very end? Yet give me leave to
say there is less danger in sound deliber^te delay, then rash precipitation.
The Graecians ordained no punishment for him that lost his Sword, but for him
that lost his Buckler. Aut hoc, aut super hoc, said the Spartan Mother to her
Son. The Romans had two gallant Capteins at one time, Marcellus full of
Courage, Life, and Activity, and Fabius Maximus, slow, but sure, who did all
things with leisure and deliberation, undoing Hanniball by inches, The former
they called the Sword, the latter the Buckler of Rome. And that Politic
Nation upon just grounds did prefere their Buckler before their Sword.

Vnus homo nobis cunctando restituit rem,
Non ponebat enim rumores ante salutem.
But to return. Thankesgiving is the Work of this Day, let us do it.
Ingratitude dries up the Fountain of Gods Love, the Rivers of his Grace, the
Dew of his Mercy. As we look to have more Victories, and the light of Gods
countenance to shine still upon us, let us do it. It becomes well the just
to be thankful. In Heaven there is no Preaching, no Praying, no Sacraments.
but Thankesgivings and Alleluiahs. Let us do it with intention and devotion,
not like Children which give thanks looking another way with their Faces; nor
like Mariners which pray hard in a storm, but so soon as they are gotten into
the Harbor, drown the remembrance (...) all their former vows in full cups. O
take heed of Forgetfulness, there is nothing that grows old sooner then a
good turn. As the Sea is the Fountain of all Rivers, so they run into the Sea
again by which means the flux and reflux is made perpetual: All good and
perfect gifts proceed from God the Father of Lights, and must be returned again
to him by Thankesgiving, that the intercourse of his Blessings and our thanks
may be reciprocal and perpetual. We have not wanted Enemies and such as hate
us, Enemies to our Church, Enemies to our State: But we wanted Arms, we wanted
our Bow and our Sword, The Enemies had seized upon His Majesty's Magazine, his
Ships and his Arms, and left us naked both for Defense and Offense. Yet the
goodness of Almighty God, and the Providence of our gracious Queen, which
ought ever to be thankefully acknowledged by this Nation, has supplied this
defect, and furnished us again with a Bow and a Sword, Arms and Ammunition, and
with these we have obtained the Victory; with these, not by these, It was not
our Bow, it was not our Sword that did help us, but it was thou O God who
did save us from our Enemies and put them to confusion that hate us. O Lord
we render unto thee all possible Thanks. Do thou settle our wandering
imaginations, do thou elevate our drowsy spirits, do thou helps our
dullness, That we may be yet more and more thankful, with our hearts, with our
tongues, with our Life's, That so we may daily hear of more and more Victoryes,
which thou give unto thine Anointed, until the hopes of his Traiterous
Enemies be like Winter Ice melted away to nothing, and his Crown be restored to
it is ancient luster, That under his Protection we may freely meet in this thy
hol^ Temple, to laud and magnify thy glorious Name, O Eternal God, Father,
Son, and Holy G^ost, who art above all, and through all, and in all, To thee
be Glory, and Dominion, and Thankesgiving, for ever and ever. Amen.

FINIS

