THE PENITENT PILGRIM.

Few and evil have the days of my life been. Gen: Cap: 47. v. 9.

LONDON Printed by John Dawson. 1641.



THE PENITENT PILGRIM.

PSALM. 66. 16. Come and hearken, all ye that fear God, and I will tell you
what he has done to my soul.

LONDON, Printed by John Dawson, and are to be sold by John Williams at the
sign of the Crane in Paul's Church yard. 1641.

TO THAT IMMACVLATE LAMB CHRIST JESUS; THE SOLE SAVIOR AND RECEIVER OF EVERY
PENITENT SINNER; HAS THIS POOR PILGRIM, HUMBLY HERE PRESENTED THESE HIS
PENITENTIAL TEARS.

The Sum, or Graduall Symptom of the Penitent PILGRIM.
CHAP. 1.
THe poor Penitent Pilgrim bemones his present sinful condition.
2
His coming into Idumaea; the companions he consorted with there.
3
How his own Meni^y, became his deadliest Enemy.
4
His encounters with the world.
5
His Combat with the flesh.
6
What Assaults he suffered by the Devil, both in company a^^^rivacy.
7.
Three Engines by his spiritual Enemy reared, that his Fort might be razed.
8.
The Concupiscence of the flesh.
9.
The Concupiscence of the eyes.
10.
The pride of life.
11.
How neither the Law of Nature nor Grace, could call him home from his wandering
course.
12.
He takes a view of the whole Decalogue, and he scarce finds in it one
Commandment, wherein either in part of in all, he has not been a most
grievous Delinquent.
13
He examines himself touching the First Commandment.
14
His breach of the Law touching the Second Commandment.
15
His transgressing of the Third in profaning Gods name.
16
His dishonor to Gods Sabbath.
17
He confesses how this bloody issue of sin, streamed forth likewise into a
breach of the second Table; and first of disobedience to his parents.
18
His contempt of the second, in his practicing mischief against his Neighbor.
19
His contempt of the Third, in playing the Wanton.
20
His breach of the Fourth, in his cunning defeating of his Neighbor.
21
His breach of the Fifth, in suppressing testimonies to witness a truth; or
suborning witnesses to maintain an untruth.
22
His dis-esteeme of the Sixth and last, in coveting what was another; and
desiring to increase his own with the loss of others.
23
He takes a view of those seven spiritual works of mercy: and acknowledges
his failings in each of them.
24
Teaching the ignorant.
25
Correcting the delinquent.
26
Counselling the indigent.
27
Comforting the afflicted.
28
Suffering injuries patiently.
29
Forgiving offenses heartily.
30
Praying for his Persecutors fervently.
31
He takes the like view of those seven corpor all works of mercy, and
acknowledges likewise his failings in each of them.
32
Feeding the hungry.
33
Giving drink to the thirsty.
34
Harboring the harbor l^sse.
35
Clothing the naked.
36
V^siting the sick.
37
Visiting andredeeming the captive.
38
Burying the dead.
39
With sorrow of heart he remembers those eight Beatitudes, whereof he has
deprived himself, by giving entertainment to sin.
40
Blessed are the poor in spirit, for theirs is the kingdom of heaven.
41
Blessed are the meek, for they shall possess the Earth.
42
Blessed are they that mourn, for they shall be comforted.
43
Blessed are they that hunger and thirst after righteousness, for they shall
be satisfied.
44
Blessed are the merciful, for they shall obtain mercy.
45
Blessed are the clean in heart, for they shall see God.
46
Blessed are the Peacemakers, for they shall be called the children of God.
47
Blessed are they that suffer persecution for righteousness sake, for theirs
is the kingdom of heaven.
48
How seven Guests, under a color of lodging with him, sought his undoing.
49
Pride.
50
Covetousness.
51
Lechery:
52
Envy.
53
Gluttony.
54
Wrath.
55
Sloth.
56
How by their treacherous assault, his Cinque ports become endangered.
57
Sight.
58
Hearing.
59
Smell.
60
Taste.
61
Touch.
62
Being thus encompassed with danger, ^ee (...) himsel^e for (...)
63
(...) prayer, and in every particular he finds himself a great Offender.
64
He renders a private account of his Faith: and in every Article of the Creed,
he finds a fainting, failing, weakness and want.
65
Having thus examined himself, and found in the whole course of his life, a
fainting in faith, and failing in works: He recals to mind those Quatuor
Novissima, o^ Four las^ Remembrances; Memorials hourly necessary for all
Christans.
66
Death.
67
Cuncta qu^ suntaddu^et^ Done. in judicium. Ec^les. 12. Reddi^uri sumus
ra^ionem de cogitati^nibus nostris Sap 1. De omnibus v^r^is. M^t. 12. De
o^eribus ^os^ris. 2 Cor. 5.
Judgment.
68
Hell.
69
Heaven.
70
With the Remembrance of these; He becomes afflicted in spirit.
71
Faith appears unto him with a cheerful presence, affording him comfort in
his affliction.
72
Hope seconds that comfort.
73
Signant se omnes signo crucis, respondent omnes Amen, c^ntant omnes Alleluia,
baptizantur o^nes, ecclesiarum pietates implent; nen discernuntursil^i Dei ^
fli^s Diabolinisi in cha^itate. Vid. Aug.
Charity promises him in this veil of misery, to cover all his scarlet sins
with the white robe of mercy: and by keeping her company, conduct him safely to
the kingdom of glory.
74
He takes comfort; And now wearied with sojourning longer in Idumaea, he turns
to Canaan.
75
The poor peniteut Pilgrims last Will and Testament.
His Funeral Obsequies.

The Pilgrims Prayer.
Look upon me, (dear Father thy poor Penitent Pilgrim. I confess, Lord, I
confess, that if thou should deal with me according to my iniquity, there
were no hope at all left to me of mercy. For what hour in all my life, since
my first entrance into this life, wherein I have not in some manner or measure,
nay above all measure, become a grievous transgressour? But there is mercy with
thee, and therefore art thou feared^ mean time I of all others, have greatest
cause to fear for abusing thy mercy. I have plentuously tasted of thy love;
and considering it, I have many times resolved to become a faithful convert
and zealous observer of thy Law. But these fair promises cl^sed in a weak
performance; No sooner was ther^ the least opportunity off^red me of sinning,
then it found in me an easy impression. Pregnant was I in conceiving, prompt
in consenting, and prone in committing. Yet Lord when I was going down evento
the gates of hell, left I should enter in, thou held me. And when I drew near
the gates of death, lest they should receive me, thy grace prevented me. Whence
I perceived, by the influence of thy sweet Spirit, whereby I became enlightened,
that whenever I fell, it was through my own frailty; but whe^soever I rose,
it was through thy great mercy. Yea, I foundthee ready in every opportunity, to
afford me thy helping hand in my greatest necessity. When I wandered, thou
recalled me: when I was ignorant, thou instructed me: when I sinned, thou
corrected me: when I sorrowed, thou comforted me: when I fell, thou raised me:
when I stood, thou supported me: when I went, thou directed me: when I slept,
thou kept me: when I cried, thou heard me. Nay, shall I more fully declare thy:
good nesse toward me? If, after these few but evil days of my pilgrimage;
even now, when the keepers of the house tremble, Eccles. 12. 3.
and the strongmen bow themselves, and the grinders cease because they are few,
and they wax dark that look out by the windows; if I say, after these many,
too many misspent days, I abuse thy gracious patience no more with fruitless
delays, but with my whole heart repent me for offending thee, thou forthwith
sparest me: if I return, thou receivest me ^ nay, if I defer my return: so
my delay make me not presume, thou waitest for me. Thus does thy mercy reclaim
me straying, invite me withstanding, expect me foreslowing, embrace me
returning. Thus have thou taught me when I was ignorant, comforted me when I
was desolate, raised me from ruin, restored me after my falling, bestowed on
me begging, found by me seeking, and opened to me knocking.

And shall I be forgetful of these? Nay, Lord, let my right hand sooner
forget her cunning, nay, may I rather become razed out of the Book of the
living, then I become forgetful of thy gracious dealing. I will return then
unto thee with a sorrowful heart, but with wings of hope, because from thee
comes my help.

I know, Lord, Because of unrighteous dealing, and wrongs, Ecclus 10. 8.
and riches gotten by deceit, the Kingdom is translated from one people to
another.

Dear Lord, great sins require deep sighs, as I have been infinite in
sinning, may I be incessant in sorrowing; that sowing in tears, I may reap
with joy in the day of my translation.

THE PENITENT PILGRIM.
CHAP. 1.
The poor penitent Pilgrim bemones his present sinful condition.
O Draw near me! do not turn your eyes from me, but look upon me; the
poorest penitent Pilgrim, that ever sojourned in Idumaea. O woe is me, that my
Habitation is prolonged! O woe is me, that I have dwelt so long with the
Inhabitants of Kedar! Psalm. 120. 5.
Hence it is, that mine house is become full of blackness; no Guest but Sorrow
lodges in it: because the woful'st, sinfull'st wretch that ever breathed, is
the owner of it. O woe is me, where shall I turn me? If to Heaven; my sins
become as bars, to shut me from it. Nay, I have highly provoked his wrath, who
is commander of it. If to Earth; I find my self wholly unworthy that it should
bear me, having already so long born with me, by bearing with that iniquity,
which it has so long time received from me. If to Hell; O there I find the
just portion of my inheritance; a place sitting to punish my wickedness. Isa.
30. 33.
I find Tophet prepared of old, and for old Transgressors. Such as have made an
old League with the Old Man. Such as have no acquain tance with the New-man.
And such an one am I, of all others the most miserable man; who have made my
self an Alien to Sion, because so wholly naturalized to sin. Worthily then
may all the Elements fight against me: Nay, all Gods Creatures profess
themselves Enemies to me, because I have imagined mischief in my heart,
against Him who made both them and me.

Retire then sinful soul, poor comfortless soul, and recollect thy self a
little. Exodus 15. 23.
Leave the Company of men, and hye thee to the waters of Marah. Leave the
world, and fly into the Wilderness. Let thy dwelling be with the Pelican and
the O strich; with the mournful Turtle, or the Sparrow on the housetop. Let
thy Music be as the Chattring of the Crane. As thine eye was the sense of
sin, so let it be the sense of sorrowing. Never had poor Pilgrim more cause.

O my Redeemer, make me sensible of my present state.

CHAP. 2.
His coming into Idumaea; The companions he consorted with there.
YOung, and so very young I was when I first came into Idumaea; as my tender
age required a Guardian to manage my youth. And diverse good and gracious
Consorts there were, whom at the first I received into my acquaintance: And
with these I lived for a little time familiarly: and bettered my self much by
their company: But alas for grief, I continued not long with them; Other
Companions drew me from them. Those good and virtuous ones betook themselves,
as I thought, to a course of life too strict for my loose affection to follow.
I felt the Spirit of youth ryoting within me. Those devout tasks, which before
I observed; begun now to be intermitted. I held a sober regular life too
eremiticall: private retired walks too stoicall. I thought with my self, how
I had stayed too long in the Tyring-house, I must now show my self upon the
Stage; where I played the Prodigals part to life: for I bestowed my whole life
upon the action of that part: when I saw a Thief, I followed him: and with the
Adulterer I divided my portion. I bestowed the day in variety of follies: and a
great part of the Night in a delightful remembrance of those follies. Let us
prepare our selves (said one) for the spoil: and I had an hand as ready to
further it, as he to demand it. Let us drink wine in bowls, and carouse till
our eyes be red; let the day care for it self, while the day of our life
admits no care. Let us take our full of pleasure, (said the wanton) let our
delight be in dalliance: and I followed the steps^ of the whorish woman; though
her ways led to death. And I delighted my self in the company of the
Drunkard: yet had I read (and the more my sin not to re^eine) To whom was
woe; to whom sorrow; to whom strife; to whom murmuring; to whom wounds without
cause; and to whom redness of the eyes. Prove. 23. 29. 30.
Even to them that tarry long at the wine, to them that go and seek mixed
wine. And I had heard too; nay my experience of others miseries, had informed
me too, How, because of the whorish woman a man is brought to a morsel of
bread, and (how) a woman will hunt for the precious life of a man. And yet I
considered not these things, nor applied them to my heart: but, like the fool
to the Stocks, I laughed while I perished; I sported in my misery, and knew
nothing how Ismael played with me.

O my Redeemer, look upon me in mercy, and give me a sensible apprehension of
my misery.

CHAP. 3.
How his own Meniey became his deadlie^t Enemy.
TOo true have I found that Proverb; Who can have a worser friend then he
brings with him? Foes I had without, Fears within: but my bosom friends I
found ever to be my busie^t foes. And what less could I expect, then that my
bosom friends should prove my deadliest Foes, being receivers and Abetters of
my bosom sins? O what disorderly passions raged, nay reigned in me? what
divided thoughts of hope and fear were ever encountering me? In my prosperity,
fear of adversity wrought upon me: in my adversity, hope of prosperity seized
on me. Neither did either of these conditions well content me: for, as
thoughts of the one made me proud; so a conceit of the other made me
impatient. Now, what hourly affronts did I suffer by my own, while I stood
thus pursued by them? I found nothing on earth worthy my desire: yet were my
crawling desires so fast glued to earth, as if they had no other Heaven to
aspire to. Natural Philosophy had sufficiently taught me in my minority, that
betwixt finite and infinite there was no proportion: that my Soul was of too
large a circumference, to be confin ^d to any earthly dimension. Again, that
the tri-angular heart, resembling the Image of the blessed Trinity; could no
more by the circumference of the world be confined, then a tri-angle by a
Circle was to be filled. In this, my Speculation had informed me, but the use
and application of it was far from me. Neither was it possible, that a Sconse
should be secured from foes without, that harbored so many dangerous Traitors
within. For my mis-guided affections (like scattred troops ^alne off from their
Captain) committed all insolences. Nothing found they in me, which was not
exposed to their fury. Thus did my Familiars, and known Acquaintance work
upon my weakness; take me with their subtilties; and lead me captive to all
miseries. Yet for all this was I silent, pleasing my self with the impunity of
a delinquent. So I might sin safely, and flatter my self with a seeming
security: and promise to my self a long life foolishly, because in it the most
uncertainty; I could hug my betrayer: And herein so far was I from
vindicating my wrong; as I accounted him my best friend, who had shown himself
privately my maliciou'st Foe. So far was I (I say) from revenging my self of
him, as I sought to ingratiate my self with him. For the injuries I suffered,
I was either insensible of them, or I dissembled them. I neither reproved him,
nor showed a displeasing countenance toward him; though for many years
together, He and his Accomplices had lived familiarly with me, sit at my table,
received meat from my hand, slept in my bosom, conversed with me when he
pleased, and disposed of me as he liked. Thus became my Meniey my deadliest
Enemy. O my Redeemer, I suffer violence, answer for me.

CHAP. 4.
His Encounters with the World.
I Am now to tell you how I entered Lists; and how weak a Combatant I proved
amidst those encounters wherewith I grappled. The Field where I pitched was the
World. A place full of Snares, and such as suited all Estates. I could not see
that place, wherein I could enjoy true peace. That which in reason should have
been my contempt, became my content. Those May-buds of prosperity, honor and
humane glory were scattered here and there to take me; and no sooner were they
seen by me, then they took me.

That retired Cell, wherein I both enjoyed my self, and the contemplation of
Him that made me, had now for a season been estranged from me. I found such
Objects in the World, as I condemned my self for staying so long out of it. If
I desired to be rich, I found means how to purchase my ends: which, were they
never so sinister, the custom was so general, as it authorized the error.
Were it Honor that I sought after, I found a way quickly to enjoy her, though
the purchase made me an unhappy gainer. Friends I could not want, so long as I
wanted no means: For means procured me powerful Friends: but all these, by
an unexpected overture, clozed with unfortunate ends. For all these, because I
did not employ them to that end whereto they were ordained; but put more trust
in them, then in him from whom they were derived; turned to my undoing, which
well bestowed, had been my raising. No fight, no victory; no Conquest, no
Crown. Indeed, in the very first assault, I remembered my Creator; and to
promote his honor, I made a fair show, as if I would have entertained the
encounter: but my resolution became weakened, and discovered my temper.

O Eternity, eternity; how I forgot thee, and now forgo thee for one poor
glympse of vanity! Had I remembered what those glorious Martyrs suffered; how
they combated; how they conquered. Had I but presented to my thoughts, what
encounters those noble Virgins endured; how they slighted price, prayer and
threats: and with their winning modesty, and resolved piety, quenched all
unlawful heats. Had I recalled to mind, with what Constancy, those famous
Confessors professed the Faith, even in the face of tyranny: and in despite of
torments confirmed their fidelity: O then, poor Pilgrim, thou would have
holden all these encounters with the World light: and, in the discomfiture of
them, shown thy self a Christian: whereas now in thy defeat thou have
acquitted thy self like a weak Champion.

O thou Lion of the Tribe of Judah fight for me; weak am I, unless thou defend
me: strong am I, if thou shield me.

CHAP. 5.
His Combat with the Flesh.
PRoud Philistine, how thou insultest over me! Is there no end of thy malice?
no bound to thy fury? Will thou still Domineere over thy Mistress: and be a
Commander of thy Soveraignesse? Remember how thou were made to be a Servant and
no Mistress: a Subject and no Princess. Imperious Agar, do me not this
dishonor. I have a noble Guest which thou have long time wronged: one who was
full of beauty, before thou blemished it: of a graceful presence, before thou
disfigured it. O tell me, thou unthankful one, how comes it, that thou
should thus dishonor her by whom thou live; disparage her by whom thou
breathest? Pray thee, vile and stinking Carrion, have thou life from thy self,
or from an other? If* from an other, why do thou not tender her that honor
that may become her, and make thee worthy of her? O whither would thou hale
me, thou hateful intruder! what have I received from thee but misery: and
shall I now incline unto thee, who have bin so ofttimes deceived by thy folly?
Withhold those sinful embraces from me: they have already undone me, let them
not entangle me in more misery. O that I were stripped of thee; or that I had
loathed those delights which thou suggested to me! O why did I so tenderly
cocker thee, thou balefull Cockatrice! And why did I not crush the Serpent in
the Egg! why did I not shun the occasion of sinning, and so prevent the means
of my undoing! O what had I from thee but Sin! And what other fruit brought Sin
forth but death! whence came thou O my Flesh, O my Darling Foe: Bern. Med.
cap. 15.
and from whence was thy beginning? From Clay, vile Clay was thy Creation: from
whence I received every clammy and earthy affection. Thou drew my thoughts from
Heaven to Earth; that I might be more like thy self, who tookest thy material
Creation from earth.

O my Soul, Ib. cap. 3.
precious Soul, (if thy knew the estimate of thy price) thou, I say, who
art with Gods Image adorned, with his Similitude beautified, by Faith to him
espoused, with his Spirit endowed, with his blood redeemed, with his Angels
numbered, made capable of happiness, inheritour of goodness, partaker of
reason, commander of passion, what have thou to do with this Flesh, from whom
thou suffer so many evils? By means of the Flesh, are strange sins
imputed to thee; sins of her own hatching; sins which thy purer condition
should have so highly hated, as nothing could relish thee less then to be so
accoutred. By her, that loose Libertine, thy fleshly Idumaean, are thy works of
righteousness accounted as a a menstruous Cloth; by her, art thou brought to
nothing; esteemed as a vain thing, and in manner nothing: For, tell me, O tell
me, poor deluded Soul, what other thing is this Flesh, whose society thou
seem so highly to tender, but mere foame made Flesh and clothed with
frail honor? But should thou consider, O my Soul, what will become of
her; how, after Death, her honor shall lie in the dust: how she shall be
stinking Carrion full of misery and corruption, meat for worms. Again, how
neatly so ever she seem now tricked, trimmed and tired, she is no more but
Flesh: and that Flesh, and the beauty thereof as the flower of the field.
Again, would thou but consider her present condition, as thou have already
heard of her Original corruption: and read an Atomy Lecture on her beauty, to
allay the heat of thy fancy. Would thou, I say, but consider with a clear
and dis-intereslsed eye, what goes out by the mouth, nosthrills, and other
passages of the body, thou would soon confess that thou never lookst upon
a more stinking Dunghill. Again, should thou but reckon up all her
miseries; how she is laden with sins, surprised with passions, polluted
with illusions, prone always to all manner of evil, and addicted to al vice,
thou would find thereby means of this stain of sin, full of all
confusion and shame. For, by company of this flesh, became man like unto
vanity, because from it, and none but it drew man that stain of concupiscence,
by which he became attached, attainted, so wholly crooked and corrupted, as he
set his love on nothing but vanity, practiced nothing but works of iniquity. O
leave to love her then, whose love is thy loss; estrange thee from her ways:
for her paths lead unto death.

And now give me leave to talk a little with thee, O my Flesh! And first
resolve me, if ever I came into any place, wherein I could promise to my self
peace. In this populous City, I cannot take my walk in any street, wherein I
am not subject to be taken by thy deceit. Thou sendest forth those two light
Spies, to purvey and bring in Objects of lust; by these am I wounded, by these
do I suffer a continual Combat. Neither are these wounds cured, now when my
youth has left me; when these daily Messengers of death summon me. For, though
I be near my Grave, I am nothing richer in Grace. Though those follies of my
youth have now left me, (and woe is me that I did not leave them before they
left me) yet other aged maladies grow strong in me; against which I must
prepare my self for the encounter, or I am undone for ever. Would you hear
what my distempers are? They are these: Though few be my hours; hoary my
hairs: yet am I as numerous in my worldly cares, as if I were but even now
entering into the world. I cannot without an envious eye see my Neighbors field
flourish; others prosperity gives me occasion of repining: others adversity
grounds of rejoicing* Honor I would have, yet can I hardly support my self,
much less that Honor which is conferred on me

Alas, poor mouldred earth! Now, when I carry about me, such constant
Companions of my mortality! when Aches, Cramps, and Coughes are my ages livery!
Now, when Death waits at the Wicket, and bids me come away, and leave the
world, seeing it is weary of me: and fit me for my shrowding sheet, being all
that is left me; yet have I a months mind to be greater, or richer, or more
eminent in the eye of the World, as if I could dispense with age, or make a
truce with death.

Thus am I encountered with new temptations: Night and day am I beleagred: nor
can I find any rest; so fierce and furious is this Combatant my Flesh. O how
justly then may I complain of this my household enemy! And how may I escape her
subtilty! It is her Delicacy that has undone me: for by pamphering her, have I
famished my self: I took pity of her weakness, and I cherished her: and
behold now I am abused by her! She has wounded me with her eye; no, with both
her eyes has she surpised me. For with her right eye she showed me
prosperity, and by inclining to her, caused me to commit idolatry. And with her
left eye she darted adversity at me, and so made me murmr against him that
made me. O how I feel my self now failing and falling to earth; yet how are
my thoughts so glued to earth, as if they had no other place to think on! O my
God from the depth of thy mercy, look upon the depth of my misery! thou
know my necessity, let me not become a prey to mine enemy.

Sweet Jesus, thou have taught my fingers to fight, give me the mastery in this
combat with my flesh.

CHAP. 6.
What assaults he suffered by thy Devil, both in company, and privacy.
O Thou envious one, was it not sufficient for thee to lose thy self by the
Pride: but like a cruel cunning Nimrod, haunt day and night after innocent
blood. Thou art for ever lost, and thou would have my poor soul in the same
state. And to bring thy purpose about, thou have practiced with people of my
own family, to betray my Fort unto the Enemy. Thou have winnowed me: and as
thou found me affected, thou wrought upon me. Thou had baits in store for
every soul, to take him napping in his Darling sin. If thou fou^dst him
labor of that birth wherein thou perished, thou could suggest to him thoughts
of his own abilities; bring him to a disdain of others. Tell him, the State
did not take sufficient notice of his worth. Advise him to hold an higher
opinion of himself: and by con^emning others, to raise his own estimate. But
whereto a^me all these trains? to undo him; for, being fed with these
conceits, he begins to aspire to places of honor: wherein being crossed of his
hopes, he falls into discontent, which clozeth the unhappy Scene of his life in
misery and contempt. Or deprived of what he once enjoyed, and to an unexpected
thraldom consined, with the heavy memory of his former felicity, and present
misery, he either lives desperately encountered with those affrighting thoughts
of danger, or takes his leave at once both of life and honor.

Again, if thou foundst him Covetous, thou had Achans wedge, and Gehaza's
treasure in readiness for him: He shall have his desires and a Leprosy to
boot. If riotous, the Rich-mans table could not be better furnished, his
delicious and liquorish appetite must be satisfied: nothing wanting that may
tend to surfeiting, but with those Rioters before the Flood, he little knows
how near he is perishing. If lascivious, his flesh must want no provocation,
to bring this deluded Minion to destruction. Fancies by night, and more visible
Objects by day, are sent forth to seize on his heart, and make him forgetful
of God. If Passionate, he shall find motives enough to inrage him; nothing he
sees can content him. Fury is in his eyes, and revenge in his heart. Many
waters cannot quench this heat: for he aims at nothing but death. If Envious,
others success finds him matter enough to work on. It is hard to say, whether
his own gain or others loss please him better. Those walks in fair
flourishing fields which are made to recreate others, are justly made to
macerate himself. For to see his Neighbors ground prosper, begets in him a
distemper. If sloathfull, the Summer-beames, though they shine never so
gloriously upon him, must not rouse him: there is an Adder in the way: yet a
little, and then a little, makes him forget his poverty. If Heaven may be got
by security, he may be secure of eternity. But the purchase of Heaven is no
such easy task.

Thus thou professed Enemy of mankind, assaultst ^im: and, according to every
occasion, preparest thy temptation. And of all others, I poor Pilgrim, became
in these most miserable. For well knew thy subtilty my weakness and infirmity.
Whence it was, that finding me no less ready to asent, then thou to assault,
thou made my own Family thy Garrison to keep that precious Fort which thou
had won from me. Thus by my not resisting temptation but yielding to it, I
rather vanquished my self, then was vanquished by it.

O my dear Jesus, be thou near me, that I may redeem the time which is left
me. Bruise thou the head of this Serpent, that he may have the foil, I the
victory, thou the glory.

CHAP. 7.
Three Engines by his spiritual Enemy reared, that his Fort might be razed.
THis enemy, as his own nature has made him cruel: so the long exercise of
his malice has made him subtle. Engines therefore he prepares to skale the
walls: and batter down those strong Holds, which stand against him. Where he
finds the least breach, he applies his instruments. Delay he cannot endure:
nor will he admit of any parley, where he finds the least weakness in the
besieged party. It is not his use to hang out any White Banner, or to give a
yielding Foe any quarter.

Now call thy self to mind poor Pilgrim, and examine thy self, what thou
have done in this fearful encounter! How did thou furnish thy self within,
to repel the Enemies fury without? Did thou fly to that Sanctuary of a
troubled soul, by offering up the sweet incense of humble devotion to the
Tower of thy strength, the Horn of thy salvation? Did thou imitate that
devout Bethulian, in sending forth the voyee of thy prayer, that Christian
sacrifice of supplication? Did thou prepare thy self against the assault?
Were It thou careful of thy spiritual provision? Did thou fast and pray,
that thou might not enter into temptation? Were those Allies thou had
within thee, true unto thee? Did not those on whom thou relied, betray thee?
yes; dear Lord, I must confess it: I was betrayed by my own, to my shame.
But alas, had these stood for me, all this had little availed me; for I was
such an Enemy to my self, as I would have betrayed my self, had I neither
suffered the assaults of heavy Friends within me, nor open Foes without me. O
how soundly slept I, while my ghostly Enemy stood at the gate ready to enter in
upon me? Watchful was he in seeking to surprise me; but careless was I in
laboring to prevent his subtilty. O how well knew he how to get ground upon
me! How subtly lay he his snares to catch me? He became came familiar, by
his too long acquaintance with me, and presented to me whatsoever he thought
would soonest take me. If at any time by the motion of Gods Spirit, I
entertained any good resolution; if I purposed to amend my life; and to
strengthen these holy motions, prepared my self f^r devotion; to the end that
He, who had begun this good work in me, might likewise perfect it in me. When,
I say, I had shut the door of my heart from worldly cares: and had now begun
to off^r the sacrifice of my weak devotions to the Throne of Grace, that I
might redeem the lives I had lost, and return with honor to my Grave. Wo^ is
me! even amidst these holy resolves, came that subtle Serpent, and reared
three strong Engines against the Fort of my soul. Strong were they, and
cunningly contrived: so as, though they were raised for my undoing; they seemed
to me wondrous pleasing: so foolishly gave I way to my destruction.

O my sweet Redeemer, look down upon me with the eye of thy mercy! let not my
Enemy prevail against me, though he pitch his Tents, and cast his Banks about
me; God will be good unto Israel; even to me, the poorest wandering sheep that
ever was received into the Fold of Israel.

CHAP. 8.
The Concupiscence of the flesh.
THis was the very first Engine which my spiritual Enemy reared against me.
And this, I must confess, made a breach quickly through the windows of my
Fort. O how willingly did I desire to perish? Though I saw mine enemies joining
their powers together utterly to lay me waste; their presence was delightful
to me. I invited them to sojourne with me. Neither did this Concupiscence want
wooing terms to win me, who was won already; nor to plead to me what
interest she had in me: seeing she was conceived and borne with me; and from
the very first time I came into the world, consorted with me. I am, says she,
thy Play-fellow. The hours of thy Pilgrimage would seem long without me.
Therefore am I given thee, to allay those miseries which attend thee. Do not
then so estrange thy self from me, nor refuse her familiarity who can so
fully delight thee* Look upon me, and see if there be nothing in me, that
may please thee! nay, look every where about thee, and see if ought could
content thee, if I were absent from thee! As thou art the Fleshes Guest, so am
I the Fleshes Darling. She, with whom thou dwell, under whose roof thou
sojournest; would hold this W^rld a Wilderness: and every Creature in it, as a
Pelican of the Desert, were not I to cheer her while she lives in it. Do not
then leave me, seeing thou can not live without me. I have variety of
pleasures to refresh thee, lest the enjoyment of one should cloy thee. I have
fresh fragrant Gardens for thee to walk in; fair goodly Buildings for thee to
plant in; pleasant sights to delight thine eye; sweet airs to please thine
ear; odoriferous soots to cheer thy smell; dainty cates to feed thy taste;
choice embraces to content thy touch. Would thou have Honor? I have
Favorites will seize thee of her. Would thou have wealth? I can bestow on
thee abundance of treasure. Would thou bestow the remainder of thy time in
delights? Enjoy me, and with me all worldly pleasure. Come then, and set thy
self wholly on me, while thou art in the world: seeing without me thy life
were misery; the World a Cell reft of all Company.

Thus with profane prayers, and treacherous tears did this Concupiscence of
the flesh work upon me: and I inclined mine ^are to her folly: so as this
Engine made the first Entry.

O in mercy look down upon me, O my sweet Savior! for that precious flesh of
thine, which was nailed on the Cross, give me grace to crucify my flesh. O
let not sin reign in my mortal body: but give me power to subdue it for my
souls health and thy glory.

CHAP. 9.
The Concupiscence of the eyes.
O Whither do you hail me, ye false spies! what wrong have I done you, that
you should thus abuse me? ye lay your trains for me in every place;
wheresoever I walk, I can find no peace. For can there be any peace to the
wicked? So long as I give ear to your enchantments; So long as I suffer my
eyes to be led by you, what comfort may I reap, or what peace may I expect?
Dinah followed you, and she was ravished: and behold while I suffer my self to
be led by such blind guides, what else can I look for, but to be deprived of
mine honor? O ye straying eyes, how soon were you casting forth your fiery
darts to surprise those who inclined to you? Paradise could not be secured from
you: nor those two sole inhabitants free themselves from being wounded by you.
Eve saw the fruit, and it was pleasant. Bitter pleasure to bereave them and
their posterity of such an inheritance for ever! And what do I, poor Pilgrim,
but deprive my self of all happiness, by giving way to your concupiscence? I
have lived in many places, and conversed with men of all conditions: and I
found in persons of every quality, a natural pronenesse unto vanity: but
examining whence the grounds of those vanities came, I found them proceeding
from you; from you, those in-lets to all dis-obedience. For were not you the
cause; those who are now proud, contemning others, and magnifying themselves
above the condition of earth, from whence they came, would learn humility.
Those, who are now covetous, thinking that the earth has not enough to fill
their mouths, would be contented* Those who now give way to wrath, would put
on the spirit of meekness, and learn to be patient. Those, who are now
eaten up with envy, by wishing to others as to themselves, would be charitably
disposed. Those, who now riot out their time in the dainties and delicacies of
earth, would be more temperate. Those, who now impaune their honor to the
Harlot, would be more contine^t. Those, who now spin out their time in
security, would be better employed. Oh sigh and groan poor unhappy Pilgrim,
take thy self now into the balance; weigh and examine thy self: Let not one
hour pass over thee without a sigh; not a minute without a sob. Take away the
force of this Engine, this fearful Basiliske, with incessant Rivers of
tears: Thou have yet a little time left thee; bestow not one moment of it, but
to Gods glory. See how every minute thou art nearer unto death; how those
Messengers of the Grave tell thee thou can not live long. There is not the
least grain of sand which passes through this Crevit of thine houre-Glasse,
but may assure thee that thou art hasting on to the Sepulcher of thy Fathers.
Can thou then find any time to game, play and sport thy self in Idumaea:
seeing, there is no way secure from snares; no place that may promise peace?
Where, if there be any pleasures, they are full of vanity: or, exceeding to an
higher measure of ill, they are nursed by iniquity. Take them at the best, they
are mutable, because subject to frailty; but take them at the worst, they are
miserable, because they deprive us of glory.

O benign Jesus, my sweet Redeemer, quench these desires of my flesh, and
refresh me with the delights of thy spirit. Let not the lust of the eyes have
any power over me: but exercise thou me in thy Law. O my dear one, be not
far from me, for if thou leave me, what shall become of me?

CHAP. 10.
The pride of life.
Poor pride! what have thou in thee that may please thee? what good thing that
may praise thee? Can the Leopard pride himself in his spots: or the Swan in
her black feet? What have thou, which thou have not received: and if received,
to whom is the glory to be rendered? Thou have nothing of thy self but sin,
and sin begets shame. What shame is it then to magnify thy self in sin?
Shall thine Horse or thy Spear save thee? or shall the strength of an Host
deliver thee? Look upon that vile matter, whereof thou were made! Poor dust
and ashes was thy moulding; and to dust and ashes must be thy returning. Is
this cover of flesh, such a dainty thing to glory in? Must not the beauty
thereof turn to rottenness and corruption: and the glory thereof sleep in
the dust? Must not that fair front be pilled, and her beauty pillaged? Must
not those sparkling lights, which, sometimes made others prisoners: or which
made thy self a prisoner by their wantonness, become Lodges, forlorn Lodges
for worms? Must not that face, now so phantastically in-laid with Love-spots,
become an horror to the beholder? Must not every part or parcel of that goodly
piece, that fair building, fall into ruin, irreparable ruin? Nothing then,
poor Pilgrim, can thou find without thee, wherein thou may justly pride
thee. Look inward then; and see if thou can find any thing there that may
procure thee favor in the presence of the Almighty, by approving thee a
sitting Instrument of his glory. Ah me poor sinful wretch! what mountains of
heavy-pressing sins do I feel, ever ready to sink down this surcharged
vessel of my soul! I begun no sooner to live, then to love sin. No sooner
to breath, then breath forth the infection of sin. The world received me no
sooner for a dweller, then she admitted me for a sinner. Sometimes, indeed,
when so much grace was given me, I communed with mine own heart: and begun to
examine my self what I had done, what works of mercy have thou performed? what
actions of perfect obedience have thou expressed? Bring forth that poor man,
whom for Christ's sake thou have clothed. That hungry-starv'd soul, whom for
his precious sake thou have relieved. Were It thou so poor as thou could not
do it? Had thou not so much as one single mite, nor one cup of cold water
to bestow on Christ's members! Blush; O blush thou wretched Pilgrim! Thou had
change and choice of clothes, and these in thy Wardroabe must lie rotting; or
to Moaths become feeding. Thou had oil and meal in thy Pitcher; yea, thy
storehouses surfeted of plenty: and thy wine-presses groaned in their
fullness: yet must the hungry soul perish, rather then be relieved; The
thirsty die, ere h^e be refreshed; The naked be utterly starved, ere he be
clothed. Look then and take a full view of thine inward man; and see if there
be any thing in him, that may justify thee by him! Sift and search him; the
more thou shall discover him: the more thou shall be ashamed of him. Whence
then thy pride? whence thy vainglory? Resolve thy self to tears; fall
prostrate before the Throne of grace. If thou have a desire to be like thy
Savior; love humility, it is the best badge of Christian honor. In whomsoever
dwells the pride of life; that soul cannot dwell in Christ's love. These are
several lodgings, and are reserved for several persons.

O my Redeemer, give me a perfect knowledge of my present condition; that by it
I may learn true humiliation. Let not the hand of the sinner move me, nor the
foot of pride draw near me. He knows not himself, that can be proud: Oh
keep me from being proud, that I may know my self.

CHAP. 11.
How neither the Law of Nature nor of Grace could call him home from his
wandering course.
THe wild Ass which runs here and there, and snuffeth the wind in the
wilderness; was a tame and serviceable Creature, in comparison of me, a
Runnagate to my Fathers house, and a most rebellious sinner. We account that
Subject, who owes allegiance to his Prince, not fitting to live, if he at any
time practice against him: and worthily do we so account him. Woe is me! what
have I then deserved? Many years are now gone and past, since I left my
Fathers house; since I divided my portion with Harlots; since I rebelled
against my Prince; that Prince of Princes. Means had he made; and sundry
Messengers had he sent to recall me. He opened unto me the Law of Nature; and
there he showed before my face, and unto my shame: what Justice and
Temperance, what Moderation and Continence; what excellent moral virtues
appeared even in those who were Heathens, and knew no God. These only pertak't
some weak glimpses of a natural light: They knew not what Eternity meant: nor
where that Heavenly City was to be found: yet hated these to wrong one
another: or to do to another what they would not have done by an other to
themselves. These loved goodness without hope of reward. Their ambition was
only to be rtemembred after death: or by their commendable lives leave to
others examples how to live. Yet were all their virtues but splendid vices;
nay, merely sin; because whatsoever is not of faith, is sin.

From these then, taking me by the hand, he brought me to the Law of Grace:
Where he showed me what wondrous things he had done for me. How, though I was
bound, infinitely bound unto his Majesty. Even by the Law of Nature, for my
creation: in distinguishing me from all others; nay, in setting me above all
others: and in giving me a command over all others: yet had it bin nothing to
have created me, had he not likewise redeemed me: lost I was, and eternally
lost: and he spared not his own to make me one of his own. Nor had all this
sufficed me: (for ever was I failing and falling:) had he not likewise sent his
Holy Spirit to preserve me from a final falling. And now what heart so hard,
whom these many benefits would not soften? And yet I (the more miserable I)
careless of my own state, or what may hereafter befall my poor sinful
soul, have not been as yet either allured with his m^rcies, or awaked with
his judgments. I had a Law in my Members that foolishly sent forth her
Prohibition to stay proceedings in all other Courts. I applied my ear to the
Cimball and to the Timbrell: I took my fullness of pleasure in sin. No sense
could take delight in any Object, wherein I strove not to satisfy her
appetite. Thus did I transgress the Law of Nature, and by that means made my
self worse then an Heathen. Thus did I reject the metions of Grace, and so
dishonored the style of a Christian.

O my good Shepherd, call this thy lost sheep now back from wandering. Bring him
to thy Sheepfold, where he may find plenteous refreshing. Write thy Law in his
heart. Let it be as a Frontlet unto his eyes; As a chain to his neck; As a
bracelet to his arm: Let him look into it, and as in a Glass, correct
himself by it. O teach me thy Law, that my soul may take delight in it, and
live.

CHAP. 12.
He takes a view of the whole Decalogue, and he scarce finds in it one
Commandment, wherein either in part or in all, he has not been a most
grievous sinner.
Who would not think it strange, that any one should forget what the very
sight of himself might make him remember? I can neither look upon mine hands
nor feet, but their number and account might cause me to call to mind that
sacred number which was delivered to Moses in the Mount. But admit I should lay
this Holy Decalogue aside in mine own house, my private family: yet when at
any time I come into Gods house, my very care cannot choose but bring it to my
memory. The view whereof is heavy to me. For what one Commandment in all that
Decalogue, which in part or in all proves me not an high delinquent? A
grievous Sinner, and what is worse, a slow Repenter! O when that Book shall be
opened; and my sinful life compared to what is in it! when this mark of
distinction shall be set over my head: Behold the man and his works! O how
full of shame and confusion shall I stand before that just Judge of the ten
Tribes! when that Lord of Lords, that great God of Hosts, who is powerful in
revenge, when he sees the malice of men to abound; when he shall shout in the
clouds; when he shall come openly; when his fury shall break silence; when
round about him a fire shall burn, and in his presence a strong tempest shall
assail us; when he shall call the Heaven from above, and the earth to judge
his people; when (lo) before so many thousands of people, all my iniquities
shall be laid naked; when before so many legions of Angels all my offenses
shall be opened, not only of my works, but even of my thoughts and words: when
before so many Judges, I, poor delinquent, shall stand, as have gone before
me in good works; when I shall be put to shame by such as rebuke me, and by
so many, as have given me examples of living godly; When before many witnesses
shall my conscience be convinced, as with their profitable instructions have
admonished me, or by their just actions have left themselves for examples to be
imitated by me. O in what case shall I then stand? what shall I be able to
answer in my own defense? to whom shall I fly? to what Court may I appeal? It
shall be then in vain for me, to call for the Mountains to cover me; no
place of privilege from the Almighty. O what will become of me, when all my
offenses shall be laid before me: nay, even those which I do not now remember,
shall be presented to me! For by a certain divine power it shall come to
pass, that every ones works good or evil shall be brought back to our
remembrance, Bern. Med. c^p. ^
and by the sight of the mind shall be seen with a wonde^full quickness: to
the end, that knowledge may accuse or excuse conscience: that so all and every
one may at once be judged. O my soul shake and tremble I consider thy
condition: with that heavy indictment that shall bring thee to confusion! For
whatsoever thou art now ashamed to confess, shall be then made manifest unto
all. Yea, whatsoever in a dissembling manner thou seek here to cover, shall
then by that avenging flame of Gods justice be brought to a fearful censure.
And by how much the longer God expects thy amendment, if thou neglect time,
so much stricter shall be his judgment, severer thy punishment. O, but will thou say, who can keep the Command^ments? This is an hard task for flesh and
blood. But I must tell thee, if thou have charity, it will make thy burden
light, and thy yoke easy. If thou do thy endeavor, and with a pure
affection beg assistance of thy sweet Savior* when all outward helps fail
thee, he will be near thee. He who bore his Cross for thy sins, will
nail all thy sins upon his Cross. He who bad thee, Do this and live, will
do this for thee that thou may live. He who commanded thee that these
things should be done, will do for thee whatsoever he has commanded to be
done. But this, poor Pilgrim, thou knewst long since. His goodness could be
no strange thing unto thee: seeing his natural propriety unto goodness; his
universal power and Omnipotence; and his specioll experience have not only
made him known to thy infirmities: but moved him to compassionate thy
infirmities. Both willing and able is he to hear thee; in the bitterness of
thy soul to cheer thee; in the bed of thy sickness to cure thee. And will thou yet complain, and say, This yoke is hard; this burden is heavy; when he,
who trod the Vinepresse alone, will make thy burden light, thy yoke easy.

O my sweet Savior make me to take delight in thy Commandments. Ps. 119. 54.
That thy Statutes may be my songs in the house of my Pilgrimage. Give m^e the
^eet of a Roe, that I may run after thee. O draw me after thee, and I will
follow thee. Set before me, what thou have done for me: to shall the memory of
thy Cross, make my burden light, and my yoke easy.

CHAP. 13.
He examines himself touching the first Commandment.
THough thou have not heard the voice of the Lord with Moses: yet have thou
heard the Will of the Lord from the hand of Moses. Thou have heard how he was a
jealous God; he would have none to partake in his honor: nor share with him in
what was only due to him. He has told thee how he was thy Lord, thy God: and
that thou should have no other Gods but Him. Now lie thine hand on thine
heart, and tell me, Have thou performed this? yes, will thou say, I was never
so Hea thenish as to worship any Gods of the Gentiles. It was his house I went
unto: His Name I did honor to. I joined in the Supplication of Saints; I went
after no strange Gods: It was the Lord of Hoasts whom I served: The Lord of the
whole Earth whom I honored: yet, tell me, were there no other Lords on Earth
whom thou served? yea, did thou not make the very Earth, thy Lord, in
preferring it before Heaven, and the hopes of a better life? Whatsoever is by
us, most loved; that for a God is by us worshipped. Now, resolve me, unhappy
Pilgrim, wherein can more love be shown then in weakening and enfeebling our
spirits with pursuit of what we love? Now, compare thy hours which thou have
bestowed on the service of Mammon; with those thou have more happily employed
in the Courts of Sion! Have thou not bestowed ten hours on Earth, for one on
Heaven? Nay, have thou not depended more upon those Egyptian reeds, these
Helps on Earth, then those Hopes of Heaven? Though thou wentst to the Lords
house: and with a seeming humility cast thy self down before him. Though thy
Prayers were mingled with tears: and thy weak devotions with lifting up of
Eyes, and beating of thy Breast, with other seeming signs of humilation: yet
was not thine heart there wholly offered, where it seemed to be present. For
long before had thou built a little Bethel in thine heart: where thou offered
thy daily sacrifice. And here did thou erect a Shrine of Gold for thy God.
Earth was thy Deity: thus in the Chamber of thine Heart did thou commit
Idolatry. For had thou taken him whom thou professedst to serve for thy God,
thou would not have distrusted his providence, but with an holy and heavenly
affiance relied on his promises. Nay, had thou taken him for thy God, thou
would have served him as he commanded thee: and with all thine heart loved
him, as he well deserved from thee. Thou would not have suffered his Members
to have starved while thou surfeted: nor his Family of faith to have mourned
while thou rioted. Thou would have had the staff of bread in readiness to
support them, counsel in store to advise them: all sitting supplies in the
time of their necessity, to relieve them. Mean time, thine heart was more hard
then the nether Millstone; with a dease ear could thou hear their groans:
with a pitiless Eye behold their tears. Nay, so far were it thou from
taking him for thy God, as thou sled to other Gods: choosing rather to lose God
by abusing his goodness, then to lose any of thy su^stance. The Wizard and the
Southsayer must be visited by thee: the Witch of Endor must not lose her
honor. Tell me, is this to put thy trust in God? Is this to have no other Gods
before him? Is this the way to espouse thy self unto him? Is this in a true
and religious way of obedience to serve him? No; No; thou can not serve two
Masters: God and Belial. Thou must put off the Old man, before thou put on the
New. Thou must leave those Groves and High places, and in the lowest valley of
an humble and contrite heart, come before God, and with the penitent Prodigal,
throw thy self down before him. -- with -- I am not worthy to be called thy
Son: closing thy Supplication with this humble Petition: -- Lord, be
merciful to me a Sinner. A Sinner! aye me, a most grievous and heinous
Sinner! One, who in the fatness of his heart has turned himself from God.
One, who in the foolishness of his heart has said, There is no God. For had
thou retained in thee one thought of God, thou would have trembled to have
done that which thou have done against the Majesty of God. Nay, whereas he has
told thee, that there is but one God, and him shall thou serve; Thou have made
to thy self many Gods: one to fulfill thy pleasure; another to advance thee
to honor; another for filthy ^ucre. Oh how can I remember this without
heaviness o^ heart! To leave him, who gave me being: To leave him, who is my
portion; without whom I have no being.

O my good God do not leave me! for what am I without thee: or what can I do
unless thou help me? All the God of the Gentiles are Devils. I^ is thou Lord
only that have made Heaven and Earth. Thou only, O Lord, art my God Those
Gods who have not made Heaven and Earth, let them perish from Heaven and Earth:
let Heaven and Earth praise that God who has made Heaven and Earth.

CHAP. 14.
His breach of the Law touching the second Commandment.
BRing forth thy golden Calfe, thy treasures of Horeb; thy Dagon, thy Moloc.
Tell me, have thou not reared these Idols in thine heart? These were but made
of Gold and Silver: and these are the Metalls which thou do honor? Where
the treasure is, there is the heart. Oh, upon how unworthy a Subject have thou
bestowed it? Oh, that thou had razed those moulten Images, those graven Idols
(too long engraven in thine heart) which thou so unhappily adored! Oh that thou
had seen into the vanity of this painted Earth! What a folly it was for an
unthankful thankful people to set them up a God in the Image of a Calfe that
eats hay? And art thou any Wiser in thy generation? Of corruptible things,
have thou made thy Gods; and on those who could not help themselves, have thou
relied. What daily sacrifices have thou offsred to those moulten Images? These
kept thee a waking, when thou should sleep. These made thee fearful to
Dye: These made thy thoughts strangers to thy true God. Oh how bitter is death
unto him that puts his trust in his riches! O hstefull Idolat^ry, to be so
unhappily wealthy, as to make a reasonable Soul to do worship unto vanity!
Gehazi became a soul Leper, by making himself such an Idolater. O my loose
thoughts whither do ye hale me? nay, to what fearful conclusions have ye
already brought me! Reason told me, besides that weak beamling of grace that
darted upon me, that there was nothing in these but vexation of spirit. How,
the love of the Creature took me off from loving my Creator. How, bowing to
these so hardened my heart, as it could sinde no knees to bow to heaven. O
depart from me, ye workers of iniquity! ye drawers of me to Idolat^ry! In
you have I found nothing but vanity. Vain in your promises: but lighter in
your performances. Ye and none but ye brought me to forget God, from whom
comes all good: and to ^ight under his Banner, who was a professed enemy to the
Cross of my Savior. But alas! where shall I turn me? where may I sly for
succor in this time of danger? I have fled from him who had comfort in store
for me: and polluted my Soul with spiritual Idolatry. It is best for me to
leave my self, and to lean on him who gave himself for me. My Soul is of
too precious a price to be left to such a keeper; as will betray her to her
enemy for a moments pleasure.

O my sweet Savior receive thou me into thy bosom. Decline my affection
wholly from adoring these Moulten Images of worldly vanity. Let me imprint thee
my cruc^fied (...) in my heart: so shall I ascribe all honor to him whom I
love best, ^y blessed Redeemer.

CHAP. 15
His transgressing of the Third, in profaning Gods name.
VIle Worm! filthy dung! Sinful dust! dare thou profane his name, at whose
voice the Mo^ntaines shall quake and tremble; at the breath of whose nostrills
the high hills shall be melted; the mountains shall be laid level with the
valleys; the whole foundation of the Earth shall shake and be removed? And
yet, unhappy Pilgrim, thou feared'st none of these things. Thou went'st^n in
Dishonouring his Name: nay in miuting new Oaths, as if the reprobate had not
already found out enough to dishonor his Maker! And these thou held'st a great
grace to thy discourse: For the imaginations of thy deceitful heart were so
set on mischief; as thou heldst Deep Oaths the breaths or accents of a brave
spirit: the strength or sinnews of any discourse. This made thee consort and
keep company with the Dames of the time (for with this t^tle are they highly
pleased) to suck from them this profane venom: this spawne of the most odious
senseless Sin that ever the Devil suggested. Senseless indeed! For there
is no one Sin which either one way or another affords not some vain delight
unto the Sense: whereas this Sin is so senseless of any such Object, as it
only affrights the Conscience. Affright! yea, and worthily may it affright.
Seeing Gods judgments shall never depart from the Swearers House. Stand
amazed, poor miserable Pilgrim, while thou hear this! Put thy self in the
Balance: and tell me, whether during all these days of thine unhappy
pilgrimage, thou have not practiced this Sin? Sometimes in deceiving thy
Brother with subtle Contracts: binding the value of thy commodities with an
Oath, to enforce him to believe what thy Conscience told thee was not true.
Sometimes in thy good resolves; calling God to witness that thou have fixed
thy resolves on this, and if God pl^ase, thou meanest to effect it; and thou
were persuaded that it would please ^od that it should be effected: mean time
thou either weakly failed in what thou intended, or else never meant to
perform what thou so ceremoniously vowed. Again, how earnestly have thou
sworn, and herein taken his blessed name highly in vain, that thou would
not sleep till thou had revenged thy self of thine Enemy? And far more
constant were thou in pursuit of this ill, then in performing ought that was
good. How deeply have thou vowed, to procure thy pleasure: which enjoyed, how
carelessly were thy vows regarded? with what coldness rendered? Thou have read
how such profane Transgressors as these, should be taken away from the
presence of God, never to see his face. And yet for all this, would not thou
lose the glory (inglorious glory) of one Oath for the forfeit of such a prize.
Not one part or Member of thy glorious Maker, thy sweet Savior, but must be
piece meal rent, torn and divided to have thine hateful humor satisfied.
That precious Head that was with thorns crowned must be affresh pierced; That
precious Side which was with a Spear pierced, must be again wounded; Those
broad-spreading Arms so cruelly racked; Those pure Hands so pitifully nailed,
must be anew opened; Those humble Feet which were so unmercifully bored, must
be again pounced. Every wound must be revived; all his sorrows renewed. O
unworthy Wretch, what hope can thou have, that he will look on thee in mercy,
who have so cruelly renewed his wounds, and increased his torments with thy
profane Oaths and hateful Blasphemy? How may thou think to hide thy self
in those Wounds which thou have thus aggravated with thine impiety? Was it not
sufficient for thee once to have pier^ed his Head, his Side, his Hands and his
Feet, and with thy crimson sins to have engaged his precious Soul to death,
but thou must be every hour crucifying him with new Oaths, hateful curses,
sinful imprecations? O what may thou think will become of thee? What hope,
what help in the depths? He cannot choose but turn that Head from thee which
thou have so dishonored; that sweet and lovely Face from thee which thou have
so buffeted; that precious Side from thee which thou have so wounded; those
immaculate Hands from thee which thou have so nailed; those beautiful Feet
from thee which thou have so bored. And now, whither will thou fly; seeing
there is no refuge for thee, neither in the Mountains nor in the Valleys? Nay
the Depths shall not cover thee from the Sight of his Majesty. Thou might,
indeed, have found a Resting place in the holes of the Rock: but they are shut
from thee by reason of thine impenitency. O will thou in this case, this
fearful case and condition, suffer thine head to take any rest? O will thou
abuse those sweet Motions of Grace, and become worse and worse the nearer thou
art to thy Grave? Woe is me for thee, for I must suffer with thee: and receive
the wages of sin for inuring my mouth to Oaths, and inthralling thee my poor
Soul, to the reward of shame!

O my mouth, how apt have thou been to learn an Oath; before thou had well
learned to speak! Often had thou in thy Mouth to dishonor him: seldom in
thine Heart to meditate of him. O how unseemly will his praise sound in thy
polluted Lips? how dry and unacceptable thy devotions from so corrupt an heart?

O my good God look not upon me as I have been; but as I resolve hereafter by
thy grace to be. Cleanse thou mine Heart and my Mouth: that with the one I may
believe unto righteousness: with the other I may confess my Sins, with the
good things which thou have done for me, unto Salvation. Let only yea, yea,
and nay, nay, be in my communication: whatsoever else is ofSin, unless it be
before a Magistrate to witness a truth.

O my Maker keep thou my Tongue, for it is a slippery member: So direct it,
that it may utter nothing but to thine honor.

CHAP. 16.
His dishonor to the Lords Day.
MAy not God be served with his own? May not he who appointed Six days for
the use and service of man, reserve one for the more p^culiar service and
worship of himself? It is not much that he has required of thee, and what
service has he received from thee? In the very beginning, after God had
created man, bestowed upon him his own Image; and put him in possession of a
World of delights in one Garden; one ^den; He gave Adam a command, a strict
command, and upon a great forfeiture. Yet became Man soon disobedient: no long
time in the Garden, till a convicted Delinquent. Now behold! as of all those
Trees Adam was but of one restrained: So of all the days in the Week, there
is but one which God has for himself reserved: yet neither that, nor this
must be observed. Thou need no Arguments to persuade thee that the Sabbath
is moral; being so far from making it Evangelicall, We are before all others,
to bestow Holy days in pious works and religious ways. Aug. Sup. Psalm. 22.
as thou did make it thy day to satisfy thy lusts. At best, thou thoughtst
thy self well employed that day, if thou bestowed it upon sight of a Wake, a
Morris dance, or the sociable frequent of an Alehouse. Yet had it been better
for thee to have dug, then have danced; to have plowed, then so to have
unhallowed this holy Day the Sabbath. How careful would thou be of observing
a profane meeting: where God was never remembered but in Oaths! Such merry
Meetings might not be forgotten: the end whereof was to forget God and his
Judgments: and if it were possible, to put far from them the ^vill day. But
as the fumes of drink begot ^orgetfulnesse in the Evening: so the sense of
sin begot bitterness in the Morning.

O my God! one Day, and but one Day; and must thy commands be neglected that
one Day? Was there no day for thee, thou profane Pilgrim, to commit sin with
greediness; to follow thy loose lusts with eagerness; nor to slave thy self
to all filthiness, but that very day, that peculiar day which God had ordained
for his own honor: and wherein his Sanctuary should be made the house of
Prayer? Was this the way to make thy handyworke to prosper, or give a blessing
to thy Labor? If at any time, thy occasions, not of necessity but pleasure
solicited thee; thou held'st it no s^ruple of conscience to dispense with the
Sabbath; thou would crave leave of God, nay thou would take leave against
the express will and warrant of God. Neither must occasion of profit nor
pleasure suffer least neglect for Gods honor.

But admit, either through want of employment or fear of Presentment thou
repair to the Temple. How did thou behave thy self there? Did not thy
irreverence and neglect of his Worship bring thee to that pass, that thou
went forth with an heart more unsanctified then thou came in? Was not
thine heart wandering in the World, while thy body was at Church? Did not the
hour seem long unto thee, whilst thou were thus undevoutly busied in this
thy enforced Practice of Piety? Yes, yes, unthankful Pilgrim; thou know
this too well. No hour could be more tedious then so employed; how then could
that stony Soil of thine Heart be^e fructified? how could thy seered
Conscience be edified? Better had it been for thee, not at all to come to it;
then by this thy repairing to it, thus to profane it.

O God of Sabbath! O God of rest! who have ordained thy Sabbath the type of our
rest: Make me to know that it is thy Day, which I am to observe; and thy House
whereto I repair. Thou have sanctified thy Sabbath; Sanctify me likewise for
thy Sabbath. Thy house is an house of Prayer; in my Lips let there be praise:
in mine Heart, Prayers: and make thou pure the viol, that it may more
acceptably pour forth those odours of her Prayers.

CHAP. 17.
He confesses how this bloodyissue of sin streamed forth likewise into a
breach of the Second Table; and first of disobedience to his Parents.
PRomises of long life, prosperity, and success in the World, are and have
been ever persuasive Orators to the ear of a Worldling. Long life is a
comfortable thing to a Worlding; because he, who setts his rest upon the
World, expects small comfort after this present World. Had there been no
further hope of future happiness, this very promise of long days might have
brought thee to Obedience. But alas, this was the lowest of my thoughts, the
least of my cares. I desired in mine Heart to be the Master of an estate before
Nature would allow me it. I took my portion, and went away into a far
Country. And there I played the riotter, till I became a miserable Beggar.
Then, and never till then did I consider what I had done. For by this time had
I forgot my Fathers House: So long and so sweetly had I been lulled in the
Lap of Sin. But having now reaped the fruits of my Disobedience, I begun to
have a remorse of Conscience: and to have some small sensible feeling of
repentance. But never till such time as I had fed freely of those empty husks
of vanity: and found my self so miserably poor as if I returned not back to my
Fathers House, I might of necessity perish, there were no remedy. Nay, I must
to my shame confess it, that such was my disobedience, and so crooked my will
amidst my greatest necessities, that this my aversion from evil and conversion
to good, rather proceeded from want of means then sincerity of will. For had
my Portion continued, the arm of Sin had been nothing shortened. And yet had my
want brought me to this natural consideration; as to think with my self
what P^rents were; What benefits I had received from them: how they had done
for me what I could never possibly do for them. How Creatures endued only
with sense by a natural instinct, bore that tender love and obedience to their
Parents; as in their age they fostered them: on their wings they carried them:
desiring rather that they themselves should perish, then their Parents suffer,
which gave a being unto them. C^ril. Basal. Honail. 8. and 9.
But these Considerations only floated upon the Waters of mine heart, they
never sunck. A natural pronenesse to obey the Lusts of my Flesh, hung such
heavy poizes on the Wings of my Obedience, as they kept me from mounting:
desiring rather to dye then wholly to leave my rebellion. Thus was I never
weary of transgressing, till my transgressions became weary of me. Neither was
I sensible of what disobedience meant: till I was brought to a Consideration of
it through want. Woe is me! How could I promise to my self length of days,
when I had disseised my self of that promise by my disobedient ways? How
could I be less then rejected of my Father in Heaven; who had borne my self
so disobediently to my Father on Earth? How could I look for an inheritance,
falling so desperately into all disobedience?

O my dear Lord, to whom Obedience is better then Sacrifice; call me now home
unto thee! Let me no longer run on in my rebellious Course. Like a Child that
fears to be beat, let me tremble at thy judgments. Like a Child that flies
into his Fathers lap, let me kiss thee for thy mercies. Correct me, Aug.
M^d. 39.
O Lord, but not in thine anger, for how shall I stand in thy displeasure? O I
know, as there is no Son, whom a Father will not correct with the rod of his
love: so is there no Father who has not a desire to deliver his Son. Correct
me, O Lord, as thou art my Savior: oh let it never be in thine heavy
displeasure.

CHAP. 18.
His contempt of the Second, in his practicing mischief against his Neighbor.
ONe may commit murder, and shed no blood. The very thoughts of our hearts may
become Conspirators against our Neighbor, and so we murder him in our
desires. Caine s^ew his brother Abel, which made him turn Runnagate, by flying
from Gods presence. O how often have I slain my brother in conceiving cruel
thoughts, which reflected upon his life, fame and substance? O how often have I
in mine heart wished a sudden end unto mine Enemy! And yet I was persuaded, he
was not well prepared for death when I wished this unto him; so as my desires
were bent to murder him both in soul and body, by wishing him so sudden and
unprepared a death in his departure from the body. Yea, I will confess against
my self, and with much bitterness of heart, will I acknowledge it; that
neither rich nor poor have been freed from those murd^ring imaginations,
which my corrupt heart had secretly nursed. For if he were rich, I murdered him
with Envy. And in this act, not only him, but my self. Wasting and eating up
my own marrow: consuming my own strength, and falling away with a languishing
desire of others ruin. Again, were he poor; I to my power murdered him: by
holding from him the staff of bread, when I might have relieved him: by
grating and grinding the face of the needy: by oppressing him injuriously: by
laying heavier burdens on him then he could bear. O how can I remember these,
and sink not down with the horror of them? Can I think, that just God who
hears the Orphans cry, and bottles up the Widows tears, will not avenge
himself of these things? Can he tender his little ones, and not revenge
himself of those who make a prey and spoil of his little ones? O no, my Lord,
I know my guiltiness is not hid from thee: Nay, I know well thou have thy Bow
ready bent, and thine Arrows in thy Quiver to shoot at the malicious and evil
doer, even at him that is of a subtle and deceitful heart. How then may I
make my peace with thee? How may I find favor in thy sight? what shall I be
able to answer for my self against those my many Accusers? While here one
proves how I sought his life: and with many bitter imprecations discovered my
malice unto him. Another accuses me with impeaching his good name, that
precious perfume of every good man. The third of his Substance, saying that my
wishes were often that he might be rest of it, or it of him: or that I my self
might enjoy it with the loss of him. Thus like a cruel and bloody Nimrod,
have I hunted for blood: And though I did not actually shed it, yet in desiring
it, and not seeking where I might to prevent it, I cannot plead less then that
I am guilty of it. Now my fact is so foul, that should I with the poor
condemned Prisoner, demand my Book, I could not hope to have the benefit of
it; yet there is a Book, wherein I have read what may afford me much comfort
by it: At what tim^ soever a sinner does repent him of his sin^e from the
bottom^ of his heart, I will put away all his wickedness out of my
remembrance, says the Lord.

It is the Lord that has said it, even he, who as he is gracious in his
promise, so is he faithful in his performance. Hence is my trust; that though
my sins be as red as scarlet; the blood of the Lamb will make them white.
Though my garments be all red as those who came from Bosro: my Savior has in
store a white roabe for me. As white as the snow of Salmon shall my soul be
made, though she be now soiled with the leprosy of sin. Yea, but dangerous
wounds require longer cures. My afflicted conscience tells me that I have
grievously sinned against his sacred Majesty, both in quantity and quality. I
have not had God before mine eyes: the paths of righteousness were estranged
from me. Those sins which with such greediness I had committed, had sent
forth their cry to the clouds: they were of no inferior nature, but suchas
derogated highly from the honor of my Maker. What may I then expect, but that
those Viols of his wrath should be poured forth even to the bottom: if he did
not look upon me with his eye of fatherly compassion?

It is true, my dear Lord, it is true; No sinner ever exceeded me in number
and nature: yet coming to thee with an humble contrite heart, receive me,
loving Father, for one of thine. Though my sins might justly make a partition
wall betwixt my soul and thee my sweet Spouse, for ever; yet have thou
promised to be a Savior to every penitent sinner. O Lord look upon me in thy
mercy, for my soul is sore vexed within me!

CHAP. 19.
His Contempt of the Third, in playing the Wanton.
IS it time to feast, and play the Wanton, when the Flood is coming? Every
hour ushers me to my Grave, yet am I still far off from receiving the
motions of Grace. Woe is me, that my Dalilah has robbed me of my strength! What
a long time of youth did I lead; as if that Spring would never have done? How
strongly, nay how strangely have I been taken with a whorish behavior; as if
there had been no wellbeseeming beauty but what was accompanied by impudence?
How often have I taken delight in the countenance of a strange woman? How
desirous have I been to take; how ready to be taken? That Belc^ne could not
open, nor in her opening discover the feature of a woman, which my wanton eye
did not fix on. Forbidden fruit and stolen waters were ever sweetest.
Lightness had got such possession of me, as were it in action or discourse,
there was nothing which took mine ear more, or made the hour less tedious. I
had read how that the Adulterer and Whore-monger God would judge. How, that the
pleasure of fornication was short, but the punishment of the Fornicator
eternal. And sometimes I had the grace to consider with my self what thing
this Eternity was? And the more I begun to consider it, the further I was from
it: yet I found it to be such a thing as admitted no end: and yet I
unfortunately made a forfeiture of it for a moments pleasure. Pleasure shall I
call it? no; that cannot be properly called a pleasure but a torture, which
dams the soul for ever. I found the deceitfulness of this sin: with what
resolves I made hourly, to become a true and unfeined Penitent, never to
return to my vomit. I considered how a continent soul was the precioust
treasure; how God would not dwell in that heart that was infected with this
sin. All this I applied to my heart; but alas, how long did it remain
incorrupt? No sooner was there an occasion of temptation offered, then my vain
heart quite forgot what she had resolved. The thought of Eternity was
presently choked with an hapless desire of enjoying what was lighter then
vanity. Woe is me that any reasonable soul should be so deluded! That neither
the promises of a better life, nor the shame of this present life could decline
me from working such iniquity! I found how all bread was sweet unto the
Adulterer. How none was more estranged from his love, then whom he was bound
most to love. Thus I perished with open eyes: for I knew well how the Harlot
would bring a man even to a morsel of bread. How her paths were full of
deceit; and how her foot-stepps led unto death. And I understood how there was
nothing to be compared to a virtuous Woman, and what felicity I enjoyed in such
a Choice. With what pious Obsequies I solemnized her Funerals; whom I once
enjoyed: with what purposes I entertained to remain a constant Widdower, after
such time as I was deprived of her. Yet, though ripeness of years had nipped
in me the blossoms of of youth: nay, though age had writ deep furrows in my
brow, yet found I youth enough in my doting fancy. For I am ashamed to think
with what an unbeseeming lightness I encountered a strange face. How soon I
could gather by the wandering motion of her eye, the disposition of her heart.
Thus in my declining age begun I to renew my acquaintance with light love: and
to practice that which did least become me. So dangerous is the custom of
sin, when it has taken full seazure, or possession of the soul.

O my sweet Jesus, cleanse me from my secret sins; and give me grace to
remember these things with heaviness of heart: Let me go all the day
mourning: and with tears of hearty contrition, move thy tender heart to
compassion. O cu^e this bloody issue of my sin! apply unto my bleeding wounds
a present cure: As thou looked upon Magdalen, and made her an holy Saint of an
heinous sinner: so look upon me with the eye of pity, that I may find thee
in the day of my visitation* a gracious Savior.

CHAP. 20.
His breach of the Fourth, in his cunning defeating of his Neighbor.
MY conscience has ofttimes told me, and woe is me that I remembered it not,
how there were many other kinds of Theft, besides purloyning, or imbezling of
my Neighbors goods. In defeating him of what was due unto him: nay, in finding
what I knew to be his, and not restoring it unto him; this, even this
convinced my conscience of guilt, and that I was a Robber of him. These seem
but light sins; and of such easy digestion, as they seem no sins at all.
But these must not be forgotten, for they are writ in his Book with a pen of
steel, and are not to be wiped away but with the soft Sponge of his mercy.

I have often thought, out of the foolishness of mine heart, that privily to
take away, or defeat any one of small toys or trifles, as I accounted them,
was no sin, because they were of small or no weight: whereas if I had known
the quality of sin aright, I would have confessed that it was not the value of
the thing, but the intention of the heart that made the sin. It skils not
much, whether the substance be vile or precious, which is unjustly procuted,
^ern. Med. 11.
or injuriously required, so as the affection be to either of these equally
corrupted. Though they be of different damage in respect of him from whom they
are taken, yet bring they equal detriment to him, by whom they were taken. O
with what sighs, with what tears did that devout Father bewail his breaking
into an Orchard, Aug. in Confess.
though he was then a Boy, and therefore pardonable? These are now so easily
dispensed with, as they are held but tricks of youth. But he could cry forth,
in the anguish of his spirit, I have had a desire to perish, O Lord, I have had
a desire to perish. O how the sense of sin makes the least seeming sin
appear heavy? O what may I think of my self, who have gloried in these
things! A grain of sand though it be light, yet much sand laid together will
press us. And a drop of water though it be light, yet many waters gathered
together may drown us. O what heaps of sins (and those no small sands) have
I raised, with those Giants, as if they had been Mounts to menace heaven? So I
might cunningly make a prey of the poor; and color my sin with fair
pretenses. I had mine end, farther I sought not. It was the eyes of men that I
feared, I took no compassion of others misery; neither were mine eyes on him,
who is the Avenger of the poor and needy. I perceived likewise in these Tents
of Kedan, where I was too long a Sojourner; how there were other thefts and of
an higher nature, being such as stepped up boldly to the Altar? And these were
Symoniacall Contracts: and I understood how no thefts were like these holy
thefts for gain, nor yet detected of less guilt. Conscience was made a thing
of equivocation. Rich Donations, according to their name, seemed to be given,
but they were sold; and that so cunningly, as if the Conscience had been as
senseless of sin, as Man was of himself, it might have past with impunity.
And in the perusal of these, me thought I could have brookt well to have
been sharer: but in these I was no actual offender, though much against my
will, for I was no impropriator. In impairing likewise, the fruits and
offerings of the Church, I had a desire to have an hand, albeit I knew this to
be taxed for a great offense by the Prophet, and such as God did highly hate.
Malac, 3. 8.
Will any man (says he) rob God? yet ye have robbed me: but ye say, wherein
have we robbed thee? In tithes and offerings.

Whence he straightly charge them to bring all manner of tithes unto his
storehouse, 9
that there may be meat in his house. By this I understood, that there was a
Snare to the Man, who devoured that which was holy. Yet while the Snare was in
readiness, Prove. 20. 25.
I went on in my wickedness. When I saw a Thief, I run with him; nay, before
he practiced that trade, I could tell him; that, as to dig would be a
toil, and to beg a shame; so to take where opportunity gave way, would show a
brave spirit. Thus was it not sufficient for me to perish alone, without
drawing others into the same ginne. My life became their line, which being
crooked, brought them to as untimely an end. Thus did I see, and seeing fall,
and falling bring others to be sharers in my fall.

O my gracious Redeemer, as thou looked with the eye of pity upon the good
Thief; as thou rewarded his late conversion, and short confession with the
promise of a Paradise, a place of endless consolation; vouchsafe to cast thine
eye upon me and save me. The Kingdom of Heaven suffers violence; let it be
my holy theft to lay hand upon it: to suffer all things for it; that as thou
sufferedst all torments to procure me it, so I by suffering with thee, and for
thee, may enjoy thee in it.

CHAP. 21.
His breach of the Fifth, in supp^essing testimonies to witness a truth, or
suborning witnesses to maintain an untruth.
NEver was there sin of higher quality, that admitted more impunity. Whereas I
might have performed an of office Christian charity, in giving testimony before
a Magistrate to settle my Neighbors estate; or in clearing his good name; or in
vindicating his cause from a powerful injurious Adversary: were it in my self
or any other, I have labored to suppress the testimony; closed with the
worser party; and so for mine own ends strengthened an injury. Or if this
failed, being so well practiced in evil, I would not stick to suborne
witnesses to maintain an untruth: and by false oaths to suppress a truth.
And yet I thought with my self, who could be safe, if such hateful Agents
could be safe? if it were sufficient to accuse, who would be found innocent?
yet whether it were for gain or spleen, or to purchase a powerful friend;
Truth must be out-countenanc'd, because private ends were made to bear it.

The excellent speech of that Heathen might have wrought much on me, for it
well deserved to be ever printed in my memory; who, when his friend came unto
him, desiring him to take a false oath in a cause of his which highly concerned
him, made answer: you must, said he, bear with me, I cannot shake hands with
truth so easily. There are many friends to be gotten if I lose you: but if by
forswearing my self I lose the favor of God, (...).
I cannot get another, there is but one God.

I had heard of the fearful judgments likewise of many false Accusers,
suborned witnesses, and hateful Suborners, what miserable ends befell them;
how they were discarded from the company of all good men; how they were to
wear some badge or mark of distinction, that every one might know them, and
knowing abhor them. Yet was this path so much bette, as I could not but
think, that there was some gainefull thing in it, or else it would not be so
much frequented And the common Road was ever held the nearest and securest. And
so indeed, I found it; the nearest to destruction: and so little safe by being
secure, as my security brought me to the brinke of perdition.

Indeed I took occasion sometimes to talk with my self (whom I ever found my
greatest foe) and by communing with mine own heart, to sift and search my
self thoroughly how I stood affected. And even in the breach of this
Commandment I thus reasoned. Tell me, Pilgrim, do thou know what in this
case thou oughtst to do and shall the sollicitancy of a powerful friend
prevail so far with thee, as to bring thee to do what thou oughtst not to
do? Have thou not to do? Have thou not a friend within thee, whose favor
thou art to prefer before all friends without thee? And will not this dear
bosom friend of thine, think much, that either for love, hatred, dread or
reward, thou should despise her, nay sell her; and by this means make thy
nearest friend thy Accuser? And I begin to inquire what friend this might be!
And I found right soon how it was no other then my Conscience; who, howsoever
I bore my self to her, would deal faithfully with me; and justly as I had
deserved at her hands, either accuse or excuse me. This was likely enough to
have wrought some good effect upon me; but alas, worldly respects made me
forget my best friend. So as she, who should have stood in the gate, and
spoken for me, is now become mine Enemy.

Sweet Jesus, thou, against whom so many false witnesses stood up, to condemn
thee; vouchsafe to be a witness for me, that I now hate what sometimes I so
unhappily loved; and intend to love what I sometimes undeservedly hated. To
witness a truth, were it for my deadliest Foe: and to suppress an untruth,
were it to the prejudice of my dearest Friend.

Dear Lord, be thou my defender against the Devil, my great Accuser!

CHAP. 11.
His dis-esteeme of the Sixth and last, in coveting what was an others; and
desiring to increase his own with the loss of others.
FOolish wordling, thine own experience had not long since told thee, and thou
might have remembered it, had not thy folly so deluded thee; how touching the
world, he had the least part in it, who had the most of it. Again, he had the
most command over it, who with most indifferency used it. To love it, was to be
drowned in it: to leave it, was bravely to neglect it, and in that neglect
amply to be supplied by it. Where as such as be worldly, are ever laboring of
a Dropsy. The richer they are in estate; the hotter they are in pursuit. These
see, and yet they will not credit their own sight, what a very small portion of
Earth must suffice them! How their thirsty and unbounded desires must be then
brought to a strait, a very strait compass! And these things I often times
considered; wondering much at the vanity of men; that knowing how their mouths
were to be filled with gravel, how any thing could in reason be so dear unto
them, which should choke them.

And yet casting mine eye upon my self; Bern Med. 17.
I found very well how I was one of this List. One that could scatter his own
like a prodigal rioter: and catch at an others like a covetous Miser. One that
could be content that his Neighbors providence should maintain his riot. One
that had a dangerous leering eye after his Neighbors Wife; or more then a
months mind to his maid; or to such a parcel of ground which lay fitting for
him; or to some of his Cattle; and these, even any of these, could he find in
his heart to enjoy without returning satisfaction for them.

It is true, very true, that the Story of Ahab is old in respect of time, but
new in respect of daily practice. Every day shall we find an Ahab borne; every
day a Naboth dye. His Vine yard must occasion a breach betwixt him and his
Landlord. He must forego it, or loose his life that owes it. The anger of a
Great man is violent. His will is his Law: his inferior must bend or break.
If the plot lie near him, it becomes an eyesore to him. He will either buy
it, or come any way by it that he may enjoy it. O how can I utter this without
remorse? How may I endure my self when I hear these things? These are they
which wound me, for like poisonous Arrows they stick in my flesh; neither can
I answer one for a thousand. How strong have been my desires in shedding my
own blood? What days have I spent in careful carking, painful toyling?
What nights in cunning compassing, watchful contriving how I might come by my
purpose? These cares made sleep many nights a stranger to mine eyes. And yet
this my affliction seemed sweet unto me; such was the strength of an inured
misery. O my Soul, how tedious would one of these hours have seemed, had it
been employed in casting about for that inheritance which shall never perish!
Alas! what could I imagine, that this earthly Tabernacle of mine should never
be dissolved? That my indirect ways should never be brought to judgment? That
God had forgotten the poor; and that he would not revenge their wrongs to my
shame? yes, Lord I considered this, and the more my sin: for I sought to put
away thy judgments far from my memory; not to think of them lest they should
startle me. Thus was their doctrine dear unto me, who sought to sow pillows
under my elbow. To fatten me in my transgressions, with a tush God sees not.
But, O Lord, holy and just, thine eye is ever over me: and thine c^are is not
shut from me; nor from those who cry for vengeance against me.

This it is which causes me to walk heavily all the day long; to chatter
like a Craine: and with much affliction of spirit to pour forth my complaint
to thee my Lord and my God. O when I remember, how cunningly I sought to wind
me into the acquaintance of my Neighbor; how smoothly I glozed with him; what
court'sies I offered him, merely to surprise him, and make my self a gainer by
him! how I seemed to esteem least, what I prized most, that so my practices
might be suspected less! How I could easily dispense with any indirect way, so
I might by it be brought to mine own end! How I neglected no time to fit mine
own turn! O while I remember these things, I am utterly cast down; there is
no breath in me; my flesh fails me; and my strength decays within me.
For I know, Lord, how thou have these things in thy remembrance; and if thou
deal with me according to thy justice, there is no hope for such an
incorrigible Sinner; he is lost, he is lost for ever. And yet, Lord, there was
a little Zacheus, whom thou calledst from the Receipt of Custom; and, no doubt,
who knew the World, and how to make gain in the World; who left his Calling
for thee; climbed up into a Figtree to see thee: and came down speedily from
thence to receive thee: and that he might more fully confirm his love unto
thee, divided his goods, that he might wholly reserve himself for thee.

O deal so with me, my sweet Savior, that of a Covetou^ Sinner I may become
a true penitent Convert, in bestowing the small remainder of my days to thine
honor.

CHAP. 23.
He takes a view of those Seven Spiritual works of mercy: and acknowledgetle
his failings in each of them.
THou have taken now a full view of those two Tables, delivered by God unto
Moses; by him to us. And thou can not, to thy great grief, find one, the
breach whereof may not justly accuse, nay convict thee. Go on yet a little
further, and thou will find thy self ever worser and worser. Tell me, do
thou hope to receive mercy? Thou do well to hope; for without hope, the
heart would break: but what have thou done that might become so acceptable in
his sight, as may bring thee in a full hope or assurance of receiving this
mercy at his hands? Thou know well, that we are to work out our salvation
with fear and trembling: That, not unto him that cries, Lord, Lord, but for
him that does the will of his Father which is in Heaven, is the place of bliss
prepared. For if works be the fruits of faith; to make a fruitful faith thou
should apply thy self to be plentuous in good works. Thou know, how the
barren Fig tree became accursed; how the barren Womb in the old Law was held
accursed. The Pharisees Prayer, because it bore more leafes then fruit, was
rejected. The Publicans Prayer because it bore more fruit then leafes was
accepted. Love is the fulfilling of the Law. Now, what argument is there of the
love we bear him: if we have not a longing desire to do that which may
please him? The proof of our love unto God is to do such works as are
acceptable unto God. Now, he has already told thee, what Works may best suit
thee: and such as may move him to take most delight in thee. And these are
those Seven works of Mercy. Now, take a little time, before time leave thee,
to examine thy self impartially; what a kind of proficient thou have been in
these. Whether thou have not so carelessly borne thy self toward God in
performing them, as thou may worthily acknowledge thy failings in each of
them.

O Lord open thou mine heart: and give me understanding in all things: let me
open mine heart unto thee, and pour my self forth before thee: and suffer me
not to flatter my self in my transgressions, lest I perish eternally. Thou
have prepared me the ways wherein I am to walk: O Lord make my ways
straight before thee: and so water me with the dew of thy grace, that I may
bring forth fruits of repentance plenteously.

CHAP. 24.
Teaching the ignorant.
BRing forth that Scholar whom thou have brought up in Christ's School. Whom
have thou fed with the milk of his word? Whom have thou seen carried away
with the blast of every vain doctrine, and have sought to reclaim him? whom
have thou at any time perceived to be ignorant in the principles of faith, and
have taken pains to inform him? whom scismatically affected, and thou
labored to convert him? whom seditiously minded, and thou sought to compose
him? Have thou taken pity of thy Brothers ignorance, and brought him to a
knowledge of God and himself with the spirit of meekness? Nay, have thou
taught thine own family: and by thine own example wained them from folly? O
no, poor Pilgrim, these things have been far from thee. It is for thee rather
to confess, how many from the light of the Gospel, thou have brought into
ignorance. How many thou have deceived with a pretended zeal. How many thou
have brought from the knowledge of the truth, by intangling them in errors;
false opinions; strange doctrines. O how many have come unto thee to receive
instruction from thee; or to be satisfied in some scruple, wherein thou might
have done an office of charity, if it had pleased thee: whilst thou,
regardlesse of those wounds of a troubled conscience; either applyedst no cure
at all unto them: or else uncharitably left them entangled in more doubts then
thou found'st them. And was this the way to teach the ignorant: in corrupting
rather then correcting the delinquent? In perplexing rather then resolving the
truly Penitent?

O my best Master, look down upon me with the eye of thy favor? I know well
I might have brought many unto thee, which by my loose life, and false doctrine
I have drawn from thee. O teach me thy Law, that I may not only learn it my
self, but teach others by the pattern of my self, to love, live and delight
in it.

CHAP. 25.
Correcting the delinquent.
AS it is humility first to examine ones self: so is it charity to correct in
an other, whatsoever he holds corrigible in himself. Gods Law is the Glass,
which will present to us every blemish that is upon the face of our soul.
Wherein, we are ever charitably to consider, and acknowledge too, that
whatsoever troubles our Brothers eye, is but a mote, compared to that beam
which is in our own. But say, unprofitable Pilgrim, wherein have thou done
this Second spiritual work of Meroy, to Correct the delinquent? Nay, rather
have thou not cherished him in his sins: and told him they were none, when as
they pierced the clouds, and came up with a strong voice even into the presence
of God? Have thou not blessed the wicked in his evil ways: and moved him to
make a league with his transgressions? Yes, Lord, yes; yet not unto all, have I
done this. For some there be whom I have corrected, nay censured rather then
corrected. For my desire was to have their sins published to their shame; to
have their good names taken away; to have them houted at in the street, which
tasted more of detraction, then correction. For this I did not with the spirit
of meekness, as I was commanded: but with the spirit of fury or indignation,
which brought them to be rather hardened in sin then reformed. But I must
confess, I offended far oftener in the former then in the latter. I mean in
humoring sin; either to make me more endeared to them: or else for fear lest
the very like sins should be found out and reproved in me by them. So as my
own guilt made me to palliate their sin.

Dear Lord, I know well I have often sinned herein: I have stood in fear to
reprove the transgressions of others, and therefore became I Author of their
death: because that poison which by crying against, I might have expelled, I
have not expelled: in humoring those which I should have corrected. Nay, what
was more: I conceived indignation, against all such as reproved me for my
vices: so as, those have I hated, whom I ought to have loved* and whatsoever
distasted or displeased me, I desired earnestly that they should not be. O
forgive me these. And make me henceforth such an Enemy to all vices, as I may
correct my self with as impartial sharpness: Others with the spirit of
compassion and meekness.

CHAP. 26.
Counselling the indigent.
Counsel to the poor and needy, is as a receipt unto the sick, in the time
of his extremity; what availes a Medicine unapplyed; Physic unministred; or
counsel unimparted? I have known such as were destitute in this kind; how with
tears in their eyes they importuned my advice: and I had it in readiness, but
would not minister it: because he was poor and despicable in the eye of the
world, that besought it. And alas, was this the cause? Had thou been well
advised, thou would rather have given it, because he was poor and
succourlesse that did request it. For consider thy own poor condition
(hardhearted Pilgrim) and in what case thou stand. How thy good and gracious
God, should he not look down upon thee with the eyes of his mercy, and take
pity on thy poverty, what might become of thee? Into what straits has thy
soul been brought? how dry, and desolate? how weak and dis-consolate have
bin thy staggring resolves? How fainting and heartlesse have been thy hopes?
Foes thou had without thee, fears within thee; not the least beamling of
comfort shone upon thee. Yet for all this, thou foundst a faithful Counselor
to advise thee; a gracious Comforter to refresh thee. And yet thou quite
forgotst all this, when thou saw thy brother in necessity. He complained to
thee how he was wronged, and it lay in thine hand to redress it, but thou
would not be seen in it. Thy Counsel at least thou might afford it, but
thou denied him it: or which was worse, so advised him in it, as might rather
hinder then further him in the pursuit of it.

Gracious Lord, in whose breast are laid up all the treasures of knowledge and
wisdom: and from whom are all the Counsels of the wise; direct me in the
ways of life; remove from me the ways of death. Give me a soft and meek
spirit, that I may use all good means to bring home those that are wandering;
to strengthen those that are standing. To help the succourlesse: comfort the
comfortless: and to afford my best Counsel unto all, according to their
several necessities. O my dear Lord, pardon me for the neglect of this duty,
and make me to redeem the time with a cheerful constancy.

CHAP. 27.
Comforting the afflicted.
AS Affliction is the means to bring man to the knowledge of himself; so
gives it occasion of trying the Charity of an other. Who is he, that was
afflicted, and I comforted him not? Now answer, poor Pilgrim, if thou can,
to this Intergatorie. Have thou at any time applied comfort to the afflicted?
nay, rather have thou not rejoiced in his affliction: or with one of Jobs
miserable Comforters, increased his affliction? Have thou played the part of the
Levite or Samaritan, when thou foundst him wounded? Did thou pour the balm
of thy best comfort into him? Did thou support him in his weakness? Solace
him in his heaviness? O no! though before the time of his affliction I professed
my self his friend: and upon all occasions would be near him: yet when he
fell from what he was, I shrunk from what I professed; my countenance begun to
be changed toward him: And was this to comfort the Afflicted? was this to
bind up his wounds? was this performing the office of a friend? Did I to this
afflicted soul, as I desired to be done unto? Had I not sometimes felt the
bitterness of an afflicted spirit; even in mine own bowels? And then I roared
out -- O -- a troubled spirit who can heal? And yet God in his due time
comforted me, expecting that the like should be done by me. But no sooner was
I set on my feet, then my corporal cure stripped me of all spiritual care, I
drunk wine in bowls, and applied mine care to the sound of the Harp; I
stretched my self on beds of Ivory, fatning my self with the delights of
vanity, but never sorry for the Affliction of my brother Joseph.

O my dear Lord, deal not thus with me. for I perish* if thou turn away thy
face from me. I have been in heaviness, and thou did comfort me; bring me to
a fellow-feeling of an others misery: that I may mourn with those that mourn,
and partake with them in their affliction: for so shall I receive comfort in
the day of my visitation.

CHAP. 28.
Suffering injuries patiently.
I Have often thought with my self, how I never more nearly resembled my
Savior, then that very day wherein I became a sufferer. And yet so strongly
had flesh and blood wrought upon me, as I found nothing more hard to digest
then an injury. I left my Pattern, and run into the world^ Where I found
revenge playing her part, crying, No peace, no peace. And I became one of her
Followers. Offenses received I weighed above their quality; but done, I could
lessen them smoothly. So partial a Friend was I to my self; so violent a Foe
unto others. We usually account that beast the strongest, that can bear the
greatest burdens: mean time, we hold him the weakest that has a back to bear
the greatest injuries. But alas, what matter makes it what foolish flesh
account him! He is not for Gods presence, who will not possess his soul in
patience. And can thou speak this, proud Pilgrim, and not tremble? Do thou
call to mind what unsufferable dishonor the Lord of lords suffered for thy
sake? what mockings, what spittings, what buffetings, what whippings, what
reproachful torments he suffered that thou might be free? yet what did his
innocence answer for it self but in silence? And yet for all this, thy blood
must be in^lamed, if the least occasion of distaste be offered; thy reputation
cannot bear it; thy spirit must not so be baffalt.

Poor passionate worm, what a stir is this thou make with thy self? pray
thee tell me, who made thee thine own revenger? O do not rob him who made
thee, of what is due unto him, and what is estranged from thee! Oh, but this
Revenge has been no stranger to me. That day nor night past not over me,
wherein she kept me not company: and with her pressing urged me to requite
an injury. She dictated to me what a disgrace it was for a man of quality to
bear an affront from any: how these would live, when I were dead, and leave an
aspersion on my Grave. These, and such as these made me forget God: and to take
out of his hand what was due unto him.

O thou avenger of the needy, raiser of the humble, and puller down of the
Mighty; let it be never said of me* that. I have sought to rob thee of thy
glory. Revenge is thine, and thou will repay it. Be it so, Lord; and may he be
taken in his own s^are who seeks to prevent thee in it.

O may the presence of my crucified Savior, make me become a patient sufferer.

CHAP. 29.
Forgiving Offenses heartily.
What a dangerous thing the Memory is, when made a Reteiner of injuries! This
caused that noble Heathen to desire rather how to learn the art of
forgetfulness then the art of Memory; because he remembered more things
(meaning of offenses done him) which he desired to forget, then ever he
forgot what he desired to remember. This very case is mine: I have suffered,
but not comparably to what I have made others suffer. I held the offenses done
me so unsupportable, as they were above the power of flesh and blood to bear.
Reconciled I would not be unto death; for death I pretended easy to such an
injury. So as, though by continuance of time, and interceed of friends, I might
seem in some sort to cool; all that their persuasions could bring me to was
this: I would forgive him, but never forget him. I would ever have an eye on
him: nay, rather if I at any time met him, I would ever have mine eye from him.
My heart was not with him. Neither could I with patience (such was my malice)
speak unto him. And was this to forgive offenses heartily? O how could I look
upon the Image of God in him, and forget my self so much toward him, as not
to vouchsafe to cast a good countenance upon him? Vile wretch, what might
become of thee, if God in his justice should so deal with thee! was there ever
offense done by the most professed enemy, that may be compared to those which we
daily do to his divine Majesty? O no! How is it then? Must he both forget and
forgive; and thy ra^cour such, as thou will only forgive but not forget? O
pour thy self forth into a Sea of tears; be so far from not forgiving
^ffences when thine enemy does beg it; as thou do heartily forgive him
before he beg it.

Dear Lord, this I resolve to do; but weak are my resolves if they be not
assisted by thee; O give me then in these holy motions such constancy, as in
the remembrance of thy love unto me, I may forget offenses heartily: and so
receive remission of my sins at thine hands in the day of mercy.

CHAP. 30.
Praying for his Persecutors fervently.
THis Lesson was taught me by my Savior, when amongst others he suffered for
me the worst of all others* When the fears of death encompassed him; when
nothing but sorrow and heaviness accompanied him; even then, when his
Persecutors deserved least, showed he his charity most. Father forgive them,
for they know not what they do. Thus did he excuse them from malice, imputing
all they did unto ignorance: so full of compassion was he, even in his
greatest anguish. Now, resolve me, poor Pilgrim, wherein have thou shown thy
self an obedient Scholar to such a Master? wherein have thou observed this
Lesson? Have thou prayed for them, who sought to make a prey on thee? Have thou
wished from thine heart, that he might ride on with honor, who sought thy
dishonor? Nay rather, have thou not cursed, where thou should have blessed?
Have thou not reviled him who wronged thee: nor sought to impeach his fame who
wrought mischief against thee? yes, yes unhappy Pilgrim; none could be more
ready to inflict, then thou to requite. To pray for them, or to perform any
office of charity in behalf of them; was so far from thine intention; as
thou accounted it rather an act of weakness, then devotion.

Dear Father, this I consider: and with grief of heart confess my self
herein a foul transgressor. Sweet Jesus, thou who prayed for thine Enemies,
teaching us to do the like for such as should persecute us, give me grace to
do good to those who do evil unto me; to love those that hate me; to forgive
those who trespass against me; to spare such as offend me: and to pray for all
such as persecute me; and that with such fervency, as my prayer may be
ascepted in the time of their necessity.

CHAP. 31.
He takes the like view of those seven corporal works of Mercy; and
acknowledges likewise his failings in each of them.
FRom the view of those Spiritual Works of Mercy; in every one whereof thou
have found thine infinite failings, descend now, poor Pilgrim, to those
corporal works of Mercy, necessarily required of every Christian, to make him
of a bondman to sin, a Freeman and a Citizen. But alas I much fear me,
that my desires have been so long allied to earth, nay laid in earth, as these
Works of Mercy are estranged from my knowledge.

Truth is, poor Pilgrim that I am, I have observed these Works neglected,
with the reasons from whence such neglect proceeded. For, taking my Survey of
all conditions: I found here one, who, priding himself in his youth, bestowed
so much time in company, as he reserved no time to think of Works of Mercy.

Another I found taken with his own beauty; who took such content in looking
upon himself, as he had not one look to bestow upon his needy Brother.
Another was so rich, and so devoted to that worldly Idol, as it was death to
him to afford one crumme of comfort to relieve him that was distressed.
Another, as one distrustful of Gods providence, refused to perform all
offices of charity, fearing his too much bounty might bring him to poverty.
Another I might hear presuming of Gods mercy; and flattering himself with --
Tush God will be merciful. Though we should forget what he has commanded
us, he will not forget to perform what he has promised us. Another seeing
the whole world set on mischief; and how the simple and innocent were most
scorned, to avoid the scorn of the fool, he scorns not to become such a
fool as to follow the haunt of the wicked* Lastly, I might find an other of so
soft and delicate a condition, as these Works of Charity were too sharp and
^ull of austerity; this man would take no acquaintance of them, lest he might
become enfeebled by them. And such as these in thy Survey on earth have thou
seen and observed; but pray thee, poor Pilgrim, all this while that thou
observedst others, was there nothing thou could find in thy self? Sure I am,
thou oughtst to have endeavored with all thy power, and all thy knowledge to
know thy self; for far better and more l^udable had it been for thee to
know thy self, then by neglecting and forgetting of thy self, to have known
the course of the stars, the strength of herbs, Bern. Med. 5.
the complexion of men, the natures of all inferior creatures, with the
experience and knowledge of all heavenly and earthly things. For better is a
simple Swain then a proud Philosopher. I gather by thy own words, thou have
been a notable Observer: but wherein have thou shown thy self an able
Professor?

O my Lord, I know not what to answer. I stand at thy Bar, and have nothing
to plead for my self. Only dear Lord, I must confess to my shame, I have
sinned, I have sinned. Not one work of Mercy, but I have either wholly
neglected, or not performed as thou have commanded. O Lord, impute not my
sins unto me, lest I perish everlastingly.

CHAP. 32.
Feeding the Hungry.
THou have heard read the parable of Dives and Lazarus; and thou condemned the
hard-heartednesse of Dives, that rich Glutton; who, amidst those various dishes
of his, would not afford some few Crumbs, some poor fragments from his
well-furnish'd Table, to feed a poor hunger-starved Beggar: And upon re-view
of that story, concluded him justly damned, for suffering his needy Brother to
perish, while he surfeited: So as his very dogs might partake, what poor
Lazarus could not get. Nay, this hungry Beggar received more court'sie from his
dogs then from their Master: For they licked his sores, whereas from. Dives he
received no comfort, no succor.

But now tell me, unhappy Pilgrim, may not I say to thee, as that Prophet said
to David? Thou art the man. Did thou never see thy poor necessitous Brother
hungry, but thou had compassion of his poverty? Did thou go to thy Cruse
to refresh him with oil: or to thy Barrel, to make him a Cake, that he might
walk in the strength thereof, and not die? Nay rather, have thou not suffered
him to cry at thy gates, till his very bowels earned within him; and thou
would not hear him? Have thou not bestowed more liberally upon the proud
Actor, then on thy poor Brother? Nay, have thou not sown so lavishly thine
illbestowed fortunes upon the Brothell or Stage, as thou have left nothing to
give to the poor man's box? Have thou not saffered some of Christ's own Members
to perish for want of food? And did thou not understand, how so many as thou
suffered thus to be starved, when thou might relieve them, so many have thou
murdered, and thy blood shall answer for them.

O my Lord speak for me; for shall I say I have not done this? my Conscience
will then accuse me, and say I am a Liar. I confess, Lord, I confess, I have
not fed the hungry: but rioted want only, fatning my self in mine own
security. O give me henceforth a soft and compassionate heart: that I may
truly suffer with my poor Brother in his necessity: and out of that store
wherewith thou have blessed me, ever reserve a portion for the hungry. I know
Lord, that thou art the Avenger of the poor. For if Lazarus beg a Crum, and
may not have it: Dives shall crave a drop, but not receive it. O cloth my
soul with compassion, that she may avoid that fearful condition! Nay, I
never see any hungry beggar, but take pity of him for his sake, whereof he is
a Member.

CHAP. 33.
Giving drink to the thirsty.
IT is wonderful thou should not remember thy poor thirsty Brother with one
cup of cold water, when thy cup flows over so plentuously, partaking of Gods
bounty in so ample a measure. Thy custom has been to rise early in the
morning, and to gather thy Companions together, and to drink till your eyes
grew red, and to put away far from you the evil day in jollity and pleasure.
Mean time, those very Snuffes which your excess procured, would have been
sweet drops to many poor thirsty souls, who for want of drink have fainted.
O but I can guess why thou, who thus riotest in thy delights, decaying thine
health with healths; art so forgetful of thy thirsty Brother. Deep drinkers
are ever of the shallowest memories. But I must tell thee, that a day will come
(and fearful will be that day) when, howsoever thou now with full cups and
loose company removest these things far from thy memory: all these neglects,
uncharitable neglects, shall be presented before thee. Then thou will find none
with a light song to spend a serious hour. Sulphur and brimstone will be then
an unsavory potion: And yet this must be thy portion: because thou abused the
good creatures of God; in bestowing them on wantonness, that might have
ministered relief to others necessities.

Gracious Savior, thou who in thine extreme thirst, had no better drink
given thee then Gall and Vinegar, which when thou had tasted, thou w^uldst
not drink, perceiving the malice of the Jews to be such, as it raged even to
thine end. Give me grace to remember the state of my thirsty Brother. To
abhor all surfeiting and drunkenesse: and to be helpful to the Saints, as
well out of my scarcity as abundance.

CHAP. 34.
Harboring the harbourlesse.
THe Pilgrims Harbor, is a Christians Honor. Mild Moses, loving Lot,
faithful Abraham were excellent patterns of this duty. Some of these received
Angels in the habit of Strangers. That charitable widow would have a bed-stead
for a Prophet. This I know well thou approvest, for even thy self art here a
Pilgrim upon earth: sojourning up and down in this vale of misery; wholly
harbourlesse, unless some take pity of thee. For the very best that lives
here upon earth, has only a place of sojourning, no place of abiding. We come
unto our Inn, and the next morning we are gone. But let me return to thee;
and now in good sadness tell me, have thou to thy power performed this Office
of charity? Have thou received such poor harbourlesse Guests as came unto
thee? Had thou a lodging for them, in the time of necessity? Took'st thou
delight to confer with them; to minister what was needful unto them? was
their sight dear unto thee, and that for his sake who made both them and thee?
O no! me thinks thou hangs down thine head, as one who acknowledged himself
guilty. Thou can not find one of this sort, to whom thou have shown this
Work of Mercy. Others indeed, there are, to whom thou have given free
hospitality; entertaining them cheerfully: and enlarging thy bosom unto them
in all offices of court'sie. But these we^e none of Christ's poor ones; These
were none of his little ones. These were none that stood in need of any such
favor. These, if their hearts would have serv^d them, might as well as thy
self have performed these good offices: and with a liberal hand supplied
others necessities. And was this to harbor the harbourlesse? Christ himself
was an example unto thee of great poverty: for whereas the Birds of the air
had their nests, and the foxes their holes, yet had not* he a place whereon to
rest his head.

Now think with thy self how memorable that work of Magdalen was, in pouring
her box of precious ointment upon his head; how commendable that devout office
of Joseph of Arimathea was, in begging the body of our blessed Savior; in
embalming it, and bestowing it in a new Sepulcher; what an happy occasion
little Zacheus had, in receiving him and giving him harbor. And if these were
such good and acceptable Offices to the Head, they cannot choose but have their
reward, being with a single and sincere heart done to his Members.

Dear Savior, may it be mine honor to be hospitable to my poor harbourlesse
Brother. For I know whatsoever I do to one of these little ones, I do it unto
thee. And what can I do l^sse then serve thee with thine own? For what have I
that I have not received from thee? Be it then my Crown, to give harbor to
those needful ones of thine which thou shall vouchsafe to send unto me: may I
lodge them in my bosom for the love I bear thee: but this I cannot do
unless thou give me a liberal heart, that I may more plenteously abound in
these good works of Charity.

CHAP. 35.
Clothing the naked.
GO into thy Wardroabe (proud Pilgrim) and see if thou find not there two
Coats. Both these are not thine; thy naked Brother has a property in one of
them. Bring it forth then unto him, and cloth him: for if thou keep it from
him, and he perish, thou, and none but thou did starve him. But this little
moves thee; so thou may observe the fashion: follow the vanity of the time,
and pride thy self in these borrowed beauties, thou little carest how thy
naked Brother fares. Change and Choice of raiments have thou in store for thee:
and these must be cut, slashed and indented: as if thy very Garment had
committed some foul crime, and were for an Anatomy begged. Neither is there
any hope that such light Minio^s as thou consortest with should take any pity
of their naked Sister: having so little pity on their own naked breasts, laid
open to wind and weather, to catch a deluded Lover. Good God; how much are the
use of Clothes inverted, from what they were first intended! For at first
Clothes were made to keep out accidental cold, and to hold in natural heat.
Whereas now they are made to let in cold, and to keep out heat. O I must tell
thee, delicate Pilgrim, that from top to toe if thou meet thy poor Brother
destitute or unprovided, and thou have in store to supply him, and yet do
deny him, thou art a false Brother in defeating him of what is due unto him.
For that very Garment which thou suffer to Moath-eate in thy Chest; those
very shoes which thou suffer to rot; are none of thine, but the shoes and
Garment of thy poor Brother: yet rather then thou will render him what is due
unto him, thou can be well contented that they both rot together.

And now tell me, base slime, what art thou, being in such precious Apparel
trimmed, but a Sepulcher outwardly dawbed, and inwardly with all corruption
filled? But what shall thou be in thy Grave, when thou art stripped of all that
outward varnish and worthless grace, which made thee so seemingly complete on
earth? Nay, what will become of thy poor Soul, that must then suffer for
giving so much way to the pride of her Maid? What will she be able to answer,
when her poor starved Brother shall come forth, and in the presence of an
all-knowing Judge, there witness against thee, how thou had Meat, and
would not feed him; Drink, and would not refresh him; Lodging, and would
not harbor him; store of Raiments, and would not cloth him?

O my sweet Jesus, answer for me; for I am dumb. Thou had but one Coat, and
it was without Seame, to signify thine unity: and for this did the Soldiers
cast Lotts, to discover their avarice or envy; put upon me the robe of
Charity, that I may rather strip my self and become naked, then suffer any
naked Member of of thine to go from my door uncloathed.

CHAP. 36.
Visiting the Sick.
THere can be no greater mercy shown in all those outward Works of mercy,
then in this one which is exercised in the service or ministry about the Sick.
For in this is both the hungry sed, and the thirsty refreshed. This receives
Christ as if it had been done unto himself, when he hung upon the Cross,
and said; I thirst. Mat. 25.
Whatsoever ye have done unto one of my little ones, ye have done it unto
me. Likewise, ye cloth the naked, when ye cover the Sick. And ye harbor
the harbourlesse, when ye make the Sick man's Couch ready for him to lie in. And
ye visit the Prisoner, when ye comfort the Sick imprisoned by means of the
bonds of his infirmity. Lastly, ye perform the pious office of burying the
Dead, inclozing those days of his infirmity, with the discharge of so holy and
solemn a duty. Thus by ministering to the Sick, Humb. Sup. reg. B. Aug.
we perform all these works of mercy. Yea, that this ministry unto the Sick,
excels all other Works of mercy and devotion, may be thus proved. For in
Works of austerity or religious discipline, we are said to serve God in the
suffering of one Sense, or one Member. As in abstinence, we serve him, and
suffer for him in our taste; in Watching, in our Sight; in course raiment; in
our Couch; in Silence, in our Tongue, in loathsome stenches, in our smell, in
doleful noise, in our Ears, and so of the rest. Whereas, in Works of charity
in ministering to the Sick: First, our Eye serves him, in watching over him; and
sometimes in seeing fearful visions; in recompense whereof the glorious
vision and divine Sight of God shall be shown unto Man in Heaven, for the
Charity he bore to his Saints on Earth. Secondly, our Smell in feeling noisome
stenches. Thirdly, our Ear, in hearing passionate words, groans, Sighs and
extremities. Fourthly, our Touch, in handling and raising the Sick. Fifthly, our
Taste, in abstaining from our usual repasts for their attendance. Sixthly, our
Tongue, in comforting them. Seventhly, our Feet, in running up and down for
them. Eighthly, our whole Body, in laboring diverse ways for them.

Now, tell me, delicious Pilgrim (for I know a Work of such* rigor has
closed, harshly with thine humor) have thou been ever in all thy time
serious, in performing this holy duty? Nay; I see thee blush, and freely
confess, when at any time thou came into a Spittle or Lazarello; thine Eye
could not endure the sight of an old Ulcer, nor thy smell that Savor; nor
thine Ear their clamor; nor thy Touch any poor diseased Member. Nay, thou
turned'st away thine Eye, thine Ear, nay, every Sense, lest they should offend
the delicacy of thy Sense: who, though thou were made of the same Mould, and
subject to the like infirmities: yet were thou so lightly touched with them,
as thou either fleighted them, or with a cold indevou^ Prayer, said God help
them, without affording one small Crumme of comfort unto them.

O my dear Lord, I know all this to be true: and how can I expect that the
Head should either love me or look upon me, when his Members were so loathed
by me? O my good Samaritan, bind up this wound: and power the Balm of thy
saving Grace into it, that it rankle not. Give me a ready hand to minister to
the Sick; a tender heart to compassionate his grief: in words to comfort him:
in works to succor him, in all necessities to be helpefull unto him.

CHAP. 37.
Visiting and redeeming the Captive.
Do thou desire to see such Sights as may rightly improve thee? Such as may
bring thee to a more perfect view or discovery of thy self, lend me thine
hand; and I will lead thee to such a place as shall do this; by presenting
before thine eyes, an Image of of the World: and a Picture of thy self. An
Image of the world shadowed in the Emblem of a Prison: and a Picture of thy
self in the Emblem of a Prisoner. Look about thee, and thou can not choose
but find variety of Objects to put thee in mind of thy imprisonment. Boults,
Shackles, Fetters and Mannacles. Sins of all sorts, spreading in every part or
member of the body; to make thy bondage more miserably heavy. The ways of
iniquity are those Boults and Shackles, which needs must load thee: for what
greater weight then the burden of iniquity? Thy Lusts and concupiscences are
those Fetters and Manna^l^s, which needs must restrain th^^^ for the too much
freedom of thy body, has abridged thy Soul of her liberty, and confined her
to live in lasting slavery.

But look upon the Prisoner^ Have thou at any time with comfort in thy Mouth,
and relief in thy Purse, come to visit him? Have thou labored with a part or
portion of thine own Substance to redeem him? O no! with what a careless
eye, stony heart, empty hand have thou past the very door of that Prison, where
thy poor Captive Brother lay on the cold ground, comfortless, succourlesse,
and more miserable in his lodging then if he were harbourlesse? thou have
heard in thy Fathers days, how devoutly many Men and Women were disposed in
distributing a great part of their estates, and freely bestowing it upon the
redemption of one Captive: so dcare unto them was the liberty of a Christian.
But these are either hid from thine eyes: or what is worse, thou fallest with
open eyes: for long may thy Brother Joseph live imprisoned, before thou visit
him; long time afflicted, before thou comfort him: long time inthralled, before
thou redeem him.

Dear Lord, though I be a Prisoner and have quite forgot my condition; never
so much as opening to my poor Captived Brother the bowels of my compassion;
yet shut not thine ear from the voice of my Complaint. O my Lord, though I
heard not them, hear thou me: and make me hence forth more ready to
communicate to their necessity, for the love I bear thee. My whole life is a
Captivity; O my joy, as thou have redeemedmee, so conduct me to my native
Country. O how can I sing my Songs in a strange Land! yet my desire is to sing
of thee: for in thy due time will thou give me a delivery out of all my
troubles. Out of the depths will I cry unte th^ee, for thou have had ever an
Ear unto my misery.

CHAP. 38.
Burying the Dead.
But sure thou would not neglect this clozing duty, though thou came short
in performimg all other offices of charity. Thou have taken so much pains as
to bury thy dead Brother: for even the very Heathen have performed this with
due solemnity one to another. Nay, even those, who all their life long were at
deadly enmity, were it but only for N^ighbourhood, would not be failing in this
Christian duty. And yet thou can speak little or nothing to it. For resolve
me but in this one short question: Had thou never any poor Neighbor dying
near thee: and that so poorly as his whole substance would not discharge his
Mortuarie? Nay, have thou not seen the very Corpse of thy departed Brother
arrested, and uncharitably stayed: who, though he had paid his debt to nature,
yet must receive no burial, till his poor Corpse has discharged his debt unto
his Creditor? And have thou sought to satisfy his hard hearted Creditor, that
those due funeral rites might be performed to thy Brother? Nay, have thou not
even in the City, when a black Cloud of Pestilence hung heavily over it: when
they fell on thy right hand and on thy lest: when thou might behold the
latepopulous and freely-frequented Streets covered with grass: the very walls
clothed with Mourning: have thou not even then, I say, neglected this duty:
seeking with powders and persumes to put from thee the evil day: and in deep
healths to drench down the remembrance of debt, death and danger: and with a
forgetful Evening to close thy days distemper? Nay, have thou not been
sometimes employed in Camp service; where the murdering Ord'nance made no
difference of persons: where nothing but fire and fury raged; nothing but
slaughter and horror ranged; nothing but doleful voices of dying Souls
resounded: while breathless Carcasses lay here and there discatered, but un
interred: and did thou play the good Centurion? did afford thy charitable
hand, after their Wars, to bring them with peace to their Graves? Did thou
perform these pious offices in any place, to purchase to thy Soul the glad
promises of peace? O no! Thy care was for one; and so thou might secure that
one, small care was taken for the rest. O how this self-love dryes up the
fountain of charity! O had thou but never so little lain aside this love to
thy self; thou would have shown more love unto thy Neighbor, and therein
more true love to thyselfe!

It is true, Lord, it is true; this love to my self made me forgetful of all
others but my self. O lessen this love in me, that I may more plentuously
increase in all offices of Charity! O give me a charitable hand, a cheerful
heart; that I may henceforth have a care to see those holy duties performed,
which I have so long time neglected. Be they Spiritual or Corporal, let their
due discharge, be my Memorial. But, holy Father, first prepare me, that I may
become better fitted for every distinct duty. As first in Spiritual duties,
give me facility in Teaching the Ignorant; Affability in correcting the
Delinquent; Ability in Counselling the indigent; charity in comforting the
Afflicted; Resolution in suffering injuries patiently; Compassion in forgiving
offenses heartily; Devotion in praying for my Persecutors fervently. Likewise,
in Corporal duties; Make me ready to feed the hungry; with that happy
Samaritan, to give drink to the thirsty; with those good Patriarchs, to^
harbor the harbourlesse and conduct them safely; with devout Dorcas, to cloth
the naked and needy; with thee my best Master, to visit the sick, and if it lie
in my power, to ease their malady; with courageous Josiah, to visit and redeem
those that are in Captivity; and with holy Joseph of Arimathea, to bury the
dead, with the performance of every other holy duty.

O my God, may my weary Pilgrim stepps be so directed that they may daily draw
nearer and nearer to Heaven, whereto they are addressed.

CHAP. 39.
With sorrow of heart he remembers those Eight Beatitudes, whereof he has
deprived himself, by giving entertainment to sin.
VVOe is me! what good thing may I expect from his hand that made me, when I
have done none of those things for which he made me? If I look not into my
self, I am wholly unknown to my self: and if I look into my self, I am not
able to endure my self. I understand, and the more unhappy I, not to make use
of his goodness toward me, how I could not partake with him in his Kingdom
of glory, if I labored not by a good and gracious life to imitate those
blessed stepps of his during my reside here in this vale of misery. And now
with sorrow of heart, I remember, how and in what manner I have contemned all
those holy duties formerly repeated: and consequently deprived my self; my
poor neglected soul, bought at so high price, of all those Beatitudes,
pronounced on such godly ones, as have walked before the Lord in uprightness
of heart. Woe is me, what will become of me? when I shall take up my bed
amongst Scorpions? when my dear Savior, that victorious Lion of the Tribe of
Judah, shall demand of me what have thou done? under whose Banner have thou
fought? if under mine, where be thy Colors? mine were red ones; died in my
precious blood; my Crimson Wounds. But those thou wear'st are none of mine.
They are more like the Enemies then mine. He can be no reteiner to me, who
scorns to wear my livery. He cannot be my Disciple that will not follow me.
And wherein have thou followed me, unless it were to betray me? or to rob
me of my glory? And such ever has bin the pursuit of all the Enemies of my
Cross.

Dear Jesus, I appeal from thy Throne of justice to thy Seat of mercy. I must
confess I have not followed thee as a faithful ret^iner, but a backsliding
follower. Nay, I deserve martial Law, for I have fled from thy Colors: and
become a Confederate with thy Enemies: yet, dear Lord, behold my tears, for
thou accountest them precious when they are offered by a Contrite heart. O d^^
not leave me, for my Soul longs after thee: even as in a dry ground where
no water is, so has she thirsted after thee.

And now, Lord, that I may present my self before thee with more humility, I
will ever set my imperfections before me: remembering what good I have omitted
when I had opportunity to do it; again, what evil I have committed, when the
remembrance of thy mercy might have declined me fr^ it. Amongst which let me
now call to mind those Blessings thy gracious goodness has pronounced to
every faithful follower; and then examine my self, whether I deserve or no to
be listed in that number.

CHAP. 40.
Blessed are the poor in spirit, for for theirs is the Kingdom of Heaven.
HVmility is the Path that leads to glory. There is no virtue that can
subsist without it: This may be one reason why the very first Beatitude is
grounded on it. But what are we to learn from hence? Not to be high-minded;
but of an humble and meek Spirit. In suffering dishonor, for the honor of
our Savior. In possessing our Souls with patience. In mitigating wrath with
mildness. In relinquishing himself; in preferring others before himself. In
judging well of others; but worst of himself. In wishing unto others, as to
himself. In rejoicing in nothing but in the Cross of Christ: yet unfainedly
suffering with those who suffer for Christ.

Now return and account, proud Pilgrim, whether there appear any tokens of
this poor spirit in thee? Have thou not ever retained a good opinion of thine
own worthless worth? Have thou not been of a Contentious spirit? Have thou
not answered reproach with reproach? Have thou not been more ready in
defending thine own honor; then advancing the honor of thy Savior? Have
thou not been so far from possessing thy Soul in patience, as thou could
not endure the least affront without much violence? Have thou with soft words
mitigated wrath: Nay, have thou never suffered the Sun to set upon thy wrath?
Have thou in an humble contempt of thy self, preferred others before thy
self? Nay, rather have thou not with the Spirit of contradiction opposed thy
judgment against others; and out of a foolish presumption made an Idol of thy
self? Have thou in the Scale of Charity, preferred others before thy self? or
rather, have thou not rashly judged others in thine heart: and in thy too
strict examination of him concluded with that proud Pharisee, I am not as this
man is? In a word, have thou judged well of others, but worst of thy self: or
wished unto others as to thy self: or rejoiced like a faithful Champion in
the Cross of Christ: or like a compassionate Member, suffered with those who
suffer for Christ? O no; nothing less can I find in my self, unhappy
Pilgrim, I have ever held a poor spirit in contempt, and an unsit Companion to
take acquaintance of in this World.

How then dear Savior, may I expect an inheritance in the Kingdom of Heaven;
who am so far estranged from a mild Spirit on Earth? O my Lord incline thine
Ear to my petition! Renew a right spirit within me; so shall I be endowed
with what delights thee; by accounting a meek spirit a spiritual beauty; and
after this life, through thy mercy become inheritour of that Kingdom which
thou have prepared for those that love thee.

CHAP. 41.
Blessed are the meek, for they shall possess the Earth.
HEre is a promise that the meek shall possess the earth: and yet is it hard
to find a spirit truly meek upon the Earth. By which thou may gather (poor
Pilgrim) that there is another Earth besides this Earth we here tread on,
which shall be given for a possession to the meek. That desired Earth,
prepared only for such who have wained their desires from earth. This is a
Land which flows with better things then Milk and Honey. An heavenly
Havilah, where the purest Gold is to be found: nay, where the very Streets are
Paved with Gold; the Walls are of precious Stones; the Gates are made of the
best Margarites; those many Mansions founded of square Aug. Med. 25.
stones, built of Saphires, arched over with golden Bricks: which none must
enter but he that is clean, none must inhabit that is defiled. Where then must
thy possession be in this Land of promise? what Mansion may thou expect in
this Holy City? Woe is me! I am unclean; I am unclean; from head to foot
there is nothing in me but boyles, sores and runnings. How may I then look
there to receive any Mansion, seeing to a Clean Lord is required a clean
Habitation? How may I think that my Master will look on me, who all my life
time have observed least what he commanded most: practiced nothing more then
what he prohibited; neglected nothing more then what he commanded? How may I
expect from his hands a blessing; or this promised possession of that earth;
who never showed so much as the least meekness upon earth? Yet did that meek
Lamb, who became an offering for me, leave such a pattern unto me; that if I
were not wholly unmindfull of my souls honor: nor wholly forgetful of the
love of such a Master, I could not choose but after his example become his meek
and obedient Follower. For his whole life was a Mirror of meekness: seeing
from the Cratch to the Cross he suffered all things patiently, bear all
reproaches meekely, to reach unto thee from the tree of his Cross a Crown of
glory.

O my Redeemer imprint this meekness of thine in my memory; let it never
depart from me; put a meek and mild answer into my mouth, when any one shall
revile me. Let me refer my cause unto thee, and that with such Christian
Charity, as I may sincerely pray for mine Enemy: and in meekness of spirit to
imitate the example of that meek Lamb, who with so resigned a will became a
Sacrifice for me.

CHAP. 42.
Blessed are they that mourn, for they shall be comforted.
THat wise Preacher could say, It was better going to the House of mourning,
then to the house of rejoicing. And yet how little did this admonition work
upon thy thoughts? How pleasant have those Consorts of death; those Brethren in
evil seemed unto thee? How merrily the hour went away? Nothing was wanting to
make your delights more complete: but that you wanted time to make your follies
more complete. Full cups, merry Songs, profane Oaths were the only Actors
that presented themselves in this expense of time. A long night soon past
over, but not so easily accounted for. But tell me, thou misguided Pilgrim,
were it thou as quick in thy visits to the house of mourning? did thou labor
to comfort the comfortless? Did thou mourn with those that mourned; or with
a tender Christian heart suffer with those that suffered? O no! shall I rather
tell thee what thou have done? Thou have rejoiced when others mourned; taken
content when others suffered. Nay, if at any time thou mourned'st, it was such,
as God himself was provoked with it. For thou either immoderately mourned'st
for the loss of thy friend, and so offended'st him with thy excessive
mourning; or what was worse, for the loss of some temporal substance, and so
provoked him with thy indiscreet sorrowing; or which was worse, for that thou
might not enjoy thy full of pleasure; and so plunge thy soul down into the
balefull pit of predition for ever.

Thy desire was to pass time over with a merry heart: and to satisfy her in
the lusts thereof. And yet thou had so much divinity in thee as sometimes to
consider, how none could partake in comfort here and elsewhere. How none could
be there comforted, who was not here afflicted. How none could be there
solaced, unless he here sorrowed. How the Almighty had a Son without sin,
but none without a scourge. One, who wept often, but was never seen to laugh.
One who from his birth to his death made his life a continued Scene of sorrow.
One, who in the bitterness of his soul called and cried to all such as past
by him, to come unto him, to behold him, and witness with him, If ever there
were sorrow like unto his sorrow.

O no my dear Savior, there was never sorrow like unto thy so^rrow, yet I who
occasioned thy sorrow, partake little in thy sorrow! O bring me now to a true
sense of my sin; to a true sorrow for my endangered soul. Let my eyes be so
well acquainted with tears; as my affection may be estranged from all joys.
Let me become so happy a Mourner, as with devout Magdalen, I may become an
hearty Convert of an heinous sinner, and so by ceasing from sin, become a
welcome Guest to my Savior.

CHAP. 43.
Blessed are they that hunger and thirst after righteousness, for they shall
be satisfied.
MAny times have thou hungered; often have thou thirsted; but tell me was this
for righteousness? No; this hunger of thine was rather like the Prodigals in
hungring after the husks of vanity; or like Esau's in hungring after
delicacie; or like Ahabs in hungring after another Vineyard greedily; or like
Hamons in hungring after honor gracelesly. And the like was thy thirst; Thou
thirsted, but it was with Gehezay, after gold; or with those before the Flood,
after full cups; or like Nimrod, after blood: or like Amnon after lust.

All this while, resolve me where thine heart is? It cannot be lodged in the
Sanctuary, being so betroathed to vanity. Thy delight cannot be in the Law of
the Lord. Thine heart can never endite a good matter, so long as thou suffers
it to wander from thee like light Thamar after this manner. O how far is this
after hungring how to promote Gods glory? how far is this from thirsting
after works of mercy? For how soever some of these, who dedicate themselves to
the devotion of the world: upon a more serious remembrance of Gods heavy
judgments, prepared for every rebellious and impenitent Sinner, may sometimes
seem struck with remorse of conscience; and heartily wish with Balaam the
death of the righteous: yet so long as they care not for walking in the ways
of the righteous: nor with an humble holy zeal thirst after righteousness,
nor mortify their desires by the Law of obedience: they may be long time
wishers before they be enjoyers. Such desires can never produce good effect,
which are not seconded with the fruits of a good life. Where piety has lost her
practice; there is small comfort in the Court of Conscience. As the faithful
man lives by faith; so must he live in the life of faith: and walk according
to the profession of his faith; or he shall never receive the promises of
faith. He who believes whatsoever is necessarily to be believed: and
observes whatsoever is by the divine Law of God commanded, that man shall be
accepted. But what is to be expected in this wide world, this wild
wilderness; where there appears such want of obedience in youth; such want of
devotion in age; such want of conscience in both? And what art thou, unhappy
Pilgrim, who speak these things; but as leaven to make sour the Lump? Thy
life has corrupted many, reclaimed none. None more ready to sin; none more
slow to sigh for those sins which he has committed. None hungring nor
thirsting more after those troubled brooks of vanity and lightness; none
hungring nor thirsting less after those precious treasures of Righteousness.

Dear Lord, be merciful unto me a Sinner. I thirst, Lord, I thirst; give me
to drink of those waters of life: for unless thou help me, and reach them
to me, I remain desolate and hopeless of relief in this time of my
necessity. Sweet Jesus, the well is deep, and I have not wherewith to draw;
unless thou draw me to thee, and bestow on me what with all humility I beg
of thee. O increase in me an holy hunger and constant thirst after
righteousness; that my ways and works may be sanctified throughout in the
practice of obedience.

CHAP. 44.
Blessed are the merciful, for they shall obtain mercy.
Can thou, unmercisull Pilgrim, look for mercy at the hand of thy Maker; and
never so much as open the bowels of thy compassion to thy poor Brother? Art
thou not in far deeper are^res to him that made thee; then he is unto thee,
whom thou usest so unmercifully? what would become of thee, if he should deal
with thee according to his justice? and throw thee into that Lake of fire and
brimstone; where the worm is ever gnawing and never dying; fire ever burning
and never cooling; and death ever living and never ending? where woe and
sorrow, howling and gnashing of teeth is the best melody that raging Tophet can
afford. Now, to avoid a place of such endless torment, who would not suffer
the loss of any temporal estate, nay even of life it self? Yet thou, unhappy
one, wilt not make thee friends of thy worldly Mammon; nor in works of mercy
express thy self a Christian. Every where may thou find subjects fit to
exercise thy Charity; in every lane, in every street thy poor languishing
Brother begging relief for his sake, who suffered death for thy sake: and yet
thou turnest away thy face from him: his many rags and running sores make
thee abhor him. Again, thou can not encounter thy Debtor but with much
distemper; though the times be hard; his family poor; and his necessities
great, yet conceivest thou no pity of his distressed estate. Thou lays thine
executions upon him, throws him into prison: where it is the least of thy care
what become of him. Let him starve for food, thou art well contented; his poor
en^eebled corpse no sooner lose their breath, then thou losest thy debt, and art
here with well satisfied.

Again, should any poor wayfaring soul repair to thy house, this Cell of
thy Pilgrimage; and after that ordin^ry form of begging in Italy, should
beseech thee to do good for thine own sake; thine answer, as it has been
ever, would be like that churlish Nabals: Shall I give my bread and my flesh
unto strangers? Tell me then how can thou look for the least drop of mercy,
who in all thy time have been a stranger to the Works of mercy? Oh when he
shall demand of thee, who gave himself for thee; where be those hungry souls
which thou have relieved; those thirsty ones whom thou have refreshed; those
naked ones whom thou have clothed; Those harbourlesse Pilgrims whom thou have
harbored; those sickly members whom thou have visited; those comfortless
Captives whom thou have redeemed; those last Obits or Offices which thou to thy
dead Brother should have performed? what Advocate then can thou find to
plead for thee? who is he that will speak a good word for thee to the King,
that his wrath may be appeased toward thee? oh none, none; Thou art wholly
left to thy self, and utterly lost in thy self: and even in thine own bosom
shall find that witness to accuse thy self: as nothing may remain but the
expectance of a terrible and irrevocable sentence.

O God of mercy, deal not with me according to the measure of my sins, for
they are exceedingly multiplied: but according to thy great mercy put away my
iniquities, that thy name may be magnified. O Lord, thou who delightest in
mercy, and wilt have mercy on those on whom thou will have mercy, make me to
delight in that wherein thou delightest, that in the day of wrath I may find
mercy.

CHAP. 45.
Blessed are the clean in heart, for they shall see God.
CAn the Leopard lay away his spots, or the Ethiopian his blackness? As the
Leper in the old Law was commanded to cry out, I am unclean, I am unclean: So
I, a foul sinful Leper, may cry out in the same manner, that men may shun me
lest they become infected by my behavior. For as the soul is far more
precious then the body: so is the Leprosy of sin far more dangerous then
that of the skin. The Swan, if at any time she pride her self in her
beauty, no sooner looks upon her bla^k feet, then she wailes her plumes,
Miserable Pilgrim! Look at thy black feet, how they are ever walking in the
ways of sin; Look at thy black hands, how they are ever with greediness
committing sin; Look at thy black profane mouth, how it is ever belching
forth motives to sin; look at thy black projecting brain, how it is ever
plotting new ways or passages for sin. Look at thy black deceitful heart,
how it is ever imagining how to strengthen the arm of sin, Look at thy
black corrupted Lever, which proves thee a corrupt Liver, how it is infected
with sin. Nay, look at every part, and every where shall thou find this
spiritual Leprosy raging and reigning; spreading and streaming into every
vein, every joint or artery? And yet what an Idol thou make of thy self?
how ready thou art to justify thy self? How far from craving thy good
Physicians help, as thou will rather dye then confess thy want of health?
Truth is, there is no sin of a more dangerous quality, then this spiritual
Idolatry; for by it whatsoever is in value least is honored most: And again,
whatsoever in honor most, is valued least. Oh had thou (unmindfull Pilgrim)
looked so carefully to the clensing of thine inward house, as thou have done to
the needless trimming of thine outward house: had thou been as mindful of
clensing thine heart, as thou have been of brushing thine habit: oh then these
leprous spots which now appear so foulely on thee, had never infected thee!
Then had thy life been a Lamp unto others; then had the affections of thine
heart been pure: yea, God himself had prepared in thee a Tabernacle for
himself to dwell in; a Bed of flowers for him to repose in; a Temple for him
to be praised in. See then what thou have lost, by losing that beauty which
should have delighted him most! The sight of God.

Woe is me, what a loss is this? To be deprived, and of that eternally, in
the fruition whereof consists all glory? The sight of God! Woe is me! that ever
I was borne, to lose that for which I was borne; for which I was re-borne! The
sight of God! The nourishment of every Angelical soul; This have I lost by
not clensing my heart: for the clean in heart shall only see God.

O cleanse me from my secret sins! O forgive me my strange sins! O let me
now return to thee with my whole heart: and cleanse thou mine heart; that I may
make godliness my gain, and with these eyes see thee, my God of Sion.

CHAP. 46.
Blessed are the Peacemakers, for they shall be called the Children of God.
I Beseech you, that neighbor near me, and whose testimony may much avail me;
speak for me; have I since I sojourned amongst you, labored to compose peace,
or to prevent occasion of Suites? Have I performed any office that might tend
to peace? Oh speak for me; be it your charity to speak for me: for unless
your charity do it, sure I am my endeavors have little deserved it. O no; I
see you cannot justly speak one good word to the King for me! For my
conversation has been otherwise amongst you. The spirit of contention and
contradiction reigned in me: and so far divided was I from the bond of
charity, as I delighted in nothing more then nursing enmity. Injuries I would
bear none: nay, rather then embrace peace, I would make injuries of none.
Neighbourly arbitrations I neither affected nor admitted: it was my counsel
ever that suits should be commenced: Let the Law try it, though the cause were
not worth a see for which we contended. Nay, to feed this fire of debate with
new fuel; I told such who repaired to me for advise (damnable advice to lead
a deluded Client into the height of all vice) that to bear an injury, were to
make every one their enemy. How he who forgives him that wrongs him,
encourages him to pick a new quarrel at him: while the remitting of one
becomes the admitting of another: yea, where a wrong is threatened and not
revenged, it emboldneth the Actor to see it executed. Thus lay I a snare
privily to catch the simple and innocent doer; and by my mischievous counsel
to make him of a Lover of peace a common Barreter. But evil Counsel is worst
for the Counselor; this I find too true to my discomfort. For now me thinks
all those differences which I raised; all those quarrels which I started;
present themselves before thee, threatening nothing less then perdition to me:
for by the malicious instigation of Satan, they buzze like Bees about me, and
with strong hand bring me forth, before the face of heaven and earth publicly
to accuse me. This is he, say they, who would be called the Child of God; but
how can he have any interest in that title; how dares he presume to derive any
such promise from God, who all his life time has been a professed Enemy to the
peace of God? He has labored to encourage Neighbor against Neighbor; to
bring all things into confusion by his distemper; and may such an one have any
hope to aspire to a title of such honor? The world has been long since weary
of him; because nothing but contention relished well with him: and shall his
spirit which disquieted every place, and became an instrument of faction in
every place, enjoy the comfort of peace? Or the reward of such as embrace
peace; or that superlative title of those Peacemakers, to be called one of the
Children of God? Thus may I, poor Pilgrim, be justly accused, and by what
means may I be freed? How may I clear these accusations, whereof I am not
only endited, but convicted.

Even by thy meditation, my dear Savior; who brought peace unto us, by
suffering so many things for us. O be thou my Peacemaker, my sweet Redeemer!
Let me now at last, after my breach of peace with thee, and with those whom I
ought to have shown my self peaceable to, for thee; let me, I say, love
peace and ensue it, that I may enjoy that Crown of peace, after my dismission
from this Camp of Earth, which thou before all times have prepared for those
who embraced peace upon Earth. And since none can be called the Child of God,
unless he be a Peace maker; give me grace to love and live in peace, that I
may receive that blessed title from thee, my only Savior.

CHAP. 47.
Blessed are they that suffer persecution for righteousness sake for theirs is
the kingdom of heaven.
Strait is the Gate, and narrow is the way that leads unto life, and few
there be that enter in at it: the reason is, because by many tribulations we
are to come unto it. The high way unto the Crown, is by the Cross. Christian
devotion and spiritual discipline must be works of pain, not of the pillow.
But this is an hard task for flesh and blood! It is true; but it will be an
harder task for flesh and blood to suffer those pains of Hell. Christ's
disciples could not watch with him one hour, till they grew heavy. Heavy,
indeed, was that Lethargy, that would not suffer them to wake one hour in
Christ's company. Yet after all this, when they were divided from his bodily
presence, they became so strengthened by his gracious assistance: as neither
watchings nor weariness; scourgings, nor imprisonments; Tyrants threatenings,
nor inexquisite torments could divide them from the love of their sweet Master,
for whose honor they were ready to suffer any torture. This, and only this, it
was, which moved so many glorious Martyrs to seal their Christian constancy
with their dearest blood; This it was, which enduced so many religious Virgins
to overcome the weakness of their sex: and with a vowed constancy, and
constant chastity to slight those assaults of savage cruelty; those threats of
brutish hostility, which the enemies of Christ and of his Cross belched forth
against them. This caused those faithful Confessors to stand in defense of the
truth, and in the face of their Persecutors to maintain whatsoever they had
professed, and to confirm it with the loss of their life's; rather then the
light of the Gospel should by their inconstancy become darkened: or the least
derogation to his glory who was the Author of it, should be by their fainting
or backsliding occasioned. These found them Refuges in Caves and Holes of
Rocks; and in these Recluses were they comforted: for in these they devoutly
meditated of those holes of the Spiritual Rock, Christ Jesus, in whom amidst
all their persecutions they found incomparable solace.

And now poor Pilgrim, with penitent Peter look upon thy relinquished Master!
what have thou suffered for him, that thou may lawfully challenge any part in
him: or any privilege by him? The Kingdom of Heaven thou have heard must be
for those that suffer: Thou should then either in act or heart be a Martyr.
Ways of softness and delicacy lead slowly to the Gate of glory. It is true,
too true; Thou have not sticked to suffer hunger, and thirst, and nakedness;
nay, all all those extremes which any worldling could suffer; but to what end
were all these? were they not to enrich thy Co^^ers: or advance thee to
immerited honors? Did these sour and heavy taskes bear in their forehead any
semblance of goodness? Were they suffered for righteousness sake? No; no; but
for self-love sake. For pray thee, did thou ever hear Gods name reviled;
the Gospel slandered; the Professors of it disgraced; and in the presence of an
imperious but an impious wretch, stood in defense of it? Have thou at any time
out of the zeal thou bear to Gods honor, opposed the malicious fury of a
powerful Persecutor? Have thou fled from City to City in defense of Gods
quarrel: or with a pious resolution fought his battle? Many presidents, and
those of great personages were recommended to thee; who bore themselves such
noble Chie^etaines in this kind, as to promote his glory whom they loved, they
hasted to death, as it had been to a Banqu^t: Honors, friends, fortunes these
relinquished, for their best friends sake, to whose sweet spousall love, they
were solely affianced.

O my heavenly Spouse, less I cannot be the^ ashamed, to hear such constant.
Champions fighting; such faithful Work men laboring; and then consider with
my self, how I have been ever sporting and loitering. O thou who have taught
me how to ^ight, teach me likewise to overcome: that suffering for
righteousness sake, or retaining in me a desire of suffering, of a Champion
on Earth, I may become a Citizen in the Kingdom of Heaven.

CHAP. 48.
How seven Guests, under color of lodging with him, sought his undoing.
MAny instead of Turtles, have received Snakes into their bosoms. And such was
my unfortunate condition. For upon a time sitting in my Summer Arbor, safe as
I thought, from the encounter of any open enemy, or secret danger: even there,
where my private repose promised me no less then a secure and untroubled
rest; suddenly there appeared before me Seven strangers; who complaining how
they had lost their way, humbly besought me to bestow upon them one nights
lodging: and that with a grateful acknowledgement of so free a courtesy, they
would depart early from me the next morning. I must confess this their sudden
approach, did at first not a little amaze me, wondering much how these could
find access unto me, seeing as I remembered, I had shut the doors of my
Garden, that none might disturb me. But even civility exacting an answer from
me; having first fully taken notice and survey of them; I in this manner
addressed my self unto them.

Gentlemen, (for you seem no less by your habits nor demeanures) though my
privacy has seldom known the condition of hospitality; yet being strangers,
as you profess your selves to be, I should hold it an act of great incivility
not to entertain you. One night shall not break square amongst us: I shall
accommodate you with lodgings, though it may be not according to your ranks or
qualities, for I am a stranger to you, yet in such manner as I have good hope
one nights stay will not tire you.

With which Answer being well pleased, I left mine Arbor, and took them in
with me; preparing such things for them as might refresh them, for they seemed
weary.

Desiring then much to hear what news those Countries afforded, wherein these
Strangers seemed very lately to have resided: and withal longing much to be
acquainted with their several Dialects, as likewise to dive into their
dispositions, which I must ingenuously confess, appeared to me so different;
that though they pretended to be of one Nation, yet both their Language,
quality, and habit seemed much to evince them, I took occasion to call them
aside, purposely to converse with them severally; little doubting how these
strangers came, rather to undermine me, then lodge with me, as you shall
hereafter understand more fully.

CHAP. 49.
Pride*
THe very first with whom I took occasion to discourse, appeared to me at the
first sight a very complete Gallant; and of a proper winning personage: neat
was his dress; perfumed and curiously dishevelled his hair; with a long
amorous lock hanging down his shoulder; the twirling whereof me thought gave
an infinite grace to his discourse. I made bold to ask of him, where he was
borne, and in what parts he had most remained. For his birth he told me the
very Angels would inform me: for howsoever some might imagine that in regard
of his familiar discourse and converse with men, he had received his birth and
parentage from them: yet he came from an higher stock: and that it was
impossible for him to remember his descent without reserving of an Angelicke
state. This I must confess made me hold him in more reverence then all the
rest of my Guests: for his curiosity in diet, lodgi^g, and whatsoever might
accommodate him did so properly become him, as his fellow Travelers seemed but
home-spunne Country Swains unto him. And to answer me in whatsoever I
demanded of him, touching the place of his abode; he told me that upon his
first coming into this lower world, he planted first near that glorious City
Babylon; where by his instructions he made the common people there such
proficients, as leaving their former rudeness, they betook themselves to such
niceness and neatness, as they would rather neglect their trade, then not
observe the fashion of the time. But to have seen what a princely port the
better sort retained, would have moved the passengers greedy eye sooner to
admire it, then unseene to believe it, But to remain in one place still, were
it never of so beauteous a site, or precious in magnificence of state, was the
least of his thought: for he told me, that his Commission was more General:
being enjoined by his Superior to put in practice such directions in every
City, Burrow, Corporation, or Village, as might win the hearts of all such
inhabitants unto his Prince: and by that means enlarge his kingdom. Wherewith
drawing forth a long scroule, he showed unto me a Brief of all such
directions as were prescribed him: with a relation of such places and persons
by whom he was best entertained. What Countries he had brought in and gained:
how far his Master Seignory was enlarged, with diverse other particular
remonstrances; the discovery whereof so much delighted me, as I desired nothing
more then with more freedom to enjoy his company: resolving to importune his
stay some longer time with me: and to my request he inclined readily. Albeit
he told me, that during his sojourne with me, he might sometimes of
necessity crave my pardon to resort to diverse of his Masters especial
Customers, as Painters, Persumers, Periwig-makers, with other commodious Ingles
for the Tyre-house of sin; to the end they might keep their hands in ure,
and their brains aworke, to shape a Coat for the Moon, and bring the world
into a new fashion. And to the end he might do me a courtesy for my late
hospitality; he so strangely madded me with the thought of bravery, as I
became wholly his, cheerfully embracing whatsoever he commanded me: for
within short time I became such a Vassal to him, as I thought any service well
bestowed that I could do unto him*

O my Redeemer, was this to serve under thy Banner? What is there that thou
delightest more in then humility; and was it my duty to entertain pride with
such hospitality? No, Lord, no. Thou became humbled, that I might be exalted;
and shall I exalt my self, to leave thee dishonored? O my Redeemer, expel
from me the Spirit of pride, and propitiously grant unto me the treasure of
true humility. O give me a full sight of my infirmities, that in the sight and
shame of them I may conclude, Why art thou proud, O dust and ashes? O, as in
this so in all other virtues, as I am thine by creation, and condition, so may
I be thine in affection and imitation.

CHAP. 50.
Covetousness.
HAving now grown into such familiarity with this neat Guest, whom in regard
of his choice discourse and spruce dress I preferred before all the rest;
nothing delighted me more freely then the enjoyment of his Company: yet
desiring to enter into conference with those that consorted with him: The very
next day, I took occasion to talk with another of my Guests: one, who as I
formerly observed, was so unlike the former in his condition, as he seemed not
to be one of the same Country or Nation. For asking of him the place of his
Birth and Country, he answered me bluntly, that for his birth, he grew
forth of Achans wedge: and for his Country, as he was a Tyrian: but ^aving now
left that depopulated City, every place was now his Country. For his
appa^ell, it was so carelessly put on, as if either he were weary of it, or it
of him* I imagined him at the first sight to be Male-contens: for with foulded
arms and dejected ^yes, poring still upon the ground; he appeared as one who
had rather be buried in it, then live above it. So as coming to him, and
desiring to know the ground of his discontent: in an heavy and s^llen manner
he answered me, Because he could not be content. Not content, said I* why
what would you have? whatsoever, said he, others have. Then replied I, you
would others to have nothing. That were nothing to me, said he, so I might
have all things. This at first seemed to me a strange humor: yet within short
time by his advice I begun to labor of the same distemper. I held it a brave
thing to be rich, for I understood how wealth had so taken up the opinion of
the world, that a rich man, lived he never so wretchlesly, yet after his death,
it would be said of him: He dyed a good man! I considered too, how by this
means one might be provided of rend^ing a courtesy to his friend, and taking
revenge upon his foe. Yet for the former of these, my sage Guest told me, that
the way to thrive was not to be giving, but receiving: and to ^^count him the
best friend, who was aptest to forget what he had given, or in expecting what
he should receive.

And now by means of those worldly Lectures, which he had by my direction so
gravely, and effectually read unto me, I became such a Proficient in Mammons
School, as those who long time had been nursed and nusled in it, could not
come near me in the Practick part of a Worldling. Though I knew nothing more
precious then time, yet made I small account of the sale of time for the gain
of gold, I begun to dispense with my nights rest: and to weaken nature, by
abridging her relief; choosing rather to starve then impoverish my state. What
others of my Meni^y enjoyed, I, though the Master of the Family, wanted.
Nothing might eat while I slept: mean time, while I slept, I gave way to
strangers to eat up my strength. Thus came my cares to be increased, while my
fortunes multiplied. Yet what comfort found I in these? The richer I grew in
state, the poorer I grew in content. Though I outwardly surfeted, I became
inwardly starved. Thirsty were my desires; ever laboring of most emptiness,
when in reason they might have bin fullest. And yet how I hugged mine own
affliction! Every day I understood how I was nearer and nearer to my
dissolution: and yet still farther and farther from content: I had heard
likewise, how riches would not deliver me in the day of wrath: yet did I
treasure up vengeance against the day of Wrath. I considered how bitter death
would be unto that man that put his trust in his substance: And yet no sooner
came mine old Guest unto me, then his worldly Rhetoric prevailed with me,
driving all other divine considerations quite out of my memory.

Dear Lord, give me grace to leave the love of the world, before I leave the
world; to leave my fancying of it, before I depart from it: that in a pious
contempt of it, I may learn this Lesson of that elect vessel; I have learned
in all things to be contented. So shall my hope be in thee planted; my herrt
on thee ^ixed; and my horn by thee filled.

CHAP. 51.
Lechery.
BY this time I had received sufficient instructions from two of my Guests; how
to thrive in the world: as likewise how to reserve a port or proud posture in
the world. And howsoever Pride and Covetousness seemed to be of different
conditions: and of such dis-consorting humors, as these two never took liking
to any Music, but what was full of discord: yet me thought they agreed well
enough together under my roof: yea, I I bestowed them in the very next lodging
to me, that I might enjoy the benefit of their Company more freely.

But having now broke off my discourse with that Guest of mine; a man wholly
made of earth; and looking aside, I might perceive a fresh youthful Consort
entering the room, where we conversed. By his habit, gate and fashion, I could
scarcely distinguish him, whether he were man or woman. So strangely
effeminate, and to light discourses so affected, as he breathed nothing but
amorous Songs and Sonnets; loose love was the line by which he directed the
whole course of his life. His bosom was farced full of amorous Knights
adventures: His morning Lectures were Boccace and Alcaeus: His evening Anthems
were Ariosto and Reginus. For his person, he was of a promising constitution,
but of pale complexion: a quick piercing eye; a nimble persuasive tongue: and
of such a wooing winning action, as no expression came from him which would not
enforce affection. I must confess, I no sooner saw him, then I found a glowing
heat within me toward him: yea, I begun me thought, to conceive better of
him, then either of the two with whom I had before conversed; so full of
delightful variety was his discourse; so melodious his voice; so
affectionately moving and complete in every part. I desired much to know his
descent and Country: and he resolved me readily; that his first plantation
was near to the banks of that famous River Sybaris* where he erected a School
for love: afterward richly endowed by such eminent proficients as had been
Scholars in it: but desiring much to see foreign Countries, not only to
improve his own knowledge, but observe her commands to whose service he stood
obliged; He coasted along by Paphos, where his Mother, the Soveraignesse of
every loyal Lover, then kept Court: And from thence with merry gale he came
to Cypr^s: and some few months after to renowned Latium. Where he found such
entertainment, as neither care nor cost were awanting to procure his liking. I
importuned him much to hear some of those Lessons which he had formerly
taught: and wherein I desired much to become his Scholar: but small
importunity needed, seeing his own desires were thereto directed: so as,
taking me apart from the rest of the Company, he imparted to me such
directions, as nothing became more pleasing to me then the embraces of folly.
Wanton Pictu^es, light amorous Poems; loose licentious meetings; luscious
Feastings seized so strongly on my deluded fancy; as love became both my Ditty
and Deity. For he advised me to walk by the twilight; and and to engage mine
honor to an Harlot. Thus was I drawn by the cords of vanity; made ^ slave to
sin; an enemy to my own soul; and in the end a byword to the people.

O my beloved what may I answer in defense of my lost honor, woe is me
miserable wretch to lose that without all hope of recovery, which I should have
preserved perpetual^y! O incomparable and inconsolable loss, to loose that
which is not only the loss of all goodness, but the purchase of all
torments! O thou precious treasure of a continent soul, how unhappily am I
robbed of thee? O my soul, my beloved, how art thou now to be loathed! O my
soul, no more my solace, but my anguish! O my dear, how art thou now becoms
my despair! whether art thou fallen? how have thou left me; nay how have thou
reft me of those comforts which I expected from thee? To what a sink of all
filth, and pollution, have thou, O lust of my flesh drawn me? How may I hope
for pardon, in playing so impudently the wanton? Even by thy mediation, my
sweet Savior; O offer up my poor petition unto thy Father, that I may become
thy devout Saint and Servant, who was sometimes a servant to sin in every
member.

CHAP. 52.
Envy.
HAving thus freely enjoyed the conference of these three Guests; in whose
familiarity I took much content. For as the first and third had recommended to
me Rules of State, and motives to pleasure; so had the Second taught me a
thriving way how to cram my Coffers, that I might more fully maintain the port
both ofth' one and the other; holdding my self satisfied in these; I resolved
to enter into treaty with the rest: so as walking one day very early, I chanced
to meet with one, but the unbeseeming'st one of all my Guests, for his
complexion seemed so withered and decayed: his body so meagre and macilent; as
he appeared rather like some Anatomy then any living Creature. This poor
marrow-eaten Wretch I found sighing and making a pitiful moan, as if some
heavy mis-chance had befal^e him: but inquiring the reason of his sorrowing, he
told me that the occasion of his grief proceeded not from any mishappe
falling to himself; but for the happiness he perceived many others lived in.
For to see another field flourish; or his goods to increase and prosper; was
such an eyesore unto him, as nothing could more distemper him. This I
conceived to be a base condition, and such as to humanity had very small
relation. So as, I resolved to quit my house of him; and give him his Pasport:
finding nothing in him but an harsh unsociable humor; rejoicing in nothing
more then the ruin of another, yet desiring to sift him a little further, and
to the bottom, to make trial of his nature; I took first, occasion to demand
of him of what Parents he descended; and in what Coast he first planted? and
he told me, that Iewry was his native Country; and his Parents Jews; with
whom he long time remained near to the Lake Asphaltos. I asked of him what
content he could take in the World, when nothing but the evil success of
others presented him any object of joy in the world? And he answered me, if I
knew what strange content the Envious man apprehended from others misfortunes,
I would prefer that humor before any personal honor: for, said he,
whosoever stands so affected, he cannot want variety of Subjects to minister
to him that content which he desired. I must, indeed, confess, quoth he, that
I am of necessity now and then to encounter with some arguments of discontent;
as I did this very Morning in seeing your Neighbors Pastures so fruitful;
their harvest so hopeful: but for one of these Objects, I shall find an
hundred occasions of content. No place is exempted from me: no person excepted
from playing one part or other in this interlude of folly. O how it joys me
to see a proud ambitious spirit entering lists with his Competitor: where the
one must necessarily fall to advance the other? Honor was their bait, and it
proves their baine. Again, to see a Lovesick amorous Fool put his whole
patrimony on his back, to enamour his light Mistress with a fantastic
Dress: and in the end come home with a repulse: and so like a Child put singer
in the Eye: or laying it to heart, make the loss of her fancy, the Cloze of his
misery. Again, to see a miserable covetous Father scraping up an injurious
estate for a Prodigal Child; who before his Fathers Funeral be solemnized,
takes as much pains how to scatter it, as ever his raking Father did to gather
it. Or to see a base worlding spend himself in sighs and tears for the loss
of his beast; making himself no better by his foolish mourning then that poor
senseless Creature for which he mourned. To see wisemen lament for the death
of their Children; as if death were some new thing: or that there were no hope
after Death. To see a confident Client fail in his Su^te; or an Earth-worme
stripped of his estate. And is not this brave sport for an envious spirit.

This I considered, and methought I begun to be taken with the pleasure of it.
The report of others welfare became distasteful to me; their misfortunes
cheerful news unto me. Others Weal became my Woe, others Woe my Weal.

O my redeemer, thou who art perfect charity, remove from me the rust of envy.
Too long has this ^anker eat^n me. O let me neither do nor wish that unto
anther, which I would not have done nor wished to my self. O make me such an
enemy to this Sin, as I may live in love; yea rather cease to live, then
surcease to love thee for thy self, my Neighbor for thy sake.

CHAP. 53.
Gluttony.
NO sooner had I dismissed this starveling; then I encountered another clear of
another temper: plumpe he was and well-liking; one who cared not much what
arrow of Gods judgment were shot, so famine were left out. He told me, he had
been a professor of Philosophy in the Epicures Academy. How he was by nation a
Sidonian, and descended from the Vitellian family. Albeit, in the manner of his
discourse, he discovered no great arguments of a Scholar; being of a dull and
clodded fancy: and of apprehension slow and heavy. His providence merely
consisted in purveyance for the belly. Wherein he observed such delicacie; as
he scorned much to sit at that Table which was not stored with all Variety. I
told him Strangers were not to be so curious; but rather contented with
whasoever was for the present provided. Wherewith seeming a little moved; Sir,
said he, I am neither so wanting in friends nor fortunes, as I need rely upon
reversions. I have thus long lived and fed deliciously, making my Belly my
Deity. And if you knew what delight there were in a luscious Tooth, and what
pleasure in full Dishes; what strength they afford to nature: and how they
infuse into the Blood a fresh reviving vigor, I am persuaded you would
prefer this delight before any other pleasure.

Sir, answered I, take me not up so shortly; I was never yet known such a
niggard; as for sparing a little trash to starve my Belly. Others through their
misery may stand indebted to it, but for my part I will rather choose to
abridge mine Inventorie, then be so taxed by it.

But by your favor I must tell you what I have heard; that Surfets kill more
then the Sword. How he who makes a God of his Belly, surfets in the delight of
such a dainty Deity. And I have sometimes read Lessius his practice in
Physic. How, when Nature grew so weak in him, as there was no hope of
recovering him: and that his Physicians had left him: yet by prescribing
himself a strict Diet, and by duly observing what he had prescribed; he even
in his declining age became youthful; in his recreations fresh and cheerful:
and even to his death strong and healthful.

And yet he for all this died (said my delicious Guest) and tell me then what
did his rules of Physic, avail him? Go to, Sir, he that lives Physically,
lives miserably; let us cramme and feed our selves fat while we live; satisfy
our desires in what we love. So long as we live in the World, let us enjoy
with all freedom, the pleasures of the World. Ab^linence suites better with an
hermitage then a Palace.

Take so much pains one day as go into a Monastery; and what will you find
there, but, as Climacus observes, Breathing Coarses? their spirits wasted;
their radical mo^st^re with their Lampe-oyle consumed; nothing left to present
the resemblance of men, save only bare Sceletons, or fleshlesse Images of men;
and these so useless for Earth, as their sole devotions and desig^es are for
Heaven. But leaving these, if you please but to take a turn or two in our
Epicureall Cloisters: you shall find Creatures of a fresh and flourishing
vigor; of a strong and sinnowy temper: and such as pro^ise a numerous supply
to people the world; defend the State: and restore nature.

This discourse came with such confidence from him, as I had no mind to
interrupt him. Yea, his advice wrought such impression on me, as I begun to
loath nothing more then temperance, and to love nothing better then delicacy.
Thus begun I to loose the hopes of a better life, for enjoying the delights of
this present life. O where was my reason to suster my self to be deprived of
joy eternally, for the pleasures of sin so frail, deceitful and transitory.

O my dear Lord, let me now at last look toward Canaan, and leave these
slesh pots of Egypt. O suffer not my heart to be laden with surfeting and
drunkenness: but arm me with moderation and temperance. I know well Lord,
how thou for my sake were it afflicted with poverty; and shall I in contempt of
thee be affected to delicacy? Nay, Lord; I will choose rather to perish with
hunger, then by my excess occasion thy dishonor. O be it my desire d^voutly
to serve thee by subduing of the flesh; that I may reign with thee by
suffering no sin to reign in my flesh.

CHAP. 54.
Wrath.
THe very next I took occasion to talk withal, was the most braving and
imperious Guest that ever any one gave harbor to. For during those few days
wherein he had sojourned with me, he begun to keep such a quarter, as if
the whole house had been at his command. Not a servant but shook and
shudder'd whenever he came in presence. So teechie and froward was his
humor, that all things seemed in his judgment out of order. Thus did my whole
family suffer through his fury. So as indeed, I had a great desire to quit my
house of him: for daily did mine ears glow with complaints against him. No
servant would stay with me so long as he remained with me. All things grew
out of joint; all things out of square. And now having resolved to put in
speedy execution what I had intended; I took the opportunity to acquaint him
with my mind. But when I had told him, how my whole family grew weary of him:
and that I might of necessity keep my house alone, if I rid not my doors of
him: He fell into such a furious passion, as I feared much he would have
offered some violence to me: but as good fortune was, his fury resolved it
self into words: which were delivered in that braving and domineering manner;
as me thought I begun to take affection to that humor. For he told me, and
that in such a scornful way, as not a word came from him but it breathed
contempt, or threatened a mischief, that if I thought he was beholden to me
for my entertainment, I was much deceived: for he held my entertainment so
unworthy of him, as I might hold my self sufficiently contented that he would
accept of it. But Sir, said he I must tell you, I cannot choose but smile at
your folly; to see you thus overaw'd and baffall'd by your own family. Your
indiscreet patience, if you quicken not your temper, will ere it be long, make
you a Servant of a Master: and by their malepertnesse bring your command into a
bondage.

Your Neighbors too, they observe the quietness of your disposition; and they
play upon your easiness. For shame, be of sharper metal. Make your Servants
tremble when they hear you: and enforce that commanding awe to your
inferiors, that as if they heard thunder, they may bless themselves, when
they come near you. Impunity opens a passage to all impiety; if any commended
or committed to your charge shall but lightly offend; yet you must not be too
indulgent in rendering a pardon. I hold it far better, and for your state or
condition fitter, never to debate the cause with mildness, for that tastes of
too much softness, but to strike before you speak; to season your reproof
with correction, which will beget in you a reverence, and in them more
subjection. This that Roman Vedius could do bravely; and in such an imperious
sort exercise his Sovereignty: as his very beck was a word of command to all
his family. And this while I was in Thebes (for I am a Theban borne) did I
constantly practice; and that not only over such as I might command: but over
such too, whose spirits I found so ready to veil to one of my quality; as I
made them no less subject to my uncontrouled will, then if they had been of
my own family. For during my reside in that famous City, none but I raised
that fearful fraternall emnity betwixt Eteocles and Polynices: which
unnatural contest (so strongly had my fury wrought upon their spirits) could
receive no end, but in one another blood. Neither was it my humor to be
confined: for I had dreamed a little before my departure thence, how with
unfortunate Hecuba, I was conceived with a firebrand, and that it could not
be quenched but in the blood of many nations. Neither did that ominous Dream
of mine prove false: for though with Cassandra's prophecy, it would not be
believed, the fatal disasters of many flourishing Estates have before this
time confirmed it. For to omit the subversion of many ancient Empires; whose
memory now sleeps in dust, I appeal even to your self, by whose means those
ruins were occasioned, and that lately amongst our Free States? By whose
agency those fearful and fatal divisions sprung up in Calidore: where
Religion made the pretense, but innovation of government plotted the ground.
And who became the manager of those disloyal attempts but my self? If then
your desire be, to be one of note or fame in the world; observe my directions,
admit of no reconciled foe into the list of your discourse. And if at any time
you have received an injury, be it public or private: if he be your
inferior, or subject to your power, squeaze him: nippe him I say, so ith'head,
as you may prevent him of all future hope of rising: but if he be your
Superior, and you not able to vye with him in power, over-vye him in policy;
faune on him; yet still carry a stone in your bosom; watch some opportunity
wherein you may surprise him: but be sure when you once have him in your
claws, to crush him. What matter makes it, though the jeering Lyricke call
anger a short madness; he is in my opinion most mad, that is least angry: for
a mild Master corrupts a family. Now, I would have you to skrue your passion to
an higher pin. Anger is of too short continuance, it is not for your honor:
give harbor then to Wrath, for that is an inveterate anger. This will make you
so terrible to your foes; as you shall easily work your own ends, by thriving
there best, where you are feared most.

This Discourse, though at first it distas^ed me; for how could it sound well
in the ear of reason, to hear one break forth into the immerited praise of
an immoderate passion? yet the conceit of revenge wrought so strongly on my
affection, that howsoever I opposed the premises, I approved well of his
Conclusion.

O Lord terrible and just, what would become of me, if thou should have my
sins in thy remembrance, or should punish me in thy wrathful displeasure?
and yet bear I a malicious heart to my Brother. He many times with many
tears has besought my pardon: yet would not all these work in me any remorse
or compassion. O look down upon me with the eye of thy mercy; remove from
me the spirit of fury; and arm me with the shield of patience and lenity. I
know, Lord, thou have commanded us not to suffer the Sun to go down upon
our wrath; and yet many Suns, nay many seasons have gone down on my wrath. I
slept securely, while wrath encompassed my bed: and revenge lay a pillow for my
head. O thou mild Lamb, imprint the memory of thy example in the Tablet of
mine heart; make me to love mine enemy; and with a wise Virgin Lamp fed with
the oil of charity, follow thee my sweet Spouse^ unto the heavenly City.

CHAP. 55.
Sloth.
But amongst all others, who had liberally partak't of my bounty; there was
one, who so little deserved it, that in a careless security, as one
respectlesse of any courtesy, he would all the day long take his rest; and
scarcely rise without much ado to take his necessary repast. And one day I
chanced to find him, when all his Companions were addressing themselves to one
exercise or another, turning or rather rolling himself in his bed, like a
door upon the hinges. So as, I begun to take him under hand, and to reprove
him; bidding to shake off Sloth for shame, and prepare himself for some
task: lest in time he might incur Margites censure, who, because he neither
dug, plowed, nor did any good thing all his time, was not only barred all
civil society living; but was not admitted to have his ashes deposited in the
Vrne of his Ancestors, dying. I desired to know further of him what content he
could take in grovelling after that manner in his bed of security, while every
creature according to his rank or quality, discovered some token of their
industry. And in a sluggish manner he told me; how there was none, but at one
time or other he might thrive, provided that he kept his shop; Now, what did
any one know but that it was his Calling to make his shop his bed: Neither was
he (as h^e impudently pretented) unimployed, when he seemed for rest most
addicted. For that very morning, and no longer since, he told me that he
kept his bed, not so much for his own ease, as for composing a maine
difference which two noble Ladies had referred to him. For there had lately
appeared to him two brave women attired in princely habit, who contended much
for superiority: and the names of these two Ladies were Euphuia and Argia. Now
these, after such time as they had appeared before him, discovered both their
Descents and Callings. For Euphuia* as she proved her self descended from an
industrious family; so she showed her self a true daughter, for she was
wonderfully given to industry. Whereas Argia was clear of another humor: for
nothing suited better with her disposition, then to do nothing. These two,
accordingly as they stood severally affected, brake forth into commendations of
what their natures stood most inclined to. Euph^ia affirmed that nothing
improved any ones private estate or country more then Industry. The other,
with no less confidence spoke all she could in praise of privacy, and a sleepy
kind of security; saying, how that was well got, that was got in a warm bed:
and that Timandra purchased as much pleasure in the embrace of her friend, as
ever Thalestris did in the discomfiture of her Foe. The other, to advance the
honor of Arms with all other honest manual employments, with much moderation
reproved her frowardness; telling her, that she did but all this to show her
wit: for else she would spend no breath in commending Sloth, which was the
death of a living soul. But said he, so strangely did the^e two cloze in the
knitting up of their arguments, as with mutual consent, the difference was
referred to me* Now, I am here consulting with my pillow, to whether of these
two I should give the pre-eminence. Nor, do I intend to rise, till I have
composed the difference. Thus did my lazy Guest play the eas^e Arbitrator,
desiring rather a nappe in a corner, then discharge the part of a Moderator: So
as, I might easily conjecture, to what side he inclined most, by his
averseness from labor. And, indeed, I must freely confess, I begun not
altogether to dislike his humor. For when he had more fully acquainted me
with the quality of his condition: how and in what manner he had ever lived;
how he had shunned all public employments: desiring rather a Writ of ease,
then to dis-ease his own quiet for another good. Again, what a madness it
was, to toil or turmoile ones self in the world; to have a sickle in another
corn; or to have an oar in every ones boat? To be accounted a wise and
subtle Commissioner; and so spend his spirits about a fruitless or
thankelesse labor? To play the carking Husband, in gathering for a progeny of
hopeless Rake-hels? To afflict himself in the hoording up of that; which is
got with pain and toil, kept with care, and fear, and lost with pangs and
grief? No, no; said he, let the world wagge, so I may enjoy my rest; draw my
Curtains close; take my morning nappe; let the Husbandman meet with a Snake in
the way; Let the thirsty worldling play the Mole, dig and delve; I shall
rather pity his folly, then envy his happiness.

This humor, the more I observed it, the more I affected it. So as I begun
to imitate my Guest, and to sing the Sluggards Lullabe, with yet a little, and
then a little. And though poverty came so upon me, yet the enjoyment of a
little Summer made me forgetful of an ensuing Winter. An hundred excuses would
I mould, purposely to sleep securely: and free my self of all business, though
it did never so nearely concern me. Either there was an Adder in the way; or
the weather was unseasonable; or some indisposition to health, enjoined me to
keep my bed. Thus did my delicacy bring me to security; which howsoever I
flattered my self, was so far divided from me: as in the end I found my
perplexed estate ever to danger most engaged, where weakness of opinion
dreamed to me, that I was most secured.

O my Lord, thou who art that heavenly Husbandman, that desire nothing more
then Laborers in thine Harvest; and art ready to pay every Workman his penny,
though he have but labored one hour in thy Vineyard. Thou, who can not
abide that any one should look back from the Plough, or do thy work
negligently; Convert my sleepy and sluggish humor into a spiritual fervor.
My too long security into a careful practice of piety. That though my outward
man, be but slime, my inward man may be a professed enemy to sloth. O grant me
so to bestow the remainder of my time in faithful laboring; that though I
have not felt the heat of the day; nay, though I have scarcely labored one
hour in thy Vineyard, I may now receive my penny in the Evening.

CHAP. 56.
How by their treacherous assault, his Cinque ports, became endangered.
THus, thus became I poor Pilgrim assaulted; thus became I foiled. But why do
I inveigh against their treachery, I became to my self the most treacherous
Enemy? For by yielding my ^ort^ to the spirit of Pride, my Luciferian glory
grew darkened. By entertaining Covetousness my former content vanished. By
cherishing Luxury, both mine in ward and outward faculties were disabled. By
feeding Envy, it became a feeder of me, and so my spirits became wasted. By
cockering Gluttony, my spiritual infirmities were strengthened. By harboring
Wrath, charity the choicest comfort of Christian society was banished. By
fostering Sloth, out of my great Masters check-roule, became my name to be
razed. Neither were these unthankful Guests so contented; for by their
treacherous attempts, became my Cinque ports endangered. So as, those darlings
of mine which had they been loyally affected, should have been my assistants,
proved to be my private A^^acinates. Not one of them but they failed in
performing those due offices to which they were deputed. My eye, Bern. Med. 14.
indeed, knew how to look, but by wandering it corrupted my understanding with
the thought of lust. My ear knew how to hear, but by hearing amiss it
distracted the intention of mine heart. My nostrils knew how to smell, but by
rejecting those flowers of divine sweetness, I begun to snuff up the wind
with the wild Ass in the wilderness. My touch knew how to perform her
office, but by touching unclean things, or by using clean things uncleanely,
that sense became slaved to all sensuality. My mouth became an open Sepulcher;
mine Heart sins Harbor. Thus fares it with the State spiritual, as it does
with the Political; if the Cinque Ports be opened, the State becomes
endangered; lesse^secured, because to Invasion more exposed. What then could
this poor razed Fort of my surprised soul expect but utter ruin, misery and
desolation? Foes wrought on me without: and fears seized on me within. I had
none left to comfort me: for my best comfort I had deservingly estranged from
me; For had I not with Demas left God for the world, I might have had God for
my Friend, and consequently all the creatures of the world. For to leave God,
is to make every creature his foe, which ever God made.

O, was it not enough for thee to have others to betray thee, but thou must
add new strength to their force, by betraying thy self unto thine Enemy?
Had thou tasted so freely of that ever streaming fountain of Gods mercy; and
was it thy duty to recompense his bounty with thy disloyalty? This had been
great inhumaniry even to have shown to the most low and despicable creature:
and could thou find in thine heart, to offer this abuse unto thy Maker? O woe
is me, that I should receive all good things from the Lord, and requite him
with nothing but evil! O that I had pondered these things well in mine heart:
so might I in the day of my trouble have found h^lpe: and received comfort in
the day of wra^h.

O my dear Lord, justly may I complain, and in the bitterness of my soul,
cry out: Sinners have built upon me: nay, they have made deep furrows upon my
back. And there is no health in me because of thine heavy displeasure. O,
though I be a Sinner, be not unmindfull of thy poor creature. Receive me, O
receive me into the arms of thy mercy; while I confess unto thee, who
know the secrets of all thoughts, my iniquity? There is not one sense that
thou have given me, but I will declare unto thee how it has dishonored thee.
O thou Balm of Gilead, heal my wounds, for they are many!

CHAP. 57.
Sight.
Look on me, and pity me, when you shall hear how this sense has deluded
me! And take warning by my Example, that ye suffer not your Dinahs to wander,
lest they lose their honor. This sense which should direct me, did first
intra^ me: for I no sooner beheld, then I was held captive by that which I
beheld. Neither was I altogether senseless of these things: for I understood
how Death entered in by the windows. And yet I would not shut them, but
suffered my mortal enemies to enter in by them. Nor a concupiscence but by
those unguarded portels received admittance. Our Grandham Eve to our shame and
loss, saw that the fruit was pleasant, and she took of the fruit and tasted
of it. This apple remains still in the eye, and must continue an eyesore to
all her posterity. Thus have our Fathers eaten sour grapes, and their
Childrens teeth are set on edge. O how often have I resolved with my self (but
as in all things else, how weak are men's resolves?) to shut these gates against
all temptations: and on that Object never to fix my sight, that might give any
Inlet to sin: or to look on that intentively, which I might not desire
safely. And to strengthen this resolve, I thought upon some wholesome
meditation, the memory whereof I had good hope would keep those lights within
me: and not suffer them to be taken up by any worldly vanity. But no sooner
gave time and place opportunity, then those weak resolves were quite razed:
the thoughts of goodness discarded; piety became a Stranger to me: for
corruption had seized on mine heart, and rendered up her Hold unto the Enemy. O
how happy had I been; had I in my youth repelled those distempered heates
which my wanton eye first infused! But so far was I from repenting of what my
youth had committed: as now my riper years are not ashamed to ^^eine a delight
in the remembrance of what my youth affected. And what more hard to cure, then
an old Ulcer, an aged sore? O ye treacherous Spies, why have ye thus wandered
about to seek my undoing? what gain may ye reap by my perdition? Is there
no end of your fury; nay, of your madding folly? O remember, how for these
beautiful sights which you have presented to me: and wherewith you have
deceived me; ougly and ghastly Spectacles shall torment both you and me. For
you, and none but you, moved me so unjustly to covet my Neighbors field,
because it was fruitful. And to hunt after the strange woman, because she was
beautiful. Your Presentiments made me in all things sensual. Thus by bitter
experience have I found how by the Co^ntenance piety became hindered; by the
eyes, chastity became harmed.

O my dear Savior, look upon me, who have lost my self by looking and
longing after what was unlawful for me. O though I be not worthy by lifting up
mine eyes to Heaven, to pray unto thee: yet am I not unworthy by blinding mine
eyes with tears, to weep before thee. O do not turn away thine eyes from
me! I am wholly lost if thou despise me; but I shall renew as the feathers of
an Eagle, if thou vouchsafe but to look upon me. O may my delight be in thy
Law; my Object thy Cross; my conscience my feast; Righteousness my Crown.

CHAP. 58.
Hearing.
Would any one think, that man the noblest of Gods creatures; nay, to whom
he has given dominion over all his creatures; man, I say, endued with a
reasonable soul, should make that sense which was given him for edification,
the instrument of his perdition? And yet behold the Man, with a sense
accompanying and corrupting Man! Faith comes by Hearing; And yet how have I
broken my faith by Hearing? I had sometimes vowed, though not my self, yet by
such as undertook for me, that I would forsake the Devil and his Works,
with the pomps and vanities of the flesh; but where was my performance? Have I
not defamed my Neighbor; or heard him defamed? And what have I answered for
him? nay, have I not delighted in hearing him defamed, or enlarged his disgrace
with some new reproach? Have I entered Gods Temple, the House of the most High,
with a sanctified ear? Nay, have I not come thither rather to traduce, then
usefully hear? Have I not labored to catch at this doctrine? Or admit I came
there with an Heart prepared for devotion: and with an ear ready to receive
instruction: did not the Eye practice with the Heart to surprise the Ear: and
by that means decline it from doing what it intended; by giving ear to that
which might distract it? Nay, let me come a little nearer thee, thou loose,
dissolute and unprepared Ear. Have thou heard so much as a Psalm in the
Church without distraction? Did not those sweet airs of spiritual devotion so
far transport thee; that thou gave better ear to the note how sweetly it
was sung, then to the end for which it was sung? Did not take more delight in
the voice then the matter; and by that means in the ear of thy Maker, become
an unfitting Quirister? Did thou not by breaking a Note to please thy fancy,
conceive more content in the melody of the voice, then purity of the heart?
Nay, did not prefer the very measure or composure of it, Bern. Med. 11.
Athan.
before his honor for which it was penned? nay, has* not God spoke unto thee
in a Psalm, and thou unto him; yet did thou consider whose Psalm it was,
Bern: Med. 8.
or for whom it was, when thou did sing it to him?

Again, shall we leave the Church, and go into the world? Tell me, O tell
me, how did thou there employ thine hearing? Did not take infinite delight
in a filthy song? Did not a wanton light tune bring thee to think of thy light
Mistress? or did it not suggest to thee some loose thoughts provoking fancy:
or some other heavy melancholy thoughts egging thee on to some desperate act
of revenge or fury? O yes! Thus did thou employ it; and thus did thou
perish by it. How then should thou come to be instructed, having been by
thy best instructing sense, thus woefully distracted?

By thee, my blessed Master, d^e I hope to be instructed: that the follies of
my youth may be at last reformed. O sanctify the Ear of mine heart, that I
may turn it away from vanity; turn it wholly unto piety. O let me be no
such Hearer as is the deaf Adder, which stops her ears, charm the Charmer
never so wisely. O let me be none of those, who will not hear, because they
would not understand; nor of those who hear, but will not understand; nor of
those who hear, but will not observe what they both hear and understand: but
give me an humble Ear to hear, and a conceiving heart to understand what I
hear, that hearing humbly, understanding fully, and practicing faithfully, I
may sing alleluia to thee in the Kingdom of glory.

CHAP. 59.
Smell.
MVst that fresh and fragrant Garden of all divine graces; with all those
precious odours of Christian virtues and holy duties be abandoned: those
saintly examples of devout and religious men be neglected; and instead of
these must those hateful weeds of vices be cherished; which, were they
disposed of as they deserve, are for no other use then to be thrown over the
wall of Gods Seed-plot, or to be burned? Must that enclosed Garden, I say,
embrodered and beautified with all spiritual flowers be plowed up by wild
beasts of the Forest? Must those red Roses of charity, those white Lillies of
chastity, those sweet violets of humility lose their beauty? Have those
constant Martyrs, chaste Virgins, and humble Confessors deserved no reverence,
nor imitation from thee? Must their memory sleep in the dust, and have no
followers after death? O consider, how all these deceiving pleasures of this
world, are but like Beane-flowers; when you are far from them; they smell
sweet unto you; but when you draw near them, they distaste you. The pleasures
of sin ever cloze with an heavy surfeit. But return unto thy self, and see
how thou have employed this sense! It is but a little one, and yet it has an
Office to attend; which neglected, it must be accountable and receive due
punishment. Come then, and tell me what thou have done! Have thou followed thy
sweet Savior in the smell of his sweet ointments? Have thou followed him,
though a far off, to his Cross? Have thou sought to be embalmed with his
odours? Have thou lived as he prescribed: or loved that which he professed? O
no; thou in the Garden slept, while he prayed; Thou in the Hall stood warming
thy self, while he was condemned; thou scarcely durst approach the Mount
where he suffered: and was this to follow him in the smell of his sweet
ointments, and in his sufferings to be comforted? His blessed life was as a
bundle of myrrh; the whole course of his conversation, a spiritual
confection. Every action, our instruction. And how were thy feet prepared to
follow him? O slowly, too too slowly: Thou had either a Father to bury; or a
Wife to marry; or a yoke of oxen to try; or a Farm to buy. Some excuse or
other must be pretended; long may his Feast be prepared, and often may thou
be invited, before thou be ready to come unto it; and when thou come,
twenty to one, thou art excluded, because thou have not on thy wedding garment,
without which never look to be entertained. O but tell me, what was it that
first hindered thee to follow the savor of his sweet ointments, who so truly
loved thee, as he gave himself up unto death, to save thee? O it was the smell
of worldly gain that divided thee from him; or the love of honor or pleasure
that made thee a stranger to him. O who then will bring thee to him, seeing
what he hated most, divorced thee from him!

O none but thy self, dear Savior; O draw me after thee, and I will follow
thee. O too much hold has the present world had in me: the cares whereof took
me quite from thee. Let it henceforth have no interest in me, that I may be
wholly possessed of thee: O inflame mine heart with a love of thee, that I may
live with thee: for live I cannot, unless I enjoy thee. And since I cannot
live here, and see thee; let me dye, that I may see thee.

CHAP. 60.
Taste.
A Dams posterity had been blessed, had he only seen the fruit, and never
tasted. O how sweet is the taste of sin to the palate; but how cold in the
stomach? Though it show a cheerful welcome, it ever leaves us with a sad
farewell. Thou have had a free and full taste of this, unhappy Pilgrim, in
preferring a mess of pottage before an inheritance. In feeding so greedily on
the Husks of vanity; and preferring them before those wholesome Viands in thy
fathers family. Yet what were all these compared to those spiritual dainties,
that incorruptible food, but as chafe to wheat, branne to bread, Onions and
Garlic of Egypt to the heavenly Manna? yet behold my misery! Though daily
observed how the world was full of troubles, perplexities, tumults and
confusions: how such only had the be^ part in it, who had the lea^ to do in
it: how the Great One had ever some Corrivall to oppose him: the little one had
foam Great One to crush him. How honor, like Hamans halter, brought the
unhappy Enjoyer of it unto ruin. How Greatness pretending privilege for
guiltiness, brought the Land to mourning. How there was nothing in the world
but shouldring one another; laboring to advance themselves even by their
nearest friends dishonor. How the world was an empty Sponge; outwardly
flourishing: fruitlesly promising; rarely prospering. How it was wholly set on
mischief: and how there was none that did good, no not one. How there was a
world of men: but a wilderness of good men. How many times virtue bare vices
livery: While vice became so innocently clothed, as it past current for down
right honesty. Yet though I say, I considered these things; I never treasured
them in mine heart. I went along with the multitude: for my taste, it was so
inured to sin, as I took most delight in that which impoysoned my soul. My
liquorish taste, my luscious tooth brought me to fare deliciously with the
rich Glutton: and to carouse deeply in Balthasars cups. I feared no more the
deluge of sin, then those before the Flood did that deluge of waters before
it came. O consider then, thou ungracious sense, seeing every one must be
punished, wherein he has been delighted, what shall thy portion be in the Lake,
where every impenitent sinner is to receive the wages of his misspent life?
Woe is me, who will deliver me, or take thee off from accusing me?

Even thou, my gracious Redeemer; who, as thou have discovered to me how
bitter the world is; wilt bring me to taste and see how sweet the Lord is. O
lead me forth to thy green pastures, near those Rivers of sweet waters,
where I may taste of the fullness of thy pleasures, and drink of those
heavenly waters for evermore.

CHAP. 61.
Touch.
SOme things were not to be touched for their exceeding sanctity and holiness:
other things were not to be touched for their impurity and uncleanness. The
Arc was not to be be touched, because of its holiness: and Pitch is not to
be touched because of its uncleanness. Evil conversation is a spiritual
infection. There be sundry evil^ concupiscences, which though they touch not
the outward faculties of the body, yet they touch the very life and well-being
of the Soul. Which though they wound, yet are the wounds to a worldling so
infinitely pleasing, as nothing delights him more then to be wounded: nothing
displeases him more then to be cured. The fish Torpedo is the very Emblem of
the world. She is ever sure to take him, by whom she is taken. Some things we
shall every where meet withal, which for their pollution bear in their
forehead this Prohibition: Look not, taste not, touch not, handle not. Least
the eye of the soul become blemished; the whole inward man infected; the
powers or faculties of the intellectual part wholly disordered. But how have
thou, poor miserable Pilgrim, observed this Lesson? How have thou employed
this peculiar sense, but to satisfy thy concupiscence? Easy it was for any
one, if they touched thee never so gently, to move thee to passion. but not so
easy it was for any object of charity to touch thy bowels of compassion. Long
might poor sick Lazarus lie at thy Gate, before thou were touched with
remorse, or moved with pity to relieve him. Long might that wayfaring man lie
wounded by the way side, before thou were it touched, as that tender hearted
Samaritan was, to minister least comfort to him. O how insensible were it thou
of poor Joseph's misery! but how quickly touched at the least smart which fame
or fortune might dart on thee! nor was it any wonder, thou insensate sense,
that thou should grow thus obdurate; seeing thy Chambering and Wantonness,
spiritual Fornication and Drunkenness; thy trampling of Gods word under feet;
thy murmuring and discontent in every estate; thy partial and corrupt love to
thy self, made thee wholly forgetful of all others but thy self. Mean time,
thou little knew how thou were it thine own Enemy; in not seeking to cure that
mortal infirmity: which by process of time became so much more incurable, as
thou of thine own malady were it grown insensible. For, howfoever they seemed
to cherish thee, and so delude thee, these were Ismalites, thy mortal enemies,
who sported with thee. Thus have I loosely rioted, and fearfully transgressed
in the abuse of every sense: and by obeying the lusts of the flesh, hatefully
sinned against mine own own soul.

Dear Lord, thou who breathest the spirit of life into every living soul; and
from whom if thou take away thy breath, they dye. Breath into my soul new
affections; rectify my disordered and mis-employed Senses. O give unto me,
thou invisible light, such a sight as may see thee. Create in me a new smell, O
thou breath of life, that I may run after thee in the smell of thy sweet
ointments cheerfully. Heal thou my taste that I may taste, know and discern
how great is the multitude of thy sweetness, O Lord, which thou have laid up
in thy heavenly Treasury, for those who are full of thy charity. Sanctify thou
mine ear, that it may be edified by thee: and so direct it, that my heart may
be inflamed by it, to the practice of piety. Quicken my touch, with compassion
to thy little ones: and so order every Sense that they may perform their proper
offices to the good both of my soul and body: making it ever their absolutest
aim to promote thy glory.

CHAP. 62.
Being thus encompassed with danger, he prepares himself for prayer.
What Sanctuary have I now to retire to: or what Refuge may I fly to, when I
have nothing within me, but practices rather to betray me then free me:
nothing without me, that may any way avail me, now when dangers of all
sorts, and on all sides thus encompasse me? Omy good God, I have one in
readiness, for thou have prepared it for me; and by it shall I in due time
receive comfort from thee. The direction is short and sovereign If any be
afflicted, Iam. 5.
let him pray; and if he be merry, let him sing Psalms. I am afflicted, Lord;
I am inwardly afflicted. I will therefore take the wings of the morning, and
fly with the Dove, till I may find some resting place for the soale of my foot:
till I may bring an Olive Branch in my bill, and so bring glad tidings to my
poor Soul, that the floods of waters are returned back: which have not only
for many days, but many years encompassed me. Those bitter waters of Marah;
those swelling floods of affiction which have gone over my Soul. In the old
world, when Noah's Arc was builded, and all the inhabitants of the earth to the
number of eight reduced: Genesis 7.
fifteen cubits only did the waters prevail upward, and covered the
Mountains. But the waters of my affliction have mounted higher: they have
bound in my soul; and brought her down to the depths. High time then is it to
fly for succor: lest the water-floods swallow me up^ and the remembrance of
me be no more: I will direct therefore my Prayer unto God; for he is a God
of mercy and all consolation: he will take pity of my affliction; and in his
appointed time rid me of all my fears.

But alas, though I know the way where comfort is to be received, and the
door of the Sanctuary be open to receive me in it: yet so long have I
estranged my self from it: and so unacquainted am I with the exercise of
Prayer, as I know not in what form or manner to make it. For when I look upon
my self, and consider how lukewarm has been my conversation, how earthly my
affection, Bern. Med. 11.
how short and rare my compunction, how my obedience has been without devotion,
my prayer without intention, my reading without edification, my speech without
circumspection; I grow ashamed of my condition: acknowledging nothing to be
due unto me, but reproach and confusion. For when at any time I pray, I mind
not what I pray, nor to whom I pray; how may I then hope for any help from him
to whom I pray, or that my prayer shall be heard by him, Ib. c. 8.
seeing I my self do not hear my self in the prayer, which I make unto him?
The precious stone Diacletes, though it have many rare and excellent properties
in it, yet it loses them all if it be put in a dead man's mouth: So Prayer,
which is the only sovereign pearl and Jewel of a Christian, though it have
many rare and exquisite virtues in it, many promises conferred on it; yet it
loses them every one, if it be put into a man's mouth, or into a man's heart
either, that is dead in sin, and does not knock with a pure heart. For Prayer
without devotion is like the bellowing of Oxen. O where am I then, whose
imaginations have been evil from my youth; whose life has been a sink of
sin; and whose heart has been a stranger to devotion? how and in what manner
may I pray in hope to be heard? how shall I render up my Supplication, that it
may be received? how shall I offer my Sacrifice of thanksgiving, that it may be
accepted?

O my dear Lord, as thou have taught me to pray, so teach me how to pray. Put
sweet incense into the Censor, and that it may burn the better, inflame my
heart with spiritual fervor. Behold, Lord, I fly unto thee, open the door of
thy Sanctuary unto me, that I may enter and offer up my prayer to thee, after
that absolute form of prayer which thou thy self have taught me.

CHAP. 63.
He repeats the Lords prayer; and in every particular he finds himself a great
Offender.
Our Father which art in heaven. -- Oh make a stop here (poor Pilgrim)
before thou go any farther! Have thou a Father in Heaven? where is the duty
thou should tender? Do thou use him like a Father; much less like an
heavenly Father, when thou preferrest the pleasures of sin before his honor?
Hallowed be thy name. -- Oh with what tongue can thou utter hallowed, seeing
his name has been by thee so much dishonored? Thy Kingdom come. -- O shake
and tremble! fearful to thee will be the coming of his Kingdom, seeing
thou by ascribing to thy self what was due unto him, shall be accused of
seeking to rob him of his Kingdom. When the foundation of the earth shall be
shaken; the whole world dissolved: and thou brought forth naked, to be
publicly judged. Thy will be done -- Oh dissembling wretch, do thou pray
that his Will may be done, when thou never yet with thy Will did that which
thou should have done: nor what thou knew well was his Will to be done? In
Earth as it is in Heaven. And yet has it been the least of thy care on Earth,
to do his will, as it is done in heaven. Give us this day our daily bread. --
Oh has he not granted thy suite? has he not strengthened thee with the staff of
bread. But have thou walked in the strength thereof to his honor: or requited
him with an offering of his own, by sowing thy bread upon the waters? And
forgive us our trespasses. -- Oh they are many! many in quantity; heavy in
quallitie: yet as a spark in the Sea, so has he drowned them in the Ocean of
his mercy. As we forgive them that trespass against us. -- O consider well
the particle of this petition! examine thine heart, whether thou have or no
performed the condition. Thou desire but to be forgiven as thou do forgive:
oh forgive then, that thou may be forgiven! ^ew be the areeres which thou
can demand of thy Brother, in comparison of those which are owing by thee to
thy Maker. And lead us not into temptation. And yet thou will not stick to lead
thy self into temptation. He is ready to bestow his grace upon thee; to send
his Holy Spirit to guide thee; to spread his Banner over thee: yet while thou
prayest not to be led into temptation, thou willingly leadest thy self into
that, which thou in thy prayer desire to prevent. But deliver us from evil.
-- Oh how many deliverances has he shown unto thee? How often has he snapped
in pieces the Spear which might have dispatched thee. Broken those Arrows
which might have wounded thee? Taken thy foot out of the snare which had
intrapped thee? Nay, how often have thou gone down even unto the gates of
Hell, and least thou should enter in, he withheld thee? How often have thou
drawn near even to the gates of death, and lest they should take thee in, he
preserved thee? Thus has he delivered thee from all evil: and yet for all
this good which he has done thee, thou have requited him with evil. And now
thou concludest: For thine is the Kingdom, power and glory; for ever and ever,
Amen. Oh how ready thou art here to acknowledge his power, and yet to deny it
in thy life? But confess thou must his power not only with mouth, but heart,
and practice of a good life, if ever thou meanest to partake with him in the
Kingdom of glory.

O my sweet Savior, as thou ^ast taught me by this absolute form of Prayer;
how I am to make my prayer: and have promised (...) grant me my request, if I
(...), that no place may be left for distraction: Here thou have taught how and
in what manner I am to pray, O let me not lose the benefit of it, by losing my
self whe^^ I pray.

CHAP. 64.
He renders a private account of his Faith: and in every article of the Creed,
he finds a fainting, failing, weakness and want.
I Believe in God; the father Almighty, maker of heaven and earth. This first
Article of our Belief was made by Christ's first Apostle Saint Peter. And
herein thou professest that thou believe: But that is not enough; The Devils
do believe and tremble. Thou must not only believe God, but believe in God:
and that he is thy God. Again, thou art not only to believe God; and believe
in God, but solely love God: and wholly live to God. For as we are to believe
with heart unto righteousness; and confess with mouth unto salvation: so are
we to bring forth fruits hereof in an holy and blameless conversation. O how
much have thou failed in the first, what then may we look for at the last?
And in Jesus Christ his only Son our Lord. Of this second Article was Saint
John the Evangelist Author: one, who was right dear in the eyes of his Master,
our blessed Savior: and one, who leaned on his bosom, at his last Supper. And
here thou confessest Jesus Christ, John 13. 23.
the second person in the blessed Trinity, to be the Son of God; and to be
our Lord. But have thou by a contrite heart and regenerate life made him thy
Lord? Thou say, thou do believe in him, but do thou love him in whom thou
believe? And how should thou be less then his Lover; so long as thou
beleev'st him to be thy savior? But where be any Signs of this love? O if thou
did truly love him in who thou believ'st, thou would rather leave to live,
then leave to love him in whom thou believe! Which was conceived by the Holy
Ghost, borne of the Virgin Mary. This third Article S. James the Greater,
composed; whereby thou art taught to believe, all sanctification to be included
in his Conception; all humility in his Nativity. But do thou, as every
Christian should do, seriously consider, for whose sake this Virgin was
conceived; for whose sake thy sweet Savior became so humbled? that the Son of
God should become the son of Man, that the Son of Man might become the son of
God? that the immortal should become mortal? that the mortal might become
immortal? that the living Lord should dye, that the dying man might live? that
the free should become bound, that the bound might become free? that God should
descend from heaven to earth, that he might draw us from earth to heaven? that
God should become humbled; that Man might be exalted? that He should become
poor, that we might be enriched? and reckoned amongst the transgressors, that
we amongst his Saints might be numbered? Have thou, I say, meditated of this;
how he was borne for thee, that thou might be re-borne in him? O I fear thou
have been more ready to partake of this benefit, then by acknowledgeing it, to
be thankful for it! Suffered under Pontius Pilat, was crueified, dead and
buried. This fourth Article Saint Andrew framed: wherein thou see, and
perhaps, admirest the unjust proceedings of a wicked Judge: for thou hear
one, and that an odious and malicious one, pronouncing the sentence of death
upon the Lord of life: and inclining to the voice and vote of the people,
delivering a murdring delinquent, to murder the innocent. Nay, pronouncing a
sentence against his own Conscience: for he washed his hands but not in
innocence. Again, thou hear and beleevest that he was crucified; and yet
it grieves thee not to crucify him afresh with new sins. Thou beleevest that
he died and was buried: and yet thou daily die not to sin, but in sin; and
have now, not three days, but many years lain buried in them. He descended
into hell. This fifth Article Saint Philip added; and thou beleevest in it. He
d^cended that thou might ascend to the place whereto he is ascended. Yet
where be there any tokens of thy desire to ascend unto him? Ascend unto him
thou can not, unless thou descend into thy self, for whom he so humbly
descended. The third day he rose again from the dead. This sixth Article Saint
Thomas annexed: An Article proper for Thomas, who touching Christ's
Resurrection, was so incredulous. And here thou see that late crucified man,
now acquit himself of death, like a victorious Lord. And hence thou rejoycest:
but unless thou ^ise from sin, and live to righteousness, Christ^
Resurrection shall afford thee small comfort in the bed of thy sickness. He
ascended into heaven, and sits on the right hand of God, the father
Almighty. This seventh Article Saint Barthol omew penned. And by this thou
beleevest that he is now ascended, Aug. in Sermon. de Ascens.
who for thy sake descended. And as from his rising came the hope of thy
Resurrection: so from his ascending the hope of thy glorification. But thou
must rise with him, before thou can reign with him: rise with him who was
free from all sin, from the Grave of sin, that thou may reign with him who
dyed for thy sin, in his heavenly Sion. And as he sits on the right hand of
God the father Almighty, where he offers up his prayers for thee, shows those
glorious scars of his precious wounds to his Father for thee, and per forms the
faithful office of a loving Mediator for thee; So art thou in thy prayers to
remember the necessity of his Saints upon earth. But cold is thy charity in
performing such a duty. From whence he shall come to judge both the quick and
the dead. This eight Article was by S. Matthew published: and by this thou
believe, how he who was judged unjustly shall judge the whole world in
Equity. For the Father judges none, but has given up this judgment unto his
Son, in whose breast are laid up all the treasures of wisdom and knowledge: And
this thou beleevest and tremblest: and reason thou have to tremble: for how
shall thou be able to stand in his presence, before whom even the heavens are
unclean? O when the righteous shall scarcely be saved, what will become of the
wicked? when the axe of his judgment shall not spare the green tree, what
will become of the dry? O nothing but woe, woe may befall thee miserable
delinquent, if he deal not with thee in mercy but in judgment! I believe in
the Holy Ghost. This ninth Article Saint James the less delivered. And thou
art taught to believe thus much by it: that the Holy Ghost the third person in
the blessed Trinity, is the Spirit of comfort, truth and unity: without which
it is impossible to please God. For as he promised unto his Apostles a
Comforter, so in the shape of a Dove, Act. ^3.
and in the form of cloven tongues there appeared unto them this promised
Comforter. But how is it that thou beleevest in the Holy Ghost: and yet with
thine hardness of heart, and looseness of life grievest the Holy Spirit of
God? Thus to believe, if thou be not penitent; will rather be a means to draw
on thee, then remove from thee Gods heavy judgment. The holy Catholic Church.
This tenth Article of faith Saint Simon founded. But how do thou believe the
holy Cathelike Church, or how is thy faith grounded, if thou observe not what
the Church has commanded? How can thou be a Member of her, so long as thou
live divided from her? Or how can thou truly call her Mother, so long as
thou hearknest not to her commands, but becommest disobedient to her? O then,
by a right faith knit thy self unto her: or else disclaim thy being a Member
of her. Aug.
But look unto it: for God thou can not have for thy Father, unless thou
have his Church for thy Mother. Neither can thou ever hope to be a Citizen
in his Church triumphant, unless thou be first a Member of his Church
Militant. The Communion of Saints, the forgiveness of sins. To this eleventh
Article is Saint Judas Thadaeus entitled. And this Communion of Saints thou
beleevest; and for the forgiveness of sins thou look. And yet thou live
not, as if thou desired to be of this Communion. Neither rendrest thou any
such fruits of repentance, as may cherish in thee, the least hope of Remission.
The Resurrection of the body, and the life everlasting. Amen. With this last
Article Saint Mathias closes our Creed. And by it thou beleevest that thy body
shall rise again from the dust: and that thy soul shall live with the just.
But have thou not fed thy Body too delicately, to rise again to glory? Have
thou not taken too much pleasure in sinning, ever to enjoy life everlasting.

O thou blessed Trinity in unity, and Unity in Trinity; thus have I made a
confession of my Faith unto thee, but my many faintings, failings, wants,
weaknesses and imperfections greatly discourage me, unless thou in thy mercy
strengthen me. I believe, Lord, O help my unbeleefe. Give me the shield of
faith; that here on earth I may acquit my self like a valiant Champion: and in
Heaven be made by thee a triumphant Citizen.

CHAP. 65.
Having thus examined himself, and found in the whole course of his life, a
fainting in faith, and failing in Works; He recalleth to mind those Quatuor
Novissima, or four last Remembrances; Memorials hourly necessary for all
Christians.
THus have thou laid thy self open to all discovery: and there is no good
thing to be found in thee. For in thy faith, thou have found a fainting and
weakness: and in all thy works a failing and barrenness.

Most freely went that blessed Father to work (and no less dangerous has
been thy walk) when he confessed himself in this fort, Aug.
Iinherit sin from my father, an excuse from my mother, lying from the Devil,
folly from the world, self-conceit from the pride and arrogant opinion of my
self. Deceitful have been the imaginations of thine heart, crooked have
been thy ways: malicious thy works. And yet have thou taken the judgments
of God in thy mouth. Desiring nothing more then to blind the eye of the world
with a counterfeit zeal. But all such Hypocrites God will judge. He will not
be mocked with. For as the Devil has his sive, with which he lets go the
good; but keeps the bad: So the Lord has his Fan, by which he lets go the
bad, and keeps the good. O when he shall separate his goats from his sheep;
his wheat from his tares; when the Just and the Wicked shall appear before
him: and every man shall be put into the balance; O ^ fear me then, thou will be found many grains too light^ It were well for thee then, to prepare
thy self against that great and fearful day. And to furnish thee all the
better, by making thee a true Convert, of an impenitent Sinner, recall to mind
those Quatuor Novissima; or Four last Remembrances: Memorials hourly to be
thought; and so necessary to be retained in thy memory, as the Christian use of
them may prepare thee before Death summon thee; and in this vale of misery fit
thee for thine heavenly voyage to eternity. And yet while I speak thus unto
thee, I find thy condition to be woeful: for if thou consider them, the very
thought of them cannot choose but startle thee: and if thou neglect them, thou will stand in amaze, when they encounter thee.

O my dear Lord remember me in thy mercy; and so prepare my memory; that these
Four necessary Remembrances may never depart from me. Let me be prepared for
Death, before it come, that it may never take me unprepared whenever it
shall come. Let me think of that fearful day of Judgment; and judge my
self before I be judged, that ^ may not be found light in thy scale, when I
shall be weighed. Let me, O let me think, how there is an Hell for the damned;
for better is it by timely fearing it, to avoid it: then by never dreaming of
it, headlong to fall into it. Lastly, let me think of Heaven, how it is the
place of the Blessed: and that none but those that are of a clean heart shall
dwell in it. O cleanse thou mine heart, that I may be prepared for it, and
with much spiritual joy be received in it.

CHAP. 66.
Death.
IT is strange that Death should be such a stranger to thee, when he so daily
visits those that neighbor near thee. Thou have been familiarly acquainted
with many, whose habitation is not now to be found; who have enjoyed the
pleasures of sin freely; Others, who have enlarged their Barnes and
storehouses carefully; others, who have ru^^led in their honors highly: and
could deliver a Word of Command bravely: and now behold how all these being
arrested at Deaths suit, were enforced to veil to his surly command! They have
made their Beds in the dark. They have left their Houses unto others; they are
gone unto their Graves, and must not return again. Their substance they have
left unto others: and strangers are become their Heirs. They are rooted out
from the face of the earth: and now they consider the vanity of their desires:
how they who lay land to land while they were here, find now what a small
scantling has sufficed them in this their return to their lasthome. Poor
shell of corruption, what do thou think of these things? I know well, that
great revenues, swelling honors, smiling pleasures are dangerous, and
fearful eye-sores to a dying man. He looks back upon his Honors, and asks
of them, if they cannot relieve him: but like false hearted Reteiners, they fly
from him, and present their service to another: so quickly have they forgot
their dying Master. He looks back then upon his Revenues, those household
Gods of his, his inchisted treasures, and asks of them, if they cannot redeem
them: But alas, they have no such power: these reserve themselves for his
prodigal Successor, or succeeding, Rioter: they were so poorly used and
employed by him, as they have quickly forgot their dying Master. At last h^
looks back upon his pleasures, unhappy pleasures, which now torment him more
then ever they did delight him; and he asks them, if they can allay his pain,
or any way succor him: but alas, they soon leave him, for they find nothing
in him nor about him that may entertain them. An easy farewell then have
these taken of their dying Master. But thou, poor Pilgrim, have no honors to
transport thee; no fortunes to detain thee; no pleasures to ens^are thee? For
the first, the countenance of greatness never shone upon thee; for the second,
worldly wealth could never yet so burden thee: and for the last, though thy
youth might affect them, the infirmities of age have now estranged them from
thee. And yet the voice of death is more terrible to thee then the noise of a
Canon. No note more doleful; (...) summons more fearful. And in this thou
art not much to be blamed: for Death is fearful to all flesh. But so to
plaint thine hopes on Earth; as if thou might never go from earth; nor
return to earth; albeit, thou can find nothing on earth worthy to entertain
thee, is the unhappiest condition that may befall thee. O think then of that
time, even now while thou have time, when thy soul, poor languishin soul,
finding thy eyes shut, thy mouth closed, and all those senses of thy body
perished, by which she used to go forth, and be delighted in these outward
things whereto she was affected, shall return unto her self: and seeing her
self all alone and naked, as one afflicted and aff^ighted with exceeding
horror, shall through despair fail in her self, and fall under her self: O
whither will thou fly in hope of succor, Bern. Med. 2.
to comfort thy poor soul in a time of such danger?

Even to thee will I fly O God of my salvation, for thou will not suffer my
soul to descend to corruption. Nay, such is thy loving kindness, as thou will
make my bed in my sickness. And because nothing is more certain then death;
nothing more uncertain then the hour of Death; prepare me continually
against the hour of Death And that Death may appear less fearful unto me,
send thy Holy Spirit to comfort me; that being inwardly armed by thee against
the assaults of Death, and sury of my Ghostly Enemy, I may fight a good fight,
and cry, O Death where is thy sting! O Hell where is thy victory!

CHAP. 67.
Judgment.
VVOe is me, I tremble to think of it, and yet I cannot think how to avoid
it! Judged I must be, and who will speak for me? A fearful witness I have
with^n me, to accuse me: sins of omission, sins of Commission to impeach
me, sins of ignorance sins of knowledge, sins o^ malice to convict me,
though, one were sufficient to condemn me. But thou will ask me, of what
art thou to be brought to account? for what art thou to be brought to
Judgment? Even for all thy thoughts words and works. Eccles. 12 12.
For God will bring every work into Judgment, with every secret thing whether
it be good, or whether (...) be evil. And that it may appear that thou shall
be accountable for all these; first, touching thy thoughts: Of these thou shall
be judged; Sap. 1^.
for froward thoughts separate from God. And he shall judge the secrets of
men. With their conscience also bearing witness, Romans 2.
and their thoughts! the mean while accusing, or else excusing one another.
Ib. 5. 15.
Secondly, thou shall give account of all thy words. Of every idle word that
men shall speak, Mat. 12.
they shall give account in the day of Judgment. Thirdly, thou shall be
accountable for all thy works. For we must all appear before the Judgment
seat of Christ, that every one may receive the things done in his body, 2 Cor.
5.
according to that he has done, whether it be good or bad.

O my poor afflicted Soul, can thou hear these things, and not melt thy
self into tears? seeing, that not only in the bed of thy sickness, by a
secret divine power all those works which thou have done; be they good or
evil, shall appear before thee, and be presented to thee; but in that
fearful day of Account, when all flesh shall come to Judgment: all these in
Capital Letters shall appear written before thee. Not one privy bosom
sin, were it never so closely committed, or subtly covered, or cunningly
carried, but must be there discovered. Adam shall be brought from his bushes,
and Sarah from behind the door, and man, miserably perplexed man, shall say to
his conscience, as Ahab said to Elias, Have thou found me, O mine Enemy! O what
numberless numbers of Bills of Indictment shall be then and there preferred
against thee? And of all these to be found guilty; O how art thou fallen into
the gall of bitterness, and all misery! For what can the thoughts and
Imaginations of thine heart say for themselves, but that they have been evil
continually? what can the words of thy mouth say for themselves, but that they
have been full of all filthiness and scurrility? Lastly, what can the works
of thine hands say for themselves, but that they have been laden with
transgressions and iniquity? But perchance, thou have some hope of a pardon,
and so like some of our deluded Delinquents here on earth, by flattering thy
self with a vain hope of life, estrangest thy thoughts from thinking of a
better life. But do not so deceive thy self; for if it be not by faithful
repentance sought for here, there is no hope for any pardon there to be
procured; nor for any Appeal to be there admitted; nor for one minutes Repreve
to be there granted; nor for that heavy sentence of Death to be one moment
adjourned. That sentence of eternal Death. Depart from me; this shall be the
sentence: To lose whose countenance, and to Depart from his presence is to
bring thy soul into endless torments, eternal anguish.

O my God, thou who have appointed a time for every man to dye, and after that
to come to judgment; make me to remember mine end; that fitting my self for
it, I may cheerfully encounter it, and so prepare my self for that judgment
which shall come after it. O make me walk in thy light, now while I have light
to walk in; and to work out my salvation now while I have time to work in.
For time will come, unless we walk here as Children of light) when we shall
have neither light to walk in, nor time to work in. O inflame mine heart with
thy love: and teach me thy judgments, and my soul shall live.

CHAP. 68.
Hell.
Hear how the damned say; while they were here on earth they lived better then
thou, and yet they are damned! And so they tax Gods mercy and indulgence
toward thee of injustice and partiality. Such is those damned souls charity.
Mean time, thou live securely, feedest deliciously, and put the thought
of the evil day from thee by walking foolishly in the ways of vanity. Little
desire then may thou have, O thou sinful Pilgrim, to see death; having so
little hope of life after Death. O, had some of those damned ones, who are now
lost for ever, received those many sweet visits, motions and free offers of his
grace; those opportunities of doing good; those many means of eschuing evil;
no doubt but they would have been as ready to entertain them, as thou have
been to reject them. O think with thy self, how happy had that rich Glutton
been, if he had rewarded poor Lazarus with some few crummes from his Table!
O had it not been far better for him, to have given to the poor all that
even he had; to have stripped himself to his shirt: and to have made exchange
of his purple raiments with rags of poverty, then to fry in hel-fire eternally?
O how happy had that rich man in the Gospel bin, if in stead of enlarging his
Barns, he had enlarged his Bowels to the poor! Little knew he how soon his
soul should be taken from him; when he addressed his care for so needless a
provision. His thoughts were so taken up with enlarging his Barnes; as he
never thought, How Tophet was ordnined of old; how it was made deep and large;
the pile thereof fire and much wood; Esaias 30. 33.
and how the breath of the Lord like a stream of brimstone, does kindle it.
Tophet was large enough, though his Barnes were not.

But turn unto thy self; for whom can thou find in more danger of falling
into that place of horror, then thy self? How have thou bestowed thy time? how
have thou employed thy Talent? O have thou not put it up in a napkin; or done
worse by employing it to some worser end? have not many bindamned for less
then thou have committed: and did it repent thee of what thou had done, that
so thou might not be condemned? O no; many a wretched soul lies there
tormented for less offenses then ever thou acted; and have thou yet turned to
the Lord, that thou may be pardoned? It is written, in what hour soever the
Righteous commits iniquity, Ezekiel. 42,
his righteousness shall not be had in remembrance. Now, if the
righteousness of him shall be forgotten by committing iniquity, who leaves
what he once loved, relinquisheth what he once professed; what may we think
of the repentance of that sinner, who returns again to that whereof he
repented? Augs Soliloq. c. 29.
O how many have ascended even up to heaven, and amongst the stars have built
their nests: and yet have suddenly fallen from that glory, by glorying in their
own strength, and so drenched themselves in endless misery? And whence came
all this, but because they ascended unto that Mountain, to which the first
Angel ascended, and as a Devil descended? And can thou excuse thy self of
being one of these? Have thou not sometimes shown to the world great arguments
of piety? Have thou not been sometimes like the Kings Daughters, all glorious
without* but how soon becamest thou stripped of this glory? Thou fell from that
seeming sanctity, or holy hypocrisy into open profaneness and impiety. Woe
is me, what shall become of me! The wages of sin is death; a death that
never dies, but lives eternally. Where nothing shall be heard but weeping
and wayling, groaning and howling, sorrowing and gnashing of teeth. O how
grievous then shall be mine anguish! how endless my sorrow and sadness! when
I shall be set apart from the society of the just; deprived of the sight of
God; delivered up unto the power of the Devils, and to go along with them into
eternal fire: where I am to remain without end in grieving and groaning! when
I shall be banished from that blessed Country of Paradise, to be tormented in
Hell perpetually: where I must never see so much as one small beameling of
light, nor the least drop of refreshment: but be tormented in Hell for
thousand-thousand years: and so tormented, as never to be thence delivered:
Bern. Med
where neither the tormentors become wearied; nor they dye who are tormented.

O my dear Lord, look upon the price of thine own blood. Thou have bought
me for a great price: O deliver thy Darling from the Dags: remember her in
mercy whom thou have bought. O let her not go down into the Pit: neither let
the Depth swallow her up. For who shall praise thee in the Depth? O my good
God, hough the terrors of Death, and torments of Hell encompasse me, yet art
thou my Succor, and wilt deliver me: and my soul shall live to praise thee.

CHAP. 69.
Heaven.
O How should I look up unto thee, that have so provoked thee? O thou Mansion
of the Saints; thou portion of the just; thou City of the great King; thou
heavenly and most happy kingdom; where thy blessed Inhabitants are ever living
and never dying; where thy glorious state is ever flourishing and never
declining. I must confess to my great grief and shame, that I have no
interest in thee. I have lost thee, unhappily lost thee, in losing my self, in
losing my soul by selling it to vanity. I sometimes resolved to play the part
of a ^ise Merchant, and to sell all I had for the purchase of one pearl. But I
held the purchase too dear, and therefore have I deservingly lost it. Foolish
Pilgrim, could thou find any thing more fitting to entertain thy best
thoughts, or bestow thy care, then the salvation of thy soul? Did thou
think it so easy a task to get Heaven, as to purchase it by making thine
Heaven on earth; yet had thou but taken half so much pains to get heaven, as
thou have done to get Hell: thou might have challenged more interest to
Heaven, then now thou can. Many summer days and long winter nights have thy
follies taken thee up: and these seemed short unto thee, because thou tookst
delight in those pleasures of vanity: But to bestow one short hour upon
devotion; O how many distractions did that suffer; and how long and tedious
seemed that hour, because that task was wearisome to thee, and thy mind was
elsewhere wandering, and would not stay with thee: and can thou now think
that so rich a kingdom would keep it self for thee; when thou would neither
knock that it might be opened to thee; nor seek that it might be found of
thee? Health, thou know well, comes not from the clouds without seeking,
nor wealth from the clods without digging. And yet Heaven must be got without
knocking or seeking. But great prizes are not to be so purchased. For as
Heavens Gate is strait, and few there be that enter; so are our tribulations
to be many; that we may be of that few that shall enter. But I hear thee now
cry out, as one that had some sense of his sin, and of the loss he has
incurred by sin. Woe is me! I cannot look upon this Earth, I tread on
without blushing; nor can I think upon Death without sorrowing; nor the day
Judgment without trembling; nor of Hell without shaking; nor of the joys of
Heaven without astonishing. For Earth, I loved it so well, (and well might I
blush at my self for for bestowing my love so ill) as the remembrance of Death
became sorrowful. For by it I understood how I was to be brought to Judgment,
of all others most fearful; and from thence as having nothing to answer in
mine own defense, I was to be haled to Hell a place disinall and doleful.
And consequently to forfeit all my title and interest in Heaven, which could
not choose but astonish me, being a place so joyful. This I like well in thee:
for this knowledge of thine infirmity, may bring thee to look for remedy: and
by degrees to find recovery. loyne then with me; and offer up thy prayer to
the Throne of grace, that He in his mercy would look upon thee.

Gracious God, though I be altogether unworthy to lift up mine eyes unto
heaven, or to offer up my prayers unto thee, much less to be heard by thee:
yet for his merits and mercies sake, who sits at thy right hand, and makes
intercession for me, reserve a place in thine heavenly Kingdom for me. Dear
Lord, in thine House are many Mansions; O bring me thither, that I may join my
voice with those voices of the Angels, and sing praises to thee, who sit in
the highest Heavens for ever.

CHAP. 70.
With the Remembrance of these, He becomes afflicted in Spirit.
O But yet I find my soul like dry ground, where no water is! wheresoever I
turn me, I find affliction and misery, on all sides encompassing me. O what
shall I do; where shall I fly to? For behold, while I take my self aside from
the world, into some withdrawing room, purposely to forget the world, and
prepare my self for the joys of a better life: while, I say, I begin to
commune with my own thoughts in the secret Chamber of mine heart; I become so
affrighted with the representment of those four last Remembrances, as I wholly
forget what I intended to speak: my tongue begins to cleave to the roof of
my mouth; my spatle is dried within me; those active faculties of my soul
leave me: and mine understanding departs from me. O Death, Death! How
bitter is the remembrance of thee? O how me thinks, thou summons me; and
like a surly Guest, breakest in upon me; nay, uninvited, resolvest to lodge
with me! And presently I feel my self wounded; and so mortally as not to be
cured. O how my divine eyesight now darkneth; my painting breast beats; my
hoarse throat rutleth; how my teeth by little and little grow black, and draw
to them a kind of rust; how my countenance grows pale, Dam. de Hora ^ort.
and all my members stiff; how every sense and faculty fails: how my wasted
body threatens a speedy dissolution! yet desires my poor soul to be a
Guest, still though there be cold comfort to be found in such a for lorne
Inn! but what are all these terrors of Death to that fearful day of
Judgment, when at the sound of the Trumpe all flesh shall rise! where none may
be exempted, but all judged! O me! Death is nothing unto this. For what
comparison betwixt a Death temporal and eternal? And such shall be the
sentence of every Reprobate, amongst which I the chief. O how terrible will
that great Judge appear to such as in this life would neither be allured by
his promises, nor awakened with his judgments? O how dolefully will that voice
sound in their care. Depart from me, I know you not! And how ready will that
officious Iaylor be upon the delivery of this heavy sentence, to hale them to
ulter darkness; a place of endless torments: where the cursings and howlings
of Fiends and Furies shall entertain their melodious ^are; ougly and hideous
sights shall entertain their lascivious eye; loathsome stenches their
delicio^^ smell; sulphur and brimstone their luscious taste; graspings and
embracings of snakes, their amorous touch; Anguish and horror every sense!
where those miserable damned souls shall be tormented, both in their flesh and
spirit. In their flesh by fire ever burning and never decaying: and in their
spirit by the worm of Conscience ever gnawing and never dying! where there
shall be grief intolerable, Bern. Med, 3.
fear horrible, filth incomparable; death both of soul and body, without hope
of pardon or mercy.

And now to cloze with the last; the loss whereof exceeds our sufferings in
all the rest. O to consider how I, unhappy I, have not only got Hell, the Lake
of horror and misery: but lost Heaven, the place of endless joy and felicity:
O what heart can consider it, and not resolve it self into a Sea of tears, in
contemplation of it? For what may the wretched soul think, when she lifts
up the beams of her mind, and beholds the glory of those immortal riches;
and withal considers, how she has lost all those for the poverty of this
life; O how can she be less then consounded with anguish; how can she do
less then rore forth in the affliction of her Spirit? Again, when she shall
cast her eyes below her, and take a full view of the vale of this world, and
perceive how it was but as a mist, and presently looking above her, admires the
beauty of that eternal light, she presently concludes, that it was nothing
else but night and darkness which she here loved. O how she faints,
faltereth and fruitlesly desires, that she might but have some small
remainder of time allotted her; what a sharp course; what a severe manner of
conversation would she take upon her? what and how great promises would be
made by her? with what strict bonds of devotion would she seemingly tie her?
But this must not be granted her; as she had her full of pleasures here, so
must she now be tormented for ever. O how my Spirit with the remembrance of
these becomes afflicted! O who will heal me, for I am wounded.

O my gracious and dear Lord out of thy boundless compassion, look upon my
grievous affliction. Psalm. 39. 12.
K^epe ^ot silence at my tears, for I am a tranger with thee and a so journer
(...) al my Fathers. I have none to fly unto but thee; and so highly have I
^rovoked thee; that unless thou ^ake pity on me, and receive me ^or his
blood, which was shed for me, I am lost eternally. O my good Shepherd, call
me, thy lost sheep, home; for lost I am, unless thou call me: lost for ever,
unless thou save me.

CHAP. 71.
Faith appears unto him with a cheerful presence; affording him comfort in
his affliction.
BEing thus afflicted inwardly and outwardly, Faith appeared to me; but alas,
so much was I dejected, that although I might have been^ moved to admiration
with he^ goodly presence: and encouraged with her affable countenance: I stood
still perplexed, being so far from comfort as I scarcely expected it. Which
Faith well perceiving, she drew near me, and pulling me to her, with a
presence no less graceful then cheerful; thus encountered me.

How now Pilgrim, have you seen so many days, and those so full of misery;
and and can you find ought here where you have lived so long, and found so
small comfort, that may deserve your tears? Is the world, this empty Sponge,
grown so near to your heart; as it has power to draw tears from your eyes?
Tell me the ground of your grief! Do you sorrow because Old Age comes upon
you, and you can live no longer: or if you should live, you cannot enjoy that
fullness of youthful pleasure which you formerly tasted? or are you unwilling
to forgo your possessions; to take a long leave of your friends; or to be
stripped of those goodly honors, which you here enjoyed? No, I hope you are
wiser then to become so foolish a Mourner. What is it then that has thus
violently wrought upon your reason: and brought your disordered thoughts unto
this distraction? Surely, it must be of some importance that has brought you
into this disconsolate anguish. But this I perceive to be a distemper of your
mind: and it shall be our principal care; upon discovery of your wound, to
apply a speedy cure. Go to then, disclose your grief freely; and believe her,
who hates nothing more then breach of faith, that upon your imparting of it,
you shall receive this friendly office from me; either to cure it or allay it.
Herewith I became so encouraged, as I made a free discovery of the grounds of
my affliction; which she took so well at mine hands, as presently causing me
to sit by her, she begun to comfort me in this manner. You have done well in
this discovery of your grief. Wounds cannot be cured, before they be opened.
Neither do we fear but by ministering some fitting prescriptions, our
endeavors will bring forth that good effect, as you shall find great case in
your afflictions. You tell me, how the Remembrance of your end is very terrible
to you: not so much in regard of your fear of Death: as of that fearful day of
Judgment after Death. For you find in your self such an infinite and
unsupportable weight of grievous sins pressing down-your soul even to the
gates of Hell, as less then grieve you cannot; else were you insensible of the
loss of a soul. Trust me, Pilgrim so far am I from sorrowing with you, as
I rejoice in your sorrowing: For this sense of your sins brings you to seek
for cure: which had they not afflicted you, and and brought you even to the
pit-brinke, had been the least of your care. It is well then for you that you
are afflicted: for else you might have gloried and fatned your self in your
sins, and so eternally perished. Be then of good comfort: and suffer not
Cains desperate conclusion to have any possession in you: For I must tell you,
he sinned more in saying, Greater is my sin then can be pardoned; then in
murdering his Brother: For as in the one, he lay violent hand on the Image of
God; So in the other he detracted from the highest and dearest prerogative
belonging to God: for there is no attribute wherewith he is more delighted,
then to be styled a God of mercy. We may safely then conclude: That despair is
of a more high and heinous nature then any sin. For tell me, has not God
himself with his own mouth promised, and is he not both able and willing to
perform what he has promised? That, At what time soever a sinner does repent
him of his sin Ezekiel. 18.
from the botome of his heart, he will put awdy all his wickedness out of his
remembrance Though late repentance then be seldom true, yet true repentance
never comes too late. The good Thief had no sooner repented him of his sin,
and confessed Christ, then he was even at the last hour received to mercy:
which example, as it admits no such liberty as to encourage any to presume,
seeing there was but one: nor to throw down any into despair, seeing there
was one. Indeed there is nothing that endangers man's salvation more then by
giving way to delay: yet when the sorrowful soul heartily repents him of what
is past, and with a constant religious resolve intends to redeem the time to
come; his pious tears, devout prayers, holy resolves will find ready
admittance to the Throne of Grace. For as his mercy is above all his Works, so
will he show it most on that work which stands in most need of his mercy.
This I am sure your long experience not only observed but plenteously tasted,
for else have those years of your Pilgrimage been ill bestowed; that he is
gracious, merciful, and long suffering. Nay, that it has been evermore the
property of this good and careful Shepherd, to call home those that were
wandering, invite those that were withstanding, expect those that were
fore-slowing, and to embrace those that were returning. Nay, that it has bin
ever the condition of this valiant Iosuah, to exhort you to fight, and so to
help you that you might become Conqueror in that fight. In one word, it has
been ever his care to behold you when you were in the Battle sighting, to
encourage you when you were failing, and crown you when you were vanquishing.
Come then tell me, are you wearied and so heavy laden, that you must faint by
the way, if you be not refreshed? Behold, how he has invited you to come unto
him, where you may receive refreshment and comfort from him! Be not then
wavering in the Faith, 1 Iam. 5.
but take fast hold of his promises who will not fail you: and rely on his
mercies, which in your greatest straits will deliver you. Be faithful then
unto the end, and he will give your hearts desire.

This Ladies exhortation afforded me much comfort in this my affliction; but
much more when I knew who she was: for I had heard much of her, though I was
never till then well acquainted with her. For so soon as I heard her name, I
began to be very confident, that whatsoever she spoke came from good ground.
Nay, I understood how no action, were it never so good in its own nature,
could subsist or become really good without her. How she was the groundworke of
all virtues; the pure Fountain and firm foundation of all divine graces. How
no fruits were they never so pleasant to the eye, nor savoury to the taste, but
they were Sodoms apples, unless they received grouth and ripeness from her.
How every faithful soul lived by her: Hab. 2. 4.
how every one became justified by her: good reason then had I to rely on her,
Romans 3. 28
and to derive comfort from her.

Having in this manner with her sweet instructions refreshed me, promising me
with all, that even in mine Agonies of death she would be near me, if now in
these few but evil days of my Pilgrimage, she were not discarded by me:
which I vowed never to do so long as there was breath in my body; she
suddenly vanished from me; which did not a little perplexe me: for never took
poor afflicted soul more joy in any ones company.

O my dear and benign Jesus, Mat. 14. 31.
how justly might thou have reproved me, Luke 17. 6. v. 5.
with -- O thou of little faith! O it is but a little one; Luke 22. 32.
the least seed in the Garden; O increase this my faith! Act. 5. 9.
O pray to thy Father that my faith fail not! So shall my heart be purified
by faith. So shall I become justified by faith. So shall I have access to thee
by faith: and hereafter live with thee and thy faithful ones in the
inheritance of the just.

CHAP. 72.
Hope seconds that comfort.
Who is he that knows not how soon Faith begins to decline and grow out of
request in the heart of a worldling? This I found true by mine own experience:
for albeit, that comfortable assurance of Faith might seem to have removed
from me all occasions of fear: and had so well strengthened me, as those
infirmities whereof I formerly labored, were to the outward eye wholly cured in
me: yet remained there still some core at mine heart. I found it was not so
well with me as it should be. Me thought day and night that terrible voice of
Behold the man and his works! ever sounded in mine care. For I considered, how
as God was merciful, so he was just. Neither did it stand with Gods Justice,
to pronounce any other sentence upon me then as my sins deserved. What then
could I expect, but to be thrown down into that bottomless pit, where
nothing but woe, woe in every place refounded: horror and confusion dwelled?
Thus fared it with me, as with one newly recovered out of some dangerous
sickness, and after his recovery, by reason of some distemper makes relapse
into his former malady. But I found, how when man's help fails, Gods
begins: And that man's extremity was Gods opportunity. So gracious is the
Lord to those that fear him: yea, to all such as with an humble and contrite
heart return unto him. For behold how light appeared out of darkness! One day
as I stood thus perplexed, weary of life, yet fearful to dye, there appeared,
me thought, before me a woman of a beautiful and cheerful countenance;
bearing an Anchor upon her shoulder: who drawing toward me, presently demanded
of me how it was with me? But as one desirous to have none to share with me
in the burden of my affliction: nor to partake of any comfort, so strangely had
my folly given way to temptation: as I turned uncivilly my face from her: but
of so sweet and well-composed a spirit seemed this Lady, as all this nothing
amated her: and the better to bring me to a feeling of mine own infirmity,
addressed her discourse in this manner unto me.

Go to sir! you must not have your own will in this sort: A froward Patient
requires a rough hand, and a resolute heart. But I will show my self more
courteous to you. I am not ignorant of of your disease; and much relyes your
malady on my cure. Doubt nothing of your recovery, so you will but ingenuously
discover your infirmity. Neither am I altogether unacquainted with my sister
Faiths late visit of you: whose sound cordial comforts might have wrought such
effect in you, as you should have less needed any other receipts, had you
discreetly applied what was so seasonably, and soveraignly ministered. But
before I begin with you; let me so far prevail with you, as to remove
from your too much dejected and depressed spirit, all those unbeseeming
thoughts which perplexe your quiet: Be not such an enemy to your self, as to
reject that, which may rectify your state: And of sick; may make you whole:
and of a faint-hearted soldier, a courageous Warrier. And now to prepare you
the better for this spiritual encounter: my first Assay must be, to remove
those skales from your eyes, which by long continuance, are grown so thick, as
they keep you from knowing us.

This said, she infused a small quantity of a precious kind of liquor into my
dusky and drery eyes: which infused, those very skales, which formerly troubled
my sight, became removed: so as, I perceived who it was that ministered unto
me: and by little and little became so strengthened, as I was confident of
^evovery. Having found me in this sort^ little cheered; as one desirous to
perfect what she had begun to make me more hopeful of her cure, she
acquainted me with the quality of her power.

How now, said she, I cannot be persuaded but you must now of necessity know
me? Though I have been long time a stranger to you; let us now renew our
acquaintance; believe it, it shall not repent you: for I never yet lodged in
that Inn, which held me not a welcome Guest. Many before this time had
untimely perished, had they not by me been seasonably supported. By land and
water have I offered my self a friendly companion: and firmly stuck I to them
who relied on me, in time of greatest danger or opposition. And when no
semblance of delivery appeared: no hope of liberty approached: We with this
Anchor brought them to the haven safely: planting them so securely, as no
peril could interpose their security.

And now tell me, is our strength so weakened, as we cannot perform what we
formerly so happily effected: No, we are the same; so we find the same Spirit
in those to whom we apply our cure; which to accomplish shall be our principal
care. Take then for an Helmet, 1 These. 5. 8 Tit: 2. 13.
the hope of salvation: Psalm. 16. 9. 31. 24.
Look for the blessed hope. Prove, 13* 12. 14. 32.
Let thy flesh rest in hope. Romans 5. 5.
Be ye of good courage -- all ye that hope. Romans 12. 12. 15. 13. 8. 24.
For I must tell you, hope deferred makes the heart sick: but the righteous
has hope in his death. For so well and surely is her foundation grounded, as
hope makes not ashamed. Rejoice then in hope: be patient in tribulation. So
shall the God of hope fill you with all joy. To which fullness I recommend you.

This said, she retired, but my Hope became much strengthened. For having
sometimes heard, how Hope that is seen, is not Hope: Though I did not see her,
yet was I comforted by her: for her sweet and comfortable advice had so cheered
me; as with that pattern of patience, (and that with great vehemence) I cried
forth in this manner; through the hope and assurance which I had in my dear
Savior: I know that my Redeemer lives, and that with these eyes I shall see
him.

And now I begun to wonder at mine own weakness; how I could so much as have
the least distrust or diffidence in Gods goodness: how I could suffer my
spirit to be so uncomfortably drenched and drowned in the depth of misery:
having so free access to the Throne of mercy. Again, how in this surging Sea
of affliction; where every worldy wave threatens ruin: I durst presume to
play the Mariner, and fail without mine Anchor. Finding then so sovereign a
cure for my care: Such sweet solace to mine anguish: so present a repreve
against death: so fit a receipt to my grief, I thought good to return to the
Lord with my whole heart; returning thanks unto him from whom comes my help,
and on whose gracious compassion have I grounded mine hope. My morning and
evening Incense have I therefore resolved to offer: that in an acceptable time
he would be pleased to receive my prayer: teaching me how to suffer, and by
suffering to conquer: and conquering, to render to the Lord of Hoasts all
honor.

O my merciful Lord God, who bindest up the wounds of every contrite and truly
penitent Sinner: suffering him not to be tempted more then he can bear: but
of the abundance of thy compassion, give him anissue out of his temptation:
Make me ever with a religious fear so to put my trust in thy mercy: as I may
never be swallowed up of my misery. And seeing, we are saved by hope: give
unto me such a saving hope; Romans 8. 24.
as neither too much confidence may make me presume: nor the too perplexing
consideration of my many sins bring me to a despair of pardon. Be near
me, dear Lord, in the (...) of my visitation: let the enemy have no power
over me: but so shadow me under the wings of thy mercy; that the remembrance
of thy judgments may rouse me sleeping; the memory of thy mercies raise me
waking; to render praise unto th^e, as my hope is in thee, my help from thee,
O Lord everlasting.

CHAP. 73.
Charity promises him in this valle of misery, to cover all his scarlet sins
with the white roab of mercy; and by keeping her company, conduct him safely to
the kingdom of glory.
But our daily experience confirms this to be so true, as nothing can be
truer: A Worldlings mind is apter to be transported with the light gailes of
presumption: then to be over-poized with any weights of a contrary nature. Man
becomes so apprehensive of the sweet promises of comfort, as he not only
forgets his former unhappy condition, but even himself. So subject is he to
surfeit of that, which was only given him to allay his discontent: and to
retain in him a thankfulness to him from whose beauty he received that
benefit. This i^ seems, charity feared much would befall me: So as one day
with a comely, affable and graceful ^resence, me thought, she appeared unto
me: not so much to increase my comfort, as to prepare my mind rightly to ^se
it. For she found me subject to no such dis-consolate humor, but refreshed
with joy above measure; which to attemper, she begun to impart her mind unto
me after this manner.

It joys me much, good Pilgrim, to see you thus brought from death to life.
But it were well for you so to moderate these comforts which you have received:
as not to lose your self, lest you might deprive your self of the benefit of
this comfort. You may do well then herein to imitate the Fly, which puts
not her feet into the great Mass of honey, but only takes with her tongue so
much thereof as serves her turn and no more, lest by doing otherwise, she
might remain taken and drowned therein. Too much honey cloyeth: and too much
of comfort drowneth. Moderate then these, as you tender your inward peace.
Time has been when the very least beameling of these comforts which now so
plentuously reflect on you, would have infinitely refreshed you: for your spirit
was wounded within you: present delights and future hopes had wholly estranged
themselves from you. Stand then in fear, lest by abuse of these, some worser
thing befall you. Many, by being unhappy have become happy: but very few have
attained true happiness, by being in this world ever happy. Now then, as my
sister Faith has in these spiritual comforts grounded you: And my younger
sister Hope has in these confirmed you: So shall it be my care, who am their
poor contemptible sister, to prepare you for them, as they have prepared them
for you: that such choice receipts may be applied to that end for which they
were ministered: and your comforts such, as the issue of them may not be
repented.

After this discourse of hers, I desired much to know her name: for being, as
she professed, sister to those two Ladies, from whose advice I had received so
great comfort: I wondered much at her Habit: for though her presence were
comely, her countenance lovely, her behavior sweetened with a well-beseeming
modesty; yet her apparel was but mean. Which she observing, with a quick
delivery and composed gravity, she thus answered me.

You must not gather by my Habit what I am. For I wear the worlds livery; such
as she is pleased to bestow upon me; with no less content, then she throws
it on me with contempt. For many years together have I been the Richmans
Almoner: yet never to this hour did I increase my store: for all the service I
did him, I required no other wages of him, but to take his poor Handmaids
counsel, which was: To make himself happy with his own. But alas, I found
Simonides saying too true! The virtuous did more frequent the doors of the
rich, then then the rich of the virtuous. The poor were virtuous, and repaired
to the doors of the rich: but the rich were vicious, and would not open their
doors to the poor. I observed how virtue was accounted such a treasure, as
'twas held more fitting to be out of the world then in it: whereas riches held
that reputation amongst men: as men were held of no reputation without it. But
yeu desire to know my name; and you shall have it: but I pray you do not
imitate the fashion of this present world, by loving one worse when you hear
it. Neither am I a fitting Consort for you, unless my two Sisters have wrought
some good effect on you. For charity is cold; and such Companions are not
easily entertained: nor such Guests kindly received; where the one bids us give
that we may receive: the other bids us give all that we have: and when all that
we have is given, to expect our reward in heaven. But this sowing of bread
upon the water, is of too hard digestion to a foolish worldling: and yet it
must be sown upon the water, or your harvest is lost for ever. Let me then
second, what my dear Sisters have proposed: as your discomforts were by them
not only allayed; but with assurance in Gods promises confirmed: So hear what
charity, the Worldlings outcast, will do unto you; to make you perfect
throughout for Him who will receive you. I have never yet been known to be
more ready to promise then perform. Yet shall the promise which I make unto
you, be of infinite consequence: for it shall make you eternally happy in the
performance. You are here planted in a veil of misery, where I promise to
cover all your scarlet sins with the white roabe of mercy. Nay, I will yet
go a little farther to confer on your peaceful progress the higher honor:
If you will deaine to leave the world, and receive me who am despised of the
world: If you will, I say, leave her society, and bid adue to her blooms of
vanity: by keeping me company, I shall conduct you safely to the Kingdom of
glory.

Now let it be the least of your fear, that I promise above my power. For as
my sisters imparted their love unto you, in cheering, comforting, and
confirming you: so shall you find no less alacrity in me, in perfecting what
they have so happily begun in you. For I must tell you, (neither would I have
you think that this proceeds from any vain glory, being that which could
never challenge the least affinity with true charity) that though my sisters
may seem to have priority in list and number, yet am I to challenge precedence
in respect of dignity and order. This that vessel of Election confirmed when
he said: Now abides faith, hope, charity, 1 Cor. 53. 13.
these three, but the greatest of these is charity. Neither shall you need to
receive any other description for the portraiture of my feature, or quality of
my nature, then what that glorious Champion has already returned to you. For
tell me, have you desire to be informed in what most concerns you; to be
edified in what most imports you? It is not knowledge but charity that must
work this good effect in you. For, knowledge puffes up, 1 Cor. 8. 1.
but charity edifieth. Or would you be persuasive in Oratory; or powerful in
prophesy; or an useful Almner for your souls safety? you must necessarily be
accompanied by Charity; v. I.
or you are but as sounding brass, or a tinkling Cymbal. Your power to remove
mountains shall not remove in you the least Molehill of your sin. Your
bestowing all your goods to feed the poor, shall not make your soul rich:
these cannot profit you, if charity do not accompany you. Seeing then the
tongues of men and angels are but tinklings and very sounds without charity;
knowledge becomes fruitless without the edifying help of charity; prophesies,
be they never so mysterious; Sciences, be they in their own nature never so
commodious, are altogether unprofitable without charity: 1 Cor. 16 14.
Let all your things be done with charity. 14. 1.
Follow after charity, Col. 3. 14
Above all things put on charity. Pet. 4. 8.
Above all things have fervent charity: for charity shall cover the multitude
of sins. 2 Pet. 1. 7
Add to godliness, brotherly kindness; and to brotherly kindness, charity.
For, the end of the commandment is charity: And now, seeing I have here given
you a full draught of charity: by a due examination of your self, you shall
easily find whether she be in your heart or no: For by these divine effects you
shall find her to be yours, and she possessed of yours 1 Cor. 13. 4.
: charity suffers long and is kind, envies not: charity vaunteth not it self,
is not puffed up. You shall likewise know even by your outward behavior,
whether or no you have received charity, or given her harbor: for Charity v. 5.
does not behave it self unseemly, seeks not her own, is not easily
provoked, thinks no evil. You shall perceive likewise by the very joy of
your heart, whether charity have taken up there her lodging. For she v. 6.
Rejoices not in iniquity, but rejoices in the truth. Lastly, you shall
gather by your constancy, whether or no you hold correspondency with perfect
charity: For charity v. 8.
never fails. Well may I then conclude with that glorious light of the
Eastern Church, where charity is present, no good thing can be absent: where
charity is absent, no good thing can be present. Aug.
Again; There is not any thing, be it never so little, but being done in
charity, it is esteemed for great: And there is nothing be it never so great,
but being done without charity, it is accounted little: To cloze then all in
one, seeing Charity is one in all: We see how all sign themselves with the
sign of the Cross, how all answer Amen, all sing Alleluia, Ib*
all are baptized, all obey the commands of their Mother, the Church: yet a^e
not the children of God discerned from the children of the Devil but by
Charity. Vide Aug.


If then you desire to live, learn to love: you are now in your Journey
toward your Country, keep me but company, and I shall safely conduct you to
a City, where there reigns perfect Charity.

It is not to be expressed what infinite content I took in the sweet discourse
of this divine Consort. For me thought I felt a fervorous heat or glowing
within me. So as I desired nothing more then to retain her still in my
company. But having told me that she had many places to go to: and that in
her absence I might find occasions in every place to remember her: for I could
not possibly give the least entertainment to my afflicted Brother, but I might
become her Remembrancer: which I should not fear to see plenteously rewarded
hereafter: with a longing eye after her, I took my leave of her. Desiring no
greater solace, then to bestow the small remainder of my time in her service:
and resolving in all humble manner, ever from that time to become her faithful
Almner.

Dear Father, thou who art perfect Charity; purify my heart throughout, that
I may prepare a room therein fitting to entertain thee. Though Charity grow
cold in the world, let my desires become so wained from this present world,
that my Charity may witness for me, that I am preparing for an other world.
Give me a liberal heart; that freely communicating to thenecessity of thy
Saints, and constantly relying on thy promises, through a firm Faith and Hope
reposed in thee, I may at last come unto thee; and of a poor Pilgrim become an
happy Citizen in thy Kingdom; there to sing Alleluia amongst those glorious
Saints for ever more.

CHAP. 74.
He takes comfort; And now wearied with sojourning longer in Idumaea, he turns
to Canaan.
SO ines^ably sweet were these comforts which I tasted; and so plenteously
flowing were those Fountains from whence they were derived; as I gathered
thence, if there were such comforts in the day of mourning? what would there
be in the day of rejoicing? If such spiritual delights presented themselves
in a Prison; what incomparable pleasures might be expected in a Palace? If
such joys in the days of our captivity, what may be looked for in that day of
Iubilee? In the consideration whereof; never did chased Heart long more
thirstily after the Water-brookes, then my poor wearied spirit did after her
heavenly Bethesda. O how shrilly me thought; did the cries of the Saints under
the Altar sound in mine ^are? O how long Lord: How long! O how long shall I
sojourne in this Pilgrimage of cares; this valley of tears; and become
estranged from that Inheritance of lasting joys; the only sight whereof shall
make me happy; and from this Wilderness of sin bring me to the Sinah of
glory? Woe is me, my Light, my Love, my Dove, my only one, for that I have
dwelled with the inhabitants of Cedar! Woe is me, my King and my God, that my
habitation is prolonged! For if holy David, David, a man according to Gods own
heart, sometimes said, how much more may I unhappy one say, My soul has been
too long an inhabitant? Long, and all too long have I sung, because I was
unsensible of my sin, my own country songs by those waters of Babylon. Well
therefore may I say, It was good for me that I have been afflicted; Psalm.
119. 71.
that I might learn thy statutes. O my Lord, had thou never afflicted me; I
had never sought to know thee. Hence is it that I know thee, because thou ^ast
afflicted me. v. 28.
And now my soul melts for heaviness, not for that thou have afflicted me:
but for that she has been so long divided from thee. I know Lord, I know, how
he who never mourned while he was a Pilgrim, shall never rejoice when he
comes to be a Citizen. And as to abide for ever, if we would we might not: so
rejoice here and hereafter, though we would, we may not. It is a great
argument that he loves not his Country; who without occasion foreslowes his
return into his Country; or takes any delight in any place before he return
unto his Country. Alas, I must confess, I have longed too much after the
Onions and Garlic, and Fleshpots of Egypt: With shreeks I entired, and in
^oyle I lived. With griefs gripes. groans, am I of life deprived.
but now with gushing eyes do I return unto thee, O receive me! I have
protested (and O strengthen so religious a protest with thy Spirit) never to
take any more delight in Idumaea. I have suffered too much in it and by it, to
be now any more taken or delighted with it. And now after my loathing of these
puddles of vanity, I have longed after those ever-running streams of eternity.
O how has my soul thirsted after thee; how greatly has my flesh longed for
thee? my soul has thirsted after thee, the living fountain; O when shall I
come and appear before the face of the Lord? when will thou come, O my
Comforter? For whom else shall I expect? O that I might see thee O my Joy,
which I desire! O then shall my soul be satisfied, when my glory shall
appear, for which I so long hungered! O then shall I be made drunk with the
fullness of thine house, after which I have sighed! O then will thou refresh me
with the Brook of thy pleasure, after which I have thirsted! In the mean
time, let my tears become my bread day and night, until such time, as it be
said unto me; behold thy God! until my soul hear, behold thy Spouse! Mean
while, thou heavenly Shepherd, feed me with my sighs, refresh me with my
sorrows. My Redeemer will doubtlesly come, for he is good: neither will he
fore-slow his coming, for he is gracious: To him be glory for evermore.

O hasten thy coming for thine Elect sake! Come Lord Jesus, come quickly!

CHAP. 75.
The poor penitent Pilgrims last Will and Testament.
IN the name of the Father, the Son, and Holy Ghost. I S. M. A poor penitent
Pilgrim, found in body, and of perfect memory: yet being daily read in the
Lecture of man's mortality: how all Flesh is Grass, and the beauty thereof as
the Flower of the field; which this day flourishes, to morrow withers: and
that it is every Christians duty to prepare himself before Death come, lest it
find him unprovided at such time as it shall come. Moved, I say, with these
considerations, I have here made this my last Will and Testament as follows.

First I bequeath my soul into the hands of my gracious Redeemer, by whose
most precious blood I was redeemed: and by whose merits and mercies (for my
merits are his mercies) I hope to be glorified. And forasmuch as there was no
safety out of the Arc; nor no salvation now without the pale of the Church,
figured by the Arc: and that the tares from the wheat must be severed: the
Sheep and the Goats must not into one Fold be gathered: HERE in the presence
of God and his blessed Angels; for the discharge of mine own conscience, and
the satisfaction of others, who, perchance, have in their opinions been
divided, doubting much how I in points of Religion stood affected; Do I make a
free and public confession of my Faith: being that Cement by which we are knit
unto her, and made Members of her.

I believe the holy Catholic Church, to be the Communion of the Faithful,
whereof I desire to live and dye a Member: for which to suffer I should account
it an honor: holding this for a Principle ever; That none can have God for his
father, that will not take his Holy Spouse the Church for his Mother. There is
no Article in the Apostles Creed which I do not believe for Catholic and
Orthodoxall, with the exposition thereof, and every Cl^use or Particle thereof
in such manner, as it has been universally received by the holy Catholic
Church, from the first four hundred years after Christ: and as it holds in
consent or harmony with the Holy Scripture, the Christians Armor; by which and
the constant practice of piety, every faithful Soldier of Christ Jesus may be
enabled to pull down those strong Holds of his spiritual enemy: and by
possessing his soul in patience, obtain a glorious victory. And as there have
been at all times tares in Gods field; so is it more to be pitied then
doubted, that there are many surreptitious errors crept into the bosom of the
Church through the corruption of time, and our enemies malice: which though
they aim not at the Cornerstone, nor at the maine foundation, yet being but
stubble, and no ways conducing to so glorious a building, they are to be
accounted of that quality, as they blemish much her primitive beauty. These
then being the fancies of humane brains, and introduced into the Church for
private ends; and so continued rather by an imperious then just command, I hold
them so far from being effectual to salvation, as they become scandalous to
many tender consciences, and consequently deserve rather to be rejected then
embraced. But for the Ornaments of the Church, as she is the Kings Daughter,
so she should be comely: and for her music or melody; being his Spouse, it
admits harmony: for so drowsy is man's zeal and affection, as he stands in
great need of something to stir up his devotion. Likewise of those ancient
and decent Ceremonies of the Church, being discreetly and not superstitiously
used, I have ever reverently esteemed. Neither am I ignorant how disputation in
arguments of controversall learning has been of late years in more request
then care of blameless conversation and living; how indiscreet and impertinent
reasoning has in many places brought that woeful effect, as it has begot many
irreparable rents in Christ's seamelesse Coat: thus wounds left to the handling
of unexpert hands became so far from curing, as they grew more dangerously
spreading; and desperately increasing then they were in the beginning, and
before they came to handling. These Deficiences are with pious tears and
devout prayers to be repaired, that men of learning may be likewise men of
living; being endowed with that zeal, as in all their arguments by way of
private discourse or more public opposition, their sole aim and desire may
be to propagate the Gospel, and in it the glory of God, with all singleness
of mind, and that without singularity of judgment; being so free from all
manner of ostentation, or the spirit of contradiction, as they may shun nothing
more then popular applause, nor hold any thing more dear then the Churches
peace, So as, to compose this breach, I never hold those in points of Religion
to be sitting Disputants, who made it their only aim in a scholasticall
manner to weave up their Arguments: but such moderate spirits, whose desires
were rather to clear men's consciences from inbred scruples, then broach new
differences.

With all due reverence I esteem of those two Sacraments; Baptism and the
Supper of the Lord, as those two nursing breasts of the Church: the one to
cleanse and purify us at our entering: the other to strengthen and sanctify us
living: and to glorify our souls at their departing. As with mine heart I
believe unto righteousness, so with my Mouth do I confess unto salvation.
Neither, do I profess my self such a Soli-fidian, as to hold Faith
sufficient to salvation without Works. Neither such a Champion for good
works, as to hold works effectual without Faith. As Faith is the root, so are
works the fruit. Nay, I hold these to have such necessary dependence one of the
other, as they are ever to go hand in hand together: Otherwise that fearful
curse which our blessed Savior sometimes pronounced upon the barraine
Fig Tree, must be their censure. And now in this day of my Change, as in this
confidence I have ever lived, so my trust is that in the same I shall dye: That
in the Resurrection of my Savior Christ Ies^s is my hope: and in his Ascension
is my glory. For, I believe that my Redeemer lives, and that with these eyes I
shall see him.

Thus have I rendered an account of my faith; the substance whereof as I have
ever professed in my life: so I hope with all Christian constancy to continue
the profession thereof even unto death. So as, though the assaults or
temptations of the Devil, my spiritual enemy, whose practice has been ever
by cruelty or subtilty to deprive man of his hope of glory, should with all
fury assail me, yet shall they never have power to prevail against me; for
the Lord, who is my defense, will in mercy draw near me, and in that dying
conflict give me the victory. This then shall be my clozing Resolve, I mean
to continue in the profession of that Faith, now when I am old; Hier. ad
Pam^^^^ et Ocean de error. Orig.
wherein being a child I was borne.

And having thus returned a due account of my Belie^e; I hold it very sitting
not to neglect that laudable use of disposing that estate whereof God in his
goodness and providence toward me, made me here his Steward. It were good
then for me, that I remembered that message returned by Isaiah the son of
Amos to Hezekiah: 2 Reg. 20. 1
Set thin^ house in order, for thou shall die, and not live. True it is, when
the outward house is orderly disposed, the inward house cannot choose but be
better prepared. To remove then from me the cares of this present world, that
I may take a more willing adeiu of the world before I leave it, and so address
my cares for a better world by waining my desires from it: for live he cannot
in the Land of the living, who prepares not himself for it before his
arriving: my mind and will is, that my worldly substance be disposed of in
manner and form following.

First, then after this vessel of Earth, this poor shell of corruption shall
be to earth committed, and as near to the bones of mine Ancestors as the
conveniencie of the place may permiti, nterred: and that my Funeral expenses
shall be discharged; in the performance of which Christian duty I approve of
decency, but in no case too much solemnity; (which has too often drowned the
remembrance of mortality in the lees of sensuality) after this, I say, my will
is, that this small estate wherewith God has blessed me, shall be divided in
equal parts or portions amongst my Children: that, as they are all equally
mine, so they may be equal sharers in mine: Of whom I will not prophecy that
they will dissipate or seatter all I leave them: I have better hopes treasured
in them. For the portions I leave them, though small yet competent, if they be
contented: and more then I could wish them, if otherwise affected. A very
little will suffice nature; enough I leave them, if well employed: too much if
abused. May Gods blessing and mine be ever with them in their improvement of
it. And that I may crown their hopes, and my hours with one blessing more:
Blessed Spirit, by which every Passenger is safely conducted from this vale of
misery, to the Kingdom of glory, as these little ones are mine by generation,
so may they be thine by regeneration, to whose gracious protection both now and
ever I commit them.

Now I nominate and appoint for Surpervisors of this my last Will and
Testament, my dear friends, Agapetus and Eilicrines, if they shall be then
living at my death: whom I heartily desire, for the love they bear to
goodness; nay, for the love they bear to him, who is the fountain of all
goodness, and as I repose much trust in them; to perform this my Will.

And now me thinks, Hieron.
all my worldly cares are drawn near unto their period. Seeing then I am
sailing toward mine Harbor; Let me strike Anchor: that taking the wings of
the Morning, I may fly to the bosom of my dear Redeemer. Co forth then my
Soul, what fear thou? go forth, why tremblest thou? Thou have had enough
of Idumaea; for what foundst thou there but anguish? Now then turn thy face to
the Wall, and think of the Land of Promise. Thou have but now a little time
left thee: the remainder whereof is justly exacted by him that made thee.
Sighs, sobs, prayers, and tears are all the treasures that are left thee: and
precious treasures shall these be to thee, if presented by faith to the Throne
of mercy. The Enemy can never prevail, where Christian fear and constant hope
possess the Soul. Let thy Desire then be planted, where thy treasure is
placed; and as one ravished with a spiritual fervor, Hieron.
cry out and spare not with that devout Father: Should my Mother pull her
hair, tear her Clothes, lay forth those Breasts which nursed me, and in this
sort hang about me; should my Father lie in the way to stop me, my Wife and
Children weep about me; I would throw off my Mother, neglect my Father,
contemn the lamentation of my Wife and Children, to meet my Savior, Christ
Jesus.

And less then this, O my soul, thou can not do; if thou call to mind
what thou leavest; to whom thou go; and what thou have in exchange for that
thou loosest. For what leavest thou here, but a world of misery? To whom go
thou, but to a God of mercy. And what have thou in exchange but immortal glory,
for a vile, frail, and corruptible body? whatsoever thou had here, was got
with pain, kept with fear, and lost with grief: Whereas now thou art to
possess eternal riches without laboring; and to enjoy them without fear of
losing. My heart then is ready, my heart is ready; too long have I sojourned
here, in making me a stranger to my heavenly Country It is high time for me
then to discamp: and to leave these tents of Kedar: that I may rest without
laboring; rejoice without sorrowing; and live without dying in the Celestial
Thabor. Say then with that vessel of Election, and think as thou say: I
desire to be dissolved, and to be with Christ. Even so Lord In sus, come
quickly.

FINIS.
His Obsequies.
NOw, as ye have seen this poor penitent Pilgrim in Idum^a wandering, and with
the Prodigal Child, happily returning, so Christian charity assures you that
he is now in Canaan arriving. Being, after so many tedious days and nights of
misery, translated hence, by the irrevocable sentence of mortality. Let pious
tears and prayers prevail so far with you, that as ye have taken a full
view of the whole progress of his life, Sitiens Sepulchrum repetit, ossa
Sepultorum respicit, suspirans Sepultum deserit; quando autem in domum,
fragilitat is humanae Speculum meditando, tenderet, in tabernam descenderet ubi
totam noctem, calicibus indulgendo, expenderet. Chysol.
so ye would perform a Christian Office in accompanying the solemn
accomplishment of his Obsequies after death. Draw near then unto his
Sepulcher; and in it consider how ye are made of the very self same Mould and
Matter: and must, as he has done, pay your debt to nature. Do not like that
unfruitful Spectator or formal Mourner, who coming amongst others to see his
Friend buried, and beholding dead men's skuls and bones peece-meale scattered,
with an easy sigh thence departed. But when he should have gone home, to
think of his last home, by meditating of that Memorial of Death; he betook
himself to the Tavern, to drench and drink down those melancholy thoughts
in a deep health.

Oh think from whence ye came, and be ashamed; Where ye are, and be
prepared, whereto ye go (if unprepared) and stand amazed! from Earth was your
beginning; on Earth is your Pilgrim being; but in Hell (without repentance)
your perpetual dwelling.

Dye then to Earth before ye leave Earth, that leaving Earth, ye may live in
heaven, the inheritance of the Just upon Earth.

His Gravestone.
HE, whom here this Stone does cover,
Whilst he lived was no other
Then a Pilgrim and your Brother,
But too long the Worlds Lover.
Would ye know that course of his?
In an Abstract, it was this.
Long in Idum^a living,
Rich in favor, fortune, fame,
Strong in power to shield the same,
Never losing, ever thriving;
He esteemed himself sole-blest
In those treasures he possessed.
Mines and Magazins of gain,
Various objects of delight
Sported with his appetite,
Till those Guests he would entertain,
Made him to consider well
Earth was but the Sinners Cell.
Pride first raised him to a Cedar,
Avarice made him hug his treasure,
Envy pined him beyond measure,
Wrath became his passion leader,
Riotcramm'd him; Lust belull'd him,
Sloth by seazing on him, dulled him.
Thus environed, rest of rest,
Solace, Soul, society,
Till Faith, Hope, and Charity
Re-possest him of a Guest,
Which those Guests he pampered so,
Had before estranged him to.
Seas thus calmed, and storms appeased,
To discover his content,
He makes his Will, and Testament,
Which if (Christians) ye be pleased
To partake her, come with full eyes
To solemaize his Obsequies.
ERRATA.
No place but is of Errors rife,
In labors, Lectures, Leafes,
Lines, life.
P Ag. 22. line. 11. for there, read her. p. 34. l. 20. f. lives, r. hours p.
72. l. 9. for Dames, r. Damns. p. 112. l. ult. r. one to dictate to thee what
thou have, etc. p. 153. l. 21. f. Nay, r. May. p. 166. l. 22. f. Couch, r.
Touch. Ibid. in marg. f. Humb. r. Lumb. p 205 l. 13. f. wailes, r. vailes. p.
213. l 9. f. meditation. r. mediation. p. 269. l. 16. for Calidore, r. Calidon.
p. 340. for them, r him. p. 355. 1 ^^. f. when, r. where page ibl. 18. f. Dags,
r. Dogs. p. 356. l. 14. for everting in some copies, r. everlasting p. 363 1.
1: f. painting, r. ^painting. p. 379 mis-folio'd.


