SCHISM GUARDED, and beaten back upon the right owners.

Showing that our great controversy about Papal power is not a quaestion of
faith, but of interest and profit, not with the Church of Rome, but with the
Court of Rome, wherein the true Controversy does consist, who were the first
innovators, when and where these Papal innovations first began in England,
with the opposition that was made against them.

By JOHN BRAMHALL D. D. Bishop of Derry.

Act. 25. 10. I stand at Caesar's judgment seat where I ought to be judged.
Psalm. 19. 2. Dies diei eructat verbum, and nox nocti indicat scientiam.
GRAVENHAGH, Imprinted by JOHN RAMZEY, Anno M.DC.LVIII.

To the CHRISTIAN READERS, especially the Roman Catholics of England.
CHristian Reader, the great Bustling in the Controversy concerning Papal
power or the discipline of the Church, has been either about the true sense of
some Texts of holy Scripture, As thou art Peter, and upon this rock will I
build my Church, and to thee will I give the Keys of the Kingdom of heaven,
and feed my sheep: Or about some privileges conferred upon the Roman See by
the Canons of the Fathers and the Edicts of Emperors, but praetended by the
Roman Court and the mainteiners thereof to be held by divine right. I e^devour
in this Treatise to disabuse thee, and to show that this challenge of divine
right, is but a Blind or Diversion to withhold thee from finding out the true
State of the Quaestion. So the Hare makes her doubles and her iumpes before she
come to her Form, to hinder Tracers from finding her out.

I demonstrate to thee, that the true controversy is not concerning St. Peter,
we have no formed difference about St Peter, nor about any point of faith, but
of interest and profit, nor with the Church of Rome, but with the Court of
Rome, and wherein it does consist, namely in these quaestions; Who shall
confer English Bishoprics, who shall convocate English Synods, who shall
receive tenths and first fruits and Oaths of Allegiance and Fidelity,
Whether the Pope can make binding Laws in England without the consent of the
King and Kingdom, or dispense with English Laws at his own pleasure, or call
English Subjects to Rome without the Princes leave, or set up Legantine Courts
in England against their wills. And this I show not out of the opinions of
Particular Authors, but out of the public Laws of the Kingdom.

I prove moreover out of our fundamental Laws and the writings of our best
Historiographers, that all these branches of Papal power were abuses and
innovations and usurpations, first attempted to be introduced into England
above eleven hundred years after Christ, with the names of the Innovators, and
the praecise time when each innovation began, and the opposition that was made
against it, by our Kings, by our Bishops* by our Peers, by our Parliaments,
with the groans of the Kingdom under these Papal innovations and extortions.

Likewise in point of doctrine, thou have been instructed that the Catholic
faith does comprehend all those points which are controverted betvveene us and
the Church of Rome, without the express belief whereof no Christian can be
saved: whereas in truth all these are but opinions, yet some more dangerous
then others. If none of them had ever been started in the world, there is
sufficient to salvation for points to be believed in the Apostles Creed. Into
this Apostolical faith professed in the Creed, and explicated by the four
first General Counsels, and only into this faith, we have all been
baptized. Far be it from us to imagine, that the Catholic Church has
evermore baptized, and does still baptize but into one half of the Christian
faith.

In sum do thou desire to live in the Communion of the true Catholic
Church? So do I. But as I dare not change the cognizance of my Christianity,
that is my Creed, nor enlarge the Christian faith (I mean the essentialls of
it) beyond those bounds which the Apostles have set: So I dare not (to serve
the interest of the Roman Court,) limit the Catholic Church, which Christ
has purchased with his blood, to a fourth or a fifth part of the Christian
world.

Thou art for tradition, So am I. But my tradition is not the tradition of one
particular Church contradicted by the tradition of another Church, but the
universal and perpetual tradition of the Christian world united. Such a
tradition is a full proof, which is received semper ubique and ab omnibus;
alvvaies, every where, and by all Christians. Neither do I look upon the
oppositio^ of an handful of Heretics, (they are no more being compared to
the innumerable multitudes of Christians,) in one or two ages, as inconsistent
with universality, any more then the highest mountains are inconsistent with
the roundnesse of the earth.

Thou desire to bear the same respect to the Church of Rome that thy
Ancestors did; So do I. But for that fullness of power, yea coactive power in
the exterior Court, over the subjects of other Princes, and against their
wills, devised by the Court of Rome, not by the Church of Rome; it is that
pernicious source from whence all these usurpations did spring. Our Ancestors
from time to time made Laws against it: and our reformation in point of
discipline being rightly understood, was but a pursueing of their steps. The
true controversy is, whether the Bishop of Rome ought by divine right to have
the external Regiment of the English Church, and coactive jurisdiction in
English Courts, over English Subjects, against the will of the King and the
Laws of the Kingdom.

SCHISM GUARDED and beaten back upon the right owners. Or A clear and CIVIL
ANSWER, to the railing accusation of S. W. in his late Book called. SCHISM
DISPAT'CHED.
Whatsoever S. W. alias Mr. Sergeant does intimate to the contrary, (for he
dare not cough out,) it is a most undeniable truth, that no particular Church,
(no not the Church of Rome it self) is exempted from a possibility of falling
into errors in faith. When these errors are in Essentials of faith, which are
necessary to salvation necessitate medii, they destroy the being of that Church
which is guilty of them. But if these errors be in inferior points, such as
are neither absolutely necessary to Salvation to be known, nor to be believed
before they be known; such an Erroneous Church erring without obstinacy and
holding the truth implicitly in praeparatione animi, may and does still
continue a true member of the Catholic Church, and other coordinate Churches
may and ought to maintein Communion with it, not withstanding that they dissent
in opinion. But if one Church before a lawful determination shall obtrude her
own Errors or Opinions upon all other Churches as a necessary condition of her
communion, or after Determination shall obtrude doubtful opinions (whether they
be Erroneous or not) as necessary Articles of Christian faith, and so not only
explain, but likewise enlarge the Ancient Creeds, she becomes Schismatic:
As on the otherside, that Church which shall not o^twardly acquiesce after a
legal Determination, and cease to disturb Christian Unity, though her
Judgment may be sound, yet her Practice is Schismatic.

This is the very case betwixt the Churches of Rome and England, She obtrudeth
Doubtful Opinions as Necessary Articles of faith, and her own Errors as
necessary conditions of Communion, Which Mr. Sergeant everywhere misseth and
misteth with his Praevarications. I cannot more fitly resemble his Discourse
then to a Winter Torrent, Which abounds with Water when there is no need of
it, but in Summer when it Should be useful, it is dried up: So he is full of
proofs (which he miscalleth Demonstrations) where there is no controversy
between us, and where the water sticks in deed; he is as mute as a fish. He
takes great pains te prove that the Catholic Church is infallible in such
things as are necessary to Salvation. Whom does he strike? He beats but the
air, We say the same: But we deny that his Church of Rome is this Catholic
Church, and that the Differences between us are in such things as are necessary
to Salvation. Here where he should Demonstrate if he could, he favors him
self. He proves that it is unreasonable to deny that or doubt of it which is
received by the universal Tradition of the whole Christian World. What is he
seeking? Surely he does not seek the Question here in Earnest, but as he who
sought for an Hare under the Leads; because he must seek her as well where she
was not, as where she was. We confess that writing adds no new Authority to
Tradition, Divine Writings and Divine Tradition, Apostolical Writings and
Apostolical traditions, if they be both alike certain, have the same authority:
And what greater certainty can be imagined then the Universal Attestation of
the Catholic Symbolicall Church of Christ. But the right Controversy lies on
the other hand. We deny that the Tradition whereupon they ground their
Opinions, wherein we and They dissent, is universal, either in regard of
time, or place.

He endeavors with Tooth and Nail to establish the Roman Papacy Iure
divino, but for the extent of Papal power he leaves it free to Princes,
commonwealths, Churches, Universities, and particular Doctors to Dispute it and
bound it, and to be Judges of their own Privileges. Yet the maine controversy,
I might say the only necessary controversy between them and us, is about the
extent of Papal power, as shall be seen in due place. If the Pope would
content himself with his exordium Vnitatis, which was all that his primitive
praedecessors had, and is as much as a great part of his own Sons will allow
him at this day; we are not so hard hearted and uncharitable, for such an
innocent Title or Office, to disturb the peace of the Church. Nor do envy him
such a pre-eminence among Patriarchs as S. Pieter had (by the confession of his
own party) among the Apostles. But this will not be accepted, either he will
have all or none, patronages, tenths, first fruits, investitures, appeals,
legantine courts, and in one word an absolute Sovereignty or nothing. It is
nothing unless he may bind all other Bishops to maintein his usurped
Roialt^es, under the pretensed name of Regalia Sancti Petri, by an Oath
contradictory to our old Oath of allegiance, altho^gh all these encroachme^ts
are directly destructive to the ancient laws and liberties both of the British
and English Churches. So we have only cast of his boundless Tira^ny. It is he
and his Court who have deserted and disclaymed his own just regulated
authority, as appears by the right stating of the question. But M. Sergeant
lapwing like makes the most pewing and crying when he is furthest from his
nest. What he is, I neither know nor much regard. I conclude he is but a young
divine, because he himself styles his Treatise the Prentisage of his
Endeavors in controversy. Page: 2. And is it not a great boldness for a single
apprentice (if he do not shoot other men's bolts after he has bestowed a
little Rhetorical Varnish upon them) to take up the Bucklers against two old
Doctors at once, and with so much youthful presumption of victory that his
Titles sound nothing but disarming and dispatching and knocking down, as if
Caesar's Motto. I came, I see, I overcame, were his Birthright? He that is such
a conqueror in his apprentisage, what victoryes may not he promise himself,
when he is grown to be an experienced Master in his profession? But let him
take heed that his over daring do not bring him in the conclusion to catch a
Tartar, that is in plain English to lose himself. The cause which he oppugneth
is built upon a rock, though the wind bluster and the waves beat, yet it cannot
fall.

I hear moreover by those who seem to know him, that he was sometimes a Novice
of our English Church, who deserted his Mother before he knew her; If it be so
to do, he owes a double account for Schism, and one which he will not claw of
so easily. And if no man had informed me, I should have suspected so much of my
self: We find Strangers civil and courteons to us every where in our Exile,
except they be set on by some of our own; but sundry of those who have run over
from us, proved violent and bitter Adversaries without any provocation, (as Mr.
Sergeant for example). I cannot include all in the same Guilt. Whether it
proceed from the Consciousnesse of their own guilt in deserting us, at this
time especially; or the Contentment to gain Companions or fellow Proselites:
or they find it necessary to procure themselves to be trusted; or it be
enjoined to them by their Superiors as a Policy to make the Breach
irreparable; Or what else is the true reason I do not determine. But this we
all know that Fowlers do not use to pursue those Birds with Clamor whith they
have a desire to catch.

His manner of writing is petulant railing and full of Praevarication, as if he
had the gift to turn al he touched into Absurdities Calumn^es and
Contradictions. Sometimes in a good mode, he acknowledges my poor labors to
be a pattern of wit and industry; and that there is much commendable in them At
other times in his passion he makes them to be absurd, non sensicall,
ridiculous and every where contradictory to them selves, and me to be Worse
then a Madman or born fool. Good words. If better were within better would
come out. Sometime he confesses me to be candid and downright, and to speak
plain; at other times he accuses me for a falsifier and a Cheater without
ingenuity. A sign that he utters whatsoever comes upon his tongues end,
without regard to truth or falsehood. If he can blow both hot and cold with the
same Breath, there is no great regard to be had of him.

The Spartans brought their Children to love Sobriety by showing them the
detestable Enormityes which their Servants committed being Drunken: so the
only View of Mr. Sergeants railing writings are a sufficient Antidote to a
stayed man against such extreme scurrility. And I wonder that the Church of
Rome which is so provident that none of her Sons in their writings swerve from
their rule of faith, should permit them so Licentionsly to transgress the rule
of good manners: and whilst they seem to propugn true Piety, to abandon all
Civility, as if Zeal and Humanity were in consistent. When Michaell the
Arch-angell disputed with the Devil about the body of Moses, he durst not
bring a railing Accusation against him. Whether does this man think him self to
have more Privilege then an Archangell, or us to be worse then Devils? When
the Holy Ghost fell upon the Apostles it was indeed in fiery Tongues to
express Devotion: but likewise in cloven tongues to express Discretion. St.
Paul would have the Servant of the Lord to be gentle to all men, in meekness
instructing those that oppose them selves, if God peradventure will give them
repentance to the acknowledging of the truth. This is the right way to gain
souls. 2. Tim. 2. 24.
The mild Beams of the Sun wrought more effectually upon the Travailer, then
the blustering Blasts of the Northwind. Generosus est animus hominis. The mind
of man is Generous and is more easily led then drawn: The Lord was not in the
loud wind nor in the Earthquake, nor in the Fire; but in a still voice. 1 Kings
19. 12.
Such a one Master Sergeants is not.

If he had objected but two or three Absurdityes or contradictions, it had been
able to have troubled a man, because there might have been some Verisimilitude
in it: but when he Metamorphoseth my whole Discourse into absurdityes and
Contradictions, that they lie as thick as Samsons Enemies, Judges 15. 10.
heaps upon heaps with the Iawbone of an Ass, it shows plainly that they are
but made Dragons, without any reality in them. Like that strange Monster which
a cunning Cheat promised to show his credulous Spectators, An Horse whose head
stood in the place of his Tail: And when all came to all, he him self had tied
the Horse to the manger the wrong way; There needs no Application. So an expert
Puppet-player can at his pleasure make the little Actors chide and fight one
with another, and knock their own heads against the Posts, by secret Motions
which he him self lends them. So the Picture of a glorified Saint, by
changing of the prospect, may be turned into a poor Lazar.

He professes that he has the gift of unpraejudiced sincerity, if he could be
credited upon his bare word: but Remember to Distrust, was Epictetus his
Jewel. No man proclaims in the Streets that he has rotten Wares to sell:
and Iuglers when they are about to play their tricks use to strip up their
sleeves in assurance of fair dealing. What pledge he has given us in this
Treatise of such Candor and unprejudiced sincerity, we may observe by the
sequel.

In sum (Reader he complains much of Wording: yet he himself has nothing
but words. He calls earnestly for rigid Demonstrations, but produces none;
And if the nature of the subject would bear one, he knows a way how to turn
it into a Contradiction. He hates Contradictions with all his heart, Mistake
him not, it is in another not in him self. It were to be wished that he knew a
little better what Contradictions are, least innocent propositions go to wrack
in his fury under the Notion of Contradictions, As poor old women do for
witches in some part of the world. He is a great Friend to Christian Peace, and
a mighty Desirer of Unity if we may trust his word; If he be indeed, it will be
the better for him one Day, but who would have thought it, that scratching and
biting among reasonable men were a ready way to Unity. I doubt it is but such
an Unity as Rabshakeh desired between Senacherib and Hezekiah, a slavish Unity.
I proposed but three Expedients in the Conclusion of my Vindication of the
Church of England, to obtein a wished peace in Christen dome, such as
themselves cannot deny to be lawful, and all moderate men will judge necessary
to be done. To reduce the present Papacy to the Primitive form, The
Essentialls of faith to the Primitive Creed, And Public and private devotions
to the Primitive Leiturgies: But this peaceable man is so far from listening to
them, that he does not vouchsafe to take notice of them; But in answer wishes
us To receive the root of Christianity, that is Practical Infallibility in
the Church, (he means the Church of Rome) which being denied there is no
religion left in the world. His style is toosharp, his Judgment over partial,
his Experience too small, his sentences and censures over rash and' rigorous,
his Advises too Magisteriall, to be a fit instrument of procuring peace. But
let us listen to those truths which he proposes whether they be as he
avoucheth (with more Confidence then discretion) as evident in themselves, as
that two and three make five. If he can make this good, his work is done: but
if there be no such thing, as thou will find, learn that all is not gold that
glisters; And let him take heed that' his new light be not an ignis fatuus,
which makes Precipices seem plain ways to wandrimg mis^ed persons.

A SVRREIOINDER or Defense of the Bishop of Derrys Reply to the Appendix of Mr.
William Sergeant.
The First part of his Rejoinder is a Corollary, drawn from his former
Principles brought against Doctor Hammond. That little remains to be replied
to me in substantial points, Since neither can I deny there is now a breach
made between us, Nor do I pretend demonstrative and rigorous evidence, that
the Popes Authority was an Usurpation, Nor lastly do I pretend that probable
reasons are a sufficient ground to renounce an Authority so strongly supported
by long possession, and Universal Delivery of immediate Forefathers as come
from Christ, or that it was prudence to hazard a Schism upon the uncertain
Lottery of a Probability. These grounds are supposed by him to be demonstrated
against Doctor Hammond; and are barely repeated here, to try if he can kill two
Birds with one Bolt made of a Burre. But I refuse the Province at present as a
needless and a thanklesse Office; N'eedlesse in respect of his learned
Adversary, who will show him sufficiently the weakness of his pretended
Demonstration, Page 543.
And thanklesse, in respect of him self, who had taxed me in this Rejoinder of
busying my self to answer an objection that was not addressed to me.

Yet least Mr. Sergeant should feign that I seek Subterfuges, I will briefly
and clearly declare my Sense of his grounds as they are here proposed, that he
may fight no more with his own shadow as it is his common use; in hope I may
recover his good opinion of my Candor and ingenuity. And if it please him, he
may borrow Diogenes his Candle and Lanthorn at noon Day to search for
contradictions.

First that there is a breach between them and us is too evident and void of
Question. Whether they or we be guilty of making this breach, They by
excommunicating us, or obtruding unlawful Conditions of their Communion upon
us, or we by seperating from them without sufficient Grounds, is a question
between us. But that which changes the whole state of the Question is this, If
any Bishop or Church or Court Whatsoever, shall presume to change the ancient
Discipline of the Church and Doctrine of Faith, either by Addition or by
Substraction, either all at once or by degrees, and in so doing shall make a
Breach between them and the Primitive Church, or between them and the present
Catholic Church; To separate from him or them in those things wherein they had
first separated from the Ancient or present Catholic Church, is not Schism but
true piety. Now we affirm that the later Bishops of Rome did alter the
Discipline of the Church and Doctrine of Faith, by changing their beginning of
Unity into a Plenitude and Universality of Sovereign Jurisdiction, and by
adding of new Essentialls of Faith to the Creed; and in so doing had made a
former Breach between them selves and all the rest of the Christian World. Here
the Hindge of the Controversy is, moved. Hitherwards all his supposed
Demonstrations o^ght to have looked. Neither will it avail him anything to say
there can be no sufficient cause of Schism, for in this case the Separation is
not Schism but the cause is Schism.

Secondly if by Demonstrative and rigorous Evidence he understand perfect
Demonstrations according to the exact rules of Logic, Neither is this cause
capable of such demonstrations, nor can his Mediums amount unto it: but if by
Demonstrative evide^ce, he understand only convincing proofs, as it seems
by opposing it to probable reasons I have made it evident that the Popes
Authority which he did sometimes exercise in England, before the Reformation
when they permitted him, and which he would have excercised always de futuro,
if he could have had his own will, was a mere Usurpation and innovation never
attempted in the British Churches for the first six hundred years; Attempted
but not admitted by the Saxon Churches for the next five hundred years; And
damned by the Laws of the successive Norman Kings ever since, as destructive
to the rights of the English Crown, and the Liberties of the English Church, as
shall be manteined where soever occasion offers it self. Yet all this while I
meddle not with his beginning of Unity; If he want that respect from me, it is
his own fault.

And this includes an answer to his third ground that the Papal Authority
which we rejected, was so strongly supported by long possession and the
Universal Delivery of Forefathers as come from Christ. He had always some
show of right for his beginning of Unity, but no pretense, in the world for his
Sovereignty of power. To make Laws, To repeal Laws, to dispense with the
Cannons of the Universal Church, to hold Legantine Courts, to dispose of
Ecclesiastical preferme^tes to call the subjets out of the kingdoms, to impose
tributes at his pleasure and the like. We will show him such an usurpation as
this; Let him prove such a Papacy by universal tradition, and he shall be
great Appollo to me. We do not hold it prudence to hazard a Schism upon
probabilities: but trust me such a multitude of palpable usurpations as we are
able to reckon up, so contrary to the fundamental Laws of England, which were
grounded upon the ancient Privileges of the British and Saxon Churche^,
together with the addition of twelve new articles or Essentialls to the Creed
at once by Pius the fourth (I say addition not explication) are more then
probabilities. He converseth altogether in Generals, a Papacy or no Papacy,
which is commonly the Method of deceivers: but if he dispute or treat with us,
we must make bold to draw him down to particulars; Particulars did make the
Breach.

I censured his light and ludicrous title of Down derry modestly in these
words. It were strange if he should throw a good cast who soales his Bowl upon
an undersong, alluding to that ordinary and elegant expression, in our English
tongue, Soale your bowl well, that is, be careful to begin your work well.

Dimidium facti, qui been cepit habet. The Printer puts seals for soales,
which easy error of the press any rational man might have found out: but Mr.
Sergeants pen runs at random, telling the Reader, that I am Mystically
proverbiall, that I am far the better Bowler. Surely he did but dream it. And
that he him self is so inexpert, as not to understand what is meant by sealing
a Bowl upon an undersong. If he were such a stranger in his Mothers Tongue,
Yet he might have learned of some of his friends what soaling a Bowl was,
rather then burden the press, and trouble the World with such empty and
impertinent Vanities Neither did his pleasant humor rest here, but twice more
in his short Rejoinder he is pursuing this innocent Bowl. Afterward he
tells us that I was beholden to the merry S^ationer for this Title, who
without his knowledge or approbation would needs make it his Post-past to his
bill of fare. This answer if it be true had excused himself: but it shows
that the Stationer was over scurriloufly audacious, to make such Antepasts and
Postpasts at his pleasure. Neither is it likely that the composer was such a
perfect stranger to our langnage as he intimates in his Epistle, and the merry
Stationer so well versed in our Vndersongs. But after all this he owneth it by
telling us that the jest was very proper and fatal. Yes as fatal as it is
for his Rejoinder to contein 666 pages, which is just the number of the Beast.
His merry Stationer might easily have contrived it otherwise, for fear of a
fatality, by making one page more or less, but his mind was otherwise taken
up, how to cheat his Customers with counterfeit bills of fare, which they will
never find, I will endeavor to cure him, of his opinion of fatality.

Sect: I. Cap: I.
BEcause Mr. Sergeant complains much of wording, and yet gives his Reader
nothing but words, and calls so often for rigorous demonstrations, yet
produces nothing for his part which resembles a strict demonstration; and
because this first part of his discourse is the Basis or ground work of the
whole building, whereof he boasts that it does charge the guilt of Schism
upon our Church, not only with Color but with undeniable Evidence, I will
reduce his discourse into a Logical form, that the Reader may see clearly
where the Water sticks between us. Whatsoever he prateth of a rigorous
demonstrative way as being only conclusive, it is but a Copy of his
countenance. He cannot be ignorant, or if he be, he will find by experience
that his glittering principles will fail him in his greatest need, and leave
him in the dirt. I have known sundry fantastic Persons who have been great
pretenders to demonstration, but always succeslesse, and for the most part
ridiculous. They are so conceitedly curious about the premises, that commonly
they quite mistake their conclusion: Causes encombred with Circumstances, and
those left to the election of free agents, are not very capable of
demonstration.

The Case in difference between us is this as it is stated by me, Schism
disarmed. page 306.
Whether the Church of England have withdrawn themselves from Obedience to the
Vicar of Christ and separated from the Communion of the Catholic Church.

And upon those Terms it is undertaken by him in the words immediately
following, And that this Crime is justly charged upon his Church not only with
Color, but with undeniable Evidence of fact, will appear by the position of
the Case, and the nature of his exceptions. We have the State of the
Controversy agreed upon between us, Now let us see how he goes about to prove
his intention.

What Church soever did upon probable reasons without any neeessary or
convincing grounds break the Bonds of Unity ordained by Christ in the Gospel
and agreed upon by all true churches, is guilty of Schism: But the Church of
England in Henry the eight^s days did upon probable reasons without any
necessary or convincing grounds, break the Bonds of Unity ordained by Christ in
the Gospel and agreed upon by all true churches, therefore the church of
England is guilty of Schism. I do readily assent to his Major proposition,
and am ready to grant him more if he had pleased to insert it, That that Church
is Schismatic which does break the Bonds of Unity ordained by Christ in his
Gospel, whatsoever their reasons be whether convincing or probable, and
whosoever do either consent to them or dissent from them: But I deny his Minor
which he endeavors to prove thus.

Whatsoever Church did renounce or reject these two following Rules or
Principles, first that [The doctrines which had been inherited from their
Forefathers as the Legacyes of Christ and his Apostles were solely to be
acknowledged for Obligatory, and nothing in them to be changed.] Secondly that
[Christ had made St. Peter first or chief or Prince of his Apostles, who was to
be the first mover under him in the Church after his departure out of this
World, and to whom all others in difficulties concerning Matters belonging to
Universal faith or Government, should have reco^rse, and that the Bishops of
Rome as Successors from St. Peter inherited from him this privilege in respect
of the Successors of the rest of the Apostles.) That Church did break the
Bonds of Unity ordained by Christ in his Gospel, and agreed upon between the
Church of England and the Church of Rome and the rest of her communion. But the
Church of England did all this in Henry the eyghts days that very year where
in this unhappy Separation began, upon merely probable, no convincing grounds.
Therefore etc.

To his former Proposition I made this exception, That he would obtrude upon us
she Church of Rome and its dependents for the Catholic Church: Upon this he
flies out as it is his Custom into an invective discourse, telling me, I
look a squint at his position of the case. He will not find it so in the
conclusion, And that I strive Hocus-pocus like to divert my Spectators eyes,
With a great deal more of such like froath, where in there is not a syllable
to the purpose, except this, that he did not mention the word Catholic in that
place. The greater was his fault. It is a foul Solecisme in Logic not to
conclude contradictorily. I did mention the Catholic Church in the State of
the Question. Whether the church of England had separated it self from the
communion of the Catholic Church. And he had undertaken in the words
immediately following, to charge that very Schism upon us with undeniable
Evidence. And in his very first Essay shuffles out the Catholic Church, and in
the place thereof thrusts in the Church of Rome with all the rest of her
communion. He might have known that we do not look upon the Church of Rome
with all the rest of her Communion as the Catholic Church; Nor as above a
fifth part of the present Catholic Church; And that we do not ascribe any
such in fallibility in necessary truths to the Roman Church with all her
dependants, as we do to the true Catholic Church, Nor esteem it always
Schismatic to separate from the modern Roman Church, Namely in those points
wherein she had first separated both from the primitive Roman Church, and from
the present Catholic Church. But we confess it to be always Schismatic
to separate from the Communion of the Catholic Church united. Thus much he
ought to take notice of, and when he has oecasion hereafter to write upon this
Subject, not to take it for granted (as they use to do) that the Catholic
Church and the Roman Church are convertible Terms, or tell us a Tale of a Tub
what their Tenet is, that these Churches which continue in Communnion with the
Roman are the only true Churches. We regard not their Schismatic and
uncharitable Tenets now, no more then we regarded the same tenets of the
donatists of old. They must produce better authority then their Own, and more
substantial proofs then he has any in his Budget, to make us believe that
the Roman Church is the Catholic Church. It is charity to acknowledge it to be
a Catholic church inclusively; but the greatest uncharitableness in the world
to make it the Catholic church exclusively, that is to separate from Christ
and from hope of Salvation as much as in them lies all Christians who are not
of their own communion. Howsoever, it is well that they who used to vaunt that
the Enemy trembled at the name of the Catholic church, are now come about
themselves to make the Catholic Church to be an appendix to the Roman. Take
notice Reader that this is the first time that Mr. Sergeant turns his back to
the question, but it will not be the last.

My next ta^ke is to examine his two Rules or Bonds of Unity. the rule of faith.
And first concerning his Rule of faith, I do not only approve it but thanck
him for it; and when I have a purpose to confute the 12 new Articles of Pius
the fourth, I will not desire a better medium then it. And I do Cordially
subscribe to his Censure, that the Transgressors there of are indeed those who
are truly guilty of that horrid Schism which is now in the Christian world.

To his second Rule or principle for Government that Christ made S^. Peter
First or Chief or Prince of his Apostles, The rule of Government No
controversy about St. Peter.
who was to be the first mover under him in the church, after he departed out
of this world to whom all others should have recourse in greater Difficulties.
If he had not been a mere Novice and altogether ignoran^ of the Tenets of our
English Church, he might have known that we have no controversy with S^.
Peter, nor with any other about the privileges of St. Peter, Let him be First,
Chief, or Prince of the Apostels, in that sense wherein the Ancient Fathers
styled him so, Let him be the First Ministerial Mover, And why should not the
Church have recourse to a prime Apostle or Apostolical Church in doubtful
cases? The learned Bishop of Winchester (of whom it is no shame for him to
learn) might have taught him thus much, not only in his own name, but in the
name of the King and Church of England, Resp. ad Apol Bellarm ^. 1.
Neither is it questioned among us whether St. Peter had a Primacy, but what
that Primacy was. And whether it were such an one as the Pope does now
Challenge to him self, and you challenge to the pope. But the King does not
deny Peter to have been the prime and prince of the Apostles. I wonder how it
comes to pass that he who commonly runs over in his expressions, should
now on a sudden become so dry upon this Subject. If this be all, be needed not
to have forsaken the Communion of the Church of England, for any great Devotion
that he bears to St. peter, more then we.

But yet we dare not rob the rest of the Apostles to cloth St. Peter, We say
clearly with St. Cyprian, Hoc erant utique and caeteri Apostoli quod fuit
petrus, pari consortio praediti and honoris and Po^estatis, sed exordium ab
Vnitate proficisci^ur, cyprian de Vnitate Eccles.
Primatus Petro da^ur ut una christi Ecclesia and una ca^hedr a monstretur, The
rest of the Apostles were even the same thing that Peter was, endowed with an
equal Fellowship both of honor and power: but the beginning comes from
Unity, the primacy is given to Peter, to signify one church and one chair. It
is well known that St. Cyprian made all the Bishop ricks in the World to be
but, one mass, Episcopatus unus est Episcoporum multorum concordi numerositate
diffusus, Ep. 52. ad Anton. de Vnitate.
whereof every Bishop had an entire part, cujus a singulis in solidum pars
tenetur. All that he attributes to St. Peter is this beginning of Unity this
primacy of Order, this pre-eminence to be the Chief of Bishops, To be Bishop of
the principal Church from whence Sacerdot all Unity did spring, Ep. 55. ad
Cornel.
Yet I esteem St. Ciprian as favorable an Expositor to the Sea of Rome, as any
they will find out of their own Chair that was no more interessed in that See.
This primacy neither the Ancients nor we do deny to St. Peter, of Order, of
Place, of pre-eminence, if this first Movership would serve his turn, this
controversy were at an end for our parts. But this Primacy is over lean, The
Court of Rome have no Gusto to it, They thirst after a visible Monarchy upon
earth, an absolute Ecclesiastical Sovereignty, A power to make Canons, to
abolish Canons, to dispense with Canons, to impose pensions to dispose
dignities, to decide Controversies by a single Authority. This was that which
made the breach, not the innocent Primacy of St. Peter, as I shall demonstrate
by evident proofs as clear as the noone day light.

Observe Reader that Mr. Sergeant is making another Vagare our of the lists, to
seek for his Adversary where he is sure not to find him, here after if he have
a mind to employ his pen upon this subject and not to bark at the Moonshine in
the water, let him endeavor to demonstrate these four things which we deny
indeed.

First that each Apostle had not the same power over the Christian world by
virtue of Christ Commission (As my Father sen^ me so send I you) which St.
Peter had. Io. 20. 21.


Secondly that St. Peter ever excercised a single Jurisdiction over the persons
of the rest of the Apostles, more then they over him besides and over and above
his Primacy of Order, or beginning of Unity.

Thirdly that St. Peter a lone had his Commission granted to him by Christ as
to an Ordinary Pastor, to him and his Successors, And all the rest of the
Apostles had their Co^missions only as Delegates for term of life; This new
hatched Distinction being the foundation of the present Papacy, I would be glad
to see one good author for it, who writ within a tho^sand years after Christ.

Lastly that the Sovereignty of Ecclesiastical power and Jurisdiction rested
in St. Peter alone, and was exercised by him alone, and not by the Apostolical
College, During the hystory of the Acts of the Apostles.

Now let us proceed from St. Peter to the Pope which is the second part of his
rule of Government. The ppe Successor to Saint Peter.
And that the Bishops of Rome as Successors of St. Peter inherited from him
this Privilige in respect of the Successors of the rest of the Apostles, And
actually exercised this power in all the Countries which kept Communion with
the Church of Rome. what Privilege? To be the first Bishop, the Chief Bishop,
the principal Bishop, the first mover in the Church, just as S. Peter was
among the Apostles? we have heard of no other Privilege as yet. If a man would
be pleased ou: of mere pity to his starving cause, to suppose thus much, what
good would it do him? Does he think that the pope or the court of Rome would
ever accept of such a Papacy as this, or thank him for his double diligence?
He must either be meanly versed in the Primitive Fathers, or give little credit
to them, who will deny the Pope to succced St Peter in the Roman Bishopric, or
will envy him the Dignity of a Patriarck with in his just Bounds. But the
Breach between Rome and England was not about any Episcopal, Metropolitical,
or Patriarchall rightes. A Patriarch has more power in his proper Bishopric
then in his province, and more in his province then in the rest of his
Patriarchate: But papal power is much greater then any Bishop did ever
challenge in his own Diocese. In my answer to his Assumtion I shall show
sufficiently who they were that Brake this Bond of Union, and are the undoubted
Authors of Schism.

But before I come to that, But not by Christ's Ordination.
I would know of him, how the Pope did inherit, all those Privileges which he
claims from S. Peter, or how he holds them by Christ's own ordination in holy
Scripture? First all the Eastern Churches do affirm Confidently that the most
of these Privileges were the Legacyes of the Church representative, not Christ
or St. Peter. And it seems to be very true by that of the Council of
Sardica, Conc. Sardic. c. 3.
Si vobis placet Sancti Petri memoriam honoremus. If all these Privileges were
the popes inheritance, it was not well done of old Osius to put it upon a Si
placet, content or not content, and to assign no better a reason then, the
memory of a Predecessor. It seems likewise to be true by the Council of
Chalcedon which attributes the primacy of the Bishop of Rome to the Decrees of
the Fathers and the dignity of that imperial City; Conc. chalced.
And when the popes Legates did oppose the Acts of the Council, Act 16.
Gloriosissimi Iudices dixerunt. The most glorieus Judges said, let both
parties plead the Canons. By the Canons that great Council of six hundred and
thirty Fathers did examine it; By the Canons they did determine it, there was no
inheritance pretended in the case.

Secondly if the Bishop of Rome did hold all his privileges by inheritance from
S. Peter how much were three successive Popes over seen, Zosimus, Bonifacius
and Caelestinus, to ground them upon the canons of the council of Nice, and
these either counterfeited or mistaken for the Canons of Sardica* Which when
the African Fathers did find o^t by the true Copyes of the Nicene Council,
they rejected that part of papal power as appears by their Letter to Pope
Caelestine We earnestly beseech you that hence forwards you do not easily lend
an ear to such as come from hence nor (which Bellarmine cuts of guilefully)
receive any more such as are excommunicated by us into your Communion, Epist.
Conc. Afr. ad caelestin.
with this sharp intimation, Ne fumosum typum saeculi in Ecclesiam videamur
inducere. If sovereign Judicature did belong to the Bishop of Rome by
Inheritance from St. Peter why did three popes challenge it upon the Decrees of
the Nicene Concell and why did the Affrican Fathers refuse to admit it, because
it was not contained in the Decrees of the Nicene Council?

Thirdly if by Prince of Bishops Mr Sergeant understand an absolute Prince, one
who has a single Legislative power, To make Canons, To abolish Canons, to
dispense with Canons as seems good in his own eyes, if he makea greater
Prince of the Steward, then he does of the Spouse of Christ, he will have an
hard Province to secure him self from the Censures of the Counsels of
Constance and Basile, in the former of which were personally present one
Empereur, Two Popes, Two Patriarchs, All the Cardinals, The Ambassadors of
all' the Princes in the West, and the Flower of Occidentall Scholars, Divines
and Lawyers. These had reason to know the Tradition of the Universal Church as
well as Mr. Sergeant.

Lastly, before he can determine this to be an undeniable truth, and a
necessary Bond of Unity, that the Bishop of Rome is Inheri^er of all the
Privileges of St. Peter, And that this Principle is Christ's own Ordination
recorded in Scripture, He must first reconcile him self to his own party. There
is a Comentary upon the Synodall answer of the council of Basile, printed at
Colone in the year 1613. comme^t in Epist. Synodal conc. Basil. pa. 31. b.
wherein is maintained, Idem page 40.
That the Provinces subject to the four great Patriarchs from the beginning of
the Christian church, did know no other Supreme but their own Patriarchs. And
if the Pope be a Primate it is by the church, If he be the head of all churches
it is by the church: and where as we have said that it is expressed in the
council of Nice, that many provinces were subjected to the church of Rome by
Ecclesiastical custom, and no other right, the Synod should do the greatest
injury to the Bishop of Rome, if it should attribute those things to him only
from Custom, which were his due by divine right.

Gerson goes much more accurately to work, Gerson de vita spirit. animae.
distinguishing Papal rights into three sorts, divine, which the Bishop of
Rome challenges by succession from St. Peter, Canonical, wherewith he has
been trusted by general counsels, and civil, gran^ed to that See by the
Emperors. Of the first sort he reckons no more but three privileges, To call
counsels, To give sentencee with councels, and Jurisdiction purely spiritual.

Among the Propositions given in to the council of Pisa and printed with the
acts of the council, Acta con^. primi Pisani impres. Lutet. 1612. fol. 69.
we find these, first, Although the Pope as he is the Vicar of Christ may
after a certain manner be called the head of the church: Yet the Unity of the
church does not depend necessarily, or receive its beginning from the Unity of
the Pope. Secondly, The church has power and authority originally and
immediately from Christ its head to congregate it self in a gonerall council,
to preserve its Unity. It is added, That the Catholic church has this power
also by the Law of Nature. Thirdly, In the Acts of the Apostles we read of four
Counsels Convocated and not by the Authority of Peter, but by the Common
Consent of the Church. And in one Council celebrated at Jerusalem, we read not
that Peter, but that James the Bishop of the Place was President and gave
Sentence. He concludes that the Church may call a General Council without
the Authority of the Pope, and in some cases, though he contradict it. The
Writers and writings of those times, in and about the Counsels of Constance
and Basile and the two Pisan Counsels, Can. lo. l. 6. c. 8 Cus. concord.
catholl. 2. ca. 34. Stap. de principfid. l. 13 ca. 15. So^o 4. sent. did 24.
qu* 2. art. 5 Driedo de Ecclesiast. dog. li. 4. c. 3. Contar. De Potest. Pont.
do a bound with such expressions.

Before he determined positively. The divine right of the Papacy as it
includes a Sovereignty of power, he ought to consider seriously what many of
his own friends have written about it; as Canus, and Cusanus, and Stapleton,
and Soto, and Driedo, and Segovius, as it is related by Aeneas Sylvius and
others; That the Popes succession is not revealed in Scripture; That Christ did
not limit the Primacy to any particular Church; That it cannot be proved that
the Bishop of Rome is perpetual Prince of the Church; That the Gloss which
prefers the Judgment of the Roman Church before the Judgment of the world,
singular and foolish and unworthy to be followed; That it has been a Catholic
Tenet in former times, that the Primacy of the Roman Bishop does depend not
upon divine, but human right and the positive Decrees of the Church; That men
famous in the Study of Christian Theology, Aen^ Sylvius de Gest. Bas. Conc. li
have not been afraid in great Assemblies to assert the Humane Right of the
Pope. He ought to Consider what is said of a great King, that Theologians
affirmed that the Pope was the head of the Church by divine right, Sleid. li. 9.
but when the King required them to prove it, they could not demonstrate it,
And lastly what the Bishop of Chalcedon says lately, To us it suffices that
the Bishop of Rome is St. Peter's Successor: Bish Chalc: Survey cap. 5.
and this all Fathers Testify, and all ihe Catholic Church believes, but
whether he be so Jure divino or humano, is no point of Faith.

Here Reader I must entreat the before we proceed a step-farther to read his
Assertion, Schism. disarmed Pa. 304.
That the Constant belief of the Catholic World was and is, that this
Principle (namely that the Bishop of Rome inherited the Privileges of St.
Peter) is Christ's own Ordination recorded in Scripture, Derived to us by the
strongest Evidences that our Nature is capable of. What a strange Confidenee is
this, to tell his Readers he cares not what so it may serve his present turn?
How should this be recorded in Scripture, when the Bisshoprick of Rome is never
mentioned in Scripture, nor so much as whether St. Peter ever was at Rome?
Except we understand Rome by Babylon? but this is too remote and too obscure to
be Christ's own Ordinance. If it be recorded in Scripture, it is either in
Nicodemus his Gospel, or in the Popes Decretall Epistles. Certainly in the
Genuine Scriptures there is no manner of mention of any such thing.

Hear the ingenuons Confession of a more learned Adversary, Bellar de Rom
Pont^ lib. 4. cap 4.
Neque Scriptura neque Traditio habet, sedem Apostolicam it a fixam esse Romae
ut inde auferri non possit, there is neither Scripture nor Trrdition to prove
that the Sea of St. Peter is so fixed to Rome, that it cannot be taken from it.
But if the Bishop of Rome did in herit the Privileges of St. Peter By Christ's
own Ordination recorded in Scripture, then there were Scripture to prove, that
it cannot be taken away from Rome. Christ's own Ordination must not be violated
Behold both his grounds Scripture and Tradition swept away at once.

It will not serve his turn at all to say Schism. dis. pa. 504.
that I take him in a Reduplicative sense as if he spoke of the Bishops of
Rome, Schism, dis. pa. 504.
as of Rome. Either Christ ordained in Scripture that the Bishop of Rome should
succeed St. Peter in his privileges, And then the Bishop of Rome does succeed
St. Peter as Bishop of Rome. Or Christ has not ordained in Scripture that the
Bishop of Rome should succeed S. Peter in his privileges; And then the Bishop
of Rome is not St. Peter Successor by Christ's own Ordination. He may be his
Successor upon another account: but by Christ's own Ordination recorded in
Scripture he cannot be, if Christ himself have not ordained in holy Scripture
that he should be. He adds that I picked these Words out of a Paragraph a
leaf after. Why? is he not bound to speak truth in one Paragraph as well as
in another? Or will he oblige one who combatteth with him to watch where his
Buckler is ready* and be sure to hit that? These things are as clear as the
light, and yet he vapors about my frivolous and impertinent answers, and
wonders how any man can have the patience to read such a Trisler. Let the
Reader judge which Scale has more weight in it.

How should the Bishop of Romes Succession to S. Peter be Christ's own
ordination recorded in Scripture; When both his fellows and he himself do
ground the Bishop of Romes right to succeed St. Peter upon the fact of St.
Peter: Namely, his dying Bishop of Rome? Bell. de Romans Pont. l. 2 cap. 12. and
lib. 4. ca. 4.
Bellarmine distinguishes between the Bishop of Romes succession of St. Peter,
and the reason of his succession. The succession (says he) is from the
institution of Christ by divine right, and commanded by Christ: but the reason
of this succession is from the fact of S. Peter, not from the institution of
Christ. Which two are irreconciliable. For if Christ commanded that the Bishop
of Rome should succeed St. Peter (as he says) Deus ipse jussit Romae figi
Apostolicam Petri sedem, quae autem jubet Deus mutari ab hominibus non possunt,
Then not the fact of St. Peter, but the mandate of Christ is the reason of the
succession. There was no need that St. Peter should do any thing to perfect
the commandment of Christ: and on the otherside, if the fact of St. Peter be
the true reason of the Bishop of Romes succession, the^ it is evident that
Christ did not command it. Let it be supposed to avoid impertinent disputes,
that Christ did create a chief Pastor of his church as an office of perpetual
necessity, without declaring his pleasure who shall be his successor, but
leaving the choice either to the chief Pastor or to the church: without
peradventure in such a case the Office is from Christ and the perpetuity is
from Christ, but the right of the Successor is from them who make the
application, whether if be the Chief Pastor, or the Church. The Succession of
the Bishop of Rome to S. Peter. is not recorded in Scripture; The fact of S.
Peter. is not recorded in Scripture. No such ordination of Christ is recorded
in Scripture, that the Bishop of Rome should be S. Peter's Successor; And
therefore it is impossible that the Succession of the Bishop of Rome to S.
Peter. should be Christ's own ordination recorded in Scripture.

Then what is this Mandate of Christ? and where contained? The Mandate is an
old legend contained in Marcellinus, Leo, Athanasius, Ambrose, and Gregory,
some of which point at it, others relate it, some define it as a matter of
faith. That S. Peter a little before his Passion being ready to depart out of
Rome did meet Christ in the gate who told him that he came to Rome to be
Crucified again, Thereby intimating that St. Peter must suffer martyrdom
there. Here is no mandate of Christ to S. Peter to fix his See at Rome, much
less that he should place it there for ever, never to be removed. True (says
Bellarmine) but yet non est improbabile Dominum etiam aperte jussisse ut Sedem
suam Petrus it a figeret Romae ut Romanus Episcopus absolute ei succederet. It
is not improbable that the lord did command plainly that Peter should fix his
See at Rome, that the Roman Bishop should succeed him absolutely. Alas? this is
but a poor ground to build a man's faith upon, that it is not improbable. And
therefore the said Author proceeds, Tame^si forte etc. Although peradventure
it be not of divine right that the Romaen Bishop because he is the Roman
Bishop, does succeed S. Peter in the prefecture of the Church.

And though it were supposed a point of faith, That the Bishop of Rome were S.
Peter's Successor: Yet it cannot be a point of faith that Pope Urban or Pope
Clement are S. Peter's Successors, and true Bishops of Rome, because there can
be no more then moral Certeinty for it. Who can assure us of their right
Baptisms and right Ordinations, according to the common Roman grounds? How can
we be sure of their Canonical Election, that two third parts of the
Cardinals did concur, or that the Election by Cardinals now, and by the
Emperors, and by the People formerly were all Authentic, forms, though I
doubt not but any of these might serve to obtain an humane right? But
especially what can secure us from the ^aint of Simoniacall Pravity, which they
who knew the Intrigues of States do tell us has born too great Vogue in the
Conclave of late days? And if it cannot be a point of Faith to believe the
present Pope is St. Peter's Successor for these reasons; neither can it be a
point of Faith that any of them all has been his Successor for the same
reasons. I do not urge these things to encourage any man to withdraw Obedience
from a lawful Superior, either upon improbable or probable suppositions but
to show their temerarious presumption who do so easily change humane right
into Divine right, and make many things to be necessary points of Faith, for
which there never was revelation or more then Moral Certainty.

Sest. I. Cap. II.
The next thing which offers it self to our Consideration is his Minor
Proposition, Orall and immediate tradition no certain rule.
Whether the church of England did break these Bonds of Unity etc* But I hold
it more Methodicall to examine first the Proofs of his Major, That these were
the right Bonds of Unity, and so dispatch that part out of my hands.

All which was agreed upon unanimouslly between the Church of Rome and its
dependents, and the Church of England, and delivred from hand to hand in them
all by the Orall and immediate Tradition of a World of Fathers to a world of
Children successively, as a rule of Faith or Difcipline received from Christ
and his Apostles, which so vast a Multitude of Eye witnesses did see visibly
practiced from Age to Age, is undoubtedly true, and such a rule is infallible
and impossibe to be Crooked.

But these two Rules are such Rules.

And so he concludes that they are incapable of Usurpations, and as easy to
teach faith as Children learn their A B C.

I have given his Argument as much force and edge as I could possibly; but all
this Wind shakes no Corn. His other two Rules were not so much to be blamed; as
this Rule of Rules, Orall and immediate Tradition. Mat. 15. 6.
Of such Orall and immediate Tradition it was that our Savior told the Sribes
and Pharisees, That they made the Commandments of God of none effect by their
Tradition, 1. Pet* 1. 18.
And St. Peter told the dispersed Jews, that they were redeemed by the blood
of Christ from their vain Conversation received by Tradition from their
Fathers. These were* such Traditions as The Jews pretended they had received
from Moses and the Prophets: as the Romanists pretend now to have received
their Traditions from Christ and his Apostles. Otherwise, we do not only
admit Orall Traditions in general, as an excellent Introduction to the Doctrine
of saving truth, and a singular help to expound the holy Scriptures: but also
particular unwritten Traditions derived from the Apostles and delivered unto us
by the manifest Testimony of the Primitive Church, being agreeable to the holy
Scriptures. The Apostles did speak by inspiration as well as write, and their
Tradition whether by word or writing indifferently was the word of God, into
which faith was resolved: The Traditions of the Catholic Church of this
present or another age, have this Privilege, to be free from all Errors that
are absolutely Destructive to Salvation: but this they have not from the nature
of Tradition; which is subject to Error, to Corruption, to Change, to
Contradiction: Mobilitate viget viresque acquirit eundo. but from the special
Providence and protection of Christ, who has promised to be with his Church
until the end of the World.

In sum, I deny both his Propositions, First his Major. Immediate Tradition
from Parents to Children is not a certain and infallible Rule of Truth and
Faith. Traditions are often doubtful, do often change with the times, and
sometimes contradict one another: As we see in the Different Traditions of the
Eastern and Western Churches about the observation of Easter, And the Counsels
of Nice and Frankford about Images etc. Neither points of Faith nor Papal
rights are so visible as he imagines. Credulity, and Ignorance, and Prejudice,
and Passion, and Interest, do all act their parts. Upon his Grounds there can
be no Ecclesiastical Usurpations: yet Experience teaches us that there have
been such Usurpations in all Ages. If he had reason to renounce the immediate
Tradition of his Father and Grandfather and great Grandfather; Then others may
have the like and better reasons. Let him believe the Suns dancing upon Easter
morn, and the Swanssinging, and the Pellicans digging of her Breast with her
Bill, and all the Stories of King Arthur and Robin Hood, for it may be he has
received all these from his Elders by immediate Tradition.

He him self Confesses that the possession of goverument must be such a
possession as may be presumable to have come from Christ, not of such an one as
every one knows when it began. P. 49. To what purpose is it to pretend
tradition for all those branches of Papal power which are in controversy
between them and us, seeing all of them had their first original eleven
hundred years after Christ?

Secondly, this is not all, he ascribes moreover too much to the immediate
Tradition of the present Church, but much more then too much to the immediate
Tradition of his elders, to make it absolutely infallible cui non potest
subesse falsum, and to resolve Faith into it, The last resolution of Faith must
be into that which is formally the word of God. The voice of the present Church
may be materially the word of God in regard of the matter and thing testified:
but it cannot be formally the word of God, in respect of the Witnesses and
manner of testifying. But immediate Tradition is often a Seminary of Errors.

Thirdly he makes the Orall and immediate Tradition of Fathers to their
Child^ren, to be a more ready and safe Rule of Faith then the holy Scriptures,
which are the Canon of Faith; and so ready, that it is as easy, as for Boys to
learn their A B C. and so safe, that it is impossible to be made crooked.

Lastly he Confounds the Tradition of the Roman Church with the Tradition of
the Catholic Church: yet the one is but particular, Aug. lib. 4. contra
Donati^tistas cap. 24,
the other Universal Tradition, Saint Augustine sets us down a certain
rule how to know a true genuine Apostolical tradition; Quod univers a tenet
Ecclesia, nec Conciliis institutum sed semper Retentum est, nonnifi authoriate
Apostolica traditum verissi^ me creditur. Whatfoever the whole Church does
hold, which was not instituted by counsels, but always received, is most
rightly believed to have been delivered by Apostolical authority. These three
marks, conjoinctly do most firmly prove an Apostolical Tradition. I do not
deny but that there have been Apostolical Traditions which have wanted some
of these Marks, but they were neither necessary to salvation, nor can be
proved at this day after sixteen hundred years to have been Apostolical
Traditions. Whatsoever wants either universality or perpetui^y is not
absolutely uecessary. Neither can the reception of one Apostolical Church
prove a tradition to be Apostolical, if other Apostolical Churches do reject
it, and contradict it.

To conclude we give all due respect to Tradition; but not so much to Orall
Tradition as to Written Tradition, as beingmore certain, less subject to
mistakes, and more easily freed from mistakes, Liter a scriptamanet. A serious
person if he be but to deliver a long message of importance from one to
another, will be careful either to receive it in writing, or put it in
writing. Nor so much to particular immediate Tradition, as we do to Universal
and perpetual tradition. He overshooteth himself beyond all aim in affirming
of immediate and Particular Tradition, that where it has place it is
impossible for usurpations or abuses to enter or find admittance. He might as
well tell us that it is impossible to make a crooked line with a leaden Rule.
Particular Tradition is flexible and is often bended according to the interests
and inclinations of particular ages and places and persons. He says, that
there can be no encroachments so as men adhere to this method that is immediate
Tradition. He tells us that they did adhere to this Method, and that there
was such immediate Tradition: and yet we have seen and felt that encroachments
and usurpations and abuses, did not only creep into the Church, but like a
Violent Torrent did bear down all opposition before them. I produce but two
Witnesses, but they are beyond exception. The one is Pope Adrian the sixth in
his Instructions to his Nuncio Franciscus Cheregatus when he sent him to the
German Princes at the diet of Nuremberg, Apud Goldast Constable. Imper. pa. 29.
We know that in the holy See for some years past, many things have been to
be abhominated, Abuses in Spiritual things, Excesses in Mandates, and all
things changed perversely. Neither is it to be marveiled at, if sickness
descend from the head to the members, from the Chiefest Bishops to other
inferior Prelates, etc. And again, Wherein for so much as concerns us you
shall promise, that we will do our uttermost endeavor, that in the first
place this Court from whence peradventure this evil has proceeded may be
reformed, that as the Corruption flowed from thence to all inferiors; so
likewise the health and reformation of all may proceed from thence. Pope Adrian
Confesses abominable abuses, and excesses, and perverse mutations and
corruptions: and yet Mr. Sergeant would make us believe that where this Method
of Orall and immediate Tradition is used, there can be no changes. Either this
Method was not used, or this Method is not a sufficient preservative against
innovations: both ways his demonstration falls to the ground.

My other Witness is the Council of nine chief Cardinals, who upon their
Oaths delivered up as their veredict, a bundle of abuses, grievons abuses,
abuses not to be tolerated, council. delect. card. impr. Lutet. p. 1612 and 140.
(they are their own words) ye a Monsters, to Paul the third in the year 1538;
beseeching him that these spots might be taken away, which if they were
admitted in any Kingdom or Republic would straight bring it to ruin. Never
any man did make encroachments and innovatious to be impossible before this man.

His assumtion is as false as his major proposition, There was no Tradition for
the Divine right of the Papacy.
But these two Rules (whereof this is one part, that the Bishops of Rome as
Successors of S. Peter did inherit from him this privilege to be the first or
Chief or Princes of Bishops, etc.) Were agreed upon unanimously between the
church of Rome and its dependents and the church of England, and delivered from
hand to hand in them all by the Orall and immediate Tradition, of a World of
Fathers to a World of children successively as a Rule of discipline received
from Christ and his Apostles, etc. If all this were true, it concerns us
nothing we may perhaps differ from them in judgment, but have no formed
quarrel with them about this that I know of. We are willing to submit not
only, to the Ordinances of Christ, b^t to the just ordinances of man, and to
yield for the common Peace and Tranquillity of Christendom, rather more then is
due, then less. But otherwise how was that unanimously agreed upon between the
Churches of Rome and England, and so delivered by Fathers to Children as a
thing accorded, whereof the Church of Rome is no better accorded within it self
unto this day? I mean concerning the divine right of the Bishop of Rome to all
the privileges of St. Peter, when the Popes greatest Champions maintein it so
coldly as a thing that is not improbable; that peradventure may be,
peradventure may not be, as grounded upon a fact of St. Peter, that is as much
as to say not upon the Mandate of Christ?

And though we should be so kindhearted as to suppose that there is some part
of Papal power, in the abstract not in the concrete, which is of Christ's own
institution, Namely, The beginning of Unity, that is a power to Convocate the
Church, and to preside in the Church, and to pronounce the sentence of the
Church, so far and no further then power purely spiritual does extend;
although there be no special mandate of Christ to that purpose, for one to be
the successor of S. Peter, or any prime or chief of all other Bishops: yet in
the Judgment even of the greatest opposers of Ecclesiastical Hierarchy, it is
the dictate of nature that one should preside over the rest, Beza defenf. page
153.
Ex dei ordinatione perpetua necesse fuit, est and erit, ut in Presbyterio
quispiam and loco and dignitate primus actioni gubernandae praesit. Yet what is
this to that great Bulk of Ecclesiastical Authority which has been conferred
upon that See by the decrees of oecumenicall counsels; and by the Civil
Sanctions of Christian Emperors* which being Humane Institutions may be
changed by Humane Authority? Can one scruple of divine right convert a whole
mass of Humane right into divine? We see Papal power is not equal or alike
in all places, but is extended or contracted variously according to the
different Privileges and liberties of several Churches and kingdoms. We see
at this day the Pope has very little to do in Sicily, as I have showed in my
Vindication of the Church of England), by reason that one of his Predecessors
long since has alienated in a manner the whole Ecclesiastical Jurisdiction to
the Sovereign Prince of the Country and to his Heirs. We may call it by
deputation or delegation. but this is plain, it is to him and his He^res for
ever. This is certain, divine right cannot be extended or contracted; There is
no Privilege or prescription against divine right, That which belongs to one
person by divine right cannot be alienated to another person by humane right;
for then Humane right should be stronger then divine right.

In sum although there be some color or pretext of divine right for a
beginning of Unity, wheresoever the Catholic Church should fix it, yet it
appears evidently by the Universal practice of the Christian world in all
ages, that there is no Color nor so much as a shadow of divine right for all
the other Branches of papal power, and those vast Privileges of the Roman
Court. In the Council of Constance they damned most of the Articles of John
Wickliffe down right without hesitation: Council. Constan. Sess. 8.
but when they came to the one and fortieth Article ( It is not necessary to
Salvation to believe that the Roman Church is supreme among other Churches,)
they paused and used some reservation, It is an error if by the Roman Church
he understood the Universal Chureh, or a General Council, or for as much as
he should deny the primacy of the Pope above other particular Churches, Their
judgment is clear enough, they yielded to the Pope primatum not suprematum. A
primacy of Order not a supremacy of power; They made him a beginning of Unity
to all particular Churches, Yet subjected him to the Universal Church; They
looked upon him as Highest Bishop, and Successor of St. Peter, but they
believed that a General Council had power to shake his Candlestick, and
remove it, if they found it expedient for the good of Christendom.

If he come so far short of divine right in his fair pretensions; by what
right will he seek to justify all his foul Usurpations and enchroachments,
which have no decree of any Oecumenicall council to warrant them, no Imperial
Institntion to authorize them; which have no foundation but the Popes own
decretalls? But ^ reserve a full account of this for the next part of my
Answer. Only Reader be pleased to take notice, that it behooved Mr. Sergeant
to have proved his Traditions clearly and distinctly, as to those parts of
Papal power which are controverted between us in earnest, with the
Universality of it, and the perpetuity of it. This he neither does nor
attempteth to do, nor in deed is he or any other able to do, but merely
presumes it, and slubbereth over the matter in deceitful Generals.

Sect. I. Cap. III.
We are come now to the last part of his demonstration, which was the Minor or
Assumtion of his former Syllogism, That the Church of England in Henry the
eighths days did break these Rules of Unity upon probable reasons, not
convincing grounds. Which being the main question, he should have fortifyed
with proofs: but he according to his Custom thinks to carry it with
confidence and clamours, Does not all the World grant and hold that King Henry
denied the Popes Supremacy: Does not all the World see that the pretended
Church of England, stands now otherwise in Order, to the Church of Rome, then
it did in Henry the sevenths days? etc.

Was Papal power cast out before? was it not in actual force till and at that
time? We beg nothing gratis, but begin our Process upon Truth acknowledged by
the whole World. What Papal power king Henry did cast out, and what Papal
power we hold out, I shall demonstrate to the World, not confusedly but
distinctly, by such proofs as are not to be gainsaid for matter of fact.

But before I gird my self to the work, it will not be amiss for the freeing
of the Cause from future Cumber about them, to give Satisfaction to his two
Circumstances, that we did it only upon probable reasons, And in the days of
king Henry the eighth. Mention of exceptions here impertinent.


For the first, he keeps a great stir and bustling every where about our
probable reasons, and tbe nature of our Exceptions. And he would make his
reader believe that I have omitted this part of his word^ Gu^lefully. All which
discourse is superfluous and impertinent. Schism. dispat. page 477.
For if he could make good his Conclusion that we have cast out that which
Christ himself did ordein in holy Scripture, no reasons nor exceptions can be
sufficient or so demonstrative and convincing as to justify a wilful violation
of Christ's own ordination. Mat. 15. 13
Every Plant (says our Savior) which my heavenly father has not planted
shall be roo^ed up. But if this be Christ's own Plant which he himself has
planted, to go about to root it up were plainly to fight against God. We
renounce all reasons and all exceptions against Christ's own ordination. His
very intimation that we might do what we did upon demonstrative reasons, is
an implicit Confession, that it was not against Christ's own ordination.

There was no need why I should meddle which mine own exceptions here, That was
his office in the position of the Case. That case is meanly and partially
stated, which is stated but on one side, he ought to have included my
Exceptions in his case Besides I was sure to meet which my exceptions in every
Section, and therefore reserved them for their proper-places, as being loath to
offend the Reader which twice sodden Coleworts. But let him not fear that I
will relinquish my Exceptions, I shall maintain them to be demonstrative of the
Popes Usurpations in England, and leave them freely to try it out with his
Demonstrations.

The second Circumstance is concerning the time when the breach is supposed to
have been made, The first breach before Henry the 8. was borne.
In the days of Henry the eighth; And it is thus far true, that then the
breach was declared, and the War proclaimed to all the World: but this breach
was making long before Henry the eighth was born; form the days of Pope
Hildebrand for about four hundred years. There was no open hostility indeed
between the Court of Rome and the Church and Kingdom of England: but they were
still upon their Gards, and still seeking to gain ground one upon another, as
appears by the decrees and Laws and Machinations of those times. A breach in
a strong Tower is long making before the Walls tumble visibly down; A Scathfire
is long kindling before it break out in an universal flame. A Cronicall
disease is long gathering and forming before the certain Symptoms there of do
appear. We use to say the second blow makes the fray, but the first blow makes
the Battery and the guilt. All that time that they were forcing their gross
usurpations upon us, the Breach was making.

I have done which his two Circumstances. Every one involved in a Schism* is not
a formal Schtsmatick.
The Substance of his Assumtion remains. But before I grapple with him about
that, give me leave to lay down four grounds or Considerations, so indifferent
that no rational man can deny them. The first is that every one who is
involved materially in a Schism is not a formal Schismatic, no more then ^hee
that marries after long expectation, believing and having reason to believe
that her former Husband was dead, is a formal Adultresse, or then he who is
drawn to give divine Worship to a creature by some misapprehension, yet
addressing his devotions to the true God, is a formal Idolater. A man may be
Baptisatus voto (as S. Ambrose said) baptized in his desire, and God Almighty
does accept it: why may he not as well Communicate in his desire, and be
accepted with God likewise? If S. Austin say true of Heresy, that. Ezech. 162.
He who did not run into his Error out of his own overweening presumption, nor
defends it pertinaci^asly, but received it from his seduced parents, and is
careful to search out the truth, and ready to be corrected if he find it out,
he is not to be reputed among Heretics.

It is much more true of Schism, that he who is involved in Schism through the
error of his Parents or Predecessors, who seeks carefully for the Truth, and
is prepared in his mind to embrace it whenever he finds it, he is not to be
reputed a Schismatic. This very Bond of Unity and preparation of his mind to
peace, is an implicit ^enunciation and abjuration of his Schism before God.
This is as comfortable a ground for ignorant Roman Catholics, as for any
persons that I know, Who are hurried hoodwinked in to erroneous tenets as
necessary points of faith, and Schismatic Practices, merely by the
authority, and to uphold the interest and ambitions or a^aricious courses of
the Roman Court.

My second ground is this, God almighty doth^ not approve of that unequal
proverb, The Fathers have eaten sour Grapes and the Childrens teeth are set on
edge. Posterity is not guilty of their Ancestors transgressions, Ezech. 18. 2^
we are not chargable with the excesses of our Predecessors.
further then they do either imitate them or maintain them. Suppose these
calumnies had been truths which some have belched forth against our Reformers,
that they had Sacrilegious or other sinister ends, it signifies nothing to us,
so long as we neither justify them, nor imitate them. Iehues heart was not
over upright; and yet God himself approved his Reformation. Suppose any of our
Reformers have run into any excesses or extremes, either in their expressions,
or perhaps in their actions, (it is a difficult thing in great changes to
observe a just mean,) it may be out of humane frailty, as Lycurgus out of
hatred to drunkennes^e, cut down all the Vines about Sparia: or it may be out
of Policy, as men use to bend a crooked Rod, as much the contrary way to make
it straight: or as expert Masters in Music do sometimes draw up their
Scholars a note too high, to bring them to a just tone. What is that to us so
long as we practice the mean and maintain the mean, and guide our selves by
the certain line and Level of Apostolical and primitive Tradition. Charity
commands us to think well of our Predecessors, and Theology to look well to
our selves.

Thirdly, that difference which divines do make between affirmative and
negative precepts, Negative Presidents prove more strongly then affirmative.
that affirmative bind always, but not to all times, semper but not ad semper.
A man is bound always to pray, but is not hound to the actual exercise of
prayer at all timts, but neganegative precepts bind both semper and ad semper.
The same I say of affirmative and negative presidents, affirmative presidents
prove always that such a fact was done, and it may be that it was justly done
at that time in that case, but they prove not a right ad semper, to do it at
all times The reason is evident, Particular Acts may be done by Connivence, or
by special License; but a General Prohibition implies a perpetual right. As
for instance I produce Negative Presidents, both General Laws against all
appeals to Rome, that no man may appeal to the Pope without the Kings
License, and Particular Prohibitions out of the Kings Courts, by form of
ordinary Justice, against such and such Appeals or such and such Sentences
upon Appeals, This argues a perpetual Right to forbid Appeals, whenever
it is Judged expedient: On the otherside he preduceth Presidents of Particular
Appeals to Rome, (which he may do of later Days, but for the First eleven
hundred years it was not so, This Proves only the Kings License or Connivence
in such cases, negative Presidents prove more strongly then affirmative.
it does not prove a perpetual Right, because two perpetual Rights
contradictory one to another can not be.

My fourth and last ground is, that neither King Henry the eighth nor any of
our Legislators, did ever endeavor to deprive the Bishop of Rome of the power
of the Keys or any part thereof, either the Key Order or the Key of
Jurisdiction, I mean jurisdictio^ purel^ spiritual which has place only in
the Inner court of conscience, and over such persons as submit willing^y. Nor
did ever challenge or endeavor to assume unto them selves either the Key of
order or the key of jurisdiction purely Spiritual. All which they deprived the
Pope of, all which they assumed to themselves, was the external Regiment of
the Church by Coactive power, to be excercised by persons capable of the
respective Branches of it This Power the Bishops of Rome never had, ot could
have justly over their Subjects but under them whose subjects they were. And
there fore when we meet with these words or the like, that no foreign Prelate
shall exercise any manner of power Jurisdiction Superiority, Pre-eminence or
Privilege Ecclesias^icall or Spiritual within this Realm, It is not to be
understood of internal or purely Spiritual power in the court of conscience,
or the power of the Keys: (We see the Contrary practiced every day:) but of
external and coactive power in Ecclesiastical causes in foro conten^ioso. And
that it is and ought to be so understood; I prove clearly by a Proviso in one
main Act of Parliament, and a Canon of the English Church.

First the Proviso is contained in the Act for the Exoneration of the Kings
Subjects from all Exactions and Impositions paid to the Sea of Rome. XXV. Hen.
8. ca. 12.
Provided always this Act nor any thing therein contained shall be here after
interpre^ed or expounded, that your Grace your nobles and Subjects intend by
the same to decline and Vary from the Congregation of Christ's Church, in any
things concerning the very Articles of the Catholic Faith of Christendom, or
any other things declared by the Scripture and the Word of God necessary for
your and their Salvations; but only to make an Ordinance by Policies
necessary and convenient to repress Vice, and for good Conservation of this
Realm in Peace Unity and Tranquillity, from ravine and Spoil, insueing much the
old ancient Customs of this Realm in that behalf. They profes^e their
Ordinance is merely Political; What has a Political Ordinance to do with
power purely Spiritual? They seek only to preserve the kingdom from ravine
and Spoil; Power purely spiritual can commit no Ravin or Spoil. ^he^ follow
ancient Customs of the Realm There was no ancient Custom of the Realm for
abolition or translation of power purely spiritual. They profess all
Conformity to Holy Scriptures; but the power of the keys was evidently given by
Christ in Scripture to his Apostles and their Successors, not to Sovereign
Princes. If any thing had been contained in this Law for the Abolition or
Translation of power merely and purely Spiritual, it had been retracted by
this Proviso at the same time it was enacted.

The Canon is the 37. Canon, where we give the Kings Majesty the Supreme
Government, We do not give our Kings either the Administration of Gods word
or Sacraments, which the Injunctions published lately by Queen Elisabeth do
most evidently declare, but only that Prerogative which we see to have been
always attributed to all Godly Princes by him self in holy Scripture, That is,
to preserve or contein all Estates and Orders committed to their trust by God,
whether they be Ecclesiastical or Civil in their Duties, and restrein
contumacious Offenders with the Civil Sword. You see the Power is Political,
the Sword is Political, all is Political, Our Kings leave the power of the
keys and Jurisdiction purely Spiritual to those to whom Christ has lest it.

Sect. I. Cap. IV.
And now having dispatched the Circumstances out of my way, The Pope and Court
of Rome did break the bonds of unity not we.
and laid down some Necessary grounds, I come directly to the Substance of his
Assumption, and affirm, That neither the King of England, nor the Church of
England, neither Convocation nor Parliament, did break his two Necessary Bonds
of Christian Unity) or either of them, or any part of either of them. But that
the Very Breakers and Violaters of these Rules were the Pope and Court of Rome,
They did break his Rule of Faith, by adding new points to the Necessary
Doctrine of saving Truth, which were not the Legaceyes of Christ and his
Apostles, nor delivered unto us by Universal and perpetual Tradition. The
Pope and Court of Rome did break his second Rule of Unity in Discipline, by
obtruding their excessive and intolerable usurpations upon the Christian world,
and particularly upon the Church of England, as necessary Conditions of their
Communion.

It appears plainly by comparing that which has been said with his positio^
of the case, that after all his Bragges of undeniable evidence and
unquestionable certeinty. he has quite missed the question. We join with him
in his rule of Faith, We oppose not St. Peter's Primacy of Order, and he him
self dare not say that St. Peter had a larger, or more extended power then the
rest of his Fellow Apostles. And though we cannot force our understandings to
assent, that after the death of S. Peter, Linus, or Cletus, or Clemens, or
Anacle^us, were Superiors to S. John, and had actual Jurisdiction, over him,
who had as large a commission immediately from Christ as S. Peter himself, and
larger then any succeeding Roman Bishop ever had: Yet to show him how little
we are concerned in it, and for his clearer conviction, we are willing to
suppose that they were his Superiors, and give him leave to make all the
advantage of his second Rule which he can in this cause.

And here if I regarded not the satisfaction of my self and the Reader more
then his opposition, I might withdraw my hand from the Table. But I am so great
a Friend of Ingenuity, that I will for once discharge his Office, and show the
World demonstratively and distinctly, what Branches of Papal power were cast
out of England by Henry the eighth; upon which consideration the weight of the
whole Controversy does lie. For it is agreed between us, that if it appear by
rigorous Evidence, that all those Branches of Papal power, which were
renounced and cast out of England by Henry the eight were gross Vsurpattons,
then his renouncing was no eriminall Breach, but a lawful self
enfranchisement. And by undeniable consequence the Guilt of ^chism rests upon
them who made the Usurpations, that is, the Pope and Court of Rome. I add
further upon the equity of my second Ground; that although Henry the eight had
cast out something more then be ought, yet if we hold not out more then we
ought, and be ready to admit all which ought to be admitted by us, then we are
innocent and free from the Guilt of Schism and it rests soly upon them, who
either will have more then their due or nothing. Wheresoever the fault is,
there the Guilt of Schism is: If the fault be single, the Guilt is single,
What branches of Papal power were cast out of England by Henry the 6.
if the fault be mutual, the Guilt is mutual.

And for rigorous Evidence, There cannot possibly be any Evidence more
demonstrative what Papal power was cast out of England, then the very Acts of
Parliaments themselves, by which it was cast out. Let us view them all. The
first Act made in the Reign of Henry the eight, which has any referente to
Rome, is the Act for holding Plurality of Benefices against the laws of the
land by dispensation from the Court of Rome, making licenses for non Residence
from the Court of Rome to be void, and the party who procures such Licenses
for Pluralityes or Nonresidence to forfeyt twenty pounds, and to lose the
profits of that Benefice which he holds by such dispensation* It were a
pretty thing indeed, if the Church and Kingdom should make necessary laws,
and the Pope might give them liberty to break them at his pleasure. 23. Hen. 8.
cap. 9.


The second Act is, that No person shall be cited out of the diocese where he
dwells, except in certain cases. Which though it may seem to reflect upon the
Court of Rome: yet I do not find that it is concerned in it, but the Arches,
Audience, and other Archiepiscopall Courts within the Realm.

The third Act is merely declarative of the law of the land, as well the Common
laws as the Statute laws, and grounded wholly upon them, as by the View of the
Statute it self does appear. So it casts out no foreign power, but what the
laws had cast out before. 24. Hen. 8. ca. 12.
The sum of it is this, That all Causes Matrimonial, Testamentary, or about
Tithes etc. shall be heard and finally judged in England, by the proper Judges
Ecclesiastical and Civil respectively, and not elsewhere notwithstanding any
foreign Inhibitions Appeals, Sentences, citations, suppensions, or
Excommunications. And that if any English Subject procure a Process Inhibition
Appeal, etc. From or to the Court of Rome, or execute them to the hinderance
of any process here, he shall incur the Penalties ordained by the Statute of
provision or praemunire, made in the sixteenth year of King Richard the second,
against such as make provision to the Sea of Rome. 25 He. 8. c. 19.
This law was e^larged afterward to all causes of Ecclesiastical cognizance,
and all appeals to Rome forbidden.

The fourth Act is an Act for punishing of Heresy. Wherein there are three
clauses that concern the Bishop of Rome. The First is this, 25. He. 8. c. 14.
And that there be many Heresies and pains and punishments for Heresies,
Declared and ordained in and by the Canonical Sanctions, and by the Laws and
Ordinations made by the Popes or Bishops of Rome and by their Authorities, for
holding, doing, preaching of things contrary to the said Canonical Sanctions
Laws and Ordinances, which be but humane, being mere repugnant and contrarious
to the royal Prerogative, Regal Jurisdiction, Laws Statutes and Ordinances
of this Realm. The second Clause is that, No License be obtained of the Bishop
of Rome to Preach in any part of this Realm, or to do any thing contrary to
the Laws and Statutes of this Realm, or the Kings Prerogative Royal. The
third Clause follows, That the Decrees of the Bishops of Rome, not confirmed
by Holy Scriptures, were never commonly attested to be any Law of God or man
within this Realm. And that it should not be deemed Heresy to speak or do
contrary to the pretended power or Authority of the Bishop of Rome, made or
given by Humane Laws and not by Scriptures; nor to speak or Act contrary to
the Laws of the Bishop of Rome, being contrary to the Laws of this Realm.

The Fifth Act is an Act concerning the Submission of the Clergy to the Kings
Majesty, 25. H. 8. c. 19.
The scope of it is this, that the Clergy shall not assemble in Convocation,
nor make or proniulge any new Canons, without the Kings License. Hitherto there
is nothing new in point of Law. Then, that the King should have power to name
and constitute, two and thirty Commissioners, sixteen of the Clergy, and other
sixteen of the Peers and Parliament, to view the Ecclesiastical Laws of the
Kingdom, and declare which were fit to be retained, 27. H. 8. c. 15.
and which were to be abrogated. The same Law is confirmed and enlarged.

The Sixth Law restreineth the payment of Tenths and First Fruits to the Bishop
of Rome. And prescribes how Archbishops, Bishops etc. are to be elected and
consecrated within the Realm, without payment of any thing to Rome for Bulls
and Pals etc. 25. He: 8.


The seventh law is, an Act of E^oneration of the Kings subjects from exactions
and impositions heretofore paid to the Sea of Rome, for Pensions, Peterpence,
Licenses, Dispensations, Confirmations, faculties etc. and for having licenses
and dispensations within the Realm, without further suing for the same; As
being Usurpations contrary to the law of the land. 26. H 8. cap. 1.


The eighth Act is Concerning the Kings Highness to be supreme Head of the
Church of England (that is Political head) and to have Authority to redress
all Errors, Heresies and Abuses in the same. That is to say, with external
Coactive Jurisdiction. We never gave our Kings the power of the Keys, or any
part of either the Key of Order, or the Key of Jurisdiction purely Spiritual:
but only that Coactive power in the external Regiment of the Church, which
their Predecessors had always enjoyed. 26. H. 8. cap 3. 28. H. 8. ca. 10.


The Ninth Act is for the annexing Tenths and first fruits to the Crown, for
the better supportation of the Burdens of the Commouwealth.

The tenth Act is au Act extingu^shing the Authority of the Bishop of Rome, or
extirpating it out of this Realm. That is, Not the Bishop of Romes Primacy of
Order, Not his beginning of Unity, Not that respect which is dne to him as
Bishop of an Apostolical See. If he have not these it is his own fault. This
is not our quarrel. It is so far from it, that we do not envy him any just
legacies of Christian Emperors or General Counsels. But that which our
Ancestors did extinguish and endeavor to extirpate out of England, was the
Popes external Coactive power over the Kings Subjects in foro contentioso, as
we shall see by and by, when we come to state the quarrel rightly between us.
35. He. 8. cap. 5.


After this Act there followed au eleventh Act made for corroborating of this
last Act, to exclude the usurped power and Jurisdiction of the Bishops of Rome.
And both these Acts are backed with new Oaths, as those times were fruitful of
Oaths, such as they were.

The last Act of any moment, 35. H. 8. cap 3.
was an Act of Ratification of the Kings Majestjes Style of Supreme head of the
Church of England making it treason to attempt to deprive the King of it. But
as well the eighth Act which gave the King that title of the Head of the
Church, as this twelfth Act which makes it treason to attempt to deprive the
King of it, are both repealed, and never were restored. So are likewise the
tenth Act of extinguishing the Authority of the Bishop of Rome; and the
eleventh act made for corroboration of that Act with both their Oaths included
in them.

All that has been added since of moment which concerns the Bishop of Rome
is one Act, 1. El. c. 1.
Restoring to the Crown the ancient Jurisdiction over the State Ecclesiastical
and Spiritual, and abolishing all foreign power repugnant to the same. Here is
no power created in the Crown, but only an ancient Jurisdiction restored. Here
is no foreign power abolished, but only that which is repugnant to the ancient
Laws of England and to the Prerogative Royal. In a word, here is no power
ascribed to our Kings but merely Political and Coactive, to see that all their
Subjects do their Duties in their several places. Coactive power is one of
the Keys of the Kingdom of this world, it is none of the Keys of the Kingdom
of Heaven. This might have been expressed in Words less subject to exception.
But the case is clear. The Grand Act xxv. Hen. 8. cap. 12, The Injunctions of
Queen Elizabeth, The Articles of our Chutch Art. 37. do all proclaim that
this power is merely Political. Christ gave St. Peter a Commission to preach,
to baptize, to bind and loose in the Court of Conscience: but where did he give
him a Commission to give Licenses, to grant Facultyes, to make Laws, to
dispense with laws to receive appeals, to impose Tenths and First fruits in
other men's Kingdoms, whether the right owner will or no? Luke. 12. 14.
Who gave him power to take other men's Subjects against their Wills to be his
Officers and Apparitors? That is more power then Christ himself did challenge
here upon Earth.

And now Reader take a Stand and look about thee; See among all these Branches
of Papal power which were cast out of England, if thou caust find either of
St. Peter's Keys, or his Primacy of Order, or his Beginning of Unity, or
anything which is purely Spiritual, that has no further influence then merely
the Court of Conscience. No: but on the other side behold a pack of the
grossest Usurpations that ever were hatched, and all so late, that is was above
a thousand years after the death of S. Peter, be fore any of his pretended
Privileges did see the sun in England; 21, Hen. 8. ca. 13.
observe them one by one.

The first is a power to dispense with English Subjects for holding Plurality
of Benifices contrary to the Laws of England, And for non Residents contrary
to the Statutes of the Realm. It had been much to have made Merchandise of his
own Decrees: but to Dispense with the Laws of the Land, Non auderet haec
facere Viduae mulieri. He durst not do so much to a poor widow woman, as he
did to the Church and Kingdom of England, to dispense with their Laws at his
pleasure. It is but vain for the Flower of our Kingdom to assemble and consult
about healthful Laws: if a Forrainer have power to dispense with the breach
of them as it seems good in his Eyes, They might as well sit them downquietly
and fall to pilling of rushes,

The second Branch of Papal power which was Excluded out of England, was the
Popes Judiciary power. I do not mean in Controversies of Faith when he is in
the Head of a council: Conc. Basil. Sess. 16 in revoc bullae 3.
Yet Eugeniur the fourth confesses that in points of Faith the sentence of the
council is rather to be atte^ded the^ the sentence of the Pope. But I mean in
points of meum and tuum, not only in some rare cases between Bishop and
Bishop, which had been less intolerable, and had had more show of Justice:
but generally in all cases promiscuously; as if the whole nation wanted either
discretion or Law to determine their own differences at home, 24. Hen. 8 cap 12.
without the help of the Roman Courtier tosqueese their purses. It was not
Henry the eighth, but the old Laws of England which gave them this blow
against Appeals to Rome.

The third Branch of papal power which was turned out of England by Henry the
eighth was the Popes Legislative power, especially in making new Heresies by
his own Authority, and for his own Interest, prescribing the punishment, as if
all the world were his Subjects. Mr. Sergeant may be pleased to inform himself
better, that the Popes Canons and decretalls never had since the First
Conversion of England the force or power of Laws in England, until they were
received by the Nation, nor then any further then they were received.

The fourth Branch is the Sovereign patronage of the English Church with all
those rights and appurtenances which belong thereunto, as to convocate the
clergy, and Dissolve their Assembly, To exempt their persons from secular
Judgment, To have the Disposition of Ecclesiastical Dignityes and the
Custodium of them in the Vacancy. But these things are so noto^ious, to all
those who are acquainted with the Ecclesiastical Customs of England, that
there can be no manner of Qnestion of it. The Convocation was always called
and dissolved by the absolute and precise Mandate of the King to the
Archbishop; Yea even when the Archbishop was the Popes legate, and when he
might have challenged, another right, if the Pope had had any pretense. The
temporaltyes of the Bishoprics in the Vacancy were ever seized into the hands
of the King, until he granted out his Writ of Manum amoveas, or Oster la main:
If ordinary Patrons did not present in due time to a benefice, it devolved to
the Ordinary, and from him to the King, there it stayed, Nullum ^empus occurrit
Regi.

The fifth Privilege was the receiving of Tenths and First fruits, which were a
late encroachment of the Bishop of Rome upon the Clergy, without any just
ground, and upon that score were condemned in the Counsels of Constance and
Basile, and now were seized into the Kings hand toward the discharge of the
Ecclesiastical Burdens of the Kingdom.

The last perqnisire whith the Pope lost was all the profits of his Court, by
Bulls, and Palls, and Pensions, and Reservations, and Exemptions, and Licenses,
and Dispensations, and Consirmations, and Pardons, and Indulgences, and an
hundred other pecuniary Artifices practiced in his Court at Rome, and in his
Legantine Courts and Nunciatures abroad. But this abuse is so foul, that the
Popes own selected Cardinals do cryshame upon it, as much as we, and laydown
this genera Rule, Conf. delct. Card.
That it is not lawful to make any gain by the exercise of the Keys, seeing we
have the firm word of Christ, freely ye have received, freely give, etc. For as
the use which now prevails does disgrace the Sea of Rome, and disturbeth
Christian people; so the contrary practice would bring much honor to this See,
and marveilously edify the people.

These are the real differences between the Sea of Rome and the Church and
Kingdom of England concerning the papacy. The true difference about the Papacy.
all these altercations which we have about. Thou art Peter, and the Keys
given to St. Peter, and Feed my Sheep, and I have prayed for thee; are but like
to the tinkling of Cybeles Priests upon their Cymballs, on purpose to deaf the
ears of the Spectators, and to conceal the Cries and ejulations of poor
oppressed Christians. To reduce them into a little better Method then they lie
in the Statutes.

The maine quaestious are or may be reduced to four heads. The first grand
quaestion is concerning the Sovereignty of the English Church in respect of the
external Regiment thereof. This has four subordinate Branches.

First who is the right Patron of the English Church under God, the King or the
Pope? Secondly, who has power to Convocate Synods of the Kings subjects within
England, The King or the Pope? Thirdly, whether the Pope have justly imposed
new Oaths upon the Arch Bishops and Bishops? fourthly whether Tenths and first
fruits in England be due to the Sea of Rome.

The second question is concerning the Popes legislative power. Whether the
Canon law or the decretalls have been anciently esteemed binding laws in
England or ought to be so esteemed, except they be received by the English
Nation, and metriculated among our laws.

The third is concerning his judiciary power, Whether the Bishop of Rome can
receive Appeals from England by the Ancient laws of that Land, and send for
whom he pleases to Rome? 2. Whether Bulls and Excommunications from Rome can
be lawfully executed in England, except the King give leave for the execution
of them? 3. Whether the Pope can send Legates and set up Legantine Courts in
England, by the Ancient laws of that Realm.

The fourth Difference is concerning the popes dispensative power, whether the
Pope can dispense with the laws of England? 2. Whether we stand in need of his
dispensations?

In every one of these diffe^ences we maintein that the Bishop of Rome and the
Court of Rome have been guilty of most gross Usurpations.

Sect I. Cap V.
To begin with the first. To whom thepatronage of the English Church does of
right belong.
If it were necessary to call in any forreyn subsidiary Supplies for the
further fortifying of the King of Englands Sovereign Patronage under God of the
Church within his Territories; I might find strong recruits from the Greek
Emperors, to show that they always practiced this power within their
Dominions, to place Bishops in vacant Sees: and that the Contrary was hactenus
inauditum, never heard of in S. Gregoryes days. Greg. lib. 4. Regist^ indict.
13. cap 78.
To them I might add the French and Germane Emperors, who not only enjoyed
the same privilege by ancient Custom, but to whom the Roman Bishops disclaimed
it, with all their Clergy Judges and Lawiers; Adrian the first to Charles the
great, Anno 774. And Leo the eighth to the Emperor Otho, Anno 964. I might
produce the presidents of the Spanish Monarchs Conc. Tolet: 12. cap. 6. It were
a most unreasonable thing that Sovereign Princes should be trusted with the
Government of their people, and have their Bishops, who must participate in the
Government, by informing the consciences of their Subjects, be obtruded on them
by Strangers. I cannot omit the observation of a Learned Bishop, That,
Quacunque ratione ad pontificatum pateret ingressus, nemo Apostolicae Cymbae
gubernacula capessebat, ni prius Imperatoris authoritas in^ercessisset, Bell.
de cler. lib. 1. ca. 9.
By what way soever the Election of the Pope was made (And Bellarmine,
mentions seven changes in the manner of choosing the Pope.) Yet no man was
ever admitted to the actual Government of the Apostolical See, without the
Emperors confirmation.

But our case is strong enough without twisting any foreign presidents with it.
William the conqueror, William Rufus, and Henry the first, did enjoy the right
of placing in vacant Sees by the tradition of a Ring and of a Crosier staff,
without ever seeking for Foreign approbation, or ordination, or confirmation,
as their Predecessors Kings of England and Britain had done before them. Else
it had been very strange, The Roman Ro^a will give decisive Sentence, for him
to be Patron of a Church who first builded it and endowed it. But then after
Eleven hundred years were e^^luxed, (a strange time to set up a divine right,)
Gregory the seventh (otherwise called Pope Hildebrand) and after him Pope
Calixtus did condemn all Investitures taken from a Lay hand, and prohibit the
Arch Bishops to cousecrate any persons so invested, Praesens audivi in Romano
Concilio prohiberi, apud Eadm^rum and Hoveden in Hen. 1.
says Anselm, I heard it with mine own ears prohibited in the Roman Court.
But what were their reasons? I believe, not overrigorous Demonstrations. The
first was frequent suspicion of Simony; An unheard of piece of Justice to take
away an hereditary right for suspicion of a personal fault. The second and
third reasons are contained in the letter of Adrian the fourth to Frederick the
first, Apud Goldast: Ab his qui Dii sunt and filii excelsi omnes, homagium
requi^is, Fidelitatem exigis, and manus eorum sacratas manibus tuis innectis,
Thou requirest homage of those who are Gods, and all the Children of the most
High, thou exactest an Oath of Fidelity and knittest their sacred hands with in
thy hands. A strange presumtion in a Sovereign Prince, if you mark it well, to
hold his subjects hands within his Hands, whilst he was swearing his
Allegiance; But the maine exception was the Homage or Oath of Fidelity it self.
And was it not high time think you to except against their swearing of
Fidelity to their Native Prince, whom the Bishops of Rome intended to exempt
from his Jurisdiction, and to make them turn Subjects to themselves: as they
did in a great part effect it very shortly after. Then was the time where of
Platina speaks, that there was great Consultation about the Homage and Fealty
and Oaths of Bishops, Plat. in Pasch. 2.
which in former times were sworn to lay men. Were they so indeed? Here is an
ingenuous Confession of the Popes own Library Keeper.

Indeed at the first whilst they were robbing the King of the Jewels of his
Crown, they preached up nothing but free Elections: Mat. Par. an 1229.
but after they had onte seized their prey, they changed their once forthwith
to Dei and Apostolicae Sedis Graria, By the Grace of God and the Apostolic
See: Or ex plenitudine Ecclefiasticae potestatis out of the Fullness of our
Ecclesiastical power. And when this Bell had rung out a while, Egypt never a
bounded more with Caterpillars, then our Native Country did with Provisions,
and reservations, and Pensions, with all the ^hellish arts of Sublimated
Simony. Then our best dignityes and Benefices were filled with Strangers (who
could not speak an English word, nor did ever tread upon English ground,) daily
more and more until these well chosen Pastors who knew how to sheare their
Flocks, though they did not know how to feed them, Mat. Par. m. Hen. 3. an.
1345.
received yearly out of the Kingdom more theu the revenues of the crown. He
were very simple who should think the Court of Rome, did not lick their own
Fingers.

There remains but one thing to be done, to stick the Guilt of this
intolerable Usurpation undeniably upon the Sea of Rome that is to s^ew that the
Investiture of Bishops was the undoubted right of the Crown

This is as clear as the Sun, both in our most Authentic Historiographers,
and records if I had the means to producethe^, and also in our ancient Laws
published long since to the world in print, and these not enactive of new law,
but declarative of the fundamental law of the land.

First for our Histories Gervasius Dorobernensis relates that Lanfrank desired
of William the conqueror the Patronage of the Abbey of S. Austin: but the King
answered. Se velle omnes baculos pastorales in manu tenere That he would keep
all the Crosier staffes (that is the Investitures) in his own hand. The same is
testified Anselm himself by one whose Authority cannot be doubted of, He
(Anselm) after the manner and Example of his Predecessor was inducted according
to the Custom of the Land, Eadm. lib 1. page 20.
and did Homage to the King (homo Regis factus est) as Lanfranke (his
Predecessor in the Archbishopric of Canterbury) in his time had done. Eadm.
lib. 1. page 18.
And the manner of his Investiture is related, how the Bishops pulled him, and
haled him as it were by violence to the Kings bedside (William Rufus) where he
lay sick, and helped to thrust the Crosier staff by force into his hand. Yet
all that time, though Anselm had many other Pretenses, he had no exception
against Investiture by a Lay hand: but shortly after it grew to such an height,
(and Anselm was the chief Stickler in it) that William the Agent of King Henry
the First protested openly to Pope Paschall, Whatsoever is said on this side or
on that, Eadm. lib. 3. page 73.
I would have all men here present to know, that my Lord the King of England,
will not suffer the loss of his Investitures for the loss of his Kingdom. To
whom Pope Paschall answered as resolutely, but not so justly, Know thou I
speak it before God; that Paschall the Pope will not suffer him to keep them
without punishment, no not for the redemtion of his head.

Neither was this the case of Anselm or Lanfranke alone, but the common case of
all Bishops in those days. Hear the confession of the same author, Ead. mer.
in praefat. page 2.
To conclude, the very cause (of the difference between the King and Anselm)
seemed a new thing (or innovation) to this our age, and unheard of to the
English from the time that the Normans began to Reign, (that I say not sooner,)
For from the time that William the Norman conquered that Land, no Bishop or
Abbat was made before Anselm, who did not first do Homage to the King, and
from his hand by the gift of a Crosier staff, receive the investiture to his
Bishopric or Abbacy, except two Bishops of Rochester, who were Surrogates to
the Arch Bishop of Canterbury and inducted by him by the Kings Concession.

Yea by his Favor, so did Anselm himself, Though he sought afterward to wave
it. And though he be loath to speak out (That I say not sooner) Yet he might
have said sooner, and others do say sooner; as Ingulph the Abbat of Crowland
in the time of the Conqueror, For many years past there has been no free
Election of Prelates, malms^. de gest. Reg. l. 2. cap. 8.
but the Kings Court did confer all dignities according to their pleasure, by
a Ring and by a Crosier. And this Custom had held not only for Many years
but for many Ages, king Edgar did grant to the monks of Glastenbury the free
Election of their Abbat for ever: but he reserved to him self and to his Heirs
the power to invest the Brother elected by the tradition of the Pastoral
staff. Thus for our histories now for our Laws where of I shall need to cite
but three.

The First is the Statute or Assise or Memorial of Clarendon containing part
of the ancient Liberties and Customs of the Realm, made in the General
assembly of the Kingdom, King, Bishops, Peers, to which they gave both their
oaths assertory for the truth of it, and Promissory for performance of it. The
fourth Custom was this, that when an Arch Bishopric Bishopric Abbacy or
Priory did fall void, the Election was to be made by such of the Principal
Dignitaryes or Members of that respective Church which was to be filled as the
king should call together for that purpose, with the kings consent, in the
kings own Chapel. And there the person elected was to do his Homage and
Fealty to the King as to his Liege Lord, The Pope had no part to Act, neither
to collate, nor consent, nor confirm, nor Institute, nor induct, nor ordeine.

The Second Law is the Statute of Carlisle made in the time of Edward the First.
the right to give Bishop-Ricks in England is the Kings
The sum of it is this, That the king is the Founder of all Bishoprics, and
ought to have the Custody of them in the Vacancyes, and the right of Patronage
to present to them. And that the Bishop of Rome usurping the Right of
Patronage, gives them to aliens. That this tends to the annullation of the
State of holy Church, to the Disinheriting of Kings, and the Destruction of the
Realm. And they ordained in full Parliament that this is an Oppression (that is
as much as an entroachment or Usurpation) and should not be suffered.

The third law was made in the 15th year of Edward the third, called the
Statute of Provisors, wherein they affirm that Elections were First granted by
the Kings Progenitors upon a certain form or Condition to demand Licenfe of the
King to choose, and after the Election to have his Royal Assent. Which
Conditions not being kept, the thing ought by reason to resort to his First
nature. And there fore conclude, that in case Reservation Collation or
Provision be made by the Court of Rome of any Arch Bishopric etc. Our
Sovereign Lord the King and his Heirs shall have and enjoy the Collations for
the same time to the said Arch Bishoprics Bishoprics and other dignityes
Elective which be of his Aavowre, such as his Progenitors had before the free
Election was granted. They tell the King plainly that the Right of the Crown of
England and the Law of the Land is such, that the King is bound to make
remedies and Laws, against such mischiefs. And they acknowledge that he is
Advowee Paramont immediate of all Churches, Prebends, and other Benifices which
are of the Advowry of holy Church. That is as much as Sovereign Patron of the
Church; Where no Election can be made without the Kings Conge d' Estire or
leave antecedent, nor stand good without his subsequent consent; it is all one
as if the Crown did Collate.

I come next to the second Branch of the First Question, the right to convocate
English Synods is the Kings.
about the Patronage of the Church, Who has power to Convocate and Dissolve
Ecclesiastical Assemblyes? and whether the Crown or the Pope have usurped one
upon another in this particular? I cannot tell whether Henry the eighth or Paul
the third, did mistake more about that Aerie title of the head of the english
church Henry the eight supposing that the right to convocate and dissolve
Ecclesiastical Assemblyes, and to receive Tenths and First fruits, did
esse^tially follow this Title; And Paul the third declaringe it to be
Heretical and Schismatic. To be head of the English Church, is neither more
nor less then our Laws and Histories, ancient and Modern, do every where
ascribe to our English Kings. To be Governers of Christians. To be the
Advocates of the Church, To be Patrons and Advowees Paramont of all Churches,
To be Defenders of the Fa^h there Professed, And to use the Words of the
Convocation it self, Ecclesiae Anglicanae Protectores singulares, Vnicos and
Supremos Dominos. The same body may have several heads of several kinds upon
Earth, as Political and Ecclesiastical; and then that which takes care of the
Archirectonicall end, to see that every member do his Duty, is always
Supreme; That is the Political head. This truth Cardinal Poole did see
clearly enough, and reconcile the seeming difference by distinguishing between
a Regal head and a Sacerdotall head, This truth the French Divines see well
enough, Polus de Conc. pa. 70.
and doubt not to call their King the Terrene head of the Church of his Realm,
without attributing to him any Sacerdotall right We had our Sacerdotall heads
too in England, without seeking for the^ so far as Rome; As the Archbishop of
Canterbury in the Reigns of our English Monarchs, who of old was Nullius unquam
Legati ditioni subjectus, Never subject to the Jurisdiction of any Legate. When
the Pope sent over Guy Archbishop of Vienna into England as his Legate
throughout Britaigne for the Apostolical See, It was received with wonder and
Admiration of all men. Eadmor. l. 3. p. 58.
Inauditum scilicet in Britannia cuncti scientes quemlibet hominum super se
vices Apostolicas gerere, nisi solum Episcopum Cantuariae: All men did know
that it was never heard in Britagne, that any Man whatsoever had Apostolical
power over them, but only the Archbishop of Canterbury. And accordingly the
new Legate did speed, so it follows, Wherefore as he came so he returned,
received as Legate by no man, nor having exercised any part of his Legantine
power. Eadm. l. 5. p. 120.
This was the ground of that Letter of the English Bishops to the Pope. That
the Church of Canterbury might not be deprived of its dignity in his times, and
that he would neither Diminish it him self, nor suffer it to be diminished. As
appears by the Popes acknowledgment in his answer.

But to come up close to the Difference, The Question is not whether ^he Bishop
of Rome have Authority to call Synods. He is a Bishop, a Metropolitan, a
Patriarch, a Prince in his own Dominions. As a Bishop he may Convocate his
Diocese, As a Metropolitan his Province; As a Patriarch his Patriarchate,
under the pain of Ecclesiastical Censure, more or less compulsory according
to that Degree of Coactive power which has been indulged to him in these
Distinct Capacities by former Sovereigns: And as a Prince he may convocate his
Subjects under Political pains. The more these two powers are united and
complicated, the more terrible is the Censure. And therefore our kings would
have their Bishops denounce spiritual pains also against the Violaters of
their great Charters. Spiritual paiues are more heavy then Political, but
Political most commonly are more speedy then Spiritual. And more certain;
Spiritual pains do not follow an erring Key, but Political do.

Neither will I dispute at praesent whether the Bishop of Rome by his reputed
Primacy of Order or Beginning of Unity may lawfully call an Oecumenicall or
Occidentall Council, by power purely Spiritual, which consists rather in
Advise then in Mandates properly so called, or in Mandates of Courtesy not
Coactive in the Exterior Court of the Church; considering the Division and
Subdivision of the ancient Empire, and the present Distractions of
Christendom, it seems not altogether in convenient. We see the Primitive
Fathers did Assemble Synods and ^ake Canons, before there were any christian
Emperors, but that was by aurhority merely spiritual; they had no coactive
power to compel any man against his Will. The Uttermost they could do was to
separate him from their Communion, and to leave him to the Coming or Judgment
of Christ. Let him be Anathema mar an atha.

The true Controversy then is this, 1. Cor. 16. 22.
Whether the Bishop of Rome by his Legates, have Coactive power in the
exterior Court, to Convocate Synods of English Subjects in England, when he
will, where he will, whom he will, without their Consents, and without the
leave of the Sovereign Prince or King of England, The Case being thus stated
determines it self. Where should the Pope appoint a place of meeting in
England without the Leave of the King of England? We see by often experience,
that if the Pope have a desire to summon a Council in Italy, within the
Dominions of another Sovereign Prince or Republic, although they be of his own
Communion; he must First ask leave, and obtein leave, before he can tell how
to do it; Or how should he pretend to any Coactive power in England without
the Kings grant or leave, where the power of the Militia and all Coactive force
is legally invested in the King. Thus for point of right.

Now for matter of Fact, First I do utterly deny that any Bishop of Rome by
his own Authority did Convocate any Synod in the British Island during the
First eleven hundred years, Or preside in any by his Legates, Or confirm them
by his Authority. If he be no table to produce so much as one instance to the
Contrary, he may cry guilty to the Usurpation where of he is accused* and hold
his peace forever.

Secondly, I do confess that after eleven hundred years, The Bishops of Rome
taking advantage of our civil combustions, and prostituting the reputation of
the Apostolical See to their temporal ends, did by the leave of our Kings,
(not otherwise,) sometimes call Synods in England, and preside in them. The
first Synod held in England by any of the Popes Legates was at London, in the
year 1125. by Ioannes Cremensis, Gervasius Do^robornensis.
Which moved England into no small indignation, to see a thing till then unheard
of in the Kingdom of England, A Priest sitting president upon an high throne
above Arch Bishops, Bishops, bats etc. But remember my third ground or
Consideration of the difference between affirmative and negative Presidents. All
which this proves, is that the King did give leave or connive at that time*
But it does not prove, it cannot prove a right to do the same at other times
when the King contradicts it.

Further we ought to take notice that there is a great deal of difference,
between an Ordinary Synod and an English Convocation. Although in truth our
Convocations be Synods; So called from one word in the Kings writ to Summon
them, Convocari facias. All the Clergy of the Realm were not present at an
ordinary Synod: but all the whole Clergy, of the Kingdom were present at a
Convocation, either in their Persons, or by their Proctors sufficiently
authorized. Secondly, the absent Clergy had no such Obligation to the Acts of a
Papal Synod, as they had to the Acts of a royal Convocation, sub Hypotheca
bonorum omnium, under the Caution or Pledge of all their Goods and Estates.

Lastly to drive the nail home, and to demonstrate clearly the Grossness of
this Papal usurpation; it remains only to show that by the Ancient Laws of
England the calling of Convocations or Synods, belonged properly to the King,
not to the Bishop of Rome or his Legates. And first by reason. By the Laws of
England more ancient then the Popes intrusion, no Roman Legate could enter into
the Kingdom withont the Kings leave, nor continue in it longer then he had his
License, as we shall see hereafter, and therefore they could not convocate any
Synods nor do any Synodicall Act without the Kings leave. Secondly by Records
of the English Convocation itself, that the Convocations of the Clergy of the
Realm of England are, always have been, and ought to be Assembled by the Kings
Writ Anno 1532.

Thirdly, by the Form of the Writ, which has ever been the same in all
succeding Ages, constantly directed from the King to the English Arch Bishops
for their distinct Provinces, The very Form speaks it English sufficiently;
For certain difficult and urgent Businesses concerning the defense and security
of the English Church, and the peace tranquillity, publik good and defense of
our Kingdom and Subjects, We command and require you by that Allegiance and
Love which you owe ^o us, that you cause to be convocated with convenient speed
in due manner all and singular Bishops of your Province, Deanes and Priors of
Cathedral Churches, etc. And the whole Clergy of your diocese and Province,
to meet before you, etc. Another Writ did always issue from the King for the
dissolution, We command you that you dissolve or cause to be dissolved this
present Convocation, this very day, in due manner, without any delay, etc.
Lastly by the concurring Testimonies of all our Historiographers, That all the
space of time of eleven hundred years, wherein the Popes did neither call
Counsels, nor Preside in them, nor Confirm them, and after unto the very
Reformation; Our Kings did both call Counsels, and Preside in them, and
Confirm them, and own their Laws: as I have showed him by the Laws of
Ercombert, Ina, Withred, Alfred, Edwerd, Athelstan, Edmund, Edgar, Athelred,
Canutus, and Edward the Confessor, in my Vindication. And particularly that
Theodore Archbishop of Canterbury Presided in a Council, in the Presence of
John the Popes Legate. That King Edward Assembled a Synod and Confirmed the
Acts of it as Decre^um Regis, The Kings decree: That King Withred called a
Council at Becancelde and Presided in it, and that the decrees of the Council
issued in his name and by his Authority. Firmiter decernimus etc. in my Answer
to the Bishop of Chalcedon. All this he pretends to have answered: but it is
with deep silence. If he desire more Presidents and more witnesses, he may have
a cloud of Authors upon holding up his Finger, to prove undeniably that King
Henry did not innovate at all in challenging to himself the right to Convocate
the Clergy and dissolve them, and confirm their Acts with in his own Dominions
but followed the steps of his Ro^al Predecessors in all Ages, from the first
planting of religion until his own days.

And not only of his own Ancestors but his Neighbors. The President of
Charles the great is very conspicuous. To omit all my former Allegations in
this behalf, Synod^^ Francica 2. Tom. Conc. Pe^ri. Crab.
In the French Synod. I Charlemain Duke and Prince of the Frankes by the Advice
of the Servants of God and my Princes, have congregated the Bishops which are in
my Kingdom with the Priests to a Synod, for the fear of Christ to Counsel
me, how the Law of God and Ecclesiastical Religion may be recovered, which in
the Days of forepassed Princes is dissipated and fallen to ruin etc. And by
the Counsel of my Clergy and princes we have ordained Bishops through out the
Cities and constituted over them Archbishop Boniface the Popes Legate, Qui est
missus Sancti Petri. And^we have decreed every Year to congregate a Synod,
that in our Presence the Canonical Decrees and the Rights of the Church may be
restored, and Christian Religion Reformed. And in the Synod of Arles held under
the said Emperor, they begin the Synod with a solemn prayer for the Emperor.
The Lord of all things establish in the Conservation of his Faith, our Most
Serene and religious Lord the Emperor Charles, by whose Command we are here
congregated. And they conclude the Synod with a submission to him, These things
which we judged worthy to be amended, we have briefly noted and decreed them
to be presented to our Lord the Emperor: beseeching his Clemency that if any
thing be here wa^tin^, it may be supplied by his Prudence, if any thing be
amiss it may be amended by his Judgment, if any thing be reasonably taxed it
may be perfected by his help, through the assistance of the Divine Clemency.
Ibidem.
So the Council of Toures begin their Synodicall Acts, That which was enjoined
us by so great a Prince we accomplished in meeting at the time and place
appointed, Where being congregated we noted such things by Chapters as needed
to be amended according to the Canonical Rule, to be showed to our most serene
Emperor. So they conclude their Acts, These things we have ventilated in our
Assembly, but how our most pious Prince will be pleased to Dispose of them, we
his faithful servants are ready at his beck and pleasure with a willing mind.
Ibidem.
Lastly the Synod called Synodus Cabilonensis in the days of the said Emperor
begins thus, Our Lord Jesus Christ assisting us, and the most renowned
Emperor Charles commanding us etc. We have noted out certain Chapters wherein
reformation seemed necessary to us, which are hereafter inserted, to be
presented to our said Lord the Emperor, and referred to his most sacred
Judgment, to be confirmed by his prudent examination of those things which we
have reasonably decreed, and wherein we have been defective, to be supplied by
his Wisdom. So they conclude, We have ventilated these things in our Assembly,
but how it shall please our most pions Prince to dispose of them, we his
fathfull servants with a willing mind are ready at his beck and pleasure. One
Egg is not liker to another, then these Synodicall Representations are to our
old English Customs, Yet these were Catholic times, when Kings convocated
Synods of their own Subjects, and either confirmed or rejected their Acts, as
they thought meet for the public good: and did give the Popes own Legate his
power of presiding in them by their Constitutions, who joined with the rest in
these Synodicall Acts.

I proceed to the third Branch of the Popes first usurpation, Oath of
all^gia^ce due to Kings from Clerks not due to the Pope.
concerning the tying of English Prelates by Oath to a new Allegiance to the
Pope. No man can serve two supreme Masters, where there is a possibility of
clashing one with another. It is true one is but a Political Sovereign, and
the other pretends but a Spiritual Monarchy: Yet if this supposed Spiritual
Monarch, shall challenge either a direct power and Jurisdiction over the
Temporal in the exterior Court, as Pope Boniface did, Nos, nos imperia,
regna, principa^us and quicquid habere mortales possunt, auferre and dare
posse; We, even We have power to take away and give Empires Kingdoms
Principalities, and what soever mor^all men are capable of: Or challenge an
indirect power to dispose of all temporal things in order to spiritual good,
(which is the opinion of Bellarmine and his party) Or lastly shall declare
those things to be purely spiritual which are truly Political, as the
Patronage of Churches and all Coactive power in the exterior Court of the
Church. In all such cases the subject must desert the one or the other and
either suffer justly as a Traitor to his Prince, or be subjected unjustly to
the Censures of the Church, and be made as an Heathen or Publicane. This is a
sad case.

But this is not all, If this poor subject shall be further persuaded, that
his Spiritual Prince has Authority to absolve him from all Sins, Laws,
Oaths, knowing that his temporal Prince does challenge no such extravagant
power, what Emperor or King can have any assurance of the Fidelity of his own
natural subjects? It is true, a Clerk may swear allegiance to his King, and
Canonical obediente to his Bishop, but the cases are not like. No Canonical
obedience either is or can be in consistent with true allegiance. The law full
Canons oblige without an Oath. And all that Coactive power which a Bishop has,
is derived from the Prince and Subjected to the Prince.

The question then is not whether a Pastor may enjoine his Flock to abstain
from an unjust oath; An oath of allegiance to a natural Prince is justifiable
both before God and man. Nor yet whether the Clergy have immunities, orought to
enjoy immunities such as render them more capable of serving God always the
first Article in our Great Charter of England. Let the Church enjoy her
Immunities. The question is not whether Clergy men transgressing of the Canons,
ought to be tried by Canonical Judges according to the Canons, especially in
the first instance. For by the Law of England the Delinquent was always
allowed the liberty to appeal to Caesar. But the question is whether the Pope
by any Act or decree of his can acquit English Subjects, or prohibit them to do
homage and swear Allegiance to their King, according to the Ancient Laws of
the Realm, because they are Clergymen: And can Command them whether the King
will or not, to take a new Oath never heard of or practiced formerly; An Oath
of Allegiance and Obedience to himself. So it is called expressly in the Edition
of Gregory the thirteenth, Electo in Archiepiscopum seeds Apostolica Pallium
non tradet, nisi prius praestet fidelitatis and Obedientiae Iuramentum, The
Apostolical See will not deliver the Pall to an Archbishop elect, unless he
first take a^ Oath of Fidelity and Obedience.

We have seen already how Henry the First was quietly seized and possessed of
the Homage of his Prelates and their Oaths of and their Oaths of Fidelity; and
his Predecessors before him. So we have heard Platina confessing, that before
the Popedom of Paschalis the second, the Homage and Feudall Oaths of Bishops
were performed to Lay Men, that is to Kings, not Popes. Thus much Eadmerus and
Nauclerus and William of Malmesbury and Hoveden and Iorvalensis do all assure
us. This agrees sweetly not only with the Ancient Law of Feuds, Ridleys View
of Civil and Eccles. p. 64.
from whence they borrowed the name of Investitures: but also is confirmed by
the decrees of ancient Councels, as diverse Toletan Counsels, and that of
Aquisgrane, which who so desires to see, may find them cited at large by King
James in his Apology for the Oath of A legiance. Apol. pro Iuram. fid. ca. 56.


But these Oaths, land Homages, and Regal Investitures, as they were a Bond of
Peace and Unity between the King and his Clergy, so they were a great Eyesore
to the Bishops of Rome, because they crossed their maine Design to make them
selves the only Liege Lords of the Ecclesiastics. As appears by that severe
Check which Adrian the fourth gave Frederick the first, for Requiring Homage
and Fealty of Bishops, who are Gods, and for holding their sacred hands in his
hands. It stayed not here, That Homage and Oath of Fidelity which Gregory the
seventh and Calixtus did rob the King of, their immediate Successor Paschalis
the second did assume to himself, as we find by the unanimous consent of all
Historiographers, and by the Canon of Paschalis himself recorded by Gregory the
ninth, De Elect. and Elect. p^otest. ca. 4.
Significasli etc. Thou signifiedst that Kings and the Peers of the Kingdom
were moved with Admiration, because the Pall was offered to Thee by our
Apocrisiaries, upon Condition to take that Oath which they brought Thee written
from us. etc. The Admiration shows the novelty of it. He confesses there,
that the Oath was not established by the Canon of any council, but by Papal
Authority, and ^ustifieth it, For fear of further evil; That is, Apostaring
from the Obedience due to the Apostolic See. The very Title does assure us
that it was an Oath of Fidelity and Obedience What manner of assurance can
Sovereign Princes promise themselves of those Subjects, who have sworn
Allegiance and Obedience to a foreign Prince.

This Form at First was modest and moderate, bounding the Obedience of
Archbishops by the Rules of the holy Fathers, as we find in the old Roman
Pontifical: but it was quickly changed from Regulas Sanctorum Patrum, to
Regalia Sancti Petri, as we find in the new Pontifical. The Change in Letters
was not great, but in the Sense abominable, Semel falsus semper praesumitur
falsus. He who is apprehended in palpable forgery, is always deservedly
suspected of forgery. With what Face can Mr. Sergeant tell us, that where the
Method of immediate Tradition has place, it is impossible for encroachments to
gain Admittance, Where were see such Hocus Pocus tricks played before our eyes
in their Pontifical. Bellarmine would persuade us that in St. Gregory the
firsts time there was such an Oath of Obedience fully made to the Bishop of
Rome. Greg. episi. l. 10. epist. 30. indic. 5.
But he does either abuse him self, or seeks grossly to abuse us First the
Oath mentioned in Saint Gregory, was not an Oath of Obedience or allegiance,
but promissio cujusdam Episcopi haeresim suam anathematiz ani^s, A promise of a
Certain Bishop anathematizing his haeresy, or an Oath of abjuration. Secondly,
the Oath mentioned by Saint Gregory, was not imposed by his authority, but
taken freely by the converted Bishop, to satisfy the world and to take away
all suspicion of Hypocrisy, (ne non pura ment^ seu simulate reversus existimer)
dictated to his own Notary by the advice of his Clergy, Notario meo cum
consensu presbyteror^m and Diaconorum atque Clericorum, scribendum dictavi. It
was no Common Case of all Bishops, neither did it comprehend any such
obligation to maintain the praetended royallties of S. Peter.

And as they extended the matter of their Oath, so they did the Subject, about
an hundred years after in the time of Gregory the niuth, De jure jurando cap.
4.
enlarging it from Archbishops to all Prelates, Bishops, Abbats, Priors, And
now what remains, but to cry up the Authority of the Canons above all
Imperial Laws, Cedant Arma Togae, concedat Laurea Linguae: As Bellarmine
does, who denies the superiority of Princes above Clergymen, Principes
Seculares respectu Clericorum non sunt Principes, Bell. li. de Clerca 28.
Princes are no Princes of Clerks, etc. Political laws have no coactive
obligation over Clerks, but only directive, The Civil laws of Emperors
must give place to the Canons of Popes. What new Monster is this, To receive
Protection from the Laws of Princes, and to acknowledge no Subjection to the
Laws of Princes? If Princes should put Church men out of their Protection, as
Bellarmine exempts them from all Coactive Obligation to the Laws of Princes,
They would quickly find their Error. It is an honor to Princes to preserve to
Church men their old Immunities, but is it a Shame to Churchmen like Swine, to
eat the Fruit and never look up to the Tree from whence it falls.

We have viewed the spoil Committed evidently, when, and by whom. He whose
office it was to praeserve all others from spoil, could not preserve himself.
It is a Rule in Law, Ame omnia Spolia^us resti^ui debet, Before all other
things he that is spoiled ought to be restored to his Right, And our old
English Laws are Diametrally opposite to these new Papal Usurpations, in all
the parts of them. First though the Kings and Kingdom of England, were always
careful to preserve the Privileges of Holy Church. In all our Great Charters
that was the first thing was taken Care for, yet not as due by Divine Law, 25.
E^ 3. cap 4.
and much less by the Laws of the Pope, (which they never regarded,) but as
Graces and Privileges granted by the Kings of England, and therefore they
excluded from benefit of Clergy such sort of delinquents as they thought fit,
6. H. 4. cap. 2.
as Proditores, Traitors against the Person of the King, Insidiatores viarum,
such as lay in wait to do mischief upon the Highwayes; Depopulatores agrorum,
such as depopulated the Land. And the most severe Laws that ever they made,
are the Statutes of Praemunire and Provisors against Churchmen, for siding with
the Bishop of Rome in his Usurpations, even to the forfeiture of their Goods
and Lands, their Loss of their Liberty, and the putting them out of the Kings
Protection.

Secondly, our Laws do acknowledge every where that Homage and allegiance is
always due to the King from all Clergymen what soever. Edward the first
injoined all the Prelates upon their faith (or Allegiance) which they ought
him. 3. Ed. 1. ca. 2.
They know no Fidelity or allegiance which is due to the Pope from any English
man either Clergy man or Lay man; but the just contrary that they are bound by
their allegiance to fight for the King against the Pope, for the redress of
these and such like Usurpations. In the fourteenth Year of Richard the second,
all the Spiritual Lords did answer unanimously, That if any Bishop of England,
16. Ric. 2. c. 4.
were excommunicated by the Pope for having executed the sentences and
commandments of the King, The same is against the King and his Crown, And they
will and ought to be with the King in these Cases lawfully, and in all other
Cases touching his Crown and his Regality, as they be bound in their
Allegiance. Our Laws know no Oath of Allegiance or Fealty due to any person
but the King, they make the King to be Advowee Paramont, 25. Ed. 3.
Supreme Lord and Patron, Guardian, Protector, and Champion of the Church of
England.

Lastly these Papal Oaths do necessarily suppose a Voyage to Rome, either to
take the Oath there, or if the Oath was sent them into England, one Clause in
the Oath^was, that they should come to Rome in person to receive the Popes
Commands within a prefixed time. But this is directly contrary to the Laws of
England, which allow no Subject Clergiman or other, to go to Rome without the
Kings Leave. Thus much both the Prelates and Peers of the Realm told Anselm
when he had a mi^d to visit the Pope. Thus much we find attested by the
General Assembly of the Kingdom in the Statute or Assise of Clarendon, where
one of the Customs or Laws of the Kingdom is, That No Ecclesiastical person
might depart out of the Kingdom, without the Kings License. No, Mat. Par. Anno
1164. Hoveden.
not though he were expressly summoned by the Bishop of Rome. And at a
Parliament held at Northampton in the Reign of Henry the third, it was enacted,
that if any persons departed out of the Kingdom, un less they would return
within a prefixed time, and answer it in the Court of our Lord the King, let
them be outlawed. This was the unanimous complaint of the whole Kingdom to the
Pope, Ma. Par. Anno 1945.
That the English were drawn out of the Realm by his authority, contrary to the
Customs of the Kingdom. No Clergy man may go to Rome without the Kings
License, say the ancient Laws of the Realm: Every English Prelate^ shall come
to Rome, upon my command says the Pope: What Oedipus can reconcile the English
Laws and Papal mandates? Commonly good Laws proceed from evil manners, and
abuses do ordinarily precede their Remedies. But by the Providence of our
Ancestors our English Remedies were preexistent before their Usurpations. Non
remittitur Pecca^um nisi restituatur ablatum, Until they restore those rights
whereof they have robbed the King and Kingdom, We may pardon them, but they
can hope for no forgiveness from God. I will conclude this point with an
ancient Fundamental Law in the Britannick Island, Hect. Boet. Hist.
Si quis cum alio societatem coierit, fidem and obsequium adversus quemlibet
professus, capite punitor, If any subject enter into Leagne with another
^Prince) professing Fidelity and obedience to any one (besides the King) Let
him lose his head. Tenths and first fruits usurped by the Pope.


I come now to the last Branch of the first Papal Usurpation Tenths and First
fruits. If Christ be still crucified between two Thieves, it is between an old
overgrown Officer of the Roman Court, and a Sacrilegious Precisian. The one is
so much for the Splendor of Religion, and the other for the Purity of
Religion, that between them they destroy Religion. Their Faces like Samsons
Foxes lock contrary ways, but both of them have Firebrands at their tails:
both of them prate of Heaven altogether, both of them have their hearts nailed
to the Earth. On the one side, if it had not been for the Avaricious Practices
of the Roman Court, the Papacy might have bee^ a great advantage to the
Christian world in point of Order and Unity, at least it had not been so
intolerable a Burden; It is feared these will not suffer an Eugenius an Adrian
or an Alexander to be both honest and long-lived. On the otherside these
Counterfeit Zelots do but renew the Policy of the two old Sicilian Gluttons, to
blow their Noses in the dishes, that they might devour the meat alone: that is
cry down Church Revenues as Superstitious and Dangerous, because they gape
after them themselves. If it were not for these two factio^s, we might hope to
see a reconciliation. Self interest and self profit are both the procreating
and conserving cause of Disunion.

Who would Imagine that the large Patrimony of St. Peter should not content or
suffice an old Bishop abundantly, without preying upon the poor Clergy for
Tenths and First fruits, and God knows how many other ways? The Revennes of
that See were infinite, yet the Bishops of ten complained of Want: Gods
blessing did not go along with these Ravenous Courses. So Pharohs lean Kine
devoured the fat, yet were nothing the Fatter them selves. Ma. Par. An^ 1229.
The first Tenth which the Pope had from the English Clergy was only a single
Tenth of their moveable Goods, not by way of Imposition, but as a Benevolence,
or free gift out of Courtesy. But the Roman Bishops having once tasted the
sweet, meant not to give over so Non missura cutem nisi plena cruoris ^irudo.

The next step was to impose Tenths upon the Clergy, not in perpetuity or as a
certain Revenue due to the Papacy, but for a fixed number of years, as a stock
for the Defense of Christendom against the incursions of the Turk. About the
same time First fruits began to be exacted, not generally but only of the
Popes own Clerks, as a Gratuity, or in plain English as a handsome Cloak of
Simony. But he that perfected the Work, and made both Tenths and First fruits a
certain annual Revenue to the Sea of Rome, Plat. In Vita Bonifaci Noni.
was Boniface the ninth, or John the two and twentieth his Successor, so says
Platina, And with him almost all other writers do agree. This Boniface lived
about the year fourteen hundred, whom Turselline makes to have been the
restorer of Papal Majesty, Turselin vita Vineislai.
whose prudence did transcend his Age, for he was but thirty years old. He was
the Usurper, that took away from the Romans the free choice of their
Magistrates. John the two and twentieth lived in the time of the Council of
Constance, some thing above the fourteen hundredth year. It was he that called
the Council, and was him self deposed by the Council for grievous Crimes, and
the payment of First fruits abolished. For neither the payment of Tenths nor
First fruits did agree with the palate of the Counsels of Constance and
Basile, Council: Constable. edit. Petri Crab. p. 1182
Notwithstanding their gilded pretenses.

The Council of Constance decreed, that it was not lawful for the Bishop of
Rome to impose any Indictions or Exactions upon the Church, or upon
Ecclesiastical persons in the Nature of a Tenth or any other way. Which Decree
was passed in the nineteenth Session, though it be related afterward. Ibidem
page 1164. Sess. 12 16.
According to this Decree Pope Martin issued out his Mandate, We Command that
the Laws which prohibit Tenths and other Burdens to be imposed by the Pope
upon Churches and Ecclesiastical persons, be observed more Strictly. And the
Council of Ba^ill Commands, Con. Basil. Ses. 21.
that as well in the Roman Court as elsewhere etc, Nothing be exacted for Tenths
or Firstfruits etc.

But for all this the Popes could not hold their Hands. Council. Later. sub
Leone 10. Ses. 12.
Leo the tenth made a new imposition for three years, Ad triennium proxime
futurum, for the old ends. And it should seem that their mind was, that thence
forward as the cause lasted, so should the imposition. But the Germane Nation
were not of the same mind, who made this their nineteenth Grievance, for as
much as concerns Tenth, Cent. Gra. vain. cap. 19.
which Ecclesiastical Prelates paid yearly to the Pope, which the Germane
Princes some years since did consent unto, that they should be paid to the Sea
of Rome for a certain time, upon Condition, that this money should be deposited
at Rome as a stock, for defense against the Turk, and no otherwise. But the
time is effluxed since, and the Princes have learned by Experience* that the
moneys have not been employed against the Turks, but converted to other Uses
etc. The Emperor Charles the fifth was not of the same mind, Apud Goldast an.
1522.
as appears by his Letter to Pope Adrian the sixth, where in he recites the
same fraud, and requires that the Tenths may be detained in Germany, for that
Use for which they were first intended. Lastly Henry the eighth and the Church
and Kingdom of England were not of that mind, nor intended to endure such an
egregious cheat any longer, so extremely contrary to the Fundamental Laws of
the Kingdom, 24. Ed. cap 1.
and destructive to them. By which Laws the King himself (who only has
Legislative power in England,) may not compel his Subjects to pay any such
Pensions, without the Good will and Assent of the Archbishops, Bishops, Earls,
Barons, Knights Burgesses and other Freemen of the land. Much less can a
foreign Prince or Praelate whatsoever he be, impose any such payments by his
own Authority. This is that which is so often Condemned in our Statutes of
Provisors* Namely, the imposing Pensions and exporting the Treasure of the
Realm. The Court of Rome is so far from any Pretense of Reparation, Traictes
des droit and libertees de l' Eglise Gallicane and Pro Liberate Ecclesiae
Gallicanae adversus Romanam Aulam Defensio Parisiensis Curiae.
that if their Predecessors were living, they were obliged to make restitution.
These are all the Differences that are between us* concerning the Patronage of
the Church of England.

Yet now least he should urge that these Laws alleged by me, are singular
obsolete Laws, not Consonant to the Laws of other Christian Kingdoms, I will
Parallel them with the Laws and Liberties of France, which he him self
acknowledges to be a Catholic Country, as they are recorded in two Authentic
Books, One of the Rights and Libertyes of the Gallican Church. The Other, The
Defense of the Court of Paris for the Liberty of the Gallican Church against
the Roman Court, both printed by Authority. First for the Patronage of the
Church.

The fourth Liberty is, The King has power to Assemble or cause to be
Assembled, Synods Provincial or National, and therein to treat of such things
as concern Ecclesiastical Order.

The seventh Liberty is, The Prelates of the French Church, although commanded
by the Pope, for what cause so ever it be, may not depart out of the Kingdom
without the Kings Commandment and License.

The eleventh Liberty is, The Pope cannot impose Pensions in France upon any
Benifices having Cure of Souls, Nor upon any other, but according to the
Canons etc.

The Fourteenth Liberty is, Ecclesiastical persons may be Convented, Judged,
and sentenced before a secular Judge for the First enormious Crime, or for
lesser offenses after a relapse.

The fifteenth Liberty is, All the Prelatest of France are obliged to swear
Fealty to the King, and to receive from him their Investitures for their Fees
and Manours.

The nineteenth Liberty is, Provisions, Reserva^io^s, expectative graces have
no place in France.

This is the brief sum of those Liberties which concern the Patronage of the
Gallican Church, agreeing perfectly with our old English Customs. I shall show
him the same perfect Harmony between their Church Liberties and our English
Customs, the Assise of Clarendon, the Statutes of Provisors and Praemunire,
through out. Either Mr. Sergeant must make the Gallican Church Schismatic,
which he dare not do, and if I conjecture rightly has no mind to do: or he
must acknowledge our English Laws to be good Catholic Laws for Company.

Sect. I. Cap. VI.
The next Usurpation which offers it self to our Consideration, is the Popes
Legislative power over the Church and Kingdom of England, The pope has no
legislative power in England.
either in his person or by his Legates* For the clearer understanding whereof,
the Reader in the first place may be pleased to take notice, that we receive
the ancient Canons of the Catholic church, and honor them more then the
Romanists themselves; as being selected ou^ of the Canons of Primitive
Counsels, before the Roman Bishops did challenge any plenitude of Legislative
power in the Church. And especially of the first four General Counsels: of
which King James said most truly, Omnibus Christ Monuarch. page 4. 1. Eli. c. 1.
that Publica Ordinum nostrorum Sanctione rec^pta sunt, They are received into
our Laws. We acknowledge that just Canons of Counsels lawfully Congregated
and lawfully proceeding, have power to bind the Conscience of Subjects as much
as Political Laws, in themselves not from themselves as being humane laws,
but from the Ordinance of God, who commands Obedience of Subjects to all
sorts of Superiors. Conc* Constan Sess. 39.
We receive the Canons of other Primitive Counsels, but not with the same
degree of Reverence as we do the first four general Counsels. No more did
S. Gregory of old, No more does the Pope now in his solemn Profession of his
Faith, at his election to the Papacy, according to the decree of the Council
of Constance. That which restrained them, restrains us. I am more troubled to
think, how the Pope should take himself to be an Ecclesiastical Monarch, and
yet take such a solemn Oath, In the Name of the Holy and undivided Trinity,
Father, Son and Holy Ghost, to keep the Fait^ of the Council of Chalcedon to
the least Tittle. What the faith of the Fathers of Chalcedon was in this great
Controversy about the Papacy, may appear by the six teenth Session, and the
Acclamation of the Fathers to the Sentence of the Judges, Haec justa Sententia,
haec omnes dicimus, haec omnibus placent etc. This is a just Sentence, These
things we all say, These things please us all etc

Secondly, we acknowledge that Bishops. were always esteemed the proper judges
of the Canons, both for composing of them and for executing of them: but with
this caution, that to make them Laws the confirmation of the Prince was
required; Constit* Justin. cont. Antim* in Syn 5
and to give the Bishop a coactive power to execute them, the Princes grant or
concession was needful. The former part of this caution is evident, in
Justinians confirmation of the fifth General Synod. Haec pro communi Pace
Ecclesiarum Sanctissimarum statuimus, haec sententiavimus, sequentes Sanctorum
Patru^ dogmata, etc. These things we ordain, these things we have sentenced,
following the opinion of the Holy Fathers, etc. Quae Sacerdotio visa sunt, and
ab Imperio confirmata: Which were approved by the Clergy, and confirmed by the
Emperor. The second part of the caution is evident out of the Laws of William
the conqueror, Qui decimam de^inuerit, Hoveden.
per justitia^ Episcopi, and Regis si necesse fueri^, ad soluttione^ arguatur,
etc. Who shall detain his Tithe, Let him be convinced to pay it by the justice
of the Bishop, and if it be needful of the King, For these things S. Austin
preached and taught, and these things (that is, both Tithes and jurisdictio^)
were granted from the King, the Barons, and the People. So hitherto there is no
difference betwee^ us, they acknowledge that the King is the Keeper of both the
Tables: and we say that for the first Table the Bishops ought to be his
Interpreters.

Thirdly, as we question not the Popes legislative or coactive power over his
own subjects: so we submit to the judgeme^t of the Catholic church, whether he
ought to have a primacy of order as the successor of S. Peter, and as a
consequent thereof, a right (if he would content himself with it) to summo^
Counsels, when and where there are no Christian Sovereigns to do it: and to
join with other Bishops in making spiritual Laws or Canons such as the
Apostles made, act. 15. 25.
and such as the primitive Bishops made before there were christian Emperors.
But then those Canons are the Laws of the Church, not of the Pope: As those
Canons in the Acts of the Apostles were the Laws of the Apostolical College,
The Apostles and Elders and Brethren, not the Laws of S. Peter. Then their
Laws have no Coactive Obligation to compel Christians in the outward Court of
the Church against their Wills, or further then they are pleased to submit
themselves. All exterior coactive power is from the Sovereign Prince, and
therefore when and where Emperors and Kings are Christians, to them it
properly belongs to summon Counsels, and to confirm their Canons, thereby
making them become laws. Because Sovereign Princes only have power to License
and Command their Subjects to Assemble, to assign fit places for their
Assembling, to protect them in their Assemblyes, and to give a Coactive power
to their Laws, without which they may do their best to drive away Wolves, and
to oppose Heriticks; but it must be with such Arms as Christ had furnished
them withal, that is. persuasions, Prayers, Tears, and at the most seperating
them from the Communion of the faithful, and leaving them to the Judgment of
Christ.

The Controversy is then about new upstart Papal Laws either made at Rome
(such are the decretalls of Gregory the ninth, Boniface the eighth, Clement the
fifth and succeeding Popes:) Or made in England by Papal Legates, as Otho and
Othobone; Whether the Pope or his Legates, have power to make any such Laws to
bind English Subjects, and compel them to obey them against their Wills, the
King of England contradicting it. The first time that ever any Canon of the
Bishop of Rome, or any legislative Legate of his, was attempted to be obtruded
upon the King or Church of England, was eleven hundred years after Christ. The
first Law was the Law against taking Investitures to Bishoprics from a Lay
hand. And the first Legate that ever presided in an English Synod was Johannes
Cremensis, of both which I have spoken formerly. Observe Reader and be
astonished, if thou have so much faith to believe it, That the Pope should
pretend to a legislative power over British and English Subjects by divine
right, and yet never offer to put it in execution for above eleven hundred
years.

It remains now to prove evidently that Henry the eighth by his Statute made
for that purpose, did not take away from the Bishop of Rome, any Privilege
which he and his Predecessors had held by Inheritance from St. Peter, and been
peaceably possessed of for fifteen hundred years. But on the contrary, that
eleven hundred years after St. Peter was dead, the Bishops of Rome did first
invade the right of the Crown of England, to make Laws for the external
Regiment of the Church, which the Predecessors of Henry the eighth had enjoyed
peaceably, until the days of William Rufus, nemine contradicente. And that
the Kings Laws were evermore acknowledged to be true Laws and obligatory to
the English Subjects: but that the Popes decrees were never esteemed to be
binding Laws in England, except they were incorporated in to our Laws, by the
King and Church or Kingdom of England. Whence it follows by irrefragable
consequence, that Henry the eighth was not the Schismatic in this particular:
but the Pope and those that maintain him, or adhere to him in his Usurpations.

First, for the Kings right to make Laws, not only concerning the outward
Regiment of the Church, but even concerning the Keys of Order and jurisdiction,
so far as to oblige them who are trusted with that power by the Church, to do
their duties, it is so evident to every one who has but cast his Eyes upon our
English Laws, that to bestow labor on proving it, were to bring Owls to
Athens, Their Laws are extant made in all Ages, concerning faith and good
Manners, Heresy, Holy Orders, the Word, the Sacraments, Bishops, Priests,
Monks, the Privileges and Revenues of Holy Church, Marriages, Divorces,
Simony, The Pope, his Sentences, his oppressions and usurpations, Prohibitions,
Appeals from Eeclesiasticall judges, and generally all things which are of
Ecclesiastical Cognifance; and this in those times which are acknowledged by
the Romanists themselves to have been Catholic. More then this, they inhibited
the Popes own Legate to attempt to decree any thing contrary to the Kings Crown
and dignity, And if they approved the decrees of the Popes Legates, Ma. Par. an
1237. Flor. wigorn. an 1227.
they confirmed them by their Royal Authority, and so incorporated them into
the Body of the English Laws.

Secondly, that the Popes decrees never had the force of Laws in England
without the Confirmation of the King, Witness the decrees of the Council of
Lateran as they are commonly called: but it is as clear as the day to any one
who reads the eleve^th, the six and fortieth, and the one and sixtieth
Chapters, that they were not made by the Council of Lateran, but some time
after; perhaps not by Innocent the third, but by some succeeding Pope. For the
author of them does distinguish himself expressly from the Council of Lateran,
It was well provided in the Council of Lateran etc. But because that statute
is not observed in many Churches, we confirming the foresaid statute do add
etc. Again, It is known to have been prohibited in the council, of Lateran,
etc. But we inhibiting the same moro strongly etc. How soever, they were the
Popes decrees, but never were received as Laws in England, as we see
evidently by the third Chapter, That the Goods of Clergimen being convicted of
Heresy be forfeited to the Church, That all Officiers Secular and
Ecclesiastical should take an Oath at their Admission, into their Office, to
their power to purge their Territories from Heresy, That, if a Temporal Lord
did neglect, being admonished by the Church, to purge his Lands from Heresy, he
should be excommunicated, And if he contemned to satisfy within a year, the
Pope should absolve his Subjects from their Allegiance. And by the three and
fortieth Chapter, That no Ec^^^siasticall person be compelled to swear
allegiance to a Lay man. And by the six and fortieth Chapter, that
Ecclesiastical persons be free from taxes. We never had any such Laws, all
Goods forfeited in that kind were ever confiscated to the King; We never had
any such Oaths, Every one is to answer for himself; We know no such power in
the Pope to absolve Subjects from their allegiance in our Law; With us,
Clergymen did ever pay Subsidies and taxes as well as lay men. This is one
Liberty which England has, not to admit of the Popes Laws unless they like
them.

A second Liberty of England is to reject the Popes Laws in plain terms. 20.
H. 3. c. 9.
The Pope made a Law for the Legitimation of Children borne before Matrimony as
well as those borne in Matrimony, The Bishops moved the Lords in Parliament,
that they would give their consent to the Common Order of the Church: But all
the Earls and Barons answered with one voice, that they would not change the
Laws of the Realm, which hitherto had been used and approved. The Popes
legislation could not make a Law in England, without the concurrence of the
three Orders of the Kingdom: and they liked their own old Laws better then
the Popes new Law.

A Third Liberty of England, is to give a legislative Interpretation to the
Popes Laws, which the Pope never intended. The Bishop of Rome by a
constitution made at the Council of Lions, excluded Bigamists (men twice
Married) from the Privilege of Clergy, that is, that should Marry the second
time de futuro: But the Parliament made an Act that the constitution should be
understood on this wise, that whether they were Bigamists before the
constitution, or after, they should not be delivered to the Prelates, but
Justice should be executed upon them as upon other Lay people. Ejus est Legem
Interpretari cujus est condere. They that can give a Law a new sense, may
abrogate it if they please.

A fourth Liberty of England is to call the Popes Laws Usurpations,
Encroachments, Mischiefs, contrary to, and destructive of the Municipall Laws
of the Realm, derogatory to the Kings Regality: And to punish such of their
Subjects as should pursue them, and obey them, with Imprisonment, with
Confiscation of their Goods and Lands, with outlawing them, and putting them
out of the Kings Protection. Witness all those noble Laws of Provisors and
Praemunire, Which we may truly call the Palladium of England, which preserved
it from being swallowed up in that vast Gulf of the Roman Court; 25. E. 1. 27.
E. 3. 2. H. 4 cap. 3. and 4. 7. H. 4. cap 6.
made by Edward the first, Edward the third; Richard the second, and Henry the
fourth. All those Collations, and Reservations, and Provisions, and Privileges,
and Sentences, which are condemned in those Statutes* were all grounded upon
the Popes^Lawes* and Bulls, and Decrees, which our Ancestors entertained as
they deserved.

Othobon the Popes Legate in England; by the Command of Urban the fifth made a
Constitution for the endowment of Vicars in Appropriations, but it prevailed
not: whereas our Kings by two Acts of Parliament did easily effect it. No
Ecclesiastical Act is impossible to them who have a Legislative power: 15. R.
2. cap 6. 4. H. 4 cap 12.
but many Ecclesiastical Acts were beyond the Sphere of the Popes Activity in
England. The King could make a spiritual Corporation; but the Pope could not.
The King could exempt from the Jurisdiction of the Ordinary; but the Pope could
not. The King could Convert Seculars into Regulars; but the Pope could not. 2.
H. 4. cap 3. and 4.
The King could grant the Privilege of the Cistercians; but the Pope could not.
The King could Appropriate Churches; but the Pope could not. Our Laws never
acknowledged the Popes plenitude of Ecclesiastical power, 2. H. 4. c. 3 and 4.
which was the ground of his legislation. Euphemius objected to Gelasius, that
the Bishops of Rome alone could not condemn Acatius, Gelas. epist. ad Faustu^*
ab uno non potuisset damnari. Gelasius answered, that he was condemned by the
Council of Chalcedon, and that his Predecessor was but the Executor of an old
Law, and not the Author of a new. This was all the ancient Bishops of Rome did
challenge, to be Executors of Ecclesiastical Laws, and not single Law makers.
I acknowledge that in his Epistle to the Bishops of Dardania, he attributes
much to the Bishops of Rome which a Council; but it is not in making new Laws
or Canons, but in executing old, as in the case of Athanasius and Chrysostom.
The Privileges of the Abbey of Saint Austin in England granted by the Popes,
Eadm* l. 4. Pa^ 92.
were condemned as null, or of no validity, because they were not ratified by
the King, and approved by the Peers. Eadm. l. 1. Pa^ 6.
William the Conqueror would not suffer any man within his Dominions to receive
the Pope for Apostolical Bishop, but by his command, nor to receive his
letters by any means, ^nlesse they were first showed to him. It is ^ikely this
was in a time of Schism, when there were more Popes then one, but is shows
how the King did interest himself in the affairs of the Papacy, that it should
have no further influence upon his subjects then he thought fit. He who would
not suffer any man to receive the Popes letters without his leave, would much
less suffer them to receive the Popes laws without leave. And in his prescript
to Remigius Bishop of Lincolne^, know ye all Earls and Viscounts, that I ^ave
judged, that the Episcopal (or Ecclesiastical) laws which have been of force
until my time in the Kingdom of England, being not well constituted according
to the praecepts of the holy Canons, should be amended in the common assembly,
and with the Counsel of my Archbishops and the rest of the Bishops and
Abbats, and all the Princes of my Kingdom. He needed not the help of any
foreign Legislation, for amending Ecclesiastical Canons and the external
regiment of the Church.

Now let us see whether the Libertyes of France be the same with our English
Privileges. The second Liberty is this, The Spiritual Authority and power of
the Pope is not absolute in Franee (if it be not absolute then it is not singly
Legislative,) but limited and restreined by the Canons and ancient Counsels of
the Church. If it be lim^ted by Ancient Canons, then it has no power to
abrogate Ancient Canons by new Canons. Their ancient Canons are their
Ecclesiastical Laws, as well as ours, and those must be received in that
Kingdom. They may be excellent Advisers without reception: but they are no
Laws without public reception, Canons are no Canons either in England or in
France, further then they are received.

The third Liberty is, No Command whatsoever of the Pope (Papal decrees are
his chief Commands) can free the French Clergy, from their Obligation to obey
the Commands of their Sovereign. But if Papal power could abrogate the ancient
Laws of France, it did free their Clergy, from their Obedience to their
Sovereign Prince.

The sixteenth Liberty is, The Courts of Parliament have power to declare null
and void the Popes Bulls, when they are found contrary to the Liberties of the
French Church, or the Prerogative Royal.

The twentieth Liberty, The Pope cannot exempt any Church, Monastery, or
Ecclesiastical Body from the jurisdiction of their Ordinary, nor erect
Bishoprics into Arch Bishoprics, nor unite them, nor divided them, without
the Kings license. England and France as touching their Liberties walk hand in
hand.

To conclude, the Popes legislative power in England was a gross Usurpation,
and was suppressed before it was well formed. But they are afraid of the old
Rule, Break ice in one place and it will crack in more. If they did confess
one Error, they should be suspected of many; If their Infallibility was lost,
all were gone: And therefore they resolve to bear it out with head and
shoulders, and in place of disclaiming a single power to make Ecclesiastical
Laws, and to give them a coactive obligation in exterior Courts, they
challenge a power to the Pope (some say ordinarily, others extraordinarily;
some say directly other indirectly,) to make and abrogate Political Laws
throughout Christendom, against the Will of Sovereign Princes. They who seem
most moderate and Cautelous among them are bad enough, and deserve right well
to have their works inserted into the Rebels Catechism, Bell. de Romans Pont.
l. 5. c. 6.
If a Civil Law be hurtful to the Souls of Subjects and the Prince will not
abrogate it, If another Civil Law be healthful to the Souls of the Subjects,
and the Temporal Prince will not enact it; The Pope as a Spiritual Prince may
abrogate the one, and establish the other. For Civil power is inferior, and
consequently subject to Spiritual power. And, The Ecclesiastic Republ^ck
ought to be perfect and sufficient to atteine its end: But the power to dispose
of things Temporal is necessary to atteine Spiritual ends. And, It is not
lawful to choose an Infidel or Heretical Prince, but it is the same danger or
damage to choose one who is no Christian, and to tolerate one who is no
Christian, and the determination of the Question whether he be fit to be
tolerated or not, belongs to the Pope. In good time. From these premises, we
may well expect a necessary Collusion. Who ever see such a Rope of Sand, so
incoherent to it self, and consisting of such Heterogeneous parts, composed
altogether of mistakes? Surely a man may conclude that either nocte pinxit, The
learned Author painted this Cypress tree in the night, or he has a pitiful
penurious Cause, that will afford no better proofs, But I hope the quarrel is
dead or dying, and with it much of that Animosity which it helped to raise in
the World. At least I must do my Adversaryes in this cause that right, I find
them not Guilty of it. Let it dye and the memory of it be extinguished for ever
and ever.

Sect. I. Cap. VII.
So I pass over from the Popes Legislative power, The Pope has no judiciary
power in England.
to his Judiciary power. Perhaps the Reader may expect to find something here
of that great Controversy between Protestants and Papists; whether the Pope be
the last, the highest, the infallible Judge of Controversies of faith, with a
Council or without a Council? For my part I do not find them so well agreed
at home, who this Judge is. All say it is the Church, but in Determining what
Church it is, they differ as much as they and we. Some say it is the
Essential Church by reception, whatsoever the Universal Church receives is
infallibly true; Others ^ay it is the Representative Church, that is a General
council; Others say it is the Virtuall Church, that it is the Pope; Others say
it is the Virtuall Church and the Representative Church together, that is the
Pope with a General Council; Lastly, others say it is the Pope with any
council, either General, or Patriarchall, or Provincial, or (I think) his
College of Cardinals, may serve the turn.

And concerning his infallibility all men confess, that the Pope may err in
his Judgment and in his Tenets as he is is a private Doctor, but not in his
Definitions. Secondly the most men do acknowledge, that he may err in his
Definitions, if he Define alone without some Council either general or
Particular. Thirdly others go yet higher, that the Pope as Pope with a
particular Council may Define erroneously or heretically, but not with a
General Council. Lastly many of them which go along with others for the
Popes Infallibility, do it upon a Condition, Si maturus procedat, and
consilium audiat aliorum Pastorum. If he proeeed maturely, and hear the
Counsel of other Pastors. Bell. de Romans Pont. lib. 4. Cap. 2.
Indeed Bellarmine says that if any man should demand, Whether the Pope might
err if he defined rashly? Without doubt they would all answer, that the Pope
could not define rashly. But this is mere presumption without any color of
proof. I appeal to every rational man, of what communion soever he be,
whether he who says, The Pope cannot err if he proceed maturely upon due
advise, do presume that the Pope cannot proceed immaturely or without due
advise, or not rather that he may proceed rashly and without due advise.
Otherwise the condition was vainly and su^e^fluously added, frustra fit
perplura quod fieri potest per pauciora.

But the truth is, we have nothing concerning this Question, nor concerning
any Jurisdiction merely Spiritual in all the Statutes of Henry the eighth.
They do all intend Coactive Jurisdiction in the Exterior Court of the Church:
Yet although nothing which he says does constrain me, I will observe my wonted
Ingenuity. We give the Supreme Judicature of Controversies of Faith to a
General Council, and the Supreme Power of Spiritual Censures, which are
Coactive only in the Court of conscience: but if the Sovereign Prince shall
approve or confirm the Acts of a general Council, then they have a Coactive
power in the Exterior Court, both Political and Ecclesiastical. There is
nothing that we long after more, then a general Council rightly called,
rightly proceeding; or in defect of that a free Occidentall Council, as
General as may be. But then we would have the Bishops to renounce that Oath
which has been obtruded upon them, and the Council to declare it void. I. A.
Bishop etc. will be faithful to St. Peter, and to the Holy Apostolical Church
of Rome, and to our Lord Pope Alexander etc. I will be an assistent to retein
and to defend the Roman Papacy and the Royalties of St. Peter. Where this Oath
is esteemed Obligatory, I do not see how there can be a Free Council.

But I retire my self to that which concerns our present Question and the
Laws of Henry the eyghth, concerning Judiciary Power in the Exterior Court of
the Church The First Branch of this third Usurpation s, The Pope ca^ receive no
appeals from England
Whether the Bishop of Rome can receive Appeals from England, and send for
what English Subjects he pleases to Rome, without the Kings leave? The First
President, and the only President that we have of any Appeal out of England
to Rome, for the First thousand years after Christ, was that of Wilfrid
Archbishop of York; though to speak the truth, that was rather an Equitable
then a Legal appeal to the Pope, as the only Bishop of an Apostolical
Church in the west, and an honorable arbitrator, and a Faithful Depositary of
the Apostolical Traditions, not as a Superior Judge. For neither were the
Adverse Parties summoned to Rome, nor any witnesses produced, both which ought
to have been done in a Legal Appeal. But the success was so contrary to the
Popes Interest, and the Resolution of the King Church and Kingdom of England
so unanimous, That they could not assent to the Popes Legation, because it was
against reason that a person twice condemned by the whole Council of the
English, should be restored upon the Popes Letter, that England was never
troubled with any more appeals to Rome until after the Conquest. Neither
Durst the Pope send any Bulls or Mandates then, but a plain Letter.

The next Appellant was Anselm a Stranger (who knew not the liberties of
England) in the Days of Henry the first, as succeslesse as Wilfrid had been.
Malm. de gestis Pont. Angl. l. 1.
Will you trust the Testimony of a King? (And I know not why a King should not
be trusted for the Customs of his own Kingdom) Hear King Henry the First the
Son of the Conqueror, It is a Custom of my Kingdom instituted by my
Father, (instituted indeed, but not first instituted, for it was an old Saxon
Custom) that no Pope be appealed to without the License of the King. Another
Law of the same King was, leg. Hen 1. c. 31
By all means we discharge foreign Judgments. If you will not trust the
King, trust the whole Kingdom upon their Oaths, in the Days of Henry his
Grandchild. The First English Custom recited in the Assise of Clarendon is
this, Mat. Par. an* 1164.
That all Appeals in England must proceed regularly from the Archdeacon to the
Bishop, from the Bishop, to the Arch Bishop, and if the Arch Bishop failed to
do Justice, the last complaint must be to the King to give order for redress.
Eadmee^us l. 5. p. 113.
If we will not trust the King and Kingdom, Yet let us trust the Pope him
self: thus Paschal the second writes to our Henry the first, The Popes
Nuncioes and Letters do find no reception within thy Jurisdiction, There are
no Complaints from those parts, no Appeals are destined to the Apostolic See.
Hove. den an. 119.
The Abbat of Thorney found this true by experience, who lay long in prison
notwithstanding his Appeal to Rome. The Case is so plain, that I shall not
cite one Authority more in it, but only one of our Statute Laws, made not
only by the Assent (as is usnall) but upon the prayer, and grievous and
clamorous Complaints of the Peers and Commons; xxvij. Edw. 3^
That because People are Drawn out of the Realm to answer things, the
Cognizance whereof belongs to the Kings Courts, and the Judgments of the
Kings Courts are impeached in another Court (the Court of Rome,) to the
disinheriting of the king and his Crown, and the undoing ^and destruction of
the Common Law of the Land; Therefore it is ordained, that whosoever shall draw
a man out of the Realm in Plea, if he do not appear upon Summons and conform
to the sentence of the kings Court, he shall forfeit Lands and Goods, be
outlawed and imprisoned.

Against such Fortifications grounded upon Prescription and Imperial Laws,
the Canon of the Council of Sardica will make no great Battery. Take the
Council of Sardica at the best, waving all exceptions, yet certainly it was no
general Council; If it were, it had been one of the four first. If it had
been a general Council it self, three succeeding Popes were much to blame, to
Father the Canons of it upon the first General Council of Nice. The Canons of
the Council of Sardica did not bind the Africans of old, much less bind us
now. Secondly, the Canon of Sardica does only give way to Appeals to Rome in
cases between two Bishops: but the Court of Rome admits Appeals from
inferior Clergy men, from Lay men, from all sorts of men, in all sorts of
Causes that are of Ecclesiastical Cognizance. Thirdly, the Canon of Sardica is
a mere permission, no precept, what may be done in discretion, not what ought
to be done of necessity: it was proposed with a Si vobis placet, If it please
you, and the ground of it is a Complement, Let us honor the Memory of S.
Peter. Fourthly, There is one great Circumstance in our Case, which varieth it
quite from that proposed by Osius to the Sardican Fathers, that is, that our
King and the Laws of the Realm do forbid Appeals to Rome. If there had been
such an Imperial Law then, do we think that the Fathers of Sardica would
have been so disloyal, or so simple to think to abrogate the Imperial Laws
by their Canons, which are no Laws but by the Emperors Confirmation? No, the
Fathers of that Age did know their duty too well to their Emperor, and if they
could have foreseen what avaricious practices, and what gross Oppressions,
would have sprung in time from this little seed of their Indulgence, they would
have abhominated them. Lastly, supposing the Sardican Council had been of more
Authority, and the Canon thereof of more Extent then it was, and more
peremptory, and that there had been no such intervening impediment why English
Subjects could not make use of that Remedy: yet the Council of Sardica can
give but humane right, And a contrary Prescription for a thousand years, is a
sufficient Enfranchisement from all pretense of humane right.

The second branch of this Usurpation, Of Papal Bulls and excommunicaetions.
is as clear as the former, concerning Papal Bulls and Excommunications; That
by our ancient Laws they cannot be executed in England without the Kings
Leave. In the Assise of Clarendon, this is found to be one of the ancient
Customs of England, That none of the Kings Servants or Tenants that held of
him in Capite, Ma. Par. Anno 1164.
might be excommunicated, or their Lands interdicted, before the King was made
acquainted. There was a severe Law made in the Reign of the same King, Hoved.
in Hen. ^ 2.
If any man be found bringing in the Popes Letter or Mandate, Let him be
apprehended, and let justice pass upon him without delay, as a Traitor to the
King and Kingdom. It seems that the first and second Henryes, were no more
propitious to Rome then Henry the eighth. Take one Statute more; it was enacted
in full Parliament by Richard the second, 26. Ric. 2. cap. 4.
that if any did procure or pursue any such Processes^or excommunications in
the Court of Rome, as are there mentioned, that is, concerning presentatio^s to
benefices or dignities Ecclesiastical and they who bring them into the realm,
or receive them, or execute them, shall be put out of the Kings protection,
their Lands Goods and Chattells be confiscated to the King, and their Bodies
attached. They had the same respect for the Popes Bulls as often as they did
not like them, 2. Hen. 4. c. 4.
in Henry the fourths time, as we see by the Statute made against those, who
brought or prosecuted the Popes Bulls granted in favor of the Cystercians.
Placit^ An. 32 and 34. Edw. 1.
By the Law of England if any man denounced the Popes Excommunication, without
the assent of the King, he forfeited al his Goods, And it is recorded in
particular, how the Kings writ issued out against the Bishops of London and
Norwich, as being at the Kings Mercy, Hoved. An. 1165. Ma. Par, an 1164.
because contrary to the Statute of Clarendon, by the Popes Mandate, they had
interdicted the Lands of Earl Hugh, and had published an Excommunication
without the Kings License, which the Pope had given out against him. All these
Laws continued still in force, and were never repealed in England, neither
before Henry the eighth began the reformation, nor since by Queen Mary, but
have ever continued iu full force until this day.

Lastly for Legates and Legantine courts, there could be no Appeal in Eugland
to any Legate or Nuncio without the Kings leave: Or Papal Legates.
but all Appeals must be from the Archdeacon to the Bishop, from the Bishop to
the Archbishop, from the Archbishop to the King, as we see expressly by the
statute of Assise of Clarendon formerly cited. The Kings of England did ever
deem it to be an unquestionable right of the Crown (as Eadmerus testifies) to
suffer none to exercise the Office of a Legate in England, Eadmerus l. 5. p.
125.
if the King him self did not Desire it of the Pope, upon some great quarrel
that could not be so well Determined by the Archbishop of Canterbury and the
other Bishops. Which Privilege was consented unto by Pope Calixius. Ibid.
By the Laws of England, if a Legate was admitted of Courtesy, Plat. An. 1.
He. 7.
he was to take his Oath to do nothing Derogatory to the King and his Crown.
Henry the sixth by the counsel of Humphry Duke of Gloucester the Protector,
protested against Pope Martin and his Legate, that they would not admit him
contrary to the Laws and Libertyes of the Realm, Acts and Monuments.
and dissented from whatsoever he did. And when the Pope had recalled Cardinal
Pooles Commission of Legate for England, and was sending another Legate into
England, Queen Mary being very tender of her Kinsmans Honor, for all her good
affection to Rome, was yet mindful of this point of old English Law, to cause
all the Seaports to be stopped, and all Letters Briefs and Bulls from Rome to
be intercepted and brought to her. She knew this was an old English, not a new
protestant Privilege: Neither would she ever admit the new Legate to appear as
Legate in her presence.

Now let us see how these old English Customs do agree with the French
Liberties. The Pope cannot send a Legate a latere into France with power to
Reform, Judge, Collate, dispense, except it be upon the desire or with the
Approbation of the most Christian King. Neither can the Legate execute his
Charge, until he has promised the King under his Oath upon his holy Orders,
to make no longer use of the Legantine power in the Kings Dominions then it
pleases him, That he shall attempt nothing Contrary to the Liberties of the
Gallicane Church. And it is lawful to Appeal from the Pope to a future
Council.

Another Liberty is, The Commissions and Bulls of Popes are to be viewed by the
Court of Parliament, and registered, and published with such Cautio^s as that
Court shall Judge expedient.

A third Liberty is, Papal Bulls Sentences Excommunications and the like, are
not to be executed in France, without the Kings command or Permission.

Lastly, neither the King, nor his Realm, nor his Officers, can be
Excommunicated nor Interdicted by the Pope.

And as England and France, so all the seventeen Provinces, did enjoy the same
Privileges, as appears by the Placaet of the Council of Brabant, dated at
Bruxelles May 12, An. 1653. Wherein they declare, that it was notoriously true,
that the subjects of those Provinces, of what State or Condition soever (that
is the Clergy as well as the Laity) cannot be cited or convented out of the
Land, no not before the Court of Rome it self. And that the Censures
Excommunications* etc of that Court, might not be published or put in execution
without the Kings Approbation. It seems that if the Pope had any judiciary
power of old, he must seek it nearer Home; People had no mind to go over the
Alps to seek for Justice. And that Ordinance of Saint Cyprian, had place
every where among our Ancestors, Cypr. ad Cornel. Ep. 55.
Seeing it is decreed by all, and it is equal and just that every man's cause be
heard there where the Crime was committed, and a Portion of the Flock is
assigned to every Pastor, which he may rule and govern, and must render an
account of his Actions to the Lord; It behooves those whom we are over, not to
run up and down, nor to knock Bishops who agree well, one^ against another, by
their Cunning and deceitful Rashness; but to plead their Cause there, where
they may have both Accusers and Witnesses of their Crime. Unless the Authority
of the African Bishops who have Judged them already, seem less to a few
desperate and lost persons etc. To say S. Cyprian meant not to condemn
appeals, but only the bringing Causes out of Africa to Rome in the first
Instance, is a shift as desperate as that of those Fugitives. For St. Cyprian
tells us plainly that the cause was already Judged, and sentence given in
Africa; The first Instance was past, and this Canon was made against Appeals
out of Africa to Rome.

Sect I. Cap VIII.
So from his Judiciary power I come to Papal dispensations, Of Papal
dispensations.
the last of the grosser Usurpations of the Bishops of Rome. Where I have a
large Field offered me to expatiate in, if I held it so pertine^t to the
present Controversy. The Pharisees did never dilate their Philacteries so much
as the Roman Courtiers did their dispensative power. The Pope dispenses with
Oaths, with Vows, with Laws, he loses from Sins, from Censures, from
Punishments. Is not this a strange Key, which can unlock both sins, and
censures, and Punishments, and Laws, and Oaths, and Vows, where there are so
many and so different wards? It is two to one that it proves not a right Key,
but a Picklock. Their doctrine of Dispensations was foul enough, especially in
such cases as concern the Law of God or Nature; as Oaths, Vows, Leagues,
Marriages, Allegiance. For either they make the dispensation to be only
Declarative; and then the Purchaser is merely Cheated, who pays his money for
nothing: Or else they make all Contracts, Leagues, promises to be but
Conditional, If the Pope approve them, which destroys all mutual trust and
humane Society: Or thirdly they make the Popes Dispensations, to be a taking
away of the matter of the Vow or Oath, that is, the Promise; as if the Papal
power could recall that which is past, or make that to be undone to day which
was done yesterday, or that not to be promised which was promised: Or lastly
they do dispense with the Law of God and Nature, as they do indeed, what
soever they pretend to the Contrary, or all this kind of dispensations signify
nothing.

But the Practice of Dispensations was much more foul. Witness their
Penitentiary Tax, wherein a man might see the Price of his Sin before hand,
Their common Nundination of Pardons, Their absolving Subjects from their Oaths
of Allegiance, Their loosing of Princes from their solemn Leagues, of Married
people from the Bonds of Matrimony, of Cloysterers from their Vows of
Celibate, of all sorts of persons from all Obligations Civil or sacred. And
whereas no Dispensation ought to be granted without just cause, now there is no
cause at all inquired after in the Court of Rome, but only the Price.
Memorial. de sa Magestad. Catolica cap. 6.
This is that which the nine choice Cardinals laid so close to the conscience
of Paul the third, How Sacred and Venerable the Authority of the Laws ought to
be, how unlawful and pernicious it is to reap any gain from the exercise of
the Keys. They inveigh sadly throughout against dispe^satio^s, and among other
things that Simoniacall persons were not afraid at Rome, first to commit
Simony, and presently to go buy an Absolutio^ and so retain their Benefice.
Bina Venena juvant. Two gross Simonies make a title at Rome, Thanks to the
Popes dispensations.

But I must contract my discourse to those Dispensations which are intended in
the Laws of Henry the eight, that is, the power to dispense with English Laws
in the Exterior Court, Let him bindor loose inwardly whom he will, whether his
Key err or not, we are not concerned. Secondly as he is a Prince in his own
Territories, he that has power to bind, has power to loose, He that has
power to make Laws, has power to dispense with his own Laws. Laws are made
of Common Events. Those benign Circumstances which happen rarely, are left to
the dispensative Grace of the Prince. Thirdly as he is a Bishop, whatsoever
dispensative power the ancient Ecclesiastical Canons, or Edicts of Christian
Emperors, give to the Bishop of Rome within those Territories which were
subject to his Jurisdiction by Humane right, we do not envy him; So he suffer
us to enjoy our ancient Privileges and Immunities, freed from his encroachments
and Usurpations. The Chief ground of the Ancient Ecclesiastical Canon was, Let
the Old Customs prevail. A Possession or Prescription of eleven h^ndred
years, is a good ward both in Law and Conscience against humane Right, and
much more against a new pretense of divine right. For eleven hundred years our
Kings and Bishops enjoyed the ^ole dispensative power, with all English Laws
Civil and Ecclesiastical. In all which time he is not able to give one
Instance of a Papal Dispensation in England, nor any shadow of it when the
Church was formed. Where the Bishops of Rome had no Legislative power, no
Judiciary power in the Exterior Court, by necessary consequence they could
have no Dispensative power. The first reservation of any Case in England to the
Censure and absolution of the Pope, is supposed to have been that of Albericus
the Popes Legate, in an English Synod in the year 1138. Neque quisquam ei
praeter Romanum Pontificem, nisi mortis urgente periculo, modum paenitenttae
finalis injungat. Let no man enjoin him the manner of final Penance but the
Bishop of Rome, except in danger of death.

But long before this, indeed from the beginning, Gervas Dorber. page 1648.
our own Bishops (as the most proper Judges, who lived upon the place and see
the nature of the Crime and the degree of the Delinquents Penitence or
Impenitence,) did according to equity relaxe the rigor of Ecclesiastical
Canons; as they did all over the Christian world, before the Court of Rome had
usurped this gainful Monopoly of Dispensations. In the Laws of Alured alone,
and in the conjoint Laws of Alured and Gu^thrun, we see how many sorts of
Ecclesiastical crimes were dispe^sed withal by the sole authority of the King
and Church of England, and satisfaction made at home to the King, and to the
Church, and to the Party grieved, or the Poor, without any manner of reference
at all to the Court of Rome, or to any foreign Dispensation. Spelm: Council. pa.
364. etc.
The like we find in the the laws of some other Saxon Kings. There needed no
other paenitentiary tax. Dunstan the Archbishop had Excommunicated a great
Count, He made his Peace at Rome, and obtained the Popes Command for his
restitution to the bosom of the Church. Dunstan answered, I will obey the Pope
willingly when I see him paenitent, But it is not Gods will that he should lie
in his sin free from Ecclesiastical discipline to insu^t over us. God forbid
that I should relinquish the law of Christ for the cause of any mortal man.
ibid. p. 481.
Roman dispensations were not in such Request in those days.

The Church of England dispensed with those Nuns, who had fled to their
Nunneries not for the love of religion, Lanf. Ep. 32.
but had taken the veil upon them merely for fear of the French; and this
with the counseile of the King in the days of Lanfranke: and with Queen Maud
the wife of Henry the First in the like case, Eadm. l. 3. p. 57.
in the days of Anselme, without any suite to Rome for a foreign dispensatio^.

There can be nothing more pernicious then where the sacred Name of Law, is
prostituted to avaricious ends; Where Statutes or Canons are made like Pitfals
or Traps to catch the Subjects by their purses; where profitable faults are
cherished for private Advantage by Mercinary Judges, as beggars do their
sores. The Roman Rota does acknowledge such ordinary avaricious Dispensations,
to be Odious things. The Delected Cardinals make them to be sacrilegious
things, an unlawful selling of the power of the Keys. Commonly they are called
Vulnera Legum, The wo^nds of the Laws: 27. Edv. 3.
And our Statutes of Provisers do style them expressly the undoing and
Destruction of the Common Law of the Land. The King, the Lords Spiritual and
Temporal, and the whole Common wealth of England, complained of this abuse as
a mighty Grievance; Of the frequent coming among them of this infamous
Messenger the Popes Non Obstante, Mat. Pa. an. 1245.
(that is his Dispensations) by which Oaths, Customs, Writings, Grants,
Statutes, Rights, Privileges, were not only weakened but exinanited. Sometimes
these Dispensative Bulls came to legal Trials, and were condemned. By the Law
of the Land the Archbishop of Canterbury was Visiter of the University of
Oxford, Boniface the eight by his Bull dispe^sed with this law, and exe^pted
the University from the Jurisdiction of the Archbishop. Whereupon there grew a
Controversy, and the Bull was decreed void in Parliament by two succeding
Kings, Ex Arch. Tur. Londin. Ex Antiq. Acad. Cantab. pa. 91.
as being obtained to the Prejudice of the Crown, the weakening of the Laws and
Customs of the Kingdom, (in favor of Lollards and heretics) and the
probable Ruin of the said University.

How the Liberties of France and the Laws and Customs of England do accord
in condemning this Usurpation we have seen formerly, The power of the Pope is
not absolute in France, but limit^ed and restrained by the Canons of Ancient
Counsels. If it be Limited and restrained by Ancient Canons, then it is not
Paramount above the Canons, then it is not dispensative to give Non Obstante's
to the Canons. And the Popes Legate may not execute his Commission, before he
have promised under his Oath upon his holy Orders, that he will not attempt any
thing in the exercise of his Legantine power to the Prejudice of the Decrees of
General Counsels, or the Privileges of the French Church. Then he must give
no Dispensarions against the Canons, or Contrary to those Privileges.

Thus we have viewed all the real differences between the Church of Rome and
us, concerning Papal power which our Laws take notice of. There are some
other pet^y Abuses which we complain of, but they may be all referred to one of
these four heads, The Patronage of the Church of England, The Legislative, The
Judicary, and Dispensative powers. Other differences are but the Opinions of
particular Persons: But where no Law is there is no Transgression. We have
seen evidently, that Henry the eighth did cast no Branch of Papal power out of
England, but that which was diametrally repugnant to the Ancient Laws of the
Land, made in the Reign of Henry the fourth, Richard the second, Edward the
third, Edward the first, Henry the third, Henry the second; And these Laws
ever of Force in England, never repealed, no not so much as in Queen Maryes
time, when all the Laws of Henry the eigh^h and Edward the sixth which
concerned the Bishop of Rome were repealed. So that I profess clearly, I do
not see what advantage Henry the eighth could make of his own Laws, which he
might not have made of those ancient laws; except only a gaudy title of Head
of the English Church, which survived him not long; and the Tenths and first
fruits of the Clergy, which was so late an usurpation of the Pope, that it was
not in the nature of things, when those ancient laws were made.

And since I have mentioned the Novelty of that upstart Usurpation, give me
leave to let you see how it was welcomed into England, whilst it was but yet
hatching with the shell upon the Head of it, By a Law of Henry the fourth,
about an Hundred years before Henry the eyghth, (so late this Mushrom began to
sprout up.) 6. Hen. 4. cap. 1.
For the grievous Complaints made to the King by his Commons in Parliament, of
the horrible Mischiefs and Damnable Custom which is introduced of new in the
Church of Rome, that none could have Provision of an Archbishopric, until he
had compounded with the Popes Chamber to pay great excessive sums of money,
as well for the First fruits as other lesser Fees and Perquisites, etc* The
King ordeineth in Parliament, as well to the Honor of God as to eschew the
Damage of the Realm and peril of souls, That whosoever shall pay such sums
should forfeit all they had, or as much as they might forfeit. Wherein are
Henry the eights Laws more bitter against the Bishop of Rome, or more severe
then this is?

To conclude, we have seen the precise time when all these Weeds did first
begin to peep out of the earth, The very first Introduction to the intended
Pageant, was the spoiling of Christian Kings of the Patronage of the Church,
which Bellarmine confesses that they held, Apol. Card. Bell. contra praef.
Monit. p. 66. Epist. Cler. Leod. Contrae Pasch. 2. in 2. tom. Conc.
Per non breve tempus, For a long time. A long time indeed, so long as there
had been Christian Princes in the world, from Constantine the Great to Henry
the fourth in the Empire; and yet longer with us in Britain, from King Lucius
to Henry the First. The Clergy of Liege say, Nimium effluxit tempus quo hae^
consuetudo incepit, ande. It is too long since this Custom (of swearing
fidelity to Princes) did begin. And under this Custom Holy and Reverend
Bishops have yielded up their souls to God, giving to Caesar that which was
Caesar's, and to God that which was Gods. But the^ rose up Pope Hildebrand
otherwise called Gregory the seventh, Fortissimus Ecclesiae Dei Vindex, The
most undaunted Vindicator of the Church of God, Bell.
Who feared not to revoke and defend the old Holy Ecclesiastical Laws. ibid.
With this accords the Church of Liege, Hildehran. dus Papa Author hujus
Novelli Schismatis, primus Levavit Sacerdotalem Lanceam contra Diadema Regni
etc. Pope Hildebrand the author of this new Schism, first lift up his
Episcopal Lance against the Royal diade^. And a little after, Si utriusque
Legis totam Bibliothecam etc. If I turn over the whole Library of the old and
new Law, and all the ancient Expositors thereof I shall not find an Example of
this Apostolical precept, only Pope Hildebrand perfected the Sacred Canons,
when he Commanded Maud the Marchioness to subdue Henry the Emperor, for
remission of her Sins.

I take no exceptions to the person of Pope Hildebrand, others have done it
sufficiently. Whether the Title of Antichrist was fastened upon him justly or
injustly, I regard not. Bern. Ep. 56.
Yet it was in the time of this Hildebrand and Paschalis his Successor, that
the Archbishop of Florence affirmed by revelatio^, (for he protested that he
knew it most certainly) that Antichrist was to be revealed in that age. Bern.
Sermon. 65. in Cant.
And about this time the Waldenses, (of whom St. Bernard says that if we
inquire into their Faith, nothing was more Christian, if into their
Conversation, nothing was more irreprehensible,) made their Secession from the
Bishop of Rome. And not long after in the year 1120. published a Book to the
world that the great Antichrist was come; That the present Governers of the
Roman Church, Joseph Mede de Numeris Danielis.
armed with both Powers Secular and Spiritual, who under the specious Name of
the Spouse of Christ did oppose the right way of Salvation, were Antichrist.

But I cannot but wonder what are those old holy Ecclesiastical Laws which
Bellarmine mentions, Plat. in Vita Greg. 7.
Those Institutions of the Holy Fathers which Hildebrand himself professes to
follow, Sanctorum Patrum instituta sequen^es; Why do they mention what they
are not able to produce, or pretend what they never can perform? Bellarmin has
named but one poor counterfeit Canon, without Antiquity, without Authority,
without Use, without Truth. If Mr. Sergeant be able to help him with a recruit,
it would come very seasonably: for without some such helps, his pretended
Institutions of the Fathers will be condemned for his own Innovations, and for
arrant Usurpations, Our Laws Meddle not with spiritual Jurisdiction.
and the Guilt of Schism will fall upon the Roman Court.

Sect. I. Cap. IX.
But I expect it should be objected, that besides these Statutes which concern
the Patronage of the English Church, the Legislative, the Judiciary, the
Dispensative power of Popes, 28. Hen. 8. cap. 10.
there are two other Statutes made by Henry the eighth; 35. Hen. 8. cap. 5.
The one an Act for extinguishing the Authority of the Bishop of Rome, The
other an Act for establishing the Kings Succession in the Crown, wherein there
is an Oath, that the Bishop of Rome ought not to have any Jurisdiction or
Authority in this Realm. And that it is declared in the 37. Article of our
Church, that the Bishop of Rome has no Jurisdiction in this Kingdom of
England. And in the Oath ordained by Queen Elisabeth That no Foreign Prelate
has or ought to have, any Jurisdiction or Authority Ecclesiastical or
Spiritual with in this Realm.

I answer this Objection three ways. First as to the two Laws of Henry the
eighth, They are both repealed long since by Queen Mary, and never were
restored by any succeding Prince, If there were any thing blame worthy in them
let it dye with them. I confess I approve not the Construing of one Oath for
another, nor the swearing before hand to Statutes made or to be made. But, De
mortuis nil nisi bonum.

Secondly, I answer according to the equity a^ my second ground, that although
it were supposed that our Ancestors had over reached themselves and the truth
in some expressions: yet that concerns not us at all, so long as we keep our
selves exactly to the Line and Level of Apostolical Tradition

Thirdly and principally I answer, That our Ancesters meant the very same thing
that we do. Our only difference is in the use of the Words Spiritual
Authority or Jurisdiction, Which we understand properly of Jurisdiction purely
Spiritual, which extends no further then the Court of Conscience. But by
Spiritual Authority or Jurisdiction, they did understand Ecclesiastical
Jurisdiction in the Exterior Court, which in truth is partly Spiritual partly
Political; The interior habit which enableth an Ecclesiastical Judge to
Excommunicate, or Absolve, or degrade, is merely Spiritual, but the Exterior
Coaction is Originally Political. So our Ancestors cast out External
Ecclesiastical Coactive Jurisdiction, The same do we: They did not take away
from the Pope the power of the Keys, or Jurisdiction purely Spiritual; No
more do we.

To clear the whole business, We must know, that in Bishops there is a
threefold power; The first of Order, The second of Interior jurisdiction, The
third of Exterior jurisdictio^. The first is referred to the Consecrating and
Administering of the Sacraments, The second to the Regiment of Christians in the
interior Court of Conscience, The third to the Regiment of Christian people in
the Exterior Court of the Church. Concerning the two former, I know no
Controversy between the Church of Rome and us but one, Whether the Bishop of
Rome alone do derive his Jurisdiction immediately from Christ, and all other
Bishops do derive theirs mediatly by him? Yet I confess this Controversy is
but with a part of the Church of Rome: For many of them are of our mind, that
all Bishops hold their Jurisdiction immediately from Christ, as well as the
Pope. And if it were otherwise, it were the grossest absurdity in the world.
For thousands of Bishops in Christendom, do not at all derive their holy
Orders from S. Peter, or any other Roman Bishop, either mediatly, or immediately
(especially in Asia and Africa,) but from the other Apostles. Must all these
poor Bishops want the Key of Jurisdiction, and be but half Bishops, to humor
the Court of Rome? For they never had ordination, or Delegation, or Commission
from Rome, either mediatly or immediately, yet the Christian World has evermore
received them for true complete Bishops.

But we have a Controversy with some others, who acknowledge no power of
Governing in a Bishop but merely directive, neither more nor less then a
Physician has over his Patient, To advise him to abstain from some meats
because they are hurtful to him; which advise the Patient, may either obey or
reject without sin. But all the Schools have tied two Keys to the Churches
Girdle, the Key of Order and the Key of Jurisdiction, and I do not mean to rob
my Mother of one of her Keys. 1. Cor. 4. 21.
What will ye, shall I come unto you with a Rod? A rod is more then chiding.
The principal Branch of this Rod is Excommunication (a Punishment more to be
feared in the Judgment of the Fathers then all earthly Pains,) The Spiritual
Sword, Like the cutting of a member in the Body natural, Or the out lawing of
a Subject in the body Political. It is a Question in the Schools, whether the
Pastors Sentence in binding and loosing, be only Declarative, or also
^perative? As if such glorious promises, and so great solemnity where with this
power was given, did imply a naked declaration; Keys are not given to signify
the door is open or shut, but to open or shut it indeed. For my part I have
always esteemed this Question, to be a mere Logomachy or Contention about
words. They who make the Sentence only declarative in respect of man, do
acknowledge it to be operative in respect of God. And they who make it to be
Operative, make it to be Operative by the power of God, not of man. Whether the
effect be attributed to the principal cause, or to the Instrument, being
rightly understood, it is both ways true.

But this will not excuse our Innovators, who have robbed the Church of one of
her Keys, the Key of Spiritual jurisdiction. They are so Jealous of the honor
of God, that they destroy the beauty of the world, and jumpe over the backs of
all second causes; and so they would make the holy Sacraments to be bare Sigus.
As it was said of old, the sword of the Lord and of Gideon: so we may say now,
1. cor. 1. 12.
the Key of Christ and his Pastor. St. Paul taxes the Corinthians for saying I
am of Paul, I am of Apollo, I am of Cephas, I am of Christ, What (says he) is
Christ divided? Is Christ divided from his Ministers? As it is an Error on the
one hand to depend so much upon Paul, and Apollo, and Cephas, or any of them,
as not to depend principally upon Christ: so it is an Error on the other hand
so depend so upon Christ, as to neglect Paul Apollo and Cephas.

In sum Christ made his Apostles not only Lawiers to give Advise, but Judges
to give Sentence. Ioh. 20. 21.
He gave them not only a Command but a Commission, As my Father sent me, so
send I you, That is, I do constitute you my Deputies, and Surrogates, with as
ample power and commission as my Father gave me; Bind, Loose, Remitt, Retein,
whatsoever you do on earth (Clave non errante, as long as your Key erreth not)
I confirm in heaven. This is the Difference between the binding and loosing of
Christ, and the binding and loosing of his Ministers; His power is Original,
Primitive Sovereign, Imperial; Their power is derivative, Subordinate,
Delegate, Ministerial. His Sentence is absolute ad Senten^iandum simplicit^er;
Their Sentence is Conditional ad Sententiandum si. His Key never erreth, Their
Key may err and many times does err. To conclude the Apostles had a
legislative power, Act. 15 28.
It seemed good to the Holy Ghost and to us, to lay upon you no greater Burden
then these Necessary things. The Observation of Sunday, was an Apostolical
precept, so is the Order of Deacons. They had a Judiciary power, 1. Tim. 5. 19.
and their Tribunalls; Against an Elder receive not an Accusation, but before
two or three witnesses. They had a dispensative power, 2. Cor. 2. 10.
To whom I forgave any thing for your sakes, forgave I it in the person of
Christ? But all this is only in the interior Court of Conscience.

The third power of Bishops, is the power of exterior Jurisdiction in the
Court of the Church, whereby men are compelled against their wills by Exterior
Means. This the Apostles had not from Christ, Ioh. 18. 36. ^
nor their Successors from them, Luke 12. 14.
Neither did Christ ever assume any such power to him self in the world, My
Kingdom is not of this world: And, Man who made me a Judge or divider over
you? Yet the greatest Controversies at this day in the Ecclesiastical Court
are about Possessions, as Glebes, Tithes, Oblations, Portions, Legacies,
Administrations, Bern. de Consid. lib. 1.
etc. And if it were not for these, the rest would not be so much valued, in
Criminibus non in Possessionibus potestas vestra, quontam propter illa and non
propter has accepistis Claves regni Caelorum, Says, St. Bernard well to the
Pope. Your power is in Crimes not in possessions, for those and not for these
you received the Keys of the kingdom of Heaven. But suppose the Controversy to
be about a Crime, Yet who can summon another man's Subjects to appear where they
please, and imprison or punish them for not appearing without his leave? All
that power which Ecclesiastical Judges have of External Coaction, they owe it
wholly either to the Submission of the parties, where the Magistrate is not
Christian (as the Jews at this day do undergo such Penitential Acts as are
enjoined them by their Superiors; because the Reverence of them who obey, does
supply the defects of their power who Command) Or where the Magistrate is
Christian, they owe it to his Gracious Concessions. Of which if any Man doubt,
and desire to see how this Coactive power, how these external Privileges, did
first come to be enjoyed by Ecclesiastical persons, Let him read over the
first book of the Code, and the Authenticks or Novels of Justinian. And for
our English Church in Particular, let him consult with our best
Historiographers. Eadmerus was one whom they need not suspect of partiality, as
being Pope Vrbanes own Creature, and by his special appointment placed over
Anselm, at his own entreaty, as a Superviser to exercise his Obedience. Whose
injunctions had so much power over him, Malms de Gest. Pont. Angl. l. 1. pa.
120.
that if he placed him in his Bed, he would not only not rise without his
Command, but not so much as turn him self from one side to another. Vt cum
Cubili locasset, non solum sine praecepto ejus non surgere^ sed nec latus
inverteret. What Marvel is it if the ancient Liberties of the English Church
went first to wrack in Anselms Days, about the Year of our Lord 1000 (for he
died Anno 1109) who being a Stranger Primate had so totally surrendered up his
own reason to the Popes Creature? Eadmer l. 4. p. 120.
Yet this Eadmerus says of Lanfranke, His wisdom recovered other Customs,
which the Kings of England by their Munificence, had granted to the Church of
Canterbury in ancient times, and established them for ever by their sacred
Decrees, that it might be most free in all things. All external exemption and
Coaction is Political, and proceeds originally from the Sovereign Prince.

This is that which S. Paul teaches us, The weapons of our warfare are not
Carnal. The weapons of the Church are Spiritual, not worldly, not external:
But Citations, and Compulsories, and Significavits, and Writs ad excommunicatum
capiendum (which are not written by the Bishops own hand, yet at his beck,) and
Apparitors, and Iaolers, etc, Are Weapons of this world, and tend to external
Coaction. For all which, the Church is beholden to the Civil power, to whom
alone external Coaction does properly and originally belong. Chrysostom. lib.
2. de Sac^rdotio.
This is that which St. Chrysostom observed in his comparison between a Bishop
and a Shepherd, It is not lawful to cure men, with so great Authority as the
Shepherd cures his Sheep. For it is free for the Shepherd, to bind his
sheep, to drive them from their meat, to burn them, to cut them: But in the
case of the Bishop, the Faculty of curing consists not in him who
administreth the Physic, but in him that is sick, etc. St. Chrysostom. speaks
of power purely Spiritual, which extends it self no further the^ the Court
of conscience, where no man can be cured against his will: But Sovereign
Princes have found it expedient, for the good both of the Church and of the
Commonwealth, to strengthen the Bishops hands, by imparting some of their
Political authority to him; from whose gracious indulgence, all that external
coactive power which Bishops have, does proceed.

Now to apply this to our purpose. Wheresoever our Laws do deny all
Spiritual Jurisdiction to the Pope in England, it is in that sense that we
call the exterior Court of the Church, the Spiritual Court; They do not
intend at all to deprive him of the power of the Keys, or of any Spiritual
power that was bequeathed unto him by Christ or by his Apostles, when he is
able to prove his Legacy. Yea even in relation to England it self, Our
Parliaments never did pretend to any power to change or Abridge divine right.
Thus much our very Proviso in the body of our Law does testify, that it was no
part of our meaning, to vary from the Articles of the Catholic Faith in any
thing, 25. Hen. 8. An Act for Exoneration.
Nor to vary from the Church of Christ in any other thing, declared by the holy
Scripture and the word of God, necessary to salvation. If we have taken away
any thing that is of divine right, it was retracted before it was done. Then
follows the true Scope of our Reformation, Only to make an Ordinance by
Policies necessary and convenient, to repress Vice and for good Conservation
of the Realm in peace, unity, and tranquillity, from ravine and spoil, ensuing
much the ancient Customs of this Realm in that behalf. That which professed it
self a Politic Ordinance does not meddle with Spiritual Jurisdiction. If it
had meddled with Spiritual Jurisdiction at all, it had not insued the ancient
Customs of the Realm of England,

In sum that external Papal power which we rejected and cast out, Eadmer l.
1. page 8.
and which only we cast out, is the same which the English Bishops advised
A^selm to renounce, when it was attempted to be obtruded upon the Kingdom, But
know, that all the Kingdom complains against thee, that thou endeavourest to
take away from our Common Master the Flowers of his Imperial Crown, Whosoever
takes away the Customs which pertein to his royal dignity, does take away his
Crown and Government together: for we prove that one cannot be decently had
without the other. But we beseech the consider, and cast away thy Obedience to
that Urban, who cannot help the if the King be offended, nor hurt thee if the
King be pacified. Shake of the yoke of Subjection, and freely, as it becomes an
Archbishop of Canterbury, 1. Eliz. ^.
in all thy Actions expect the Kings pleasure and Commands. What soever power
our Laws did divest the Pope of, they invested the King with it: but they
never invested the King with any Spiritual power or Jurisdiction, witness the
Injunctions of Queen Elisabeth, witness the public Articles of our Church,
witness the Professions of King James, witness all our Statutes themselves,
wherein all the parts of Papal power are enumerated which are taken away; His
Entroachments, his Usurpations, his Oaths, his Collations, Provisions,
Pensions, Tenths, First fruits, Reservations, Palls, Unions, Commendams,
Exemptions, Dispensations of all kinds, Confirmations, Licenses, Faculties,
Suspensions, Appeals, and God knows how many pecuniary Artifices more: but
of them all, there is not one that concerns Jurisdiction purely Spiritual,
or which is an essential right of the power of the Keys; They are all Branches
of the External Regiment of the Church, the greater part of them usurped from
the Crown, sundry of them from Bishops, and some found out by the Popes
themselves; as the payment for Palls, which was nothing in S. Gregoryes time,
but a free gift or liberality or bounty, free from imposition and exaction.

Lastly consider the grounds of all our grievances, expressed frequently in our
Laws, and in other writers, The disinheriting of the Prince and Peers, The
destruction and Anullation of the Laws and the Prerogative Royal, The
Vexation of the King Liege people, The impoverishing of the Subjects, the
draining the Kingdom of its treasure, The decay of Hospitality, The disservice
of God, And filling the Churches of England with Forreiners, The excluding
Temporal Kings and Princes out of their Dominions, The Subjecting of the Realm
to spoil and ravine, gross Simoniacall contracts, Sacrilege, Grievous and
intolerable oppressio^s and extortions, Jurisdiction purely Spiritual does
neither disinherit the Prince nor the Peers, nor destroy and anull the Laws
and Prerogative royal, nor vex the Kings Liege people, nor impoverish the
Subject, nor draine the Kingdom of its Treasures, nor fill the Churches with
Forreiners, nor exclude Temporal Kings out of their Dominions, nor subject the
Realm to spoil and Ravine. Authority purely spiritual is not guilty of the
decay of Hospitality, or disservice of Almighty God, or Simony, or Sacrilege,
or oppressions and extortions* No, No, it is the external regiment of the
Church, by new Roman Laws and Mandates, by new Roman Sentences and Judgments,
by new Roman Pardons and dispensations, by new Roman Synods and Oaths of
Fidelity, by new Roman Bishops and Clerks; It is your new Roman Tenths, and
First fruits, and Provisions, and Reservations, and Pardons, and Indulgences,
and the rest of those horrible mischiefs and damnable Customs, that are
apparently guilty of all these evils. These Papal Innovations we have taken
away indeed, and deservedly, having showed the express time and place and
person, when and where and by whom, every one of them was first introduced into
England. And we have restored to every Bird his own Feather, To the King his
Political Supremacy, to the Peers their Patronages, to the Bishops that
Jurisdiction which was due to them, either by Divine right or Humane right.
More then these Innovations we have taken nothing away, that* I know of. Or
rather it is not we, nor Henry the eighth, who did take these Innovations
away: but our Ancesters by their Laws, three, four, five hundred years old;
so soon as they began to sprout out, or indeed before they were well formed,
as their Statutes yet extant do evidence to the world? But that filth which
they swept out at the Fore door, the Roman Emissaryes brought in again at the
back door. All our part or share of this work, was to confirm what our
ancesters had done.

I see no reason why I might not conclude my discourse upon this Subject,
Mutatis Mutandis, with as much Confidence as Sanders did his visible Monarchy,
Quisquis jurabit per Viventem in aeternum etc. Whosoever shall swear by him
that lives for ever, that the Church of England is not Schismatic, in
respect of any Branches of Papal power, which she has cast out at the
Reformation, he shall not forswear himself. But Wagers and Oaths and
Protestations, are commonly the Arguments of such as have got the wrong end of
the staff. I will shut up this long Discourse concerning Henry the eighths
Reformation, with a short Apostrophe to my Countrymen of the Roman Communion in
England.

They have been ta^ght, that it is we who Apostate from the Faith of our
Ancesters in this point of the Papacy, that it is we who renounce the
Universal and perpetual Tradition of the Christian world. Whereas it is we who
maintain ancient Apostolical Tradition against their upstart Innovations:
whereas it is we who do propugne the Cause of our Ancesters against the Court
of Rome. If our Ancesters were Catholic in this Cause, we cannot be
Schismatic. Let them take heed least whilst they fly o^t of a Panicall Fear
from a supposed Schism, they do not plunge themselves over head and ears
into real Schism. Let the^ choose, whether they will join with their
Ancesters in this cause, 15. Ri. 2. c. 4.
or with the Court of Rome, for with both they cannot join. If true English
blood run in their veins, they cannot be long deliberating about that which
their Ancesters, even all the Orders of the Kingdom, voted unanimously, That
they would stand by their King, and maintain the rights of his Imperial
Crown, against the Usurpations of the Roman Court.

I have represented clearly to you the true Controversy, betwee^ the Church and
Kingdom of England and the Court of Rome, concerning Papal power, not as it
is stated by private writers, but in our English Laws, a glass that cannot
deceive us, for so far as to let us see the right Difference. Let them quit
these gross Usurpations; Why should they be more ashamed to restore our lust
rights, then they were to plunder us of them? Let them distinguish between
Jurisdiction purely Spiritual, and Jurisdiction in the exterior Court, which
for the much greatest part of it is Political: between the power of the Sword,
which be longs to the Civil Sovereign, and not to the Church further then he
has been graciously pleased to communicate it: between that Obedience with
proceeds from fear of wrath, or from fear of Gods Revenger to execute wrath
(that is, the Sovereign Prince) and that Obedience which proceeds merely from
conscience; To. 13.
And then there is hope we may come to understand one another better.

It is true, there are other Differences between us: but this is the main
Difference, which gives Denomination to the Parties, And when they come to
press those Differences, they may come to have such another account as they
have now. The wider the hole grows in the middle of the Millstone, Men see
clearer through it. Dies Diei eructat verbum and nox nocti indica^* Scientiam.
The latter day is the Scholar of the former.

Sect. I. Cap. X.
BY this time we see that Mr. Sergeants great Dispatch will prove but a
sleevelesse Errand, An answer to Mr. Serjea^t concerning immediate tradition
and his two rules of Unity.
and that his First Movership in the Church, which he thought should have born
down all before it, is an unsignificant expression, and altogether impertinent
to the true Controversy between them and us. Unless as Dido did encompasse the
whole Circuit of Cathage, with a Bulls hide by her art: so he within his First
Movership can comprehend the Patronage of the English Church, and the right to
Convocate and dissolve and confirm English Synods, and to invalidate old Oaths
and to impose new Oaths of Allegiance, and to receive Tenths and first fruits,
and all Legislative Judiciary and dispensative power, Coactively in the
exterior Court of the Church, over English Subjects. He cannot plead any
Charter from England, we never made any such Grant: and altho^gh we had, yet
considering how infinitely prejudicial it is to the Public Tranquillity of the
Kingdom, we might and ought more advisedly to retract what we unadvisedly once
resolved. And for Prescription, he is so far to seek, that there is a^ clear
Prescription of eleven hundred Years against him. So there is nothing
remains for him to stick to, but his empty pretense of divine Right, which is
more ridiculous then all the rest; to claim a divine right of such a Sovereign
power, which does branch it self into so many particulars, after eleven hundred
Years, which for so many Ages had never been acknowledged, never practiced in
the English Church either in whole or in part.

We cannot believe that the whole Christian world were Mole-eyed, or did sit in
darkness for so many Centuries of years; until Pope Hildebrand, and Pope
Paschalis, did start up like two new Lights with their Weapons in their hands,
to thumpe Princes and knock them into a right Catholic belief.

And indeed this Answer to his pretended demonstration, by a real
demonstration where the true Controversy does lie, and who are the true
innovators, does virtually answer whatsoever he has said. So I might justly
stop here and s^spend my former pains, but that I have a great mind to try if
I can find out one of those many Falsifications, and Contradictions, which he
would make ns believe he has espied in my discourse, if it be not the
deception of his sight.

First, Our faith not only probable.
he tells us that our best Champions do grant, that our faith and its
grounds are but probable. Surely he did write this between sleeping and waking,
when he could not well distinguish between necessary points of faith, and
indifferent Opinions concerning points of faith: Or to use Cajetans expression,
between determinare de fideformaliter, and determinare de eo quod est fidei
Materialiter, Between points of faith necessary to be believed, And such
Questions as do sometimes happen in things to be believed. As for Essentialls
of faith, the Pillars of the Earth are not founded more firmly, then our
belief upon that undoubted Rule of Vincentius, Quicquid ubique semper and ab
omnibus, etc. Whatsoever we believe as an Article of our faith, we have for it
the Testimony and Approbation of the whole Christian World of all Ages, and
therein the Church of Rome it self. But they have no such perpetual or
Universal Tradition, for their twelve new Articles of Pope Pius. This
Objection would have become me much better then him. Whatsoever we believe,
they believe, and all the Christian World of all Places, and all Ages, does now
believe, and ever did believe; except condemned Heretics: But they endeavor
to obtr^de new Essentialls of faith upon the Christian World, which have no
such Perpetual, no such Universal Tradition. He that accuses another, should
have an eye to himself.

Does not all the World see, that the Church of England stands now otherwise in
order to the Church of Rome, then it did in Henry the sevenths days? He adds
further, that it is confessed that the Papal power in Ecclesiastical affairs*
was cast out of England in Henry the eights days, I answer that there was no
Mutation concerni^g faith, nor concerning any Legacy which Christ left to his
Church, nor concerning the power of the Keys, or any Jurisdiction purely
Spiritual: but concerning coactive power in the exterior Court, concerning
the Political or External Regiment of the Church, concerning the Patronage or
civil Sovereignty over the Church of England, and the Legislative, Judiciary,
and Dispensative power of the Pope in England, over English Subjects; Which was
no more then a Reinfranchisement of ourselves, from the upstart Usurpations of
the Court of Rome. Of all which I have showed him expressly the first source,
who began them, when, and where; before which he is not able to give one
instance, of any such Practices attempted by the Bishop of Rome, and admitted
by the Church of England.

Who it is that looks asquint or awry upon the true case in Controversy
between us, let the ingenuous Reader Judge. I do not deny, nor ever did deny,
but that there was a real separation made, yea made by us from their
Usurpations: but I both did deny and do deny, that there was any Separation
made by us from the Institution of Christ, or from the Principles of Christian
Unity. This Separation was made long since by themselves, when they first
introduced those novelties into the Church: and this Separation of theirs, from
the pure Primitive Doctrine and Discipiine of the Church, does acquit us, and
render them guilty of the Schism before God and man.

And therefore it is a vain and impertinent Allegation of him to tell us, that
Governors may lawfully declare themselves publicly and solemnly, against the
renouncers of their Authority, by Excommunication; unless he could show that
the Bishop of Rome, has such an absolute Sovereignty over us as he imagines,
extending it self to all those Acts which are in Controversy between us; And
that in the exercise of the power of the Keys, they proceeded duly in a legal
manner; And especially that they did not mistake their own Usurpation for the
Institution of Christ, as we affirm and know they did.

His whole Discourse about immediate Tradition, is a bundle of uncertain
presumptions and vain Suppositions. First he supposes that his Rule of so vast
a multitude of Eyewitnesses of Visible things, is uniform and universal: but
he is quite mistaken, the practi^e was different. The Papalms made Laws for
their Usurpations, and the three Orders of the Kingdom of England made Laws
against them. To whom in Probability should our Ancestors adhere, to their ow^
Patriots, or to Strangers?

Secondly he presumes, that this uniform practice of his Ancestors was
invariable, without any shadow of Change, but it was nothing less. First
Investitures were in the Crown, and an Oath of Fidelity made to the King
without any Scruple, even by Lanfranke and Anselm both Strangers; Afterward
the Investitures were decried as profane, and the Oath of Fidelity forbidden.
Next a new Oath of Allegiance was devised of Clergimen to the Pope; First only
for Archbishops, then for all Prelates; And this Oath at first was moderate, to
observe the Rules of the holy Fathers, but shortly after more Tyrannous, to
maintain the Ro^alties of Saint Peter, as their own Pontificalls the old and
the new do witness. First when they took away Investitures from the Crown,
they were all for free Elections, but shortly after there was nothing to be
heard of but Provisions, and such Simoniacall Arts. It is as easy to shape a
Coat for the Moon, which alteretb every day, as to fit one constant Tradition
to all these diversified Practices.

Thirdly he supposes, that all Paren^s have Judgment to understand aright
what they see, and to penetrate into the secret Caballs and Practices of their
times, And Ingenuity void of self Interest, to relate it rightly to their
posterity: But herein also he will fall much short of his aim. Most Parents
know what is acted publicly: but they know little what is done in their
retiring Room. They know who is their Bishop: But who invested him, what
Oaths he has made, they are to seek. Most Parents see a Bishop fit in his
Consistory: But by what authority he sits, whether merely by the power of the
Keys, or partly by Concession of the Sovereign Prince, they know nothing. What
do thy understand of any distinction between Jurisdiction Spiritual and
Ecclesiastical and Political? What Legends of Fopperies have been brough^
into the Church, by this Orall Tradition and the Credulity of Parents? And if
all Parents had Judgment to understand these things: Yet who shall secure us
that they are void of Self interest? The Philosopher found that all the people
forsook him, so soon as the market Bell began to ring.

Lastly, he supposes one constant succession of Truth, upon this Tenor or
Method throughout many Ages. Why do we hear words, when we see deeds? We see
them change daily; if they had not changed we had had no need to leave their
Company. I have showed him when and where and by whom* all these changes
wherein they and we differ concerning discipline, did come into the Church of
England, at least all those which made the Breach between us. Immediate Orall
Tradition, without any further Corroboration, is but a ^oy: Perpetual and
Universal Tradition is an undeniable Evidence; or so Universal for time and
place, That the Opposers have been censured in a manner Universally for
Heretics or Heterodox. In a chain, if one link be loose, or have a notorious
Crack or Flaw, there is little trust to be reposed in it. Then what Credit is
to be given to the pretended Chain of Tradition, where the eleven first Linkes
are altogether divided from the rest, and fastened to the hand of the Sovereign
Prince, beyond the Popes reach? The four next Linkes are full of Cracks and
Flawes, the Pope pulling at the one end, and the Prince holding at the other.
The last Link of all, in England is put again into the hand of the Prince.
Where so many Centuries are wanting, he is like but to maintain a poor
Tradition. All this while I speak only of the external Regiment of the
Church.

But it is a wonder to me, why he of all others should so much magnify this
Medium of Immediate Tradition, as an in^allible Rule: For if I be not
misinformed by some Friends, his Fathers chalked out another way to him by
their Examples and Instructions, to hold himself in the Communion of the Church
of England. But let that pass as not much material. If he reduce his Argument
into any Form, he will quickly find that it halteth on both sides. Whatsoever
we received by immediate Tradition from our Fathers, as the Legacy of Christ,
is infallibly true; But we received those points of discipline wherein we
differ, by immediate Tradition from our Fathers, as the Legacies of Christ. I
deny both his Propositions, my reasons he will find formerly at large.

I charged him for making two distinct Rules of Unity, whereas one would have
served his Turn; that he might have more opportunity to shuffle the later
Usurpations of the Popes, into the ancient discipline of the Church. For this I
am lashed, as a man that cannot or will not write common sense, with a deal of
such poor stuff not worth repeating. Cannot a man abandon his Religion
unless he abandon his Civility also? He might remember that I had the honor
to be a Doctor in the University, I think as soon as he was a Schooleboy in the
Country. The first part of my Charge is confessed by him self, S. D. pa. 308
that his first Principle does also include the truth of the second. If his
second Principle be comprehended in the first, then it is no new distinct
Principle, but either an inference, or a Tautologie. But let him carve and
mince his Principles into shreds if he please, rather then I will draw the Saw
of Contention about the dream of a Shadow. To the second part of my Charge he
answers, S. D. pa. 484
that Neither I, nor any man else can instance of any Usurpation which did ever
come in, either in Secular or Ecclesiastical Government, pretending that
Tenor, or could come in so long as men adhered to that Method. Does not he
pretend to that Tenor? Or indeed takes it for granted, and would make us
believe they do adhere to that Method? If they do not, his demonstration does
not weigh a Grain. Yet I have showed him heaps of usurpatio^s, more perhaps
the^ he is desirous to see. Some men have made the Pope infallible, in point of
faith formerly; but he is the first that ever made him incapable of usurping,
and I think will be the last; if he can persuade us with reason to be thus
mad, he deserves to have his head stroked, Go, Go Mr. Sergeant, Learn better,
there are more ways of erring in point of Tradition, either real or supposed,
S. D. pa. 484
then the Conspiracy of a World of Fathers, to tell a World of Children this
Lie, that ten years ago they practiced that which all the World besides
knows they did not practice. Of all men Juglers pretend most to perspicuous
Evidence.

I was contented to admit both his Rules in General, to try what use he could
make of them against us: but whether I use sharpness or blandishments, he is
still waspish; See Reader the right Protestant Method, S. D. pa. 485
which is to bring the Controversy from a Determinate State to Indetermination
and Confusion; I fear he will rather dislike my being too distinct and
particular. I have showed him expressly what Branches of Papal power we have
altogether rejected, and what we are not unwilling to acknowledge, for peace
sake, if that would content him; which is more then he has done hitherto, as
much as he will do, and I fear more then he dare do; They are not free from
their Jealousies and Dissensions at home among them selves. Hitherto he has
not adventured to let us know, into what Church he himself resolves his Faith;
whether the Virtuall Church, that is the Pope; or the Representative Church,
that is a General Council; or the essential Church, that is the whole
multitude of Believers, whose Approbation is their reception. And in this very
Pa^ragraph, he has one passage that points at the last opinion, S. D. p. 486.
making the consent of Catholic Fathers, immediately attesting that they
received this Doctrine from their fore fathers, to be the infallible voice of
the Church.

At other times he makes the extent of Papal power to be a matter of
Indifferency, S. D.
wherein every Church is free to hold their own Opinions. In his Rule of
Discipline, he makes St. Peter only to be the Head, the Chief, the Prince of
the Apostles, the First mover in the Church; all which in a right sense we
approve, or do not oppose. Why does he not acknowledge him to be a visible
Monarch, an absolute Sovereign, invested with a plenitude of power, Sovereign,
Legislative, Judiciary, Dispensative? All the rest of the Apostles were First
Movers in the Church, even as well as St. Peter (except only his Primacy of
order which we allow*) When your men come to answer this, they feign the
Apostles were all equal in relation to Christian people, but not in relation
to one another. Yes, even in Relation to themselves and one another; as has
bee^ expressly declared long since, in the First General Council of Ephesus,
not now to be contradicted by them; Epist. Conc. Ephesians. ad Nest. To. 1. fol.
315. Edit. Pet. Crab.
Petrus and Ioannes aequalis sunt ad alterutrum dignitatis, Peter and John were
of equal Dignity one toward another. A Primacy of Order may confist with an
Equality of Dignity: but a Supremacy of power takes away all Parity; Par in
parem non habet potestatem. He is blind who does no see in the History of the
Acts of the Apostles, that the supremacy or Sovereignty of power, did not rest
in the person of any one single Apostle, but in the Apostolical College.

These indefinite Generalities he styles Determinate points. It may be
Determinate for the general truth: but Indeterminate for the particular
manner, about which all the Controversy is. Yet he who never wants
Demonstrative Arguments to prove what he lists, will make it evident out of
the very word Reformation, which we own and extol, that we have broken the
Rule of Unity in Discipline. If he do he has good luck, for by the same
reason he may prove that all the Counsels of the Christian world* both
General and Provincial, have broken the Bond of Unity, by owning and
extolling the very word Reformation, both name and thing.

As for the points of our Reformation, I do not refer him to Platonicall
Ideas, to be found in the Concave of the Moon: but to our Laws and Statutes,
made by all the Orders of our Kingdom, Church and Commonwealth; not as they
are wrested by the tongnes and pens of our Adversaries, (Malice may be a good
informer but a bad judge,) but as they are expounded by the Genuine and
Orthodox Sons of the English Church; by our Princes, by our Synods, by our
subsequent Parliaments, by our Theologians, by our most Judicious Lawiers; in
their Injunctions, in their Acts, in their Canons, in their writings; which he
may meet with if he have such a mind in earnest, without any great search, in
every Library or Stationers shop, The creed is the old rule of faith. Our
Articles no points of Faith. who falsifieth the Council of Ephesus.


Sect I. Cap. XI.
We do not suffer any man to reject the 39. Articles of the Church of England
at his pleasure, yet neither do we look upon them as Essentialls of saving
Faith, or Legacies of Christ and of his Apostles: but in a mean, as pious
Opinions fitted for the Preservation of Unity, neither do we oblige any man to
believe them, but only not to contradict them. Yet neither is the Bishop got
into a wood, nor leaves his Reader in another, further from knowing what these
Doctrines of saving Faith are, then he was at first. It is Mr. Sergeants
Eyesight that fails him, through too much light, which makes him mistake his
ancient Creed for a wood, and the Articles for trees (persons who are gogle
eied seldom see well,) wherein all things necessary to be believed are
comprehended. And although he inquire, S. D. pa. 487*
Where are the processions of the Divine Persons, the Sacraments, Baptism of
Children, the Government of the Church, the acknowledging there is such a thing
as Scripture, to be be found in the creed? The Bishop is so far from being
gravelled with such doughty Questions, that he pitieth his simplicity, and
returns him for answer, that if he be not mop^eyed he may find the Procession
of the Divine Persons in his Creed; that the Sacraments and Discipline of the
Church are not to be reckoned among the Credenda or things to be believed, but
among the Agenda or things to be acted; and the Holy Scripture is not a
particular Doctrine or point of Faith, but the Rule wherein and whereby, all
Fundamental Doctrins or points of Faith are comprehended and tried. So still
his truth remains unshaken, that the Creed is a Summary of all particular
points of saving faith, which are necessary to be believed.

He proceeds, S. D. pa. 487
that the Protestants have introduced into the Church since the Reformation no
particular Form of Government, in stead of that they renounced. A grievous
accusation! We had no need to introduce new forms, having preserved the old.
They who do only weed a Garden, have no need to set new Plants. We have the
Primitive Discipline of the Church, and neither want Spiritual, nor
Ecclesiastical, nor Political Government. If you have any thing to say
against it, cough out and spare not. And although we want such a free and
general Communion with the Christian World as we could wish, and such as
Bishops had one with another by their formed Letters: Yet we have it in our
desires; and that we have it not actually, it is principally your faults, who
make your Usurpations to be Conditions of your Communion.

And so I leave him declaiming against Libraries of Books filled with dead
words, and thousands of Volumes scarcely to be examined in a man's whole life
time, and quibling about Forefathers, and inheriting, and Reformation, and
Manasseh Ben Israel, and repeating the same things over and over again, as if
no man did understand him who did not hear him say over the same things an
hundred times.

He Charge me that having granted that They and we do both maintain his Rule
of Unity, p. 490.
yet I do immediately disgrace it by adding, that the Question is only who have
changed that Doctrine or this Discipline, we or they? We by substraction or they
by Addition? Which is as much as to say the pretended Rule is no Rule at all.
When he and his Merry Stationer were set upon the Pin of making Contradictions,
doubtless this was dubbed a famous Contradiction or an absurdity at least. As
if a man might not hold one thing in his Judgment, and pursue another in his
Practice, profess one thing in words, and perform another in deeds, Video
melior a proboque, Deterior a sequor; Medea see that which was right and
approved it, but swerved altogether from it in her Practice, Tit 1. 18
They profess (says St. Paul) that they know God, but in works they deny
him. The Church of Rome professes in words, to add nothing to the Legacies of
Christ and his Apostles: but in their deeds they do add and add notoriously;
as the Universality of the Roman Church, the doctrins of Purgatory, of
Indulgences, of Worshipping of Images, and the rest of their new Essentialls of
faith, Extra quas nemo salvus esse potest (says Pope Pius,) Without the
belief of which no man can be saved. Then no man was saved for a thousand
years after Christ. If there be the least Print of a Contradiction here, it is
not in my discourse, but between their own Principles and their Practice. He
taunteth me sufficiently for making the Apostles Creed, a summary of all things
necessary to be believed by all Christians, calling it the wildest Topic that
ever came from a rational head, and would gladly persuade us that it was only
an Act of Prudence, to keep out heterogeneous persons in that present age,
which was to be enlarged as often as new Heresies did arise. I pity the young
man, who is no better acquainted with that Value, which both the ancient
Fathers and his own Doctors set upon the Creed. Whilst he thinks to confute
me, Tert. de virgin. cap. 1. Clem. Romans Ep. 1. ad frat. Dom.
he is ignora^tly condemning all them. He condemns the Fathers, who made it
to be the one only immovable and irreformable Rule of Faith: The sum of the
whole Catholic Faith: The Key of the Christian Faith: The Rule or Square of
the Apostolical (Sermons after the Composition of it.) Wherein the Apostles of
the Lord have collected into one breviary, Amb. Sermon. 38.
all the points of the Catholic Faith which are diffused throughout the
Scriptures. He condemns his own Authors, Aust. Sermon. 18. de Temp. Canis.
Catech. Bellar. de Just. l. 4. cap 2.
who acknowledge it to be a short comprehension or summary of all things to be
believed. Bellarmine says it contains the sum of the Gospel: And more
plainly, there is ex^ant that most ancient Symboll which is called the Creed of
the Apostles, because the Apostles composed it to this end, that it might be
agreed among all men what was the sum of the whole Christian Faith. Whereof
he produces Witnesses, St. Ambrose, St. Hierom, De Just. l. 1. cap. 9.
St. Austin, Maximus; Adding that in the Creed (although briefly) is contained
in a Summary the whole object of Faith. According to that of St. Austin, the
Creed is a simple, Aust. i^bid.
short, full Comprehension of our Faith: that the simplicity may provide for
the Rudeness of the Hearers; Aust. de Sacr. Euch. lib. 3. cap. 6. Conc.
Trident. Ses. 3.
the shortness for their memory; and the fullness for their Doctrine. And
elsewhere he tells us, that all Catholics do confess, that it is the
unwritten word of God. So there is more in the Creed then a mere Shiboleth, to
distinguish an Ephraimite from a Gileadite. It is fundamentum firmum and
unicum, not only a firm but an only Foundation. He asks me whether ever
Protestant did hold, there is nothing of Faith but the 12 Articles in that
Creed? I do not know how I come to be obliged to answer him to so many
impertinent Questions: but for once I will not refuse him. Protestants do know
as well as himself, that there are many things of faith, which are necessary to
be believed by some men at some times; as that St. Paul had a Cloak: but there
is no Article or Point, absolutely necessary to Salvation to be believed, which
is not comprehended within the 12 Articles of the Creed. And here, he serves
us up again his twice sodden Coleworts, that the Procession of the Holy Ghost,
the Baptism of Infants, the Sacraments, the Scriptures, are not comprehended in
the 12. Articles. I have but newly answered the very same Objection, and here
Meander-like with a sudden turning he brings it in again: but I will not wrong
the Reader so much, as to follow him in his Battologies. Only if he think the
Creed was imperfect, until the word Filioque was added, he is much mistaken.

But says he, by the same Logic we may accuse the Church, at the time of the
Nicene Council, for pressing the word Consubstantiall. Pardon us good Sr,
there is no Analogy between the Consubstantiality of the Son with the Father,
and your upstart Doctrins of Indulgences and Image Worship. Indeed the word
Consubstantiall, was not in the Creed before the Nicene Council, but the thing
was, and was deduced from the Creed. When the Apostles delivered the Creed to
the Church, they did it by Orall Tradition: and this is that famous Tradition
much mentioned in the Fathers, which you do altogether misapply to the
justifying of your new patches* and when they delivered the Creed they
delivered likewise the sense of the Creed, by the same Tradition: and it was
the most proper work in the world, for those first Oecumenicall Counsels, to
search out and Determine by Tradition, the right sense of the Articles where in
they were delivered by the Apostles. But for us now after fifteen or sixteen
hundred years to inquire, not only into new senses of the old Articles,
altogether unknown to the Ancients: but to find out new Articles, which have no
relation to the old Articles, and all this by Tradition, is ridiculous. For
whatsoever Tradition we have, we have from former Ages successively: and
therefore if they had no Tradition for such an Article, or such a sense; we
can have none,

But such are all the twelve new Articles, added to the Creed by Pius the
fourth; not only new senses of old Articles, which had been too much, but new
Articles newly coined, which have no relation to the old Articles at all.
Somethings are de Symbolo, contained in the Creed; somethings are contra
Symbolum, against the Creed; and somethings praeter Symbolum, besides the
Creed. First, for those things which are contained in the Creed, either in the
Letter or in the sense, or may be deduced by good consequence from the Creed;
as the Deity of Christ, his two Natures, the procession of the Holy Ghost: the
Addition of these is properly no addition, but only an Explication; Yet such
an Explication, none under a General Council can impose upon the Church.
Secondly, such things* as are contrary to the Creed, are not only unlawful to
be added to the Creed, but they are Heretical in themselves. Thirdly, for
those things which are neither of the Creed, nor contained in the Creed, either
explicitly, nor can be deduced by good Consequence from the Creed, and yet they
are not contrary to the Creed, but Opinions or inferior truths, which may be
believed or disbelieved, without any great danger of Heresy (of this nature are
chose 12. points or Articles which Pius the fourth added to the Creed: To make
these part of the Creed, and to oblige all Christians to believe them under
pain of Damnation, as Pius the 4^h does, without which there is no Salvation;
is to change the Symbolicall Apostolical Faith, and to add to the Legacy of
Christ and his Apostles. Faith does consist in indivisibili, and the Essential
parts of it, cannot be contracted or enlarged.

This is that which we Charge the Romanists withal, and which I see not how
they will be able to shake of. Not the Explication of the old Articles of
Faith, nor the prescribing of inferior truths as inferior truths to those who
are under their Jurisdiction, nor the obliging of their Subjects not to oppose
their Determinations for peace and tranquilities sake: but the adding of new
Articles or Essentialls to the Creed, with the same Obligation that the old
Apostolical Articles had, to be believed under pain of Damnation. Either all
these 12 new Articles which were added to the Creed by Pius the Fourth, were
implicitly or virtually comprehended in the 12 old Articles of the Apostles,
and may be deduced from them by necessary Consequence, (the contrary where of
is evident to all men): or it is appare^ that Pius the 4. has corrupted the
Creed, and changed the Apostolical Faith.

He might even as well let our 39. Articles alone for old acquaintance sake,
(Dissuenda non dissecanda est amtcitia) as to bring them upon the Stage, and
have nothing to say against them. Some of them are the very same that are
contained in the Creed: some others of them are practical truths, which come
not within the proper list of points or Articles to be believed: lastly, some
of them are pious opinions or inferior truths, which are proposed by the
Church of England to all her Sons, as not to be opposed; not as Essentialls
of Faith necessary to be believed by all Christians Necessitate medii, under
pain of damnation. If he could charge us with this as we do them, he said
something. The Nicene, Constantinopolitan, Ephesian, Chalcedonian, and
Atbanasian Creeds, are but Explications of the Creed of the Apostles, and are
still called the Apostles Creed. He will not for shame say that Pius the
fourths Creed, is only an Explication of the Apostles Creed, which has 12.
new distinct Articles, added at the Foot of the 12. old Articles of the
Apostles.

I do not say that there can be no new Heresy, but what is against some point
found in the Creed. I know, that as there are some Errors heretical in their
own nature, so there are other Errors which become heretical, merely by the
Obstinacy of them who hold them. Yet if I had said so, I had said no more then
some Fathers say, and sundry of their own Authors; Neque ulla unquam exit it
heresis quae non hoc Symbolo damnart po^uerit: Catech. Trever.
There was never any Heresy which might not be condemned by this Creed. And so
he may see clearly if he will, that it was no incomparable strain of
weakness, nor self contradicting absurdity, nor nonsense, (as he is pleased to
Vapor) to charge them with changing the Legacy of Christ and his Apostles, by
the Addition of new Essentialls of Faith.

I will conclude this point with the excellent Judgment of Vincentius
Lirinensis; Peradventure some man will say shall there be no growth of the
Religion of Christ in the Church? Yes, very much; but so that it be a growth of
Faith not a change. Let it increase; but only in the same kind, the same
Articles, the same sense, the same Sentences. Let the Religion of souls
imitate the manner of bodies etc. The members of infants are little, young men's
great, yet they are the same, Children have as many joints as men etc. But if
any thing be added to, or taken from the number of the members, the body must
of necessity perish, or become monstrous, or be enfeebled: so it is meet that
Christian Religion do follow these Laws of Proficiency etc.

But now he brings a rapping Accusation against me, charging me with four
falsifications in one sentence: page 495.
and then concludes triumphantly, Go thy ways brave Bishop, If the next Synod
of Protestants, do not Canonise thee for an Interpreter of Counsels, they are
false to their best interests. Who so bold as blind Bayard? Here is a great
deal more Cry then Wool. But let us examine these great falsifications, my
words were these. The Question is only who have changed that doctrine or this
Discipline, we or they? we by Substraction, or they by Addition? The Case is
clear, The Apostles contracted this Doctrine into a Summary, that is the Creed,
the Primitive Fathers expounded it where it did stand in need of clearer
Explication. Then follow the words which he excepteth against, The General
Council of Ephesus did forbid all men to exact any more of a Christian at his
Baptismall Profession. It is strange indeed to find four falsifications in two
short lines: but to find four falsifications where there is not one syllable
cited, is altogether impossible. I relate as of my self what the Council of
Ephesus did; I cite no Authority at all, neither in the ^^ext nor in the
Margent; nor put one word into a different Character. His pen is so accustomed
to overreach beyond all aim, that he cannot help it; A Scotch man would take
the Liberty to tell him that he is very good Company.

The truth is, I did forbear to cite it, because I had cited it formerly in my
answer to Monsieur Militier, where he might have found it if he had pleased;
Conc. Ephesians. pa. 2. Act. 6. c. 7.
That it should be lawful for no man to publish or compose, another Faith (or
Creed) then that which was defined by the Nicene Council, And that whosoever
should dare to compose, or offer any such to any persons willing to b^
conver^ed from Paganism, Iudaisme, or Heresy, if they should be Bishops or
Clerks should be deposed, if Laymen Anathematised. If he can find any
Falsification in this, let him not spare it: but to find four falsifications,
where not one word was cited, was impossible. In a word, to deal plainly with
him, his f^ur pretended Falsifications are a silly senseless ridiculous Cavil.

To clear this, it is necessary to consider that this word Faith in holy
Scripture Counsels and Fathers, is taken ordinarily for the Ob^ect of Faith,
or for the sum of things to be believed, that is, the Creed: and so it is
taken in this very place of the Council of Ephesus, and cannot be taken
otherwise; for it is undeniable, that that Faith which was defined, published,
and composed by the Nicene Fathers, was the Nicene Creed, or the Creed of the
Apostles explicated by the Nicene Fathers. Secondly, we must consider that the
Catholic Church of Christ, from the very Infancy of Christian Religion, did
never admit any person to Baptism in an ordinary way, but it required of them
a free profession of the Creed or Symbolicall Faith, either by themselves, or
by their sureties if they were Infants: and so did baptize them in that Faith*
This was the practice of the Apostolical Church; this was that good profession
which Timothy made before many witnesses; 1. Timo 6. 12.
This was the universal practice in the Primitive Church, and continued ever
since until this day. Abrenunc^as? Abrenuncio* Credis? Credo. Do thou
renounce the Devil and all his works? I do renounce them. Do thou believe
in God the Father Almighty etc.? All this I steadfastly believe. Will thou be
baptized in this Faith? It is my desire. This baptisticall profession, which he
ignorantly laugheth at, is attested by Fathers, by Counsels, by Leiturgies,
ancient and modern; even by the Leiturgies of the Roman Church it self. And
this is the undoubted sense of this place of the Council of Ephesus, that no
man should dare to offer any other Creed, to any person, willing^ to be
converted from Paganism or Iudaisme to Christianity, that is to say to be
baptized. Always upon Palm sunday, such of the Catechument, as were thought
fit to be admi^ted into the number of the Faithful, did petition for Baptism
(the Anniversary time where of did then approach who from their joint
petitioning were called competentes, and from that day forward, had some
assigned to expound the Creed unto them, whereof they were to make solemn
profession at their Baptism; as we find by the Homilies of the Fathers upon the
Creed, made to the Competentes.

So we keep ourselves to the old faith (...) the whole Christian World, that is
the Creed of the Apostles, explicated by the Nicene, Constantinopolitan,
Ephesine, and Chalcedonian Fathers; the same which was professed by them of old
at their Baptism, and is still professed by us at our Baptism; the same
wherein all the Christian World, and themselves among the rest were Baptized.
None of us all ever made any profession at our Baptismes, of the Universality
of the Roman Church, or of the Sovereign Monarchical power of the Roman Bishop
by divine right, or of the Doctrine of Transubstantiation, Indulgences,
Imageworship, or the like. Wherefore we are resolved to adhere to that faith
which has been professed always, everywhere, and by all Persons, and
particularly both by them and us at our Baptisms; in which faith and which
alone, we were made Christians, without either diminution or Addition of any
new Essentialls. This was their faith formerly, and this is ours still. But he
objecteth it is a great Absurdity, that thus the Creed defined by the Fathers
in the Council of Nice, p^. 495
and the Apostles Creed, according to the Bishop are one and the same Creed.
Have you found out that? Yes, indeed are they, and always have been so reputed
in the Church, even in the Roman Church it self in their ancient Leiturgies,
which call the Nicene Creed the Evangelicall Creed, the Creed of the Apostles,
inspired by the Lord, instituted by the Apostles; and when he grows older, he
will be of the same mind.

I hope by this time he sees that although I did not cite the Council of
Ephesus in this place, and therefore could be no falsifier of it: Yet the
Council of Ephesus says more then I did in every respect. I said only the
Council did forbid: but the Council it self goes higher, that whosoever
should dare. I said forbid to exact: but the Council itself goes higher,
whosoever should dare to compose, or publish, or offer. The Original word is
Prospherein, to offer, and as it is translated into Latin, Qui vero ausi
fuerint aut componere fidem alteram, aut proferre, aut offerre. Whosoever shall
dare to compose, or to utter, or to offer another faith or Creed. One may
compose or publish and not offer; one may offer and not exact: but whosoever
does exact does more then offer. If the Council does forbid any man to compose
or publish, or offer any other Creed, much more does it forbid them to exact
it. Thirdly I said to exact any more then the Apostles Creed, as it was
explicated by the Fathers, that is, concerning Essentialls of says: but the
Council goes higher, to compose or publish or offer alteram fidem, another
Creed, containing either more or less, either new Essentialls or new
Explications. I said only at our Baptismall profession: but the Council
extends it further, to the reconciliation of Heretics, as well as the
Baptism of Pagans and Jews; and generally to all occasions, not allowing any
man Clergy or Lay, to compose or publish any other Creed or form of profession.
So every way the Council says more then I said.

But he says, there is nothing in the Council of Baptismall profession,
except the bare word fidem. Well, fides in that place signifies the Creed, and
that Creed which all Christians did profess at their Baptism, is their
Baptismall Profession. But that is not all, for as fides signifies their Creed
or Profession of faith: so those other words, to any Persons willing to be
converted from Paganism or Iudaisme, signi^ieth as much as who desire to be
Christened or to be Baptized. But he says, these words if the proposers of
another faith ^e Lay men, let them be excommunicated, do make it impossible to
have relation to Baptism, because the Ordinary Minister of Baptism is a Clergy
man. If a Sophister should have brought such an Argument in the Schools, he
would have been hissed out for his labor. Because one part of the Canon has
reference to Lay men, therefore no part of it can have reference to Clergy men.
Just like this, an Aethiopians teeth are white, therefore it is impossible that
any part of him should be black. Whereas the Cano^ says expressly the Contrary,
if they be Bishops or Clerks let them be deposed, if Layme^ Anathematised.

But this great Censurer himself does falsify the Council of Ephesus indeed,
twice in this one place. Once in omitting the word Prospherein, to offer.
Secondly where he says, that Charisius had made a wicked Creed. It was not a
wicked Creed, but a wicked exposition of the Creed which the Council
condemned, Depravata Symboli Expositio; Which was indeed produced by Charisius,
but neither made by him, nor approved by him, but condemned by him as well as
by the Council. Observe Reader, with what gross Carelessness these great
Censurers do read Authors, and utter their fictitious Fancies with as great
Confidence. He would have called this Forgery in another.

Sect. I. Cap. XII.
He says I charged their whole Church, with changing the ancient discipline of
the Church, into a Sovereignty of power above General Counsels, whereas I
confess that it is not their Universal Tenet, and withal acknowledge that
they who give such Exorbitant Privileges to Popes, do it with so many Cautions,
that they signify nothing; And then courteously asks me, whether this be a
matter deserving that Church Unity should be broken for it? I charge not the
Church but the Pope and his party
I do easily believe that this is one of his merry Stationers Contradictions.
What pitiful Cavills does he bring for just exceptions? First I do not clap
it upon their whole Church (that is one injury, or if I should speak in his
language a gross Falsification) but upon the guilty party. Secondly, I never
said that they who change the ancient Government of the Church, into a
Sovereignty of power, do it with so many Cautions: but I spoke expressly of
them, who ascribe infallibility and temporal power over Princes to the Pope;
This is another injury or falsification. Thirdly, how often must I tell him,
that we did not disunite our selves from their Church: but only reinfranchise
ourselves from their Usurpations? Lastly, this party which advances the
Papacy, above the Representative Church, is no worse then their Virtuall
Church, the Pope and the Court of Rome with all their adherents, they who have
the Keys in their hands: such a party as he dare not say his soul is his own
against them, nor maintain the Contrary; that a General Council is above the
Pope.

He urges, that I ascribe no more to S. Peter and the Pope for their first
Movership, page 496. First movership.
but only Authority to sit first in Council or some such things. I ascribe
unto the Pope, all that power which is due unto him either by divine right or
humane right, at the Judgment of the Church, but I do not hold it meet, that
he should be his own Carver. And for S. Peter, why does he not leave his
wording of it in Generals and fall to work with Arguments in particular, if he
have any? We offer him a fair trial for it, that S. Peter never enjoyed or
exercised any greater or higher power in the church, then every one of the
Apostles had, either extensively or intensively, either in relation to the
Christian world or the Apostolical College, except only that Primordium
Vnitatis or Primacy of Order, which he scoffeth at every where: Yet neither do
we make his first Movership, void of all Activity and influence, as he accuses
us. First we know he had Apostolical power, which was the highest spiritual
power upon Earth, As my Father sent me so send I you. Secondly, some power does
belong to a First Mover even by the Law of nature, besides the First seat; As
to convocate the Members, to preserve Order, to propose such things as are to
be discussed, to receive the Votes, to give the Sentence, and to see it
executed so far as he is trusted by the Body. What the Church of England
believes, p. 497,
of the Popes inheriting St. Peter's Privileges, and the exercise of that power
before the Reformation, and how the breach was made, and when, I have showed
abundantly already.

We have seen his rare skill, in the discovery of a Falsification or a
Contradictio^, now let us see if his sent be as good to find out an Absurdity.
He makes me argue thus, The Pope did not exercise St. Peter's power, because he
exercised St. Peter's power and much more, which is as much as to say, totum est
minus part; and more does not contain less: and then he Crows out his
Victory aloud; a hopeful Disputant, who ch^seth rather to run upon such Rocks
etc. What Rocks, does he mean? I hope none of the Acro^eraunia. those
ridiculous things which he calls Rocks, are soapy bubbles of his own Blowing.
This inference is none of mine, but his own Is it not possible for this great
pretender to sincerity, to miss one Paragraph without Falsifications? Give him
leave to make Inferences and Periphrases [which is as much as to say] and
Africa did never abound so much with Monsters, as he will make the most
rational writing in this world abound with Absurdities. I desire the Courteous
Reader to view the place, and either to pity his Ignorance, or detest his
Impudence. The words which I answered were these, That the Bishops of Rome
actually exercised St. Peter's power in all those Countries, which kept
Communion with the Church of Rome, that very year when this unhappy Separation
began. My answer was, that this Assertion did come far short of the truth in
one respect, for the Popes exercised much more Power in those Countries which
gave them leave, then ever St Peter pretended to. Here is no other inference
but this, The Pope exercised more power then ever St. Peter pretended to,
therefore this Assertion that he exercised St. Peter's power came short of the
truth; which consequence is so evide^t that it can admit neirher denial or
doubting. What has this to do with his whole is less then the part, or more
does not contain the less?

But now suppose I had said, Half more then the whole*
as he makes me to say on his own head, that in this case the whole is less
then the part, or more does not contain the less, what had he to carpe at?
Has he never heard or read, that in morality the half is more then the whole?
Has he forgotten his Ethics, that he who swerveth from the Mean or strict
measure of virtue, whether it be in the excess or in the defect, is alike
Culpable, and commethshort of his Duty? If the Pope as Successor to S. Peter,
did usurp more power then S. Peter had right to; no man in his right wits, can
call it the actual exercising of S. Peter's power.

The second part of my answer was, Papal usurpations not universal.
that as the Pope exercised more power then was due to him, in some places,
where he could get leave: so in other places, no less then three parts of
four of the Christian World, that is all the Eastern, Southern, and Northern
Churches, his Universal Monarchy which he claimed, was Universally rejected.
For this I am first reviled. Are moderate expressions of shamelessness
sufficient to Character this man? etc. If better was within better would come
out. But Stultis the saurus iste est in linguasitus, ut discant male loqui
melioribus. And then when he has first censured me, he attempteth to answer
me, as well as he is able, that the Pope exercised his power over them, by
excommunicating them as Revolters. As Revolters? In good time; They were
Christians and had Governors of their own, before either there was a Church of
Rome, or Bishop of Rome, and never acknowledged themselves to be his Subjects
until this day, nor regarded his Excommunicatious upon that score at all. If
they were Revolters, the Apostolical Age and all succeding Ages were joined in
the Revolt. These are his rigorous demonstrations, to prove the Popes single
Jurisdiction by divine right, from his own impotent Actions. If the Pope have a
Supremacy of Power by divine right, he has it over the world, but that we see
evidently he never enjoyed from the beginning: if he did did not enjoy it
universally from the beginning, then certainly it cannot be an Apostolical
Tradition.

I do begin with the Eastern Church, because their case is plainest, as having
Proto-patriarchs of their own, and Apostolical Churches of their own: but when
that is once acknowledged, I shall be contented to join issue with him in the
West, First for our Britannick Churches, and next even for the Church of Rome
it self; that the Popes Universal Monarchy, and plenitude of Sovereign power
by divine right, was neither delivered from Parents to Children by perpetual
Tradition, as a Legacy of Christ and his Apostles, nor received by the Sons
of that Individual Church as a matter of Faith; but only a Primacy of Order
or beginning of Unity, which we do not oppose, nor yet those accessions of
humane power, which Christian Emperors and Oecumenicall Counsels, have
conferred upon that See, provided they be not exacted as a divine right.

His First Movership and his First Governourship, are but general
unsignificant Terms, which may agree as well to a beginning of Unity or
Primacy of Order, as to an absolute Monarchy or plenitude of power. If he will
say any thing to purpose he must say it particularly, particulars began the
breach particulars must stop the breach. I have given him an account, what
particular Differences we have with him concerning St. Peter, what particular
Differences we have with him concerning the Pope, let him apply him self to
those, and not make continual Excursions (as he does) out of the Lists.

When I acknowledged an Authority due to the Roman Bishop in the Church, What
respects due to the Pope.
as a Bishop in his Diocese, as a Metropolitan in his Province, as the Bishop
of an Apostolical See and Successor of St. Peter, I expected thanks; there
are many that will not yield him one inch of all these steps without a new
conflict. But behold the evil natures or evil manners of this Age, I am
accused for this of frivolousnesse and insincerity. Yet I will make bold to
tell this Apprentice in Theology, page 498.
that whenever the case comes to be solidly discussed, it will be found
that the principal grounds (if I had said the only grounds I had not said
much amiss) of the Popes pretended Monarchy, are the just rights and
Privileges of his Patriarchateship, his Protopatriarchateship, and his
Apostolical Chair, mistaken for Royalties, for want of good Distinction. I
know the Court of Rome, who have been accustomed in these latter times, to
milk the purses of their Clients, do not love such a dry Primacy (as he
phraseth it): but where they have no more right, and other Churches have a care
to preserve their own Privileges, they must have patience perforce.

His Parallel between the King of England and the Pope, pa. 302. Extent of
Papal power.
will be then to some purpose, when he has first proved that the Pope has a
Monarchy: until then it is a mere begging of the Question; what a gross
Solecisme that is in Logic, he cannot choose but know. But since he is
favorably pleased to dispense with all men for the extent of Papal power, so
they believe the Substance of it, and yet he himself either cannot, or dare not
determine what the Substance of Papal power is; he might out of his Charity
have compassion, and not style us Mountebankes, who know no difference, between
Roman Catholics and our selves about the Papacy, but only about the extent of
Papal power. Although he style us heretics now, yet he was lately one of us
himself: and would have continued so longer, if he had understood himself
better, or the times been less Clowdy. Let him call it Substance, let him call
it extent, let him call it what he will, I have given him our Exceptions to
their Papacy, let him satisfy them as well as he ^an, and let truth prevail:
We have not ^enounced the substance of the Papacy, ex^ept the substance the
Papacy do consist ^n Coactive power. I side with no parties, ^ut honor the
Church of England, and welcome truth wheresoever I meet it.

Tros Tyriusve mihi nullo discrimine habetur. He tells his Reader, that I
grant the whole question, where I affirm that the Bishop of Rome had Authority
all over, as the Bishop of ^n Apostolical Church, or Successor of St. Peter.
Much good may it do him. As if every Bishop of an Apostolical Church, were
straight way an universal Monarch; or as if Authority did always necessarily
imply jurisdiction, or every Arbitrator or Depositary were a legal judge. I
had reason to place a Bishop of an Apostolical Church, in my Climax, after a
Patriarch, for the larger extension of his Authority every where, not for the
higher intension of his jurisdiction any where.

I urged that if the Bishop of Rome did succeed St. Peter, by the ordinance of
Christ, in this Privilege to be the Prince and Sovereign of the Church, endowed
with a single Sovereignty of power, that the Great Council of Chalcedon was
much to be blamed, to give equal Privileges to the Patriarch af Constantinople
with the Patriarch of Rome, and to esteem the Imperial City more then the
Ordination of Christ. To the second part of this Argument, that the great
Council of Chalcedon, did ground the Advancement both of Rome and
Constantinople, upon the Imperial Dignity of those two Cities, and to much
more which is urged there against him, he is as mute as a Fish: but to the
former part he answers, that for any thing I know to the Contrary Rome might
remain superior in Jurisdiction, though they had equal Privileges. Very
pretty indeed. He would have his Readers to believe, that a Sovereign and his
Subjects have equal Privileges. Equals have no power one over another; there
may be a Primacy of Order among Equals, but Supremacy of power takes away
Equality. Does not he himself make it to be S. Peter's Privilege to be Prince of
the Apostles? And does not he tell us that this Privilege descended from S.
Peter upon the Bishop of Rome? Then if the Bishop of Constantinople, have
equal Privileges with the Bishop of Rome, he is equal to him in this
Privilege which descended from S. Peter. Rome and Constantinople equal.


Let him listen to the eight and twentieth Canon of that Council, where having
repeated and confirmed, the decree of the General Council of Constantinople
to the same purpose, Conc. Chalc. cap. 28.
they conclude thus, for the (Nicene) Fathers did justly give Privileges to the Sea of old Rome, because it was the Imperial City. And the hundred and fifty
Godly Bishops (in the Council of Constantinople) moved with the same
consideration, did give equal Privileges to the Sea of new Rome; Rightly
judging, that that City which was the Seat of the Empire and the Senate, should
enjoy equal Privileges with the ancient Imperial City of Rome, and be
extolled and magnified in Ecclesiastical affairs as well as it, being the
second in Order from it. And in the last sentence of the Judges, upon the
Review of of the Cause, The Archbishop of the Imperial City of Constantinople
or new Rome, must enjoy the same Privileges of honor, and have the same power
out of his own Authority, to ordain Metropolita^s in the Asiatick, Pontick, and
Thracian Diocesses. That is as much in Law as to say, have equal Jurisdiction;
for all other rights do follow the right of Ordination.

But he knows right well that this will not serve his turn, his last refuge
is to deny the Authority of the Canon; telling us that it was no free Act, but
voted tumultuously, after most of the Fathers were departed. And miscalling it
a Bastard issue pinned to the end of the Council. Which is altogether as false
as any thing can be imagined to be. It was done before the Bishops had their
License to depart; It had a sec^nd hearing, and was debated by the Popes own
Legates on his behalf, before the most glorious judges, and maturely sentenced
by them, in the name of the Council. This was one of those four Counsels,
which St. Gregory honored next to the four Gospells. This is one of those
Counsels, which every succeeding Pope, does swear solemnly to observe to the
least tittle. I hope the Pope has a better Opinion of it then he, at least for
his Oaths sake.

Good Reader observe, Schism. disarm. pa. 112.
what Clusters of Forgeries, this great Censurer has repacked together, in the
compass of a few Lines. I need to cite no other Authority to convince him, but
the very Acts of the Council. Remember whilst thou live to distrust such
Authors. First he says, This was no free Act, most falsely: the Bishops all
owned it as their free Act by their Subscriptions, and by their Testimonies
before the Judges. Secondly he says, the Clergy of Constantinople extorted it,
with tumultuous importunity, most falsely: for it had been once decreed before
in the free general Council of Constantinople; and then the Clergy of
Constantinople, did entreat the Popes Legates to be present at the first debate
of it, but they refused; and when the said Legates alleged in Council that the
Fathers were forced, they all unanimously testified against the^, Nemo coactus
est. Thirdly he says, it was voted after most of the Fathers were departed,
and only those of the party of Constantinople left, most falsely: the Fathers
were forbidden to depart, and three of the Proto-patriarchs with their
subordinate Bishops determined it, and subscribed the first day. Fourthly he
says, it was disavowed by the Patriarch of Antioch and those under him, most
falsely: for the Patriarch of Antioch and those under him did ratify it, and
subscribe it in Council. Fifthly he says, No Patriarch of Alexandria was
there; Good reason: For there was none in being, the Sea being vacant, by the
turning out of Dioscorus. Though this be not so false as the rest, yet it is as
deceitful as the worst of them. Sixthly he says, the Alexandrian
Metropolitans and Bishops refused to subscribe it. They did not refuse to
subscribe it, but they requested the Council, that because it was their
Custom to subscribe nothing, until first it was subscribed by their
Patriarch, that the Subscription might be deferred, until they had a new
Patriarch chosen; and they themselves were contented to stay in Chalcedon,
until this was effected. Now Iudg^ freely Reader, whether this man do not
deserve a whetstone.

That which follows concerning Immediate Tradit on* is but one of his
Ordinary Meanders, or an improper Repetition of an heap of untruths and
uncertainties, blundred together to no purpose, without any proof. That the
Tradition of all Churches of the Roman Communion is necessarily an Universal
Tradition; That only those Churches of the Roman Communion do adhere to the
rule of Tradition, and all other Churches have renounced it; That all those who
differ from the Church of Rome did never pretend immediate Tradition, for those
points wherein they differ from it: are so many gross untruths. That the very
same which is delivered by some Christian Parents to their Children, is
delivered by all Christian Parents after the same manner; That whatsoever is
delivered by Christian Parents of this Age, is necessarily derived from the
Apostles by au uninterrupted Succession; And that external Unity does
necessarily imply an Identity of Tradition: Are contingent uncertainties, which
may be true or may be false. His reason, that it is impossible for the
beginners of a Novelty, to pretend that their immediate Fathers had taught
them, that which the whole World sees they did not; is absurd and impertinent,
and may serve equally to both parties.

First it is absurd and Contrary to the Sense of the whole World. We see daily
by experience, that there are Innovations in Doctrine and Discipline, and both
parties pretend to ancient and immediate Tradition, he might as well tell us.

Nil int^a est oleum, nil extra est in Nuce duri. The Arrians pretended to
immediate Tradition as well as the Orthodox Christians. Changes undiscernible*
Secondly it is impertinent; Changes in Religion are neither so sudden nor so
visible as he imagines, but are often made by degrees, in tract of Time, at
leisure, insensibly, undiscernibly. An Error comes first to be a Common
Opinion, then a pious Doctrine, lastly a point of faith: but seldom do Errors
appear at first in their own shape.

Fallit enim vitium specie virtutis and umbra. A beginning of Unity in time may
grow to be a Sovereignty of power. Investitures were taken away from Kings for
fear of Simony: and this fear of Simony before the wheel had done running,
produced the most sublimated Art of Simony that ever was devised. Who would or
could have suspected, that those huge Cries for free Liberty of Election,
should have ended in Papal Provisions; or the Exemption of Clergymen from
their Allegiance to their native Prince, have been an Introduction to a ^ew
Oath of Allegiance to a Foreign Prelate? The subjection of the Emperors to the
Popes, began with Pictures, proceeded to Poetry, and ended in down right Maxims
of Theology. There has always been a Mystery of Iniquity, as well as a Mystery
of Piety; the Tares were sown whilst men slept, and were not presently
discerned. It is not I, who have changed faith into opinion: My faith is the
very same that always was professed throughout the Christian World, by every
Christian at his Baptism, and comprehended in the ancient creed of the Church.
But it is they who have changed Opinion into faith, when Pius the fourth
metriculated 12. new Opinions, among the ancicient articles of the creed. Let
them be probable, or pious, or erroneous, or what you will; I am sure they are
but Opinions, and consequently no Articles of faith.

I said such Opinions of an inferior Nature, Opinions not necessary
are not so necessary to be known. He asks, Whether they be necessary or no?
If they be not necessary, why do I grant them to be necessary by saying, they
are not so necessary? If they be necessary, why call I them but Opinions? Does
he know no distinction of things necessary to be known, that some things are
not so necessary as other? Somethings are necessary to be known, necessitate
medii, to obtain Salvation: Somethings are necessary to be known only,
necessitate Precepti, because they are Commanded, and they may be Commanded by
God or Man; the latter are not so necessary as the former. Somethings are
absolutely necessary to be known by all Men: Some other things are only by
some Men; John. 3. 10.
Art thon a Master in Israel and know not these things? Somethings are
enjoined to be held only for Peace sake; those are not so necessary to be
known as the Commandments, or the Sacraments, or the Articles of the Creed.
The Popes infallibility in his definitions of faith, is but an Opinion, and yet
they hold it necessary. The Superiority of a General Council above the Pope,
was a necessary Opinion in the time of the Counsels of Constance and Basile:
Bell. de Council. lib. 2. cap. 17.
and now the Contrary Opinion is fere de Fide; almost an Article of Faith.

He knows better by this time what I understand by points of Faith publicly
professed; even the Articles of the Creed, which every Christian that ever was
from Christ's time until this day, professed at his Baptism. All the Christian
world have ever been baptized into the Faith of the old Creed, never any man
yet was baptized into the Faith of their new Creed: If these new Articles, be
as necessary to be known and publicly professed for the common salvation as
the Old, they do them wrong to baptize them but into one half of the Christian
Faith. Heresies empeach not the perpetuity of tradition


He troubles himself needlessly with Iealousy and suspicion, least under the
notions of Faith universally professed, and the Christian world united, I
should seek a shelter or Patrociny for Arrians, or Socinians, or any other
mushrome Sect; as if the Deity of Christ were not delivered by Universal
Tradition, or not held by the Christian world united, because of their
Opposition. I do not look upon any such Sects, which did or do oppose the
Universal and perpetual Tradition of the Catholic Church before their days,
as living and lasting Streams, but as sudden and violent Torrents: neither do
I regard their Opposition to the Catholic Church, any more then of a Company
of Phrenetick persons, whilst I see plainly a part ante, that there was a
time when the wheat did grow without those Tares; and a part post, that their
Errors were condemned by the Catholic Church. This exception of his has
great force against his immediate Tradition; should the Children of Arrians or
Socinians, persist in their Arrian or Socinian Principles, because they were
delivered to them, as the Legacies of Christ and his Apostles, by their erring
Parents? But against my Universal and perpetual Tradition they have no force
at all. Neither do I look upon their petty interruption, as an empeachment to
the Succession from the Apostles, no more then I esteem a great mountain, to be
an Empeachment to the roundnesse of the Earth.

Neither was it the Church of Greece, and all the other Eastern, Southern, and
Northern Churches, which receded from this Universal Tradition, in the case in
Difference between us, concerning the discipline of the Church; but the Church
of Rome which receded from them.

Non tellus Cymbam, tellurem Cymba reliquit. He knows little in Antiquity,
who does not know, that the Creed was a Tradition both materially, as a thing
delivered by the Apostles, and Formally as being delivered by Orall Tradition.
But he who shall say (as he does) that all the points controverted between us
and them, were delivered as derived from the Apostles, No tradition for the
points in difference betwee^ us.
in a Practice as daily Visible as is the Apostles Creed, by our Forefathers;
as invoking Saints for their intercession, the the lawfulness of Images,
praying for the dead, Adoration of the Sacrament etc; and in particular the
Subjection to the Pope as Supreme head (to use his own phrase) is a frontlesse
man, His very mumbling of them, and chopping of them by halves, as if he durst
not utter them right out, is a sufficient Evidence of the Contrary. We do not
charge them only with invoking Saints for their intercession, or to speak
more properly with the invoking God to hear the intercession of his Saints:
but with more insolent forms of ultimate prayers to the Creatures, to protect
them at the hour of death, to deliver them from the Devil, to confer
spiritual Graces upon them, and to admit them into heaven, precibus
meritisque, not only by their prayers but likewise by their merits. As
improper and Address, as if one should fall down on his Knees before a
Courtier, and beseech him to give him a Pardon, or to knight him, meaning only
that he should mediate for him to the King.

We do not question the lawfulness of their having of Images; but worshipping
of them, and worshipping of them with the same worship which is due to the
Prototype. We condemn not all praying for the dead, not for their
resurrection, and the consummation of their happiness: but their prayers for
their deliverance out of Purgatory. We our selves adore Christ in the
Sacrament, but we dare not adore the Species of bread and wine. And although we
know no divine right for it: yet if he would be contented with it, for peace
sake we could afford the Bishop of Rome a Primacy of Order by humane Right,
which is all that antiquity did know. And if any of our Ancestors in any of
these particulars, did swerve from the Universal Perpetual Tradition of the
Church, we had much better warrant to return to the Apostolical line and
Level, then he himself had to desert those principles temerariously, which his
immediate Forefathers taught him, as delivered by the Apostles and derived from
them.

His next exception is a mere Logomachy, that I call two of his Assertions
Inferences. What does this concern either the person or the Cause? Either this
is to contend about the shadow of an Ass, or I know not what is. Let the^ be
premises or Conclusions which he will, they may be so disposed to make them
either; if they be neither what do they here, if they be conclusions they are
inferences. He calls the former Conclusion their chief Objection; who ever
heard of an Objection without an Inference? And the second is so far from being
no Inference, that it comprehends four Inferences, one from the first
Principle, another from the second Principle, and the third from both
Principles. That Churches in Communion with the Roman have the only right
Doctrine in virtue of the First Principle, and the only right Government in
virtue of the second Principle, and Unity necessary to Salvation in virtue of
both Principles. And the last conclusion is the General Inference from all
these, And by consequence we hold them, only to make the entire Catholic
Church.

I said truly, that we hold both their Rules of Unity; I add that we hold
them both in the right sense, that is, in the proper literal sense of the
words: but what their sense of them is, concerns them not us. If by the Popes
Supremacy he understand a single Sovereignty or Supremacy of power, by virtue
of Christ's own Ordinance; we hold it not indeed, neither did the Catholic
Church of Christ ever hold it. So likewise if by Tradition of our Ancestors,
he understand Universal and Perpetual Tradition, or as it were Universal and
perpetual; we join hands with him: but if by Tradition he understand the
particular and Immediate Tradition of his Father, or ten thousand Fathers, or
the greater part of the Fathers of one Province or one Patriarchate, in one
Age, excluding three parts of the Catholic Church of this Age, and not
regarding former Ages between this Age and the Apostles; we renounce his Rule
in this Sense, as a Bond of Error not of Unity. And yet in general, according
to the Literal sense of the words, we embrace it as it is proposed by him
self; that The Doctrins inherited from our Fore fathers, as the Legacies of
Christ and his Apostles, are only to be acknowledged or Obligatory. So we
acknowledge both his Rules in the Literal sense de facto: but the Popes single
Supremacy of Power and particular Tradition, were never Principles of Unity,
neither de facto nor de jure; and so he may seek for his flat Schismatic de
facto at Rome.

I said there was a Fallacy in Logic of more interrogations then one, when
Questions of a different nature are mixed, to which one Uniform answer can not
be given. He says he put no Interrogatory at all to me. True; but he
propounded ambiguous Propositions to be answered by me, confounding St. Peter
and the Pope, an Headship of Order and an Headship of power, which is all one.
An head of Order has power to Act First, as well as sit first: but he acts
not by his own single power, but by the conjunct power of the body or College.

To show him, Pa. 510.
that I am not ashamed of my voluntary railing (as he phraseth it) too silly to
merit transcribing or answering, I will transcribe it for him. [The Church or
Court of Rome have Sophisticated the true Doctrine of Faith, by their
supplementall Articles, contrary to the First Principle; and have introduced
into the Church, a Tyrannical Government, contrary to the second Principle:
and are so far from being the entire Catholic Church, that by them both they
are convicted to have made them selves guilty of Superstition and Schisme]. If
this be railing, what Term does his Language deserve? If this be silly, what
pitiful stuff is his?

He said my only way to clear our church from Schism, The Proof rests on
their side.
was to disprove his two Rules. I answered he was doubly mistaken, first in
putting us to prove or disprove, who are the persons accused, the defendants
duty is to answer not to prove: that is the duty of the accuser. They accuse us
of Schism, therefore they ought to prove their Rules, whereon they ground
their Accusation, in that Sense wherein they take them; not put us to disprove
them. He urges that by this Method, no Rebel ought to give any reason why he
did so, because he is accused of Rebellion by his lawful Governor. By his
leave, he that condemns a Subject of Rebellion, before he have proved his
accusation, does him wrong, But he says, the truth is wheresoever there is a
contest each side accuses the other, and each side defends it self against the
others Accusations: but we were the first accusers, who could not with any Face
have pretended to reform, unless we accused first our actual Governor of
Usurpation. I told him before that he was doubly mistaken; now I must be bold
to tell him that he is three ways mistaken. First the Pope was none of our
actual Governor, in the external Regiment of the Church, by the Laws of
England. Secondly our Reformation was no Accusation, but an Enfranchisement of
our selves sub moderamine inculpatae tutelae. Thirdly, I have already
manifested the Vsurpatio^s of the Court of Rome, upon other manner of grounds
them his ambiguous Rules. As we have proved our intention; so let him endeavor
to prove his.

My second answer was, that although the proof did rest on oursides: Yet I did
not approve of his advise, that was, to disprove his two Rules. My reason is
evident, we approve of his two rules as they were set down by himself; it is
not we but they who have swerved from them, and therefore it were madness in
us to disprove them. He says, he dare swear in my behalf, that I never spoke
truer word in my life, and out of his Supererogatory kindness offers him self
to be bound for me, that I shall never follow any advise that bids me speak
home to the point. What silly nonsense is this, should I follow any ma^s advise
to disprove that which I approve? I have spoken so home to the point without
any advise, that I expect little thanks from him and his fellows for it.

What he prateth of a discipline left by Christ to the Church of England in
Henry the eighths time, is ridiculous indeed. And it equally ridiculous to hope
to make us believe, that the Removal of a few upstart Usurpations, is a change
of the discipline left by Christ to his Church. page 513.
And lastly it is ridiculous to Fancy, that later usurpations may not be
reformed by the Pattern of the Primitive times, and the ancient Canons of the
Church, and the Practice of succeeding Ages, because we received them by
particular Tradition from our immediate Fathers. That one place which he
repeateth as having been omitted by me, has been answered fully to every part
of it.

The rest of this Section is but a Repetition of what he has said, without
adding anything that is new; and in the Conclusion of this Treatise he gives
us a Summa totalis of it again (either he must distrust his Readers memory or
his Judgment): and yet for fear of not being understood, he recapitulates it
all over again in his Index. Surely he thinks his discourse so profound, that
no man understands him except he repeat it over and over again: and for my part
I did never meet with such a Torrent of Words, and such Shallowness of matter.
And so I leave him to S. Austins censure alleged by himself. In mala causa non
possunt aliter, at malam causam quis coegit eos habere.

Sect. II.
That they who cast Papal power out of England were no Protestants, but Roman
Catholics throughout, except only in that one point of the Papacy.
HItherto (he says) he has been the larger in his reply, because the former
points were Fundamental concerning, and totally decisive of the Question. They
do concern the Question indeed, to blunder and to confound Universal Tradition
with particular Tradition, a Primacy of Order with a single Supremacy of power,
Jurisdiction purely Spiritual with external Jurisdiction in foro contensioso:
otherwise they concern not the Question. And for deciding of the Question;
wherewithal should he decide it? who has not so much as alleged one
Authority in the Case, Divine or Humane, not a Text of Scripture, not a Canon
of a Council, not a Testimony of a Father; who has not so much as pretended
to any Universal or perpetual Tradition, but only to the Particular
immediate Tradition of the Roman Church; and this he has only pretended to,
but neither proved it, nor attempted to prove it, nor is it possible for him to
prove by the particular Tradition of the Roman Church it self, that the Bishop
of Rome is the Sovereign Monarch of the Church by Christ's own Ordination. His
only grounds are his own Vapourous Fancies, much like Zenoes Vaunts, who used
to brag, that he sometimes wanted Opinions, but never wanted Arguments.

My six grounds he styles Exceptions. And why Exceptions? But let them be
grounds, or exceptions, or whatsoever he will have them to be: and let him take
heed that every one of those Trifles and Toys (as he calls them) do not
baffle him and trip up his heels.

I pleaded that [Roman Catholics did make the first separation]. He answers,
that this Plea does equally acquit any Villain in the World, who insists in the
steps of his Forefather Villains. Would no expression lower then this of
Villains serve his tur^e? Who can help it? If those Forefathers (whom he
intimates) were Villains or any thing like Villains, they were his Forefathers
twenty times more then ours; We inherit but one point in difference from them,
but he twenty: The denomination ought to be from the greater part. If any of
them were deemed more propitious to us then the rest, it was Henry the eighth,
or Archbishop Cranmer: For both these we have their own confession that they
were theirs. First for Henry the eight, Guil. Alan. Apol. cap. 4. page 59.
We had a King who by his Laws abolished the Authority of the Pope, although
in all other things he would follow the faith of his Ancestors. And for
Archbishop Cranmer hear another of them, Cranmer the unworthy Archbishop of
Canterbury was his (the Earl of Hartfords) right hand and chief Assistant in
the work, although but a few months before he was of King Harries Religion,
yea a great Patron and Prosecuter of the six Articles. But to deal clearly
with you, there is not the same reason to imitate a notorious knave in his
confessed knavery, and to follow one who has not only a reasonable and just
cause of contending, but also the reputation of an honest man, even in the
judgment of his adverse party, in all other things, except only therein
wherein he is adverse to them. Such were all the Actors in this cause by their
Confession. If we acknowledged, that they who cast out Papal Usurpations were
Schismatics for so doing, he said something: but we justify their Act, as
pious and virtuous; and so his Comparison has never a leg to run on.

I pleaded, that [it was a violent presumption of their Guilt and our
Innocence, when their best Friends, and best able to Judge, who preached for
them and writ for them, who acted for them and suffered for the^, who in all
other things were great Zelots of the Roman Religion, and persecuted the poor
Protestants with fire and faggot, yet condemn the^ and justify this
seperario^.] He minceth what I say according to his use, and then excepteth,
The word [best] might have been left out; They ever were accounted better
Friends who remained in their former faith, and the other Bishops looked upon
as Schismatics by the Obedient party. Survey cap. 2.
Yet the Bishop of Chalcedon doubted not to call them the best of Bishops. He
should do well to tell us for his credits sake, who those other Bishops were
who looked upon these as Schismatics. Such is his ignorance in the State of
these times that he dreameth of two parties, an Obedient Party and a Rebellious
Party; whereas there were no Parties but all went one way. There was not a
Bishop, nor an Abbot of Note in the Kingdom, who did not vote the Kings
Supremacy, Four and twenty Bishops and five and twenty Abbots personally at one
time. There was not a Bishop nor any person of note in the Kingdom, who did
not take the Oath of the Kings Supremacy, except Bishop Fisher and S. Thomas
Moore; who were imprisoned for treason, either true or pretended, before that
Act was made, for opposing the Succession of the Crown. If he will not trust me
let him trust the Veredict of our Universities; A length we all agreed
unanimously in this Sentenc^ and were of one accord, Act. and Mon. p. 565. Reg.
Epist. Vni. Ox. Ep. 2. Sac. Syn. An. 7. 1530. and 1532. 24 Hen. 8. c. 12.
Devera Obedientia.
that the Roman Bishop has no greater Jurisdiction given him by God in holy
Scripture, in this Kingdom of England, then any other Foreign Bishop. The same
Sentence was given by our Convocations or Synods, The same Sentence was given
by our Parliaments with the same concord and Unanimity, Nemine Dissentiente; We
had no parties but one and all. Let him listen to his Friend Bishop Gardener,
No Foreign Bishop has any Authority among us; all sorts of people are agreed
with us upon this point with most steadfast consent, that no manner of person
bred or brought up in England has ought to do with Rome.

And Ireland was unanimo^s herein with England. All the great Families as well
of the Irish as of the English, did acknowledge by their Indentures to S.
Anthony St. Ledger then chief Governor of Ireland, the Kings Supremacy and
utterly renounce the Jurisdiction of the Pope. Counc. book An^ 32. 33. 34.
Hen. 8.
Yet it was not the meaning of our Ancestors then, and (though some of them
had been so minded) it is not our meaning now to meddle with the power of the
Keys, or abridge the Bishop of Rome of any Jurisdiction purely spiritual, or
any Legacy which was left him by Christ or his Apostles: but only to cast out
his usurped Coactive power in the exterior Court, without the leave of the
Sovereign Prince, which Christ and his Apostles did never exercise or dispose
of or meddle with, and to vindicate to our Kings the Political or external
Regiment of the Church, by themselves and by their Bishops and other fit
delegates, as a Right due to all Christian Princes by the Law of God and nature.

But he attributes all this to the Fear of the Clergy and the people, and the
Kings violent Cruelty: and for proof of what he says, cites half a passage
out of Doctor Hammond, but he does Dr. Hammond notorious wrong. Dr. Hammond
speaks only of the first preparatory act, which occasioned them to take the
matter of right into a serious debate in a Synodicall way: he applies it to
the subsequent act of Renunciation after debate. Dr. Hammond said only it is
easy to be believed: Mr. Sergeant makes it a just Presumption or confessed
Evidence. Dr. Hammond speaks of no fear but the fear of the law, the law of
Praemunire; an ancient law made many ages before Henry the eighth was borne, the
Palladium of England, to preserve it from the Usurpations of the Court of Rome:
but he misapplieth it wholly to the fear of he Kings violent Cruelty. Lastly he
smothers Dr. Hammonds Sense expressed clearly by himself, that there is no
reason to doubt, but that they did believe what they did profess, the fear
being the Occasion of their debates, but the reasons or Arguments offered in
debate the causes (as in all Charity we are to Judge) of their decision. He
uses not to cite any thing ingenuously.

If he did, he could have told his Reader, that this answer was taken away by
me before it was made by him. For two whole Kingdoms, the Universities, the
Convocations, the Parliaments, to betray their Consciences, to renounce an
Article which they esteem necessary to salvation, only for the fear of a
Praemunire or the loss of their goods, to forswear themselves, to deny the
Essence of their faith, to turn Schismatics, as if they did all value their
Goods more then their souls, without so much as one to oppose it; is a vain
uncharitable surmise or rather it is incredible, and not only incredible but
impossible. They were the men that advised the King to assume the Supremacy.
Act. ad Mon.
Archbishop Warham told the King it was his right to have it before the Pope,
Bishop Gardmer was the chief framer of the oath of Supremacy, Bishop Tonstall
and Longlands were the chief Preachers up of the Kings Supremacy at St. Paul's
Cross. Tonstall justifies it in his Letter to Cardinal Poole. Gardener and
Beckenshaw did write Polemick books in defense of the Kings Supremacy. The
whole Convocation did set forth a Catechism or Catecheticall book, to
instruct the people in the Kings right to the Supremacy, called the Institution
of a Christian man. Bishop Bonner, bloody Bonner, who made such Bonefires of
the poor Protestants, being then the Kings Ambassador with Clement the 7th,
Acworth contra Sand. l. 2. page 195.
did so boldly and highly set forth King Henryes Supremacy in the Assembly of
Cardinals, that they thought of burning him or casting him into a vessel of
Scalding lead, if he had not secured himself by flight.

Suppose it was credible that they all voted out of fear, and took the Oath
of Supremacy out of Fear; what fear could constrain them to advise the King
to assume the Supremacy as his right, to frame the Oath of Supremacy, to
instruct others in the Kings right to the Supremacy, by private Letters, by
public Catechismes, to preach up his Supremacy, to propugn his Supremacy in
their Polemick writings, in their Orations before the Cardinals themselves
with hazard of their life's, to tickle the Kings ears with Sermons against the
Popes Supremacy? Speed in Hen. 8. cap. 21. n. 105.
Who shall still say what these men did was out of fear, must be a very
credulous man. The contrary is as evident to the world as Noone day light. I
will conclude this point of the Fear of the Kings violent Cruelty, with Bishop
Gardiners Testimony of himself. D^ verae Obedie^tia.
He objecteth that as a Bishop he had sworn to maintein the Supremacy of the
Pope. To which he answers, that what was holily sworn, is more holily
omitted^, then to make an Oath the Bond of Iniquity. He confessed him self to
have been married to the Church of Rome bona fide as to his second wife; but
after the return of his first wife (that is the truth) to which he was espoused
in his Baptism, being convicted with undeniable evidence, he was necessitated
out of Conscience, to forsake the Church of Rome in this particular Question of
Supremacy, and to adhere to his first wife the truth, and after her to his
Prince the Supreme head of the English Church upon earth.

Secondly, I pleaded that [although it does not always excuse a toto from all
guilt, to be misled by others into error, yet it always excuses a tanto, it
extenuateth the Guilt]. This Allegation is so evidently true, that he has not
confidence enough to deny it, (which is a wonder,) but argues against it,
first, how could we think their example to be followed, whom we confess to
have done what they did out of fear? Or rather what a shamlesse untruth is
this? His witness says, that fear might be the Occasion of the debate, but
reason and Conscience were their directours in the decision; and we have
demonstrated that their actions could not possibly proceed from fear.

His second answer is, why do we not rather follow them in renouncing their
Schism, as those Bishops did after the Kings death? Once proved false is
always presumed to be false. Who told him that they made any retractation
after the Kings death, after they were freed from their imminent fear? They
made no Retractation, but held their Bishoprics in King Edwards time until
other Questions did arise, and executed the Statute of Supremacy as rigorously
as they did in Henry the eighths time. For proof where of, I cite the
Testimony of Queen Elizabeth, given to their Faces in their lives times, before
the most eminent Ambassadors of the greatest Princes, when they might have
contradicted it if they could, when the Emperor and other Roman Catholic
Princes interceded with her for the displaced Bishops: She gave them this
answer, that they did now obstinately reject that Doctrine, Camd. an. Eli* an
1559
which most part of themselves under Henry the eighth and Edward the sixth, had
of their own accord with heart and hand, publicly in their Sermons and
writings taught unto others, when they themselves were not private persons but
public Magistrates. Observe the words, first, of their own accords. Secondly
not only under Henry the eighth but Edward the sixth; therefalleth his Plea to
the ground. Thirdly when they themselves were public Magistrates, and
consequently in a Capacity of doing rather then of suffering. Lastly with heart
and hand, not only in their Sermons, but also in their printed Writings. We
use to say, there is no defense against a Flaile: certainly against
Subscriptions and publik writings there can be no Defense.

To the Queens testimony I add another of Sanders, D^ Schism. Anglic. l. 2.
p. 282.
that the Bishops of Winchester, London, Durrham, Worcester, Chichester,
Excellent Men and inwardly Catholics, yet being made Bishops in the Schism,
they had not the Spirit of courage. Therefore they resisted faintly to the
Kings Primacy, or rather they subscribed simply both to it and all other
innovations, which seemed not to contain open haeresy, least they should lose
their Bishoprics. When may we expect a true word from him?

Thirdly, he urged the beginners of a fault, may be less culpa^le then their
followers, when their Provocations be greater. Their Provocations were no less
then expectation of death and destruction by the Kings inhumane Cruelty: but
our continuance in Sch^sme compared to the Motives of theirs is in a manner
gratis, all our reasons being for our Livings and Interest heretofore, and now
a vain glorious Itch to approve ourselves to our party. We have had many
proofs of his Veracity, here is one more of his Charity. Suppose his new light
had lead him into ready Paths not Precipices, (which no man will grant him, but
his own Fellows): Yet why should he accuse us of Hipocrisy rather then of
error in Judgment, who have lost all our estates for our Consciences, which
probably he never had to loose, nor would have quitted it so if he had had it?
but only that his own guilt does dictate such uncharitable Censures to him. No
Mr. Sergeant, we are no such Changlings or turning weather cocks; that is your
own part: And you may live to act it over again, such hot water freeseth
soonest. Are you so blind, that you do not see that this Accusation might be
retorted upon you, and upon your great Co^verts whom you propose to us for
Patterns? Who as you say had been Schismatics in Henry the eighths time; you
might as well say for the most part of them in Edward the sixths time also, and
had no other way in the World to preserve or recover their Bishoprics in Queen
Maryes days but by prete^ding at least such a Conversion. But we are not so
uncharitable as you, we Judge them by their profession and leave their
Consciences to God.

Thirdly, I pleaded that although those who cast the Popes pretended
Sovereignty out of England, had been Schismatics as they were not: yet we
cannot be charged with Schism, so long as we seek carefully after truth, and
are ready implicity in the preparation of our minds to embrace it, whenever
we find it. Because he shall not Prevaricate with us, I will reduce my Argument
into Syllogisticall Form. Whosoever invented not their false Opinions
themselves, but learned them from their erring Parents, are not to be reputed
Heretics (much less Schismatics,) if they defend the^ not with pertinacious
animosity, but inquire carefully after the truth, and be ready to embrace it,
and correct their errors when they find them: But if we had any false opinions
we invented them not our selves, but learned them from our erring Parents.
Therefore we are not to be reputed Heretics (much less Schismatics,) if we
defend not our Opinions with pertinacious Animosity, but inquire carefully
after the truth, and be ready to embrace it, and Correct our Errors when we
find the^. Aust. Epist. 162.
The Major is St. Austins to a word, and is yielded by Mr. Serjea^t to be true.
The Minor is evident to all the world and cannot be denied: Therefore the
conclusion is firm.

I do not urge this, as though I had the least suspicion in the world that our
Ancestors did err, but to show that although they had erred, yet we are not
to be reputed Heretics or Schismatics whilst we do our endeavors to find
the truth, and embrace it implicitly in the preparation of our minds. Neither
do I urge this to convince others who do not know our hearts, and perhaps will
not believe us, when we tell them that we hold the truth implicity: but for the
satisfaction of our own Consciences. We know whether we hold Opinions
pertinaciously or not; and whether we desire and endeavor to find out the
truth or not; and whether we are willing to embrace the truth whenever God
shall reveal it or not: None know it but God and ourselves, Mr. Sergeant cannot
know it. And therefore as his answer is improper and contrary to the Rules of
Logic, to deny the Conclusion or Condition contained in the Conclusion: So it
is vain and presumptuous to Judge of another man's Conscience, which is known
only to God and himself. I cited S. Austin to prove the Proposition which he
yields, not the Assumtion which is too evident in it self to be denied, much
less to be a witness of our hearts which it was impossible for S. Austin to
know. Judge Reader what Ardelioes and busy bodies these are, censuring and
damning all Protestants to the Pit of Hell as Heretics and Schismatics, and
yet when they are pressed home, are forced to confess, that if they do
endeavor to find out the truth, which all good Christians do; then they are
neither Heretics nor Schismatics. This may be a great Comfort and
Satisfaction to all Conscientious Protestants, who are daily molested by these
men and terrified with such Bugbeares as these. But Mr. Sergeant has devised a
new Method to discover the hearts of Protestants, by the Testimony of their
eyes, and the undeniable Veredict of their Reason, only by viewing my Answer
to his first Section. Risum tenealis amici?

To draw the Saw of Contention to and fro, about Henry the eighth Warham Heath
Tonstall Gardener Bonner etc, whether they were Protestants or Papists is
impertinent and frivolous. Impertinent; let them call them Protestants, or
Papists, or neither, or both, it it all one to my Argument, that it is a
violent Presumption of their guilt and our Innocence, that all their great
Scholars who preached for them, and writ for them, and acted for them, and
suffered for them in all other differences, should desert them in this. And
frivolous; to contend about the word when we agree upon the thing. The thing is
without all Controversy or Dispute; they held with the Protestants in the
Article of the Supremacy, and with the Papist in all other Articles what soever.

Now whether their Denomination shall be from the greater part as it is in all
other cases, (mix one drop of milk with twenty or forty of water, and we call
it water not milk) or from the Lesser part as Mr. Sergeant would have it, I
commit to the Readers Judgment, and desire him to determine it himself;
whatsoever way he determins it, his Judgment will be less Prejudicial then
to be molested with such wranglers.

Protestants may persecute Protestants, but not as Protestants, and Papists may
persecute Papists (as the Iansenists persecute the Jesuits), but not as
Papists; even Ishmaels mocks are termed persecutions: but they seldom make
such bloody laws, against those whom they acknowledge to be of their own
Communions, as the law of the six Articles was, or persecute them with fire and
faggot as Bonner did. p. 520
He urges that between every Species of Color which we have names for, there
are hundreds of middle degrees for which we have no names. Well argued against
himself; Wit whither will thou? Then why does he call them Protestants, and
give them a name? There are indeed between every Species of Colors, man middle
degrees which have no distin^ names: but therefore we give the^ the name of
those Colors which they come neare^ to; either with a distinction if the
diffe^rence be easily expressed, as grassegreen^ seagreen, willowgreen, etc. or
without any distinction, the white of an Egg is not so white as snow, yet both
white. If he would pursue his own instance this Controversy were ended.

He prateth of the subordinate Sects of Protestants, and how changeable they
are every day. He loves to have a Vagare out of his lists. It is his
Spiritual Mother the Church of England, that gave him his Christian being,
which he has undertaken to Combat; let him adorn that Sparta as he is able:
and if he did it with more Modesty he were less to be blamed then he is. If
she had been but his old Friend, yet Friendship ought to be unstitched by
degrees not torn asunder suddenly. But to cast dirt in the Face of his own
Mother, is a shrewd sign of an ill nature. As the Fool said to a Favorite, If
I fall I can rise again, but if thou fall thou wilst never rise again: so if
we change, there is no great danger in it, because we keep our selves firmly to
our old Essentialls, that is the Apostles Creed; but their Change is dangerous,
who change their Creed, and presume to add new Essentials to the old.

He bears such a perfect hatred against Reformation, because it is
destructive to his Foundation of immediate Tradition, that he makes No Papist
and a Reformer to be the Character of a Protestant. Popes and Cardinals,
Emperors and Kingdoms, Churches and Counsels have all acknowledged both the
Lawfulness and necessity of Reformation. What does he think of the Council
of Trent, or has he peradventure never read it? But what does he think of the
Counsels of Constance and Basile, who profess themselves every where to be
qualified to reform the Church, tam in Capite quam in membris; as well in the
head as in the members? They escape fairly if he do not censure them as
Protestants: for they were great Reformers, and they were no great Papists,
placing the Sovereign power under Christ in the Church and not in the first
Mover. I might well call the Reformation in Henry the eights time their
Reformation, the Papists Reformation rather then ours, if the Reformers were
more Papists then Protestants, as it most evident.

I pressed him that if the Renunciation of the Bishop of Romes absolute
universal Monarchy, by Christ's own Ordination, be the essence of a Protestant,
then the Primitive Church were all Protestants. He answers, it is flatsy
false. I am contented to be silent for the present, but when time serves, it
may be made appear, to be flatly true; and that all that the Primitive Fathers
did attribute to the Bishop of Rome, was no more them a Primacy of Order or
beginning of Unity; and that an absolute Monarchy by Christ Ordination, is
absolutely repugnant to the Primitive Discipline.

I proceeded [then all the Grecian, Russian, Armenian, Abyssen Christians are
Protestants this day]. He answers, that it it is partly true and partly
false, and serves only to prove that the Protestants have fellow
Schismatics. And why partly true and partly false? when all the world sees,
that all these Churches do disown and disclaim the Popes Monarchy. This is
just the old condemned Tenet of the Schismatic Donatists, who did most
uncharitably limit the Catholic Church to their own Party, excluding all
others from hope of Salvation, as the Romanists do now. The best is, we must
stand or fall to our own Master: But by this means, they have lost one of the
notes of their Church, that is multitude, for they exclude three or four times
more Christians, out of the Communion of the Catholic Church, then they admit
into it.

I proceeded yet higher, [then we want not store of Protestants, even in the
bosom of the Roman Church it self]. His answer is, that to speak moderately,
it is an impudent falsehood, and a plain impossibility, for whosoever renounceth
the Substance of the Popes Authority, and his being head of the Church, becomes
totally disunited from the Church. Good words! His groundworke is to weak to
support the weight of such an heavy accusation. A Primacy of Order implies an
headship, as well as Supremacy of power; neither is it destitute of all power.
It has some power essentially annexed to it, to congregate sub paena pure
spirituali, to propose, to give sentence according to the votes of the College;
It may have an accessory power, to execute the Canons according to the
Constitutions of Counsels, and Imperial Sanctions, and Confirmations.

But all this comes far short of that headship which he asserteth, a
Sovereign Monarchical Headship of absolute power, above the whole Church by
Christ's Ordination. This is that Headship which he mainteineth against me every
where. This is that Headship which the Primitive Church never acknowledged.
This is that Headship which the Grecians, Russians, Armenians, Abyssines and
the Church of England renounce at this day. This is that Headship, which many
of his own Communion who live in the bosom of the Roman Church, do not
believe; as the Counsels of Constance, and Basile, and Pisa, the School of
Sorbon, and very many others every where who do all reject it, some more some
less. The maine difference and almost the whole difference between him and me,
is concerning Coactive power, in the Exterior Court, over the Subjects of
other Princes, against their wills; this is so far from being vniversaly
believed, throughout all places of the Roman Communion, that it is practically
received in few or no places, further then it seems expedient to Sovereign
Princes. If the Pope himself did believe, that he had such an absolute
Sovereignty of Monarchical power, in the exterior Court by Christ's own
Ordination, to him and his Successors, How could he alienate it from his
Successors almost wholly to the Princes of Sicily, and to their Heirs for ever,
within that Kingdom: Or how could the Princes retein it? If the King and
Kingdom of France did believe, that the Pope had such an absolute Monarchical
power, in the Exterior Court, by Christ's own Ordination; how could the King of
France forbid the Popes Legates without his License, or restrain their
Legantine Commissions by his Parliaments, or swear them to act nothing
contrary to the Liberties of the Gallican Church, and to cease to execute their
Commissions whe^soever the King and Kingdom should prohibit them, or reject
Papal decrees further then they are received in that Kingdom? Or if the
Council of Brabant did believe it, how could they forbid the Subjects to
repair to Rome out of their own Country, upon the Popes Summons? All men know
that there is no Privilege or Prescription against Christ's own Ordination. Qui
pauca considerat, facile pronunciat. This is ever the end of his Contradictions.

Lastly he Charge me for omitting to answer to his reason, pa: 522
that the renouncing the Pope is essential to Protestantisme. Truly I neither
did nor do hold it worth answering. Cannot he distinguish between the whole
Essence of any thing, and one Essential? He might as well affirm, that he who
believes but one Article of his Creed is a Christian. This requires no great
skill to explicate it: but I have remitted this Controversy to the Reader as
fittest for his determination.

Sect. III.
That Henry the 8. made no new Law: But only vindicated the ancient Liberties
of England.
CHristian Reader thou have seen hitherto, how Mr. Sergeant has failed
altogether to make good his pretensions: and in stead of those great mountains
of Absurdities, and falsifications, and Contradictions which he promised, has
produced nothing worthy of so weighty a cause, or an ingenious Scholar, but
his own wilful ridiculous mistakes. We are now come to his third Section,
wherein thou may see this young Phaeton mounted in his Triumphant Chariot,
driving the poor Bishop as a Captive before him: now expect to see him
tumbling down headlo^g, with a fall answerable to his height of pride and
insolence. He professes himself willing to stand to the Award of the most
partial Protestant living, who has so much sincerity as to acknowledge the
Suns shining at noone day, or that the same thing cannot both be and not be at
once. If after this loud confident brag; he be not able to make any thing
good that is of weight against me, he has forfeited either his Judgment, or
his ingenuity, and deserves not to be a writer of Controversies. I need no
partial Judges, but appeal to the indifferent Reader of what communion soever
he be: he needs but to compare my Vndication his Answer, my Reply his
Rejoinder, and my Surrejoinder together in this one short Section, and give
sentence readily who is the Mountebanke and Prevaricatour.

And first I challenge this great Champion of downright Cowardice, as great as
ever his Predecessor Thraso showed in the Comedy; in smothering and concealing
palpably and shamefully his Adversaries reasons, and declining the heat of the
assault. The maine subject of this Section, was to show that the ancient Kings
of England, did assume as much power in Ecclesiastical affairs as Henry the
eighth did, that the Laws of Henry the eighth were no new Laws, but only
renovations and Confirmations of the ancient Laws of England, which had never
been repealed or abrogated in the days of his Predecessors, but were of force
in England at that very time when he made his Laws; As the Statutes of
Clarendon, The Statute of Carlisle, The Articles of the Clergy, The Statutes of
Provisors and other old Laws made in the time of Henry the first, Henry the
third, Edward the first, and Edward the third, Richard the second, Henry the
Fourth, all of them dead and gone many ages before Henry the eighth was born. I
showed particularly, that they suffered not the Pope to send for any English
Subject out of England to Rome without leave, nor to send any Legate into
England without leave, nor to receive any Appeal out of England without leave.
They made it death, or at least the forfeiture of all a man's estate, to bring
any Papal Bulls or Excommunications into England. They called Ecclesiastical
Counsels, made Ecclesiastical Laws, punished Ecclesiastical persons,
prohibited Ecclesiastical Judges, received Ecclesiastical Appeals, made
Ecclesiastical Corporations, appropriated Ecclesiastical Benifices, rejected
the Popes Laws at their pleasure with a Nolumus; we will not have the Laws
of England to be Changed, or gave Legislative Interpretations of them as they
thought fit. All this I have made evide^t out of our ancient Laws, our
Records, our Historiographers; in my Vindication, in my Reply, and in this
Treatise. And therefore I might well retort upon him his own Confident brag,
that it is as clear as the suns shining at noone day, or that the same thing
cannot be and not be at once; that our Ancestors who did all this and much
more then this, did acknowledge no Monarchical power of the Pope in the
Exterior Court, by Christ's own Ordination, as Mr. Sergeant asserteth; and that
they did exercise as much power in the external Regiment of the Church, as
Henry the eighth did; and that Henry the eighths laws were no new laws
devised by himself, but were the laws of these ancient Kings renewed by him,
or rather the Fundamental Laws and Liberties of England, exposed by these
ancient Kings as a Buckler against the Encroachments of the Roman Court.

Now to all this clear evidence what answer does Mr. Sergeant make? Just
Thrasolike, when the matter comes to push of pike he sneaketh away post
principia, into the securest place he can find. Speak the truth in earnest, did
Pyrrhus use to do thus? It is not possible to squeese one word of particular
answer out of him: only in general he says I bring diverse allegations, Down
Derry pa 311.
wherein the Popes pretenses were not admitted etc. And so proceeds, do we
profess the Pope can pretend to no more then his right etc.? Laws and Records
are but bare Allegations with him: and prohibiting under pain of Death or
Confiscation of Goods, is no more but not admitted. Speak out man and shame
the devil; whether did the Pope pretend more then is right or not? whether
were the ancient English Laws just Laws or not? This is certain, his
Pretensions and these Laws cannot both be just. The very substance of his
Monarchical power in the exterior Court, is prohibited by these Laws, his
Sovereign power or Patronage of the English Church, his Judiciary Power, his
Legislative Power, his dispensative Power, all are lost if these Laws stand.
All which Mr. Sergeant blancheth over with this general expression, such and
such things. Will the Court of Rome thank such and such an Advocate, who
forsakes them at a dead lift? I trow no.

And although I called upon him in my reply, for a fuller and more satisfactory
answer to these Laws: yet he gives none in his Rejoinder, but shuffleth up
the matter in Generals. As for his particularities entrenching on, or
pretended to entrench on the Popes Authority; whether they were lawfully done
or no, how far they extended, in what Circumstances or cases they held in what
not, how the Letter of those Laws are to be understood etc. all which the
Bishop Omitts, though he express the bare words; it belongs to Canon and
Secular Lawiers to scuffle about them, not me. I hold my self to the Lists of
the Question, and the limits of a Controvertist. Yes, even as Thrasoheld
himself to the Lists, when he stole behind the second wards. This is neither
more nor less, but flat running away, and crying to the Canonists for help. If
the subject be improper for him, why did he undertake it, and not try first,
Quid far recusent,
Quid valiant humeri.


Why did he undertake it with so much youthful Confidence and insulting scorn
and petulance, to accuse his adversary of impudence? And as if impudence were
too moderate a Character for him, as a professed and sworn enemy of truth shame
and honesty; making him worse then a mad man or born fool. And all this for
pretending that Henry the eighth did no more against the Papacy, then his
Ancestour Kings had done before him: and now when his Cavills are thrust down
his own throat, when the impudence is brought home to him and laid at his own
door, when the very Laws of his Ancestors are produced wherein they provided
the same remedies for the Roman Court that Henry the eighth did; he would with
draw his own neck o^t of the Collar, and leave the defense of his cause to the
Cano^ and Secular Lawiers, to scuffle about the sense of these ancient Laws,
and whether they were law fully done or no, and how far they extended, and in
what cases they hold in what not. And this is all the answer, which he
vouchsafes to these ancient English Laws; that is as much as to say he
knows not what to answer, or it does not belong to him to answer: and this he
calls holding himself to the Lists of the Question, but all other men call it
leaping out of the Lists of the Question, and a shameful deserting the cause
he had u^dertaken to defend.

I ever acknowledged that Henry the eighth made sundry new Sta^utes against the
Usurpations of the Court of Rome: but I add that these Statutes were
declarative of old Law, not Enactive of new Law. This is as clear as his noone
daylight. And I proved it by the Authority of two of our greatest Lawiers, Fitz
Herbert and my Lord Cook, persons sufficient to know the difference between a
Statute declarative of old Law, and a Statute Enactive of new. Secondly, I
proved it by one of the Principal Statutes themselves: those terms of Law
which declare old Law, are not the same with those which enact new Law. This
proof is demonstrative. He urges, if there were something new, it was new,
and a Statute we Englishmen use to term a Law. So if he new turn his Coat,
there is something new, yet we English men say his Coat is and old Coat for all
that. Magna Charta or the great Charter of England is an old Law, yet it has
been renewed or newly declared by almost every succeeding King. New Statutes
may declare old Laws.

He says I cite two Protestants Fitz-Herbert and my Lord Cook, both of mine
own party, to speak in behalf of Protestants. I cite no Protestants as
Protestants, nor to speak for Protestants, nor as witnesses in any case in
difference between Protestants and Papists: but I cite two great English Judges
as Judges, to speak to the Difference between a Declarative Statute and an
Enactive Statute by the Law of England; and who could be so proper witnesses of
the Law of England as they. Secondly who told him that Fitzherbert was a
Protestant? No more a Protestant then himself; for any thing that ever I could
perceive. He was a great Judge, lived in Henry the eighths time, and writ
sundry works. Where he sets down the Charge against a Papist, he does it in
such a manner that it can hurt no man, except he will confess himself to have
done what he did obstinately and maliciously: Fitz Herbert the charge, page
111. and p. 129.
but where he sets down the charge of a Justice of Peace against Heretics
or Lollards, he gives it home. But Mr. Sergeant has the art to make
Protestants or Papists, of whom he list, so it serve his present turn. Thirdly,
though Fitzherbert and my Lord Cook had said nothing, yet the case is as
clear as the light, that this very Statute is Declarative of old Fundamental
Law not Enactive of new Law.

And this I prove first by view of the Statute it self. He that has but half
an eye in his head, may easily discern the difference between an Enactive
Statute and a declarative Satute. An Enactive Statute looks only forward to
the time to come, and medleth not at all with the time past* but a declarative
law looks both ways, backwards and forwards, forward to the time to come and
backward to the time past. Again, the very from and tenor of the words is not
the same in an Enactive Statute and in a Declarative Statute; An Enactive
Statute regards only what shall be, but a Declarative regards what is and
what has been; an Enactive Statute creates new Law by the authority of the
present Lawgiver, a Declarative Statute confirms old Law, and is commonly
grounded upon the Fundamental Constitution of the Kingdom. 24. He. 8. cap. 12.
Now then let us take a view of this very Law. By diverse old authe^tick
histories and Chronicles it is manifestly declared, that this realm of England
in an Empire and so has been accepted in the world, governed by one supreme
head and King etc. unto whom a body Politic compact of all sorts and degrees
of people, divided by names of Spiritualty and Temporalty, owe next to God a
natural obedience, he being instituted by the goodness of God, with plenary
power to render final justice for all matters. You see plainly that this
Statute looks both ways forward and backward, and does not only create new
Law, but also declare what has been, what is, and what ought to be the
perpetual Law of England. By diverse old authentic Histories and Chronicles
it is manifestly declared etc.; then it is manifest that this is a declarative
Law.

He says, I quote the Schismatic King himself and the Schismatic
Parliament to speak in their own behalf. By his leave, he is mistaken, I
ground not my reason upon the Authority of the King and Parliament, but upon
the form or tenor of the Statute, whether these words do contain the form of
an Enactive Statute or a Declarative Statute. Secondly, if I did so, yet he
has no reason to complain of it, who makes the Pope and his Council to be
the last Judge in his own case. Thirdly, I shall be bold to scrue up this pin a
note higher, and tell him that if Henry the eight did make himself the last
Judge, in those differences between him and the Papacy, which concerned the
Church and Kingdom of England, he did no more then many other Christian Kings
and Princes have done before him; as I have showed in the Empire, Spain, Italy,
Brabant etc. Fourthly, if that which was decreed in this Law, was decreed in
former Laws standing in full force and unrepealed, then it is not Enactive of
new Law, but Declarative of old Law: but I have produced him the Laws
themselves, wherein the self same things have been decreed, and he turns his
back upon them, and refers us to the Canonists for an answer. Lastly, it, is
so far from being true, that those Statutes made by Henry the eighth were new
Laws, tha^ those ancient Statutes of Clarendon, of Carlisle, the Articles of
the Clergy, the Statutes of Provisors, were no new Laws when they were made:
but new declarations of the Fundame^tall Laws of England, or of the Original
Constitution of the English Empire; as appears undeniably by the Statutes of
Clarendon, the Statute of Carlisle, and the Statutes of Provisors; wherein the
same truth is affirmed as positively as I can do it.

But now, Reader, will thou see a convincing proof, of the extreme
carelessness and unconscionable oscitance of this great Champion, who writes
his answers at Random, and never so much as reads what is objected against
him. I cited two Statutes; the one of 24. Hen. 8. cap. 12. the other of 16*
Ric. 2. cap. 5. The Printer cites them right i^ the margent, but a little
confusedly: but when Mr. Sergeant comes to answer them, he confounds them
indeed, attributing Richard the seconds Statute to Henry the eighth. And lest
any man should excuse him and say it was the fault of the Printer, hear him;
he alleges another Statute made in the 24. of Henry the 8* Yes, well guessed:
otherwise called the 16. of Richard the second. And a little after, what matters
it what this Statute says, being made two years after his unlawful marriage
with Anna Bullen? I know not where he learned this, except it was from the old
Puppet player, who would have Queen Dido to be Richard the thirds Mistress; he
might perchance have such another odd Fancy that Richard the second was Anne
Bullens Servant. That which I observe in earnest is this, that he answers at
Random to he knows not what, and never peruseth that which is objected
against him. If it had been some rare piece that was cited that he could not
have come by it, it had been the more pardonable: but it is an English Statute
which he might have found in every Bookebinders Shop, in every Lawiers Study,
in every Justice of Peaces Closet. And yet he is as confident as Gawen; the
best Statute he could pick out you may be sure. How does he know that? We all
see he never read it, nor knows whether it be a Statute or no. Then he
tells us, there is not a Syllable in it concerning Spiritual Jurisdiction.
Well guessed by Instinct: but for once his Instinct has deceived him; if
Excommunication be any part of Spiritual Jurisdiction, there is more then one
Syllable of Spiritual Jurisdiction in it. But concerning our English Statutes
both ancient and new, which concern the casting of Papal Authority out of the
Kingdom, I have given him a full satisfactory account formerly, to which I
refer him.

We have seen how careless he is in reading over Laws before he answer them:
Now let us observe the same Oscitance or want of Ingenuity toward his
Adversary, that he may learn what he gets by his Falsifications Nempe hoc quod
Veneri donatae a virgin puppae. Real falsifications retorted upon him instead
of his feigned ones. He answered that to limit an Authority, implies an
admittance of it in cases to which the Limitation extends not. I replied, that
these ancient Laws of England did not only limit an Authority, but deny it,
that is deny it in such and such cases mentioned in the Laws, deny it
Coactively in the exterior Court without the leave of the Sovereign Prince. So
the Laws may differ, the restraints may differ, the leave may differ in
degrees, according to the difference of places* notwithstanding this denial.
That which he beats at is this, that we deny all Papal power whatsoever; but
other Churches do only limit it. I answer, we do not deny the Bishop of Rome
all manner of power; We deny him not the power of the Keys, we deny him not any
power purely Spiritual, we deny him not his beginning of Unity, if he could he
contended with it: but we deny him all Coactive power in the Exterior Court,
over the Subjects of other Princes, without the Sovereigns leave. If some
Princes give more leave then others, as finding it more expedient for their
affairs; we do not envy it.

But he urges, that I do not deny equivalent Laws in France Spain Germany
Italy. Reply pa. 21.
I neither deny it nor affirm it, or I affirm it only in part [Yes, there are
some such Laws in all these places by him mentioned, perhaps not so many, but
the Liberties of the French Church are much the same with the English]. Some
such Laws, not so many, much the same, are no proofs of Equivalence: or if he
will call them Equivalent, it is only secundum quid not simpliciter,
respectively in some cases not universally in all cases. But he has another
place, which strikes home, Vind. pa. 73.
where I affirm that [the lik^ laws may be found in Germany, Poland, France,
Spain, Italy, Sicily, and if we will trust Padre Paolo, the Papacy it self].
But did either I or Padre Paolo, speak of those ancient English laws by me
cited, made to restrain the Usurpations of the Bishops of Rome? So he says,
but it is a gross Falsification. I did neither speak of them in that place,
nor Padre Paolo: but we both speak of another Law of a quite different nature
from these, that is the Law of Mortmain, a Law merely Political to restrain
men from giving Lands to the Church without License. Of this I said there are
found like Laws to it in Germany, Poland, France, Spain, Italy, Sicily, and
Padre Paolo adds in the Papacy it self. What an Adversary have I to deal
with, who either understands not what the Law of Mortmain is, or regards
not how he falsifieth his Adversaries words?

But from these mistaken and misshapen premises he draws ten Conclusions,
every one of them driving me to a Contradiction or Absurdity at least* The
first second third and fourth are the same in effect, or all comprehended in
the first, that it is opposite to the general opinion of the whole world,
Catholics, Protestants, Puritans. Secondly, that it is against the profession
of the Protestants, who extol that happy time when England was freed from the
yoke of Rome. Thirdly, that it contradicts our Reformation in the point of the
Popes Supremacy, there could be no Reformation of that which was not otherwise
before; and therefore Henry the eighth added something of his own to these
ancient Laws. Fourthly, he says that Doctor Hammond acknowledges, that
Papal power was cast out of England in Henry the eights days. And the sixth
is, that this Position is particularly opposite to the Common ^onsent of the
Catholic Countries, who all looked on Henry the eighth and the Church of
England ever since as Schismatic. Doubtless he means Roman Catholic
Countries. Was it not enough to say that it was Contrary to the General
opinion of the whole world, unless he added Protestants, and Reformers, and
Doctor Hammond, and Roman Catholics, as if they were none of the world?
Reader, I undertook to prove that Henry the eighths Laws against the
Usurpations of the Roman Bishop, were no new Laws, but ancient Laws of
England; I have done it by producing the ancient Laws themselves, five or six
hundred years old: and I am yet ready to show further, that they were no new
Laws then, but the Fundamental Laws of England, derived from the first
founding of the British and English Churches, as to the substance of them. To
all my premises or particularities (as he calls them) he has been able to
answer nothing, but leaves them to the Canon and Secular Lawiers to scuffle
about them: but he utterly denies my Conclusion, what an absurdity that is, he
is not ignorant.

But alas! what does the world know of the Municipall Laws of England, until
we instruct them better? and what Opinion can Forreiners have of us, but what
they learn from him and his Fellows? We acknowledge with Doctor Hammond, that
Papal Usurpations were cast out of England in Henry the eights time: but we
add, not by the Creation of new Laws, but by the vigorous execution of the
ancient Laws, being first renewed and confirmed by himself. We acknowledge
that Henry the eighth did finally shake of the yoke of Rome, which could not
have been done, if there had been nothing to have been shaken of or reformed:
but this does not hinder but that his Predecessors did attempt to shake it of
long before, even at the first appearing of it; yea and did actually shake it
of, for a time, in a great part.

His fifth Objection is, that according to me the Laws made by Henry the
eighth, did no more then the former Laws. Where did I say so? until he is
able to show it me, (which I shall expect at the Greek Calends,) I shall score
it up among his lesser Falsifications. And for his inference which he makes,
that he never heard it pretended, that they did shake of the Roman yoke in
part, or for a time, therefore they did it not; it shows but his ignorance in
the Laws and histories of his native Country. If he had perused them
diligently, he might have observed how the Court of Rome and Crown of England,
were long upon their Gards watching one another: and the one or the other
gained or lost mutually, according to the Vigor of their present Kings or
Popes, or according to the exigence of the times.

His seventh Objection, that the like Laws to ours in England were made in the
Papacy it self, but those could not be against the Popes Headship of the
Church: and his tenth Objection that then there never was a Papist Country in
the world, because equivale^t Laws to ours were made in France Spain Italy
Sicily Gormany Poland, etc: and his answer to my demand [what law full
Iur^sdiction could remain to the Pope in England, where such and such Laws
had force?] The same that remains still to him in France Spain Italy where
the like laws are in force, in his last paragraph; are a dish of unsavory
mushromes, all sprung up from his own negligent mistake or wilful
Falsification (let him choose whether he will) in confounding the Laws of
Mortmain with the other Laws against the Popes Usurpations; Vind. pa 71.
Which I distinguished exactly both at the beginning of that discourse [the
Statute of Mortmain justified] and at the Conclusion [But to leave this
Digression.] Vind. pa 74.


But besides this gross error, there want not other inconsequences and
fallacies in his discourse; as in his seventh Objection from the Popes
particular Headship of his own Church, to an Universal Headship over the
Catholic Church, and from an Headship of order to a Monarchical Headship of
power; and in his tenth Objection from [like lawes] to the same Laws, from
Laws made to Laws duly observed. We had Laws made against Non-conformists
in England, will he conclude thence that we have* no Non-conformists in
England? the Argument would hold better the Contrary way, Ex malis moribus
bonae leges. And in his last Paragraph, from Coactive Jurisdiction in the
Exterior Court to Jurisdiction purely Spiritual in the Court of Conscience;
and from Coactive Jurisdiction with the leave of the Prince to the same without
Leave. We see all Roman Catholic Countries, do stint the Popes Coactive
Jurisdiction over their Subjects more or less, according to their several
Liberties, which they could not do at all, if he held it by Christ's own
Ordination.

His eighth Objection, that upon this new Law made by Henry the eighth, England
stood at another distance then formerly from Rome; is a Fallacy non causae pro
causa, when a false cause is assigned for a true cause. Our just Laws are not
the right cause of our distance from Rome: but the Popes unjust Censures, and
that Character which some of our Countrymen give of us. But this distance is
greater among the Populacy then between the Estates, who do not much regard the
Popes Censures either in making or observing of Leagues.

To his ninth Objection in his order, and his last in my order, that this
Posi^^on takes away the Question, and makes all the Controvertists in England
on both sides talk in the air, because it makes the Pope to have had no
Authority there to be cast out. I answer, I wish it did, but it does not. The
Pope had Authority there, and Authority usurped fit to be cast out,
notwithstanding our former good Laws. But yet I must confess this Position
does much change the Question, from spiritual Jurisdiction in the inner Court
to Coactive Jurisdiction in the exterior Court, and makes him and many other
such Controvertists talk in the air, who dispute only about Headships and
First Moverships, when the true Controversy lies in point of Interest and
profit.

Sect. 4.
That the Britannick Churches were ever exempted from foreign Jurisdiction, for
the first six hundred years, and so ought to continue.
After I had showed the Equality of the Apostles, except only a Priority of
Order; and that the Supremacy of power did not rest in any single Apostolical
College; that National Patriarchs were the highest Order constituted by the
Apostles in the Church; and how some Patriarchs came to be advanced above
others, with the true dignity or Pre-eminence of Apostolical Churches: the
sum of all the rest of this Section might be reduced to a Syllogism.

Those Churches which were exempted from all foreign Jurisdiction for the first
600 years, cannot be subjected to any foreign Jurisdiction for the future
against their own wills.

But all the Britannick Churches were ever exempted from foreign Jurisdiction
for the first six hundred years.

The Major Proposition was proved by me undeuiably, out of the first General
Council of Ephesus; to which Mr. Sergeant has objected nothing. Next I proved
the Minor* First by Prescription. Affirmanti incumbit probatio; The burden of
the proof in Law rests upon the Affirmer: but they are not able to show so
much as one single act of Jurisdiction, which ever any Bishop of Rome did in
Brittaign for the first six hundred years. Secondly, I proved it from the
Antiquity of the Britannick Church, which was ancienter then the Roman it self,
and therefore could not be subject, to the Roman from the beginning. Thirdly,
because the Britannick Churches sided with the Eastern Churches against the
Roman, and therefore were not subject to the Roman. Fo^rthly, because they had
their Ordinations ordinarily at home, which is an infallible sign of a free
Church subject to no Foreign Jurisdiction. Lastly because they renounced all
Subjection to the Bishop of Rome. I am forced to repeat thus much to let the
Reader see the contexture of my discourse, which Mr. Sergeant does whatsoever
he can to conceal, or at least to confound and disjoint.

Out of this he picketh here and there what he pleases, First he pleads that
my Title is the Vindication of the Church of England: but the Church of England
can derive no title from the Britannick or Scottish Churches. He never read or
quite forgets the State of the Question. I will help his memory. Let him
read the Vindication [by the Church of England we understand not the English
Nation alone, Vind. pa 24.
but the English dominion, including the British and Scottish or Irish
Christians]. So at unawares he has yielded the Bishoprics of Chester,
Hereford, Worcester (for all these were Suffragans to Carleon), Wales,
Cornwall, Ireland, Scotland with all the adjacent Islands, that is to say, two
third parts of the English Dominion.

Secondly, he pleads that for this many hundred years they acknowledged the
Popes Authority as well as the Church of England. I answer, that this will do
him no good nor satisfy the General Council of Ephesus at all, which has
decreed expressly in the case of the Cyprian Prelates, and they Command the same
to be observed in all Provinces, that no Bishop occupy another Province, which
formerly and from the beginning was not under the power of him or his
Predecessors, and if any do occupy another Province (that in this case) let
him restore it, Council. Ephesians. part 1. Act. 7.
that the Canons of the Fathers be not slighted. But they who never exercised
one Act of Jurisdiction in the Brittannick Island for the first 600 years,
cannot pretend that it was under their power, in the time of the Council of
Ephesus or long after. It was not for nothing that he concealed the words of
the Council.

Yet he asks, what do the Scots concern the Church of Englands Vindication?
Do they not? Are not the Scots a part of the Britannick Islands, and so
comprehended under the name of the Church of England in this Question? Besides
he must know that I challenge some Interest among the Irish Scots, from whom I
derive my Episcopal Orders. Against the Irish Ordination never any man had any
pretense of Exception to this Day. The Irish were the ancient and principal
Scots, and the Britannick Scots a Colony derived from them. That they are the
ancient Scots, who did join with the Britons in not submitting to the Sea of
Rome, I shall show him clearly from the Authority of Lawrence, Successor to S.
Austin in his Archbishopric, and the other English Bishops of that Age, in
their Letter to the Bishops of Scotland, To conclude he took not only Care of
the new Church collected of the English, Bid hist. Ec. lib. 2. ca. 4.
but of the old Inhabitants of Britain, and also of the Scots who inhabit
Ireland, the next Island to Britain. For as soon as he knew that their life and
profession in their Country, was like that of the Brittons in Britany not
Ecclesiastical etc. That is to say not Roman. He sees I had some reason not
to ^eave out the Scots.

Besides the Britons the Scots and the Irish, I urged that [the great Kingdoms
of Morcia and Northumberland were converted by the Scots, and had their
Religion and Ordination first from the Scots, afterward among themselves,
without any foreign dependence, and so were as free as the Britons]. He says
all the force lies in these words [without any Foreign dependence] which I
obtrude upon them without any proof. His mistakes are infinite, my proof is
Demonstrative, They who had their first Ordination from the Scots, and ever
after were Ordained among themselves, never had any Ordination from the Bishop
of Rome, and consequently were never subject to the Jurisdiction of the Bishop
of Rome: For it is a Maxim in the Law, and is most evident in the case of the
Cyprian Bishops in the Council of Ephesus, that the right of ^urisdiction does
follow the right of Ordination. And if it were not so, yet what man in his
right wits could Imagine, that the Scots who were the Converters, should
renounce Subjection to the Bishop of Rome themselves, and teach their Converts
the Mercians and Northumbrians to submit to the Bishop of Rome

But if I had said no more* but only that they were without any foreign
dependence, it had been enough on my part. It belongs not to me to prove a
Negative, and such a continued Negative as this is: but the burden of the
proof rests wholly upon him, both in reason and Law, to prove his
Affirmative, that the Mercia^s and Northumbrians did depend upon the Bishop of
Rome in those days, in point of practice, for Ordination and Jurisdiction;
which he is not able to do. What he adds, that I said Ordination is nothing
at all to Jurisdiction, is for want of Understanding, because he is not able to
distinguish between the right of Ordination, and the Act of Ordeining. We
attribute to the Scots the Act of Ordeining, not a Superior right of
Ordination.

In the next place I urged, that [a world of British Christians staid behind
among the Saxon Conquerours, every where all over England, such whom they had
no cause to fear for their power Activity or Influence upon others; which
poor Conquered Christians had a right to the just Privileges of their
Ancestours]. He would persuade us, First that all of them or all except some
few fled into Wales or Cornwall. What to do? To be repacked there as herrings?
Or like Camelions to live upon the air and leave all the rest of the Kingdom
desolate? It was not ten, or twenty, nor a hundred, nor a^ thousand little
Vessels, could bring over Saxons enough with their wifes and Children and
Servants, to plant the Kingdoms of England. We see daily, that the very Armies
of such Conquerours, do consist for the greater part of Natives, and that it
is not their foreign Numbers, but their Military Skill and resolution which
gains them the Victory. Look upon all the Kingdoms of the world, Italy,
Spain, France, England, etc. and what are they but mixed Societies, of
Forreiners and Natives, Conquerers and Conquered persons, now i^corporated with
little or no distinction, by long Tract of time. After the Norman Conquest,
hundreds of English inhabited England for one Norman. In the beginning of the
late Insurrection in Ireland, notwithstanding those great n^mbers which came
over daily into Ireland and Scotland to seek for Plantations, for thirty or
forty years together, yet there were ten Irish, for one English and Scotch*
and yet we do not find that these Saxon wars were so bloody as the Irish
wars, or that either they persecuted the persons of the Britons with Cruelty,
or so much as demolished their Churches.

But he supposes, that if there were any such British Christians, yet they
became subject to the Pope. I believe some of them were subject to the Pope as
to the Bishop of their Mother Church, and all of them as to the Bishop of an
Apostolical Church, that is, to be guided by his grave advise and direction:
but I deny that ever the Saxon Bishops were subject to the Pope, as to an
absolute Monarch by Christ's own ordination, or that the Pope enjoyed the
Sovereign Patronage of the Saxon Church, or the Supreme Legislative Judiciary
or dispensative power over it. This the Saxon Kings and their Bishops under
the^ ever enjoyed, as the Britons did before them: and this is all which our
Kings desire, or we claim for them. If he have any thing to say to this point,
let him bring Authorities not words.

He says, This is all one as if some few men settling by accident in France,
should pretend an exemption from the French Laws, and expect English
Privileges. Nay, it is clear contrary, as if some French men coming into
Britain, and planting and propagating there, should expect the British
Privileges to their Posterity. So the Saxons planting in Britain, so soon as
their Posterity was capable of them by becoming Christians, might justly
claim the Liberties and Privileges of British Christians.

I said [the Saxon Conquest gave them as good title to the Privileges as to the
Lands of the Britons]. He styles it, a rare reason, as if I meant that
Ecclesiastical Jurisdiction, were a thing of that nature to be won by the
sword. Or rather as if he meant Coactive Jurisdiction in the Exterior Court,
and Jurisdiction purely Spiritual which Christ left unto his Church, is all
one. I do not mean that power purely Spiritual is to be won by the Sword: but
I believe that exemtion from Coactive power in the exterior Court is to be won
by the sword. So the Scots eased the Archbishop of York of the trouble of a
great part of his Province^ So just Conquerours may, and do often change the
External Policy of the Church, for the public good.

He bids me, show that the English Bishops were empowered by the British
Bishops, or else let me confess that they could inherit no Privileges from
them. I can show him that I my self was empowered, and did receive my
Episcopal Ordination from the ancient Scotch Bishops by an uninterrupted
Succession; And many English Bishops have received their orders mediatly* or
immediately from the British Bishops.

I said most truly, that before he can allege the Authority of the Council of
Sardica for Appeals to Rome, he must renounce the divine institution of the
Papacy, or at least the divine right of the Bishop of Rome to the Papacy:
because that Canon submitted it to the good pleasure of the Fathers, and
grounded it upon the Memory of St. Peter, not the Institution of Christ. The
reason of this Consequence is most evident. For the Council of Sardica would
not, nor could have submitted that which is the Popes right, by Christ's own
Ordination, to the good pleasure of the Fathers, whether he should have it or
not; nor would have assigned their respect to the Memory of Saint Peter, for a
ground of that for which they had the Commandment of Christ: But the Council
of Sardica did submit the Popes right to receive Appeals, to the good pleasure
of the Fathers, Placetne? does it please you that we honor the memory of St.
Peter? Therefore, they did not hold this right of the Pope to receive Appeals,
to be due to the Pope by Christ's own Ordinance or Commandment: This he is
pleased to call, a flat Falsification of the Council, there being not a word
in it, either concerning Papal power it self or its institution, but
concerning Appeals only. I am grown pretty well acquainted with his
Falsifications. Did I say there was any thing in the Council, concerning the
Papacy or Institution of it? If I did, let him tell us where and when, or else
it is his own Falsification. But by his own Confession, there is something in
the Council concerning Appeals to the Pope, and this is submitted by the
Council to the good pleasure of the Fathers, and no higher ground assigned for
it, then the respect to the Memory of St. Peter: yet this right of receiving
Appeals is made by him and all his Partakers, an Essential Branch of Papal
power. Therefore if he and his Partakers say true, the Council of Sardica did
submit an Essential Branch of Papal Power, (or Papal power in part,) to the
good pleasure of the Fathers; which is as much as to say they held it not to be
of divine Institution. By this time I hope he understands my meaning better.

He presumes, that some British Bishops sat in Council of Sardica; it may be
Athanasius intimates as much. He presumes that they assented to the Sardican
Canon about Appeals. It may be, or it may not be. I should rather assent to
their voting to acquit Athanasius, who testifies of them that they were right
to the Nicene Faith. Epist. ad Iovinia.
But surely among all the Subscibers in the Sardican Council, there is not one
British Bishop named. And in the Synodall Letters of the Council it self,
wherein they reckon all the Provinces, Britain is not named. But what is the
right of receiving Appeals, to an Universal Monarchy, or the decree of a
Council, to Christ's own Ordination? If we would be contented to abrogate our
old Laws, and give the Bishop of Rome leave to execute that power which the
Sardican Fathers did give him, he would scorn it, and much more their manner of
giving it, Council. Sard. cap. 3.
Si vobis placet; if it please you, or of it seem good to your Charity let us
honor the Memory of St. Peter; as both the Latin and the Greek Edition have it.

I said that the Council of Sardica was no General Council after the Eastern
Bishops were departed, not out of any ill will to Athanasius, or favor to the
Arrians (as for Arrianisme, the Sardican Fathers did no more then the Nicene
had done before them): but out of another Consideration, because the presence
of the five great Patriarchs with their respective Bishops, or at least the
greater part of them, was ever more held necessary to the being of a General
Council; as Bellarmine himself confesses that the seventh Synod judged the
Council of Constantinople against Images to have been no General Council,
Bell. de Con. li. 1. ca. 17.
because it had not Patriarchs enough. If the Council of Sardica had been a
General Council, why do St. Gregory the great, Isiodore and Venerable Bede,
quite omit it out of the number of General Counsels? Why did St. Austin,
Alypius, and the African Fathers slight it? And which is more then all this,
why do the Eastern Church, not reckon it among their seven General Counsels,
nor the western Church, among their eight first General Counsels? To
Conclude, why did the English Church, leave the Sardican Council out of the
number of General Counsels, in the Synod of Hedtfelde in the year 680* and
embrace only these for General Counsels until that day, The Council of
Nice, the first of Constantinople, the first of Ephesus, the Council of
Chalcedon and the second of Chalcedon? Apud Spelm. an. 680. p. 169.
Here he may see a plain reason, why I say the Council of Sardica was never
incorporated into the English Laws. I would know, whether he or I be of the
old English Religion in this point; The five First General Counsels were
incorporated into the Law of England: but the Council of Sardica was none of
them, Therefore no General Council. I have given him a further account
concerning this Council Sect. 1, c. 7. to which I refer him.

I said, and I said most truly, that the Canons of the Sardican Council
touching Appeals were never received in England, nor incorporated into our
English Laws. For proof hereof, I bring him an evident demonstration out of
the Fundamental Law of England, as it is recorded in that famous Memorial of
Clarendon: All Appeals in England must proceed regularly from the Archdeacon
to the Bishop, from the Bishop to the Archbishop, and if the Archbishop failed
to do Justice, the last complaint must be to the King, to give Order for
redress. Our Ancestors had not so much respect for Pope Julius, nor thought
appeals to Rome any honor to the Memory of St. Peter.

I said, [the Canon of the Council of Sardica, was co^tradicted after by the
Great Council of Chalcedon]. He rejuneth that I neither thought the words
worth citing, nor the Canon where the Abrogation of the Sardican Canon is found
worth mentioning. Pardon me, I said nothing of Abrogation, but I did say it
contradicted it: and for proof of the truth of what I said, take the very
words of two Canons of that Council, Council. Chalc. par. 2. Act. 14. cap. 9.
But if a Clerk have a cause against his own Bishop, or against another Bishop,
let him be Judged by the Synod of the Province: but if a Bishop or a Clerk
have a Complaint against the Metropolitan of the same Province, let him repair
either to the Primate of the Diocese, or the Sea of their royal City of
Constantinople, aend let him be judged there. We see every Primate, that is to
say, every Patriarch in general in his own Diocese or Patriarchate, and the
Patriarch of Constantinople in particular out of his own Diocese, is equalled
by the Council of Chalcedon to the Bishop of Rome. The same in effect is
decreed in the seventeenth Canon, that if there shall happen any Difference
concerning the Possessions of the Churches, it shall be lawful to them who
affirm themselves to be grieved, to sue before the Holy Synod of the Province:
but if any man be grieved by his Metropolitan, let him be judged by the Primate
of the Diocese, or by the holy See of Constantinople.

I have read those silly Evasions, which your greatest Scholars are forced to
make use of, for answers to these downright Canons. Sometimes by Primate of the
Diocese (which signifies all Patriarchs) they understand and the Pope. Do men
use such improper expressions, which no man can understand, in penning of
Laws? Is it not a great Condiscension for the Visible Monarch of all
Christendom, to stoop to so mean a Title as the Primate of one single
Diocese. But alas, it will do him no good! For if it were taken in this sense,
it were the most unjust Canon in the world, to deprive all Patriarchs of their
Patriarchall Jurisdiction, except the Patriarch of Rome and Constantinople. The
Council which is so careful to preserve the Bishop his right, and the
Metropolitan his right, could not be so careless to destroy Patriarchall
right; or the Patriarchs themselves, who were present at the making of this
Canon, so stupid to join in it.

At other times they tell us that this is to be understood only of the first
Instance, not of Appeals. This is weaker and weaker What has a Metropolitan
to do with private causes of the first instance, out of his own Bishopric?
What have the Patriarchs of Rome and Constantinople to do, to Judge causes of
the first Instance in other Patriarchates? The case is clear: if any man be
grieved by his Bishop he may appeal to his Metropolitan and a Synod; and if
any man be grieved by his Metropolitan he may appeal to his Patriarch. And if
this absurd sense (which they Imagine) were true, yet the Bishop of
Constantinople might receive Appeals, from all parts of the world, as well as
the Bishop of Rome. Let them wind, and wrest, and turn things as they can,
they shall never be able to reconcile the Papal Pretensions, with the Council
of Chalcedon.

I have neither changed my mind nor my note, concerning Eleutherius his Letter
to King Lucius; I did, I do esteem it to be of dubious Faith. So much I
intimated [if it be not counterfeit]. So much he intimated [as much as we have
Records in our Histories] Is it necessary with him to inculcate the same doubt
over and over, so often as we may take occasion? Thus far then we are of
accord: but in the rest we differ wholly. He is positive, Down Derry p. 133.
as much as we have Records, the Popes Authority does appear: I am as
positive, as much as we have Records, the Kings Authority does appear. For if
those Records be true, Eleutherius left the Legislative part to King Lucius and
his Bishops. This was enough to answer him.

He adds, though our Faith relieth on immediate Tradition for its certain
Rule and not upon Fragments of old Authors, that is in plain English, upon his
bare word without any Authority. How should a man prove ancient Tradition but
by Authors? Yet after all this flourish, he produces us not one old Author but
St. Prosper, a stranger to our affairs, and him to no purpose^ who says only
what he heard in Italy, That Pope Celestine sent St. German in his own stead to
free the Britons from Pelaginisme, and converted the Scots by Palladius. If all
this were as true as Gospel, it signifies just nothing. I have showed
formerly that there is no Act of Jurisdiction in it, but only of the Key of
Knowledge. He rejoineth, that he relied on these words [vice sua] in his own
stead, which shows that it belonged to his Office to do it. Why should it
not? The Key of Order belongs to a Bishop, as well as the Key of
Jurisdiction: And more especially to the Bishop of an Apostolical Church, as
Pope Celestine was, and in such a case as that was (the Pelagian Controversy)
to testify the Apostolical Tradition; he was bound by his Office to do it,
and he trusted S. German to do it in his place. All this is nothing to the
purpose; there is no Act of Jurisdiction in the Case, but of Charity and
Devotion. Yet if it were not altogether impertine^t to the purpose we have in
hand, I should show him that there is ten times better ground to believe that
it was done by a French Synod, then by Pope Celestine; not out of an obscure
Author, but out of Authentic undoubted Histories; as Consta^tius in the Life
of S. German, Venerable Bede, Matthew Westminster and many others. Is it not
strange, that they being so much provoked, are not able to produce a proof of
one Papal Act of Jurisdiction done in Britain for the first six hundred years?

Here he catches hold at a saying of mine, which he understands no more then
the Man in the Moon, that [all other rights of Jurisdiction, do follow the
right of Ordination] which he takes as though I meant to make Ordination it
self to be an Act of Jurisdiction, though I deny it and distinguish it from it.
To make the Reader to understand it, we must distinguish between actual
Ordination, and a right to ordain. Actual Ordination, where there was no
precedent Obligation for that person to be ordained, by that Bishop, does imply
no Jurisdiction at all: but if there was a precedent right in the Ordeiner to
ordein that man, and a precedent Obligation in the person Ordained to be
ordained by that Bishop, then it does imply all manner of Jurisdiction,
suitable to the Quality of the Ordeiner; as if he were a Patriarch all
Patriarchall Jurisdiction, if he were a Metropolitan all Metropoliticall
Jurisdiction, if he were a Bishop all Episcopal Jurisdiction. And the
Inference holds likewise on the Contrary side, that where there is no right
precedent to Ordein, nor Obligation to be ordained, there is no Jurisdiction
follows: but I showed out of our own Histories, and out of the Roman
Registers so far as they are set down by Platina, that the Bishop of Rome had
no right to ordein our British Primates, but that they were ordained at home;
and therefore the Bishop of Rome could have no jurisdiction over them.

I said no more of Phocas but this, that [the Popes prete^ses were more from
Phocas then St. Peter.] He refers me to his answer to Doctor Hammond. Pa. 1.
Sect. 6.
And I refer him to Doctor Hammond for a reply, as Impertinent to my present
business.

When I did first apply my thoughts to a sad Meditation upon this Subject, I
confess ingenuously, that which gave me the most trouble was to satisfy my
self fully about the Popes Patriarchate: but in conclusion, that which had been
a cause of my trouble, proved a means of my ^inall Satisfaction. For seeing it
is generally confessed that the Bishop of Rome was a Patriarch, I concluded
that he could not be a Spiritual Monarch. The reasons of my Resolution I have
set down, and received no answer: Yet it shall not seem irksome to me to repeat
them, as desiring nothing but the discovery of the truth. First I argue thus,
The Sovereign Government and the Subordinate Government, of the same person in
the same Society, or body Politic or Ecclesiastic, is inconsistent: But the
Popes pretended Monarchy or Supremacy of power over the whole Church, and his
Patriarchall Dignity in the same Church, are a Sovereign and Subordinate
Government of the same person in the same body Ecclesiastic. The reason of the
Major is because Sovereign power is single of one person or Society: but this
subordinate power is conjoint of fellow Patriarchs. Sovereign Power is
Universal, but this subordinate power is particular. And therefore as a
Quadrangle cannot be a Triangle, nor a King a Sherif of a Shire or a President
of a Province within his own Kingdom: so neither can the same person be an
Universal Monarch and a particular Patriarch.

Secondly, the Spiritual Sovereignty of the Roman Bishop is pretended to be by
divine right, his Patriarchall power is confessedly by humane right: but a
Spiritual Sovereignty by divine right and an inferior dignity by humane right
are inconsistent. As it is absurd to say that God should make a man a Prince,
and after the people make him a Peer: or God should give him a Greater Dignity,
and afterward the people co^ferre a less upon him.

Thirdly, a Sovereignty above the Canons, besides the Canons, against the
Canons, to make them, to abrogate them, to suspend them with a Non obstante, to
dispense with them at pleasure, where the Canon gives no dispensative power.
and a Subjection to the Canons to be able to do nothing against them are
inconsistent* But such a Sovereign Power is above the Canons, and such a
Patriarchall power is subject to the Canons Therefore they are inconsistent.

All the answer he offers to these two Instances; the one that Bishop Usher
was at once Bishop of Armagh, and as such the Bishop of Derries superior. I
answer, first he mistaketh much, The Primacy of Ireland and the Archbishopric
of Armagh are not two di^^inct dignities, but one and the self same dignity:
but the Monarchical power of the Pope by divine right, and his Patriarchall
power by Humane right, are two distinct dignities. Secondly, the Primate of
Ireland is not endowed with Monarchical power: but all the difficulty here
lies in the Conjunction of Monarchical power and Subordinate power. His other
Instance, must a person leave of to be Master of his own Family* because he is
made King, and his Authority extends over all England. I answer, first his
Argument is a transition into another kind, or an excursion from one kind of
power to another; from Political power in the Commonwealth to an Oeconomicall
power in the Family. Secondly it is one thing to make an inferior person a
King, and another thing to make a King a Constable, or to make Sovereignty and
Subordination consist together. When a King does discharge the place of a
General of an Army he acquireth no new dignity or power or place, no man
calls him my lord General; but he does it as a King by his Kingly power, to
which no higher or larger power can be added: but the Bishop of Rome did not,
does not exercise Patriarchall power, by virtue of his Monarchy by divine
Ordination, but by humane right; first by Custom or prescription, and then by
authority of the Council of Nice. All the world sees and acknowledges that
the Bishop of Rome has more power in his Bishopric then he has out of it in
the rest of his Province; and more power in his Province, then he has out of
it in his Patriarchate, and more power in his own Patriarchate, then he has in
another Patriarchate: but if he had a Sovereignty of Power and Jurisdiction by
Christ's own Ordination, he should have the same power every where; if he had a
Sovereignty of Power and Jurisdiction by Christ's own Ordination, then all
Patriarchall power should flow from him, as from the Original Fountain of all
Ecclesiaasticall honor. But the Contrary is most apparent, that all the
Patriarchs, even the Roman himself, did owe their Patriarchall power to the
Customs of the Church, and Canons of the Fathers. These are the reasons why I
conceive Monarchical Power and Patriarchall power, to be inconsistent in one
and the same person: But the Pope was co^fessedly a Patriarch, therefore no
Monarch.

The next thing which comes to be observed, is his Exceptio^s to Dionothus
the learned Abbat of Bangor his answer to Austin, professing Canonical
Obedience to the Archbishop of Caerleo^ in his own name and the name of the
British Church, and disclaiming all Obedience except of Brotherly love, to the
Bishop of Rome. His first exception was the naming of the Bishop of Rome [Pope]
without any Addition of Name or place, contrary to the use of those times. For
answer I committed him and his Friend Bellarmine together, When the word Pope
is put alone the Bishop of Rome only is to be understood, Bell. li. 2. de Romans
Pont. cap. 31.
as appears out of the Council of Chalcedon [the most blessed and
Apostolical man the Pope does command us this,] without adding Leo or Rome or
the City of Rome or any other thing. He sleighteth Bellarmine and rebukes me
for folly, to think that Catholic writers cannot disagree, and answers the
Council that thought the word [Pope] be alone without Addition, Yet which is
equivalent, the Comitant Circumstances sufficiently indigitate the person. For
the words were spoken by Boniface the Popes Vicegerent. As if there were not
the same indigitating Circumstances here as well as there, the words being
spoken by Austin the Popes Legate and Vicar as well as Boniface, in the name of
Pope Gregory to the Britons, which were answered here by Dinoth.

His second exception to Dinoths Testimony is, that there was no such
Bishopric as Caerleon in those days, the Sea being removed from Caerleon to
Menevia or S. David's, fifty years before this. That it was removed before this
I acknowledge, but how long before this is uncertain. Some Authors make S.
Gregory and S. David, to have died on one Day some years after this meeting.
And it is an usual thing for Bishoprics to have two names, as the Bishopric
of Ossory and Kilkenny is the same Bishopric: ^he Bishopric of Kerry and
Ardfert is the same Bishopric. The Sea of Derry was long removed from
Ardstrath to Derry, before it was commonly called the Bishopric of Derry; and
so was Lindesfern to Durham. I produced two witnesses for this very Place of
Caerleon, that it still retained the old name. The one the British History,
Then died David the most holy Archbishop of Caerleon in the City of Menevia.
And yet it is thought, that the first removal of the Sea was made by Dubritius
to Landaff, and after from Landaffe to Menevia by St. David, at whose death it
was styled the Archbishopric of Caerleon. The other witness was Geraldus
Cambrensis, we had at Menevia five and twenty Archbishops of Caerleon
successively whereof St. David was the First. He takes no notice of the first
Testimony, and puffes at the second and sleights it: p. 504.
but answers nothing Material, but that which will cut the throat of his
cause, Had Caerleons Archbishops (says he) only for some convenience, resided
at Menevia, and the right of Jurisdiction still belonged to Caerleon, it might
more easily be conceived fa^sible. Take notice then that the Bishops of
Caerleon did remove from a populous City in those days, (as Caerlegion or the
City of the Roman Legion was) to Menevia only for the convenience of a
solitary life and contemplative devotion; and it is more then p^obable that the
active part of his Jurisdiction was still executed at Caerleon. The Sea is
changed so soon as the Church is builded: but the City will require longer
time, to be fitted for Inhabitants and furnished. All that he opposes to this,
is that it was ordinarily called the Bishopric of Menevia. Who douhteth of it?
but that does not prove that it was not also called Caerleon. It was First the
Bishopric of Caerleon alone, then the Bishopric of Caerleon or Menevia
indifferently, afterward the Bishopric of Menevia or St. David's indifferently,
and now the Bishopric of St. David's only. He carpeth at the name of Caerleon
upon Vske. Why so? why not as well Caerleon upon Vske, as Kingston upon Hull,
or Newark upon Trent, or Newcastle upon Tine? Where there are several Cities
of one name, as there were Caerlegions or Cities of Roman Legions in Britain,
it is ever usual to give them such a marck of Distinction.

But why does he wrangle about names and persecute an innocent paper after this
manner? The thing is sure enough, that there was one Dinoth a learned Abbat of
Bangor at that time, who did oppose Austin, and stand for the Jurisdiction of
his own Archbishop of Caerleon or Menevia, choose you whether. Thus much he him
self acknowledges in this very Paragraph, citing out of Pitseus, a book of
this very Dinoths, the title whereof was Defensorium Iurisdictionis Sed^s
Menevensis; p. 544.
an Apology for the Jurisdiction of the Seeof Menevia. And against whom should
this Apology be, but against Austin and the Romans? no men else did oppose the
Jurisdiction of the Bishop of Menevia. Bid
With this agrees that of Venerable Bede, Eccl. Hist. l. 2. c. 2.
That Austin by the help of King Ethelbert, called to a Conference (or
Council) the Bishops and Doctors of the greatest and nearest Province of the
Britons: and began to persuade them with brotherly Admonitions to hold
Catholic peace with him, to undertake the Common work of preaching to the
Pagans, for they observed not Easter in due time, and did many other things
contrary to the Unity of the Church. The end of this first Assembly was, They
would give no assent, neither to the prayers nor exhor^ations, nor
reprehensions of Austin and his fellows, but preferred their own Traditions
before all others throughout the Church. And among all their Traditions, there
was none which they held more tenaciously, then this inserted in this
Manuscript, that is the Independent Jurisdiction of the British Primate, which
they never deserted till after the Norman Conquest. To maintain the
Independence of their own Primate, is as much as to disclaim obedience to the
Pope.

But this is clearer in their resolution after the second Synod, whereat were
seven British Bishops and very many learned men, especially of the most noble
Monastery of Ba^gor, whereof that time Dinoth was Abbat; who gave this final
answer to Austins three demands, mentioned here by Mr. Sergeant, At illi nihil
^orum se facturos, neque illum pro Archiepiscopo habituros esse respondebant:
They answered they would do none of them, nor hold him for an Archbishop. Here
we see Dinoth was Abbat at that time; Dinoth was present at that Council, and
all the Britons did not only reject those three propositions (which he
acknowledges): but did moreover in renouncing Austin, disclai^me St. Gregory's
Authority over them, whose Legate he was. What is this less then Dinoths
Manuscript?

The author of the old British History called Brutus, relates this answer of
the Britons thus; Se Caerleonensi Archiepiscopo obedire voluisse, Augustino
autem Romano Legato omnino noluisse: That they would obey the Archbishop of
Cae^leon but they would not obey Austin the Roman Legate. Here he has express
testimony of their adhering to their British Primate, and their renouncing
Papal Authority, and lastly of the very name of the Archbishop of Caerleon at
that day. To the same purpose Grai^s in Scala Cronica, and Grocelinus in his
greater History are cited by Caius de Antiquit: Acad. Cantab.

With them agrees Geoffry of Monmouth who says there were at least one and
twenty hundred Monks in the Monastery of Bangor, DeOrig and gest. Brit. li. 8.
ca. 4.
who did all live by the Labor of their own hands, and their Abbot was called
Dinoth, marveilously learned in the liberal Arts, who showed to Austin
(requiring subjection from the British Bishops, and persuading them to
undertake with him the Common labor of preaching,) by diverse reasons, that
they did owe him no Subjection, nor to preach to their enemies. Seeing they had
an Arch prelate of their own etc. And a little after, Ethelbert King of the
Kentishmen when he see the Britons did disdain to subject themselves to Austin,
and to despise his preaching, stirred up the Saxon Kings to collect a great
Army against Bangor, to destroy Dinoth the Abbat, and the other Clerks of that
Monastery, who had despised Austin. This is the very same in effect with
Dinoths Welsh manuscript: and there fore it was no welsh Ballad first made in
Edward the sixths time, by some English Schoolmaister to teach welsh boys
English, as Mr. Sergeant Vapoureth.

With him agrees Giraldus Cambrensis, But yet always until, Itin. Camb. l.
2. c, 1.
Wales, was fully subdued which was done by Henry the first King of the
English, the Bishops of Wales were consecrated by the Archbishop of Menevia.
And he (the Archbishop of Menevia) in like manner was consecrated by others, as
being his Suffragans, without making any Profession of Subjection at all to
another Church. They all agree in this, the Britons were (...) and (...), all
ways ordained at home, independent upon any foreign Prelate, Bid Ec Hist. li.
2. c. 1.
ought no subjection to Rome. And there fore it is no great wonder, if Pope
Gregory did not know when he was the favorite both of the Pope and people, not
long before his own promotion to the Papacy, whether the Ilanders of Britain
were Pagans or Christians.

To the same purpose speaks Nicolas Trevet, who having commended this Dinoth
for a learned and a prudent man, he adds, that Austin meeting him did demand
that they should perform subjection to him, as a Legate sent into this Land by
the Pope and Court of Rome; and demanded further that he would help him in
preaching: but he denied the one and the other. Still Subjection is denied.
With these, Baleus writing of Dinoth and the life of Austin in Sr. Henry
Spellman, and all our Antiquaries do agree exactly. And none of our
Historiographers that I know, do disagree from it in the least, who write upon
that subject, though some set it down more fully then others. Judge now Reader
of Mr. Sergeants Knowledge or Ingenuity, who tells the so Confidently that
the right of Subjection never came into play: and when I said the British
Clergy, did renounce all obedience to the Bishop of Rome, citing [Bede and all
others], tells me so confidently that I belied Bid and all our
Historiographers at once. I challenge him to name but one Historiographer, who
affirms the contrary to that which all these do affirm: if he be not able
(as he is not) I might safely say without asking him leave, that it strikes
the Question dead.

His third Exception, that it appears not that Sr. Henry Spellman found any
other Antiquity in that Welsh Manuscript worth mentioning, is so dull and
unsignificant a piece, that I will neither trouble myself nor the Reader with
it. And such like are his other Ob^ections, which helpresseth not but touches
gently: the Heads of them will not merit a repetition, having been answered
already by Doctor Hammond.

But when he is baffeld in the cause, he has a Reserve, that Venerable Bede,
and Gildas, and Fox in his Acts and Monuments, do brand the Britons for wicked
men, making them as good as Atheists: Of which Gang if this Dinoth were one, he
will neither wish the Pope such Friends, nor envy them to the Protestants. What
needed this, when he has got the worst of the cause, to revenge himself like a
Pinece with a stink? We read no other Character of Dinoth, but as of a pious
learned and prudent man. If Gildas, or Bid have spoken any thing to the
prejudice of the Britons, it was not intended against the whole Nation but
against particular persons, There were St. David's, St. Dubricius's St.
Thela^s's St. Oudoceus's and Dinoths as well as such persons as are intended by
Gildas or Beda. What have they said more of the Britons, then God himself and
his Prophets have spoken of his own people, or more then the Saxons have said
one of another, or more then maybe retorted upon any Nation in Europe? Have
Gildas or Beda said more of the Birions, the^ St. Bernard and others have said
of the Irish? and yet Ireland was deservedly called the Island of Saints. The
Question is whether the British Church, did ever acknowledge any Subjection to
the Bishop of Rome. Let him adorn this Sparta, and leave other impertinencies.

Sect. V.
That the King and Church of England had sufficient Authority to withdraw
their obedience from Rome.
The sixth Chapter of my Vindication comprehended my fourth ground consisting
of these three particulars. That the King and Church of England had sufficient
Authority to reform the Church of England; That they had sufficient Grounds for
doing it, And that they did it with due moderation. His Rejoinder to this my
fourth ground is divided into three Sectio^s, whereof this is the first.
Whatsoever he prateth in this Section of my shuffing away the whole Question,
by balking the Bishop of Romes divine right to his Sovereignty of power, to
treat of his Patriarchall right, which is humane; is first vain, For I always
was and still am ready to join Issne with him concerning the Bishop of Romes
divine right to a Monarchical power in the Church; saving always to myself
and my cause this advantage, That a Monarchy and a Patriarchate of the same
person in the same Body Ecclesiastical are inconsistent. And this right being
saved, I shall more willingly join issue with him about the Popes Monarchy,
then about his Patriarchate. Secondly as it is vain, so it is altogether
impertinent, for my Ground is this, that a Sovereign Prince has power within
his own Dominions for the public good, to change any thing in the external
Regiment of the Church, which is not of divine Institution: but the Popes
pretended Patronage of the English Church, and his Legislative Judiciary and
dispensative power, in the exterior Courts of the same Church, do concern
the external Regiment of the Church, and are not of divine Institution. Here
the Hindge of our Controversy does move, without encombring our selves at all
with Patriarchall Authority. Thirdly I say, that this discourse is not only
vain and extravagant, but is likewise false; The Popes Protopatriarchall
power, and the Authority of a Bishop of an Apostolical Church as the keeper of
Apostolical Traditions deposited in that Church, are the fairest flowers in
his Garland. Whatsoever power he pretends to, over the whole Church of
Christ, above a Primacy of Order, is altogether of humane right; and the
Application of that Primacy to the Bishop of Rome is altogether of humane
right. And whatsoever he presumes of the Universal Tradition of the Christian
Church, or the Notion which the former and present world, and we our selves
before the Reformation had of the Papacy, that is, of the Divine right of the
Popes Sovereignty, is but a bold, rattling, groundless brag. I did and do
affirm, that the Pope has quitted his Patriarchichall power above a thousand
years since; not explicitly, by making a formal Resignation of it, but
implicitly, by assuming to himself a power which is inconsistent with it.

I was contented to forbear further disputing about Patriarchall rights, upon
two Conditions; one that he should not presume that the Pope is a Spiritual
Monarch, without proving it. The other that he should not attempt to make
Patriarchall Privileges, to be Royal Prerogatives. This by one of his peculiar
Idiotisms he calls Bribing of me. If he had had, so much Civility in him, he
might rather have interpreted it a gentle forewarning of him, of two Errors
which I was sure he would Commit. After all his Bravadoes, all that he has
pretended to prove, is but a Headship, a First Movership, a Chief
Governourship, about which we have no Difference with them: and all the proof
he brings even of that, is a bold presumption that there is such an immediate
Tradition. There is not so much as a National Tradition, for those Branches of
Papal power which we have rejected, and much less for the divine right of
them. And if there were such a Particular Tradition, yet wanting both
perpetuity and Universality, we deny that it is a sufficient proof of any
right. This and the Privilege to receive Appeals, which is a Protopatriachall
Privilege, is all he produces.

If he would know what a Spiritual Monarch is, let him consult with Sanders de
Visibili Monarchia, and Bellarmine in his first book de Pon^fice Romano. But
he is quite out of his aim, who knows no mean between a flat Tyrant and an
Ordinary Chief Governor. Upon these Terms a President of a Council, a
Master of a College, a Major of a Corporation should be so many Monarchs. I
have showed him what are those Branches of Sovereign Monarchical Power which
the Popes have Usurped, and when each Usurpation did begin, (the first of the^
about 1100. years after Christ,) with the Opposition that was made unto them
by the King and Kingdom of England. If he will speak to the purpose, let him
speak to these in particular, and trouble us no more with his Chief
Governourships, or hold his peace for ever. All the Controversy between them
and us is in point of Interest, and the External Regiment of the Church, which
is due to every Christian Sovereign in his own Kingdom. It is not we, but
they who have changed their Governor.

He would feign persuade us if he could, that no Catholic will believe that a
Patriarch is dependent on a King in Ecclesiastical affairs: yet he himself
has confes^ed formerly, that they hold that every good King is to take Order
to see Ecclesiastical Grieva^ces remedied, Sect. 3. pa. 52^
and the Canons of the Church observed. Then Patriarchs are not altogether
independent upon Kings in Ecclesiastical affairs, if a King be bound to see
that a Patriarch execute the Canons, and see Patriarchall Grievances remedied.
Sovereign Princes have founded Patriarchates, and confirmed Patriarchates, and
conferred Patriarchates, and taken away Patriarchates, still here is some
dependence. Gregory the Great was a Patriarch and a Pope: yet he acknowledged,
that he ought due Subjectio^ to the Law of Mauritius in an Ecclesiastical
affair; I being subject to your Command have transmitted your Law to be
published, Greg. Ep. l. 2. Ep. 61.
through diverse parts of the world: And because the Law it self is not
pleasing to Almighty God, I have expressed my Opinion thereof to my Lords.
Wherefore I have performed my duty on both sides, in yiedling Obedience to the
Emperor, and no^ concealing what I thought for God. But Mr. Serjea^ts reason
is silly beyond all degrees of co^pariso^; Otherwise St. Peter could not preach
at Rome if Nero were a King, nor St. James at Jerusalem without unkinging
Herod. See what a doughty Argument he has brought. Apostles, or Patriarchs, or
Bishops, or Priests may perform the Ordinance of Christ, notwithstanding the
Prohibition of Pagan Emperors and Kings: therefore they are independent upon
them, and owe no Subjection or Obedience to any Kings, Christian or pagan. Yes
Sr. although they owe the^ only passive Obedience in that, yet they owe them
active Obedience to their other lawful Commands, even in Ecclesiastical
affairs.

But now he says, he will give me fair Law. Put the case Papal Government had
not been of Divine, but only of Humane Institu^ion, yet it ought not to have
been rejected, unless the abuses had been irremediable. I allow him to give
law, and shuffle, and cut, and use what expressio^s he pleases: yet I used but
an innocent allusio^ to the soaling of a Bowl, and it is thrice cast in my
teeth. But for his fair law I tha^k him, I will take no Law from him but what
I can win my self. He would be glad with all his Heart, to have but a good
pretense of Humane Institution, for those Branches of Papal power, which are
really controverted between us: but I deny him all manner of Institution both
divine and Humane, and have showed that they are but upstart Usurpations of the
Popes themselves, after 1100. years, and wanting lawful Prescription even in
these last ages, which ought to be plucked up as weeds, so soon as they are
discovered, and to be removed before all other things, by those who are in
Authority; Ante omnia spoliatus restitui debet. And here he is at us again with
his often repeated and altogether mistaken case; Mart. Ep. l. 1. Epig. 46.
which hence forward I shall vouchsafe no other answer to, but pass by it with
a (...).

He demanded, whether I would Condescend to the Rejection of Monarchy, or
extirpation of Episcopacy, for the misgovernment of Princes or Prelates? I
answered [No;] We fancy not their Method, who cannot prune a tree except they
pluck it ^p root and Branch: but I gave him three reasons why this could not
advantage his cause. First, never any such abuses as these were objected to
Princes or Prelates in England; Secondly, we desire not the extirpation of the
Papacy, but the reduction of it to the Primitive Constitution. Thirdly;
Monarchy and Episcopacy are of divine Institution, so is not Papal Sovereignty
of Jurisdiction. To the first he says nothing, but by way of Recrimination,
the most ignoble kind of answering, especially when he himself cannot but
condemn them in his own Conscience, for notorious Fictions of Cretian
Minotaures: But these abuses which we complain of, are the proper subject of
the next Section.

He is here pleased to relate a pretty story of the late Archbishop of
Canterbury, that he confessed himself to lein a Schism, in a private discourse
(I warrant it was private enough, without either witness or parties) as this
Author was told by a very grave person, whose Candor he has no reason to
suspect. And why does this grave person appear in a Vizard without a name, or
appear after the parties death, that durst not have said it in his l^fetime,
and for fear to be detected now tells us it was in private? And when all is
done, it is ten to one this worthy person (if he be in rerum natura) is an
utter enemy, and of another Communion. We have had many abominable lies spread
abroad in the world, upon the bare Testimony of some such single Adversary; as
the Apostasy of Bishop King, the Defection of King Charles, the hopes they had
of my Lord of S^rafford; when all that knew my Lord of Strafford and that
witness, knew right well he never did in the presence of any other, nor ever
durst offer to him any discourse of that nature.

To the second he answers, that we have already ex^^rpated the Papacy out of
England. No, we have only cast out seven or eight Branches of Papal
Jurisdiction in the exteriou^ Court; which Christ or his Apostles never
challenged, never exercised, never meddled withal; which the Church never
granted, never disposed. He might still for us enjoy his Protopatriarchate, and
the dignity of an Apostolical Bishop, and his Primacy of Order, so long as the
Church thought fit to continue it to that See, if this would content him.

To my third reason he excepteth. If Monarchy be of Divine Institution, the
Venetians and the Hollanders are in a sad case. I am glad when I find any thing
in him that has but a resemblance of matter, more then wind and empty words,
although they weigh nothing when they come to be examined. The Venetians and
Hollanders may be in a sad Condition, in the Opinion of such rash Censurers as
himself is, who have learned their Theology and Politics but by the halues.
Who taught him to argue from the Position of one lawful form of Government,
to the Denial of another? All lawful Forms of Government are warranted by
the Law of Nature, and so have their Institution from God in the Law of Nature;
The Powers that be are ordained of God, Romans 13. 1.
whether they be Monarchical, or Aristocraticall, or Democraticall, Man
prepares the Body, God infuseth the Soul of Power, which is the same in all
Lawful Forms.

But though all lawful Forms of Government be warranted by the law of nature,
yet not all in the same Degree of Eminency. There is but one soul in the body,
one Sun in the heaven, one Master in a Family, and anciently one Monarch in
each Society: all the first Governors were Kings. The soul of Sovereign Power
is the same in all Forms, but the Organ is more apt to attain its end in one
Form then another; in Monarchy then in Aristocracy or Democracy. And we say God
and Nature do always intend that which is best. Thus it is in the Law of
Nature, which is warrant sufficient for any form of Government: but in the
Positive Law of God, he never instituted or authorized any form but Monarchy.

In the last Paragraph, where I say that the Popes Headship of Jurisdiction, is
not of divine Institution, he excepteth, that it is my bare saying, and my old
^rick to say over again the very point in dispute between us. If this be the
very point in dispute be^ween us (as it is indeed), it is more shame for him
who lets the very point in dispute alone, and never offers to come near
it, especially having made such loud bragges, that he would charge the Crime of
Schism upon the Church of England with undeniable Evidence, and prove the
Popes Headship of Jurisdiction or Power; by a more ample clear and continued
Title, then any right of Law or Humane Ordinances can offer. Quid tanto dignum
tulit hic promiss or hia^u?

As for my part I know my Obligation, whilst I am upon the defensive to make
good my ground: and when it is my turn to assault, I shall discharge my duty.
If he have any thing to say to the Huguenots of France, they are at age to
answer him themselves; Our Controversy is only concerning the Church of
England.

SECT. 6.
That the King and Church of England, had sufficient grounds to separate from
the Court of Rome.
I had reason to wonder, not at our Grounds but their silence, that having so
long, so often called for our grounds of Separation, and charged us, that we
have no grounds, that we could have no grounds, now when sufficient Grounds are
offered to them* two of them one after another should pass by them in deep
silence. And this Dispatcher being called upon for an answer, unless he would
have the cause sentenced against him upon a Nihil dicit; with more ha^^ then
good speed, gives us an answer and no Answer, like the Title of an empty
Apothecaries Box. If there be any Monster, the Reader may look for it on that
side, not on our side. He may promise the View of a strange Monster in his
Antepasts and Postpasts, and blow his Trumpet to get pence a piece to see it
(as he phraseth it): but if the Readers expect till he show them any such rare
sight, they may wait until Dooms day, and all the remedy he offers them is, to
say he has abused them, as he does often.

Now room for his Case or his two Principles of Unity, which are evermore
called in to help at a dead lift. But his case, is not the true case, and his
Rules are leaden Rules, they might be streigh^ at the beginning, but they have
bended them according to their self Interest. Both his case and his Principles
have been sufficiently discussed and fully cleared: so that I will not offend
the Reader with his slight dish of Coleworts sodden over and over again.

He is angry, that I make our separation to be rather from the Court of Rome,
then from the Church of Rome, and styles it perfect Impudence. So my Assertion
be evidently true, I weigh not his groundless Calumnies. Let any man look
upon our Grieva^ces, and the Grounds of our Reformation, 1. the intolerable
extortion of the Roman Court, 2. the unjust Usurpations of the Roman Court, 3.
the malignant influence of the Roman Court upon the body politic, 4. the like
malignant influence of the Roman Court upon the body Ecclesiastic, 5. and
lastly the Violation of ancient Liberties and Exemtions by the Roman Court; and
he can not doubt from whence we made our Separation. All our sufferings were
from the Roman Court; then why should we seek for ease but where our Shoe did
wring us? And as our Grieva^ces, so our Reformation was only of the Abuses of
the Roman Court; Their bestowing of prelacies and dignities in England to the
prejudice of the right patrons; Their Convocating Synods in England without the
Kings leave; Their prohibiting English Prelates to make their old Fe^dall Oaths
to the King, and obliging them to take new Oaths of Fidelity to the Pope; Their
imposing and receiving Tenths and First fruits, and other arbitrary Pensions
upon the English Clergy; And lastly their usurping a Legislative Judiciary and
Dispensative Power in the exterior Court by Political Coaction. These are all
the Branches of Papal power which we have rejected. This Reformation, is all
the Separation that we have made in point of Discipline. And for Doctrine, we
have no Difference with them about the old Essentialls of Christian Religion:
And their new Essentialls which they have patched to the Creed, are but their
erroneous or at the best probable Opinions, no Articles of Faith.

He is still bragging of his Demonstrations, (yet they are but blind
Enthymematicall Paralogismes, wherein he makes sure to set his best leg
foremost, and to conceal the lamenesse of his Discourse as much as he can from
the eyes of the Reader) and still calling upon us for rigorous Demonstration. I
wish we knew whether he understa^d what rigorous Demonstration is in Logic,
for no other Demonstration is rigorous, but that which proceeds according to
the strict Rules of Logic, either a priore or a posteriore, from the cause or
the effect: And this Cause in Difference between us (whether those Branches of
power which the Pope claims and we have rejected, be the Legacies of Christ
or Papal Vsurpatio^s) is not capable of such rigorous Demonstration, but
depends upon Testimony, which Logicians call an Inartificiall way of arguing.
But if by rigorous Demonstration, he u^derstand convincing proofs, those
grounds which I offer in this Section do contain a rigorous Demonstration. That
Discipline which is brimfull of intolerable Rapine, and Extortion, and Simony,
and Sacrilege; which robs Kings, and Subjects Ecclesiastical and Secular,
of their just rights; which was introduced into the Church of England, eleven
hundred years after Christ; which has a Malignant Influence upon the Body
Politic; which is Destructive to the right ends of Ecclesiastical Discipline;
which in stead of securing men in peace does thrust them into Manifest and
manifold Dangers, both of soul and body; which is contrary to General
Counsels, and the ancient Liberties of particular Churches: qua talis, as it
is such, is no Legacy of Christ, but ought to be purged and reformed from all
such abuses and Vsurpatio^s: But such is that Papal Discipline, which the
Bishop of Rome excercised in England before the Reformation, and less then
which they will not go; and such are all those Branches of Papal power which
we have cast out.

The truth of this Assertion I have made manifest in my Vindication c. 6, and
this is the place of a further examination of it, if he did discharge the part
of a fair solid Disputant; to leave his windy Invectives, which signify
nothing to the cause, but to his own shame, and to proceed closely and
ingenuously to the investigation of truth without prejudice or partiality. But
on the Contrary, he minceth my grounds, and concealeth them, and skippeth over
whatsoever disliketh him, and choppeth them and cha^geth them, and confounds
them, that I cannot know mine own Conceptions again as he has dressed them,
and disordered them, and mutilated them. I proposed five distinct Grounds of
our Reformation, and casting out so many Branches as we did of Papal power; if
he dealt like a just Adversary, he should pursue my Method step by step: but he
reduces my five grounds into three, that between two Methods he may conceal
and smother whatsoever he has no disposition to answer, as he deals with
many points of weight and moment, and particularly with all those Testimonies
and instances I bring to prove the intolerable extortions, and manifold
Usurpations, and malignant Influence of the Roman Coutt upon the Body Politic
and Ecclesiastic, being much the greater part of my discourse. But I do not
altogether blame him, for they are so foul, that a man can find small credit
or contentment in defending them. For once rather then loose his Company, I
will pursue his Method. Let us give him the hearing.

He reduces my five grounds to three, first such as entrench upon Eternity and
Conscience. May not any Heretic object that the Church imposed new Articles of
faith etc. or complain of new Creeds, when she adds to her public
Professions some points of Faith held formerly? Might not he Complain of
peril of Idolatry, as your Brother Puritans did for Surplesses etc? Might not
he pretend that all Heretics and Schismatics were good Christians, and that
the Church was Tyrannical in holding them for excommunicate? Might he not
shuffle together Faith with Opinion, and falsely allege as you do here, you
were forced to approve the Popes Rebellion against General Counsels, and take
Oaths to maintain Papal Usurpations? This is all the Answer I get of this
brave Disputant, as if the unjust complaints of the Puritans did satisfy the
just exceptions of the Protestants. It is probable enough, that he him self was
one of our Brother Puritans in those days: otherwise he could not well have
talked so wildly of peril of Idolatry from Surplesses. His discourse is so
slight and impertinent, that I will not vouchsafe any answer but leave it to
the Reader to compare my Vindication and Reply with his Rejoinder. That they
have added new Essentialls to Faith, is fully evinced against them in this
Treatise Sect. 1. cap. 11. What our Judgment is concerning their Idolatry, he
shall find exactly set down in my answer to Militier Pa. 133. As for the Oaths
of Fidelity which every Bishop must make to the Pope, he may satisfy him self
Sect. 1. Cap. 5. and see the From of it. cap, 7. Or if he Desire to see a later
form, let him take this. I Henry Archbishop of Canterbury will be faithful and
Obedient to St. Peter from this hour as formerly, Antiq. Eccles. Brit. vita 66.
and to the holy Apostolic Church of Rome, and to my Lord Pope Alexander the
sixth and his Successors. I will give no counsel nor consent nor act any
thing toward the loss of their life's, or members, or liberty. I will discover
their Counsels to no man to their prejudice, which they have communicated to
me by themselves or their Messengers. I will help them to retein and defend the
Roman Papacy, and the Royalties of St. Peter (saving my Order) against all men.
I will entertein the Popes Legates honorably going and coming, and help them
in their necessities. I will visit the Papal Court every year, if it be on
this side the Alps, and every two years if it beyond the Alps, unless the
Pope dispense with me, So help me God and the Holy Gospel. What fidelity can a
King expect from a Subject who has taken this Oath, if the Pope please to
attempt any thing against him? If the Popes Superiority above a General
Council, be but held as an indifferent Opinion in their Church, and not a
point of Faith, as he intimates: yet it is such an Opinion as he dare not
contradict, it is fere communis, it is almost the Common Opinion of all Roman
Catholics, if Bellarmine say true, and fere de fide, almost a point of Faith,
upon which modern Popes and Counsels are accorded. It is determined expressly
in their last General Council of Latera^, Sess. 11.
that the Bishop of Rome alone has Authority over all Counsels.

Were these all the grounds he could find which entrench upon Eternity and
Conscience? He might have found more, that by means of Papal abuses there
described, hospitality was not kept, the poor not sustained, the word not
preached, Math. Paris. an. 1245.
churches not adorned, the Cure of souls neglected, divine Offices not
performed, Churches ruined. He might have found Oaths, Customs, writings,
grants, statutes, rights, privileges, to have been not only weakened but
exinanited, by the Popes infamous Messenger called Non obstance. And all this
attested by the Lords Spiritual and Temporal, and the whole Commonwealth of
England. But it is no matter whether he take notice of it or not, whilst he
answers nothing.

He faith my second sort of Grounds, are those which relate to Temporal
inconveniences and injuries to the State, by reason of the Popes pretended
encroachments, which I huddle together in big Terms. Do I huddle the^ together?
Nay I handled them distinctly under three heads or notions. First the
intolerable Oppressio^s and Extortio^s of the Court of Rome in points of Fact,
Secondly their gross and grievous usurpations in point of Right, Thirdly the
malignant influence of foreign discipline in point of Policy. It is he that
huddles them together, because they are so foul and so evident, that he dare
not take a view of them singly, much less repeat them: and so they might be
buried in Oblivion for him, unless the Reader be pleased to take a review of
them. I shall not willingly add a word more, either to the Extortions or
Malignant Influence, because I Judge in Charity, that all good men do wish
them amended as well as I: And for the Usurpations, being matter of perpetual
right, I hope I have cleared them sufficiently in this Treatise throughout the
first Sectio^:

But what is his answer to all this? That it is disputable between Canon and
Civil Lawiers, whether many of these were abuses or just rights; of which kind
of Controversy he neither thinks me nor himself competent Judges. Adding, that
these Questions do not concern our present quarrel. How? not concern our
Quarrel? They are all the Quarrel we have: and not a Primacy of Order, or any
power purely spiritual in the Court of Conscience. If he have nothing to do
with these, why does he meddle to no purpose? whatsoever power was given by
Christ, or is recorded in Scripture, is expressly excepted out of our Law. And
once more Reader observe and wonder, that these men who called upon us often
for the Grounds of our Separation, must be called on as often for a fair
answer. He promised to show the Readers a Monster in this Section for pence a
piece: It seems by his bogling, he sees something that he is afraid to
meddle with. I doubt he will prove a true Prophet of himself, that all the
Readers satisfaction for their money will be, to tell them that he has abused
them.

But it may be he is better at his sword then at his Buckler, at opposing in
Generals, then defending himself from Particulars. Altho^gh he has not given
us one particular answer, to the truth or falsehood of the Crimes and
inconvenie^ces objected: yet he gives in seven general Exceptions, but it is
with as much have as the dog by Nilus, which runs and drinks. First he
says, those inconveniences which I mention, if they had been true, are abuses
in the^ Officer not faults in the Office, which ought not to be taken away for
them. Intolerable extortions and gross Usurpations, are no more with him then
inconveniences. This Objection was answered by me before it was moved by him,
if he had not thought fit to smother it; where I distinguish between the
personal faults of Popes, and faulty principles or Laws, and show how far
the one and the other do warrant a Separation. The former only from the
faulty person, to preserve ourselves from participating with him in his Crimes:
^Vind. cap. 6. pa. 128
The latter from the faulty Office, so far as it is faulty, until it be
reformed. Neither have we taken away any Office, but only abuses and
Usurpations.

Secondly he excepreth, that some of these pretended abuses are only my own
Deductions, which I show not evidently ou^ of the Science of Politics, but out
of two or three matters of Fact. I answer, that experience is the Politicians
best Schoolmaster: and that every man finds where his own Shoe wringeth him,
much better by wearing it himself, then by hearing others discourse of it. But
I thank him for his Memento, and the next time I have occasion to make use of
it, I shall demo^strate to him out of the Science of Politics that Foreign
Jurisdiction is useless and chargeable to the Subject; Dangerous and
destructive to the King and Commonwealth; a Rack and Gibbet to the Conscience,
by subjecting it to two Supremes who may possibly clash one with another; and
altogether opposite to the Ecclesiastical Policy of the Primitive times, which
conformed the bounds of Ecclesiastical Jurisdiction to the Civil.

Thirdly he pleads, that I do not prove that some of these pretended abuses
were not just rights, but only show that such and such things were done, and
that either party had learned Lawiers for them, and that sometimes the Kings
renounced their pretenses, as in point of Investitures. I answer, that the
Opposition of King and Kingdom to any branch of Papal power, shows
evidently that they did not believe, that the Pope had any right to it, divine
or humane, and clearly destroieth his Foundation of immediate Tradition. How
should they leave that to their Children, as a Legacy of Christ or his
Apostles, which they themselves rejected? Our Kings never renounced their right
of Investitures, only they consented, that they should not give Investitures
in their own persons, but by a Bishop, still reteining both the right of
Patronage and their Feudall Oaths.

Fourthly, he says that these temporal Laws which I cite, concluder not
evidently a right; and reason gives more particular respect to Ecclesiastical
laws then to temporal. I answer, though such Laws do not always prove a
right; Yet they always prove the common consent of the Kingdom, what they
esteem to be right; they always disprove the Popes Prescription. But he is
wholly mistaken, many of those Laws which I cited were Ecclesiastical Laws:
And the Popes Decretalls which he intimates for Laws, are no Laws, nor ever
were held for Laws in England, without the reception of the Church and
Kingdom. Reason gives more respect to the Sanctions of Bishops then of Kings,
in cases purely spiritual: but more respect to the Laws of Kings then of
Bishops, in the External Regiment of the Church within their own dominions.

Fifthly he charge me for saying, that the Pope usurped most injustly all
right Civil, Ecclesiastical, Sacred, Profane, of all Orders of men, Kings,
Nobles, Bishops, etc. Which he calls a loud ^outhed Calumny. By his favor,
he does me wrong and himself more with his foul Language, when he is not
provoked at all. I said not [all right] in the abstract, but [all rights] in
the concre^e. Has he forgotten that which every boy in the University knows,
to distinguish betwixt singula generum and genera singulorum, Some of all
sorts, and all without exception. My words* only signify some rights of all
sorts; as is evident by the words following, Civil, Ecclesiastical, sacred,
profane, of all Orders of men, Kings, Nobles, Bishops etc. which is an
ordinary and proper expression, and cannot possibly be extended to all rights
without exception.

Sixthly, he urges that grant all these abuses had heen true, was there no
other remedy but division? Had not the Secular Governors the sword in their
hand? Did it not lie in their power to choose whether they would admit things
destructive to their rights? I answer, that it does not always rest in the
power of the Civil Magistrate, to do that which is best in it self,
especially in seditious times, when the Multitude (as a good Author says) do
more readily obey their Priests then their Kings. But they must move their
Rudder according to the Various Face of the Sky, and await for a fitter
opportunity; As our Kings did, which fell o^t at the Reformation, when they
followed his Counsel in good earnest, and with the Civil sword did lop away
all Papal Usurpations and abuses; Other Division then this, to divide between
the rotten and the sound, we made none. The great division which followed our
Reformation, was made by themselves, and their Censures. Our Articles do
testify to all the world, that we have made no division from any Church, but
only from Errors and Abuses.

Seventhly, he pleads that in case these temporal inconveniences had not
been otherwise remediable, ye^ Ecclesiastical Communion ought not to be broken
for temporal Concernments. To prove this Conclusion he brings six reasons,
some pertinent, some impertinent and very improper, but he might have saved his
labor. For if he understand his Conclusion in that sense, wherein he ought to
understand it, and wherein I hope he does understand it, of deserting the
Communion of the Catholic Church, or of any member of the Catholic Church qua
^ale as it is a Member, for mere temporal respects, Concedo omnia, I grant the
conclusion: but if by breaking Ecclesiastical Communion, he understand
deserting the Communion of a particular Church, as it is erroneous and wherein
it is erroneous, his Conclusion is not pertinent to his purpose, nor his six
proofs pertinent to his conclusion. But he might remember, first that our
Grounds by his own Confession do not all relate to temporal inconveniences,
but some of them to Eternity and Conscience, and that they ought to be
considered conjointly. Secondly, that we do not make these temporal
Inconveniences to be irremediable, we our selves have found out a Remedy: and
it is the same which he himself advises in this place, to thrust out all
entroachments and Usurpations with the civil sword. If they will grow Angry
upon this, and break Ecclesiastical Communion themselves, it is their Act, not
ours, who have acted nothing, who have declared nothing against any right of
the Bishop of Rome divine or humane, but only against his encroachments and
Usurpations, and particularly against his Coactive power in the Exterior
Court, within the English Dominions. They might take us to be not only very
tame Creatures, but very stupid Creatures, first to suffer them to entrench and
encroach and usurp upon us daily, and the^ to be able to persuade us to
Isachars condition, to undergo our burden with Patience like Asses, because
we may not break Ecclesiastical Communion for temporal concernments. We have
done nothing but what we have good warrant for from the Laws of God and
nature; let them suffer for it, who either separate from others without just
cause, or give others just cause to separate from them.

In the next place follows a large Panegyricall Oration i^ the praise of
Unity, of the Benefit and Necessity of it, mixed with an Invective against us
for breaking both the Bonds of Unity. The former of those considerations is
altogether superfluous, To praise Unity which no man did ever dispraise, but to
his own perpetual Disgrace. The latter is a mere Ta^tology or repetition of
what he has said before, which I will not trouble the Reader withal, but
only where I find some new weight added. page 572,
He says we acknowledge the Chnrch of Rome to be a true Church. Right,
Metaphisically a true Church, which has the true essence and being of a
Church, but not Morally true or free from Errors.

He demands, what is the certain Method to know the true sense of Scripture? If
he please to take so much pains to View my answer to Militier, he may find
both whom we hold to be fit Expositors of Scripture, and what is the right
manner of expounding Scripture; If he have any thing to say against it, he
shall have a fair hearing. He tells us, that our best Champions
Chillingworth and Falkland do very heartily confess, that we have no
certainty of Faith but probability only. He cites no place, and I do not hold
it worthy of a search, whether they do confess it or not. It is honor enough
for them to have been genuine Sons of the English Church, (I hope they were
so), and men of rare parts, whereof no man can doubt: yet one of them was a Lay
man, it may be neither of them so deeply radicated in the right Faith of the
English Church, as many others. But our chiefest Champions are those who stick
closest to the Holy Scriptures, interpreted according to the Analogy of Faith,
and the Perpetual Tradition of the Universal Church: but for that Assertion
which you father upon them, that we have no certainty of Faith but probability
only; We detest it. And when you, or any other is pleased to make trial, You
will find that we have as great assurance altogether for our faith, as your
selves have for your old Articles of faith, and much more then you have for
your new Articles,

He accuses us for joining iu Communion with Greeks Lutherans Huguenots, p.
373.
perhaps Socinians Presbyterians Adamites Quakers etc. And after he adds
Roman Catholics. Are not Huguenots Presbyterians in his Sense? If they be, why
does he disjoin them? I know no reason why we should not admit Greeks and
L^^herans to our Communion, and (if he had added them) Armenians Abyssines
Muscovites, and all those who do profess the Apostolical Creed, as it is
expounded by the first four General Counsels under the Primitive Discipline:
and the Roman Catholics also, if they did not make their Errors to be a
Condition of their Communion. As for Adamites and Quakers we know not what they
are, and for Socinians we hold them worse then Arrians. The Arrians made Christ
to be a Secondary God, erat quando non erat: but the Socinians make him to be a
mere creature. And for Presbyterians what my Judgment is, he may find fully
set down in my reply to the Bishop of Chalcedons Epistle.

But says he, every one of these has a different head of the Church, The
English head is the King, The Roman Catholic head is the Pope, The Grecian
head is the Patriarch, The Presbyterian head is the Presbytery or Synod, and
the Lutheran head is the Parish Minister. First for the Lutherans he does them
egregious wrong. Throughout the Kingdoms of Denwark and Sweden they have theit
Bishops, name and thing, and throughout Germany they have their
Superintendents. And to the rest I answer him, that there are several Heads of
the Church, Christ alone is the Spiritual head, the Sovereign Prince the
Political head, the Ecclesiastical head is a General Council, and under
that each Patriarch in his Patriarchate, and among the Patriarchs the Bishop of
Rome by a Priority of Order. We who maintain the King to be the Political head
of the English Church, do not deny the spiritual Headship of Christ, nor the
supreme power of the Represe^tative Church that is a General Council or
Synod, nor the Executive headship of each Patriarch in his Patriarchate, nor
the Bishop of Romes headship of Order among them: and thus this great Objection
is vanished. By this he may see that we have introduced no new Form of
Ecclesiastical Government into the Church of England, but preserved to every
one his due right if he will accept of it: and that we have the same Dependence
upon our Ecclesiastical Superiors, which we had evermore from the Primitive
times.

He charge us, that we give no certain Rule to know which is a General
Council, which not, or who are to be called to a General Council. There is
no need why we should give any new Rules, who are ready to observe the old
Rules of the Primitive Church. General Summons to all the Patriarchs, for them
and their Clergy; General Admittance of all Persons capable, to discuss
freely, and to define freely, according to their distinct Capacities; and
lastly the presence of the five Protopatriarchs and their Clergy, either in
their persons or by their suffrages, or in case of Necessity the greater part
of them, do make a General Council. Whilst we set this rule before us as
our pattern, and swerve not from it but only in case of invincible Necessity,
we may well hope that God who looks upon his poor Servants with all their
Prejudices, and expects no more of them then he has enabled them to
perform, who has promised that where two or three are gathered together in
his name, there will he be in the midst of them: Will vouchsafe to give his
assistence and his Blessing to such a Council, which is as General as may be,
although perhaps it be not so exactly General as has been, or might have been
now, if the Christian Empire had flourished still as it did anciently. In
sum, I shall be ever ready to acquiesce in the Determinaation of a Council
so General as is possible to be had: so it may be equal, not having more
Judges of one Country then all the rest of the Christian world, as it was in
the Council of Trent, but regulated by the equal votes of Christian Nations,
as it was in the Counsels of Constance and Basile: and so as those Nations
which cannot in probability be personally present, may be admitted to send
their Votes and Suffrages as they did of old: and lastly so it may be free,
called in a free place whither all parties may have secure access, and Liberty
to propose freely and define freely, according to the Votes of the Fathers,
without being stinted or curbed or overruled by the Holy Ghost sent in a
Curriers Budget.

And for the last part of his exception that Heretics should not be admitted,
I for my part should readily consent; provided that none be reputed Heretics,
but such as true General Counsels have evidently declared to be Heretics, or
such as will not pronounce an Anathema against all old Heresies, which have
been condemned for Heresies by undoubted General Counsels. But to imagine that
all those should be reputed Heretics, who have been condemned of Heresy or
Schism by the Roman Court for their own interest, that is four parts of five
of the Christian world, is silly and senseless, and argues nothing but their
fear to come to a fair impartial Trial.

And this is a full answer to that which he allegeth out of Doctor Hammond,
that General Counsels are now morally impossible to be had, the Christian
world being under so many Empires and Divided into so many Communions. It is
not credible that the Turk will send his Subjects, that is four of the
Protopatriarchs with their Clergy to a General Council, or allow them to meet
openly with the rest of Christendom in a General Council, it being so much
against this own Interest: but yet this is no impediment why the Patriarchs,
might not deliver the Sense and Suffrages of their Churches by Letters or by
Messengers; and this is enough to make a Council General. In the First
Council of Nice, there were only five Clergymen present out of the Western
Churches; In the Great Council of Chalcedon not so many; In the Counsels of
Constantinople and Ephesus none at all. And yet have these four Counsels
evermore been esteemed truly General, because the Western Church did declare
their consent and concurrence. Then as there have been General Oriental
Counsels, without the personal presence of a Western Bishop: so there may be
an Occide^tall Council, without the personal presence of one Eastern Bishop,
by the sole Communication of their sense and their Faith. Neither is such
Communication to be deemed impossible, considering what correspondence, the
Muscovian Church did hold long with the Patriarch of Constantinople, and the
Abyssine has long held, and does still hold with the Patriarch of Alexandria.

It is confessed that there are too many different Communions in Europe, it may
be some more then there is any great cause for, and perhaps different Opinions
where there is but one Communion, as difficult to be reconciled as different
Communions. But many of these Mushrome Sects, are like those inorganicall
Creatures bred upon the Banks of Nilus, which perished quickly after they were
bred, for want of fit Organs. The more considerable parties, and the more
capable of reason are not so many; if these could be brought to acquiesce in
the determination of a free General Council, they would towe the other like
lesser Boats after them with ease.

No man will say that the Unity of the Church in point of Government, does
consist only in their actual subordination to General Counsels. General
Counsels are extraordinary Remedies, proper for curing or composing new
differences of great Concernment in Faith or discipline. That being done,
General Counsels may prove of more Danger then use. No healthful man
delights in a continual course of Physic. But Unity consists also and
Ordinarily in Conformity and submission to that discipline which General
Counsels have recommended to us, either as the Legacies of Christ and his
Apostles, or as Ecclesiastical Policies instituted by them, with the
Concurrence or Confirmation of Christian Sovereigns, for the public good of
the Catholic Church.

He charge us, that we have so formed Gods Church, that there is no means
left to asssemble a General Council, having renounced his Authority whose
proper Office it was to call a General Council. His errors seldom come
single, but commonly by Clusters or at least by paires. What height of
Confidence is it to affirm, that it is the proper Office of the Pope to call
General all Counsels, when all ingenuous men do acknowledge that all the
First General Counsels, were Ab Imperatoribus Indicta, Called by Emperors?
To which the Popes Friends add, that it was by the Advice and with the Consent
of the Pope. And Bellarmine gives diverse reasons why it could not be
otherwise, First, because there was a Law, De Council. lib. 1. cap. 14.
which did forbid frequent Assemblyes for fear af Sedition. Secondly because
no reason does permit that such an Assembly should be made in an Imperial
City, without the leave of the Lord of the place. Thirdly because General
Counsels were made then, at the Public Charge. He might have added, that
Counsels did receive their Protection from Emperors, and they who sit in
Counsels were the Subjects of Emperors.

In the second place he erreth in this also, that we have taken away the means
of assembling General Counsels. We have taken away no power from the Pope of
convocating any Synods, except only Synods of the King of Englands Subjects,
within his own dominions, without his leave; which Bellarmine himself
acknowledges to be agreeable to reason. If the Pope have any right, either to
convocate General Counsels himself, or to represent to Christian Sovereigns
the fit seasons for Convocation of them, either in respect of his Beginning of
Unity, or of his Protopatriarchate, we do not envy it to him, since there may
be a good use of it in respect of the division of the Empire, so good caution
be observed. Bellarmine confesses that that power which we acknowledge, that
is, that though the Pope be no Ecclesiastical Monarch, but only chief of the
Principal Patriarchs, yet the right to convocate General Counsels should
pertein unto him. De council. li, 1. c. 12.
But it may be, this is more then Mr. Sergeant did know.

My last Ground, was the Exemtion of the Britannick Churches from foreign
Jurisdiction, by the General Council of Ephesus. As to the Exemtion of the
Britannick Churches, he refers himself to what he had said formerly, and so
do I. To the Authority of the Council of Ephesus he answers, that howsoever
Cyprus and some others are exemted from a Neighboring Superior, falsely
pretending a Jurisdiction over them, yet I shall never show a Syllable in the
Council of Ephesus, exemting from the Popes Jurisdiction as head of the
Church. Not directly, a man may safely swear it, for the Council never
suspected it, the world never dreamed of it, the Popes themselves never
pretended to any such headship of Power, and Universal Jurisdiction over the
whole Church, in those days. All that the Primitive Popes claymed by divine
right, was a Primacy of Order or Beginning of Unity, due to the Chair of St.
Peter: all that they claimed by humane right were some Privileges, partly
gained by Custom or Prescription, and partly granted by the Fathers to to the Sea of Rome, because it was the Imperial City. But there is enough in this
very Canon collaterally to overthrow all the Usurpations of the Roman Court.
There is no need that Britain should be named particularly, where all the
Provinces without exception are comprehended, Let the same be observed in other
Diocesses and in all Provinces. There is no need that the Bishop of Rome should
be expressed, where all the Bishops are prohibited, That no Bishop occupy
another Province, which formerly and from the beginning was not under the power
of him or his Predecessors. If the Fathers were so tender of pride creeping
into the Church in those days, or of the danger to lose their Christian
Liberty in the case of the Bishop of Antioch, who pretended neither to divine
right nor Universal Jurisdiction: what would they have said or done in the
present case of the Bishop of Rome, who challenges not only Patriarchall but
Sovereign Jurisdiction, not over Cyprus only but over the whole world, not
from Custom or Canons but from the institution of Christ? If Master Sergeant
be in the right then the Bishop of Antioch was quite out, to sue for the
Jurisdiction of Cyprus which belo^ged more to the Bishops of Rome then to him.
Then the Bishops of Cyprus were quite o^t, to challenge the Ordination of
themselves, and Jurisdiction over one another, as a proper right belongi^g to
themselves, which they hold only by Courtesy and favor from the Bishop of
Rome. Then the holy Synod was quite out, to Determine so positively, that not
only Cyprus, but every Province should enjoy its rights and Customs
inviolated, which it had from the beginning, without a Salvo or saving the
right of the Bishop of Rome, or a restriction, so long as he pleases to permit
them; and to do it in such Imperial Terms, It has pleased the holy Synod, or
such is our pleasure. Lastly the Pope himself was out, to ratify the Privileges
and exemptions of the Cyprian Bishops, not only from the Patriarch of Antioch,
but from himself also, and to suffer his divine right to be trampled under
foot, by Customs and Canons, which are of no force without him. But this is the
least part of the passages in the four First General Counsels, which are
repugnant to the Popes pretensions of a General Monarchy. The Eastern Churches
do still adhere firmly to the Primitive Discipline, and for this cause the
Pope has thought fit to excommunicate them. Si violandum jus est, regnandi
causa violandum est.

Against all our Grounds, the most intolerable extortions that ever were heard
of, most grievous Usurpations, malignant Influence both upon the State Politic
and Ecclesiastic, and undoubted Privileges, he produces nothing but immediate
Tradition: and you must be content to take his bare word for it, for he is
altogether unfurnished of proofs. Some men by telling strange Stories over and
over, do come at last to believe them. It may be, he believes there was a
Tradition, for those Branches of Papal power, which we cast out: but we deny
it altogether, and require him to prove first that there was such a Tradition
in England, next that a particular Tradition is a sufficient proof of divine
Institution.

We admit readily, that the Unity of the Church is of great importance, and the
breaking of it an heinous Crime, and that no abuses imaginable are sufficient
excuse for a total desertion of a just power. Thus far in the Thesis we agree,
but in the Hypothesis we differ, That which is a sufficient ground for a
reformation, is not a sufficient Ground for an extirpation. So many, so
grievous, so unconscionable extortions, and Usurpations, and malignant
influences, as we complain of and prove, are without all peradventure a
sufficient ground of Reformation, which is all our Ancestors did, or we
defend; though not a sufficient cause of the extirpation of any just Authority.
Our Grounds are sufficient for a Reformation of abuses and encroachments, which
we acknowledge, and which is all we did at the Reformation: but for the
abolition of any just power, it is his fond Imagination, we disclaim it
altogether. We have cast out all Papal Coactive Jurisdiction in the Exterior
Court, as being Political not Spiritual: but for any Papal Jurisdiction
either purely spiritual or justly founded, we have not meddled with it; Those
things which we have cast out, are only abuses and Usurpations. So there is no
need of that Consideration which he proposes, whether the abuses were
otherwise remediable, or not: for our Reformation is that very Remedy which he
himself has prescribed, to hold out encroachments with the point of the sword,
without any meddling with just right. Other division then this (which he himself
has allowed) we believe our Ancestors intended none, we hold none, and so are
accountable for none.

The main Question is whether the Britannick Churches were de facto subject to
Rome or not. I have demonstrated the contrary already, that they were not, and
had always their Ordinations at home. But his Conclusion which he puts upon
me, that true complaints against Governors, whether otherwise remediable or
no, are sufficient reasons to abolish that very Government, is a vain assertion
of his own, no Conclusion of mine.

He starteth a Question here little to his own Credit, whether he that
mainteineth the Negative, or he that mainteineth the Affirmative ought to
prove. He says (according to his old Pueriles) that a Negative may be proved
in Logic. No man doubts of it or denies it, Quis e^im potest negare? I said
on the Contrary, that in this case which comes here in difference between us*
according to the strict rules of Law* the burden to prove, rests only on
his side who affirms. As the Question is here between us, whether we had
other Remedies, then to make such a Reformation as we did. We say, No. They
say, Yea. It is possible to ^rove there might be other Remedies, ^ut it is
impossible to prove there were no ^ther Remedies. Galen or Hippocrates himself
would not have undertaken such a Task, to prove that there were no other
Remedies for a disease, then that which they used. It is not for want of
Logical Forms, that Negatives are not to be proved ^n matter of Fact, but for
want of sufficient Mediums. He says he is no Bowler, and so ^nexpert as not to
understand what is the soaling of a Bowl; It may be it is true, but if I
should put him to prove this Negative, it is impossible. But so far as a
Negative of that nature is capable of proof, I did prove it, by our Addresses
to Popes and Counsels, and long expectation in vain, that we had no other
Remedy then that which we used, to thrust out their Usurpations by the power of
the sword, which course he himself advises, and we practiced. The division is
not made by them who thrust out Usurpations, but by them who brought them in
and defend them.

I said, that not only our Ancestors but all Catholic Countries did maintein
their own privileges inviolated, and make themselves the last Judges of their
Grievances, from the Court of Rome. Hence he concludes with open Mouth,
therefore there were other Remedies, there needed no Division. Alas poor man,
how he troubles himself about nothing! They and we used the very same
Remedies, the same that he advises in this place. The Pope would not ease them
upon many addresses made. What then? had not the King the Sword in his own
hands? p. 571.
Did it not lie in his power to right himself as he listed? and to admit those
pretended encroachments only so far as he thought just and fitting? Yes, the
King had the sword in his hands, and did right him self, and cast out those
Papal Usurpatious so far as he found Just: and now when we have followed your
own advise, you call us Schismatics and Dividers. Sr. we are no Dividers, but
we have done our Duties, and if we prove those things which we cast out to be
Usurpations (as we have done), you are the Schismatics by your own Confession.

He pleads, If Papal Authority be of Christ's Institution, then no just cause
can possibly be given for its Abolishment. Right: But those Branches of Papal
power which we have cast out, are neither of Christ's Institution nor of Man's
Institution, but mere Usurpations. Neither do we seek to abolish Papal
Authority, but to reform it from Accidental Abuses, and reduce it to its first
Institution. The best Institutions Divine or Humane, may sometimes need such
Reformation. Here is nothing like proof, but his World of Witnesses, and his
Immemoriall Tradition, presumed not proved.

To show that no Nation suffered so much as England under the Tyranny of the
Roman Court, he says I produce nothing, but the pleasant saying of a certain
Pope. Well, would he have a better witness against the Pope, then the Pope him
self? Habemus confitentem reu^, He was pleasant indeed, but Ridentem dicere
verum Quid vetat?

What hinders that a man may net tell the truth laughing? He asks whether
those Testimonies which I produce, be Demonstrative or rigorous Evidences? I
think he would have me like the unskilful Painter, to write over the Heads of
my Arguments, This is a Demonstration. It would become him better to refute
them, and show that they are not Demonstrative, then to trifle away the time
with such frivolous Questions.

I showed, that [England is not alone in the Separation, so long as all the
Eastern, Southern, Northern, and so great a part of the Western Church, have
separated themselves from the Court of Rome, and are separated by them from the
Church of Rome as well as we]. In answer to this, he bids me show that those I
call Christians, have any infallible or certain Rule of Faith etc. This is
first to hang men up, and then to examine their cause; first to excommunicate
four parts of five of the Christian world for their own Interests, because they
will not submit their necks to the Roman Yoke, and embrace their upstart
Usurpations, with as much Devotion as the genuine Legacies of Christ and his
Apostles. It behoved the Court of Rome to have weighed the case more maturely,
before they gave such a temerarious sentence, against the much greater part of
Christendom, in so weighty a cause. But for their rule of Faith, they have a
more certain and Authentic Rule then he himself, by as much as the Apostles
Creed is a more Authentic rule of Faith, then Pius the fourths Creed, and the
Holy Scriptures a more infallible ground, then particular supposititious
Tradition, which wants both Perpetuity and Universality.

I said that [we desired to live in the peaceable, Communion of the Catholic
Church, as well as our Ancestors, as far as the Roman Court will give us
leave]. He answers, that he knows very well we would be glad that the
Church of Rome would own us for hers etc, That lack Straw or Wat Tiler after
they had rebelled, had no mind to be hanged, That it is no Charity or Courtesy
in us, but a request of an unreasonable favor from them, to admit us into
their Communion, and would be most absurd in Government, etc. Whether they hold
us for theirs or not, is not much material; if they did, it were the better
for themselves; if they do not, it is not the worse for us: so as Christ own
us for his, it skilleth not much whether they say, come ye blessed, or go ye
cursed; whether we be the wheat or Chafe, their tongues must not winnow us.
Although he snuff at our desire of Union: yet God Almighty sets a greater
value upon it. He is not out of the Church who is within it in the desires of
his heart, and implicitly in the preparation of his mind. Observe Reader who
are the procreative and conserving Causes of this Schism. They frighted us
from them with new Articles and Usurpations, they thrust us from them with new
Censures and Excommunications; and if we had a mind to return, they tell us it
were absurd in Government to readmi^ us. But my chiefest wonder is, that he who
was the other day, by his own vote, an Ar^h rebel, should talk so suddenly of
hanging. Sudden Changes are always dangerous, and for the most part
personated.

He asks, whether our Ancestors did renounce the Popes Authority as Head of
the Church? If he mean a Head of Order, they did not, no more do we: if he mean
a Head of Sovereign power, they did, and so do we. What I granted once I grant
always, it is for Turncoats to take their swings. I write semper idem, of the
same religion wherein I was baptized: can he do the same? But he urges, that I
make it the top of my Climax, that our Ancestors threatened to make a wall of
Separation, between the Court of Rome and them, which shows that they did it
not: but it is evident, that we have done what they only threatened to do, and
plead for our excuses, that we have more experience then our Ancestors had. I
made it the top of my Climax indeed; honest men's words are as good as deeds.
But does he think that our Ancestors did only make counterfeit Grimaces, and
threaten that which they could not Lawfully have performed? Absit: The Laws
and the threatening are easily reconciled. Our Ancestors made very severe Laws
against the Usurpations of the Court of Rome, as I have showed in particular
throughout: but they did not execute them so rigorously, but connived at many
innocent or not pernicious encroachments, in hope the Court of Rome and their
Emissaries, would have kept themselves within some tolerable bounds of
moderation. But they found by experience, and we by much longer and surer
experience, that all our Hopes were vain, that the Avarice of the Roman Court
was not to be satiated or to be stinted, that if we give them leave to thrust
in their head they would quickly draw in their body after. And therefore our
Ancestors finding this true in a great part, did threaten them to make a wall
of Separation, that is, to execute their Laws rigorously, to use no more
indulgence or connivence, to take away their Coactive power in the Exterior
Court altogether, which the Laws have taken away before sufficiently. And we
being confirmed by much longer and surer experience, have accomplished what
they threatened. So this threatened Wall of Separation is no new Law, b^t a new
Mandate to execute the old Laws: and our experience and our Ancestors
materially is the same, but ours is more grounded and more sure; their
separation and ours was the same to point of Law, but not of Execution. And the
reason why our Ancestors remedies were not Sovereign or sufficient enough, was
not want of virtue in the Remedy, but want of due application. Thus all Mr.
Serjean^s hopes are vanished, and his Contradictions tumbled to Dust* Great is
Truth, and prevails.

Yet he keeps a great stir and bustling, Page 578.
about our Experience more then our Ancestors, and prays me in his scoffing
manner, Good my Lord tell us what this new experiment was; and despairing as it
were of success in his request, he adds, Since you are resolved to make a
secret of this rare Experiment. Now I have told him the secret, what good will
it do him? as much as he may put in his eye and see never a jot the worse. I
told him this rare secret before, in these words, Rep. pa. 37.
We have more experience then our Ancestors had, that their Remedies were not
Sovereign or Sufficient enough, that if we give him leave to thrust in his
head, he will never rest until he have drawn in his whole body after, whilst
there are no Bonds to hold him but National Laws. But I was not bound both to
write him a Lecture and find him eyes.

Now Readers look to yourselves, out comes the great Monster, that has been
so long threatened, (as he phraseth it scurrilously) in the likeness of a
Drunken Dutchman, making Indentures with his Legs: so says he my discourse
staggers, now to the one, now to the other far distant side of the
Contradiction. The Reader shall find that the fault is not in the innocent
Dutchman, who goes straight enough: but in the Prevaricators eyes, who sees
double. Either he did never know, or he has forgotten what a Contradiction is.
The Itch or humor of Contradicting has so far possessed him, that he
regards not what the Rules of Contradiction are. The first Contradiction is,
That the Laws of our Ancestors were not remedies sufficient enough, yet I
maintein stoutly that in the Separation no new Law was made, That is (as he
collecteth) the same Laws were both sufficient and not sufficient. Is this the
monstrous Contradiction which he promised to show the Readers for pence a
piece. The same Laws were not sufficient in the days of our Ancestors, and
yet the same Laws were sufficient in the Days of Henry the eighth^ has no
show of a Contradiction in it, nor of any the least opposition, which ought
always to be made according to the Rules of Logic, at the same time. I will
show him a hundred of these Contradictio^s, every day in the week for nothing.
Mr. Serjean^ was no Roman Catholic, Mr. Sergeant is a Roman Catholic, is just
such another Contradiction: or the same Plaster was not sufficient to cure
such a sore at one time, yet it was sufficient at another time when the Body
was better disposed. All his Contradictions end in smoke and laughter.

The second Contradiction is, that I said the Laws of other Countries were
equivalent to those of England; but I acknowledge elsewhere that the Laws of
other Countries were sufficient; and here I say that the Laws of E^gland were
insufficient: So they were equivalent and inequivalent. Here is another
Contradiction, like the former. The same Laws proved sufficient to France, yet
proved insufficient to England. It is another rule in Logic, Opposition ought
to have the same Subject and the same Predicate without ambiguity: but here the
Predicate is diverse, sufficient for France, not sufficient for England, and
ambiguity more then enough. He might as well argue, The same Medicine will work
upon a child, which will not work upon a Man: therefore the same Medicine is
not equivalent to it self.

The third Contradiction is, that I say All Catholic Countries did maintein
their Privileges inviolate, by means which did not maintein them, or by Laws
which were not sufficient to do it. Where did I say this? It is his Collection
not my Assertion: but let it pass muster for once. Here is a Contradiction
deserves a Bell and a Babble: Catholic Countries did maintein their Privileges
inviolate by such means, at one time not at another, in one place not in
another, in one degree not in another, in one respect not in another.

The last mock Contradiction is, that I say The Laws which denied the Pope all
Authority, and were actually in force, that is, actually left him none, were
not sufficient Remedies against the abuses of that Authority, Which had quite
taken them away. This is not finding of Contradictions, but making of them.
Give him leave to use this [id est, that is] and he will make a hundred
Contradictions in every page of the Bible; as here, actually in force, that is,
which actually left the Pope no Authority, or which had quite taken his
Authority away. If this [id est that is] be mine, then he may object the
Contradiction to me, if it be not, then he may keep the Contradiction to
himself, such as it is. He knows, and all the world know, that a law is said
to be actually in force, whilst it is unrepealed; in this sense I did, and all
men but himself do use that expression. And here he commits a third gross
fault against the Rule of Opposition, which ought to be ever (...), in the same
Respect. The Law takes away abuses as a Rule: but the Magistrate by due
execution, as an Artificer. The Law is sufficient, when it is sufficiently
penned and promulged: but the effect follows the due execution. The not
observing of this obvious and easy truth, has made us all this stir about
Imaginary Contradictions, as I have showed in my answer to his last ^^ragraph,
which alone is a sufficie^^ answer to all these pretended Contradictions: but
whether it will be so actually in force to procure his assent, is more then I
know; if it do not, it detracteth nothing frem the sufficiency of the answer.
Go Mr. Sergeant, go, bring us less wind and more weight Saepius in libro
memor atur Perseus uno.
Quam levis in tota Tharsus Amazonide.
In the last Paragraph is nothing but a Calumny against Henry the eight, which
he is not able to prove: and if he were, it neither concerns us nor the
Question.

SECT. VII.
That the King and Church of England proceeded with due Moderation.
THis Section does not much concern either us or the merit of the cause. A
Reformation might be just and necessary, although the Reformers did exceed the
bounds of due Moderation; neither are we answerable for their excesses, further
then we ourselves do maintein them. I pass by his pleasant Topic unsaluted,
as being impertinent, and having nothing in it deserving the least stay of a
serious Reader,

I reckoned this as the first Branch of our moderation, that we deny not to
other Churhes, the true being of Churches nor possibility of Salvation, nor
separate from Churches, but from Accidental Errors. For all his scoffing, if
their Church would use the like moderation, it would save the world a great
deal of needless debate. Against that which I say, he objecteth thus, Now the
matter of Fact has evidenced undeniably, that they (the Protestants) separated
from those points, which were the Principles of Unity both in Faith and
Government. He has brought his matter of Fact and his Principles of Unity so
often upon the Stage already, and they have been so often clearly answered,
that I will not insist upon such a threedbare subject, or trouble the Reader
with an irksome repetition. We have seen how far his Principles of Unity, or
his Fundamental of Fundamentalls is true, and ought to be admitted: and in a
right sense, we adhere much more firmly unto them, then the Church of Rome it
self.

He proceeds, that the Church of England defines, that our Church (the Church
of Rome) erreth in matter of Faith Artic. 19. The words of the Article are, Non
solum quoad agenda and Ceremoniarum ritus, verum etiam in iis quae credenda
sunt, that is, Not only in Practical Observations and Ceremonial rites, but
also in those things which are to be believed, that is (to use Cardinal
Cajetans distinction), Not in those things which are de fide formaliter, in
necessary Fundamental Articles (for we acknowledge that the Church of Rome
does still retein the essentialls of Faith), but in those things which are
fidei materialiter, in inferior Questions which happen in things to be
believed, that is to say Opinions, wherein himself acknowledges that a
particular Church may err. That this is the right sense of the Article
appears hence; that the Article does contradistinguish Credenda or things to
be believed, not to Opinions, but to agenda things to be practiced.

He urges, that we have declared four points of their faith to be vain
Fictions, contradictory to Gods word. Artic. 22. That is to say, their Doctrine
of Purgatory, Indulgences, their Adoration of Images and Relics, Invocation of
Saints. Right, four points of their new Faith, enjoined by Pius the fourth, but
no Article of the old Apostolical Faith, and at the best only Opinions. Yet
neither does he cite our Article right, which does not define them to be
contrary to Scripture, but only besides the Scripture, or not well grounded
upon any Texts of Scripture.

He adds, the like Character is given of another point Art. 28. That is
Transubstantiation. Our highest Act of Devotion Art. 31. is styled a
blasphemous fiction and pernicious imposture: that is, the Propitiatory
Sacrifice of the Mass. Concerning Transubstantiation what is our Opinion, I
refer him to my answer to Militier in the very beginning of it. And
concerning their Propitiatory Sacrifice of the Mass, to the same answer page
152. Edit. 2. The true state of the Controversy, was not so clearly understood
at first on either side as it is now. He cannot go one step further then we
do in that cause, without tumbling into direct Blasphemy.

It follows, And Art. 33. that those who are cut of from the Church
publicly, should be held as Heathens and Publicans. Well, here is no
distinction between Roman Catholics and Protestants: And Franciscus a Sancta
Clara, in his Paraphrasticall Exposition of the English Articles, gives this
Judgment of this Article, This Article is Catholic, and agreeable as well to
holy Scripture as to antiquity. Then why does he snarle at this Article which
he cannot except against? Because he conceives that the Article means
Catholics, or at least does include them, Judge Reader what a spirit of
Contradiction does possess this man, who when he is not able to pick any
quarrel at the words of the Article, calumniateth the meaning, upon his own
groundless suspicion.

But nothing was more common in the mouths of our Preachers, then to call the
Pope Antichrist, the Church of Rome the Whore of Babylon, Idolatrous,
Superstitious, Blasphemous: and to make up the Measure of his Forefathers
sins, the Bishop calls here the two Principles of Unity in Faith and
Government, errors and Falsehoods. If any of our Preachers being exasperated
(...) some such Boutifeus as himself, have in their Pulpits used any Virulence
or Petulanc^ against the Church of Rome; Let him mak^ use of his style against
them, who will furnish him with Lettuce suitable to hi^ Lips; What is that to
the Church of England? what is that to us? Quid immerentes hospites vexat Canis
-- Ignavus adversus lupos? Let him but observe what Liberty be himself takes,
without any manner of Provocation. But as for my self he does me notorious
wrong, I did not mention any Principles of Unity in this place, nor so much as
dream of them, but that he must needs bring them in by head and shoulders, in
every Paragraph. All I said was this, That we do not separate from other
Churches, but from their Accidental Errors: but some men are like Nettle^
touch them gently and they sting you.

The first part of our Moderation was, not to censure other Churches for no
Churches, nor deny them possibility of Salvation, nor thrust them from our
Communion; which I showed in the Example of St. Ciprian. In answer to this he
shows the unlawfulness of Communicating with Idolaters, which is reconciling
Christ with Antichrist. Was not this impertinent, if he himself were Judge?

I said, it might be very lawful in some cases, to communicate with material
Idolaters Heretics and Schismatics, (that is such as err through ignorance
and frailty, not obstinacy) in Religious Duties. And for proof hereof, I
produced the insta^ce of the Primitive Christians, communicating in some cases
with the Heretical Arr^ans, and the Schismatic Novatians. He demands first
who forbids them to go visit the sick? I add, or pray with them also? which
was as much as I said there, but because he falls with such Violence upon the
point, I will now take the Liberty to express my self more fully. First, it is
to be remembered that I did speak only of Material Idolaters Heretics or
Schismatics, not Formal. Secondly, of pious Offices not of Idolatrous Acts,
nor any thing favoring Heresy or Schism. Thirdly, I do new exclude case of
Scandal, for just scandal may make that Act to be unlawful, which in it self
is Lawful. Fourthly, I except cases of Just Obedience, the prohibition of a
lawful Superior Civil or Ecclesiastical, may make that Act to be unlawful,
which was Indifferent. Lastly, I distinguish between persons Learned and
grounded in Religion, and persons unlearned and ungrounded; the former may and
ought to communicate with Idolaters Heretics and Schismatics, as far as they
can with a good Conscience, to gain them to the truth; the latter are obliged
not to come over near to pitch, least they be defiled.

The Question being thus stated, I believe the main point has no great
Difficulty in it. For they who are Idolaters Heretics or Schismatics only
materially, not formally, that is, against their meanings resolutions and
intentions, are no Idolaters Heretics or Schismatics, in the eyes of God or
discerning men: neither are they out of the Pale of the Church, or out of the
way of Salvation as the Bishop of Chalcedon says most truly, De Fundament.
cap. 2. pa. 62.
We allow all those to have saving Faith, to be in the Church, in way of
Salvation, for so much as belongs to Faith, who hold the Fundamental points,
and invincibly err in not Fundamentalls. But all Idolaters Heretics and
Schismatics, who are only materially Idolatrous Heretical or Schismatic,
do err invincibly: for if they erred vincibly, then they were formal
Idolaters Heretics or Schismatics.

Thus much I lay down for certain; the rest I only propose, that although they
were formal Heretics or Schismatics, yet they are not altogether out of the
Pale of the Church, but only in part, Ex ea part in tex^urae compage
de^inentur, Aust. li^ 1. de baptis. cont. Donat.
in cae^era scissi sunt, So far they are woven into the web, for the rest
they are divided, as St. Austin says, And Bellarm^ne out of him acknowledges,
that they are absolutely in the Church, until they go out of it by Obstinacy,
(which they who ate only materially Heretics or Schismatics do not): and
after they are gone out of the Church by Obstinacy, yet they are still in the
Church secundum aliquid non simpliciter, Bell. d^ Eccl. l. 3. ca. 4.
not absolutely but respectively or in part. And after he has vapoured a long
time to no purpose, thus much is acknowledged by himself, page 585.
as long as Schismatics are not hardened into an Obstinacy (as no Schismatics
are who are only materially Schismatic), there is a prudentiall Lati^ude
allowed by the Church, delaying her Censures as long as she can possibly,
without wronging her Government; as was de facto practiced in England till the
10 of Queen Elizabeth. This is full as much as I said, that it may be lawful
to communicate in some cases with material Schismatics.

And whatsoever I said, was rather to make a Charitable Construction of their
material Idolatry, then out of fear that they should be able, to attaint us of
any Schism either material or formal: if he had any thing of reality to
object against us, he would be ashamed to intimate our inclinations to favor
Arrianisme, which he himself knows our souls abhor, and which he himself
knows to be expressly condemned, in the second Article of our Church. He may
find my Instances of the Primitive Christians, communicating with the Arrians
and Novatians in Church Offices, in my answer to the Bishop of Chalcedons
Preface, pa. 36, if he have any thing to say to them. Neither was it at the
first sprouting of the Arrian Heresy, but after they had formed several
Doxologies to themselves; nor at the First beginning of the Novatian Schism,
but toward the Conclusion of it. I cited St. Cyprian for no other purpose, but
to show that his moderation in absteining from censuring did preserve him free
from Schism, although he was in an error. When Optatus called the Dona^ists
his Brethren, he did not mean his Brethren in Adam, but his Brethren in Christ,
and wonders why his Brother Parmenian (a Donatist) would rank himself with
Heretieks, who were falsifiers of the Creed. If this be the infallible mark of
an Heretic, Let Pius Quartus and his party look to themselves.

I disliked a position of his, which the Reader shall have in his own words, I
cannot say my Religion is true, but I must say the Opposite is false; mine is
good, but I must say the Opposite is naught; mine necessary, but I must Judge
that which is inconsistent carries to damnation. Therefore who does not censure
a Contrary Religion, holds not his own certain, that is, has none. Upon this
he pursues me with a full Cry, that the Common Principle of Nature [if any
thing be true the Opposite is false], or [a thing cannot both be and not be at
once], is denied by the Bishop. Stay Mr. Sergeant, be not so fierce; the Bishop
knows as well as your self, that the disjunction of Contradictories is
eternal: and it seems by what passed lately between us, that he
understands the Rules of Opposition or right Contradiction better then your
self.

First the Emphasis lies not in the word [true], but in the words [say] and
[censure]. Cannot a man believe or hold his own Religion to be true, but he
must necessarily say or ce^sure another man's, which he co^ceiveth to be
opposite to it, to be false. Truth and Falsehood are Contradictory, or of
eternal Disjunction; but there is a mean, between believing or holding mine
own Religion to be true, and saying or censuring another man's (which perhaps is
opposite) to be false, both more prudentiall and more charitable, that is,
silence; to look circumspectly to myself, and leave other men to stand or fall
to their own Master. S. Cyprian did believe or hold his own Opinion of
Rebaptisation to be true, yet did not censure the opposite to be false, or
remove any man from his Communion for it. Rabshakeh was more censorious then
Hezekiah, and down right Atheists then conscionable Christians.

Secondly, that which he calls his Religion, is no more in truth then his
Opinion; and different Opinions are styled different Religions. In opinions it
is not necessary to hold with any party, much less to censure other parties.
Sometimes seeming different Opinions are both true, and all the Opposition is
but a Contention about words, and then mutual censures are vain: sometimes
they are both false, and then there is more use of Mutual Charity then mutual
Censures: and evermore whether true or false, an Error against Charity, is
much greater then a mere speculative error in Judgment. Prejudice and
sel^love are like a colored glass, which makes every thing we discern through
it, to be of the same color: and on the otherside rancour and animosity, like
the tongue infected with Choler, makes the sweetest meats to taste bitter; In
each respect censures are dangerous and his principle pernicious, that He who
does not censure every Religion whieh he reputeth contrary to his own, has no
Religion.

I set down some Principles, whereof this is the first, [particular Churches
may fall into Errors.] He answers, it is true if by Errors he means Opinions
only. No, I mean Fundamental Errors also: and not only fall into some
Fundamental Errors, but apostate from Christ and turn Turks, and change
their Bible into the Alchor^a; whereof we have visible experience in the world.
He answers, that Principle is not so undeniable as I think, in case that
Particular Church adhere firmly to her rule of Faith, Immediate Tradition.
Well, but we see visibly with our eyes, that many particular Churches have not
adhered to any Tradition, Universal or Particular, Mediate or Immediate, but
have abandoned all Apostolical Tradition, then to what purpose serves his
Exception, in case that Church adhere firmly to immediate Tradition, when all
the World sees that they have not adhered firmly to Apostolical Tradition?
His Preservative is much like that, which an old Seaman gave a freshwater
Passenger when he was to go to Sea, to put so many pibble stones into his
mouth, with assurance that he should not cast, whilst he held them between his
teeth. What sort of Tradition ought to be reputed Apostolical, what not, I
have showed formerly.

My second Principle was, that [all Errors are not Essentialls or
Fundamentalls]. He demands, what is this to his Proposi^^o^ which spoke of
Religion, not of Opinions? Very much, because he makes Opinions to be
Essentialls of his Religion (as we see in the new Creed of Pius of fourth), so
do not we. To the third Principle we agree thus far, that an Error de side
formaliter, or in those things which are Essentialls of Faith does destroy the
being of a Church. I add, that Errors in those things, Quae sunt fidei
materialiter, that is, in Inferior Questions which happen in or about things
believed, or which are not in Essentialls, howsoever they may be lately crowded
into the Catalogue of Essentialls, do not destroy the being of a Church.

My fourth Principle was, that [every one is bound according to the just extent
of his power, to free himself from such Errors as are not in Essentialls.] He
answers, Why so my Lord? if those errors be not Essential, they leave
accordin^ to your own Grounds sufficient means of Salvation, and the true being
of a Church; How prove you then you ought to break Church Communion? etc. As
if no Errors ought to be remedied, but only those which are absolutely
exclusive from all hope of Salvation: as if those Errors which are only
impeditive of Salvation, ought not to be eschewed. The least Error maintained
or committed against the dictate of Conscience is a sin; every good Christian
ought to do his uttermost endeavonr to free himself from sin; it is not
lawful to do evil that good may come of it. Yes, says he, but not to break
Church Communion which is essentially destructive to the being of a Church, or
to endanger our souls where there is no necessity. First, they who free
themselves from known Errors, do not thereby break Church -- Communion: but
they who make their Errors to be a Condition of their Communion. Let him hear
the Conclusion of the Bishop of Chalcedon. Brief Survey cap. 2. s. 4.
In case a Particular Church do require profession of her Heresy, as a
Condition of Communicating with her, Division from her in this case is no
Schism or sin, but virtue and necessary; Where he speaks only of
material Heresy. It was they who made their Errors the Condition of their
Communion, and therefore the Schism and sinlyeth at their doors. Secondly,
Schism does not destroy the being of a Church, for the Church continues a
Church still, after the Schismatics are gone out of it: but it destroys the
Schismatics themselves. Lastly, to free ourselves from known Errors, when
they are made Conditions of Communion, is so far from being dangerous to
salvation, that as the Bishop confesses truly, it is virtue and necessary.

The second proof of our Moderation was our Charity, that we left them as one
should leave his Fathers house, whilst it is infected with some contagious
Sickness, with an hearty desire to return again so soon as it is cleansed.
This Charitable desire of ours, I prooved by our daily prayers for the^ in our
Letany, that God would bring them out of the way of Error into the way of
truth: and particularly by our prayer on Good Friday for them, That God would
have mercy upon all Heretics, and fetch them home to his Flock, that they may
be saved among the remnant of true Israelites, and be made one fold under one
Shepherd Jesus Christ our Lord. And this our Charity is the more conspicuous
by this, that in bulla caenae, that is the next day before, anniversarily, they
do as solemnly curse and Anathematize us. To this he answers, first that
they do more for us, and hazard their life's daily to convert us. They hazard
their life's to serve a foreign interest; not to convert, but to pervert as many
as they can; not to sow good seed in the Lords Field, but to superseminare, or
sow Tares above the wheat. We should thank them more to stay at home, then to
compass Sea and Land to gain Proselites as the Pharisees did, and made them
twofold more the Children of Hell then themselves. He says, that this is the
solemn Custom of their Church every Good Friday. Let it be so: but they have
not the same incentive and provocation which we have, we do not curse and
Anathematise the^ the day before, as they do us. This Advantage we have over
them, that we render blessing for cursing, which they do not.

He adds, that they cannot be understood under the notion of Heretics; first
because we acknowledge theirs to be a true Church, and therefore not
heretical; Secondly they are of Christ's Flock already, and therefore not
reductble to his Flock. To the First ^ answer, that a particular Church which
is only materially Heretical, not formally, does still continue a true Church
of Christ. The Bishop of Chalcedon understood these things much better then
himself, this is confessed by him in the place formerly alleged, Brief Survey
cap. 2. sect. 4.
A particular Church may be really Heretical or Schismatic, and yet morally
a true particular Church, because she is invincibly ignorant of her Heresy or
Schism. We agree with him wholly in the sense, only we differ in the
expression. What he calls really Heretical, we style materially Heretical;
and what he calls morally a true Church, we use to style Metaphysically a
true Church, that, is by truth of Entity not of Morality. Secondly I answer,
that the Flock of Christ is taken variously, sometimes more largely, sometimes
more strictly; more largely for all those that are In domo, by outward
profession; more strictly for those who are Ex domo, so in the Church, that
they are also of the Church, by inward Sanctification. And our Collect has
reference to this later acception of this word [Flock]: So Fetch them home
blessed Lord to thy Floek, that they may be saved.

He takes it ill, that our Church has changed these words in the Missall
[recall them to our Holy Mother the Catholic and Apostolic Church], into this
dwindling puling puritanicall expression, of [one Floek and one Fold under one
Shepheard]. Whether it be because he has a Pick against Scripture phrases, as
sounding too preacherlike; or rather because our Church did presume to name the
right Shepherd Jesus Christ, and not leave it to their Glosses to entitle the
Pope to that Office. But certainly the Authority of the Catholic Church, is
not formidable at all to any Genuine Sons of the Church of England.

I do readily acknowledge, that it is the duty of each Orthodox Church to
Excommunicate Formal Heretics, and them who swerve from the Apostles Creed as
the rule of Faith: but this does not oblige the Church of England to
Excommunicate all material Heretics, who follow the dictate of their
conscience, in inferior Questions which are not Essentialls of Faith, and do
hold the truth implicitly in the preparation of their minds. Neither do I ever
know that the Church of England did ever excommunicate Papists in gross qua
tales, but only some particular Papists, who were either convicted of other
Crimes, or found Guilty of Contumacy. It were to be wished, that the Court of
Rome would use the same Moderation, and remember how Ireneus reproved Pope
Victor, that he had not done rightly, to cut of from the Unity of the Mystical
body of Christ, Eusebius. li. 5. cap. 24.
so many and so great Churehes of God. This is that great nonsense, which this
egregious Prevaricatour has found in our Collect, that the English Church
cannot reconcile her doctrine and her practice together. Let him not trouble
his head with that, but rather how to recoucile himself with his own Church. He
will have prayers to be only words no works: but his Church makes Prayer,
Fasting and Alms, pa. 590
to be three satisfactory works.

My third proof of our Moderation was, that we do not challenge a new Church,
a new Religion, or new holy Orders: but derive our Church, our Religion, our
Holy Orders, from Christ and his Apostles by an uninterrupted Succession; we
obtrude no Innovations upon others. All this is quite omitted by this great
pretender to Sincerity, and yet he knows or may know, that there have been,
pretended Reformers, who have committed all these excesses. But he catches
hold of two words of my defense, that we have added no thing (I wish they could
say as much) nor taken away any thing but Errors. To the former part he
excepteth, that he who positively denies, ever adds the contrary to what he
takes away; He that makes it an Article there is no Purgatory, no Mass, no
prayers to Saints, has as many Articles as he who holds the Contrary. I have
taken away this answer before, and Demonstrated that no negative can be a
Fundamental Article, or necessary Medium of Salvation, because it has no
Entity: That there are an hundred greater disputes and Contradictions among
them selves, in Theological Questions, or in these things quae sunt fide^
materialiter, then those three are between us and them: Yet they dare not say,
that either the Affirmatives or Negatives are Articles of Faith. The Christian
Church for fifteen hundred years, knew never more then 12. old Articles of
Faith, until Pius the 4th added twelve new Articles. And now this young
Pythagoras will make us more then 1200. Articles, affirmative Articles and
Negative Articles, Fundamental Articles and Superstructive Articles. Every
Theological truth shall either be a Fundamental Article, or an indifferent
and unconcerning Opinion.

He says, our 22. Article defines the Negative to Purgatory: yet I like an
ill tutored Child, tell my old Crasy Mother the Church of England that she
lies. page 593.
I hope by this time the Reader knows sufficiently, that his pen is no
slander. If the Church of England did ever ill, it was when she begot him.
Neither do I tell the Church of England she lies, nor dissent in the least
from the Definition of the Church of England: neither does the Church of
England define any of these Questions as necessary to be believed, either
necessitate med^i, or necessitate praecepti which is much less, but only
binds her sons for peace sake not to oppose them. But he himself can hardly
be excused from lying, where he tells us the good simple Ministers did swear
to maintein them. Perhaps he was one of the simple Ministers, did he ever
swear to maintein them? did he ever know any man who did swear to maintein
them? For him to urge such falsehoods after they have been so often detected, is
double Effronterie, Periisse puto ^ui pudor periit. He infers further, By
the Bishops Logic, these propositions that there are not two Gods, that the
devils shall not be saved, nor the Saints in Heaven damned, that there is no
Salvation but through Christ; must cease to be Articles of Faith, and become
indifferent unconcerning Opinions, because they are Negative. I wish no more
disparagement to any man, then to be the author of such an absurd assertion,
Either they are Fundamental Articles, or unconcerning Opinions. How should
they cease to be Articles, which never were Articles? That there is one God,
and one Savior Jesus Christ, that the life of the Saints is everlasting, and
the Fire of the devils Everlasting, are Articles of Faith: but every thing
which may be deduced from these, is not a distinct Article of Faith.

To the latter part of my plea that we took nothing away but weeds, he
pleads, first that it is but a self supposition, or a begging of the
Question. By his leave, I have demonstrated that all the Branches of Papal
power, which are in controversy between them and us, are all gross Usurpations
and weeds, which did never sprout up in the Church of England until after 1100
years; no man can say without shame, that such were planted by Christ or his
Apostles. Secondly he excepteth, that to take away Errors, is a requisite act
af Justice, not a proof of Moderation: On the contrary, therefore it is a
proof of Moderation, because it is a requisite Act of Justice; all virtue
consists in the mean or in a moderation. It is not his particular,
pretended, supposititious Tradition, which does secure us that Christ was, and
that the Holy Scripture is the Genuine word of God: but the Universal and
perpetual Tradition of the Catholic Church of Christ.

My last proof of our Moderation was, that we are ready in the preparation of
our minds to believe and practice, whatsoever the Catholic Church of this
present Age does believe and practice. And this is an infallible preservative
to keep a man within the Pale of the Church, whosoever does this Cordially,
cannot possibly be a formal Heretic or Schismatic, because he is invincibly
ignorant of his Heresy or Schism; Ang. Epi. 48.
No man can have just cause to separate his Communion, a Communione orbis
Terrarum, from the Communion of the Christian world. If he would have confuted
this, his way had been to have proposed something which the Christian World
united does believe or practice, which we are not ready to believe or
Practice. This he does not so much as attempt to do, but barketh and raileth
without rhyme or reason. First he tells us we say that there is no Universal
Church. Choose Reader whether thou will believe him or our Leiturgy, wherein we
pray daily, that God will inspire the Universal Church with the Spirit of
Truth Unity and Concord. He tells us, that they do not doubt but we have
renounced our Creed. Choose Reader whether thou will believe him or our
Leiturgy, wherein we make profession daily of the Apostolic, Nicene, and
Athanasian Creeds. He tells us, that we have renounced our reason. If he had
said only that we had lost our reason, it is more then any man in his right
wits would say: but to say we have renounced our reason, is incredible.

The reason of all this is, because we give no certain Rule to know a true
Church from an Heretical. He supposes, that no Heretical Church is a true
Church. The Bishop of Chalcedon may instruct him better, that an Heretical
Church is a true Church whilst it erreth invincibly. He says that he has
lived in Circumstances, to be as well acquainted with our Doctrine as most men
are: Yet he professes that if his life were at stake, be could not Determine
absolutely upon our Constant Grounds, Whether Presbyterians Anabaptists or
Quakers are to be excluded from the Universal Church or no. The nearer
relation that he has had to the Church of England, the more shame for him to
scoff so often at the supposed Nakedness of his Mother, and to revile her so
virulently, without either ground or Provocation, which gave him his Christian
being. He has my Charitable Judgment of Presbyterians, in my Reply to the
Bishop of Chalcedons Epistle. And for the other Sects, it were much better to
have a little patience and suffer them to dye of themselves, then trouble the
world so much about them: they were produced in a Storm and will dye in a
Calm. He may be sure they will never molest him, at any Council either
General or Occidentall. It is honor enough for them to be named in earnest by
a Polemick writer.

But what manner of Disputing is this, to bring Questions in stead of
Arguments? As what new Form of Discipline the Protestants have introduced? What
are the certain Conditions of a right Oecumenicall Council? What is the
Universal Church, and of what particular Churches it does consist? What are
the notes to know a true Church from an Heretical? We have introduced no new
discipline, but retained the old. Our Conditions of a right Oecumenicall
Council, are the same they were, not altogether so rigorously exacted in case
of invincible necessity. We are readier to give an account of ourselves, then
to censure others: either to intrude ourselves into the Office of God, to
distinguish perfectly formal Schismatics from material; Or into the Office
of the Catholic Church, to determine precisely who ought to be excluded from
her Communion, who not. We exclude all those whom undoubted General Counsels
have excluded, the rest we leave to God, and to the determination of a free
Council as General as may be. But because I would not leave him unsatisfied
in any thing, I am contented to admit their own Definition of the Universal
Church, That is, the Company of Christians knit together by the profession of
the same faith, and the Communion of the same Sacraments, under the Government
of lawful Pastors. Taking away that purple patch, which they have added at
the latter end of it, for their own Interest, And especially of the Roman
Bishop, as the only Vicar of Christ upon Earth. And if they had stinted at a
Primacy of Order, or beginning of unity, I should not have excepted against it.

He objecteth, that Protestants have no grounds to distinguish true believers
from false. That were strange indeed, whilst we have the same Scriptures,
interpreted by the same perpetual Tradition of the Universal Church,
according to the same Analogy of Faith (wherein we give this honor to the
Fathers, not to be Authors but witnesses of Tradition); whatsoever grounds
they have to distinguish true believers from false, we have the same. But
because I made the Apostles Creed to be the rule of Faith, he objecteth, First,
then the Puritans who deny the Article of Christ's descent into Hell, must be
excluded quite from the Universal Church. If they be so, what is that to the
Church of England? if they be turned out, yet let them be heard first. They
plead that the manner of Christ's descent is not particularly determined: but
let it be determined or not, they ought to be turned out of the Universal
Church by a General Council; and it may be they will submit to the Authority
of a General Council, then there will need no turning out. Secondly he
objecteth, So a man may reject all Government of the Church, the Procession of
the Holy ghost, all the Sacraments, all the Scriptures, and yet continue a
Member of Gods Church. Why so? When I said the Creed was a ^ufficient Rule of
Faith, or Credendorum of things to be believed; I neither said nor meant, that
it was regula agendorum, a Rule of such things as are to be practiced; such as
the Acts of discipline and of the Sacraments are. The Creed contained enough
for Salvation, touching the Procession of the Holy Ghost, before the words
[Filioque] were added to it: and there is great cause to doubt, that the
Contentions of the Eastern and Western Churches about this Subject, are but a
mere Logomachy or strife about words. The Scriptures and the Creed are not two
different Rules of Faith, but one and the same Rule, dilated in the Scripture,
contracted in the Creed; the end of the Creed being to contein all Fundamental
points of Faith, or a summary of all things necessary to Salvation, to be
believed Necessitate medii: But in what particula^ writings all these
fundamental points are contained, is no particular fundamental Article it
self, nor contained in the Creed, nor could be contained in it; since it is
apparent out of Scripture it self, that the Creed was made and deposited with
the Church as a Rule of Faith, before the Canon of the new Testament was fully
perfected. Arrians and Socinians may perhaps wrest the words of the Apostles
Creed, to their Heretical Sense: but not as it is explained by the first four
General Counsels, which all Orthodox Christians do admit. He says, they and
we differ about the sense of two Articles of the Creed, that is the descent of
Christ into Hell, and the Catholic Church, but sets not down wherein we
differ. He has reason to understand our Differences, having been of both
Churches: but I for my part do rather believe, that he understands neither
part right. Howsoever it be, the Different Sense of an Article does make an
Heretic, after it is defined by the Universal Church, not before.

He says, he has already showed in the foregoing Section, that the Protestant
Grounds, have left no Order and Subordination of Universal Government in Gods
Church. But he has neither shown it in the foregoing Section, nor any where
else, nor is able to show it. We have the same subordination that the Primitive
Church, of Inferior Clergy men to Bishops, of Bishops to Archbishops, of
Archbishops to Patriarchs, and of Patriarchs to a General Council, or as
General as may be. Let him show any one link of this Subordination that we
have weakened. I said [we acknowledge not a Virtuall Church, or one man as
infallible as the Universal Church]: He rejoineth, Nor they neither. I wish it
were so Generally: but the Pope and Court of Rome, who have the power of the
Keys in their hands (who^ only we accuse in this behalf) do maintain the
Contrary; that a General Council without the Pope may err; that the Pope
with any Council General or particular, cannot err; that the infallibility
of the Church is radicated in the Pope, by virtue of Christ's prayer for S.
Peter, that his faith should not fail, not in a company of Counsailers, nor in
a Council of Bishops; that the Pope cannot define temerariously, in matters of
Faith or good manners, which concern the whole Church. What a General Council
is, and what the Universal Church is, and who ought to be excluded from the
one or the other as Heretics, I have showed already; namely, all those and
only those, who do either renounce their Creed, the badge of their
Christianity, the same Faith whereinto they were baptized; or who differing
about the sense of any Article thereof, have already been excluded as
Heretics, by the sentence of an undoubted General Council.

Howsoever he sleighteth the Controversies which they have among themselves,
concerning the last resolution of Faith, as if they were of no moment: yet they
are not of so little concernment to be so slighted. What avails it to say
they have the Church for an infallible Judge; whilst they are not certain or
do not know what the Church is, or who this infallible Judge is? May not a Man
say unto them as Elijah said unto the Israelites, Why halt ye between two
Opinions? Or rather why halt yet betwixt five or six Opinions? If the Pope
alone be infallible Judge, follow him; If a General Council alone be this
infallible Judge, follow it; If the Essential Church be the infallible Judge,
Adhere to it; If the Pope and a General Council, o^ the Pope and a particular
Council, or the Pope and his Conclave of Cardinals, be this infallible Judge,
follow them.

He tells us, that their Universal Church, is as Visible as the sun at Noone
day, to wit, those Countries in Communion with the Sea of Rome. Without doubt
they are Visible enough: but it is as Visible, that they are not the Universal
Church. What shall become of all the rest of the Christian world? They are the
elder Christians, and more numerous four for one, both Patriarchs and people.
It is against reason that one single Protopatriarch, should cast out four out
of the Church, and be both party and Judge in his own Cause. But here it ends
not; If the Pope will have his Visible Church to be one Homogeneous body, he
must cast out a great many more yet, and it is to be suspected this very
Dispatcher himself among the rest, for all his shows. They flatter the Pope
with General Terms of Head, and Chief Governor, and First Mover, which
signify nothing: but in reality they would have the Pope to be no more, then
the Duke of Venice is in the Venetian Common wealth, that is, less then any
single Senator: Or that which a General Master is in a Religious Order;
Bell. de Council. lib. 2. cap. 14.
Above all Priours and Provincialls, but subject to a Congregation General.
Wherein do these men differ from us?

Sect. 8.
That all Princes and Republiques of the Roman Communion, do in effect the
same thing which Henry the eighth did, when they have Occasion; or at least do
plead for it.
This was the Title and this was my scope of my Fifth ground; which I made good
by the Laws and decrees of the Emperors, with their Counsels and Synods and
Electorall College: by the Laws of France, the Liberties of the Gallican
Church, the Acts of their Parliaments, and declarations of their Universities:
By the practice of the King of Spain, his Counsels, his Parliaments, in
Sicily, in Castile, in Brabant and Flanders: By the sighs of Portugal and
their blea^ings, and the Judgment of the University of Lisbone: By the Laws
and Proclamations of the Republic of Venice. This I made good, in every
particular branch of Papal power which we have cast out of England; the
Patronage of the English Church, The right to call and confirm Synods, to
confer Bishoprics, to receive Tenths and First fruits and Oaths of Fidelity,
and concerning the Supreme Legislative Dispensative and Judiciary power, in all
things perteining to the External Regimeut of the Church. To all this, neither
the Bishop of Chalcedon nor Mr. Sergeant, either in his former Answer or in
this rejoinder (although provoked), have offered one word of Answer.

This Plea does utterly destroy their pretense of Divine right and of
uninterrupted Tradition, for all these Branches of Papal power. Can any man be
so stupid as to Imagine that to be of divine right, which was first tacked into
the Church, with so much Opposition, after eleven hundred years? or that to be
grounded upon perpetual and Universal Tradition, which has been opposed in
all Ages since it was devised, in all places, by all sorts of persons; Kings
and their Parliaments and Counsels, Synods and Universities, Divines and
Lawiers? What shameful Tergiversation is this, which no ingenious Adversary
could be guilty of, but out of invincible necessity? Thus he served me where I
produced all our old English Laws. Thus he served me where I produced their
own Authors to testify the intolerable extortions and Vsurpatio^s of the Roman
Court. Thus he serves me here, and in place of so many laws and
Proclamations, and Placaets, and Synodall Acts, and Judgments of Universities:
he shuffleth in so many of his fiddle-faddle Contradictions, which are not all
worth a deaf Nut. If it were not that I have proceeded so far already; and
Toto devorato Bove, turpe est in Cauda deficere, I would not Vouchsafe to
answer them but with Contempt.

Thus he begins, Nine or ten self Contradictions in one Section. He speaks
modestly, if there be one, there are nine hundred. This word [in effect] says
he, deserves a Comment. It has a Comment, wherein his feigned Contradictions
were satisfied, before they were hatched by him; the more uningenuous person
he, to take no notice of it. He may find it in my reply to the Bishop of
Chalcedon cap. 7. s. 2. pa. 243. Other Princes of the Roman Communion have made
laws as well as we, to renounce and abrogate all those branches of Papal
Authority which we cast out, that is, only Papal Usurpations: but neither
they nor we ever defined against Essential right. We deny not to the Pope a
Superiority of Order above the Archbishop of Canterbury, but we deny him a
Superiority of power in the Exterior Court, that is, we deny him the supreme
Judiciary Power: so did they. King Henry the eighth abolished the Jurisdiction
of the Bishop of Rome within his Dominions, but the Emperors did not so; If
they did not so, yet if they pleaded for it, or justified it, it is as much as
I said: And if they did it by parcells (as I have showed they did) though they
did it not in gross, it is the same thing in effect. Our Ancestors threatened
the Pope to make a wall of Separation between him and them, not by making a new
Law, for it was the Common Law of England; but by declaring the Law, by
executing the Law: And though they had threatened him to make one general Law,
against all his Usurpations in gross; yet formerly having made single Laws
against the same in particular, it was but the same in effect. This sucking
Contradiction has been answered sufficiently in the last Section. He says,
our Controversy is not about the extent of Papal Power, but about the right it
self. The just Contrary is true; Our Controversy is only about the extent of
Papal Power, or about those particular Branches of Papal power which we have
cast out. He loves to hover in Generals: but we shall bring him willingly, or
against his will, to descend to particulars.

He takes notice here, of my complaining that they answer not particulars, and
I assure the Reader that if their cause would have born it, they would have
answered them. Observe but how tame he is upon this Provocation, that uses to
be so fierce without any Provocation. All the Answer it does extort from him
is, Was ever man so ignorant of the common Laws of Disputing? Needs any more
answer to be given to particulars which one yields to, then to say he grants
them? If he be over much acquainted with the Laws of disputing, Reddat mihi
Minam Diogenes; Let him who tanght me Logic give me my Money again. But it is
well we have his Concedo omnia etc, We grant all his particular Instances of
these Contests between Kings and Popes: Yet not so very well neither; for what
he grants with one hand, he takes away with the other, Not entering into that
dispute, how far they were done Justly, how far unjustly, which is little
to our purpose, since the Authority it self is acknowledged on both Sides. It
is little to their purpose indeed, but it is much to ours. Is the Papal Power
acknowledged, where the Popes Sovereign Power, his Legisllative power, his
Judiciary Power, his dispensative power are all opposed? Much good may his dry
Papacy (as he pleases to call it sometimes) do him. In every one of these
Instances, besides mere matter of Fact, there is an Inference to matter of
right. The Common Laws of Disputing require that he should have answered that,
as well as granted the other. If his Dispatches be such as this, he may
dispatch more answers in a day, then St. Austin could have made Oppositions in
a year.

When I said, what is the Ground of his Exception, Nothing but a Contradiction?
he urges, that I make account a Contradiction is a matter of nothing. No, but
I meant that his vain Objecting of Imaginary Contradictions, is a matter of
nothing. Twenty of them will not amount to one Fleabiting: and I showed him,
that this ridiculous Contradiction which he brings here, is such an one. The
pretended Contradiction is this, that their Doctrine concerning the Pope is
injurious to Princes, and prejudices their Crowns: and yet, that they hold and
do the same in effect against the Pope that Protestants do. A doughty
Contradiction; both parts are as true as can be, referendo singula singulis,
referring what I said to the right Subject, as I applied it. The Doctrine of the
Pope and Court of Rome is injurious to Princes, (of whom I speak expressly and
no others:) and yet sovereign Princes and their Counsels have held and done,
the same things against the Pope in effect that Protestants do. Just such
another Contradiction as this, The Guelphes are for the Pope against the
Emperor: yet the Gibellines are for the Emperor against the Pope, and both
Factions Roman Catholics. Thus he changes Subjects, and Predicates, and
times, and respects, and all Rules to make a Contradiction. But his defense is
more ridiculous then his pretended Contradiction, That the substance of the
Popes Authority is the point which belongs to me to impugn. So the
Contradiction lies not in what I did say, but what I should have said, or
rather what he would have had me to have said. When his Substance of Papal
Authority, has lost all its extent (which he gives every man leave to
question), it is an Indivisible indeed. His second Exception is just such
another. I pleaded that [I speak expressly of the Pope and Court of Rome]: He
rejoineth, No my Lord, but I would not let you change ^he Subject of the whole
Question. If he will change my sense, he must take the Contradiction upon
himself. These are the Common Rules of disputing with this great Dictatour in
Logic.

I chanced to say, that [our Religion and theirs is the same]. He bids me
answer seriously, whether the Roman Religion and ours do not differ in this
very point of the Popes Supremacy? If the Roman Religion be the Christian
Religion, then our Religion is the same. Every Difference in this point or
another point, does not make a Diverse religion. A Garden weeded and a Garden
unweeded is the same Garden. We esteem it an honor to be Christians, and no
Dishonor to us that we are no Papists; what they think of us concerns
themselves not us. We do gladly admit the old Apostolical Rule of Religion:
but we like not their new Rules or new Creeds. And we are ready for peace sake,
to attribute as much to the Pope as many of their own Doctors do, that is, a
Primacy of Order or beginning of Unity: and the not accepting of this, renders
them guilty of Schism and breaking the Unity of Gods Church.

He demands, if these rigorous Assertions be not the General Tenet of their
Church, whom do we impugn? We impugn the Pope and Court of Rome, whose Tenets
these Rigorous Assertions are, upon which they grounded their manifold
Usurpations, which we have cast out deservedly; and for so doing they have
excommunicated us, and so broken the Unity of the Church. The substance of the
Popes just Authority is no more then a Primacy of Order, or beginning of Unity
at the most; This we have not cast out. And this Act we can justify, by betier
Logic then he can oppose it. We know the Pope has sometimes remitted of his
rigor, when he was not able to make good his sentence by force: but it will
trouble him to find one instance of a Pope who has ever retracted his unjust
censures out of pure Conscience, or acknowledged his unjust Usurpations.
Whether he did or no, we do not much regard, being done with an erring Key.
Many Millions of Christians are saved, which are out of his Catholic world.

Next follow two heavy Contradictions, able to make Miloes back crack with
their weight. Take them in his own words, for they are even absurd enough
without any Aggravavation. The Bishop said, that all Catholic Kings, abetted
by their Doctors and Casuists, did resist the Pope in his Usurpations, but here
to show how some Doctors at sometimes escaped the Popes Clutches, he says,
that the Pope and his Court have something else to do, then to enquire after
the Tene^s of private Doctors. Why may not this grow to be a Contradiction in
time? It is no Conciliation already. The other Contradiction is yet more silly.
I said, perhaps some of those Doctors lived about the time of the Counsels of
Constance and Basile: that is one Enuntiation, what is the other? Nay there is
none at all of mine. Yet he cries score up another self contradiction. How? A
Contradiction of one Proposition? A Contradiction with a Perhaps? Such a
Contradiction was never heard of in our days, nor in the days of our
Forefathers. But though it be not a self Contradiction, yet perhaps it may
contradict the truth: No truly, it con^^adicts the Truth no more then it self.
I will take away the [perhaps] to give him Line enough. Some of the Opposers
lived in this last Age: Yet the Bishop says some of them lived in the time of
the Counsels of Constance. This is the first time that ever a Contradiction
was pretended betwixt two particular Propositions such as these. He says, that
none can tell what I mean by their living out of the Popes reach* I told him
my self, their being protected by Sovereign Power; My lord the Emperor defend
me with the Sword, and I will defend the with the Pen.

He says, what the Sorbon Doctors thought of the Court of Rome, concerns not
me nor the Question. They ever valued the Popes Supremacy as a point of Faith,
for the not doing of which we are cast out of the Church. He will find, that it
does both concern me and the Question. If the Court of Rome had not obtruded
another manner of Supremacy, then the Sorbon Doctors allowed, this Schism had
never been. For all the Popes Supremacy, they radicated Ecclesiastical power
in the Church; they subjected the Pope to the Church; they made him no
Sovereign Prince but a Duke of Venice, less then the Senate, that is, less
then a General Council. All that they allowed him was a beginning of Unity,
where have we dissallowed that?

He accused, Our bloody Laws and bloudier Execution. I referred him to my
Reply to the Bishop of Chalcedon, where this Question is clearly stated, and
fully discussed: and I expected an account from him, of that he had to say
against it solidly and fully, but I see Omnibus hoc vitium est Cantoribus,
inter Amicos V^nunquam inducant animum cantare rogat^, Injussi nunquam
desistant. He delights altogether in Generals; and I love to have
Controversies circumstantiated, Qui pauca considerat facile pronuntiat. I bring
more then pretended Fears and Iealousies on our part, to Justify our Laws;
even gross treason by the Law of Nations on their parts.

He says, that in my 48. page, I clear their Religion from destroying
Subjection to Princes. All I say is this [their Religion is the same with ours,
that is Christian, and needs not to be cleared from being a Source of
Sedition, or an Incentive to Rebellion]. Here is something to clear Christian
Religion, but not Popery qua talis, as it is obtruded. Well, but he says he
will supply that defect, I subsume, But the Supremacy of the Pope is to us a
point of Faith, Therefore the holding of it, is according to him no ways
injurious to Princes. Observe Reader it is he subsumes, not I: so it is he that
clears them qua tales, as they are Papists, not I. And how does he clear them?
By a Syllogism as memorable as his Contradictions. His Assumption is: But the
Supremacy of the Pope is to us (Roman Catholics) a point of Faith* Therefore
the holding of it is according to him (the Bishop of Derry) no ways injurious
to Princes. Stay Sr. here is a Syllogism with a witness, which has more in
the Conclusion then there was in the premises, namely, according to him. Who
ta^ght you this Logic, to assume for yourself, and Conclude for me?

Here he presents the Reader with two new Contradictions of mine, as silly and
senseless as the rest. They are these, that I say the Instances cited by me,
were before the disloyal Opinions of the Romanists: and yet some of my
Instances were in Cardinal Richlieus days, and since very lately. Adding,
that I contradict myself yet once more, affirming that I hope those seditious
doctrins, at this day are almost buried. What Satisfaction does this man owe to
his Reader, to conceal from him all the Presidents Laws Sentences, of
Emperors Kings Commonwealths Universities, and to present him nothing but
such Fopperies as these? I will not vouchsafe to spend any time about them, but
only give the Reader an Ariadnes clew, to guide him out of this Imaginary
Maze. I have showed him, what these seditious Opinions were, where they were
hatched, and when; namely, in the beginning of Queen Elisabeths Reign. Reply to
the Bish. of Chalc. c. 3. sect. 4.
And though some few of my Instances were after that time, yet the maine body
of them was much more ancient; as in the Empire,, from Charles the great to
Charles the fifth, and in France from Carolus Calvus downward. So I might
truly say that the Instances cited by me, were long before those disloyal
Opinions were hatched: and yet they are not so lately hatched, but I hope they
are almost buried at this day. A man would have thought that I deserved thanks
for my Charity, not to be traduced. But it is all one, let the Reader judge who
it is that trippeth up his own heels.

When I said, It was great Pity that he was not one of Christ's Counsa^lers when
he formed his Church; It did not suppose that Christ had any Counsailers, but
to tax him who takes upon him so Magisterially to dictate, what was necessary
then for Christ to do. This I called sauciness, and justly. Good Christians
(as I told him formerly) ought to argue thus, Christ formed his Church thus,
Therefore this is the best Form: not thus, This is the best Form, therefore
Christ Formed it after this manner. The only reason why I cited that text of
St. Paul, Ephesians. 4. 4.
One Body, one Spirit, one Hope, one Lord, one Faith, one Baptism, one God and
Father of all was this; that St. Paul reckoning up seven Bonds of Unity, should
omit this which Mr. Sergeant makes to be the only Bond of Unity, namely, unus
Papa, One Pope, or one Bishop of Rome: Christ saw it necessary to make a Bond
of Unity between the Churches; And that for this reason he gave the
Principality to St: Peter, and Consequently to the Bishops of Rome. All this he
supposes on his own head, but does not go about to prove any thing; if St.
Paul had been of the same, mind, that was the proper place to have recorded it,
and doubtless he would not have omitted it. This Argument which only I used,
he does not touch: but fancieth that I make these seven Bonds of Unity, or
Obligations to Unity, or means of Unity, to be seven marks of those which be
in the Church; which I never dreamed of. And therefore I pass it by as
impertinent: Only adding, that our Ground for Unity of Faith is our Creed, and
for Unity of Government, the very same form of Discipline, which was used in
the Primitive Church, and is derived from them to us.

When I wished that he had expressed himself more clearly, whether he be for a
beginning of Order and Unity, or for a single head of Power and Jurisdiction; I
spoke of St. Peter, of who^ the case is clear, that he had no more power over
his Fellow Apostles then they had over him: and that the Supremacy of Power
rested in the Apostolical College; All that St. Pe^er had was a beginning of
Unity, What St. Peter had, the Pope may pretend a claim to, what he had not,
the Pope has no pretense for. Neither John Patriarch of Constantinople, nor
any other ancient Bishop, nor yet St. Gregory himself, did ever dream of such a
singular Headship of Power as he mentions, that is, that no Bishop in the
Church should have Power but he; Although the Court of Rome and their adherents
come very near it at this day, deriving all the power of Jurisdiction of all
other Bishops from the Pope. That Power which John affected, and St. Gregory
impugned then, and we impugn now, is the Power of Universal Jurisdiction in
the Exterior Court; If that were an Heresy in him (as he confesses,) let them
look to themselves. Neither is the Bishops Primacy of Order, so dry a Primacy
as he pretends, nor destitute of those Privileges which belong to a Primate
of Order by the Law of Nature, To call Assemblies sub paena spirituali, or to
intimate the nec^ssity of calling them, to propose doubts, to receive Votes,
and to execute so far as he is trusted by the Church; This is the single
Power of a Primate of Order, but besides this, he has also a conjoint power in
the Government of the Church. What he says to the prejudice of General
Counsels, I have answered formerly.

He asks me, What other Successor St. Peter had, who could pretend to an
Headship of Order, except the Bishop of Rome? I answer, that I did not speak,
of what St. Peter had, but what he might have had, or may have whenever the
Representative Church, that is a General Council, should give the Primacy of
Order to another Bishop. Since he is so great a Friend to the School of
Sorbon, he can not well be ignorant what their learned Chancellor has written
expressly upon this Subject, in his Book de A^seribilitate Papae, not the
taking away of the Papacy, but Removal of it. And what Bellarmine confesses,
that neither Scripture nor Tradition does prove, that the Ap^s^olicall See is
so fixed to Rome that it cannot be removed, He urges, that then the Church
should remain without this Principality at the death of every Pope, until all
the Churches in Iapan China and India had given their consent: yet I
acknowledge it to be of perpetual necessity. First, he does me wrong, I did
not say positively that it is of perpetual necessity: but that I like it well
enough, and the reason being of perpetual necessity, seems strongly to imply
the necessity of the thing. Secondly I answer, that there is no need to expect
such far fetched Suffrages, so long as the Primacy may remain fixed where it
is, unless a General Council or one as General as may be, think fit to
remove it: and if a General Council remove it, it will take order for the
future succession. And this same reason does clearly take away his answer to my
instance, That as the Dying of such a Bishop Lord Chancellor of England, does
not perpetuate the Chancellourship to that Bishopric, because there is a
Sovereign Prince to elect another: so the dying of St. Peter Bishop of Rome,
does not perpetuate the Primacy to that Bishopric, because a General Council
when it is in being, has power to transfer it to another See, if they find
it expedient for the public good.

The Bishop knows right well, that the Church of Christ is both his Spouse
and his Family, both the Governesse and the Governed; The Supreme Governesse in
respect of its Representative a General Council, to which all Ecclesiastical
Officers higher or lower, whether Constituted by Christ or substituted by the
Church, do owe an account; And the Governed in respect of that Universality of
Christians which he mentions. And this sounds much more sweetly in Christian
ears, then to make either the Pope the Master, or the Church of Rome the
Mistress of the Church.

He brought an Argument for the Succession of the Roman Bishop, drawn from the
Vicissitude of Humane affairs. I reto^ted it upon himself, that Rome itself
was as much subject to this Vicissitude, as any other place, [it may be
destroyed with an Earthquake.] He says, It must be an unheard of Earthquake,
which can swallow up the whole Diocese: if the City be destroyed, yet the
Clergy of the Roman Diocese can elect to themselves a new Bishop. But this new
elected Bishop, shall be no more the Bishop of Rome after it is destroyed, But
that which concerns him and the cause more is, he proposes my Objection by
halfes; I said it might be destroyed by wars also, that is both City and
Diocese, and become a place for Satyrs to Dance in and Owls to scr^ech in. As
great Cities as Rome have run that Fortune; In that case what will become of
his Election. I added [it may become Heretical or Mahumetan]. He answers,
True, so may the whole Church, if it had pleased God so to Order causes. No, by
his leave not so, Christ has promised that his Universal Church shall never
fail: but he has not promised that Rome shall never fail. I said, [the
Church never disposes so of her Offices, as not to be able to change her
Mesnagery, according to the Vicissitude of Humane affaires]. He opposes, that
I granted in the foregoing Page, that Christ himself and not the Church
instituted this Prineipality or Primacy: and bids me show, that the Church has
Authority to change Christ's Institution. I did not grant it but suppose it: but
whether granted or supposed, it is not material to the purpose. The Church
has no power to change Christ's Institution in Essentialls: but all
Ecclesiastical Officers whatsoever are her Officers, and she has power to
dispose of them, and govern them, and to alter what is not Essential.

I know there are other meaus between Tyranny and Anarchy, besides Aristocracy,
even all lawful Forms of Government, as Monarchy and Democracy: but in the
Government of the Catholic Church Monarchy and Democracy had no place, unless
it were in respect of Particular Diocesses or Provinces; and therefore to have
named Monarchy here, had been superfluous and impertinent. But the Government
of the Primitive Church in the Apostles and their Successors was ever
Aristocraticall, first by an equal Participation of power in the Apostles, and
then by a Subordination of Bishops in their Successors; and this as well out
of General Counsels as in them, as well before there were General Counsels
as after. It is not my want of Memory, but his want of Judgment, to pursue
such shadows as these and nickname them Contradictions.

He asks, how should a Primate of Order, who has no power to Act at all in
order to the Universal Church, have more power to prevent her good or procure
her harm, then one who has Sovereignty of power? This is his perpetual
Practice, to dispute from that which is not granted. St. Peter was a Primate of
Order a^ong the Apostles and no more: yet he had power to act singly as an
Apostle and as a Primate among the Apostles, he had power also to Act jointly
with the Apos^olicall College; so have all other Primates of ^rder. Whatsoever
Mr. Sergeant thi^kes, Our Savi^u^ thought this Form of Gove^ment as conducible
to the good of his Church, both to procure her Good and to prevent her harm, as
an absolute Sovereignty. I do not feast the Reader with Contradictions;
Nothing is more true then my Assertion, but he abuses his Reader with
notorious Fictions.

If the Papacy be the Bridle in the mouth of the Church, then without
peradventure the Pope is the Rider; though the Papacy be not, I said enough
before to let him see the, unfitness of his l^dicr^us Allegory, and taxed him
for it: if he delight in it let him pursue it; Nos hac a Scabie tenemus ungues.
How the Church does both govern and is governed, I have showed him formerly.

In his answer he fell into a large Encomiu^ of the Papacy, demanding among
other things, What Christian Prince can choose but be glad to have an Arbitrator
so prudent, so p^^^s, so distinteressed, as a Good Pope should be and if this
Authority were duly Governed? I told him that to look upon men as they should
be, was to write dreaming. He rejoineth, that he looks not upon men at all in
this place, but speaks of the Office it self; And challenges me, what say you
to the Office it self? I answer, first he says not truly, for he did look at
men in this place, otherwise why did he add this Condition; as a good Pope
should be? And this other; If this Authority were duly governed? Certainly he
who looks upon an Arbitrator so prudent so pious, so Disinteressed as a good
Pope should be, looks something upon men. And so in truth he ought to do:
but his fault is, that he looks upon them as they should be, and not as they
commonly are; which is the same fault I tax him with, to write Dreaming, not
waking.

Now to his Question, What say you to the Office it self? I say first, that
though he has stated it p. 624: Yet he has not stated it at all, neither (I
fear) dare he state it, nor is willing to state it. He tells us indeed
sometimes of the Substance of the Papacy, but wherein the Substance of the
Papacy consists (except some General unsignificant Expressions of an Headship,
or Chief Governourship, or First Movership, about which we have no Controversy
with them, and which are equally appliable to a Primacy of Order and a
Sovereignty of Power), he says nothing. Whether the Pope be an absolute
Monarch or a duke of Venice, inferior to the whole Senate; whether he have a
Coactive power in the Exterior Court, throughout all other Princes dominions,
without their leaves; Whether he have the right to confer Bishoprics,
Convocate Synods, Impose Pensions, For bid Oaths of Allegiance, and require new
Oaths of Allegiance to himself, Set up Legantine Courts, Receive Appeals, make
Laws, dispense with Laws at his pleasure, he says nothing: yet these are the
only Controversies we have with them, to ask what we say to the Popes
Authority, without stating of it, without stinting of it, is an unreasonable
demand.

I say secondly, that he ought to explain himself, by what right he does
challenge this Authority Divine or Humane, or only out of Prudentiall reasons.
If he challenge it by divine right or Humane right, he ought to prove the
right, according to the just extent of that Authority which he does challenge:
and not wave the extent, as a thing Indifferent. If he challenge it out of
Prudentiall Reasons, it ought to be considered, whether the Hopes or the
Hazards, the Advantages or Disadvantages, the Convenie^ces or Inconveniences of
such a Form of Government particularly circumstantiated, do over balance the
one or the other; And the surest trial of this is by experience. It will
trouble him to find so many Advantages, which the Church and Kingdom of
England have received from Papal Jurisdiction, (I speak not of the Key of
Order,) as may overweigh all those Disadvantages which they have sustained, by
the Extortions, and Usurpations, and Malignant Influence of the Papacy. If he
attribute no more power to the Pope, then all Roman Catholics universally do
approve, (which is the only Rule that he gives us, to know what is the
Substance of Papal Authority), he need not be so impetuous, this Question is
near an end.

He asks whether we, and the Eastern Southern and Northern Christians, be
under the Government of Patriarchs or any other Common Government? I answer we
and they are under the same Common Government, which the Primitive Church was
under from the Days of the Apostles, long before there were any General
Counsels; that was the Government of Bishops under Primates or Patriarchs. For
as I have said formerly, a Protarch and a Patriarch in the Language of the
Primitive Church are both one. We have as much Opportunity to Convocate Synods
as they had then, before there were Christian Emperors, and more: yet by such
Counsels as they could Congregate, though they were not General; they
governed the Church. If there be not that free Communication of one Church with
another that was then, either by reason of the great distance, or our mutual
misunderstanding one of another, for want of the old Canonical Epistles or
Literae Formatae, the more is the Pity: We are sorry for it, and ready to
contribute our uttermost endeavors to the Remedy of it.

With these western Churches which have shaken of the Roman Y^ke, we have much
more Communion, by Synods, by Letters, by Publishing our Confessions: and we
might justly hope for a much nearer union yet, both in doctrine and Discipline,
if God would be graciously pleased to restore an happy Peace. That we have it
not already in so large a measure as we might, is their only Faults, who would
not give way to an Uniform Reformation. Sometimes they accuse us for having too
much Communion with them, at other times they will not grant us to have any at
all.

Concerning the rest of the Western Churches which submit to the Papacy, we
have the same Rules both of Doctrine and Discipline which they had, We have the
same that they have, saving their Additionall Errors. We have broken no Bonds
of Unity, either in Faith or Discipline; we have renounced no just Authority,
either Divine or Humane; we adhere to the Apostles Creed, as the ancient and
true Rule of Faith, into which alone all Christians (that ever were) have been
baptized, and we renounce the upstart additionall Articles of Pius the fourth.
We are willing for peace sake to give the Pope the same Primacy of Order, which
St. Peter had above his Fellow Apostles: but the Supremacy of power was not in
St. Peter, but in the Apostolical College; neither is now in the Bishop of
Rome, but in a Council of Bishops.

He says we maintein a larger Brotherhood then they, but never go about to
show any visible Tie of Government. We show them the same Badge or Cognizance
of our Christianity, that is, the same Creed, and the same Discipline or
Government, that is, the same Colors, derived down from the Apostles by an
uninterrupted Succession; The same Doctrine and the same Discipline is Tie
enough. To take an exact View it is necessary the Organ should be perfect, the
Medium fit, and the Distance convenient; if any one of these were Defective in
Mr. Rosses View, he might well mistake: but I may not do him that wrong to
trust your Testimony, without citing his words.

He urges, If Christ have left any Unity of Government in his Church and
Commanded it to be kept, and we have taken a Course to leave no such Unity,
then we have rebelled against Christ and his Church, and falsely pretend to have
him our Spiritual head. I admit this: now let him Assume. But you
(Protestants) have taken a Course to leave no Unity of Government in the
Church, which Christ left and Commanded to be kept. I deny his Assumtion
altogether: and he says not one word to prove it. This is his Enthymematicall
manner of Arguing.

He proceeds, That to have a General Council for an Ecclesiastical Head, is
to confess that there is no Ordinary Unity of Government in Gods Church, but
extraordinary only when a Council sits. I deny this Proposition altogether,
and the reason is Evident; because besides a General Council which sits
but rarely, (neither is it needful that it should sit often, Nisi dignus
Vindice nodus inciderit,) there are particular Counsels, which in lesser
Exigents serve the turn as well as General. There are Patriarchs and Bishops,
which are Ordinary and perpetual. In an Aristocracy, it is not necessary that
the Governors should be evermore actually Assembled. In the first three
hundred years, there were no General Counsels held, there was less hope of
ever holding them then, then now: yet there was an Ordinary Unity of Government
in Gods Church in those days, for which they were not indebted at all to any
visible Monarch. B^t when a General Council does sit, the Supreme
Ecclesiastical power rests in it.

He wonders why I should make the King only a Political Head, Contrary to our
Common Assertion. It seems that though he has been bred among us, yet he
has not been much versed in our Authors; No man that ever understood himself,
made him otherwise. Yet this Political Head, has a great Influence upon
Ecclesiastical Causes and persons, in the External Regiment of the Church. He
demands, is there any Orderly Common Tie of Government, obliging this Head to
Correspond with the other head? If not, where is the Unity? I answer, yes, the
direction of his Spiritual Guides, that is, his Bishops and Synods; If this
Method be so great a Rarity with him, it is his own fault. He had said more
properly, to Correspond with the other Heads then Head.

He says, It is false to say, that they have sometimes two or three heads,
since there can be but one true or rightly chosen Pope. True, but the Election
may be uncertain, that no man living can know the true Pope: so whether there
be three Popes, or one Pope and two pretenders, yet if the right Pope cannot be
made appear, it is all one relatively to the Church; If the Trumpet give an
uncertain sound, who shall prepare himself to the Battle. He tells us
further, that when the Sea of Rome is vacant, the Headship is in the Chief
Clergy whom they call Cardinals, as secure a Course as man's wit can invent. As
Chief as their Cardinals are, the much greatest part of them, were but
Ordinary Parish Priests and Deacons of old. The Cardinals indeed have to do
with the Church of Rome in the Vacancy: but what pretense have they from St.
Peter? What have they to do with the Universal Monarchy of the Church? Before
he told us, that their Headship was Christ's own Ordination; now he tells us
that this Headship is sometimes in the College of Cardinals, and that it is as
secure a Course as man's wit can invent. What a Contradiction would he make of
this?

He demands, does the Harmony of Confessions show, that we have one Common
certain Rule of Faith, or any particular sort of Government, obliging us to an
Unity, under the Notion of Governed? I do show him one Common certain Rule of
Faith, even the Apostles Creed: and a particular sort of Government, even the
same was used in the Primitive Times. What am I the better? he will take no
notice of them, because I will not fix upon that Rule of Faith, and that Form
of Government which he Fancieth. Yet I am for Tradition as well as he, but it
is Universal and perpetual Tradition: such a Tradition is the Creed, and in
deed is that very Tradition which is so renowned in the Ancients.

He charge me with saying, That Heretics can have no Baptism. Let him
either make his accusation good, or suffer as a Falsifier. All that I say is,
Turks Jews Heretics and Christians, have not the same Baptism. The reason
is plain, because Turks and Jews have no Baptism at all. Secondly we ought
to distinguish between the Baptism of Heretics, and Heretical Baptism; if
the Baptism it self be good, the Administration of it by Heretics does not
invalidate it at all: but if the Heretic baptize after an Heretical Form, as
without due Matter, or not in the Name of the Trinity; such Baptism is
Heretical and naught. But all this is needless to understand the right scope
of my words, I said that a Body cousisting of Jews Turks Heretics and
Christians, had not the same Baptism: I did not say that every one of these
wanted true Baptism; He might as well charge me with saying that Christians
can have no true Baptism.

I have manifested elsewhere, that the Creed is a List of all Fundamentalls:
Sect. 1. cap. 2.
and in the same Section and Chapter the Reader shall find that the Bishop is
not a Falsifier, bu Mr. Sergeant, is both an egregious Calumniator and
Falsifier of the Council of Ephesus. I to^ke the word Paganism, in the
ancient Primitive sense for Infidelity, as it is contradistinguished to
Christianity. The true reason of that Appellation was, because Country Villages
did continue long in their Infidelity, after Cities were converted to
Christianity. So the Turks are the only Pagans, which we have now in this
part of the World. What a piece of Goteham Wisdom is this, to quarrel about
names, when we agree upon the things. Turks and Pagans in my sense were the
same thing: both Infidells.

But he instructs the Learned Bishop, that the Turks acknowledge a God. So did
the Pagans also, if Lactantius say true, Non ego illum Lapidem colo quem video,
sed servio eiquem non video. He adds, that I affirm the Council of Ephesus
held in the year 430, Ordered something concerning Turks, which sprang not up
till the year 630, and calls this good sport. If there be any sport, it is
to see his Childish Vanity. If I listed to play with words, I could tell him
that the Mahumetans sprung up about the year 630, the Turks many Ages after.
But the answer is plain and easy, the Council of Ephesus did give Orders for
all Ages ensuing concerning Infidells: but Turks are Infidells, and so it gave
Order concerning Turks.

Socinians and Arrians, may admit the Apostles Creed interpreted their own way:
but they ought to admit, it as it is interpreted by the Frst four General
Counsels; that they do not, and so they believe not all Fundamentalls as they
should do. What he Objecteth further, that Puritans hold not the Article of
Christ's descent into Hell, and the Roman Catholics and Protestants differ
about the sense of two other Articles, has been answered formerly. The
Puritans will tell him, that the manner of Christ's descent has not been
determined hitherto. And I doubt much, he understands not the Romish and
English Tenets, so well as he should.

SECT. IX.
That the Pope and Court of Rome are most guilty of the Schism.
My first Charge was this, That Member of any Society which leaves its proper
place, to assume an higher place in the Body, is Schismatic: But the Pope
and his Party do not content themselves that the Church of Rome should be the
Sister of other Patriarchall Churches, and the Mother of many Churches, unless
she be Lady and Mistrisse of all Churches; or that the Pope should be the
Brother of Other Bishops, or a fellow of other Bishops (as he was styled of
old), unless he may be the Lord and Master of all Bishops. That the former is
his proper place, I clearly proved by Letters, not of himself to other Bishops,
that might be Condiscension; as for a General to call his Officers Fellow
soldiers: but of other Bishops to him; no under Officer durst presume to call
his General fellow soldier. That he assumeth the other place to himself, is
proved out of the new Creed of Pius the fourth, I acknowledge the Roman Church
to be the Mother and Mistrisse of all Churches: and I promise and swear true
Obedience to the Bishop of Rome, as to the Vicar of Jesus Christ. And in the
Oath of Allegiance which all Bishops swear to the Pope, IAB Bishop etc. will
be Faith full to St. Peter, and to the holy Apostolical Church of Rome, and to
our Lord Pope Alexander etc. There is a great distance between the old Brother
Bishop and fellow Bishop, and this Oath of Allegiance to the Pope as to their
LiegeLord.

First he Charge me, that I do flatly falsify his words, which do never
deny her to be a mother, but a Sister only. Either I falsified his words, or
he falsified mine. My words were these, First they make the Church of Rome, to
be not only the Sister of all other Patriarchall Churches and the Mother of
many Churches, but to be the Lady and Mistress of all Churches. The two Former
Branches of Sister and Mother are both acknowledged, the last only of Lady and
Mistress is denied. He falsifieth my words in his answer thus, because she
takes upon her to be Mistress, where she is but Sister to other Churches. You
see the word Mother is left out, and because I bring it in again as I ought,
to make the Argument as it was before his Curtaling of it, I am become the
Falsifier with him, and he who is the Falsifier in earnest is innocent.

I cited the words of St. Bernard, to prove that the Pope was not Lord or
Master of other Bishops, and the Roman Church a Mother of other Churches, not
a Lady or Mistress. He distinguishes between Dominam and Magistram, an
Imperious proud Lady Mistrisse, and a Schoole-Mistresse or Teacheresse; Adding,
that they use the word Magistram in the latter sense. So they say no more then
we; we do acknowledge the Church of Rome to be a Teacheresse, and the Pope a
Teacher, as it is an Apostolical Church and he an Apostolical Bishop: but all
the Question is of the other word Dominum, which the Pope takes to him self as
well as Magistrum; as we have seen in the Oath of Allegiance which he makes all
Bishops to swear. Neither does St. Bernard oppose proud Imperious Dominion to
Gentle Dominion, but he contradistinguisheth Dominion to no Dominion; and thy
self not a Lord of other Bishops, but one of them. Not a Lord of other Bishops,
says St. Bernard: A Lord of other Bishops, says the Oath of Fidelity; I will
be faithful to our Lord Pope Alexander.

He urges, that the Bishop has brought a Testimony, which asserts the Church
of Rome to be the Mother of other Churches, and so of the Church of England
too. St. Bernard asserted the Church of Rome to be the Mother of other
Churches, so did the Bishop: but not to be the Mother of all other Churches, no
more did the Bishop; particularly not of the Church of Britain, which was
ancienter then the Church of Rome, and so could not be her daughter. Let them
prove their right that they are our Mother, and we are ready to do our filial
Duty; saving always that Higher duty which we owe to our Mother Paramount, the
Universal Church. But neither can they prove their right that they are our
Mother, neither is that Subjection which they Demand, the Subjection due to a
particular Mother, but to an Universal Lord.

But Schism involves in its Notion disobedience, etc. And so the Bishop
concludes the Mother Schismatic because she is disobedient to her Daughter.
His first error is, to make the Church of Rome to be our Mother. The second,
to think that a Mother may challenge what Obedience she lists of her
Daughter. The third, that Schism consists altogether in the Disobedience of
Subjects. Causall Schism may and does Ordinarily consist, in the unlawfuli
Injunctions of Superiors.

My second reason to convince them as guilty of Schism, was the new Creed set
out by Pius the fourth; This he calls a Calumny. He cannot speak lower then
Calumnies, Absurdities, Contradictions, Falsifications etc. A high Calumny to
slander them with a matter of truth; It is such a Calumny as they will never be
able to shake of. He refers the Reader to what he has said in the first
Section, and I to my Answer there. He says it is known that each point in that
profession of Faith (that is the twelve new Articles) was held of Faith by the
former Church. How? held of Faith? as an Essential of Faith? And this known?
to whom? to the man in the Moon? But here is the maddest Contradiction that
ever was, and might well have become his Merry Stationer. It is a Contradiction
to pretend that he (Pius the 4.) made a new Creed, till it be shown that any of
these points was not formerly of Faith, and be proved satisfactorily that the
Apostles Creed contained all necessary points of Faith. A Contradiction? I see
many men talk of Robin Hood, who never shot in his Bow: talk of
Contradictions, who know not what they are. Observe the equity of these men,
They Visibly insert 12 new Articles into the Creed, and then would put us to
prove, that they were not of Faith before, and that all necessary points of
Faith are contained in the Apostles Creed. He is resolved to keep two strings
to his Bow, and knows not which of them to trust to. Hear you Sr. If they
be Articles of Faith now, as you have made them, then they were always
Articles of Faith: and all those were damned which did not believe them; but
that you dare not say.

My third Charge of Schism was, because they maintain the Pope in his
Rebellion against General Counsels. Here he distinguishes between a
Schooleman and a Controvertist, to no manner of purpose, for it is altogether
impertinent. There is no man who inveigheth so much against wording and
Quibling as himself, and yet the world has not a greater Worder or Quibler
then he is. Wherefore to prevent the Readers trouble and mine own, and his
shifting and flinching, and to tie him within his Compass perforce; I made
bold to reduce my Argument to a Syllogisticall Form. They who subject a
General Council, which is the Highest Tribunal of Christians, to the Pope,
are guilty of Schism: But the Pope and Court of Rome, with all their
mainteiners, (that is, much the Greater part of of their writers,) do subject
a General Council to the Pope. Therefore the Pope and Court of Rome with all
their Mainteiners, that is the much greater part of their Writers, are Guilty
of Schism.

Here he should have answered Punctually to the Proposition or Assumtion,
either by denying granting or distinguishing: but for all his calling for a
Rigorous Demonstrative way, he likes it not, because he cannot make such
impertinent extravagant excursions as he uses to do, which are the only help
he has at a dead lift. All the Answer he gives is this, He (the Bishop) is
accused of a Contradiction and Nonsense, and to clear himself he tells us, he
will now lay aside the one part of the Contradiction and endeavor to make good
sense of the other. To what Proposition, to what ^erme does he apply this
answer? I see no Contradiction, I see no Nonsense in my discourse, nor any body
living but himself. I said no such thing as he pretends. What does the man
mean by these waves of brainlesse butterd fish, by these heterogeneous
incoherent Fopperies, and Chimaeraes which have no existence but in his own
pate? If he mean to answer, let him do it clearly like a Scholar; since I
have found this way to tie him to his matter, and restrain his torrent of
words, I shall put it in practice oftener. Yet if I meet with any such thing as
is substantial among his vapouring expressions, which has but the least
resemblance of an answer, though it be not reduced into Form, I will gleane it
out, and examine the weight of it.

Such is this which follows, Was it for this Opinion of the Pope above the
Council etc. How were they guilty of Schism for this? unless they had denied
you Communion for holding the Contrary, or pressed upon you an unconscientious
approbation of it, which you know they did not. Fool not your Readers my Lord;
It was not for this Tenet which you impute to the Court of Rome, but for that
of the Popes Headship or Spiritual Jurisdiction over all Gods Church held by
all Catholics, etc. For which you are excommunicated. It is true they did not
deny us Communion for holding this Opinion, nor press upon us an
unconscientious Approbation of this Opinion directly, for any thing that I
know: but nevertheless, they have by their power subjected a General Council
to the Pope, they have procured it to be defined (though not expressly) in the
Council of Florence, and to be expressly defined in the Council of Lateran
under Leo the tenth. Hence it is, that all the Counsels since the Counsels of
Constance and Basile and the two Pisan Counsels, have wanted Conciliary
Freedom, and been altogether at the Disposition of the Popes; to prorogue
them, to tranfferre them, to stin^ them what matters they might handle and what
not, to defer their Determinations until he had formed or created a party,
or wrought some of the dissenting Bishops to his will, to ratify or reject
their decrees at his pleasure. When or where was it ever heard before, that
there was twice as many Bishops of one Nation in a General Council, as of all
other Nations in the world? Hence was that complaint of the Fathers in the
Council of Trent, that the Synod was guided by the Holy Ghost sent from Rome
in a Male. If it had not been for this thing, but the Fathers had been
permitted freely to have proceeded in the Council of Trent, in the Resolution
of that noble Question concerning the Residence and divine Right of Bishops: in
all probability this great rent had been made up, and he and I had not needed
to have disputed this Question at this Day.

Thus by this Opinion and by their Sinister Practices to establish it, they are
causally and formally Schismatic: and have been both the procreating and
conserving Cause of this great Schism; the procreating cause, by altering the
Hierarchy, and Disordering the Members, which does necessarily produce a
disturbance and Schism in the Body; and the conserving cause, by destroying
the Freedom of Counsels, which are the proper Remedies of Schism. Whether
these later Counsels were Occumenicall, or Occidentall, or neither, is not the
point in debate; They are those which they call General; They were as General
as they would permit them to be; and to conclude, it was their fault that they
were not more General. So though this were not the very cause alleged by them,
why they did excommunicate us: yet it was one of the Causes of the Schism, and
consequently of our Excommunication.

I leave every man free to Judge for himself: but for mine own part I am so
great a Lover of the peace of Christendom, that I should not oppose the Bishop
of Romes headship of Order, if he would be content with it; and that is as much
as many whom he styles his own Sons do yield him. But though that be
sufficient for the Catholic Church, it is not sufficient for the Court of Rome
to fill their Coffers; they love not such a Dry Papacy. I dispute only whether
the Popes right be Divine, or humane, or mixed (as Gerson thought); either
score may justly challenge Duty: But I am very positive, that whatsoever the
Bishop of Rome has more then this Primacy of Order or beginning of Unity, he
had it by humane right, and by humane right he may lose it. Neither do I go
about to deprive the Bishop of Rome, or any Bishop whatsoever of any
Jurisdiction purely spiritual, which was left them as a Legacy by Christ or by
his Apostles: but I deny that Apparitors, or Pursivants, or Prisons are of
Christ's Institution; I deny that Christ or his Apostles did ever either
exercise themselves, or grant to others Authority to exercise Coactive
Jurisdiction in the exterior Court, over the Subjects of other Princes, within
their Dominions, and without their leaves. If Subjects submit, Volenti non fit
injuria, but then it is not Coactive; If Princes give leave, (as they have done
in all Ages, so far as they judged it expedient for the public good), then it
is very lawful: but without the Subjects submission or the Princes leave,
there may be indeed a spiritual kind of Coactio^ in the interior Court of
Conscience, but no true coactio^ in the exterior Court of the Church.

I see he understands not the sense of that Logical restriction, The Papacy
as it is such; which signifies not the Papacy as it ought to be, or so far as
all Roman Catholics do agree about it; but the Papacy as it is Qualified in
present, or as it is owned, or obtruded, or endeavored to be obtruded by the
Pope and Court of Rome. So the Papacy as it is such, is opposed or
contradistinguished to the Ancient Papacy in the purer and more Primitive
times, which was not guilty of those Usurpations which the modern Popes have
introduced. Thus still my Contradiction does end in his misunderstanding.

My fourth and last charge of Schism upon the Pope and Court of Rome was thus.
They who take away the Line of Apostolical Succession, throughout the world
except in the Sea of Rome, who make all Episcopal Jurisdiction to flow from
the Pope of Rome, and to be founded in his Laws, to be imparted to other
Bishops as the Popes Vicars and Coadjutors, assumed by them into part of their
Charge, are Schismatics: But the Pope and Court of Rome and their mainteiners
do thus: Therefore the Pope and Court of Rome and their mainteiners, are
Schismatics.

To this Argument, he vouchsafes no answer at all in due Form as it ought to
be, and I have no reason to insist long upon his Voluntary Iargon. All the
Answer which he intimates is this, that this Tenet is not General among them,
but points of Faith are held generally. Here is an answerlesse Answer, without
confessing or denying either Proposition: such an Answer does not become one,
who makes himself so great a Master in the Art of disputing; I charge not
their whole Church, but the Pope and Court of Rome, and all their Abetters and
Mainteiners, with the Crime of Schism. I conclude no more then I assume. He
answers that the whole Church dot not hold these Tenets. What is that to the
purpose? As if a Particular person, as the Pope, or a Particular Society, as
the Court of Rome, or the greater part of a Church, as all their Abetters and
mainteiners, could not be Schismatics except the whole Church be
Schismatic, which is most absurd. I am free to charge whom I will, if he
will not answer for them, he may be silent: but if he undertake to be their
Advocate, let him defend them in due Form as he ought, and not tell us, that
he is not concerned as a Controvertist to defend any thing but Points of Faith.
Which is neither better nor worse in plain English, then to run away from the
Question. All our Controversy is, whether such and such pretended Privileges be
Papal Rights or Papal Usurpations: If he dare not maintein them to be just
rights, either by divine Law or humane Law, and refuse to contend with us when
we prove them to be Usurpations; to what end does he interest himself, and
break other men's heads with the clattering noise of his Sabots.

SECT. X.
An Answer to their Objections.
THeir first Objection was, that we had separated ourselves from the Communion
of the Catholic Church. I answered that we hold Communion with thrice so many
Catholic Christians as they do, that is, the Eastern Southern and Northern
Christians, besides Protestants. He interprets these Christians with whom we
hold Communion to be num^erlesse Multitudes of Manichees, G^osticks,
Carpocratians Arrians, Nestorians Eutichians etc. Adding, that he protests
most faithfully, he does not think that I have any solid reason to refuse
Communion to the worst of them. Reader, learn how to value his faithful
Protestations hereafter. I show that we all detest those damned Heresies, and
complain of his Partiality and want of Ingenuity, to abuse the Reader with
such lying suggestions, which he himself knows to be most false, and
challenge him to show that any of us are guilty of any of these Heresies: now
see what he produces to free himself from such an horrid Calumny.

First he says, that the Bishops tax is evidently this, to show some solid
reasons why he admits some of these and rejects others. This is not the purging
of his old Calumny, but the twisting of a new Calumny to it. Labhominate and
Anathematise them all, and he will have a reason of me why I admit some of them
and reject others. Well done brave disputant!

Secondly he urges, Suppose he could not charge the Church of England, or any
of these other Churches with any of these Heresies* are there no other
Here^sies in the world but these old ones? Or is it impossible that a new
Heresy should arise? There are other Heresies in the world, and it is possible
that a new Heresy my arise: but what does that concern the Church of England?
unless he think that there is no Heresy in the world, nor is possible to be,
but the Church of England must be guilty if it. Worser and Worser.

He proceeds, that he accused not the Church of England or the Bishop for
holding those material points, but that having no determinate certain Rule of
Faith, they had no grounds to reject any from their Communion, who hold some
common points of Christianity with them. It is well, habemus c^nfi^entem reum,
Mr. Sergeant retracts his Charge; The Church of England and the Bishop are once
declared innocent of those old Heresies, which he made a Muster of to no
purpose* To let him see that I say nothing new, and how he thrasheth his own
Friends blind fold: Peter Lombard, Thomas a Jesus, Cardinal Tolet, and many
others, do make the Question about the procession of the Holy Ghost, to be
Verbal only without Reality; and that the Grecian expressions of Spiritus
Filii, The Spirit of the Son, and per Filium, by the Son, do signify as
much as our Filioque, and from the Son. And of the Nestorians, Onuphrius gives
this Judgment, Onuphrius in vita Iulii tertii.
These Nestorians do seem to me, to have retained the name of Nestorius the
Heretic rather then his errors: for I find nothing in them that savoureth of
that Sect. And for the supposed Eutychians, Thomas a Jesus gives us ample
Testimony, That the suspicion did grow upon a double mistake. Thom. a Jesus
Contr. l. 7. pa. 1. ca. 3. and 11.
They were suspected of Eutychianisme because they retained not the Council of
Chalcedon; and they received not the Council of Chalcedon, because they
suspected it of Nestorianisme: but yet they accurse Eutyches for an Heretic,
and so did the Council of Chalcedon Anathematise Nestorius. The same is
asserted by Brerewood, Brerewoods Enqu. ca. 25. p. 183.
out of the Confessions of the Iacobites, Nestorians, Armenians, Cophites and
Abyssines. To his Objection I answer, First, that though we had no such certain
Rule of Faith: yet it was not presently necessary, that we must tumble headlong
into such abominable errors, as many of these Heretics held, which the
Discreeter Heathen did detest. Secondly, we have a certain Rule of Faith, the
Apostles Creed dilated in the Scriptures, or the Scriptures contracted into the
Apostles Creed: and for that ugly Fardle of Heresies, which he mentions, we
can show that they are all diametrally opposite to the Apostles Creed, as it is
explained in the four first General Counsels. Reader have a care to presere
Epicte^us his Jewel, Remember to distrust such faithful or rather feigned
Protestations.

He argues, All those Heretics had the Same Rule or Grounds of their Faith
that Protestants have, namely the Holy Scripture; therefore they are all of the
Protestant Communion. In good time. All those Heretics had the same Rule or
grounds of their Faith, that Roman Catholics have, namely the Holy Scriptures,
therefore they are of the Roman Catholic Communion. If he except, that the
bare Letter of the Scriptures, is not the Ground or Rule of Faith to Roman
Catholics, but the Scripture interpreted according to the Analogy of Faith and
Tradition of the Church* the Church of England says the very same for it self.
So if this be the source of all error to abandon the Tradition of the Church,
we are far enough from the source of all error. This is the only difference
in this particular between me and Mr. Sergeant, what he attributes to the
Tradition of immediate Forefathers, I ascribe to the perpetual and Universal
Tradition of the Catholic Church. Who would believe, that this man himself had
deserted the Tradition of his Immediate Forefathers?

That which he adds, the Tradition of Immediate Forefathers is the only
Ground of Faiths certainty, and the Denying of it more Pestilentiall then the
Denying of the Godhead of Christ, or the asserting the worst of those errors
which any of those old Heretics held, as there are two Gods, a Good God and an
Evil God; is most false and Dangerous, to tumble into a certain Crime for
fear of an uncertein. What he adds concerning Sects new sprung up in
England, and Luther, and Carolostadius, concerns not us nor the present
Controversy.

I said, that some few Eastern Christians were called Nestorians, and some
others by reason of some unusual expressio^s suspected of E^tichianisme, but
most wrongfully: and in our Name, and in the name of all those Churches which
hold Communion with us, I accursed all the Errors of those Heretics.
Notwithstanding all this, he says that nothing is more right then to call them
so, that what I say here is contrary to the public and best intelligence we
have from those remote Countries, that I have a mind to cling in very Brotherly
and very lovingly, with the Nestorians and Eutychians, though I say I will not,
that I stroke those errors which I accurse, with a gentle hand, stiling them
but unusual expressions. First for so much as concerns my self, I have
renounced those errors, I have accursed them: if yet he will not cr^dit me,
there is nothing left for me to do, but to appeal to God the searcher of all
hearts, that what I say is true, and his accusations are groundless Calumnies.
But as to the merit of the cause he adds, that these unusual expressions
were only these, that Christ had two distinct persons, and no distinct
natures. Thus he says, but what Authors, what Authority does he produce, that
any of these Churches are guilty of any such expressions? None at all, because
for all his good intelligence, he has none to produce, nor ever will be able
to produce any; and so his good intelligence must end in smoke and stink, as
his most faithful protestation did before. I will conclude this point to his
shame, with the Doctrine of the English Church Art. 2. That the two Natures
Divine and Humane are perfectly and inseperably conjoined in the Unity of the
person of Christ. Does this agree with his counterfeit expressions, Christ has
two distinct persons no distnct natures?

When I used this expression [the best is we are either wheat or chafe of the
Lords Floor, but their tongues must not winnow us], these words [the best is],
had no such immediate Relation unto the words immediately following [we are
either wheat or Chaffe], but to the last* words [their tongues must not winnow
us], making this the complete sense, we are either wheat or chafe, but the
best is whether we be wheat or chafe, their tongues must not winnow us. What
poor boyish pickquering is this?

In my Reply to the Bishop of Chalcedon, occasionally I showed the Agreement of
the Greek Churches with the Church of England, in the greatest Questions
agitated between us and the Church of Rome, out of Cyrill late Patriarch of
Constantinople; which he takes no notice of, but in requital urges a passage
out of Mr. Rosse, in his book called a View of all Religions. It is an
unequal match, between Mr. Rosse a private Stranger, and the Patriarch of
Constantinople, in a cause concerning his own Church. I meddle not with Mr.
Rosse, but leave him to abound in his own sense, I know not whether he be truly
cited or not: but with Mr. Sergeant. I shall be bold to tell him that if he
speaks seriously and bona fide, he is mistaken wholly, Neither do the Greeks
place much of their Devotion in the worship of the Virgin Mary and painted
Images. Cyrill. ad Int. 4.
Hear Cyrill the Patriarch, we give leave to him that will, to have the Images
of Christ and of the Saints, but we disallow the Adoration and worship of them,
as prohibited by the Holy Ghost in Holy Scripture. And another, They give great
honor to the Virgin Mary the Mother of Christ, but they neither adore her, nor
implore her aid. And for the Intercession, prayers, help and Merits of the
Saints, (taking the word [Merit] in the sense of the Primitive Church, that is
not for Desert but for Acquisition), I know no Difference about them among
those men who understand themselves: but only about the last words, which they
invocate in their Temples rather then Churches. A Comprecation both the
Grecia^s and we do allow, an ultimate invocatio^ both the Grecians and we
detest: so do the Church of Rome in their Doctrine, but they vary from it in
their practice. It follows, They place Justification not in Faith but in
works, Most Falsely* Hear Hieremy the Patriarch; Prim. Resp. cap. 6. C. 13.
We must do good works but not confide in them: And Cyrill his Successor,
We believe that man is justified by Faith not Works.

Before we can determine for whom those Eastern Southern and Northern
Christians are, in the Question concerning the Sacrifice of the Mass: it is
necessary to know what the right state of this Controversy is. I have
challenged them to go one step further into it then I do, and they dare not,
or rather they cannot without Blasphemy.

The next instance concerning Purgatory, is so gross and notorions a mistake,
that it were a great shame to confute it; They believe that the souls of the
Dead are bettered by the prayers of the living. Which way are they bettered?
That the souls of damned are released or eased thereby, the Modern Greeks
deny, and so do we; That there are any souls in Purgatory to be helped, they
deny, and so do we; That they may be helped to the Consummation of their
Blessedness, and to a speedier Union with their Bodies by the resurrection
thereof, they do not deny, no more do we: We pray daily, Thy Kingdom come: and
Come Lord Jesus come quickly: and that we with this our Brother and all other
departed in the Faith, may have our perfect Consummation and bless both in
body and Soul. They hate Ecclesiastical Tyranny and lying supposititious
Traditions, so do we; but if they be for the Authority of the Church, and for
genuine Apostolical Traditions, Gods blessing on their hearts, so are we.
Lastly the Grecians know no feast of Corpus Christi, nor carry the Sacrament up
and down, nor elevate it to be adored. They adore Christ in the use of the
Sacrament, so do we: They do not adore the Sacrament, no more do we.

Yet from hence he infers, that there is not a point of Faith wherein they
dissent from the Church of Rome, except that one of the Popes Supremacy. It is
well they will acknowledge that. Yet, the Grecians agree with us and differ
from them, in his two Rules or Bonds of Unity. In the Rule of discipline; the
Grecians and we have the same Government of Bishops under Patriarchs and
Primates, Secondly in the Rule of Faith; the Grecians and we have both the same
Canonical books of Scripture, both reject their Apocryphal Additions from
the Genuine Canon. They and we have both the same Apostolical Creed, both
reject the new Additions of Pius the fourth. In sum, they and we do both
deny their Transubstantiation, their Purgatory, their Justification by works
in sensu forensi, their doctrine of Merits and Supererogation, their Septenary
number of the Sacraments, their Image worship, their Pardons, their private
Masses, their half-Communion. And to be brief, the Grecians do renounce and
reject all those Branches of Papal power, which we have cast out of the Church
of England. As the Popes Sovereignty over the Catholic Church by divine Right,
as Nilus says; It is intolerable that the Roman Bishop will not be subject to
the Canons of the Fathers, since he had his Dignity from the Fathers. Secondly
his Legislative power, as Peter Stewart Vice-chanceller of Ingolstad
witnesses, that the Grecians object it as an error to the Latins, that they
make the Popes Commandments to be their Canons and Laws. Thirdly his
Judiciary power, equalling the Patriarch of Constantinople to the Patriarch of
Rome, or rather preferring him. Lastly his dispensative power, accusing his
Pardons and Dispensations as things that open a ga^e to all Kind of Villainy. I
am glad that Nilus is in his good grace, to be styled by him one of the gravest
Bishops and Authors of that party, for one moderate expression wherein he says
no more then we say* His Friend Possivine calls him a Virulent Adversary: and
if ever Mr. Sergeant read him thoroughly, it is ten to one he will change his
note. Thus much for my Communion with the Eastern Churches, it is the same with
the Southern and Northern Churches; all which do plead better Tradition then
himself.

Whereas he says that my Assertion, that the Creed contained all points
necessary to be believed, is grounded only upon my falsifying of the Council
of Ephesus; he bewrays his ignorance both in the Fathers and in his own
Authors. The Scripture is none of those particular Articles which are
necessary to Salvation to be believed: but it is the Evidence whereby those
Articles are revealed* and wherein they are comprehended; The Creed was
composed before the Canon of Scripture was perfected. They have not only
changed from their Ancestors in Opinions: but they have changed their own
Opinions, into necessary Articles of Faith, which is worse.

I denied that the Council of Trent was a General Council, as wanting the
requisite Conditions of a General Council, which they themselves judge to be
necessary. The summons ought to have been general, but it was not. The great
Patriarchs ought to have been present, but they were not; neither the
Patriarchs of Constantinople, Alexandria, Antioch and Jerusalem, nor any of
them; nor yet the Patriarchs of Armenia, Abissina, Mosco, Mussall etc., nor any
of them. He answers, they had no right to be summoned thither, unless to be
called to the Bar as Delinquents, nor to sit there, nor are to be accounted
Christians. It had need to be a large Bar indeed to hold them all. Was it
ever heard before, that a fifth part of a Council did call four parts to the
Bar? Their Ancestors had right to be summoned to a General Council, and to
sit and vote there as well as the best; how have their posterity lost this
right? Had they been heard and condemned in a General Council? No. But he
urges what need hearing, when themselves in the Face of the whole world
publicly confessed and maintain their imputed fault. How? what needed
hearing? O Just Judge! He that gives a right Sentence, yet if he give it
without hearing, is an unrighteous Judge. They confessed their imputed Fault:
but did they confess it to be a Fault? No I warrant you, he can not say it for
shame. Or how should they confess it in the Face of the whole Christian world?
They are the Christian world themselves, and your Roman world is but a
Microcosme in comparison of them.

The case is so evident and notorious, that no man can doubt of it. The
Continent has not left St. Peter's Boat, but St. Peter's Boat has left the
Continent. The Innovation or swerving from Apostolical Tradition, was not in
the Christian world, but in the Court of Rome, who would have advanced their
Aristocraticall power to a Sovereign Monarchical power: but the Christian
world would not give way to it; if this were an error in them, all their
Ancestors were guilty of it as well as they. But the Court of Rome being
conscious to themselves that they were the Innovators, to free themselves from
fear of being censured by the Christian World, adventured to give the first
blow, by censuring the whole Christian world it self. This was a Bolder Act
then that of Pope Victor which Irenaeus misliked so much.

He will never leave his Socraticall manner of disputing by Questions; what
certain Rule have we to know, what Sects are of she Church? Although I needed
not, yet I have answered this demand formerly. All those are of the Church who
wear the Badge and Cognizance of Christians, that is, the Apostles Creed as it
is explicated by the four first General Counsels, as all those Churches do:
and have not been cast out of the Church by the Sentence of a General
Council, as none of these Churches have; no nor yet by the Sentence of the
Roman Church it self, if we may trust the Bishop of Chalcedons Survey cap. 8.
Neither does the Roman Church excommunicate all the Christians of Afric Asia
Greece and Russia, but only such as do vincibly or sinfully err. He adds,
that there are innumerable who are not formal Heretics, but only Hereticis
Credentes. These continue good Christians still, and are Churches still, and
ought not to be excluded from General Counsels, though supposed to be
materially in an error; much less being innocent and in no Heresy or Schism
either formal or Material.

I pleaded that though it were true, that all the other Patriarchs were such
Material Heretics, yet of all others they ought especially to have been
summoned. The reason is evident, because they that are sick have more need of
the Physician, then they that are in health. Hence he infers, that it is
more necessary that Heretics be called to a General Council, then Orthodox
Fathers. Not so, both are necessary, the one to Cure, the other to be cured:
but the especial Consideration or end of a Council, is for those that err,
that they may be reduced.

I said [the Pope has not that Authority over a General Council, that the
King has over a Parliament]. He answers, that he is so plain a man, that he
understands not what the Authority of King or Parliament signifies. I will
help him. The King may dissolve a Parliament when he pleases: so may not the
Pope a General Council against their wills. If the King dye by whose writ it
was called, the Parliament is dissolved: so is not a General Council by death
of the Pope. The King has a Negative voice in Parliament: so has not the Pope
in a General Council.

I urged, that the Proto^patriarchs are not known or condemned Rebels. He
answers first, this is only said again not proved. He is always stumbling
upon the same Block: It does not belong to me to prove they were not condemned;
but to himself who accuses them, to show when and where they where condemned.
Secondly he answers, that their Errors have been condemned by Counsels, and
for the most part some of their own party being present. But the condemning of
their errors, is no sufficient warrant for the excluding of their persons out
of General Counsels. Neither were these Counsels General Counsels, or such
as had any Jurisdiction over the Protopatriarchs. Moreover, they condemn
Papal Errors as well as he condemns their Errors, whether is more Credit
to begiven to the Pope, in his own cause charging all the Patriarchs in the
world, or to all the other Patriarchs in the world, unanimously condemning his
Usurpations in the name of the Catholic Church?

He demands, whether there might not be a Parliament of England, without having
the fifth part of the Members found in that Council, and yet be a lawful
Parliament? I think there might, if the absence of all the rest proceeded from
their own neglect: but not if it proceeded from want of Summons, as the absence
of the Protopatriarchs did.

He bids me rub up my memory, he believes I will find an English Law, that
sixty Members is a sufficient number to make a lawful Parliament. I have done
his Commands, and I know no such law, nor he neither: and then he must be a
very confident man to cite such a Law. Perhaps he has heard of some Ordinance
of the House of Commons, how many members at the least must be present at doing
of some inferior Acts: but neither is this Ordinance an English Law, ^or that
House an English Parliament.

He says, I excepted against the superproportioned multitude of Members out of
one Province, which never lawful Parliament had. Superproportioned indeed,
where there were double the Number of Italian Bishops to all the other Bishops
of the Christian world, (this is no equal representative): and these assembled
thither not to dispute, as he fancieth vainly, but merely to overvote the
Tramontanes. A few Bishops had sufficed to relate the Belief or Tradition of
Italy, as well as the rest of the world: but that had not sufficed to do the
Popes work, that was, to overswey the rest of the Christian world, with his
Superproportioned multitude of Italian Bishops. He says, perhaps I will
pretend, that had the Catholic Bishops out of their Provinces been there, they
would have voted against their Fellow Catholics, in behalf of Luther and
Calvin, which were a wise answer. I heed not much what he calls wise or
foolish: I do not only pretend, but I see clearly, that If the Bishops of
other Countries had been proportioned to those of Italy, they had carried the
Debate about Residence and the Divine right of Episcopacy; and that had done
the b^sinesse of the Western Church, and undone the Court of Rome.

But he quite omitteth the most material part of my Discourse, concerning his
resemblance between a Parliament and a General Council; That [the absence of
whole Provinces and the much greater part of the Provinces, either of England
or of Christendom, for want of due Summons, does disable such a Parliament or
such a Council, from being a General Representative of the whole.] He might
even as well say, that an Assembly of the Peers and Burgesses of Wales upon
Summons, without any appearance or summons of all the rest of the Kingdom of
England, was a lawful Parliament of all England: as say the Council of Trent
was a General Representative of the Christian world, which was never summoned.

I proved, that the Council of Trent was no General Council, because it was
not Generally received, no not among the Occidentall Churches: particularly, by
the Church of France in point of Discipline. He answers that notwithstanding,
They acknowledge it to be a lawful General Council, and receive it in all
Determinations belonging to Faith. Adding, that the Disciplinarian Laws of a
General Council, do bind particular Countries only in due Circumstances,
and according to their Conveniences. But the Contrary is most apparent, that
Counsels truly General, being the Supreme Tribunalls of the Catholic Church,
do bind particular Churches as well in point of Discipline as of Faith. The
General Counsels of Constantinople and Chalcedon, did set the Sea of
Constantinople before Alexandria and Antioch, And equal it to Rome,
notwithstanding the Popes Opposition. What Opinion the King and Church of
France had of the Council of Trent in those Days, appears by the solemn
Protestation of the French Ambassador, made in the Council in the name of his
Master and the French Church, that seeing all things were done at Rome rather
then at Trent, Gold. to. 3. pa. 571
and the decrees there published, were rather the decres of Pius the fourth
then of the Council of Trent, We denounce (said he) and protest before you
all, that whatsoever things are decreed and published in this Assembly by the
mere will and pleasure of Pope Pius, neither the most Christian King will ever
approve, nor the French Church ever acknowledge to be the decrees of a General
Council.

That the Council of Trent was not a free Council I proved, first by the
Testimony of Sleidan; secondly by the bitter complaint of the Fathers in the
Council of Trent, that it was guided by the Spirit sent from Rome in a Male;
thirdly by the Popes creating ^ot only new Bishops, but new Bishoprics in the
time of the Council, to make his party able to overvote their Opposers. To the
first he says, that Sleidan was a notorious lying Authonr of our own side. Who
fitter to relate the Grievances of the Protestants then a Protestant? which he
did not say in a Corner but published to the world in print, when they might
have refuted it if they could. To the second he answers, that it was a
jeering expression. Yes, it was biting as well as jeering Ridiculum acri
Fortius and melius magnas plerumque secat res. The French Ambassador (whom he
thought to pass by in silence) did not jeere: yet he said the same thing in
sad earnest. To my third Argument he says ^t is nothing to the purpose. How
nothing to the purpose, for the Pope when his affairs were going retrograde,
and his party like to be overvoted; to create new Bishoprics, to ordain new
Bishops, and pack them away presently to the Council to assist his party, and
by that means to gain a plurality of Voices? Is this nothing to the purpose in
his Opinion? It may be he thinks, that Italy had not Bishops enough there,
(yet they had two thirds of the Council before): or that these new Bishops,
did understand the Tradition and Belief of Italy better then all the rest.

If it be his mind to wave the Popes Patriarchall power, I am contented:
otherwise his proof will not weigh much, unless we admit strangers (who know
little or nothing of our Privileges, more then we know the Cyprian Privilege,
before the Council of Ephesus) to be compete^t judges, and will interpret a
Western Patriarch to be the only Patriarch of all the west. The Archbishop of
York is Primate of England, and yet all England is not subject to his
Jurisdiction. Forfeiture and Quitting are two distinct Charges: an Office is
Forfeited by abuse, and quitted by assuming a new Office inconsistent with the
former; as I have showed the Papacy and a Patriarchate, that is, a Sovereign
and Subordinate power to be. But a Patriarchate and a Bishopric, being both
subordinate to a General Council, are not inconsistent: and much less the
Office of a King and Master of a Family, the one being Political the other
Oeconomicall. But an Universal Monarchy by divine right, and the Presidency of
a Particular Province by Humane right, are inconsistent; I gave him my reasons
for it, and he takes no notice of them.

He excepteth against my styling Patriarchall Authority, a Patriarchall
Aristocraticall dignity, which he calls my thrice repeated non sense. It is
well he did not make it a Contradiction. His reason is, because a Patriarcha^e
is a Government by one, an Aristocracy by many. The answer is Obvious and easy;
a Patriarch is a Monarch in the Government of his own Patriarchate, yet
subordinate to a General Council: but in a General Council or in the
Government of the Catholic Church, he is but one of the Optimates, or a Fellow
governor with other Bishops. He says, it was never pretended by Catholics,
that the Pope was the King of the Church. I wonder that he is no better
acquainted with the Sorbone disputes, whether the Regiment of the Church, be an
absolute Monarchy tempered with an Aristocracy.

We have a Meritorious Sacrifice, that is the Sacrifice of the Cross; We have
a Commemorative and Applicative Sacrifice, or a Commemoration and Application
of that Sacrifice in the Holy Eucharist. A Suppletory Sacrifice, to supply any
want or defects in that Sacrifice, he dare not own, and unless he do own it,
he says no more then we say.

What I spoke of our Registers, I intended principally of that Register of the
right Ordination of Protestan^ Bishops, that he may see when he will for his
love, and have the Copy of any Act in it for his money: but he had rather
wrangle about it then take such pains; if he will have a little Patience I
will ease him of that Labor and Expenses. It is no insuperable difficulty nor
any difficulty at all to us, to find out that Catholic Church which we have in
our Creed: but to find out his Roman Catholic Church; is both a Contradiction
in adjecto, and an Apple of Contention, serving to commit him and his Friends
together among themselves, which he knows and therefore declineth it.

I called not the Ancient Bishop of Italy either Episcopelles, or the Popes
hungry Parasiticall Pensioners: but the Fla^terers of the Roman Court, and
Principally those petty Bishops, which were created during the Council of
Trent to serve the Popes turn. If he think that Court free from such Moths, he
is much mistaken. Neither are these expressions mine originally, I learned them
from the ancient Bishops of Italy themselves, who gave them those very names of
Episcopelles etc. Neither did I tax any man in particular.

He desires me to examine my Conscience, whether I do not get my living by
preaching that Doctrine which I put in my Books, which how many notorious
Falsities, Contradictions, and Tergiversations they have in them, may be judged
by this present work. Yes, if he and his merry Stationer may be my Judges. Now
his work is ended and answered, I will make him a fair offer; If he be able
to make but one of all his Contradictions, and Falsifications, and absurdities
good, I will be reputed guilty of all the rest: if he be not, I desire him both
to examine his own Conscience and Discretion, what reward he de^erveth both at
the hands of God and man, for so many notorious Calumnies. As for his Faults, I
shall rather leave them to the Judgment of the Reader, then trouble myself
with the Recapitulation of them.

In the close of my Discourse I answered an exception of his, that I cited
Gerson against myself. The words of Gerson (or rather of the Eastern Church
when they separated from the Roman) are these, Potentiam tuam recognoscimus,
Avar^^iam tuam implere non possumus, Vivite per vos; We know thy power, we
cannot satisfy thy Covetousness, Live by yourselves. They knew that he had a
Patriarchall power, and that he was the first or chief of the Patriarchs: but
this power we deny not, that power which we deny, is a Supremacy of single
power, and that by Christ's own Ordination. The Question is, whether the
Grecians did acknowledge such a power due to the Pope in these words. That they
did not, I prove, first by the practice of most of all the Eastern Churches,
who excommunicate the Pope yearly as a Schismatic for challenging this power.
Secondly, I prove it by the Testimony of all their writers, especially the
modern Greeks, as Hieremy and Cyrill, the two succeeding Patriarchs of
Constantinople, and Nilus an Archbishop etc., who all deny this power to the
Pope in the name of the Greek Church. Thirdly, I prove it by his own confession
in this very Chapter, There is no one point produced by him, which our Church
looks upon as a point of Faith, in which they dissent from us and consent with
the Protestants, except that one of denying the Popes Supremacy. How? do they
grant the Popes Supremacy and deny the Popes Supremacy, and yet continue the
same without Variation (as they have done)? I do not say this is a
Contradiction, but let the Reader Judge.

His reasons are mere Prevarications, not reasons. First here is no Opposition
between power and covetousness, unless he mean all Affirmatives and Negatives
(whatsoever be the Subjects or Predicates,) are Opposites; and if they were, it
signifies nothing. Secondly, he demands what power had the Pope over them
except Spiritual Jurisdiction? I answer, he showed them sufficiently at the
Division of the Greek Empire: and then they stood in need of his assistence
against the Turk.

His third fourth and fifth Arguments may be reduced to one, and when they are
twisted they will not have the weight of one single hair. The Difference was
about undue Subsid^es and Taxes, but the Demanding Subsidies seems incredible,
had there not been some preacknowledged power to ground such demands upon. Yes,
there was his Protopatriarchall power, and that tentered and stretched out to
the uttermost extent: and when he would have extended it yet higher, the
Grecians cast out his Usurpations. I see he does but grope in the dark, I will
help him to some light. Peter Steward upon Caleca tells him what these undue
Subsidies and Exactions were, when the Popes Legates brought yearly the Chrisme
from the Apostolic See to Constantinople, they would not depart from thence
unless they had eighty pound weight of Gold, besides other Gifts bestowed upon
them.

Lastly he adds, Gerson concludes that upon this Consideration, they might
proceed to the Reformation of the French Churches, notwithstanding the
Contradiction which perhaps some of the Court of Rome would make; which
evidenceth that the acknowledgement of the Popes just power was retained, and
encroachments on their Liberties only denied. Concedo omnia. His
Protopatriarchall power was acknowledged, his Sovereignty of Jurisdiction was
denied as an encroachment: and this is the same Method which we observed in
England.

And so Mr. Sergeant concludes his Rejoinder, that the Bishop began like a
Bowler and ends like one of those Artificers, who going to mend one hole, use
to make other three. Just Mr. Sergeant, just, As your mind thinks, so the
Bell clinketh. If there be any of those Artificers here, it is yourself, whose
constant Custom is to make holes where there are none, and out of an eager
desire of Contradicting others, to plunge yourself irrecoverably into real
Contradiction. With Scurrility you began this Rejoinder and with Scurrility you
end it.

That which follows is a Dish of thrice sodden Coleworts, or a vain
recapitulation of his own Imaginary Achievements, which the Reader has been
troubled withal too often already.

I have done with Mr. Sergeants Rejoinder, and have but one short request to
the Reader; That if he meet with any thing in this Treatise, which is not
becoming that Gravity or Civility which one Scholar owes to another,
especially in Theological Inquisitions, Sciat responsum non dictum esse. He
will be pleased to consider, that it is hardly possible to answer so much
Petulance, without some Tartness. For the future, if Mr. Sergeant have any
thing to say upon this subject, let him say it Logically and he will not have
cause to complain that he is neglected: but if he pursue this way of quibling
and wording, (which he complains of in others without a cause, and practices
himself) I shall make bold to cull out and answer whatsoever I Judge material,
and leave the rest to a younger pen, which will attend his Motions.

FINIS.

