A new Sect of Religon Descryed, called ADAMITES: Deriving their Religion from
our Father Adam.

Wherein they hold themselves to be blameless at the last day, though they
sin never so egregiously, for they challenge Salvation, as their due, from
the innocence of their second ADAM.

This was first disclosed by a Brother of the same Sect, to the Author, who
went along with this Brother, and saw all these Passages following.

By Samoth Yarb, Bachelor in Arts.

Down Proud Flesh Down
in a grand hall, a naked man schools another naked man on rejecting the
pleasures of the flesh, while a naked woman, book in hand and hair loose, looks
on

Printed Anno 16^^

A New Sect of Religion descryed, called Adamits, deriving their Religion from
our Father Adam.
I Know, Reader, thou can not be ignorant of the multitude of Sects, which
are scattered here and there about this Kingdom, and how they lie like nests
of Caterpillars, destroying our sweet smelling garden roses; this therefore is
but as a poroemium to our ensuing discourse; Let not their multitude, because
some are supposed to be untruths, any way disanull of the verity of ours, for a
brother of the same Sect, seeing the folly which he heretofore had nourished,
for a truth has related, what my unable quill has strove to write.

For J, the Author, walking in Moore-fields (as my custom is to take the fresh
Air) met with a brother in a great melancholy, he went a slow pace, his hat
over his eyes, and his eyes fixed on the ground, his arms were locked one
within the other, with all the postures of a malcontent as possible could
be, I noted his carriage a great while, at last being desirous to know
something from him, struck him upon the shoulder with this salute, well
overtaken brother.

That very name of Brother was such an enlivning to this discontented man, that
he answered my salute with a welcome; well, we walked along together, in
which time I was so bold as to enquire from him, what should be the cause of
his so sad a melancholy, he answered me first with a sigh, then after some
postures which told me he was much troubled in mind, he began as follows.

Sir, you seem by your habit to be a Scholar and Schollres can both keep
things secret and also give good Counsel to avoid evils which may hang over
their heads which are in danger.

I am entangled in a religion which much troubles my soul, you being a
Scholar may therefore unfold the truth of things unto me; First we attribute a
name to our selves, that we might be known from all other men, Adamites; and
in that we hold all things which he held and no more: Secondly; we go all
naked whenever the word is expounded, holding it unlawful to call those
vestments which we wear but figleaves, because our ancient Parents Adam and
Eve, did cloth themselves in no other when they fled from the presence of God
in the garden of Paradise; Also no man of what degree soever he be must live
idly from handy-worke, because it is said in the Curse, In the sweat of thy
face, shall thou eat thy bread, till thou return unto the ground, Genesis the 3.
at the 19. verse. Now Sir, I desire you, that you would tell me, whether yea,
or nay, the Father of errors dwell in the hearts of these men. J answered him,
that it was very ill done of them, to attribute a name unto them selves,
scorning as it were the name of Christians. Let them take heed, lest they bring
another Babels confusion on their heads, Genesis 12. But in the second point they
show themselves at full to be very ignorant, or unbeleeving men. Did not our
Savior go in vestments, else the Soldiers could not have cast lots for his
garments, John 19. v. 23. Nay the Lord himself clothed Adam and Eve with
Coats of skins, Genesis the 3. and the 21. verse. The last also is as gross an
absurdity as the first; for some are brought up as Scholars and cannot follow
any handicraft at all, and I never read that our Savior did any handicraft
work at all, but said J, if thou will have me where I may see the fashions of
these men, I shall a great deal better resolve thee; I will (said he) but you
must make as if you were converted by me, and take your Oath on the bark of a
Tree to be secret; I thought with my self, that that Oath could not be very
prejudicious to me, but went along with him, whether he should lead me.

We had not gone far (according as I could guess) the value of half a mile,
when we came to a very fair house (more fit for a Lord, then such fools)
where this fellow knocked, by and by came the Porter, who knowing of him let
him in, and I was also admitted as his friend, soon after we were conducted
into a very fair Gallery, at my first entrance I thought J had bin in
Long-lane among the Brokers, for it was hanged on both sides with clothes:
this brother whispered me in the ear, and wished me to do as he did: well, he
walks up to the upper end of the Gallerie, then had we two Chaires brought us,
he sat down in one, and J in imitation seat my self in the other, he
presently begins to uncloath himself, which I did also, when we were both
naked there came an ancient man all naked also, with a long white stick in his
hand, and conducted us into a very fair Chamber, where were above ninescore
naked persons men and women, one with another: this brother steps before me to
the antientest of the company, telling him that it was my great desire to
become one of their society, the old man called for the bark of the tree,
speaking to me as follows.

Son, it seems by the relation of this our holy brother, that thou art come
to be admitted into our society, we swear thee therefore upon this bark which
our Father Adam brought with him from forth the garden of Paradise, that thou
shall keep due hours at meetings, and also keep it secret both from the eyes
and ears of the World: after this was said, he willed me to bite a piece of
the foresaid bark, which me thought indeed was old enough, for infaith it was
pestilent tough.

After I had taken my oath to keep due hours at meetings, and protesting
secrecy by biting the old ancient bark of a Tree, I was seated by my brother
which brought me in, then after the Clark had cried silence, he that was to
prophecy that day was brought led between two, and elevated up to the height
of a joined stool, where without any ceremony at all, he began to bawle what
came first into his mind. The first thing he prophesied there (as I remember)
was the downfall of all Religions except theirs, with many most blasphemous
things, which J am both afraid and ashamed to write.

Now it was an order among these naked sooles, that if the Plannet of Venus
reigned in their lower parts, making them swell for pride, or rather for Lust,
then should the Clarke with his long stick strike down the presumpteous flesh.

This zealous brother which prophesied there, in the very midst of his
Discourse was interrupted, and thus it happened; A zealous sister which sat just
opposite unto him, being somewhat weary of sitting, rose up, now this holy
Brother being more lowly minded then was fitting for him, saw something which
lay mumpping the upper lip like an old Rabbet, but sure it was a young Cony,
which made his flesh to rise in such an unmeasurable manner, that the old
Clarke was forced to use both hands to allay his courage, which put the
Prophesier unto such pain, that the whole House could not hold him, but he
would kill the Clark, at length I stepped forth, and began to persuade him, which
after some heat of words and ravings, he began to be somewhat pacified; then
thus I began to question with him, what if you had killed him, said I? He
answered, he had not cared, for he was assured of salvation by the second Adams
innocence, which is Christ Jesus our-Lord.

Another thing I took notice of, for after this hurly-burly was over between
the Prophet and the Clark there came a many Women into the Chamber, all naked,
also the foremost bearing a naked Child in her arms, as it came from the
Mothers womb, this foremost woman went and kneeled at the feet of the prophet,
then presently thereupon he cried Abell, after the name of the second Son of
our Father Adam. And this is the manner of their Christning children.

Read and judge, whether I am in most fault, now I have revealed it, or if J
had kept it secret. They must surely look for a great plague from God for this
their unbelief, according to the Psalmist.

If they break my Statutes, and keep not my Commandments; Then will J visit
their transgression with the Rod, and their iniquity with stripes. Psalm. 89.31,
32.

FINIS.

