THE HISTORY OF MODERATION; OR, THE Life, Death and Resurrection OF MODERATION:
TOGETHER WITH Her Nativity, Country, Pedigree, Kindred, Character, Friends, and
also her Enemies. Tam prodesse velit, quam delectare. --
Nec prodesse sibi, sed pluribus. --
Immoderata ruunt, sed moderata struunt.
Let your moderation be known to all men, the Lord is at hand, Phil. 4.
5.Written by Hes^chius Pamphilus: And now faithfully translated out of the
Original.

London, Printed for Tho. Parkhurst, at the Golden Bible on London Bridge, next
the Gate. 1669.

TO HIS HONORED FRIENDS T. E. J. B. and H. S. ESQUIRES, The Translatour
wishes all Health.
Gentlemen,
I Find this following discourse was written many a day ago by Hesychius
Pamphilus, in the native Language of Feliciana (a Language peculiar to that
Island.) And because there are not many Copies of it, and the Language it self
not much understood, but by such as have been bred and born in that Island, or
have traveled thither, I thought good to translate it for the common benefit
or delight of our Countrymen.

The Story is not long, and in some things parallel to our present times,
therefore did I judge the Translation more seasonable. If any reap either
benefit or delight by reading of it, I reckon my pains more then requited. And
for your selves, Gentlemen, if you shall please to own it as a testimony of
singular respect to you (after that to the Public) I shall superadd that to
the other Engagements upon him, who is,

Gentlemen, Yours to serve you, N. S.

THE EPISTLE TO THE READER.
TO the Courteous or Curious Reader, all Moderation. The like to all
bystanders, Hearers, Examiners, and Censurers of this discourse; and but one
thing more, viz. To make this your Moderation known to all men, ('it is
Apostolical) that with whomsoever you converse, you commend, promote, propagate
and countenance it; then have I as many Licensers (as I need;) so many Readers,
so many Licensers, who though they subscribe not to the Letter, yet do concur
with the Spirit of this Treatise. Then what happy Times! no more Swords, but
Plough-shares; nor Spears, but Pruning Hooks; then no more jars, divisions,
dissentions, schisins, or heart-burnings, but the voice of the Turtle shall be
heard in our Land, and the unity of the Spirit in the bond of peace in the
Church.

Then shall you not need to enquire where Feliciana is, we shall have it here:

Est hic, est Ulubris, animus si te non deficit aequus. Nor yet to enquire what
this Hesychius Pamphilus was, for I can promise for him, being in my younger
days as well acquainted with his Spirit and Temper as any one. That he was one
who would not willingly offend any one, no not the worst Sons of Disobedience
here spoken of, but to desire they might all be reduced to the wisdom of the
Just: And that by Disobedience here described, he meant not any who in
controverted Points do soberly and peaceably dissent,

Omnes hic veniam petimusque damusque vicissim. But only such as are disturbers
of the Civil Peace; and for such, Moderation her self has not a word to say,
but has in readiness the weapons of her warfare, to revenge all such
Disobedience.

Nor did he in speaking of Extremity, Politicus, or any other, intend any
reflection upon any particular Person or Persons whatsoever, but had the same
design with the wise Tekoitess, who fetched about a form of words, in a
Parabolical strain, only to reduce the Lords banished, and to prevent the
putting out the Coal of Israel, the Sacred Coal of Religion and Peace.

Now Reader, if thou carest neither for Hesychius, nor Pamphilus, nor the
Translator neither, if thou art but for Moderation, I have enough, and shall
love thee, and thank thee, yea, give thee the public thanks of the Nation.

And then have a Commission to invite thee to a meeting with some of
Moderations Friends, to congratulate her up-rising, and the hopes of her
Churching in due time, where we shall be merry, and more then that, thankful;
and the Dishes we shall provide are but two great standing Dishes; the one, the
largest that can be, of the greatest thankfulness to Almighty God for his
Mercy; and the other, as near that as may be, of heartiest thanks to his
Majesty, for his Gracious Indulgence, and Royal Clemency; and after both, one
sober draught in a friendly Cup, called Poculum Charitatis, which we desire may
go round the whole Nation.

Now, Reader, go on, or farewell.

Thine N. S.

THE HISTORY OF MODERATION.
CHAP. I. The Country, Pedigree, Parentage, Kindred and Acquaintance of
Moderation.
MODERATION, howsoever she has of later days lived obscurely, as a Stranger
to most Nations of the Earth, and altogether unknown to not a few, is descended
of a very ancient and honorable Family, famous for their Piety and Loyalty;
She came out of the holy Land, was born at Arimathea, of the most Honorable
Family in that City, and of the Senatorian Dignity.

A Family which brought forth more Saints then all the world besides; all the
holy Prophets of old, and the blessed Apostles, sprang out of it; and very near
in blood she was, and intimately acquainted with those many Worthies famed in
ancient Story, whose Race is almost wholly worn out since, to wit, famous
Urban, Pudens, Clemens, Justus, Aristobulus (an excellent Statesman and a Privy
Counselor) Aristarchus (a great and gracious Prince) and Fortunatus (a happy
and experienced General) Saints all in the Primitive Calender: As also with
those of her own Sex, the Lady Dorcas, the Lady Elect, and her Sister Elect
(whose names I do not now rememb^r) so well known, and so much honour^d by the
beloved Disciple, and Saint Lydia, Saint Priscilla, Saint Damaris, Saint
Tryphaena, and her Sister Saint Tryphosa, and Saint Cl^udia (supposed to be our
Country-woman:) But all of them unquestioned Saints in the first Primitive
Calender, before any of those were Canonized, whose names fill up our present
Calenders.

Many great Personages besides desired acquaintance with her, and some claimed
Kindred of her; as first the Lady Pilate, but it was afar off, who privately
sent word to the Lord Deputy her Husband, sitting President in the High Court
of Justice (as then called) that he should in no hand proceed to the
condemnation of the Prisoner then at the Bar, whatsoever should come of it,
though he lost his place upon it.

And King Agrippa, who was much further off, who though he foully disliked the
bandying against Moderation, yet he spoke but one word, and that but faintly,
in favor of the cause, and was but almost persuaded to countenance ^t. Doctor
Gamaliel was the nearest of the three, and spoke more in her behalf, to stop
the further prosecution against her for a time, and so did help her out.

But Tertullus the Solicitor, was a a pestilent Adversary (whether, as one
said, Avaritiae magis quam malitiae causa, I will not determine) and he spent
all his Oratory and Rhetoric to make her as black and odious as he could.

The place of her birth was Arimathea (as I said before) and is the same with
that which was called Rama^ of old, where was the first Academy of Divine
Students, and the ancientest College that was for the sons of the Prophets,
whereof Samuel was President; and the self same City, where before him Deborah,
that renowned Princess, and first Queen Regent, kept her Court. There was she
born.

Her Fathers name was Seignior Gravity: Her Mothers, Matron Sagacity (a Woman
of few words, but great understanding.) And a happy Couple they were, and of
ancient and honorable Extractions. Gravity's Father was a Grandee of State, an
Honorable Privy Counselor, lived and dyed at Arimathea, his name Joseph,
whose Genealogy may be fetched from the Second Adam, it was so high, so holy,
and so ancient; his Father Ben Hagios, surnamed Bar-Jonah, he the Son of David,
he the Son of Abraham, he the Son of Noah, he the Son of Enoch, he the Son of
Seth, he the Son of Adam the Second, he the undoubted Son of God, and the
firstborn of every Creature.

He it was that in open Court, when that first High Court of Injustice was set
to arraign and condemn the most Innocent Person that ever was, and their Sacred
Sovereign besides, the Lords Anointed, persuaded and pressed, with all his
might, to stay that bloody Sentence from being pronounced and executed, which,
as he then told them, might sooner be repented then recalled, and would set all
the Nation a bleeding; and when he saw he could not be heard, he entered his
Protestation, arose from the Bench, and withdrew with much detestation from
their Assembly, with whom he would not have his Honor united, nor his Loyalty
and Conscience stained.

Sagacity's Ancestors were Churchmen; some of them had been present at the
first and best Synod that ever was called together, met purposely for
Accommodation, where all unanimously voted no Imposition of things burdensome to
Conscience, and agreed to pass a very few Canons, enjoining only some things
necessary, whereby the Peace of the Church was then happily settled.

The Children did not at all degenerate from their Parents, but as they had
been virtuously brought up, so they lived together as sweetly, not being
married till of full age, and good understanding; and as their Fathers had
been, each of them, the glory of their resp^ctive Professions, so were the
Children the glory and joy of their Parents.

But it happening after a certain time, that Persecution wasting on the one
hand, and desolating Armies on the other overrunning all, their Native Country
grew too hot for them to abide in: Therefore were they forced to seek out some
more safe and quiet habitation; and having traveled many Countries, but
finding no such, where they might quietly settle, they came at last to a
certain Island, called Feliciana, by others corruptly, Elysiana; an Island
nearest the Equator of any other, yet not under the Equinoct^al line; that
being an error which our times have corr^cted, the just Equator not being
where days and nights are of equal length, but where the Inhabitants minds and
spirits are ^qually affected each to other, therefore by some called the
Aequianimal, or Aequi-amicitial line, by others the Aequi-scriptu^al line, more
easy to be found in the new Celestial Globe, then in the old Terrestrial;
th^re did they plant themselves and their Family. A very fertile Isle it is,
and seated in a most temperate Clime, there being no extremity of heat or cold;
blessed with a happy Government and Laws, squared many of them to a Conformity
to Divine Precepts, others suited to the condition of the people, in order to
public good: No where is a Deity more honored, a Prince more beloved, a
people more happy, and peaceably disposed. There they usually live to a great
age, and in much health and plenty, and dye not till they are full of days.
The temperateness of the Clime may be easily conjectured, if you consider the
situation of it, it being seated just in the very middle Degree of Latitude,
and in the very utmost and most remote degree of Longitude from the Meridian of
Rome.

Thither, I say, came this Family, and there seated themselves, and there had
they the Children which they had, of whom we shall speak; whose History being
many a day ago written in the native Language of that Island, is here
transcribed and translated out of the Original, for the benefit or d^light of
our own Country.

CHAP. II. Of the two Brethren of Moderation.
THe Parents had but a few Children, though they lived long together, to a
great age; never had but two Sons (and they Twins) and one only Daughter, of
whom this Discourse chiefly relates. The name of the elder was Philodike, or
Love-Justice, a rare Patriot, and excellent Statesman: of the other Philotheos,
a true friend to Religion, and as eminent a Clergyman.

They were Twins, as I said, and so alike, that you could ^ot know the one from
the other* Both were nurs^d by their own Mother Sagacity, of like feature,
stature and disposition; always bred up together, equally beloved of their
Parents, and (which is rare to be found among Brethren in these days) no
emulation or unkindness in the earth, but always i^tire love and firm
agreement to their dying day; whatsoever pleased or displeased the one, did the
same to the other; they both joyed and grieved together, liked and disliked
alike, by a strange and rare simpathy of nature and affection: They lived both
to be good old men, and dyed both together, immediately after their Sist^r
Moderation (even the self-same D^y) and all three buried in one and ^he same
Grave.

The Mother, if she might have had the name, would have had the elder called
Philotheos, and bred a Divine, because her father was so; but her Husband
perswad^d her, and she presently yielded to have the younger so called, adding
withal, that it could be no (...) to him, to have the elder called Philodike,
for otherwise, said he again, it were but small honor or comfort to me, to
give the name of Religion and Love to God, if there were not first had a
respect to Justice and Righteousness.

But it made no matter which was which, for not only their age, habit and
complexion were alike, but their disposition too, so that you had not been much
mistaken, or at all called them out of their names, if you ^ad called either of
them Philodike, or Philotheos* for Philodike, the Lover of Justice, was as true
a Friend to Religion as Philothe^s himself was; and Philotheos, the Lover of
God and Religion, was as much for Justice and Righteousness as his Brother was.

CHAP. III. The Birth and Breeding of Moderation.
THey had but one Sister b^tween them, her name was Moderation (born to her
Parents when they were well in years:) And she bred up at home, and nursed by
her Mother Sag^city, who, with Seignior Gravity the Father, had instilled into
her the chief Principles of Religion, Morality and Prudence, and she so apt and
apprehensive withal, to conceive and retain (whatsoever she heard or read was
all her own pres^ntly:) And besides it was observed in her, she would o^t ask
such Q^estions, and make such Q^eries, to understand the reason ^ things that
se^med high, or doubt^l and obscure (but ^ill things pertinent and serious) as
was to be wondered at in a Woman, and of her age especially: Neither did she
ever trouble her head about Niceties and Impertinencies, that it was verily
conceived she could give as good satisfact^on in most points of Religion and
Practice as most Divines; and in matters of Pruden^e, and right State Policy,
few Statesmen could go beyond her: So that it was said, of all hands, of her
when she was young, that she must be married, either to some eminent Statesman,
or Churchman, for she would make an excellent Wife for either, and accordingly
it fell out, for she was married to two such, one after the other, as you will
hear anon.

CHAP. IV. Of Experience, Aunt to Moderation, her Husband, Children, Character
and Employment, and how Moderation was bred in her School.
I Might have informed you also, that Sagacity had an elder Sister, called
Experience, a very wise, knowing and virtuous Woman, and she lived to a very
great age, in so much as she was commonly called Old Experience: Bu^ she had
gone through a world of troubles as ever any did (inward and outward) for many
year^, much sickness, many cross^s in the world, yet would she still say, all
were for her good. And the least was not in her Husband, to whom she was
married very young; his name Philantos (he loved himself, and cared for no body
else) a great Gallant he was, and newly come of age, and of a fair Estate; but
a wilful and heady young man he was, and must not be contradicted nor
counseled neither: He would never hearken to the advice of his Wife Experience
till all was gone; He was many times hasty and unkind to his Wife besides, when
any thing had crossed him, and this was a great cut to her. But at last she, by
her wisdom and fair carriage, wrought a great change in him; so that people
would often say, See by Experience, what may not a wise Woman bring a bad
Husband to in time? The Good Gill may mend the Bad Jack.

She had by him many Children, three Sons, and as many more Daughters: The
three Sons first, whose names were, Philedonos, Misoponos, and Asotos, all
three too like the Father.

Philedonos was all for play and his pleasure; a dainty and delicate youth he
was, and his Father had spoiled him, by making a very Wanton of him, and he
must be a Gentleman because the eldest.

Misoponos was put to a Trade, but a deadly lazy Boy he was, very dull at
learning, and hardly brought to settle to any thing, or stay with any Master.

Asotos was worst of all, a prodigal vain he had in spending whatever he could
wrap and rend, and good at nothing in the Earth but stroying.

When many saw these young Lads, and beheld their carriage, they said, it was
not for nothing that that Proverb was raised, Experientia Matter Stultorum, that
is, Experience is the Mother of Fools. But all three at last having well
smarted for their folly, and being well taught by their Mother, Dear Experience
(she took a world of pains with them first) they were much reclaimed.

But her Daughters proved all singularly good. The first was Probation; she had
endured much, and had been exercised with many temptations.

The second Patience, a very meek, quiet and submissive a Creature as lived,
never murmuring, fretting, or discontented.

And the third Diligence, a mighty active and handy body, and so willing and
desirous to please, as you never saw the like.

These three she had pretty thick one after the other in her younger days, and
stayed a fair while ere she had any more; in so much that many thought she
would have had no more Children: An^ all these three went through much
hardship; you might, if you had looked wishly on them, have disc^rned somewhat
of Care in their very Co^ntenances, for the Mother had been under several
troubles all the while she went with them: And they had all of them a spice of
Melanch^ly, and were troubled with the Hypocondriack wind, which they after
rubbed out, and then grew very healthful, and lived all of them comfortably.

After these three, Probation, Patience and Diligence, were a little grown up,
she had thr^e other goodly Children: Hope the first, after her Confidence, and
last of all Assurance: These she had not so thick as the other three, but she
stayed a fair while between Hope and Confidence, and somewhat longer ere she
had Assurance. These three l^st made Experience a joyful Mother, and crowned
her later days with much happine^s, and they were as happy for their part in
their Mother: Tender Children all three when young, and had never grown up, if
their own Mother had not carefully nursed them: But when grown, they were of an
excellent Complexion, and rare Constitution, ever healthful, and so cheerful,
that they were never known to have an ill day, or look with a sad Countenance:
Nay, the Mother never had an ill fit all the while she went with Hope,
Confidence and Assurance, as she had formerly had with all her other Children:
Yea, it is thought she lived ^he longer for them; and they were such good
Children, and so tender o^ their Mother, that they eased her of all troubles,
so that she was never troubled with any earthly business after, but lived as i^
she had been in Heaven already, no Creature in all the world so happy as she.

Her wild Husband Phila^tos, having now made away all his Estate, and his Wives
Portion too, was at last fain to live upon his Wives care and pains; and she
maintained him and all her Children very comfortably.

She taught a School, and was excellently qualified for that Employment; a
mighty judicious and solid Person she was; a great and diligent Observer she
had been of whatever memorable matters she had read, or had occurred in her
time: She was universally read, I suppose, in all Histories whatsoever,
Ecclesiastical or Civil, Ancient or Modern; she had all the Chronicles of the
Kings of the Land, and all the remarkable Accidents and Occurrents that had
happened in their several Reigns, ad unguem, besides what she had furnished her
self with of her own Collections and Observations for many years; and she had a
most rare memory.

She could tell you by variety of Examples, and plenty of Instances, what had
made Princes happy or unfortunate, what would make a Common wealth flourish or
decay; what would raise or ruin a Family, what would settle or disturb the
Churches peace: In a word, you could hardly put that to her, which she could
not ^tisfie you in; she could tell you who, or what, was like to thrive or
miscarry; what Match was like to prove well or ill: And her Judgment seldom
failed.

She had an Aphorism, which was frequently and familiarly in her mouth, and
called it an infallible Maxim, by which you might ghess at what was future by
what was past, which, she said, she had from the Pen of a matchless Prince, a
man of the deepest insight, and greatest wisdom and observation in the world,
and was this, That which has Been will Be, and there is nothing new under the
Sun.

With her Moderation had much of her breeding, besides what she had had put to
her by her Father Gravity, and her Mother Sagacity; and careful she was to
treasure up her Aunt Experiences Aphorisms and Dictates as so many Jewels of
Gold; yea, in every matter of moment she would still come and advise with her
Aunt Experience, to her dying day, for she long outlived Moderation.

Moreover, Philodik^ and Philothe^s, the two Brothers, were wont, at every
breaking up at School, to come and spend their time with her; yea, after they
had been at the University, they would often come and visit her, and they
thought their time well spent while they were with her: They would often
confess, they had learnt that from her mouth, which they might have looked for
long enough in their Books, and not have met withal: Yea, when they were
advanced to that greatness, whereof I shall tell you more anon, they would
familiarly come to her for advice and counsel, and this made the one so happy
and accomplished a Statesman, and the other a Divine.

She had not, as was thought by some, much of Learning or Languages, knew none
but her Mothertongue: But she had read most of the Writings of the Divines, and
of the Histories of her own Country ove^ and over, and had them perfect: And
^he did constantly back her Precept^ with such choice and pregnant Examples
that made such impression in her Scholars, as that her Dictates were looked
upon as Authentic ^strations, or Probatums at least; and Ipse dixit was never
more current in the old Philosophers School, then ipsa dixit, or Experientia
doeuit, was in hers; yea, Experientia docuit went for current Authority all the
Land over.

Very famous she was for the great good she did in teaching, and indeed she
excelled all other Schoolmasters and Mistrisses whatsoever, so that she was by
some, for a singular Gift she had in teaching above all others, by way of
Honor and Eminency, styled, Experientia Magistra Stultorum, Experienc^ the
Mistress of Fools, because where none else could do good of them she could; but
by most she was styled, Magistra Sapientum, the Mistress of the wisest. But to
be sure all were the better that came under her Education and Instruction; and
this was an Observation that was generally taken of her Scholars, That they
always were better Livers, then those who had been taught only by Book.

Moderation was bred up in her School, as I said, and profited much, was the
most pliable Scholar she had in all the School, and therefore she took the more
delight to discourse with her, read her many a long Lecture: She would
sometimes take her in private with her into her Closet, and say to her,
Moderation, thou art my near Kinswoman, I love thy very name, I would there
were more of it; and next to my three youngest Daughters, Hope, Confidence and
Assurance, so necessary to my Salvation, I love thee as well as any Child I
have, and above any other mortal Creature whatsoever; thy name and nature being
so full of benignity and beneficialness to all mankind, because so full of
charity, which brings us Mortals on Earth to the nearest affinity with those
Immo^tals in Heaven; and should I ever have another Daughter, I would call her
by thy name.

Moderation, I will tell thee what I have observed, and know to be most
certain; Thy Ancestors have been blessings to Mankind in all Ages, and in
whatsoever Countries they have lived, have honored God, preserved Peace,
secured States, prevented Commotions, suppressed Insurrections, united Hearts,
strengthened Hands, confirmed Love, rooted out Discord, countenanced Piety,
cherished Loyalty, protected Innocence, settled the Church, secured Religion,
prevented Schisms, extirpated Heresies, enacted wholesome Laws, established
Commonwealths, enriched the lower World with the highest blessings of Heaven,
Peace, Joy, Unity and Concord, and with the best of earthly blessings, Love,
Friendship, Plenty and Prosperity. Oh! how good and joyful it is, to see
Brethren dwell together in Unity, cemented together with the Spirit of true
Christian Moderation! Let me advise thee, my Child, said she, to hearken to old
Experience; If thou love thy life, and desire to see good days, refrain
thy Tongue from evil, and thy Lips from speaking guile; eschew evil and do
good, seek peace and ensue it: follow Peace with all men and Holiness: Be sure
thou follow him, who said, learn of me that I am meek and lowly: Get that meek
and quiet Spirit, which is said to be of so great price with God: Honor the
King, obey Principallities and Powers; speak evil of no man, much less of
Dignities; clothe thy self with humility, meekness and inoffensiveness; and be
sure to remember thy own old short Lesson, Let thy moderation be known to all
men: be not high-minded, envy no man's greatness; study to be quiet* and to do
thy ow^ business; fly, as the most dangerous disease, and most infectious Pest
to a State, that itching and bewitching evil, called Polypragmosyne, in our
Language, pragmaticalness, the fatal break-neck of many and many: Avoid
Contentions, detest Schisms; conjure down by faithful prayer, self-denial, and
all other honest means, that evil spirit of Divisi^n, Censoriousness and
Superciliousness: Mark them that cause Divisions and avoid them: Have no
commerce with wickedness, and the rebellious sons of Belial, those of a fiery
and turbulent spirit; in no hand meddle with them who are given to innovations
and ^hange; pray for all, and do good to all, that we may lead a quiet and
peaceable life in all godliness and honesty; learn to bear and forbear:
whosoever says a Confederacy, say not thou a Confederacy, but let integrity
and uprightness preserve thee; remember him, who watched over himself, when he
saw others watched over him, that they might not take him tardy in any matter
of the Kingdom: and who then will harm thee, if thou followest that which is
good? But if thou meetest with trouble when thou do well, remember who said,
it is better, if the will of God be so, to suffer for well doing then for evil,
and whose Legacy that was, In the world you shall have trouble, but in me
peace: But be sure you never suffer as an evil doer, or busie-body in other
men's matters: then trust in God, and take his promise, and Experiences
t^stimony to it, He will never fail thee, nor forsake thee, but make thy
righteousness shine as the light, and thy innocence as the noonday: Then
Moderation thou shall be a happy Woman, blessed in thy life, and more blessed
in thy death; blessed in thy coming into the world, and more blessed in thy
going out of this world into a better. This, and ^uch more to this purpose, did
Experience say to Moderation, and the like precepts she gave to all her
Scholars.

And when Philodike and Philotheos came to visit her at any time, she would be
lessoning them the best she could, and she would say to them*

You are young, and I am old, I have seen many changes, I hope you will see an
happy settlement; I have lived to see an end of Wars, I hope you shall never
see an end of Peace; I have lived privately, being a Woman, and of many sad
trials, you are hopeful and likely young men, and it may please God so to bless
you, as that you may be called forth to public Employment, and if ever it
shall please God to raise you, remember you are not born for your selves:
Labor to be as good as great, more to please God then men; more to mind the
public good then your private interest: First seek the Kingdom of God, and the
righteousness thereof; next, the happiness of this Kingdom, and the welfare
thereof; next to the Peace of God, and a good Conscience, prefer the Peace of
Church and State, without which you can neither have nor keep the former; nor
make nor cherish Panties.

Drive on no Interest or Design but the public good; contend for nothing but
Piety, Sanctity, Unity and Charity; oppose and detest nothing so much as
Irreligiousness, Profaneness, Pride, Division and Revenge; fear God, honor your
Sovereign, love your Country, pray for the Church, then shall you be blessed of
God, protected, and, it may be preferred by your Prince, and beloved of your
Country: Remember that old never failing Oracle, that Experience has ever seen
made good, Them that honor me I will honor, and they that despise me shall be
lightly esteemed. And last of all, let me charge you, in whatsoever place you
may be set, that you never forget your Sister Moderation; whom she held all
that time in her hand, and there we now leave her at present, with her Aunt
Experience.

CHAP. V. of Philodike and Philotheos bred together. Philodike's Profession,
Character, Advancement, Death, Burial and Epitaph.
NOw leaving Moderation and her Aunt Experience together, we will return to
Philodike and Philotheos, the elder Childr^n; While they were young they were
bred together under the same Tutors and Teachers: Towardly and hopeful Children
both (the forwardest Scholars in all the School) learning the same Authors,
and performing the same School-Exercises, and profited so much, that in a short
time (being well fitted first) they were sent to the University, where bothwe^
taken much notice of for their extraordinary diligence, early rising, and
sometimes late sitting up at their study, and their great pro^iciency. There
when they had taken their several Degrees (which had been conferred on them,
not out of favor, but merit) Philodike removed thence first, to the Inns of
Court, where he was none of your young Gallants, that brave it in rich Apparel,
as if they came thither merely to see and learn fashions; but a close and hard
Student he was, diligently examining and enquiring into the Reasons and Grounds
of the Law, and diving deeply, and piercing thoroughly into the more knotty
Intricacies and profound Mysteries of his Profession; to which having so well
attained, he was called to the Bar, and in short time became famous for his
practice; a most courteous and affable Gentleman he was, of a quick
apprehension, clear head, firm memory, free expression, and excellent good
language, and above all, very conscientious as to his Clyents and their Fees
(great or small) he looked not so much at Clyent or Fee, as at the Cause, and
that not whose it was, but what it was.

He was afterward, by many steps, advanced to be Lord Chief Justice in the
Island Feliciana; which Dignity he did more honor with his worthy carriage,
then the place did honor him; there was he commonly styled, the Incorrupt
Judge, and the Poor man's Advocate.

And after that, his Prince taking further notice of him, he was taken in to be
one of the Privy Council, and had the Great Seal committed to his custody, and
so he continued to his dying day; living in the high favor of his Prince, and
dying in the love and honor of his Country.

Never was Great Patriot more generally lamented, and his Funeral Hearse more
laden with E^comiastick Elegies, then when he was buried. One Paper I snatched,
which had at the foot of every Tetrastick this for the Burden; translated out
of the Original, thus it may be rendered;

Mourn, mourn for Philodike:
Pray, pray God send's more likc.
And upon his Monument this Epit aph engraven.

Here lies Great Philodike, of Gravity descended,
And Matron Sagacity, so much commended;
The Glory, Peace, Welfare, Pillar of the Nation,
He served God, Prince, Country in his Generation,
Brother to Great ^ Philotheos and Moderation.
CHAP. VI. Of Philotheos, his Profession, Preferments, Character, Life, Death,
Burial, Epitaph.
PHilotheos, as the Mother desired, was bred a Divine, and stayed much longer
at the University, till he was accomplished with all Endowments requisite for a
Churchman; And being of great note there for his good life, solid preaching,
and depth of learning, he was presented by a worthy Patron to a competent
Living, whereto he went, and was there constantly Resident, never had Plural^y,
preached painfully, did very much good, kept Hospitality, made Peace among his
Neighbors (if any were at variance) brought his Parish to a great measure of
knowledge in Religion, and to a general good Conformity.

There had he dyed incumbent, had not his Prince, hearing of his singular
worth, promoted him to a Bishopric (that Government being then in use in that
Island, and so had been time out of mind) which though he accepted, he was not
yet at all changed from what he was before, nor lifted up above his Brethren,
but continued his former constancy in preaching, became a Pattern to his Flock
in Doctrine and Conversation; a great encourager of Learned, Orthodox, painful,
pious and peaceable Ministers; nor did he more ^trictly enquire after their
conformity to the Church, then to the Scripture-Canons.

In a word, he so gave himself to Reading, E^hortation and Doctrine, and the
other duties of a worthy Past^r, so fulfilled his Ministry which he had
receiv^d, as a good Stew^rd of the House of God; and one he was besides, that
so well ruled his own house, that had he lived in the Primitive times, he might
have been accounted a second Timothy, or in later times, he might have been
called another Jewel: He also dyed full of days, and was much lamented: And
upon his Hearse many a sad Elegy was fastened, and one much longer then all the
rest, had at the end of every Verse this Burden, supposed to be made by the
same Author, and translated into English, thus it runs.

All weep for the death of worthy Philotheos;
Most pray, that the World become no^ now Atheos.
And upon his Monumen^ this Epit^ph inscribed.

H^re lies Philotheos, of Churchmen best,
Him the good will follow; God mend the rest:
Moderation loved him, he Moderation:
His death fills all with sad lamentation.
CHAP. VII. Of Moderation her Virtues and Character, her two Enemies.
ANd now to return again to Moderation: Her two Brothers, while living, being
of such eminent Quality (as you have heard) you would not think that their only
Sister Moderation could want pr^t. or sit long without many fair offe^s ^or a
Great Match, and many such she had: But though she was a Lady of a most amiable
Aspect, and completely accomplished, yet did she never a^ect Curiosity in her
Dress, nor Costliness in her Apparel (though very de^ent and comely;) and upon
that account partly, some of the (...)* who had heard much of her fame, wisdom
and virtues, and had begun to court her* fell off again, and could give no
other reason for it but this, that they f^ared she had so much of her Father
Gravity in her, as was not suitable to their youthful and frollick humors.

And indeed she had a great resemblance both of Father and Mother; Her Father
Gravi^y she resembled to the life in her compos^d Countenance and Gesture, and
her Mother Sagacity for all the world for her speech, prudence and t^mper of
spirit; so full of serious consideration* and so judiciously circumspect, as
not to take up ^very thing upon vulgar estimation, and common report, but duly
examining and deliberately weighing ^very thing still, as was to admiration:
And the truth is, her two Brethren, Philodike and Philotheos, even in their
highest Dignities, held it not below them to advise with Moderation, but in
difficult cases especially, they would be sure to consult with her, because she
had had more of her breeding with their Aunt Experience then themselves:
Neither did they ever repent their hearkening to her, for they still found, by
Expe^ience, that her counsel was (...) safest; she was a Woman of a deep
insight into matters of concernment for ^urch or State, and was never known to
be biased by interest or private passion (as most an end others are) but
always warily foresaw what was like (...) be the issue of things, and
accordingly she advised what was most for p^blick good. She was universally
beloved of all, above any mortal Creature, and had no Enemy in all the World,
save only two, Extremi^y and Disobedience.

Extremity hated her with all her heart, though she had never given her any
cause: And Moderation hated Dis^bedience with a perf^ct hatred (and blame her
not) she had just cause.

CHAP. VIII. Of Extremity, her ^ed g^ee, Character, and Enmity to Moderation.
EXtremity was descended of an Ancient and Noble Family in Cilicia, sometimes a
famous Province of the old Roman Empire; Her Father Saul the second, surnamed
Hyperzelotes, a man known far and near, whose education had been choice,
proficiency incredible, parts great, abilities rare, travels many, in his life
always irreprovable, and in his way very devout: In his younger days he had
been of a hot and eager spirit, a Proto-persecutor of the ProtoMartyr Steven,
but as he grew eld^r he grew more mild and moderat^; and as he changed his
harsher name of Saul, into a softer, Paul, so was he quite changed in his
disposition from Hyper-zelotes to Hyper-philadelphote^, and was turned into
another man, as Saul the first was for a while, but he for ever.

He had been once of that Opinion, that no sort of men ought more severely to
be Animadverted into, and dealt with, then such, who in the least dissented
from the Religion and Rites of their For^fathers; and would but Authority pass
Acts severe enough ^or suppr^ssion of such by Banishment, Bonds, ^mprisonment,
or death, he would be the man that would see them put in execution, which he
also did, judging it the best service could be done to God, or his Church;
thereupon he haled many into Prisons, and compelled them to abjure, recant and
blaspheme, or suffer and dye.

But after he was (I say) quite of another mind, and became the most complacent
and complying Person in the world, and held with Mod^ration as much as any* Now
(he said) what was his gain before was now his loss, and what he formerly
esteemed his glory, he looked o^ as his shame: Circumcision was no more with
him now then Uncircumcision; both nothing to the new Creature, to faith in
Christ, to the keeping of the Commandments of God. He could condescend and
comply so far now, as to be made all things to all men, so it were to further
the salvation of any. His Daughter Extremity was begotten by him in his younger
years, as he was traveling to Damascus, before he had been better catechized
and instructed by Ananias.

The younger days of the Daughter, were an imitation of the Fathers younger
days, who observing, in those unsettled times that had been in Feliciana,
about that time when there was no King in Israel, and every man did what was
right in his own eyes, that many distempered Humors, ^ven to a plain Delirium,
if not (...), had pestered both Church and State, thought it high time to
awaken Authority, to revive former severity, wit^ some further addition too, to
curb Moderation; and being passionately z^alous to prevent any Rupture in the
Church, before many other Disorders in the State, would have all brought into
an exact Uniformity.

It fell out also unhappily, and much to the prejudice of Moderation, that some
of tho^ Sons of Disobedience, and Grand-^hildren of Belial, had much about that
time, or not long before, b^oke out into an open Rebellion, and made s^ditious
Commotions, when all were in exp^ctation of settlement in the Island; and not
long after a bloody War was commenced, between that Island and some other
potent Neighbors in the adjacent Islands: And Extremity, zealously watchful,
and prudently sollicitous, to pr^serve common Peace at home, held a suspicious
eye over Moderation and all her Actions, as mistrusting she had underhand
countenanced the former, or corresponded with the latter; both which (God
knows) she was far enough from, constantly praying for public Peace, and the
prosperity of the Church and State; yet could not Innocence (as yet unknown)
secure poor Moderation from many a harsh Censure and bitter Taunt. Then would
Extremity twit Moderation, and charge her with disaffection, and often hit her
in the t^th with the miscarriages of others, that she had nothing to do
withal; and would be saying, you must go a way by your s^lves, and be wiser
then all the world* and had I power in my hands, said some (which was well they
had not) I would make Moderation pack, or change her note.

But a^terwards, to the great sati^faction of all, upon a through observation,
(I will not say a better information) Extremities prejudice against Moderation
was abated, and afterward became perfect Friends, as we shall say anon.

CHAP. IX. Of Disobedience, Moderation's only Enemy, whom she hated, her
Pedigree, Character and vile Poflerity.
DIsobedience was the other Enemy Moderation had, and her indeed did she as
much hate as Extremity did her, and much more justly, for her many wicked
pranks and practices against both Church and State, yea, against all humane
Society.

She was a Woman of an ill feature, and more untoward nature; descended of an
infamous and stained Family, yet very ancient; she was the Daughter of old
Belial, and that by a strange woman; she was of a shrewd and subtle wit,
misshapen countenance, monstrous in her birth (being born with teeth in her
head, came laughing into the world, with a Coal of fire in one hand, and a
Sword in the other) of hollow eyes, and looking asquint very ill-favouredly;
besides, by a fall in the Cradle, she had her back broken, and wry-neckt ever
after: Nature had branded her ^or a prodigious Carryon: She was twice married,
first to Sheba, the Son of Bichri, an old Incendiary, and head of a seditious
Crew; and after he had lost his head, she ma^ried with Elymas the Sorcerer, who
dealt with the black Art, an utter enemy to all Righteousness, and as full of
all subtilty, malice and wickedness, as his Brethren the Jesuits could wish,
or his Father Beelzebub could make him; and he was fittest for her, for it was
shrewdly susp^cted, they had been naught together before.

She was a Woman too too fruitful, and had by both her Husbands a many lewd,
vicious, and graceless Children.

Her first Husband openly taught the Art, and invented the Instruments of
Rebellion, was the first that blew a Trumpet of Sedition against his Sovereign;
and it is thought she set him on: She had instructed her Children in all the
ways of Impiety and Disobedience; a Roman Catholic she was, and therefore
sent some of her Children beyond sea; some were Students at Doway, some at
Lovayn, and one she sent to John of Leyden's College at Munster: They were
great Proficients all in the Arts, and very forward to propagate those
Principles taught by the Hebrew Doctor Abaddon, the Greek Professor Apollyon,
and the Latin Dictator Filius Perditionis; for some of them understood all
Languages; men of working brains and restless spirits; a viperous Generation,
tea^ing out the bowels of whatsoever Nation bred them; skilful to divide,
destroy and supplant; the only Enemies to Monarchy and public Peace; they have
set their heads and their Agents awork to destroy Kings, blow up Parliaments,
burn Cities, lay waste Churches, to divide between Prince and people, to make
or increase parties, and their last end is to bring in the Abomination of
Desolation.

The Children by the later Husband were the more by far, and of several
Complexions and Dispositions, as if they had not been by the same Father and
Mother; yet were they their natural Children, and had somewhat of both in them,
for both were notorious for all or any manner of* wickedness imaginable,
neither barrel better Herring; and the Children like them, nothing came amiss
to them, so it were (...) ^ough; such a Generation for swearing* st^ring,
drinking, whoring, ranting, roaring, quarrelling, fighting, ^ilching, stcaling,
cutting of Purses, and cutting of Throats, as was not i^ the world ag^in,
f^aring nor God nor man, slighting Laws, Statutes, Penalties, Stocks, Pillory,
Prison, G^llows, Death, and Hell too, as if they had been the Spawn of the old
Leviathan, of whom it is said, he is made without fear; the Mother, for the
Childrens sake, was called Mystical Babylon, the Mother of whoredoms and all
abominations in the earth.

Some of her Children are professed Atheists, and deriders of all Religion, of
the Sadducean Heard, believing nor Angel, nor Spirit, nor Heaven, nor Hell,
regarding nor Law nor Gospel: Some again she has taught and trained up to be
the Inventers of new coined Oaths, prodigious Blasphemies, and worse then
hellish Execrations, and Preterplu-Satanical Imprecations, out-daring Gods
Justice and Patience, and dastarding Satan himself, yea a whole Legion of
Devils, not one of them once saying Dammee, but all Let us alone, I beseech
thee torment us not.

Sure enough their damnation li^greth not, who draw sin thus with Cords, and
damnation with Cartropes, and say, Let the most High make speed, that we may
see him, and make have, that we may know what Hell is: This I know, that when
these wretched Souls are excoriated, and shall but begin to feel those
torments, they will presently relent, and change their note, either seemingly
to say their Lords prayer, Let us alone now, and torment us not, or to say
their own backward, Lord Un-Dammee.

Others again are the Masters and Professors of the Liberal Science of
Carowsing, and prescribe the rules and method of drinking round by number and
measure, till it be without either number or measure.

Others are devising new Games at Cards and Dice, and new ways of cheating by
them.

Out of t^is Family, as once out of that monstrous Palladian Beast, came out
^ose that set Troynovant afire; or out of this Pit came those swarms of
Locusts, Drunkards, Gamesters, Whorers, Epicures, Luxurious and Riotous
persons, who darken the glory of Feliciana, and besides the devouring their own
patrimonies, devour the fat and the best fruits and wealth of our Land.

All these called Disobedience Mother, and were looked upon as hers by all that
knew them, having the lively Image of the Beast in their foreheads; others had
it in their right hand, set on by the right hand of Justice; others had it in
their Noses, by drinking too freely of Madam Porne's Cup; and others had a
brand all their Face over, by tasting too often of their Sister Crapula's Bowl;
but all spoke one Language, which was the Language of the Beast (used by no
Nation, Civil or Barbarous, but themselves) every word an Oath, or a Curse, or
profane Scoff and Jest at Scripture and Piety, or a Belch of Baudery, which
some called a corrupt or bastard Hellenish, but others, who had more
understanding, said, it was pure and perfect Hellish Language.

I should have told you also, that Disobedience, after her second marriage,
kept a common Inn (otherwise a common Stews.)

And as Experience, Moderation's Aunt and best Friend, kept her School, so did
Disobedience, her worst Enemy, set up a School to increase her comings in; but
with this difference, that all were made the better (even the worst) that came
under her hands; so all were the worse (even the best) that came under the
hands of Disobedience.

Many a fair estate was soon made away there, and many a hopeful person utterly
undone and quite marred, that came to be acquainted with her, or any of hers.

She had six Daughters, to whom she committed the carrying on of her Trade. The
Eldest was Madam Porne, a Woman of person proper and handsome enough, but
otherwise more common then proper, mighty gallant in her Dress and Apparel.

The Second Donna Spatalosa, a very lascivious Wanton and enticing Creature.

The Third Mistress Crapula, a fowl Beast, all Belly and Guts.

The Fourth Bold Anaideia, a confident and brazen-faced Slut, a Shameless and
impudent Carryon.

The Fifth Donna Olympia, lately come from the Holy Mother-See, where she had
practiced the same Art, with much success, for many years.

The youngest Damosilla Blandula, a mighty fair tongued, smiling, and
bewitching Creature.

They lived all under the same Roof, and had their several Offices; their
Lodgings are within, or over one another.

Blandula, the youngest, was to sit at the door, and watch and ^spy who went
by, and what Passengers were fit to be called in; them would she invite to come
and make choice of a Room, and tell them what Entertainment was to be had in
the House: Being entered, she conveys them presently into Donna Olympia's
Lodging, who, for her self, was richly adorned with Jewels taken out of the
Triple Crown, and her Room was hung with the rich Hangings she had brought out
of the Vatican.

After a short stay there, and a Collation given, and the Curiosities viewed
and looked over (that came from beyond Sea) among which were certain Beads, and
Medals, and some Images of our Lady and other Saints, and a fair Crucifix, she
desires them to go up stairs to Mistress Anaideia's Lodgings; Her they found at
her Glass, curiously curling her Locks, and spotting her Face, with her naked
Breasts, and her Chamber all round hung with many a lascivious Picture.

If then any one startled, and thought they had seen enough, and craved leave
to return, they would all three tell them, there was more to be seen above, and
they must not refuse to go up one short pair of Stairs and taste of their
Sister Crapula's Cup; It was a Gilt Bole of old and clear Circe, a Liquor,
whosoever once tasted was turned into a Swine at the second draught; then they
would of themselves desire to go on and see all, and to behold Donna Spatalosa;
She was preparing Bracelets made of her hair, and mixing Potions for Guests,
that she had expected, and she came boldly and saluted them, offering them the
courtesy of the House; and tells them, they must not refuse to visit their
eldest Sister, Madam Porne, whose Room would give them more contem, then all
they had yet seen: There sat she on a stately Couch, in rich array of Silk and
Crimson Satin, all daubed with broad Gold-lace; her Face new painted; she wa^
old and wrinkled, but her paint made her look as fair as a Rose and a mixture
of Lilly; a fair Room it was indeed, hung with the richest Arras; and you would
wonder to see what a Cupboard was there of Plate, and what a fair Prospect into
all the Fields and Gardens round about: She presented them by the hands of her
waiting Gentlewoman Eutrapeleia, a smiling, merry and witty young Woman (all
Jests and mirth) with a Venus Glass of Wine, and some costly Sweetmeats: But
under the Balcony was a close Trap-door (discerned by few) over a deep Ditch
and narrow Pit, called Avernus, into which, after a few short Amorous Embraces,
she was wont to throw her Guests headlong, with the help of her Sisters, after
they had first stripped them of all they had about them, and they were never
heard of more: Few, or none, that ever I heard of, that came once into Madam
Porne's Clutches, ever came back again, or were seen alive, but sometimes a
naked Corpse was seen floating on the top of the Ditch: Only one escaped once,
as Lot out of Sodom, to make the relation of their Entertainment; and he said,
it was almost as great a miracle as his was; for he was fain to steal out at a
backdoor, which he found locked, but putting forth all his strength, he burst
it open, and then came down a narrow pair of Stairs, very steep and dark, which
few were able to find, and so got away, resolving never to come more there; for
said he, had I stayed longer, or attempted to go back the same way I came, I
had certainly been snapt: He would ever after call them, the six fatal Sisters,
and would warn all his Acquaintance not to come near them.

But enough, and too much of Disobedience, and I fear I have troubled the
Reader, with this long Discourse of her and her Children, and their wicked
pranks; and no wonder, for it is this Disobedience that has troubled all the
World, troubled both God and Man.

To return therefore to Moderation; the ways both of the one and other Litter
she could not choose but detest; and for the latter breed, she never had so much
as her name called in question to favor any of them; but when any of the
former Race broke out into Rebellion, she could not help it; but watchful and
jealous Extremity would have some hard thoughts of her, as if she had been an
Abettor, whereas she was never so much as privy to any of their Designs, and
whenever she came to hear of them, was as forward as any to declare against
them, and to give her best assistance to suppress them; and whenever any of
the Sons of Rebellion and Disobedience were taken, and did receive condign
punishment, she did heartily rejoice, as having no such enemies of her own in
that defiance, as those that were enemies to God, to the King, to Religion, and
to her Country.

CHAP. X. Of the Pedigree and Progeny of Politicus, no great friend to
Moderation.
I Could give you a Relation of a third Person also, that lived in the midway
between Extremity and Moderation, who was no sure friend to Moderation, yet can
I not call him an enemy neither. His name Politicus; and a mere Politician he
was; no body could tell of what Religion he was, neither fish nor flesh; as he
loved not Moderation, so he cared not for Extremity; he hated Disobedience
indeed to the very death, and was for that much to be commended.

He came of the Ancient Roman Race, Gallio his Grandfather, and Portius Festus
his near Alliance: Politicus was no bad Member in the Commonwealth, though none
of the greatest Friends to the Church nor Churchmen, at whose Revenues he would
sometime have a fling; no Recusant, much less Phanatick; scarce good
Protestant, but of the Epicene Gender.

He was a conformable, quiet and peaceable Subject, and many ways useful and
serviceable, being an extreme good natured man, ever loyal to his Prince, and
true to his Country.

In times of Peace he had a Commission for the Peace, and was in Authority, and
singular good service he did, and kept his Country in quiet and good order,
executing Justice between man and man, and now and then he would put down some
notorious ill Alehouse. In time of War he had a Command, and kept his Soldiers
in good discipline, from Robbing and Plundering, as severe as Tamerlane: But he
never troubled his head about Religion.

If God Almighty had created man for no higher end, then to live in Civil
Society, and to mind the things of this inferior world, and this present life,
there had been no better man then Po^iticus. But in as much as man, ^reated in
the Image of God, has (as a more excellent nature and b^ing then other
Creatures, and more nobl^ Endowments, so) a more excellent and higher end, viz.
to seek, know, s^rve and worship God, and at last come to enjoy him, and have
Communion with him; and that Religion and true ^iety is the only way and means
to attain that end, and that there is another Country to be looked for after
this, H^ was much to blame for his coldness and indifferency in matters of
Religion; many thought him little better then an Atheist in his heart, though
his life not much faulty*

He never expressed much zeal or regard to Piety, nor was he ever known to go to
prayers by himself, nor much to look into his Bible: A piece of Tacitus, or
Livy, or Machiavel, he would sometimes discourse of, and their Observations he
did seem to relish, as well as any in the Books of Moses and the Prophets: And
for Seneca, and his Epistles of Morality, he did, in his Judgment, prefer them
above, and did take more delight to ^ead them, then all Saint Paul's Epi^tles
of Divinity.

Several Children he had, both ^ons and Daughters: His Sons, he ^ave them all a
taste of good Lite^ature, and gave them the breeding and education which was
fit for (...).

His eldest Son was bred a Courtier, his name Honorius.

The second a Soldier, called Captain Eupo^emus.

The third a Physician, who traveled France and Italy, and took his Degree at
Padua, his name Temerarius.

A fourth he bred a Merchant, his name D^sus.

And the youngest he made a Scholar, and a va^n in Po^try he had, hi^ name
Gelas us, a ^rvellous witty an^ (...) Gentlem^n he was, full of h^ Joques and
merry Conceits, that h^ made all the Comp^ny mirth wherever he came. Civil
Gentlemen all, but of the Fathers Religion.

His eldest Daughter he named H^nora, her great Grandmother (...) a Lady of
Honor to Queen Bernice.

And her Sister Phantasia was waiting L^dy to her Highness Drusilla, much about
the some time, in re^ of whom he called his second (...) by her name.

And the third was Madam Eulalia; she could sing and dance rarely well, and had
her French and Italian very perf^ct, and was well read in foreign Histories,
yet had never read the New Testament over twice in all her life, nor the Old
Testament so much as once.

Eudoxia, the youngest, was the tallest and hansomest Woman of them all; an
absolute Beauty, and of so rare a temper you could never anger her, and of so
graceful a deport, that she took all persons: Had you seen her at Church, which
was but seldom, you would think you saw a Saint; would you be (...) at other
times, she would be serious; would you be pleasant, she would be as facetious.

Goodly Ladies they were indeed all four, and as great Gallants as were either
in Court or City: But to tell you how they spent their time, and what was their
employment, would be a strange story to tell our Grandmothers, were they alive
again, and much more strange to the old Christian Ladies that lived longer
before them: Their morning was all taken up wi^h Dr^ssing, Painting, Powdering:
The afternoon usually spent in Visits, or a Playhouse; and at night a Pack of
Cards: These were the Books they were most read in, and had them more in their
hands, then either Bible, Sermon, or Prayer Book; and indeed all of them did
more frequent the Playhouse then their Parish Church, the Prayer-ho^se, and
were more attentive ther^ then here: Twice or thrice a month was fair to come
to Church; but at a Play three or four times a week was ordinary: To Church
they came to see and to be seen, and that usually when Sermon or P^ayers were
hal^ ^nded; but to the Play-^ouse they went to learn, and came in with the
first, and staid it out without tediousness, as never thinking a Grace or
Sermon too short, or a Play too long.

Rabbi Ben- Johnson was highly in their Books, and they more versed in his
Writings, then either Rabbi BenSyrach, or Rabbi Solomon.

But in as much as P^liticus was no professed Enemy to Moderation, but wished her
as well as he did Extremity (he cared for them much alike) we will let him go,
wishing that the State may never have cause to fear any Enemy more, nor the
Church and Religion need a Friend less.

CHAP. XI. Of the Marriage of Moderation, her two Husbands, and Children by
them.
NOw to return to the Marriage of Moderation. Her Brother Philodike would fain
have brought her to Court, and have her married to one of his own Rank, a Privy
Counselor of State, as knowing full well, how much more good he might do,
being assisted by such another Privy Counselor in his own Bosom.

But her Brother Philotheos was earnest for a Churchman, his old Acquaintance,
bred with him in the same College, and his Chamber-fellow (somewhat his
Junior) Doctor Eusebius, and now also settled near him in a competent Living; a
Grave and Reverend Minister he was as any in all the Country, an Orthodox and
able Divine; to him the motion was no sooner made by the Brother, but he
presently embraced it, both in respect of her singular Virtues, and of the
Alliance to her Brethren. Soon after they were married, and most happily they
lived, beloved of all the Parish, and honored of all that knew them (Gentry,
Clergy, and others;) but long she enjoyed not that happiness, for her Husband,
being a sickly man, and worn out with his Studies and painfulness in preaching,
was taken away, to her great loss, and gri^f of the Country, and she left a sad
Widow, big with Child, of which she was after delivered, whom she called
Settlement; as sweet and hopeful Child as ever Woman bare, had he lived, but he
dyed in his Cradle.

After some good space of time, her Brother Philodike desired she might be
married to a Statesman; and he was intimate with an Honorable Privy
Counselor, whose name was Philodemus; to him he re^ommended his Sister, and to
him she was married, to his great contentment, and of all the Court besides: He
lived not long with her neither, being aged when he married her, and left her
with child again of Twins, who only lived to be christened: They were two
Sisters, as lovely Babes as was ever looked on, their names, Peace and Plenty,
who dyed soon after their Father.

CHAP. XII. Of the Trouble and Grief of Moderation: Her last Will: Her Heir:
Epitaph.
ANd being now a Widow again, as seldom one Cross or grief comes alone, both
her Husbands, Eusebius and Philodemus (and the Children by them) being dead,
who would suffer no injury to be done her while they lived, they so dearly
loved her. It fell out afterward, that some of her envious Neighbors, who
bare her no good will before, though she never did them the least wrong, would
be offering her many an affront, and ready to pick any Quarrrel with her.

A poor Widow is ever like the gap (...) in the hedge, soon trod^en ^own, and
old Fri^nds now were grown (...) and, which went (...) to her heart, her two
(...), who were wont form^rly ^o support and countenance her in every thing,
that was just and reasonable, were now under a Cloud: Philodike for appearing
in a C^use, wherein Innocence had b^n oppressed had he been sil^nt (as his
Gr^nd-father Joseph and his Uncle Nicodemus had done before him) incurred the
displ^asure of some great On^s, who procured his troubles; and Philothe^s for
being now and then ^ome hat plain, and a little s^art in an Use of Reproof* at
both which she was inwardly grieved in her mind (and they b^ing under
restraint, or else keeping their Chamber by reason of their Ag^ and
Infirmities) though she had le^ned to endure any thing, and was nev^r forward
to stir or move in her own private Cause; yet when she saw her two Brethren
concerned in point of their Honor and Reputation, and the Public more in
point of (...), she could not for her life sit still* bu^ presents a^ humble
and mod^ Petition in their behal^, which wa^ but this, that they might come ^o
^ fair hearing* and when matters should be rightly understood, if they were
found Offenders, she d^sired no favor for them; she desired no more, and
(...), at l^ast, ^he might have been (...) in, and spoken to, or ^r Petition
re^d (...): But when no admit^ance could be obtained for Moderation, and
instead thereof T^unts and R^proaches sent after, and told withal, that if she
moved any further she should be secured (her old friend Extremity was then
Doorkeeper, and to be sure would do her no good office, and ^he it was gave the
answer, and it is thought of her ow^ head:) Moderation took it so t^ heart,
that she never joyed her sel^ after, nor had any delight to go abroad, but
lived retired in her privat^ Lodgings, and gave her se^f to her Devotions, and
not long after departed this life.

The news whereof no sooner came^ to the Brothers hearing, but it struck them
to the very heart, that they both of them departed the selfsame day, not
willing to outlive their Sister Moderation. Never was the like heard of by all
Relation, that two Brothers and Sister should all three dye in one day (but
they had loved most entirely, as if they all had but one Soul) and they were
all three buried together in the same Grave; the same Grave it was, wherein
Eusebius and Philodemus, the two Husbands, and Settlement the Son, and Peace
and Plenty the Daughters of Moderation, had been laid before.

Now was both Court, City and Country full of Lamentations for the death of
three such eminent Persons; neither were the two Brethren more Iamented, then
was sweet and allcontenting all-pleasing Moderation; only Extremi^y rejoiced
extremely at the death of Moderation; and D^sobedience rejoiced as much at the
death of Philodike and Philotheos.

Philodike was most lamented at Court by the Grandees, Sag^ Statesmen and
Patriots, for his grave advice and equal administration of Justice, whereby the
general Peace of Feliciana was preserv^d.

Philotheos was most lamented by the Cl^rgy, and such as were learned, and abl^
to judge of his Elaborate Tracts, his Solid and Learned Sermons, and his great
Prudence in Ecclesiastical Affairs, whereby the Cause of Religion, and the
Peace and Honor of the Church, had been maintained and pres^rved But as their
names were above the understanding, so was their worth above the cognizance of
the Vulgar.

But as for Moderation, all knew what she was w^ll enough; all Feliciana had
heard and talked much of her all the Island over, as good a Subject as could
live under a Prince, a true Daughter of the Church, and a Mother in Israel; and
bewailed she was both in Court, City and Country, by Man, Woman and Child,
young and old, simple and gentle, because all understood she had no interest
but the public good, and desired favor and protection only for such, as
should be judged worthy to live in any wellgoverned State in the World: And the
more lamented she was, because she dyed without ^ssue, and left none of her
name behind; yet being sick, and knowing she was now near her end, she made her
Will, and sent for a Kinswoman of hers, named Repentance (a Kinswoman once
removed) younger sister to Consideration, dead before, and her she made her
adopted Child, and sole Heir and Executrix; who so sadly took her death, that
she was not only Close Mourner at the Funeral, but went in mourning to her
dying day, and could never get Moderation (dear Moderation) out of her mind.

Never was the Lady Dorcas more lamented, and her recov^ry more desired then
was this Ladies: And very remarkable it is, though it be against the Religion
professed in Feliciana, to put up any Prayers for their b^st Friends when dead,
yet did all pray for Moderation when she was dead and gone, and the most
Religious, the most heartily of all others, and so do to this day; yet not for
the resting of her Soul, but for her return or Resurrection, of which they have
a steadfast belief and full expectation, grounded on an old Prophecy, whereof I
shall tell you more anon. And seldom did any come near her Tomb, but they
bedewed it with their Tears, over which, as I remember, was Engraven in a
Latin Character,

Heu placide obdormit Veneranda Matrona Moderatio novam expectans
Resuscitationem ante novissimam Resurrectionem. And under it was this Epitaph,
written in that Country Language,

Here lies Intombed Matron Moderation,
True Friend of the Church, Joy of the Nation;
Her worth to few was known
Until that she was gone:
No Issue great or small,
This the saddest of all.
All ye friends that look on,
Pray for Moderation.
Long may she not stay, let the next Generation
See out of these Stones rise a New Mode^ation.
And to see what good Prayers can do! Not long after, when you would have
thought she had been quite consumed, Moderation did revive, and her Spirit did
return, yet not into the former Corpse (that had been too great a Miracle for
this latter Age to believe) but as Moses Spirit was once transfused into
seventy others, so did her Spirit return, and was transfused, and did enter
into many more, and made a happy change in them; They were now so many new
Creatures, which made the Author, and many others, sing in the words of that
famous Verser,

Jam nova Progenies Coelo dilabitur alt^. There dropped down from Heaven high,
Of Mankind a new Progeny.
Yea, and which was the wonder of all, and you will hardly believe it, even
Extremity her self was changed, and endued with another spirit, as the next
Chapter will inform you.

CHAP. XIII. Of the wonderful change wrought in Extremity, and the occasion and
means of it.
BEfore I make an end, I shall tell you what became of Extremity and
Disobedience: Extremity made a happy end, repented, reformed, and dyed
comfortably; Disobedience lived obstinately and dyed miserably, and who could
look for other?

Extremi^y, as I told you before, was the only Enemy that Moderation had in all
the world, and had hated her extremely while she lived; and she the only Person
that rejoiced, and i^deed she insulted at her death.

But this E^mity lasted not always; for, as God would have it, within a few
years after Moderation's death, Extremity fell into a fit of Sickness, and a
happy Sickness it was to her, (her Extremity was Graces Opportunity) she was
sore handled: An ordinary Disease it was not, but she was in great extremity
and pain.

The Physicians, who were sent for, were at their Wits end, when they saw her:
They perceived her trouble lay deeper, and concluded, by all Conjectures they
could make, it was some inward trouble or grief oppressed her: And being much
pressed by them, to declare whether it were so or no, she confessed at last it
was so indeed, and that she was much troubled in her Mind, and could get no
rest.

It was about her former course of life, and her many sins; especially she
said, one thing lay heaviest upon her above all others, which they were long
ere they could get out of her; yet she was observed by them that watched with
her, sometimes, between sleeping and waking, to mutter to her self, and they
could overhear her now and then, and her talk was of Moderation; and many times
she would start of a sudden, and look aghast, and bid the By-stand^rs look
about, and tell her if they saw any thing; and sometimes would ask them, if
they saw not Moderation there. Once she lay, as in a Trance, and seemed to them
to pray and call upon God for mercy: At another time she would cry out of her
self, and her former miscarriages, saying, Ah! vile Extremity! Ah! sin^ul
wretch Extremity! Ah! cruel Extremity! And once she told one of her Maids, that
Moderation had appeared to her in her sleep, all clothed in white, and with a
smiling Countenance asked her, what reason she had to be so bitter an Enemy to
her, who had never done her wrong in all her life? and now she was dead
continued her Enmity to her Friends: Told her, she was sent to admonish her to
repent, and amend her way^es, then should she be a happy Woman.

This did much run in her mind, and she would often say, O! that Moderation
were alive again! All the World should see, I did not so much hate her before,
as I should now prize and love her.

She would often wish also, that Eusebiu^ or Philotheos, the Husband and
Brother of Moderation, were now alive, that she might manifest what respect she
bare them, and that in her distress she might ease her mind to them, and
receive some comfort from them, which she thought was not possible for her to
have, but from the hands of some of Mode^ation's Friends.

Then she began to make enquiry, what able and discreet Divine there was, to
whom she might unbosom her self: And was told, there lived not far from her, a
choice and prudent Minister, named Agathophilus, one well experienced in Cases
and perplexities of Conscience, and one mighty tender in dealing with a
troubled Spirit (a cheerful and comfortable old Man he was, and a great
ch^risher of every Spark of good, were it never so little) and for that he had
his name given him.

Extremity had never been acquainted with him before, although they lived not
far the one from the other (nor indeed with many other strict Divines, whom she
had looked upon, ^or the most of them, formerly, as a company of Sour and
discontented persons) for him she presently sends, and he came immediately, and
she at first sight of him was ready, somewhat like Cornelius to Saint Pe^er, to
rise off her Couch and fall down upon her knees to him. He asked her how she
did? what was her grief? She confessed she had been a grievous sinner, and had
much offended; but one thing there was, which she had hitherto concealed, but
now she would hide nothing from him; one thing there was, that troubled her
more then all the rest; she had been a bitter Enemy to Moderation; and now she
saw plainly (the Evening of Sickness is the Morning of Light) that she had been
much mistaken in her, and feared she had much to answer for her
uncharitableness; she had alway^s looked upon Moderation with an evil eye, as
if she had been the (...) Creature alive, and thereupon had hat^d her to the
death; but now she was quite and clean of another mind, and did think she was
as good a Soul as liv^d, and the most innocent, and saw that she was a better
Christian then her self; wishing, with all her heart, that when she dyed, she
might change places with Modera^ and were she now alive again, he would show
her all the love was ^ossible: This and much more she ^onfest, and the Tears
gushed out ^hen she mentioned these things; and oft-times would lift up her
eyes ^o Heaven and pray, God forgive ^e my bitterness against Moderati^n.

And another thing she charged her self withal, which she thought made her
more inexcusable, and she said, she had never thought of it till in this her
sickness; and that was this; she had been formerly under the hands of cruel
Oppressors, and could not help her self; and indeed she had had hard measure,
but it was not from the hands of Moderation, nor any of her Friends, who could
only pity her, and were troubled to see it; but by other hands as extreme as
Extremity her self: Scholars have a saying, One extr^am is most opp^site to
(...): But then s^e had promised, and made a solemn Vow, that if ^ver she
should come out of her sufferings, she ha^ learnt to pity sufferers while she
liv^ ed, and should never countenance Violence again; yet since she had bee^ in
that good condition she now enjoyed; and Moderation she acknowledged had not
been backward to contribute her best assistance for hers an^ the common
benefit; she had bot^ forgotten Moderation, and her own former Vows and
Promises: And here she burst out into Tears a^resh.

Agath^philus seeing her in such an Agony, (...) to comfort her, yet told her,
she had been much to blame for her former Violence; but seeing she was now so
true a Pen^tent, and so changed in her mind, as she declared, he bad her not
fear, her case was no ways desperate; and to confirm her, he told her further,
that in his Experience he had m^t with the like before* and could give her many
Scripture Instances.

He would not tell her of Manas^es (he said) and what he had done, yet found
mercy, for his Case was quite beyond the Line, and Eccentrical to her Relation
she had made.

But he could tell her of diverse of no mean Quality, whose Names and Stories
are no ways blemished by it, that had been drawn aside sometimes as she had
been: As Darius, a Median King; and Ahasuerus, the Persian Emperor (some part
of whose Story is recorded by a Sacred Pen) whose good Natures had been wrought
upon, by the solicitation of some mis-informers, to pass some Acts, severe
enough, against some of Moderation's Ancestors; yet upon further enquiry and
satisfaction, gave a check and stop to further proceedings, repealing those
Acts, and receiving into highest favor such as, by mis-representation, they
had been whetted against; nor was it ever imputed to them as a note of Inco^
stancy, that they had rescinded suc^ Acts, but is the brightest St^ of Glory
that shines in their St^ry.

And for your Father, Saul the Second (said he) of ever blesse^ Memory, that
famous Saint an^ Martyr, I need not tell you wha^ the former part of his Story
was somewhat like yours, by your ow^ relation: But he had been outra^ gious
when time was, not onl^ hunting Moderation out of hou^ and home in her own
Corporat^ ons, but persecuting her and he^ followers into strange Cities; ye^
did he not only find mercy, bu^ for his memorable change and Pi^ ty, afterward
has his Name s^ down among the first Three.

He was content to take the Tau^ (...) Heretic at the hands of Tertullu^ (...)
(...) a Mad. Phanatick at the hands ^ Festus afterward, he was so much alt^red.

The like, I trust, said he, will befall you, whose former days, by your own
confession, have been like his, that your last end will be as his also; and if
you continue in this good mind, you will hereafter come into the same estate he
is possessed of; for which purpose I shall ever pray for you, and, if you
please, am now ready to pray with you -- which accordingly he did before they
parted.

She was not a little comforted and settled in her mind, after her discourse
with Agathophilus; and soon after she mended apace and recovered, lived many a
day after, and made an happy end.

And to testify the reallity of her change (not long after this ill Fit she
proved with Child, and when she had gone her time she was delivered of a
Daughter, and would have her called Mitigation, her elder Daughter being dead a
little before, whose name was Violence, and upon her Deathbed she made it her
last R^quest, to some of Moderation's Acquaintance, that her Daughter might be
brought up with their Children, and if she lived to be bestowed in marriage, it
might-be to one of that Family, which she desired above any thing in this
World, as being verily persuaded, God had a bl^ssing in store for that Family,
then should she dye in peace.

And so it came to pass as she desired, for Mitigation was married to a near
(...) of Moderation's, called Philallelos, the loveliest Person in the World:
He was all Love, and nothing but Love, and so much his name signified when it
was given him, and he made it good.

And now ca^ it not be exp^ssed, what joy this Marriage caused all the Country
over; ^or by this means, those two great Families, of Extremity and Moderatiou,
were united, which, while at enmity, had divided and dis^racted all the
Neighborhood.

Of the which memorable Sickness, Repentance and Recovery of Extremity, and her
change, and the Marriage of her Daughter, one made this following Verse, which
though a plain and homely one, I thought fit to have inserted.

Extremity was sick, and hard it is to say,
In what extremity Extremity then lay,
Troubled much in mind about Moderation,
Whom she had pursued with much Indignation.
Extremity recovers, and a while after
Into Moderation's Stock marries her Daughter.
They being made Friends, the World was well amended:
Mitigation survives, Extremity is ended.
CHAP. XIV. Containing a digression of the Author.
I Am not ignorant, that many will look upon all this that has been said of
Extremities Sickness, trouble in mind, and Repentance, to be but a Story, no
more then Moderation's rising again. I shall ^ot go about to impose upon any
man a belief of what he dislikes, but leave every one to think what he pleases.

Only it is certain, that Philallelos and Mitigation made a happy match, and
many there were that gave them Joy, and wished they might live many a good day
together, and have many good Children between them, and hoped there would be
much more Love among all the Neighbors, then there had been for a while
before: And, whencesoever it came, it was observed there was a fresh breathing
of a Spirit of Love all over the Land, as if serene Zephirus had blown away all
the former Storms and Clouds, and presented Men with a milder Air to breath in;
and the content that most had in their hearts and their hopes, were legible in
the cheerfulness of their Countenances. But what the secret causes of this
alteration and reconciliation between Extremity and Moderation were, is too
deep a Mystery for Hesychius Pamphilus to penetrate. Only I shall relate to
you, what were the several Conjectures of several Persons, who would, as they
pleased, assign their several apprehensions, which might produce this happy
effect.

First, This is not to be concealed, that the Inhabitants of Felici^na are a
people above any in all the World beside, next to the Word of God, given much
to the observation of Divine Providence; and they h^d taken notice, that after
some hard dealing with Moderation, many disasters had besallen that Island
(which though it were too high presumpti^ to give the reason of, yet is it but
piety to take notice of) as the Apparition of some prodigious Comets, which
amazed the Spectators, and were seen in that Island (whether one and the same,
or two, or thr^e) for about six months together, followed with a sweeping
(...), which took away an hundr^d thousand out of the Capital City; and the
^ame City, the y^ar following, consumed with Fire, for the greatest part of it;
and during all this time, a chargeable and doubtful War with potent Neighbors,
consuming what Lives the Pestilence had spared, and what Treasure had escaped
the Fire. Dreadful and amazing Judgments all.

With the pious sense whereof, many of the Islanders being duly affected, began
to reflect upon themselves, as sometimes the Patriarks did, in a day of their
distress, and said, Are (...) not guilty concerning our Brother, because we saw
the anguish of his Soul, when he besought us, and we would not hear?

Others there are, that, next to the Goodness of God, ascribe it principally to
the Native and largehearted Clemency and Prudence of the Prince; who having
observed how patient and silent Moderation had been under her Trials; and
moreover, when some unqui^t Spirits had been formerly stirring at home; and
during the time of that War, that was then afoot with the Neighbors abroad,
Extremity it self could not find the least defection in Moderation from her
wonted constant Fidelity. Thereupon the prudent Prince said to his people, as
formerly another Prince had said to his, concerning the Family of Jacob,
Behold, these men are quiet and peaceable, let them dwell in the Land, and
trade t^erein; behold, the Land is large enough, let us make Marriages with
them, and take their Daughters in marriage with our Sons.

Others again said, it was no more but this; the good hour was come, wherein
God would bring Moderation out of her Troubles, as he had done Joseph, who had
lain in disgrace under some foul Accusations, till the time that his Word came,
the Word of the Lord had tried him; then the King sent and loosed ^im, the
Ruler of the people, and let him go free: And the rather, because he had been
^formed by some about him, that he had skill in opening Divine Revelations, and
might be of great use in preventing a (spiritual) Famine.

Others again, that it had been with the Daughter now, as it was with her
Father Hyperzelotes, both in his first and last: Time and immediate inspiration
from God, had wrought this (...) change in him; who, after his intemperate zeal
spent against Mode^ation, became now her great Friend, Patron and Advocate, and
then the most glorious Champion for Truth, Piety and Charity that ^ver was, and
a most Emin^nt Instrument of good to the universal Church; after which, it is
observed by a Sacred Pen, Then had the Churches rest in all Judea, (...) and
Galil^e, and ^re edified* and, walking in the fear of the Lord, and in the
Comforts of the Holy Ghost, were multiplied. And in all the Churches, where
Tidings came of this blessed change, They glorified God in him. The like was
now done in all Feliciana.

Howsoever it was, and whatsoever may be thought the cause, it becomes not
Pamphilus to determine; but all remembered, what a Blessed, Peacemaking, and
GreatUniting-Monarch of a famous Island, had given for his Motto upon his Coin,
A Domino factum est illud, and est mirabile in oculis nostris: This was the
Lords doing, and it is marvelous in our eyes: who h^d united Kingdoms, formerly
divided, and at enmity; and said, the like had befallen them; and therefore
desired God might (...) the whole glory and praise ascribed to him.

Only this is certain, nothing could have b^n done more to the general
satisfaction of the sober sort of Men in the Island, to r^ise up their hearts
in the highest praise o^ God, and to the greatest measu^ of thankfulness to so
Graci^us and Prudent a Prince, and to the cementing of Christian Love and
mutual good Affection all the Island over only Disobedience was much
dis^ontented; and looking seorn^ully ou^ at a Window (as M^chal o^e, when all
Is^ael were in their highest joy at a great Festival) and shook her head:) So
that Isr^el of old did not more rejoice, when the King had brought the Ark out
of a private House into public again, and appointed it a fixed Station; or
when the Son of the same King had newly Dedicated the holy Temple; it being set
down in their sacred Stories, that both these Princes blessed their people, and
they were again blessed by their people: And the conclusion of the Story of the
lat^er was this; after his Devotions ended, He sent away the people, and they
blessed the King, and went into their Tents, joyful and glad in heart, for all
the goodness the Lord had done for David his Servant, and for Israel his People.

CHAP. XV. What became of Disobedience and her Children, they being quelled and
reduced, what a happy World followed, according to an old Prophecy.
NOw, when we shall have dispatch^d Disobedience out of the way, our work is at
an end; we shall therefore tell you what b^came of her, now th^re was no other
Enemy to be (...); And would we could say, she came to the like good end
Extremi^y made: But it was (...) likely. --

She was not of like Temper and Spirit as Extremity was, ever to be touched
with any sense of Honor or Conscience.

Extremity was of a Generous Spirit, and Noble Education, and ever bare a true
Love to her Country; only too too passionate.

Disobedienc^, on the other side, was of a dogged, surly and unquiet Spirit;
nothing could pl^ase her, neither could she well tell what she would have, only
fretted at the times, and her own private condition.

But now those great Famili^s of Extremity and Moderation being united and
allied, there was no fear of any considerable disturbance Disobedience could
make. And to make sure, and timely to pr^vent any mischief that any of the
Children of Disobedi^nce could hatch or devise, Extremity and Moderation's
Friends agreed, with their united Forces to fall upon them: And they being
within a short time after up in Rebellion, it was the Lot of a Party of
Extremities Forces to give the first charge, who scattered the body, and took
some of the chief Heads, and made them Examples; and Moderation's, with their
Party, took some others: And both agreed, to the terror of the rest, to send
them bound to their Father Absalom's Oak, drawn backward in his Chariot by his
Mule, whom when she carried thither, and had left them safe hanging by the
head, between Heaven and Earth, upon a three-forked Branch (the Wood devoured
more that day then the Sword) the lightened Beast went away from under them,
leaving them hanging.

Some of the rest that were taken straggling, were made to go on Pilgrimage a
foot to the Oak of Reformation, a Tree which had formerly done good service o^
like occasion in the days of their forefathers: And because this Tree was
somewhat higher then the former, they were fain to climb or else to be lifted
up to it, an^ (...) after, the kind Earth, ^o (...) the World of them, opened,
and they were swallowed up wi^h the Congregation of Abiram.

The Heads being taken off thus, the rest submitted, and f^ll to hard Labor;
all save a f^w desperate ones, who seeing they could do no more good on it
(others call it mischief and wickedness) fled the Island: Only some (too many
of them too) of the latter brood of Disobedience, the Hectors and T^ries, the
Drunkards, Whoremongers, and other vicious persons, remained sculking in
Corners, and har^oured in wicked houses, who^ it is hoped, the good and
wholesome Laws of the Island (for there are no better any where) and due
execution of them, may, in time, reduce from the evil ways of their Mother
Disobedience; then no Nation in the World more happy, and may well be called
Feliciana, or Elisiana for ever.

But already all S^orms were scattered, and an happy Calm followed, and there
seemed to be a new World: The Island was settled, Armies disbanded, every Man
sat under his own Vine and Fig Tree, eating, drink^ng and making merry, as in
the older World, or in the Halcyon and Golden days of Solomon's Reign,
rejoicing, that Mercy and Truth, Righteousness and Peace, Extremi^y and
Moderation, had kissed each other: And the Primitive times did seem to be
returned, wherein they did eat their meat with gladn^ss and sing^eness of
heart, praising God, and having favor with all the people, and the Lord added
to his Church daily such as should be saved. And all good Men prayed, long may
Extremity and Moderation be friends, or rather, no more Extremity, but always
Moderation.

And then many could remember, there ha^ been an old Prophecy, which their
Fathers had told them (foretold many a day agone by a holy Man) which was now
fulfilled, and was to this effect.

Moderation shall Revive, Extremity shall Cease,
Disob^dience stoop to Reason, All end in Peace.
The Envy of Ephraim shall cease; Ephraim shall not envy Judah, no^ Judah vex
Ephraim.

Te Duce, siqua manent sceleris vestigia nostri,
Irrita perpetua solvent formidine ^erras. Virgil.
Glory to God in the highest, on Earth Peace, and good will amongst Men.
Moderations Rec^ipt, (taught her b^ her Aunt Experience;)
Sovereign to cure any Distempers i^ ^he Church, especially in^ard in the
Bowels* as ^lso of excellent vert^e against a Rupture.

Blessed Soul! she taught how to secure
The Church. 'Twill do, if put in ure.
A Pound of Piety she singles,
As much of Charity then mingles:
Zeal bruised with Knowledge next she takes,
(Two Pugils a rare Compound makes)
Then tops of Prudence, and the Pith
Of Elder Faith; Stale Truth, therewith
A good handful of Humility,
Some mild Forbearance, Unity
In Matters Mayn; Opinions New,
Leaves, Roots and Stalks away she threw;
And to make sure it shall Digest,
Loyalty sweetens all the rest.
THE Outlandish Names IN THIS DISCOURSE ENGLISHED.
ABaddon, and Apollyon, Names given in Scripture to Satan, signify a
Destroyer. Agathophilus, a Lover of Goodness or good Men. Anaideia, Impudence.
Asotos, a Prodigal or Riotous person. Avernus, a Lake put for Hell. Blandula, a
fair spoken Woman, or a Flatterer. Ben-hagios, an holy Son. Bar-Jonah, the Son
of the Dove. Crapula, Drunkenness, or Excess. Circe, a Witch, whose Cups turned
men into Swine. Donna Olympia, a Roman Lady, who lately managed all Affairs for
the Pope, at the Court at Rome. Donna Spatulosa, a lascivious Lady. Dolosus,
Subtle, or Crafty. Eulaleia, a well-spoken Woman. Eudorla, Comeliness, or
making a fair show. Eupolemus, a good Warrior. Eusebius, a Godly person.
Eutrapeleia, Jesting, or Merriment. Feliciana, an happy Island. Gelasius, one
given to Laughter. Hyperphiladelphotus, one exceeding loving to the Brethren.
Hyperzelotes, excessively zealous. Misoponos, one that hates labor and pains.
Phantasia, Pomp, or Gallantry. Philautos, one that loves himself. Philallelos,
one that loves others. Philedonos, a lover of pleasure. Philodemus, a lover of
the people. Philodike, a lover of Justice. Philotheos, a lover of God. Porne, a
Harlot. Probation, Trial. Temerarius, Rash, or venturous.
FINIS.

