THE CHURCHES RESURRECTION: OR, The CREATING of the New Heavens.

Written by an unworthy Gospel-Minister, JOHN BRAYN.

Rev. 21.2. And I John saw the holy City, etc.

Acts 13.41, Behold, ye despisers, and wonder, and perish: for I work a work in
your days, a work which you shall in no wise believe, though a man declare it
unto you.

London, Printed for George Whittington, at the Blew-Anchor in Cornhil, near
the Royal Exchange. 1649.

To the Honorable, The General Council OF THE ARMY.
IN that I am assured you and your despised Armies, are they by whom the Church
is to be ushered out of her long hid estate into the world again; I presume to
present you with this ensuing Tract, as belonging to you, which may something
serve to help-direct your Councels in Church Affairs, in the sound foundation
whereof you will find to consist the strength of your undertakings, Councels
and comforts to depend, and issues to succeed, it being the work only of God,
to give man to his labor an expected end. Now the Lord so direct you in your
great undertakings, to do the work of the Lord, that he may have glory, and you
mercy in the day of Christ, is the desire of

Your Servant in the Gospel, JO: BRAYN.

To the Reader.
I Think good to acquaint thee, that God may have the greater glory, That the
Form of Government I drew wholly from the Word, before I saw the least footstep
of it in the Primitive Practice, mentioned by the Fathers; which when I came to
see them to be as so many Witnesses to the Truth, I could not for the Truths
sake but make it public for thy profit. It is not as large as intended, but
Epitomized only, my allowance for my Ministry being detained from me; nor did
I therefore translate but few of the Authorities cited; some are, for the use
of the unlearned. I desire you to pass by the errors committed in Printing it,
because having other occasions, I could not attend the Press, and it shall be
your honor, and be esteemed of

Your Servant in the Gospel, JO: BRAYN.

IN these times it has been the way of men to cry down the sound and saving
Truths of God and the Gospel, by branding them with terms of Novelty, and New
found Notions, proudly and scornfully calling them ridiculous things, in
branding the men that God reveals them to with odious names, hindering many from
so much as trying the Truth; then which, Satan has not had a greater Engine
against the way of God in these last times, which the trial of the first and
purest of Antiquity will reveal unto us, and show us how; and I shall endeavor,
as my weak ability, small reading, and other great employments will give me
leave, in these few sheets of Paper following to manifest. And first,

THat the Government of the Church in the Primitive times, was not looked on as
in these latter times it has been (even to be a thing to be made conformal to
every estate in which the Gospel is preached prudentially) which is clearly to
be proved by many witnesses; but in that the Scripture says, Under two or
three witnesses every thing shall be established, I shall only prove them by
two or three, and no more, as being sufficient hereunto alone.

Tertullian, who lived about Two hundred years after Christ, says, Nobis vero
nihil ex nostro arbitrio inducere licet, sed nec eligere quod aliquis ex suo
arbitrio induxerit, Apostolos Domini habemus auctores, qui nec ipsi quicquam ex
suo arbitrio quod inducerent eligerunt, sed acceptam a Christo disciplinam
fideliter Nationibus assignarunt itaque etiamsi Angelus de coelis aliter
Evangelizaret, anathema diceretur a nobis. De Praescrip. Heret.

The sense this: It is not lawful for us to induce any thing at our pleasure,
nor to choose that any one has induced of his own will; we have the Apostles
of the Lord, Authors, who themselves nor chose nor brought in (to the Church)
any thing of their free will, but they faithfully assigned to the Nations the
discipline received from Christ: Therefore, though an Angel from heaven should
teach otherways, let him be accounted as accursed of us.

Ap. What place is there then for a prudential Government in the Church? How
can Ministers plead for it, or Magistrates set it up?

Dionisius Ep. to Demophilus.
Si distinctiones ordinesque confundere Sacratissimas Dei Sanctiones jura
transgredi est, omni profecto ratione caret Dei causa pervertere traditum
divinitus ordinem; neque enim in seipsum Dei sermo divisus est, alioquin
quomodo staret ejus regnum?

Clem. Alex. Lib. Strom. 7. p. 841.
Quomodo ergo in bello non est ordo deserendus quem dedit imperator militi, ita
nec est deserendus ordo quem dedit nobis verbum, quem accepimus principem ac
ducem cognitionis and vitae.

I may prove this by others, but Tertull. whose Authority is questioned by
none, speaking to this exceeding pertinently, I propose again, as in his Book
Adversus Marcion.

Et oportuerit utique prius alium Deum exponi, postea ejus disciplinam induci;
quia Deus auctoritatem praestet disciplinae, non Deo disciplina.

This I suppose proves sufficiently, That in the Church no Discipline ought to
be set up, but what Christ in the Gospel has commanded.

The second thing to be considered, is, The Ministry without the Church,
erected by Christ in the world to fit for the Church.

1. The Books of Arnobius, Lactantius, Justin Martyr, called Sermon. ad Gentes,
prove it.

Clem. Alex. ad Gentes.
Venite, venite o meorum juvenum caetus nisi: enim rursus efficiamini ut pueri,
and regeneremini ut ait Scriptura eum qui vero est pater non recipietis, neque
unquam in regnum Coelorum intrabitis, quando enim est hospiti permissum
ingredi, sed quando ut puto inscriptus fuerit and cives effectus, and patrem
acceperit; tunc erit in numero filiorum patris, tunc dignus habebitur qui sit
haeres.

Come ye, come ye, O Congregation of my young men, for unless ye become again as
children, and be new born, as the Scripture says, ye cannot receive him who is
truly the Father, nor shall ye ever enter into the Kingdom of Heaven: When is
it permitted the stranger to enter, but when, as I think, he is enrolled and
made a Citizen, and has received the Father? then he shall be in the number of
the Fathers children.

That this was to unconverted Gentiles, is without doubt; and farther shows,
They were to be enrolled, and receive the Father (that is, I suppose) they were
to profess Faith in and Obedience unto God, before he could be a Citizen or a
Son, which at first must be an estate of childehood in the Church again (though
men by nature) or they could not enter.

Clemens in Orat. adhor. ad Gentes.
Praecursor Johannis vox verbum praecurrit, vox adhortatoria praeparans ad
salutem, vox adhortans, ad haereditatem Coelorum per quam sterilis and deserta
non est infertilis.

This shows what the work of this Ministry was, even only to prepare for, and
persuade men of the necessity there was to become members of the Church, and to
be of the society of the Saints, that the barren and the desert souls may not
be unfruitful, he alluding herein to John's preaching in the wilderness of Judea.

Tertull. adversus Marcion.
Lex and Prophetae usque ad Joannem ex quo regnum Dei annunciatur, quasi non
and nos limitem quendam agnoscamus Joannem constitutum inter vetera and nova ad
quem desineret Judaismus, and a quo inciperet Christianismus: non tamen, and ab
alia virtute facta sit sedatio legis and prophetarum and initiatio Evangelii in
quo est Dei regnum Christus ipse.

1. This Ministry in John the Baptist was set up among the Jews, Gods own
ancient people, to prepare them for the Gospel estate, which proves the
Ministry to be exercised among all other people, to prepare them for the
Church estate, if it had been needless among any, it had been among the Jews.

2. This Ministry is clearly confirmed by the Apostle, 2 Timothy 1.11. who is
(...); here Apostle and Teacher are the two extremes of the Church, Ministry
the first and last, highest and lowest, between which, the Prophet, the
Evangelist and Pastor are contained; before all which, the (...) is placed, who
prepares for the Church Ministry, but is not of it.

Eusebius Lib. 6. cap. 2.
Cum Ecclesiae apud Alexandriam Magisterii deesset officium, cumque omnes
perturbati persequtorum minis and ferocitatibus anfugissent, aliquanti
Gentilium conveniebant ad Originem tunc adhuc Grammaticum docentem audire de eo
verbum de nostra fide ac Religione Cupientes; quos ille non tantum ad fidem de
perfidia convertebat, sed etiam perfectae vitae institutionibus informabat.
Hence Mr. More in his Chronol. Tables, calls Origin Catechist, as if he had
obtained no other degree of Ministry.

It is remarkable he says, he did not only convert them from infidelity to
the Faith (which was the proper work of the Ministry without the Church, and
so here employed) but informed them in the Institutions of a better life.

1. This was more, I suppose, then any before Origin ever did by an ordinary
Call.

2. It is true, the Ministry were all fled, and so none left to do it.

3. Called on of the people to do it.

3. A word or two will not be amiss, to show the manner of Admission to Church
society, as recorded by the Ancients.

Clem. Alex. Lib. 7, page 834.
Number ergo si quis pacta conventa non observaverit, and transgressus fuerit eam
quae fit apud nos confessionem, propter eum qui non stetit suae professioni
abstinebimus nos quoque a veritate? sed ut oportet virum probum minime esse
mendacem and nihil infirmare eorum quae est pollicitus, etiamsi aliqui alia
pacta conventa transiliant, ita nos quoque nullo modo convenit transilire
regulam ecclesiasticam, and maxim eam quae fit de rebus maximis professionem.

Tertul. de Spectaculis: Cum aquam ingressi Christianam fidem in legis suae
verba profitemur, renunciasse nos diabolo and pompae ejus and Angelis ejus ore
nostro contestamur.

Dionisius cap. 2. de Hierar. sets it out thus, He that is taken with the love
and desire of sublime and celestial benefits, comes to one of the number of the
faithful, and desires him to bring him to the Priest, promising he would
observe all that should be required of him with his whole heart; desiring him
he would also take the care of the ordering of his remaining life. Now although
the believer be inflamed with a sacred love of the salvation of his soul, yet
considering the height of the thing, and humane infirmity, forthwith horror and
distress invade him: At length he bountifully promises him to do what is
desired, and taking the man, brings him to the high Priest (or Evangelist) who
with great joy receives the man no otherways then as a lost sheep on his
shoulders; then he (that is, the high Priest) gathers all the sacred Orders,
that they may cooperate with him (which is the Pastor and Teacher, admitting
him for a Member) and that they may rejoice together for the man, and as the
holy Church (that is, the society of the Saints) they give thanks to the Divine
Clemency, and in the beginning sings some Hymn, inserted in the sacred Books,
together with all the Orders of the Church, post haec deosculatis Sanctis
altaribus: After this, the Priest comes to the man standing by, and demands of
him, What moved him to come there; he accusing himself (as he was taught by him
that took the charge of him) of ungodliness, and ignorance of the true God, and
sighing for that he has been so long destitute of the work of the divine life;
and praying, That by his most sacred Office and Prayer, he may be permitted to
enjoy God and the Divine Mysteries. Now on this it is witnessed unto him by the
Priest, that he ought to come to God with his whole heart, and in all things to
be perfect and unblameable. Then the Priest opening the nature of a divine
Conversation and life, it is demanded of him, if he will live so, yea or no;
which when he has promised, he puts his hand on his head, Consignansque illum,
he commits him to the Priests, they Record the man, and him that undertook for
him. Other Ceremonies are by the perverters of Antiquity added after, which I
pass by as spurious things, and then the Evangelist, Pastor and Teacher proceed
to the Baptizing of him.

Clem. Alex. Lib. 7. Stro. p. 790.
Nam ante mysteriorum quoque seu Sacramentorum traditionem exhiberi oportere
quasdam expiationes iis qui sunt initiandi mysteriis; utpote quod oporteat
impia deposita opinione ad veram converti traditionem.

Herein that this was done to those were to be initiated, at their initiating
(by the mysteries) that is, at their Baptism; before which they were to promise
the denial of themselves, and the forsaking their old Conversation, and a
subjecting themselves to the Gospel, and promise to live the life of Christ, in
society with the Saints.

Now in these do I suppose begins the bonds and ties spoken of Ephesians 4.16.
Colloss. 3.19. in which, the member is bound to Christ, to the Minister, the
members by Promise, by Sacraments, by Profession of Faith, etc. and Christ unto
the Christian.

Application of this is, That seeing the collection of Churches was in this
manner set down in the Gospel, and practiced for Two hundred years after in the
Church, sure the same way is still to be observed, or the constitution of our
Churches cannot be said to be according to Christ in the Gospel, or the
Churches in the Primitive pattern; but must resemble the estate of Churches as
they were set up under Antichrist, or that Form which made way for him, and
contributed to the inthronizing of him.

Justin. Apol. 2.
Eucharistae nemo admittitur nisi qui credit veram esse nostram doctrinam,
ablutus regenerationis lavacro in remissionem peccatorum, and sic vivens ut
Christus docuit.

The fourth general is of the Ministry, that appertains unto the Church only.

Their number are said to be three only.

Tertull. de Exhort. Castitatis.
Differentiam inter ordinem and plebem constituit ecclesia auctoritas and honor
per ordinis confessum sanctificatus a Deo, ubi non est ecclesiastici ordinis
consessus, and Offers, and Tingis, and Sacerdos es tibi solus, sed ubi tres,
ecclesia est.

The words for the Ministry are obsolete; but he that is not a stranger to his
Writings, will not admire at it, especially in his Apolog.

Dionisius Eccles. Hierar. cap 5. par. prima.
Nunc jam Sacerdotalis perfunctio suo est loco, exponenda, in purgantem atque
illuminantem Consummantemque ordinem distributa, which he calls cap. 6.
Minister, Sacerdos, Pontifex.

Now, says he, the Sacerdotal Calling is to be expounded in its place, and is
distributed into the Purging Order, which is the Teachers, the illuminating the
Pastors, and the Perfecting Order, which is the Evangelists.

And after idem ibid. he clears it thus, Rudes hactenus purgat, Mediaque
purgatos ratione Sacratioris eruditionis illuminat, ultima quae and priores
concludet and complet quod ineruditos Suarum instructionum scientia perfecit.

Which plainly proves the Ministry then exercised in the Church, to be
threefold, and distinguished by the operations of them, purging, illuminating,
perfecting, and by the Order they are placed in the Church; as, the first
Ministry, the middle Ministry, the last Ministry.

In the Ep. Decretal of Lucius it is said, That a Bishop should have two
Priests and three Deacons following him, which was intended for the
constituting of a Church according to the Gospel, and not for pompous pride, as
Papists understand for Popes.

Ignatius Ep. to the Church of Trallis.
Quid vero Presbyterium nisi collegium Sacrum? consiliarii and consessores
Episcopi: quid item Diaconi nisi imitatores Angelicarum virtutem ei
ministrantes ministerium purum and immaculatum ut Sanctus Stephanus beato
Jacobo, and Timotheus ac Linus Paulo, and Anacletus atque Clemens Petro? qui
igitur inobediens fuerit his Atheus and impius omnino fuerit and Christum
improbans.

I the sooner quote this Epistle, because not questioned, and this matter,
because its used by Ignatius demonstratively; in which he proves their
Presbytery, consisting of a Bishop and two Presbyters, to agree with that of
Paul, Timothy and Linus, Peter, Anacletus and Clemens, and so to be according
to the Apostolical institution: This Epistle spoken of by Nicephor, lib. 3.
cap. 29. Hyreneus. Eusebius.

The reason why Irenaeus speaks so little of these things in his Five Books,
Advers. Haeres. I suppose is, because he wrote a Book De Disciplina, mentioned
by Hieron. de vita Iraenei, which with the true History of Egisip. and that
Book of Josep. Antioch. called Speculum perfectae militiae ecclesiae
Primitivae, are all lost; and the beginning of the first Lib. of Strom. of
Clemens Alexandrinus, which was the Key of his Books of Stromes doubtless.

Hyraen. Lib. 4. cap. 43.
Quapropter eis qui in ecclesia sunt Presbyteris obaudire oportet his qui
successionem habent ab Apostolis sicut ostendimus, qui cum Episcopatus
successione Charisma veritatis certum, secundum placitum patris acceperunt.

In which he shows, That in every Church there ought to be Presbyters, who are
to have their succession from the Apostles.

This may be seen in Origin. Eusebius. Hist. Lib. 6. cap. 2. Videns Demetrius
Episcopus quod ad ipsum praecipue doctrinae gratia and praedicationis verbi
multitudines plurimae convolarent, and Calezizandi ei, id est, docendi
magisterium in ecclesia tribuit, which I take to be Catechizing.

Lib. 6. cap: 5. Nam cum apud Palaestinam praecipui and eminentes inter
Episcopos viri id est, Hierosolimorum Alexander, and Theotistus, Cesareae,
videntes divinum opus verbo Dei ordinassent eum Presbyterum, ac eum Sacerdotio
jam namque dignum probarent.

Sacerdos is usually applied to the Pastors Ministry, which he was thought
worthy of, but received it not; which proves this Presbytership he now
received, was nothing else but the Doctors office, as appears more clearly in
the words following, Origines apud Alexandriam Doctor ecclesiae valde clarus
habebatur.

Lib. 6. cap. 17. Post Philetum autem apud Antiochiam Zebenus ecclesiam
suscepit, quo in tempore Origines rogatus est ab ecclesiis; (that is, the
distinct Societies at Antioch) apud Antiochiam ut illo usque pro convincendis
haereticis qui inibi liberius convaluerant perveniret, quo cum pergeret and
iter necessario ageret per Palestinam, Presbyter apud Caesaream ab illius
provinciae Episcopis ordinatur.

1. By his first Presbytership he ministered at Alexandria.

2. By his second at Antioch.

3. He was under Zebenus the Bishop at Antioch, he never assumed that degree of
Ministry in the Church.

4. He was Catechist before, by the ordination of Demetrius.

5. In this is observeable, That the People of Antioch had the call of their
Ministers, and none assumed that Authority over them in those days.

Justin Martyr speaks nothing of the Discipline of the Church, but in his
second Apology made to Antonius Pius, at the end of it, in which he speaks of
the Praesul and Praepositus, Lector and Deacons; but the Papists have so
corrupted it, as that there is no use to be made of it, there is foisted in it
the carrying about of the Sacraments to the sick, the Minister, not the Deacon,
to collect the Alms of the Church, etc.

Ignatius Ep. 3. ad Magnesianos.
Caeterum quoniam merui videre vos per Damam Deo dignum Episcopum vestrum, and
Presbyteros Deo dignos, Bassum and Apollonium and convivam meum Sotionem
Diaconum.

Here the Pretbyters are clearly by name expressed, who are only two; if there
had been more, he would not have left them out, and have named Sotion the
Deacon: And in all his Epistles, when he writes of Presbytery, you are to
understand the same number always, no true Church having one more then another.

Egisippus. Vna cum Apostolis suscepit ecclesiam administrandam frater Domini
Jacobus, qui Justus ab omnibus cognominatus.

Which Apostles were Peter and John, Gal. 2.9.

Hence Irenaeus, lib. 3. cap. 12. writing of that Acts 15. Ascendissent Paulus
and Barnabas Hierosolimam ad alteros Apostolos propter hanc quaestionem, and
universa ecclesia convenisset in unum: Here he speaks of the Apostles and
Church, but not Elders, which shows the Apostles and Elders were the same
persons, though diversely set out, as 1 Pet. 6.1. An Elder and Witness, and
Paul, 2 Timothy 1.11. An Apostle, a Teacher, which implies the same thing.

Tertul. de Pudicitia.
Apostoli emittunt ad eos qui jam ex Nationibus allegi caeperant, Visum est
Spiritui Sancto and nobis.

Where he leaves out the word Elders, and mentions Apostles, only intimating,
that the Apostles and Elders were the same men.

Clemens of Rome, Ep. to James.
Proretae officium Episcopus impleat, Praesbyteri Nautarum, Diaconi
dispensatorum locum tenent, hi qui Catechizant Nautalogis conferantur, Epibatis
autem totius fraternitatis multitudo sit similis. The rest of his works (if
this Epistle be not) is spurious, and this grossly corrupted: But here the
Catechist and the Presbyters are distinct workers in the Gospel work or
Ministry, the Presbyters were not to Catechize.

Hyeren. lib. 4. cap. 37.
Per omnia haec Deus pater ostenditur Spiritu quidem operante, filio vero
administrante, patre vero comprobante, homine vero consummante ad salutem. And
after shows how it is done, saying, Divisiones charismatum sunt, idem autem
Spiritus; divisiones ministeriorum, idem autem Dominus; divisiones operationum
sunt, idem autem Deus qui operatur omnia in omnibus.

1. The gifts ars said to be the Spirits.

2. The Ministeries or execution of them, the Sons.

3. The operations which depend on the several gifts of Evangelist, Pastor,
Teacher, and their several teachings, are said to be Gods or the Fathers.

4. These all tend to perfect the Believer.

Similitud. Hormae. Disc. Paul. Similitud. 8.
Nuncius Domini coronas jussit afferri, allatae sunt autem coronae velut ex
Palmis factae, and coronavit eos viros nuncius in quorum virgis Pampinos
invenerat and fructum, and jussit eos ire in turrim: sed and illos viros misit
in turrim in quorum virgis Pampinos invenerat sine fructu, dato eis sigillo,
nam vestem eandem habebant, id est, candidam sicut nivem, cum qua jubebat ipsos
ire in turrim. Nec minus and eos qui reddiderant virgas suas sicut acceperant
virides, data eis vest candida and sic eos dimisit ire in turrim: his
consummatis ait ad Pastorem illum; ego vado, tu vero dimitte hos intra muros in
eo loco quo quisque meruit habitare.

This Book is wonderfully corrupted throughout, yet many things thereof would
serve to prove the things asserted, but this being clear and full, suffices.

Hieron. Ep. ad Evagrium.
Et ut sciamus traditiones Apostolicas sumptas de veteri Testamento, quod Aaron
and filii ejus atque Levitae in Templo fuerint, hoc sibi Episcopi Presbyteri
and Diaconi in ecclesia.

Here he compares Aaron and his two Sons to the Evangelist, Pastor and Teacher
(though I suppose the true order was broken before Hieroms time) and the
Levites to the Deacons.

Gregory is forced to confess the truth, though, as it were, against his will,
16 Hom. super Ezekiel. lib. 2. p. 72. Orientalis via tres hinc and tres inde
Thalamos habere memoratur: non inconvenienter accipimus, si tres esse fidelium
ordines.

Now as there are three Orders of Believers, so there were three Chambers or
Meeting-places to meet in, and Ministry employed, though then at Rome were no
such Order.

Policarp. Ep. ad Philippenses.
Rogo igitur vos omnes insistere verbo justitiae and patientiae quam oculata
fide vidistis non solum in beatissimis illis Ignatio scilicet, and Zozimo and
Rufo.

These three being the whole Church Ministry mentioned by Nicephor. lib. 3.
cap. 29. Zozimus and Rufus were never Bishops of Antioch, as in the Catalogue
of the Bishops appears.

5. The ground generally laid down for this threefold Ministry, is taken from
the Trinity of persons in that one Divine Essence of God.

Clem. Alex. Strom. Lib. 7. p. 799. calls the three Assemblies of the Church,
Beatam Sanctorum mansionum trinitatem, then by which it could not be expressed
more fitly, commending it unto us in the highest mystery, in whom they are
indeed made one, to which Christ alludes, Joh. 17. ver. 11, 21.

Dionysius cap. 5. de Eccles. Hierarch.
Et quidem Hierarchiam omnem in trinitatis distribuerimus numerum.

And truly, says he, we distribute all Hierarchy into the number of the
Trinity, that is, of three.

Ignatius Ep. 6. ad Philad.
Vnus Episcopus, una cum Presbyterorum Collegio and Diaconis conservis meis,
quando quidem and unus ingenitus Deus and pater, and unus unigenitus filius
Deus verbum and homo, unus paracletus Spiritus veritatis.

Hyren. Lib. 4. cap. 75.
Per hanc ordinationem and hujusmodi convenientiam and talis factus and
plasmatus homo secundum imaginem and similitudinem infecti Dei, patre quidem
been sentiente, filio vero ministrante and formante, spiritu vero nutriente and
augente, homine vero paulatim proficiente and perveniente ad perfectum.

6. Now as the Ministers are three, so they had a threefold Mininistery, which
were distinguished diversely one from the other.

Clem. Alex. Lib. 7. p. 779.
Salutares hae conversiones pro ordine mutationis dividuntur and temporibus,
and locis, and honoribus, and cognitionibus, and haereditatibus, and
ministeriis usque ad eam quae transcendit contemplationem, and est proxima
Domino in aeternite.

These saving conversions for order of change, are divided both in times,
places, honors, knowledge, inheritances, ministeries; and implies, That the
Saints in the Church came (in time) to change their Ministry, and with their
Ministry, their former place of Ministry, and had greater honor in the
Church, and had a higher degree of knowledge ministered to them then formerly:
So that it is clear, the same Doctrine was not preached by the Evangelist, that
was by the Pastor or Doctor; nor did they preach to the same people, or in the
same place, as men dream. 2 Cor. 10.16. the Apostle speaks of another man's
life, which he would not boast of, that is, other man's Ministry.

Dionysius Ep. Tito. divides the Ministry into Nutriens, Renovans, Perficiens
Ministerium.

In his Eccles, Hierarch. Pontificalis ordo non perficere solum, verum and
illuminare and purgare novit.

Sacerdotum vero virtus habet in se, illuminantem and purgantem.

Verum qui inferiores ad praestantiora transire nequeunt, propterea quod fas
illis non est ad istjusmodi prosilire superbiam.

Tertul. de Exhort. Castitatis.
Si habes jus Sacerdotis in temetipso ubi necesse est habeas, oportet etiam
disciplinam Sacerdotis ubi necesse sit habere jus Sacerdotis: Digamus Tinguis,
Digamus offers, quanto magis, etc. of this more fully in my Letters sent to the
Assembly, printed.

7. And then by degrees, as believers were fitted, they were passed from one
Ministry to the other more perfect Ministry.

Dionysius cap. 5. Eccles. Histo.
Ista quidem Sacrosancta Lex est, ut per primam and sequentiam ad augustissimam
illius subvehamur lucem, idem ibid. cap. 2. Rudis ex seipso non statim
continenter hanc cupiet, vero sensim ac per gradus ad priora semper and
digniora atque ad excellentiora conscendit, sicque perfectus ad supremum illum
tandem divinumque ordinem gradu proficiente subvehetur.

Clem. Alex. Lib. 3. Pedag.
Multa per aenigmata, multa per parabolas quoque possunt prodesse iis qui in ea
incidunt: sed non est meum inquit paedagogus hac docere, sed magistro ad sancta
verba exponenda opus habemus, ad quem nobis eundum est; and jam quidem tempus
est mihi cessandi a paedogogia, vobis autem audiendi Magistrum; cum is autem
vos acceperit, in bona disciplina eductos edocebit eloquia.

1. Hence it is clear, one Ministry ended in the other, and fitted for the
other, and none taught the others Doctrine.

2. Here Magistrum is put for Pastorem; he taught the Doctrine of Milk in his
Paedagogus, which was the Teachers office, is clear.

Tertul. de Resurrect. carniss.
Number and homo interior hic utique renovari habebit per suggestum spiritus,
proficiens fide and disciplina die ac die; non illic, id est, non post
resurrectionem, ubi non utique die ac die renovare habemus, sed semel ad
summum.

1. He shows the renovation of the inward man spoken of, is to be in this life.

2. That it is to be day by day.

3. It is by a proficiency in Faith.

4. This proficiency of Faith must have with it also a proficiency in
Discipline day by day ministered to it, that it may grow in Faith accordingly.

Clem. Alex. Lib. 7. illustrates this by a sweet Simile, Atque adeo usque ad
nos ipsos alii sub alios sunt collocati, quomodo ergo vel minima pars ferri una
monetur spiritu lapidis magnetis, extensa per multos annulos ferreos; ita etiam
qui sunt virtute praediti, Domino spiritu attracti, cum prima mansione
conjunguntur, deinceps autem alii usque ad postremam.

This seventh Book I suppose was written to perfect men; and signifies that
some are placed in the first Order, others of the second, even to our selves of
the third Mansion: therefore as a small piece of Iron moved by the spirit of a
Lodestone, drawn through many small Iron Rings; so also they that are endued
with virtue, are drawn by the Lords Spirit, when they are joined in the first
Mansion, then to the other, unto the third and last Mansion.

A clearer proof of the practice of the Church, I suppose, cannot be brought,
by which the Church Government is to be exercised amongst us; and before this
be done, it is unpossible that the Saints should thrive by any means ministered
unto them in that confused way of Antichristian Discipline amongst us at
present.

Dionysius Areop. cap. 6. p. prima, the whole Chapter shows this.

These three Ministeries, and their several operations, are in an imperfect
manner, according to the imperfect estate of the Church, thus touched by Tertul.
de Corona.

Alia est conditio, etc. ut illorum quos Johannes admittebat ad lavacrum, ut
centurionum fidelissimorum quos Christus probat, quos Petrus Catechizat.

In this there is a threefold act given to these three, which are to be
exercised by the Ministry to every Christian, Catechizing, Baptizing, and the
approbation of the Evangelist in Baptizing. Hence Ignatius Ep. to Philadelp.
That none should be Baptized without the approbation of the Bishop, Non licet
sine Episcopo baptizare.

In the same Epistle he divides the threefold Society thus;

Sine ipsis ecclesia electa non est, the Evangelist.

Neque Collectio Sanctorum, the Pastors.

Neque Congregatio Sancta, the Doctors Society.

And to this purpose it is, that the Apostles call in the Gospel those
ministered in the Gospel with them, Fellow-laborers, co-workers, and helpers in
the Gospel; the one Catechizing the people without, the other admitting them
into the Church, by Baptism; another, exhorting, and exercising their gifts to
fit them for that Ministry, perfected them.

Cyp. Ep. 10. lib. 3. A primordio Episcopatus mei statuerim sine consilio
vestro, id est, Compresbyterorum, and sine consensu plebis, mea privatim
sententia gerere nihil.

Dionysius cap. 2. Eccles. Hierarch.
Deinde Sacros omnes gradus sibi cooperentur, etc.

Cypr. lib. 1. Ep. 4. calls Felix and Sabinus, Coepiscopi; and after, Quod and
factum videmus in Sabini Collegae nostri ordinatione; the word Collega is the
same with Paul's (...): and though it is thought that those Coepiscopi, a word
fit for the whole Church Ministry, were Bishops of diverse Societies;
especially reading in other of his Epistles, where he is said to have many
Colleagues, which may be corruptions inserted by the Papists: Thus we see what
corruptions are in Ignatius Epistles, multitudes of officers and offices
inserted, that were never thought on; and so in Cyprians much more.

Lib. 3. Ep. 9. he speaks of his own Colleagues and Rogations also: It is my
opinion, That no Book extant is more corrupted, then Cyprians, of his time, for
the Church was strangely corrupted; he yet in many things retains some
Principles of the true Church, and wrote more clearly of them then others of
his time; though I confess, after the Two hundred years, the face of the Church
was so changed, as that it was not to be known about which time he lived: and
it is plain, he retained the Apostles term, which few after him do, and it were
strange if he did no more but that.

Here I suppose it will not be unnecessary to set down an Answer, usually made
by many, to those enquire the Reason, Why the Churches are not constituted as
they were in the Apostles, rnd immediately after; they say, The Church was then
in its Infancy, which was the only grand ground of Apostasy, at the first, of
men from the truth, as if the first form in the Gospel were not the best, and
the pattern for future times, as Moses pattern in the Mount for him.

Ambrose on Ephesians. 4. At ubi autem omnia loca circumplexa est ecclesia,
Conventicula sunt constituta, and rectores and caetera officia in ecclesiis
sunt ordinata, ut nullus de clero auderet qui ordinatus non esset, praesumere
officium quod sciret non sibi creditum vel concessum, and caepit alia ordine
and providentia gubernari ecclesia.

More then this need not be said to prove the practice of the then Church, and
how then of the after Churches, and the Churches for some time before, upon
this Atheistical Antichristian ground to be in the form totally subverted; so
that the form of Church Government then and for some time before, cannot be
brought to prove, or warrant any now, the true form of the Gospel being
destroyed; nor was it scarce known which was indeed the hiding of the Church;
no wonder if it be a hidden thing to us: he says in this place, Omnes
docebant, omnes baptizabant, he says, They observed not the time, nor fasted
before Baptism, nor had Peter any Deacons at Cornelius house to Baptize, as if
the Deacons office was only to Baptize, he not minding that some of the seven
may be with him and Baptize; in all which he corruptly quarrels with the
Apostles practice, as if they had found a better form to serve God by, then
that of the Gospel; which the Bishops of the times preceding did correct, and
like the carnal Gentiles, seeking to be wise, became fools; and like the
foolish woman in the Proverbs, pulled down the House of God with both their
hands, and worse then she, set up a Cage for unclean birds of their own,
predicted by Zech. 5.8, 9. But of this in its place.

Ignatius Ep. to Policarpus, He writing to Policarpus, mentions the Presbytery,
and says, Vna laborate, inter vos una certate, una currite, etc. ut
dispensatores, and assessores, and ministri Dei. In the word Dispencers, the
admission of members to Ordinances is signified; in Assessors, their Government
in general intended; in Ministers, their teaching.

8. The Church was governed by these three conjunctly in Ecclesiastical things.

Ignatius to Trallis. (...).

It is necessary, whatever ye do, ye go about nothing (that is of
Ecclesiastical public concernment) without the Bishop; but also, that ye
submit to the Presbytery, as to the Apostles of Jesus Christ. In these is the
Church true Presbytery; only and alone in these the Synod and College of
Ministry is existent, and in none other. Other Authority is Antichristian, and
tends to oppression of the Saints.

Tertull. in the forecited place de Exhortatione Castitatis, Honor per ordinis
consessum sanctificatus, adeo ubi non est ecclesiastici ordinis consessus, and
Offers, and Tinguis, and Sacerdos, etc. before he says these have Ecclesiae
aucthoritas, the Church authority.

This is Consessus Ecclesiaestici ordinis (...) and any other Ecclesiastical
convent, then this Juridical is not according to the Primitive Church and
Gospel-frame; this was the true Presbytery, and all other then these are
spurious and false.

To this well agrees that of Mat. 18.19. that if two of you agree on earth,
etc. The Church, while it was according to the Gospel institution, governed by
these three, it was called, The pillar and ground of Truth; but when that fell,
and Ministers of other Societies ruled, then came the corruption of the Church,
the Lord not approving of them, as is well observed in the Preface of the
Bibles written To the Reader, printed in King James's days: yet for all that,
the learned knew, That certain worthy men have been brought to untimely death
for no other fault, but for seeking to reduce their contrymen to good order
and discipline; and that in some Common-weals it was made a capital crime, once
to motion the making of a new Law, for the abrogating of an old, though the
same were most pernicious; and that certain which would be accounted pillars of
the State, and paterns of virtue and prudence, could not be brought for a long
time to give way to good letters and refined speech, but bare themselves as
averse from them, as from Rocks and boxes of Poison: And he was no babe, viz.
Greg. Theol. but a great Cler. that gave forth, and in writing to posterity (in
passion peradventure) That he had not seen any profit to come by any Synod or
Meeting of the Clergy, but rather the contrary. By saying it was in passion,
was a good plaster for such a dangerous sore. He shows what the Councels
before him, he living about 380. did; and indeed God ordained, That not many
together, but seven men of several ages, signified by the seven Angels, are
only to restore the fallen Church.

Hieron. 1 Cap. ad Titum. says, When Presbyters governed, Ecclesiae cura
aequaliter inter plures dividebatur.

To this may be applied that of Egisippus, cited by Eusebius, Vna cum Apostolis
suscepit Ecclesiam administrandam frater Domini Jacobus, qui justus ab omnibus
cognominatus. This was understood of Peter and John, Gal. 2.9. and not of all
the Apostles: Paul and Barnabas ministered to the Gentiles; James the less was
slain, before he took this Government, by Herod: So that it is without
question, here is only meant the three Apostles, who were (...), as Peter
calls himself, 1 Pet. 6.1. according to the form of Government in the other
Gospel Churches, they being not differing one from another in form of
Government, Jerusalem being the pattern or mother Church. This Book is said to
contain Apostolical Traditions, but is lost, and a counterfeit left in its
place, Nicephor. Eccl. Hist. l. 3. c. 26.

9. As the Ministers, so the People were distinguished.

Anthanasius cites Theognostus in his Tract. de verbis Evang. Matthei cap. 2.
ver. 31. quicunque dixerit, etc. Qui semel atque iterum terminos praetergressus
ost, minus feret supplicii; qui vero tertio contempserit, nullam veniam
consequi potest.

Here, by the bounds of the Church, I understand the threefold Societies of the
Saints; under the third whereof, if any contemned, there was no pardon.

Athanasius primum and secundum terminos appellat Catechesin, hoc est
initiationem de patre and filio; tertium vero qui est in consummatione
mysteriorum, and sermon; qui traditur in communicatione spiritus.

This shows the Government was much hid in Athanasius time; he says,
Catechizing was initiation, which was not; but in Baptism under the Doctors
Ministry was initiation, and not under the Catechists Ministry: And then he
says, In Catechizing were to be understood the two first bounds, which was but
one part of Ministry, and that not of the Church neither; without doubt
Theognostus alludes to that of the Apostle, Heb. 6.4, 5, 6.

He is more clear in that which follows, Verum ex his nequaquam aliquis
dicere poterit, quod doctrina spiritus excellentior sit doctrina filii, sed
filius sese dimittat ad imbecillitatem imperfectorum, spiritus autem signaculum
est eorum qui perfecti sunt: proinde non irremissibilis and incondonabilis est
blasphemia in spiritum, quod spiritus major est filio, sed quod imperfectis
detur venia, iis vero qui gustaverunt coeleste donum, quique perfecti sunt,
nulla relinquatur ad veniam excusatio, aut paenae excusatio.

1. Here are three bounds expressed of the Church.

2. In these the Saints are divided according to their gifts, in one the
imperfect, the other the perfect.

3. In Athansius time these bounds were destroyed.

4. He alludes these three Mansions to the Trinity, making that the ground of
them, as the other before.

Dionisius distinguishes them by these names, Rudes, illuminati, perfecti.

Simil. Herm. 9. Omnos enim infantes honorati sunt apud Dominum, and primi
habentur; and after, Hi omnes candidi juvenes sunt, qui crediderunt and qui
credituri sunt, ex eodem enim genere sunt.

And being a Pastor, mentions not the society of Fathers, alluding to 1 John
2.14. unless the copy be corrupted, or they closely intended in lapidibus
rotundis, of these he says, Hi omnes de candido monte sunt.

Tertul. de Praescrip. Haeret. showing how the Heretics by their wiles
corrupted the Church, says, De scripturis aguni, and de scripturis suadent;
and after, in ipso vero congressu firmos quidem fatigant, infirmos capiunt,
medios cum scrupulo dimittunt.

Clemens says of the children or Doctors Society, Non enim nos pueri and
infantes appellati sumus, quod sit puerilis and contemnenda nostra disciplina,
ut nos calumniati sunt qui inflati sunt scientia.

Strom. l. 1. Parvuli ergo sunt etiam philosophi, nisi a Christo viri fiunt, he
calls them, Primogeniti qui descripti in coelis sunt, because their Names
written after Baptism in the Church Rolls, alluding to that Heb. 12.23. He
calls the other Church members, youth and perfect men, Germani and amici Dei,
Athletae, perfecti Dei alumni.

Vatablus, Psalm. 84.8. De turma ad turmam, de cumulo ad cumulum, vel de caterva
ad catervam, comparebit quisque eorum apud Deum, etc. id est, ad singulas
catervas accedent, ut audiant lauds Dei, vel ibunt turmatim donec videant
Deum, etc. vel apparuerint coram eo in Sion, ac si diceret, nunquam quiescent
donec pervenient ad Templum ipsum, ubi Deus super arcam conspicitur. Quidam
vertunt, ibunt de virtute in virtutem, videbitur Deus in Sion: alii, de
doctrina in doctrinam, vel de academia in academiam, id est, crescet illorum
doctrina adeo ut unusquisque videat eam in ecclesia: aut crescet donec
perveniant ad penfectam Dei notitiam. Doctoris magis placet illa versio, de
virtute in virtutem, id est, Collectis inde novis viribus donec appareat illis
Dominus in Sion. Without question in these words the Gospel-Government is aimed
at, and sweetly set out, when things shall be made more clear unto us.

Clem. Lib. 7. Strom. p. 811. Mihi quidem videtur esse prima quaedam salutaris
mutatio quae fuit a Gentibus ad fidem, ut prius dixi, secunda est a fide in
cognitionem 3 illa vero trajiciens ad charitatem; a threefold change clearly
expressed, as in words they may, and that matter and way by which, and unto
which, as excellently set down.

Dionysius cap. 6, Eccles. Histor. seems to mention a ceremonial practice in
use in the Church, at the changing of Societies, by a change of Garments,
alluding unto Coloss. 3.10, 12, 13.

Prioris autem vestis positio, alteriusque assumptio, migrationem illam a media
vita (licet sacra) ad perfectiorem significat; sicut in Divina regeneratione
promotionem indicabat a purgata vita, ad contemplantem, illuminantemque habitum
illa vestis condentis immutatio.

Clem. Strom. lib. 7. p. 817. Sunt enim quomodo Gymnicis certaminibus, ita
etiam in ecclesia coronae virorum and puerorum.

Dr. Field observes, there were in ancient Rome, certain Churches called
Baptismal Churches, because in them only Baptism was originally ministered, and
not in all. Vid. Potter, of 666. cap. 17. p. 114.

Clem. lib. 7. p. 810. Cum cessaverint quidem a purgatione, cessaverint etiam
ab alio ministerio, and sic sit sanctum and inter sanctos: deindo iis qui sunt
mundo cord per proximam Domino adhaesionem perpetuae contemplationi permanet
restitutio.

Ambrose, 1 Timothy 3.12. When the Church was taking her leave of the world, sets
down the full Ecclesiastical Officers, called by Ignatius fitly (...), which is
more then any since, that I have read, have done.

Nunc autem septem Diaconos esse oportet, aliquantos Presbyteros, ut bini sint
per ecclesias, and unus in civitate Episcopus: in which he shows what the
Ecclesiastical officers, in every Gospel Church, ought to be at the departure
of the Church, he living about 380. as which he shows are to be seven
Deacons, two Presbyters, and one Bishop in a city.

Ambros. on 1 Cor. 14.31. Ye may all Prophecy one by one; shows, how they were
distinguished in their general Meetings in their manner of sitting, which
Meetings by Dionysius is fitly called Synaxis.

Haec traditio Synagogae est, quam vos vult sectari; quia Christianis quidem
scripsit, sed ex Gentibus factis, non a Judoeis: ut sedentes disputent seniores
dignitate (not in age) in Cathedris, sequentes in subselliis, novissimi in
pavimento, super Mattas, quibus si revelatum fucrit dandum locum dicendi
praecepit, nec despiciendos, quia membra corporis sunt.

This is a Tradition of the Synagogue, which he will have us to follow, because
he has written it to Christians, but done of the Gentiles, not of the Jews;
That the Seniors in dignity should dispute sitting in Chairs, those next them
on Forms, the last upon Mats on the the pavement; to whom, if any thing were
revealed, he requires that they should have leave to speak, and not to be
despised because they are members of the body.

1. He confesses this order of placing members in this their general
Church-meeting, to be derived from the Jewish Synagogue; but the exercise here
required of the Gentiles was such, as the Jews in their Synagogues practiced
not.

2. He proves sufficiently this often to be the Christian Church practice,
because written to the Gentiles.

3. Here are only three sorts of people mentioned; the first whereof are
Seniors, yet not senectute, but dignitate, not in age, but dignity; the last
sort, some of them that sat on Maps, may be of fuller age then those sat in
Chairs: This being one of the distinctions made by Clemens among the Church
members, Dignitatibus, p. (...) and these are Elders indeed, and no man is to
despise their youth, but honor them for their gifts sake. Now this being the
means they had to try the ability of their members, to fit them for the
succeeding Ministry, it was permitted to any to speak; and gives the Reason,
Because they are members: by which he shows these were none, but such as were
of Church communion.

Ap. Of this may be fitly this, That as in the natural man there are differing
statures, according to which men are differenced and honored; so in the
Spiritual there are differing statures, according to which, Christ has in the
Gospel differenced them, and appointed them so to be in the Church.

2. It shows, Flesh and blood shall not inherit the kingdom of God; so that
men cannot inherit it by prerogatives thence, or accordingly thereunto (durus
sermo) or in consideration of any thing thereof: Man, as natural, has nothing
to do therein at all.

3. Hence the condition propounded to all, old and young, rich and poor, is,
That unless they become as little children, sit among them, learn among them,
etc. bearing the image of the heavenly Infancy of Christ, as of Adam, they
cannot enter the kingdom of heaven, that is, the Churches Society, 1 Cor.
15.49. he that cannot deny himself in this, is not fit for the kingdom.

That we may see we are not left only to this Traditional Exposition only,
but that we have Divine Authority more fully to confirm the same by, see James
2. ver. 1, 7.

The Objections are many against this, the Scriptures abounds with as many
Answers. The Objections may be reduced to two chief heads.

1. Do ye think old men will be made children, and sit with children, and
endure to sit with them?

2. Will rich men sit on Mats, and poor men sit in Chairs? what dishonor were
this to greatness?

1. This is one thing makes the entrance into the Kingdom so difficult, Luke
18.17. Matthew. 19.23.

2. God respects not any man's person for his greatness.

3. It is according to the will of God, that goodness in his presence should be
honored, not riches.

4. Hence the richest man of the world cannot be Christ's disciple, unless he
thus deny himself.

But to the Scripture, James 2.1.

1. It is necessary to let you know, That this Epistle was written to men out
of Church society, as this we are in, whose meetings the Church Order or
Discipline was not observed, in which greatness, not goodness, was looked on.

2. The Apostle reproves this corruption in the Jews, and tells them, This was
an injury offered to the faith of Christ, which is worthy of more honor then
any thing else, and make a man more honorable before God, though not before the
world.

3. He shows in Church Discipline, no respect of persons is of God to be
permitted.

4. That in Church-meetings, before God only, faith is had in esteem; and to
be honored so, that the way of the Church, and of God, are quite contrary to
the world and our Church Way, which is according to the world, and not the word.

Ver. 2. 1. He shows in whom it was done, in two men exemplarily.

2. Where it was done, and that was, in their Synagogue.

3. How it was, and that was, by placing one in a place of note, a chair, and
the other on the Mat at his footstool.

4. For what the one has his good place, and that is, for his Apparel, and
gold Ring; and the other is placed meanly, because he have no better clothes.

1. In which God reproves all carnal respect in Spiritual things, either to
disesteem the godly, because poor, or to honor others in the Church, because
rich.

Here let no man think, that I write this to shadow the greatness or Authority
of any in the Commonweal, to whom God commands (for conscience) obedience of
his people, they having their Authority and Institution from God, for the good,
peace and weal of the State in which we live.

Ver. 4. God condemns them for partiality: and,

Ver. 5. Opposes the riches of the Saint, to the natural man's riches, and
says, He is rich in faith, far exceeding worldly goods; and tells them, They
are also chosen of God, though they condem them, and imply, That it is a
grievous thing before God, in Gods house to set up earthly glory, and depose
that that is the glory of the kingdom, which thing is not according to God nor
godliness: And then tells them, The poor are heirs of the kingdom, and that the
place and honor thereof may belong to them as to any other, and to take it from
him, is to rob him of his inheritance, as to take a rich man's possessions were
to rob him.

Ver. 7. He shows them their error, by representing the ungodly practice of
graceless great men; and thence shows how unfit they were to be honored in the
Church: 1. They were persecutors of those believers, drawing them before
Judgement-seats. 2. They blasphemed that worthy name by which they were called,
by railing against, accusing and condemning Godliness to the world; 1. As to
the Church, that they give honor to none in the Church, until they have that in
them makes them honorable, for the honor in the Church comes from God first.
2. Not to dishonor God or Godliness in a poor man for his poverty. 3. To
Christians, not to imitate the Pharisees in their corruptions, by seeking to
have the chief places in Synagogues, but to be content with that place Christ
the Lord of the Church shall place thee in. It is illustrated Luke 14.8, 10.
when called to a wedding (that is, to the Society of Christ in the Gospel) sit
not down (...) in the chief place, v. 10. but sit down (...) the lowest, lest
one more honorable then thou, etc. I believe, that were the Jewish customs
known better of us then they are, many Gospel mysteries would be unfolded,
which now are hid: the variety of words imply a diversity of matter intended,
as (...), by which God reveals, that we without the Jews shall not be made
perfect, God will again come to honor that people to the world in these and
many other things: But the Scripture shows, That a man must first sit in the
lowest place, and continue there until called higher; that is, to the higher
means of grace, when he should have honor of all. I may say of this Scripture,
as the Apostle of another, Does God take care of Oxen? so does God take care of
feasting; only here in feasting was but the bark, the Church order, the pith,
though I do not say; but it serves to direct men in that also, which is as the
shell to the kernel. Jam. 1.9. makes a sweet application of these things to the
poor, That though they were poor in the world, yet by grace came to be exalted
above worldly advancements. Ver. 10. the rich they are exhorted to rejoice, in
that they are made low, that they have a heart to become children, to see grace
in a poor Saint, set up above greatness in himself, and his heart not oppose
it; For its hard for a rich man to enter into the kingdom of heaven: and, 1
Cor. 1. Not many rich, not many wise, etc. so that the mercy is the greater to
those rich men are called, and thus endowed with an humble mind, and nature
thus overcome in them by grace.

1 Cor. 15.41. Tertul. in his book de Resurrectione carnis, applies, There is
one glory of the sun, another of the moon, another of the stars, to the
differing estates of the Saints in the Church; but if not to them, if to the
Saints in heaven, it shows that there is an agreement between the glory of
Saints in heaven, and those in earth; those of the third Mansion, of men, shine
as the Sun, those of the second, of youth, as the Moon, those of the first, as
Stars: Whence is great matter of encouragement to be ministered to men to grow
in grace, and to contend for perfection in the Church for this life, for that
to come, whereas in our Societies there is none at all.

Tertul. in the same book has excellently distinguished them, had not the
enemies of truth labored to obscure it, saying, Non omnis caro est eadem caro,
non ad denegandum substantiae communionem, sed praerogativae peraequationem,
corpus honoris non generis in differentiam redigens, in hoc and figurata
subjicit exempla animalium and elementorum, alia caro hominis, id est, servi
Dei qui vere homo est, alia Jumenti, id est, Ethnici, de quo propheta,
Adsimilatus est homo irrationalibus Jumentis: alia caro volucrum, id est,
Martyrum, alia caro piscium, id est, quibus aqua baptismatis sufficit.

Here Caro volucrum should be for Martyrum (Juvenum) for Tertul. applies it to
the differing estate of the general Church Societies, and then the comparison
sweetly agrees with the Church and the world Ethnic, to which it is compared;
but the words following abundantly clear it, Ad disciplinam totam hoc dirigit
(now Martyrdom pertains not to Church discipline) ut hic dicat portandam
imaginem Christi in ista carne in justo tempore disciplinae. Mark it well, in
just time of discipline, applying to the times of infancy, of youth, and
Christian man-age, according to the order of Christian discipline in the
Church, and not natural growth. Again, for the manifestation of the study and
endeavor of these children of Error to pervert the right ways of God, for which
they had leave of God to accomplish his own purpose, for the hiding of the
Church, and proves the way to be the true way, because they endeavored so much
to hide it.

Tertul. de praescr. Haeret. Quid ergo si Episcopus, si Diaconus, si vidua, si
virgo, si Doctor, si etiam Martyr lapsus a regula fuerit? ideo haereses
veritatem videbuntur obtinere? ex personis probamus fidem, an ex fide personas?
1. Here is vidua and Diaconus, before Doctor; and in stead of Pastor, virgo put
in, a mere plain Popish foist, and no way countenanced of the truth. 2. I
suppose, as virgo, so Martyr is also added, to make the confusion the greater:
For how can a man be a Martyr, as that word is usually taken, and fall from the
Rule; in which is to be seen, how unprofitable the writing of the Ancients are
in themselves, what diligent care is to be taken in them, and how useless
without the Word unto us. 3. If this be not assented to, how can the whole
Church officers be mentioned in this place, as intended by the Author? so that
there is a putting in and putting out, and inversion of order clearly seen in
it: and this was practiced before Tertullians days, but much more after,
appears by the Obtestation placed by Hyrenaeus, at the end of a book, now lost,
Adjuro te qui transcribis librum istum per Dominum Jesum Christum, and per
gloriosum ejus adventum, quo judicaturus est vivos and mortuos; ut conferas
postquam transcripseris, and emendes illum ad exemplar unde scripsisti
diligentissime, hanc quoque obtestationem similiter transferas ut juvenisti in
exemplari.

10. Now that the people were thus in Ministry, and places ordinarily divided,
and at the administration of the Sacraments were to meet together, 1 Cor.
11.20. appears.

Ignatius Ep. to Philadelp.
Vnus etiam panis pro omnibus confractus est, and unus calix totius ecclesiae.

That this Epistle is ancient, appears from the allowance of the Cup to the
whole Church.

Clem. Alex. tells, Those were newly ingrafted into the Church, they were not
to enjoy mean things, only as they looked on them.

At vero augustior illa unius ejusdemque and panis and calicis communis
pacifita que communio, concordiae illis ut fratribus una educatis Divinas
statuit leges.

Dionysius only shows the manner how it was to be communicated to the members
of the several Societies cap. 3. de Eccl. Hist. Elementisque (which are the
Sacramental bread and wine) illius ad inferiora and secunda processus, finem
facit diviniorem, ad prima and principaliora redditum.

1. Here are three Societies expressed in the inferior, second and first. 2.
With his elements of bread and wine he comes to the children, and then proceeds
to the second, the young men; and returning, ends at the first and more
principal Society of Fathers. How full and clear this testimony is, I leave to
all to judge, seeing it is the childrens bread, but not the Catechumeni, they
were not baptized, nor had any part in the Sacrament of the Lords Supper.

11. That the several Societies under the several Ministers were one Church,
appears.

Ignat. Ep. 5. ad Philadelph.

Gaudium sempiternum est and singular, maxim iis qui sunt in unum cum
Episcopo, cum Presbyteris and Diaconis probatis in voluntate Dei Patris, per
Dominum Jesum Christum. (In unum, that is, in unum corpus, in one body.

This order was glanced at by Basil. de Sp. Sanct. but I doubt not practiced in
the Church he living about 370.

Profecto stulti and omnino infantilis animi, est puerique cui revera lacte
opus est, ignorare magnum illud necessarium salutis, quod quemadmodum doctores
facere solent in instituendis discipulis; ita nos in exercitatione pietatis,
dum ad perfectionem inducimur, primum perceptu facilioribus ac nostro modulo
congruentibus, ad incomprehensibilem scientiam paulatim introducti fuimus, etc.
then after gives the reason, ne protinus spectaculo purae lucis offensi
caligaremus.

Gregor. Nissen 380 An. de orat. pauper.
Quemadmodum hi pueros e parentum manibus susceptos adhuc infantes and
balbutientes, non protinus abditis disciplinarum praeceptionibus onerant; sed
primo literarum formas insculpunt in ceris, earumque nomina declarant, and
ipsorum manus per impressos illos literarum ductus agunt, and exercent mox
illos, ad cognitionem syllabarum pervehunt, atque ita deinceps ad verborum
expressionem perducunt; sit etiam Ecclesiae duces initio documenta quaedam quae
sunt instar elementorum auditoribus proponunt: Deinceps, gradatim ea quae
perfectiora magisque recondita sunt patefaciunt.

Jerem Ep. to Marcell. shows a strange confusion to be in his time in the
government of the Church, An. 370.

Episcopus tertius est apud Montanistas, habent primos de Pepusa Phrygiae
Patriarchas, secundos quos Canones appellant; atque ita in tertium, id est,
pene ultimum locum Episcopi devolvuntur. And then after of the Bishops (who
among the Montanists were degraded) thus, Locum Apostolorum tenent apud nos.

Which shows, 1. In these times some Churches retained some more likeness of
the Gospel form then other, though the true form was not observed by Jerome. 2.
It is like some Church might retain the true form in those times, but condemned
for Heretics and Schismatics, they not observing the Decrees of the Councels
of these times.

The Apostle Paul divides the Ministry, as is observed by Ambrose on the Ep. to
the Romans which is very remarkably done in his Salutation to the Romans; whom he
salutes not in the beginning of the Epistle as others in the other Epistles;
but in the last Chapter; the form whereof was not changed without cause of note.

1. The Evangelists Society, chapter 16. ver. 5. in which he salutes the house of
Aquila, and the church therein.

Quest. How appears this to be the Evangelists Society?

R. 1. He calls that Society the Church Synecdochi (...).

2. He calls Aquila my helper, (not ours, as usually, and after as he says of
Urban) signifying he did at Rome what Paul was to do had he been there, or that
he did do when he was there.

Obj. Priscilla is said to help Paul also with Aquila: therefore it was in
Tent-making, not in Church-edification.

R. 1. Ver. 3. They are said to be his helpers in Christ.

2. Priscilla, as those women Phil. 4.3. (...), which was a work required of
all, Phil. 1.17. with one spirit striving together: and this was a private
persuading of men or women to embrace the doctrine Paul taught in public, as
Act. 18.16. which was not a ministerial work.

3. Paul in this would honor Priscilla in Aquila; giving honor to her as to
the weaker vessel.

But the chief grounds proving this Society to be the Evangelists are, 1 From
those he salutes, which were of that Society doubtless, from the commendation
given them for their eminency of gifts. Epinetus is the first fruits of Achaia;
Mary labored much on them; Andronicus and Junia were in Christ before Paul
himself; and then salutes Urban the chatechist, an helper with Aquila, which
was a member of that Society; Apelles approved, Stachys and Amplias my beloved
ones.

2. He comes to salute the other Societies, having done with the Evangelists,
and begins with those (...) where is to be understood for perfecting the sense
(...), that is, those of the brethren of Aristobulus Society, ver. 10.

3. Ver. 11. Salute those of the brethren of Narcissus ministry.

4. Those from ver. 12. to 15. were members belonging to both Societies of
Pastor and Teacher.

Object. Ver. 14, 15. it is said, Salute the Brethren with them: Hence the
Apostle had no such purpose in this place; or there were no more Societies then
three in the Church of Rome, of Church-Societies.

Resp. The expressions by the Apostle are changed, and so the mind of the
Apostle appears plainly to differ: in ver. 11. it is (...) in ver. 14 and 15.
(...), which may be understood of men serving or sojourning with them of the
dispersed Saints. And after, ver. 16. he joins the whole Church together with
this, Salute one another, with an holy kiss.

Ambros. Romans 16.11.
Narcissus hic illo tempore Praesbyter dicitur fuisse, sicut legi in aliis
codicibus, and quia praesens non erat, videris qua causa eos in Domino salutet
ut sanctos qui ex ejus erant domo. Hic autem Narcissus Presbyter officio
peregrini fungebatur, exhortationibus firmans credentes.

1. His ministry consisted in exhortations; the Pastor's proper duty. 2. He
says he had it from former writings; and therefore the more to be considered.
3. Wherever he was, they are by the holy Ghost said to be his; he was to give
account to God for them.

Ver. 10. those of Aristobulus.
Iste Aristobulus congregator intelligitur fratrum fuisse in Christo
credentium, cujus factum sic probat ut ejus discipulos sua salutatione dignos
ducat.

1. He was the gatherer of the Brethren; which could be no other then the
Doctors, Ministers properly and fitly so called.

2. These Disciples, he says, were believers.

3. They are his Disciples.

4. Without question, as Ambrose had that of Narcissus left written by some of
the Apostles times or immediately after; so he had this of Aristobulus.

5. These two with Aquilas society make up the full Church Ministry.

Theophilact on those of Narcissus.

Hos nominatim non explicat, quia forte erant eorum quos supra meminit similes:
alluding to the Church in the House of Aquila.

Adeod on ver. 5. says, There were an Assembly of believers did assemble
together at Aquila's house; and that there were diverse small assemblies in one
City.

Object. Is it to be thought the famous Chuch of Rome had no other meeting
places but private houses?

Resp. Act. 28.30. Paul taught in Rome in his own hired house three years.

Fox in his Martyrologie in the life of Severus, An. 224. records this Story,
to show the Christians of Rome had no Church builded, nor public house quietly
obtained; because the Christians having got some convenient place for the
assembling of their Congregation (in which time it was doubtless much
increased,) the company of Cooks or Tiplers made challenge of the place to
belong to them: but the matter being brought before the Emperor, he judged it
more honest that the place should serve for the worship of God, how ever it
were, then to the dirty slobering of Cooks and Scullions.

12 El ction of Ministers.

Cypr. lib. 2. Ep. 11. A. 240.
Cognoscant and intelligant, Episcopo semel facto, and Collegarum and plebis
testimonio and judicio comprobato, alium constitui nullo modo posse.

Tertull. de exhort. castitatis.
Vsque adeo nisi and Laici ea observent per quae Praesbyteri adleguntur,
quomodo erunt Praesbyteri qui de Laicis adleguntur?

Says he, insomuch, unless the Laymen observe those things, for which the
Presbyters are deputed; how shall they be Presbyters that are deputed of the
Laics?

Ministers took the several Ministeries on them by degrees, as Timothy and
others.

Cyp. lib. 4. epist. 2. Says of Cornelius of Rome, Ad Sacerdotii sublime
fastidium cunctis religionis gradibus ascendit.

This appears in Clemens Alexandrinus.

1. Some call him Catechist from his writing to the Gentiles, some Presbyter,
some Bishop, from the several places and ministry, as appears in his Paedag.;
and Stromes he successively took in the Church, and not per saltum.

Hieron ad Evagrium.

Alexandriae a Marco ad Heraclem and Dionisium Episcopos, Praebyteri semper
unum ex se electum, in excelsiori gradu collocatum Episcopum nominabant.

Ambrose, Tim. 3.8.

Post Episcopum Diaconatus ordinationem subjecit; quare nisi quia Episcopi and
Praesbyteri una ordinatio est? uterque enim sacerdos est, sed Episcopus primus
est, ut omnis Episcopus Presbyter sit, non tamen omnis Presbyter Episcopus.

See here what the change of names is; had he held to the name Evangelist, it
had been Truth, but is now false, and by Scripture reproved. Paul calls the
whole ministry of Ephesus, Acts 20.28. Bishops.

I mention not the Election of Ambrose, Eusebius. lib. 11. cap. 11. Auxentius
being dead, he a Caterechumenus, not baptized, is chose Bishop against the
mind of God, 1 Timothy 3.6. (...).

Ordination pertained to every true Church.

Cyp. lib. 1. epist. 3.

Plane Episcopi non de voluntate Dei fiunt qui extra ecclesiam fiunt, sed
contra dispositionem and traditionem Evangeli fiunt.

Eusebius. lib. 6, 17.

Post Philetum autem apud Antiochiam Zebenus ecclesiam suscepit, quo in tempore
Origenes rogatus est ab ecclesiis qui sunt apud Antiochiam, ut illuc usque pro
convincendis haereticis qui inibi liberius convaluerant, perveniret. Quo cum
pergeret, and inter necessarios ageret per Palaestinam, Presbyter apud
Caesaream ab illius Provincae Episcopis ordinatur, pro hoc autem adversum eum
in humanus clivor accenditur.

1. Here he is ordained at Caesarea.

2. For his taking Order of Pastorship or Presbyter there, and not at Antioch
where he was to minister, of that Presbytery he kindled against himself
inhumane hatred, or extreme spite.

In the following story, the Bishops of the Church of Caesarea plead only his
sufficiency in Preaching the Word, as if that were enough to justify the act,
and in that they plead this, it appears they had none but this, and that it was
done against the Gospel Institution, and the precedent practice of the Churches
of Christ; though after in the Council of Nice this was taken violently from
the Church, as I shall show after.

Again, the same Origin, lib. 6. cap. 2.

In the Church of Alexandria by Demetrius of the same Church, is made
Catechist; Ei docendi magisterium in ecclesia tribuit. The same power the
Presbytery of Alexandria had to ordain him Catechist, they had to ordain him
Pastor and Teacher, and none had it but that Church in which it was to be
exercised.

13. For constituting of a Church, I know but one example in story extant that
may give us any light herein, which was done in the beginning of the darkning
of the Church way, and by him that holp to darken it.

But before I proceed, it will be necessary to clear an Objection made by
Bilson, c. 12. perp. Church Government; which is, that Origin, Clemens,
Pautenus, were but lay men upon the words of Demetrius, spoken of Origin before
his Ordination.

2. Master Fox thinks that Heraclas was Usher to Origin, in keeping his School.

Eusebius. lib. 6. cap. 2. Igitur Origenes, injuncto sibi a Dimetrio Episcopo
Magisterii Officio, Grammaticam Scholam negligere coepit. Cap. 5. Origenes apud
Alexandriam Doctor ecclesiae valde clarus habebatur. Lib. 6. cap. 2. Tunc adhuc
Gammaticam docentem, etc. Which shows, he taught not School long after he
taught the Gospel, cap. 6. He had not an hours time to do it as after; and
Heraclas teaching with Origin, was that way, by which he came after to become
Bishop of Alexandria, and governed that Church, succeeding Demetrius therein,
Eusebius. lib. 6.

Eusebius. cap. 11. lib. 6.
Interea cum videret Origenes se non sufficere ad omnia, id est;

1. Vel in profundioribus and divinioribus pertractandis.

2. Vel in sanctae Scripturae explanationibus disserendis.

3. Vel etiam in eorum qui quotidie fidei addebantur instructionibus, vel
institutionibus adimplendis.

Ex quibus omnibus ne respirare quidem ei unius saltem horae liberum tempus
dabatur, dum semper ex aliis in alia vocaretur, ita ut prima luce usque ad
profundam vesperam neutiquam cessaret auditorium suum, aliis vero non
recedentibus dum verbi Dei dulcedine colligati sunt, utilius esse ratus est
segregare incipientium turbas, and uni ex discipulis suis plene jam and optime
instructo, viro atque in omnibus virtutibus sibi probato Heracli tradere:
participemque eum officii sui ac laboris assumere; erat enim in Sermon
disertissimus and in omnibus Philosophicis eruditionibus opprime institutus.
Huic ergo tradendi prima elementa incipientibus delegat officium, sibi vero
perfectorum instructiones reservat.

In the mean time when Origin saw himself not to be able to do all, that is;

1. Either for the handling of the more profound and divine things,

2. Or for declaring the Explanations of Scripture,

3. Or else for perfecting the Instructions of those who daily were added to
the Faith.

1. Here are the three operations declared of the threefold Ministry.

2. He was put on these things in a time of extreme necessity.

3. Those were no things pertaining to Philosophical School.

(He proceeds) by reason whereof, there was not given him one hours time to
breath in, whiles that always he was called from some to others; so as that
from the Morning light, to the dark night, his audience never ceased: Some not
departing.

1. Here it is remarkable, he taught not all confusedly together, but went from
some to others. That is, from those he taught the profound things, to those he
declared the expositions of Scripture; and thence to those whom he instructed
in the Institutions of Christianity, who were daily added to the Faith.

2. See some stayed until others were exercised, even unto the dark night; each
society being Ministered unto according to his proper capacity, in its proper
time and allotted place.

(Again) Whiles they are gathered by the sweetness of the Word of God; he
thinking it more profitable to separate the Assembly of Beginners, and to
commit them to Heracles, one of his Disciples, being a man well instructed and
approved in all Virtues.

1. This was the way of the Apostles, taking helpers with them to the Work.

2. The Church did ordain (that was constituted) Members of their society of
men for Ministers, as here, Heracles, of whom it is said, Cap. 2. Qui cum ab eo
non solum in fide nostra atque scientia, sed and vitae purioris institutionibus
ad perfectum fuisset instructus, Alexandrinae Ecclesiae praeesse post Demetrium
subrogatus est. Who, says he, was not instructed only of him in our Faith and
Knowledge, but also in the Institutions of a purer life to perfection; who was
appointed after Demetrius, to govern the Church of Alexandria. Now this could
not be applied to an Usher of an ordinary School, as by some.

3. The ground of this Separation, was not altogether for his ease, but the
peoples profit; that the Ministry may prove to be for the peoples greater
edification.

4. He is approved for his virtue and knowledge, as a Minister of the Gospel
ought to be.

(And then) he made him partaker of his office and labor.

1. He was partaker with him of his labor, laboring with him in the Gospel.

2. Of his office, to show that to this work he had a call, and without it he
could not undertake it, which in schooling was not required; and that he could
make him partaker of his office by Ordination and Election of the Church.

(Lastly) What his office and his labor was, is set down in the last words.
Showing,

The office delegated to him, was to teach the first Elements to Beginners.

But reserveth to himself the Instruction of the Perfect.

This agreed nearly to the Gospel Pattern, and was also practiced in the Church
of Alexandria before, but on a better call; from which Institution, Origin like
himself, changes and seeks to destroy, as after.

For Neoterics, it is not my purpose to cite any but that ye may see Calvine
(on whose judgment and practice the foundation of the Presbytery is laid,)
thought otherways of it then those which succeed him do, who for ought I
understand did better discern the Estate of the Church under that way of
Administration, then those succeed him in it do or seem to do. Calvine 1. Ep.
Cor. 12.28. God has set in the Church, First Apostles. Secondarily Prophets.
Thirdly Teachers, he having spoken largely before and showing much uncertainty
or unresolvednesse how the differing Ministry is to be exercized in the Church,
in the end concludes thus.

Si quis dissentat facile patior, neque rixas propterea excitabo: est enim
difficile judicare de donis and muneribus quibus tam dui jam orbata fuit
Ecclesia, nisi quod vestigia tantum vel umbra adhuc apparent. If any (says he)
dissents, I am well content, nor will I therefore stir up contentions; for it
is hard to judge of the gifts and Offices of which the Church has now been so
long deprived; so that the signs only or shadows as yet appear of them.

If this be truth, then we are to inquire further for the knowledge of the true
form of Church Discipline then Calvine went, further then whom I think
Presbytery proceeds not, though with higher and greater confidence then he did
go; or were he living, I presume would go on his first discoveries from his
own words; nor do I see any thing altered in the Offices or dispensations of
them now under the Presbyteriall form, from that Calvine in his institutions
has proposed; but rather in that we rest, as in the full and perfect discovery
of the way of God; laying claim to a Jus Divinum for a conformation of it.

14. I come now to speak a word of the Apostasy of Church Discipline in the
Church. Eusebius. 3. l. 26. cap.

Vsque ad tempora Trajani virgo munda and immaculata permansit Ecclesia,
corruptoribus veritatis and divini verbi temeratoribus, aut nunquam omnino
extantibus, aut etiam si qui forte fuerant in occultis and abditis hiatibus
terrae delitescentibus: ut vero and Apostolorum chorus, and omnis illa aetas
quae a Domino susceperat, vivae voces auditum de hac luce discessit, tum velut
in vacuam domum falsae doctrinae, impius se error immersit, and tanquam ubi
nullus jam diutius census desensor existeret nudato ut aiunt capite
corripientes arma mendacii, oppugnare Apostolicam veritatem nituntur, sed istud
bellum intrinsecus gerebatur.

Nicephorus Eccles. hist. l. 3. cap. 19. says, Heresies began about Ignatius
time.

Eusebius. lib. 4. cap. 21. He says, Simon the son of Mary Cleophas was ordained
Bishop: Electus ab omnibus pro eo quod esset consobrinus Domini, propterea
autem tunc Ecclesia virgo vocabatur, quod nondum fuerat adulterini verbi
subreptione corrupta, sed Theobutes quidem quia repulsus, non meruit
Episcopatum, ipse caepit in initio perturbare omnia and corrumpere, qui erat ex
septem haeresibus in populo constitutis, etc.

1. Here is the time of the Churches continuance in it is purity or virgin
estate.

2. Here is the time and cause of it is Apostasy, Theobutus an Heretic
troubling and corrupting all things, because he could not be advanced to the
Episcopacy of Jerusalem.

Yet with the Apostle John we may say, that Antichrist already wrought, for in
these times when the Church kept not the form of sound words, not calling
their Ministers by their proper names, they made way for Antichrist to rise in
a unspeakable manner, little thought they that their allusions to the legal
Ministry, and naming the Evangelist Pontifex from Aaron, the Pastor Sacerdos
from his sons, and the Teacher Minister from the Levits, was the name, means
and way by which Antichrist at his inthronment should take up. The same may be
said of Ignatius, if the word Episcopus be not adulterous, and put in for
Evangelist, which I suppose came thus to pass, the whole Governments being
rightly called Episcopacy, as said of Judas, Acts 1.20. Let an other take his
(...); now in time the senior Presbyter or Government by way of eminency was
called Bishop: though a principio non fuit, Hyreneus requires in Presbyters,
lib. 4. cap. 43. successionem Episcopatus. Those wrote now mentioned here in
this tract, Clement Romans whose 1. Epist is strangely corrupted, and diverse
other spurious writings go under his name written long since, vide Scult. Anno
90. Ignatius, Policarp. Epist Anno 70.

Dionysius Areopag. who is questioned for his antiquity: the very things he is
questioned for prove it many ways. And Scultetus after all the objections he
had made against his antiquity, says, Quiscunque autem Dionysius iste fuerit,
antiquus fuerit necesse est, quod ipsa ecclesiastica ordinationis forma docet,
etc. In his Medulla Theolog. Patrum he is said to be about an. 80.

In the second Century corruptions began to increase much.

Justinus 130.

Hogesippus 190. the 5. Books pass under his name, now have only the History
of the Jews destruction, and nothing of the Apostolical traditions, as the
right Egisippus is said by Eusebius, Nicephorus and others to have.

Ireneus 170. Clem. Alex. 200.

Tertull. Anno. 200. some would 160.

Tertull. de proscrip. advers. haeret. complains of the Lay Peoples taking the
Ministry on them, says, Qui hodie Presbyter, cras Laicus.

Again he shows in his time began the corruption of the Church by a mixture
of societies, crying out, Pariter adeunt, pariter audiunt, pariter erant; quis
Cathecumenus, quis fidelis incertum est.

1. See, in the beginning it was only of Catechists and Believers, that they
came in one place together, were taught together, and prayed together: what
would he say of our Societies in which all altogether do these, and more also,
receiving Sacraments also together?

2. He calls these Societies only then the Societies of Heretics.

3. The devil of this was such, he observes it was not known who was a
believer, who a Catecumenus: may not we say to him, as the Pharisees to Christ,
in saying this thou reproachest us also: and no people ever were more guilty of
reproach hence then we in this Kingdom are?

About this time in this Kingdom was set up the first National Church in the
world, the first Archbishops, and their suffragans in the world, if we may give
any credit to our own histories, which I take to be the first time of
preaching of the Gospel here, or at least to take a place in the Kingdom, what
ever men say of Paul, Simon Zelotes, Joseph of Aramathea preaching here, which
they may do and not constitute a Church here, for the Apostles constituted not
always Churches where ever they came, and preached the Gospel.

Moreover, Hyreneus who lived Anno 170. in France, in his lib. 1. cap. 3.
adversus Here Is. mentions the Churches that were known then to be in the world,
but not a word of Britain, Et neque in Germaniis fundatae Ecclesiae aliter
credunt aut aliter tradunt, neque in Hispaniis, neque in Celtis, neque in
Egypto, neque in Libya, neque in Orient, neque hae quae in medio mundo sunt
constitutae: Sure if in his time had been any Church in England, he should have
known of it, and would not have past it by in his enumeration of Churches.

2. Lucius, according to Harrisons Cronology, whom Holinshed fellows, says,
he began his Reign 165. who did send to Rome Elvan and Meduin to Eleutherius
the Bishop to send Ministers to instruct the people of this Land, and baptize
them; who did send Eugatianus and Damianus, who baptized the King with all his
Family and People, and therewith removed the worshipping of Idols and false
gods, and taught the right means and way to worship the true God, there were,
says he, in the bounds of Britain 28. Flamins, and three Archflamins, which
were as Bishops and Archbishops, or Superintendants, of the Pagan or the
gentile Religion, in whose place they being removed, were instituted 28.
Bishops, and three Archbishops of the Christian Religion, one of the which
Archbishops held his Sea at London, to whom was subject Cornwall and all the
middle part of England, to Humber, another of their Seas was at York; to whom
was subject the North part of Britain, from Humber to the end of Scotland: the
third Archflamins Sea was at Carleon Arwiske in Clamorganshire, to whom was
subject all Wales.

He says further this Kingdom was the first that openly that is indeed that
did universally, nationally) received the Gospel. Holinshed Lif. Lucius.

An Ancient Author I have by me says, one Pagan and Elybain were sent from
Rome by Eleutherius, who baptized the people until all the Land was baptized,
going from Town to Town, baptizing men, more he says, King Lucius made two
Archbishops and many Bishops.

Fox out of Monumetensis and others relates the same in his story of the Church.

Eleutherius, as Platin says, lived about 171. Epistolam accepit a Lucio Rege
Britanno, etc. Inibi erant pontifices 25. quos Flamines vocabant.

1. That this is right Romish work, contrary to the primitive practice, none
will deny I think.

2. This was the first Nation that became a National Church.

3. It was made so under a Satanicall Government.

4. From this it went unto other Lands, and other then this was never in this
Kingdom, if there had been any Church or Ministry hear, Lucius would never
have sent to Rome to have some thence to baptize him.

1. Ep. Clement Romans Though corrupt yet is it Ancient: In illis vero
civitatibus in quibus olim apud Ethnicos Archiflamines eorum atque primi legis
Doctores erant Episcoporum Primates poni, vel Patriarchas ordinavit, qui
reliquorum Episcoporum judicia and majora negotia quoties necesse foret in fide
agitarent, and secundum Dei voluntatem sicut constituerunt sancti Apostoli, ita
ut ne quis injuste periclitaretur definirent.

Hence we may see the ground of Government of Archbishops and Bishops, whence
taken, and how and when it did begin to be, even within two years of the truth
it self, and no wonder our Nation continued so long under it, that Bishops
have pleaded the antiquity of their government.

Three things confirm this story.

1. That Gregory, who did send Austin into this Kingdom, appointed that the
Sea of York should have the same extent it had under Sampson the first
Archbishop in Lucius time, which succeeded the Archflamine, whose Jurisdiction
was all Scotland, and part of England: All the Bishops of Scotland since that
time have fetched their consecration thence, and swear Canonical obedience to
that Sea, until the year 1466. when as George Nevil was Bishop, in whose time
the Scots Bishops cast off their Canonical obedience on this ground, that in
respect of the many and bloody wars, between the two Nations, the Metroplitan
of York could bear no fatherly affection to his sons of Scotland.

2. It is said that the Bishop of Meneva, or David's, to which that of Caerleon
was removed, had seven suffragan Bishops under him, at the coming of Austin
unto the Land, who gave him a meeting to compose differences between them being
about an. 600.

3. Rome was to be the Mother of Harlots, she was the cause of this Idolatry
before, as Heathenish Rome; for Onuphrius says, in Heathenish Rome were three
Archflamins called Dialis, Martialis, Quirinalis, He mentions only 15. more,
the rest (it is like) of them their memory perished with them: For Flora that
Romish Harlot being of those flamins mentioned of Onuphrius, was, as the
remains prove, of her Festival among us, of our 28. and came from Rome.

It came hereby to be the mother of Idolatry, as it was Antichristian Rome, the
Jews joined Mosaycal Ceremonies and the Gospel, the Gentiles Gentile
Superstitions and the Gospel together, 1. Cor. 10.20.21.

Again, in that Tertull. about the year 200. says, the Britains are subject to
the true Christ, but he says not in the true way of Christ.

1. Applic. That after the 200. year of Christ there is no proving the true
Gospel Government from the practice of the then Churches, they being fallen
into a strange apostasy from the Gospel institution.

2. As they fell somewhat from the practice, so the corruptions added of the
Papists to them, make them abundantly the more useless to the Church.

Of the third Century were

Origin An. 230. Cyprian An 240. Cornelius Romans 250.

Origin, I suppose to be the first corrupted the order of Ordination in the
Church, taking it not from the People and Presbytery, in which he ministered,
but from other Bishops of other Churches: Pro hoc autem adversum eum inhumanus
livor accenderit; and the Bishops ordained the justification of their fact,
plead only, Quod in praedicatione verbi satis clare effloruerat. Eusebius. l. 6.
cap. 17.

It appears in that Zebenus the Bishop was so much offended at it,

1. It was not according to the Gospel.

2. It was not practiced in the Churches.

3. The Bishops then did not plead, that it was proper to their function only,
and not to Presbyters, as now.

This will more clearly appear, in that of Hieron. ad Evagrium. Alexandria a
Marco ad Heraclam and Dionysium Episcopos: Presbyteri semper unum ex se electum
in excelfiori gradu collocatum Episcopum nominabant.

Heraclas was Origens Scholar in whose time the old form observed by the
Church, from Mark to that day was broken; and who was more like to break it
then Origin, who was of that Church, and a man (not unknown to any that have
read him) of unsound and uncertain judgment? yet learned and witty; who did
acknowledge in taking Ordination from Dimetrius at the first, for Catechizing,
that the power of Ordination did reside in every true constituted Church: And
who knows where God permitted him to Emasculinate himself as a judgment on
him for destroying that order by which God raised up seed in the Church, he
being best to take the litterall, no man since but has taken mystically as
other things, being all forced: it may be Origin did this for some controversy
had between Dimetrius of Alexandria and himself, and to honor Theotistus and
Alexander, who had showed exceeding favor to him in his banishment at Ceserea,
who it is like were willing to take this honor to themselves, robbing the
Church of it is choicest Jewel.

Hieron. In the first times Bishops differed nothing from Presbyters, and are
now above them rather by the custom of the Church, then by the truth of the
Lords disposing, and ought to rule the Church in common, which shows, that the
Bishops practice in Jeroms time differed from that of the Apostles, and that
the true primitive practice was fallen in his time.

In Cornelius time Eusebius. l. 6. cap. 43. at Rome numbers under one Bishop, 46.
Priests, 7. Deacons, 7. Subdeacons, 42. Acoluths, 52. Exorcists, and a
numberless company of Readers and Sextons: if these are not Popish
corruptions, the Church in 50. years was strangely altered.

Cyprian mentions in his Epistles the same names of Officers whose names are
not written in the Gospell-Kalender.

In his time also there were Bishops of Provinces, and although he held the
name of Colleagues and Compresbyeters, yet the number were altered, and so the
order among them (as appears in many Epistles) is to be doubted.

Bilson in his 14. cap. of Perp. Church Government tells us, how Bishops came
to extend their Jurisdiction so vastly far about them in the Country.

By no means (says he) could any Countrey-Parishes in the Primitive Church
have any Presbyters but from some City, and that not without the liking of the
Bishop, which forced all Country Towns and Villages to matriculate and
incorporate themselves into the Church of some City, by whose Bishop their
Presbyters living were governed, and dying were supplied.

1. It Is confessed, they must incorporate, or should have no Presbyter.

2. The people and Presbyter are forced to be under his Jurisdiction, or they
should have no Presbyter, nor will let Episcopal Authority go from him.

3. It must be with the liking of the Bishop, conditions are first agreed on
between Presbyter and Bishop, and Bishop and People.

So that whereas the Episcopal power should reside in every true and right
constituted Church, the Bishops would keep it from them, the Presbyter shall
not be ordained, nor people be taught, if beforehand they promise not
submission to the City-Bishops Jurisdiction, and this granted by a Bishops
confession, which shows the subtle course taken to raise Antichrist.

The 4. Century.

Eusebius Caesariensis, 320. Lactantius wrote to the Gentiles, but nothing of
the Church Discipline at all.

Athanasius 370. Hylarius 370. Bazilius, Chrysostom. 370. Hieronimus, Ambrosius,
370. Augustinus, 370.
The Church was to go into the wilderness, and be hid to the world in the
Year 406.

It was to remain hid 1260. years.

That the number of Antichrist may be 1666.

1. Eusebius, l. 5. cap. 9. says of the time of Pantenus, about 210.

Erant enim adhuc in illis Temporibus and Evangelistae nonnulli, qui ad
imitationem sanctorum Apostolorum in diversis orbis partibus oberrantes, per
gratiam Dei and animi sui virtutem.

1. It is to clear these of these times could not be extraordinarily called,
nor I think were they extraordinarily gifted; until these times the Church
kept it is true form, and it is like the senior Presbyter was of many called the
Evangelist, however altered in their writings.

2. It seems that after these times the name and the office of Evangelist
ceased in the Church.

1. In the Council of Nice, his office was destroyed, and an Antichristian
Officer put in his place.

Canon 10. Et ne in una civitate sunt duo Episcopi; which proves, before this
Canon or Council there were in some Cities two Bishops, there being in them
two complete Churches. A high step, made to help Antichrist into his throne.

Council of Antioch took down the Country Evangelist or Bishop; as Nice the
City.

Conceditur Chorepiscopis, ut ordinent Lectores, Subdiaconos, and Exorcistas,
de superioribus ordinibus decernitur, ut nec Presbyterium nec diaconum ordinare
audeant praeter civitatis Episcopum, cui ipse cum possessione subjectus est.

1. Had not Country Bishops ordained all degrees of orders in the Church, they
by a Council would not have granted the lesser, and have denied the greater.

2. Whereas he may do it by leave of the City Bishop, though not without,
shows the act was lawful according to God, or how could it be done by the
allowance of men.

3. If it were lawful according to God, then the tyranny of Antichrist was
great in these times.

Zozomen l. 7. cap. 19.

Etenim per Scithiam cum civitates multae unum duntaxat, hae omnes Episcopum
habent, apud alias vero Nationes reperias ubi in pagis Episcopi ordinantur,
sicut apud Arabes; Cyprios, apud Novatianos, Montanistas.

1. This is more then is written of any after his time, this was quickly
altered when Antichrist came to his throne in the world.

2. These that held the Church form, went under the name of Novatians,
Montanists, Sectaries.

The ground they had to distinquish the Country from the City Bishop, was that
the Country Bishop was resembled in the 70. the City Bishop in the Apostles.

But as it is well observed of Mr. Rutherford, p. 476. of a Presby. Church at
Antioch.

Look what frame of Churches the Apostles did institute in Cities, that same
they behoved to institute in villages also, for places cannot change the
institution of Christ.

And before p. 470. on Acts. 8.5.6. When Peter and John came to Samaria, to
help Philip, it cannot be that they all went to one house, and to one single
assembly to preach the Word.

And Page before 460. on 1. Cor. 14.15. I baptized none but Cryspus and Gaius,
etc. If many were baptized, other Pastors not Paul baptized them, and so they
were baptized in other Assemblies, then in those in which Paul baptized, Acts.
18.8. Many Corinthians were baptized.

I pass by these and come to my task, though these are the truths I intend.

Chrysostom. on Ephesians. 4.11. Tertio Evangelistas non circumeuntes, sed
Evangelizantes; ut erant Priscilla and Acyla, Pastores and Doctores quibus viz.
universus populus concreditus erat; Quid ergo juniores erant Pastores ac
Doctores? admodum erant enim circumeuntibus, and Evangelizantibus inferiores,
qui habitando quieti circa unum dunta^at locum occupabantur; ut Timotheus ac
Titus, verum alias ex hoc loco subjectio and praelatura colligi non potest; and
after, Ne quid huic expositionis meae contradicas, potest fieri, ut
Evangelistas eos hic intelligta, qui Evangelium conscripserunt. If Chrysostom
were thus ignorant of the Office of Evangelists, no wonder if we are; one while
he is for walking Evangelists, then for those abide in one place; and to these
he adheres, or else prelature cannot be proved thence; and then he comes to
those wrote the Gospells, how can it be thought possible so great a darkness
should come on the world in so short a time, on those who had the learning of
the age?

And it is like the Ancient copies of the primitive Writers, were either lost,
hid, or corrupted before his time, making way for the departure of the Church,
now about to take its leave of the world.

Bazil. in an Epistle to Ambrose calls on him (...).

Montacu of Tithes, understands this complaint of his to be only about the
dividing of Cappadocia into two Metropolitans; which had been one at Caesarea.

1. I conceive Bazil understands the first tract of the Fathers, in which only
was a reformation that was right, and not that went immediately before.

2. Nor could that be understood well, for the old marks for it were not 200.
years, before that there were no provincial Bishops in all the world.

And after, (...), etc. which shows, he sought this in some spiritual way,
and for a spiritual end, quite contrary to that objected before.

And in his Epistle to Athanasius, I conceive he implies the same, when he
calls on him to join with him in restoring the Church (...), in which he
alludes to the allusion of John the Baptist, to the Gospel Government, Mat.
3.12. (...), to me it seems, that (...) more fully manifests the Gospel truth,
and then (...) more full, to which no government then did so fitly agree, as
the Gospel government.

Applic. Seeing he calls on Athanasius and Ambrose to reform by the first
times, it proves there is no true reformation to be made of the Church by the
practice of the then times, least we would seek to prove one corruption by
another.

2. That the true Church Discipline was near gone from the world, or going, as
he instanceth, only Antioch, whose practice he commends, which doubtless was
deficient in many things in those times.

Ambrose Ephesians. 4. Coepit alio ordine and providentia gubernari Ecclesia; and
points out the time to be ubi omnia loca circumplexa est Ecclesia, it was after
doubtless the 200. year.

O Ambrose! did they think of the curse denounced of the Apostle against men or
Angels, should attempt this, or had they divine revelations to do it, or
Apostolical Authority delegated, that they dare to do such a thing!

After he gives us the reason; Scripta Apostoli ideo non per omnia convenient
ordinationi quae nunc in Ecclesia est, quia hac inter primordia sunt conscripta.

As if the government written in the Gospel, and exercised by the Apostles,
was only for the Apostles time, or Church-Infancy, and would not serve all
estates thereof, in which we see the plea now used is an old one.

An instance he gives of this in Timothy, made a Presbyter by Paul, and called
a Bishop, ut recedente eo, sequens ei succederet, that is, the Evangelist
dying, the senior Presbyter, the Pastor succeeded him, he being next in place
and office.

The reason of this change is this: Sed quia coeperunt sequentes Presbyteri
indigni inveniri ad primatos tenendos, mutata est ratio prospiciente consilio,
ut non ordo, sed meritum crearet Episcopum multorum judicio constitutum, ne
indignus temere usurparet et esset multis scandalum.

1. If any such there had been, the Lord had provided a remedy against it, by
giving the Church a power among themselves to prevent it, which here the
Bishops, to the destruction of that privilege usurp to themselves.

2. It is done by a Council, that it may have the more fair pretense, and that
hereby unworthy men may not come ad primatos tenendos.

That the senior Presbyter succeeded the Evangelist, if fit, is illustrated in
that of Aaron and Eleazer his eldest son, Numb. 20.25, 26.

But see what the Bishops did with this usurped authority, when wrested from
the Church quickly after.

Sozom. lib. 7. cap. 8. tells a story of a Bishop chosen by Bishops, for
Constantinople.

He was chosen by Diodorus means, and commended to the Council, his name was
Nectarius.

That which they chose him for is, because he had a white head, a sacerdotall
Countenance, and the like; this fitted him ad primatos tenendos.

1. He was not a man baptized; it is said Diodorus seeing him so grave a man,
thought he had been baptized.

2. He is exhorted to give him to reading, which shows, he had little
abilities in him to teach.

1. Ap. Could this be said of a senior Presbyter, he must be better qualified
then so.

2. Let man never give leave to man to change the everlasting Ordinances of God
for never so fair pretenses, for the foolishness of God is wiser then men.

In the same manner Ambrose was elected before baptized, against the Word.

Ambrose on the same 4. Ephesians. says of the Teachers, Doctores sunt hi qui
lectionibus imbuendi infantes solebant imbuere, sicut mos Iudaeorum est quorum
traditio ad nos transitum fecit, qu^ per negligentiam obsolevit.

He shows, though the custom were taken from the Jews, yet it belonged to
the Gentiles, to have it exercised in their Churches also.

The Doctor being to initiate their children in grace, as the Jewish theirs in
nature, which through negligence is out of use, of whose Ordination he thus
writes, Prophetia est qua eligitur quasi Doctor futurus idoneus, manus vero
impositiones verba sunt mystica quibus confirmatur ad opus electus auctoritatem
test conscientia sua ut audeat vice Domini sacrificium Deo offerre, 1 Timoth.
4.14.

1 Timoth. 5. Apud omnes utique gentes honorabilis est senectus, unde Synagoga
and postea Ecclesia, seniores habuit, quorum sine Consilio nihil agebatur in
Ecclesia, quod qua negligentia obsoluerit nescio, nisi forte Doctorum desidia
aut magis superbia dum soli volunt aliquid videri.

Hereby Seniores M. B lson will not admit the helping Governor, or ruling Elder
to be understood, but that advice which Bishops used to take of Presbyters, was
now not taken in Church Government.

1. He alludes in this place, as I suppose, to that 2 Chronicles. 19.8, 9, 10. where
with the Priests and Levites there are of the heads of the people (...).

2. Here it seems to me Senior is opposed to Doctor, I suppose if he had
intended as it is objected, he would have set down Episcoporum rather then
Doctorum, which comprehends the whole Ministry.

3. It is clear the Church-ruling Elder in 1 Cor. 6. was ceased before his
time, and practiced as I think by the Bishops and Doctors.

August. cited by Calvin on 1 Cor. 6. says thus, which confirms it; In libro
de opere Monachorum ubi suas occupationes commemorat, hanc sibi de multis vel
molestissimam esse asserit, quod secularibus negotiis partem diei impendere
cogatur, se tamen patienter far, quia ejusmodi necessitatem sibi Apostolus
injungat ex hoc loco, and quadam Epistola apparet, solitos certis horis sedere
Episcopos ad lites-dirimendas, quasi eos hic designet Apostolos, ut autem res
in deterius semper labuntur, ex illo errore deinde manabit Jurisdictio, quam
sibi in causis pecuniariis Episcoporum officiales usurpant, in illo autiquo
more duo sunt reprehensione digna, quod Episcopi alienis a suo officio negotiis
implicabantur, etc.

1. This of judging in civil causes, was the office of the helping Governor,
which the Bishops in and after Ambrose time executed themselves.

2. M. Calvin says, this was a business belonged not to Bishops; he calls it
in them malum tolerabile, yet see how Augustine says, it was designed them by
Apostles.

3. In that he says, in alienis negotiis, shows it was a business pertained
to some, and it must be a Church Officer, though not them which was the Ruling
Elder.

Hieron. on Ep. Tit. cap. 1. shows the reason why it was decreed in the whole
world, that all the care of the Church should pertain to one, and that was from
the primary dissentions of Presbyters; which was, that whereas when the three
Presbyters governed the Church together, they could not agree among themselves:
therefore they would have the Government only to be in one, and not in three
any more. A fair excuse it was, even for the peace of the Church.

1. If they walked by the Rule, how could they disagree?

2. Tyranny of Antichrist could never get up by three, but by one in giving
government to one in the Church, was much of Antichrist revealed, and made way
for all.

Applic. 1. Mixed societies are set up, and National Churches constituted,
Ordination is taken from the Church, and the Government of the Church by its
own Presbyters is destroyed, Evangelists rooted up, and Teachers office cast
down, and the helping Ruler is taken away: whereas were two Bishops in a City,
now one rules a whole Province; these proceed to Patriarks, which preceded the
Pope, all this is left upon Record, and that the government of the Church was
not in Ambrose time such as in the Apostles.

2. I desire those read, and intend to write against what is herein contained
to clear,

1. How.

2. When these things thus said to be altered, came to be restored.

3. Whether that a government be right that has not all, and no more then all
that the Apostles practiced and left to be practiced in the Church.

4. Whether the Conventicula quae constituta sunt and Rectores and caetera
Officia in Ecclesia ordinata, spoke of Ambrose, Ephesians. 4. have not respect to
single Congregations the same now amongst us, in opposition to Gospel
Churches, consisting of several societies set up usually in Cities, if not
what they were then?

5. Whether his Capit alio ordine and prudentia gubernari Ecclesia, signify
not that then one Minister came to do all, and all parts of Ministry were done
in the Conventiculis, and ^^er have been since, and where this used by us be
not ab alio ordine and prudentia quam eo quod a Deo est in Evangelio, if not,
in what the constitution of our Churches do differ from theirs here mentioned.

That I may bring you to the Pope, in whose manifestation the
Gospell-Government was fully hid; In the time of Theodo. the younger, Anno,
423. which is but 17. years after the time of the Churches obscuring, the
highest of Antichrist was manifested in a manner in the public Charter,
granted Bononia for the making of an University.

WE Theodosius by the grace of God, Emperor of the Romans, ever Augustus, moved
with the commodiousnesse and fertility of the place, having 25. months taken
found and deliberate advice therein, sitting in our seat of Majesty, a general
council of Christians being assembled in the presence of Celestine high Bishop
of Rome, 12. Cardinals, Archbishops and Bishops innumerable, and sundry other
Dukes and Princes of diverse degrees and callings, Baldwine Earl of Flanders,
and Gaulter Earl Poictiers, Ambassadors, the one representing the person of
the King of France, the other of the King of England, the whole College of an
100. senators sitting, do by this inviolable act, etc.

Given at Rome in the Capitol. Anno 423. May. 11.
This made the Pope truly Antichrist, when he counterfeited Christ's Ordinance,
by setting up that in his false Church in a false way, which Christ set up in
the true; his 12. to Christ's 12. which are above Archbishops and Bishops, Dukes
and Princes.

Clem. recognit. l. 3. though a counterfeit, yet is it ancient. Haec autem and
his similia cum dixisset Petrus, manibus superpositis Zacheo, oravit ut
inculpabiliter Episcopatus sui servaret officium: post haec 12. Presbyteros
ordinavit, and diaconos 4. These are said to be ordained to serve at Cesarea to
justify the Roman practice, and their 12. Cardinals, though not a word in
Scripture witness any such thing at all.

Having briefly spoken of the fall, I shall propose one Prophetical Scripture
for the rise of the fallen Churches, Gentiles as well as Jews, together now
shortly to be within 18. years in most of the world.

Ezekiel. 16.55. When thy Sister Sodom and her daughters shall return to their
former estate, and Samaria and her daughters shall return to their former
estates, then thou and thy daughters shall return to your former estate.

1. To understand this, note that in Scripture, the first Churches are called
Mother Churches, those that succeed them, and are constituted according to
them, and receive ministry and means mediately from them, are not unfitly
called Daughter Churches, whether they are true or false, and in this it well
agrees, such as the mother such as the daughter.

2. In this sense it cannot be said of literal Sodom, she was no Church, she
had no daughters, but in Rev. 11.8. Rome mystically is said to be called
Sodom; and surely no where, if not here in all the Book of God, she is the
mother of Harlots, that is of idolatrous Churches, and societies: and in 7.
Sess. Council of Trent, can. 3. De Baptismo, she is called Matter omnium
Ecclesiarum.

1. All the Churches, before An 200. constituted according to the Apostles,
were Jerusalem and after to the 400 year.

2. All the Idolatrous false Churches, set up after Antichrist of Rome since
the year 46. are Romes daughters.

3. All the Societies separated from Rome within this 150. years, being not
according to the Gospel frame, or pattern, are Samarias daughters.

1. Their Priest was brought from Assyria, or Babell, as was Martine Luther
from the Monastery.

2. They made Gods of their own, every Nation as they please, 2. Kings
17.27.29.

3. Ver. 41. These Nations feared the Lord, and served the graven Images, both
their children and childrens children, as did their fathers.

The Application I leave to the Reader.

1. It is observable, Jerusalem is first, Sodom next, Samaria last, in
Scripture and in time; yet ver. 46. Samaria is called the elder sister, and
Sodom the younger; yet first in time and Scripture, God in this showing the
Samaritan estate had more of the truth then Sodoms estate, and so may be said
to be elder, and has honor given her of God in it, and Sodom dishonor.

2. Ierusalems, Sodoms, Samarias daughters, shall be brought all again to their
former estate, that is the primitive gospel-government.

3. In the bringing Sodoms and Samarias, God will bring again Ierusalems
Captives, the Jews in the midst of them, their call promised, and time
intimated.

4. Ver. 61. Thou shall receive thy sister, thy elder and thy younger; here
Samaria is spoke of first, who first shall have the gospel government set up in
her, and shall be acknowledged by the gospel to be so, and then God shows how,
in saying he will give them to Ierualem for daughters, who before were Sodoms
and Samarias, Rev. 20.6. this is the first resurrection of Churches

Q. When shall this be?

1. When Jerusalem has born her lewdness, ver. 5.8.

2. After Jerusalem has had all her daughters, and Rome or Sodom all her
daughters, and Samaria or the Church departed from Rome had her daughters.

1. They and their daughters are said to dye, as it were, as the true Churches
were abolished by Antichrist, Antichrist by Samaria; God now by giving the
truth, abolisheth Episcopacy and Presbytery the daughters of Samaria, and
giving the true knowledge of the gospel-government, first to Samaria which I
think will be seen in England; God is said to bring Samarias daughters, and
then after will Romes daughters, France, Spain, etc. among whose return the
Jews shall be called, and return also, and the new Jerusalem shall receive
them for daughters. So that I suppose the true gospel-government will be set
up, and spread into farther parts, Dominions and Countries, then ever the
Apostles spread it, and continue much longer in time and purity in the world.

4. Sodom and Samaria shall lay down in a short time their corruptions,
abominations, and false government, taking up the way of God.

5. This cannot be understood of the last day of Judgment, that after that
resurrection the spiritual harlot Sodom or Samaria shall be daughters, that is
be constituted Churches according to the gospel pattern.

6. Nor of Sodom burnt by fire, in Genesis 20. for they shall never hereafter be
given to be daughters to Jerusalem.

7. This Scripture held by some to make against the call of the Jews, rightly
understood, makes a strong and undeniable proof of it as any whatsoever.

1. The Scripture following, Mat. 25.20. compared with Luke 19.17. the first
which is he in Matthew had the five Talents, is promised to be in Luke made
Ruler of ten Cities, which seems to me to show that there shall be abundance
more of Churches under the new Jerusalem to be, then under that that was; the
Gentiles shall bring their glory, riches, that is, wisdom, learning,
knowledge, their all unto it. In which is shown how the Ministry shall be
taken from the single Ministry, and given to the true Church Combination, after
which, before the end, may be Apostasy to a twofold Ministry, but never to a
single Ministry more.

Math, 25.14, 15, The Kingdom of Heaven. etc.

In these words of Matthew, are to be considered two general things. 1. That
which is the Parabolicall sense of the Scripture. 2. That which is the
Mystical or the Prophetic sense. In the first we are to consider what this
Parable is alleged for by the Lord, and that is to set out the Kingdom of
Heaven by, not in the inward operations of it on the Soul, but the outward
administrations of it in the Ministry of the word, etc.

2. Ye have the way the Lord takes in the disposing the government of the
Church, called the Kingdom of Heaven.

1. (...), he did it by a call, the way by which he ordained his Disciples at
the first, and still does by an ordinary call of his messengers, and without
which none are to undertake the Ministry.

2. Those that are called, ate called (...) his own servants: in which is
signified the separating of the Ministers of the gospel from all other
employments, and the destinating of them unto this only, Acts 6.4. without
which the Ministry cannot be discharged.

3. After their Call and Separation, then he comes to entrust them with the
dispensations of the gospel, rightly called his goods, in which Satan nor the
world have not the least property, which are left to the Ministers only, not
the people, 1 Cor. 4.1.2.

4. In the number of his servants which are three, they have the number of the
Ministers ordained by Christ, for the right government of the Church in this
world until the end.

5. Ye have the disposing of these goods of Christ remarkably set down, the
manner how, and that is not all to any one, but one has one, another two, the
third five Talents.

6. He that had his one, had his Call from Christ, his Ordination from Christ,
his intrustment, his Talent from Christ, that is Jure Divino as well as he that
had five.

7. These are delivered to each according to his ability:

1. Signifying, that one of the Church Ministers has more committed to him
then an other.

2. He that had five, had as much as his ability could enable him to exercise,
he could not exercise the two the second had, or that one more then his own
five which the third had:

3. Which shows, it was not the mind of Christ, nor is it in the power of man
to exercise the whole Ministry, which by the Lords Institution is to be done by
three.

Object. This is a novelty and a new found Exposition.

Resp. If it be the truth, receive it though; but Clemen. Alex. lib. 1. Stro.
understands hereby the Teachers of the Church.

2. An uncertain Author on Matthew translated by Erasmus, and bound up with the
third Tom. of Chrysostome^, applies these to the Ministry; first, the five
Talents to the Presbytery, which he makes to be Government, Preaching, Baptism,
offering Sacrifice, and Prayer for the People.

2. The two Talents to the Deacon, which he makes his godly life and faithful
Ministry in his Deaconship.

3. The one Talent he understands to be the Peoples knowledge.

1. The Ministry of the Gospel was fallen in Chysostomes times, in most places
of the world; hence it is no wonder if it be applied to the Ministry; the
application holds not correspondency with the Text.

2. If one be to be applied to the Ministry, then all are; there is no
difference in call, in appointment to the Ministry, in the Stewardship, in the
nature of the goods that the one had or the other, but in the quantity only.

3. If this be said of the people and Ministers, then all Ministerial
differences are destroyed betwixt People and Ministers hereby.

Many have given their judgment what these Talents are several ways, as
Salmeron in Parabolis, but I pass that, and come to the mystical sense or
prophetic.

1. God predicts by the unprofitablenesse of the man only which had but one
Talent, which indeed is the first Ministry called the Doctor, the misery of the
Church under a single Ministry, in the time of Antichrist, whose work it was to
destroy the true Gospel Ministry of three, and set up his Babble Ministry of one
singly in the World instead thereof.

2. God predicts he should have but one Talent that should be truly gold,
which is the Word; the rest under that Ministry, should be corrupt spurious
false and fained things, indeed scroffe and dross to be burned.

3. Under this one unfaithful Ministry should be a hiding of that Talent it
had, which signifies a hiding or shutting up of the Scriptures in an unkwon
tongue.

4. The converting the Gospel-Government contained in the Word, which was from
heaven and heavenly, into an earthly constitution tending only to wordly glory
and greatness, the one being of God, the other of man, the one the pattern of
heavenly things, the other of earthly things.

The doom of God written of him, verse. 29. cleares the truth of the intended
mystery, from him that has not, shall be taken that which he has.

1. This cannot be understood of any but of a Minister, nor be verified in a
particular person, but must be done in a public spiritual general sense of
Scripture; you may apply it to Judas in some kind, who was the lively
representative of Antichrist: But 1. he without all question had more then one
Talent: 2. This here does mainly intend the ordinary Church-Ministry and not
extraordinary.

2. The Scripture says he has the goods of his Lord, and again he is said
not to have them.

1. Signifying that he should have nominally, formally, and in show those
things the true Church of God has.

2. That he has them not really and indeed according to the Lords Institution,
the Word indeed it has, and the people may be said not to have it while they
have it, having it in an unknown tongue.

3. God will take away that which he seems to have:

1. This we see partly done in the discovery the World has in part already
made of her Idolatrous Worship.

2. In the Saints, condemning her Church, Church-Ministry and Ordinances, to be
Antichristian, Superstitious, Heathenish and ungodly.

3. The full taking away, will be when God shall erect a true faithful
Ministry and pure Ordinances among his Saints in the place of that Idol
worship, as in verse. 28.

Appl. 1. These all meet in Antichrist as lines of a circumference in its
Center, and so in him as in none but him.

2. Antichrist, is he the Gospel Prophesies aim at, that should disturb,
counterfeit, and oppose the truth of the Lord, under whom the Church changes
should be.

3. Antichrist, is he from whom the Talent shall be taken, who is indeed tho
unprofitable servant to his Lord in the Ministry, he being to be destroyed.

4. How in a general Scripture-sence, these can be understood of any, but
Antichrist I know not (but should gladly be informed) he is to be a called
Minister, and entrusted with the Gospel which the first Bishops were by the
Lords Institution; he proves unfaithful, hides the Word, turns the Discipline
of it to earthly advancements, that hiding the Gospel ends must have a fall and
be ruined, his Ministry taken from him, after which the Church is to be
restored.

3. Mystery, in the verse. 28. where the Talent is taken from him, and given to
him that has ten Talents.

1. In which is showed Antichrists Ministry shall be destroyed.

2. In that it is given to the first, it shows the restoration of the
Gospel Ministry and Government in the Church again to be as in the beginning.

3. That God will bless by degrees in the use of means, that Ministry to whom
the one Talent shall be given, abundantly, from five to ten, which shows it
will be extraordinary, but not by an extraordinary way, as verse. 16.

4. It is given to the first Ministry which is the Evangelist, the act of
Ordination being Primarily in him, by whom with others the Church should come
to be re-estated, and to him had two which was the Pastors.

5. The taking away of the one, and the giving of the one Talent, signifies
that Authoritatively by some one that has power to do it, this act shall be
done in the Church before the burnings of Antichrist.

Object. 1. Here he that had five, has ten, which is more then all the
Ministry had, which were but eight in all; and therefore one man may exercise
all.

1. Shows the abundance of knowledge the Ministers of the Gospel that shall
be, shall be blessed with, and how happy the world shall be in them, or in
particular him that is designed for the Churches restoration.

2. What is signified by the words (...), other five Talents; first, they are
other indeed, but not in kind as the three other Talents are which do differ
in kind from his five, but the same five Talents or gifts are increased in
him, in the use of them more then they were double.

3. Though he had ten, the other that had two, had four, and the
unprofitable servant had his one, so that he that had the ten, did not like
Pharohs cattle, one eat up the other.

4. The one's being given to him that had the ten, was but that he that had the
ten as the Apostles by their extraordinary Call, did before come to set up by
Gods approbation, the Ordinances in the Church of Christ as they were first
instituted in the Word, which when once done, he was to leave it to them to
exercise as the Apostles had done before him, and only exercise his own part
ordinarily in the Church.

17. Having spoken of the Church-Ministry, we now come to speak of the
Church-Elder, or helping Ruler.

MEn to please the Magistrate have demolished this Officer out of the Church,
and set up a counterfeit in his place, for whom I dare boldly affirm there is
no one word of Institution in the Gospel to be found, to do that he is
appointed to do.

The true helping Governor:

1. Is indeed a Lay-Elder.

2. His Institution is without laying on of hands, Bilson. cap. 11. perp.
Church Government; if they had laying on of hands, they had not been Lay-Elder.

3. The gospel has instituted no Church-lay Officer, but that of 1 Cor, 6.1.6.
who was only set up to compose differences in the Church in civil affairs.

4. There is no institution for any such Officer in the Church, as the
Lay Elders under Presbytery are assigned unto: so they cannot but be an
Antichristian Office acting by a Antichristian power, unless we say there
are to be Officers and Offices in the Church that are not of gospel
institution. As for that brought to prove them out of 2 Chronicles. 19.9.10. it is
of no validity; Christ says, No man puts an old piece, no not a piece to a
new Garment; therefore that is not Christ's mind that they whatever their Office
was, should be to rule under the gospel, though I think their Office was far
differing from Lay Elders now.

5. The Office of the Elder was not about Ecclesiastical things, but 1. (...),
an ordinary business, ver. 1. and then ver. 2. (...), the lesser things, ver.
3. (...), things of this life or livelihood; and to this, Chron. 2.19.11.
Amariah is for the matters of the Lord, and Zebadiah in the matters of the
King, ver. 10. proves it clearly.

The word (...) signifies the Churches instituting some, and in an
autoritative way among themselves for determining differences amongst them,
occasioned about things abovesaid, as in ver. 4.

Question will be whether the governor set up by the Corinthians were Iure
divino.

The Governors Rom 12.8. 1 Cor. 12.28. are said to be set up of God in the
Church; the same is meant doubtless, 1 Timothy chap. 5. ver. 17. Institution for
an other Governor then this in this 6 to the Corinthians; I prove all those
hold the contrary, to show, 1. The grounds to be observed by the Church in
ordaining Lay Elders, are laid down by the Apostle in this Chapter as fully as
for the ordaining any other Officer in the Church: First he must be qualified
with wisdom, a wise man: Secondly a Churchmember: Thirdly a member of their
own Church, a wise man amongst them; which proves it to be a proper office
pertaining to the well governing of every Church: Fourthly they are to be set
up to judge by the Churches authority. Fifthly the Apostle does approve the
practice by arguments drawn a majore ad minus; they are just, therefore fit to
judge, and more fit then those are unjust, before whom they brought their
Causes to trial, they shall judge the World and Angels, how much more the
things of this life.

Q. If these are Iure divino, then whether are they to continue in the Church
or not, they being set down in Scripture to be set up in the Primitive Church?

Respons. Master Bilson Chap. 10. Perpet. Church Government, says, they had no
authority, necessity, nor perpetuity; and after in Christian Commonwealths
these Judges must cease, because there is no cause of declinining the Tribunal
of Christian Magistrates.

Yet he himself confesses these to be Governors and Moderatours of their
brethrens quarrels and contentions; others he finds not in the Apostolic
writings, but such as withal were watchmen and seeders, Chap. ibid. page 142.
who then if not these were the helping Governors?

1. He calls them Governors, and yet says rhey had no authority, and 1 Timothy
5.17. God requires obedience to those that rule well.

2 They were set up or appointed by the whole Church, which must be a public
intrustment of the Church bestowed upon some particular persons for this end in
the Church, which is the common ground of authority that is set up over a free
people as the Church in this case.

3. Master Bilsons Title of his Book, is the Perpetual Government of Christ's
Church, which shows that the Government in the beginning instituted by the
Apostles in the Church, and consequently the Governors, are to be perpetual,
of which this 1 Cor. 6.1. was one.

Object. These were set up only to prevent scandals among the Heathen, under
the Christian Magistrate; it needs not to be.

1. Christ never intended the being of a National Church in the World.

2. If once Churches come to be collected, there is the same reason for them
now, that ever there was in the World.

3. It was instituted to prevent scandals, as well within the Church from
offending one another, as without from the offending the world.

Object. This were to eclipse Magistracy.

1. He rules for the Magistrate, and under him, Romans 13. and is to be
accomptable to the Magistrate for his acts if required.

2. He rules not as the Magistrate by the sword to compel or force, or lay
any pecuniary mulcts on those that disobey, or corporal punishment; that
indeed were to take the sword out of the Magistrates hand; but by the word and
by love, showing what is the command of Christ in their several cases one to
perform to another.

3. To me it seems the Apostle alludes to this power in the Church only, he
writing to the Church, Romans 13.1. Let every soul be subject to the higher
Power, and so calls the Church Elder the inferior power, so that this
establishes the Magistrate.

Object. You say the Church should set him up, and so he stands not by the
Magistrate.

Respons. Indeed, he stands jure divino; now the privilege God has given the
Saints, is no more then the Magistrate gives to every petty Incorporation,
which is, that they shall choose their own Magistrate.

Object. The City Magistrate rules by the Law of the public Magistrate

Respons. True, the Elder rules in the Church by the gospel, which if the world
could bear, it were far better if all were ruled by it only.

Illust. God ruled by the Magistracy of Rome, by the Law of nature, by Moses
government, in a way that made men more holy and merciful one to another then
others were: why so? God rules one way in the world, another way in the Church,
more evangelically, mercifully; the members have a spirit of love by which they
are taught to seek not their own, but the good of one another.

2. As in proceeding in the Church, first tell one or two, then the Church: so
remedy should be sought by this way of the Church first before any other.

3. In case the member submit not to wholesome counsel according to the nature
of the fact, the ecclesiastical Officers being first acquainted with it, they
may suspend from Sacraments, excommunicate, and deny society to them until
satisfaction in some way be given to the Church.

3. This is authority enough for Christ to rule by, which cannot be any way
offensive to Magistrates, it is a small boon to be granted Christ: every free
subject is granted as much in his house, and shall not Christ have it in his
Church? what has Christ among the people, where he has not this?

4. As the Church is divided from the world, so is its government, they
themselves though being subject to the Magistrate as Gods Vicegerent.

5. The Magistrate, Romans 13.3. is said to be ordained for the praise of them
that do well; now the Elder in the Church preventing scandals in the world,
composing differences, preserving peace in the Church in a Gospel way,
according to Christ, does well; therefore the Magistrate is to encourage him,
uphold him against those that oppose him.

6. The Elders of the Church National, 2 Chronicles. 19. are reduced to the
government of the Church particular, 1 Cor. 5.13. these Elders have not to do
to judge any without the Church, their authority is bounded.

Object. This is the way to exempt the Church from the public Magistrates
command.

1. They are commanded obedience to them, as to the higher Power, and as
ordained of God.

2. Are to pay Custom and Tribute to them.

3. To defend, honor, and maintain them.

4. To pray for them.

1. Magistracy is exalted by it, in that they rule over those which rule in a
more excellenr way then other Under-rulers in the Commonwealth.

2. The Churches obedience is better then theirs of the world; they obey of
conscience, the other of necessity and fear.

3. In the world a natural man may be a fit helper in the Church, he must be a
wise believer and a Saint.

4. The Magistrates office is to see the Church under his Jurisdiction has all
that liberty, authority and power left free to it, to exercise within it self,
Christ left it without impair.

5. It is necessary the Magistrate have a help in Church as well as in the
world, he being no more able to do all the one then all the other of himself.

That the Church ought to choose this Officetr.
1. They have the choice of all other as Ministers and Deacons, and of this
also; therefore it were wrong to deprive the Church of the choice of these as
of the other.

2 The Elders Constitution depends on his Election by the Church.

3 By this the people more gladly assent to his determination, because chosen
of themselves.

4. To prevent all means of rise of offense in the Church.

5. To show he must be approvedly known for integrity and ability, that is to
be entrusted herewith.

6. They being enlightened men, know how and whom to choose better then others,
and therefore God trusted them with these privileges themselves, and left it
not to Ministers within, or Magistrates of or without the Church.

Appl. Gods people will make no ill use of this, that the Magistrate should
have cause to fear them, for they will choose the most godly wise man among
them, which is the best choice for the Magistrate and themselves also.

In the Exercise of this Authority.
1. The Elders of one Church have no Authoritative power over any other Church
then their own.

2. Nor have they to do with men of the world without the Church.

3. I suppose if differences arise between members of several Churches, then
some of the Elders of each Church may be nominated to compose them.

4. If injury be done to a member by one not belonging to any Church, if
satisfaction cannot be had any other way, he may appeal the Offender before
the Judge without scandal.

5. If injury be done by a member to one without, the party offended may seek
restitution, and complain to the Elders against him.

6. This Government is the golden scepter; the compulsory power by corporal
punishments, is as the Iron rod.

7. By this, cost is spared, poverty prevented, unity and peace continued,
scandals prevented to the world without and members within, and edification
exceedingly furthered hereby among the Saints.

I now add a word more to prove this general practice of this government held
out in Scriptures to be exercised in the Church.

Deuteronomy. 32.1.

1. Hear O Heavens, that is the Church or Saints of God.

2. Hear O Earth, that is the World of unbelievers; two sorts of persona being
intended herein.

3. It is emplyed that what he had to say concerned both these two sorts of
people.

4. Note in the Metaphor, rain comes down from heaven and not goes up to
heaven, as the words here signified must if heaven be meant literally.

1. The Earths ministry is meant in this, hear the words of my mouth.

2. The Church-Ministry; 1. It distills as the deaw; 2. It drops as the rain on
the tender herb; 3. As the showers upon the grass.

1. How fitly these hold out the differing Ministry, the Doctor Ministry
distilling the principles of grace as deaw.

2. The Pastor dropping.

3. The Evangelist showring it down in abundance.

4. Here are two sorts expressed, the tender herb, the grown grass; but 3
emplyed, the tender herb being to set out the children of the Church and the
youth, by distilling and dropping, being both set before and applied to the^
tender herb.

Cant. 6.9. (...) My Dove is one, my perfect one is one, she is dear to her
mother, the choice one of her that bare her.

1. I chose this place above other, because Mr Brightman and others understood
it to signify the Gospel estates.

2. It is without question, wholly spoken of the Church.

1. Here is her birth, as born under the Doctor Ministry.

2. Her Doveship or reservednesse to Christ under the Pastor.

3. Her perfection under the Evangelist.

4. Her unity expressed, though under diverse Administrations and estates, she
is one, she is one.

Math. 13.33. The three measures of meal signify the three societies of
Saints; the Leaven and hiding of it, the Gospel and the threefold Ministry
thereof.

Math. 13.23. The good ground is said to bring out in some a hundred, in other
sixty, in other thirtyfold.

1. The seed is one.

2. The ground is said to be good.

3. It is differenced not in it self, but in its fruit.

4. This difference is only threefold, to show amongst the Saints in the
Church, there was a threefold division and no more, the least is thirty, the
second doubles it, the third is more then both.

Rev. 11.1. There was a Reed given me like a rod, and the Angel stood and said,
Arise and measure the Temple of God, and the Altar, and the Worshipers therein.

1. This was done under the sixth Trump, and respects that time in which we
live.

2. In this time, the Gospel Primitive pattern is revealed, by which at first
the way and Church of God was set up in the world and governed.

3. All are reduced to these three heads, that are to be measured; first, the
Temple; secondly, the Altar; thirdly, the worshippers.

1. A material Temple is not meant, God intending not the building of any.

2. Nor can the mystical Temple be meant here, that is set out in that word
worshippers.

3. Though not the Temple, yet something of the Temple is alluded unto of God
in this place, which I take to be the form of the Temple which was divided
unto three parts, shadowing the three societies of Saints under the Gospel.

1. The Porch, the Doctor society; 2. The place of Priests sacrifice; 3. The
Sanctum Sanctorum, the Evangelist society.

So that by the measuring of the Temple, I suppose is intended of God, that a
strict survey should in these times come to be taken of what pertained to each
differing Church society, Ordinances and Orders appertaining thereunto.

The second thing Measured is the Altar.
1. Under the Law, there were two Altars which shadowed the Divine nature, and
humane nature of Christ, here reduced to one, mentioned Heb. 13.10.

2. Christ here represented is not to be measured, Joh. 3. verse. 34. the
Spirit was not given by measure to him, so that man cannot measure Christ gifts
as Mediator, much less as God; hence this can not be meant of Christ, as in
himself, but as in the word.

3. Hence the measuring of the Altar, is only that Christ should be preached so
to the society of children as the Word the measure holds him out in the
Elementary or Doctrinall part thereof, 1 Thessalonians. 2.4. Paul, Timothy, Sylvanus,
preach only as they are allowed of God therein, the Gospel, an allowance what
to Preach to each society, viz. Doctrine in the Doctors, Exhortations in the
Pastor, Consolation in the Evangelists society.

4. That in all the Saints Societies, Christ is to be set up as an Altar, at
which all are to offer, all having to offer to God thereon, as well Infants as
men, Heb. 13.10.

1. The differing Ministries are set down in the Temple, in several distinct
places.

2. The Doctrine in the Altars measuring.

3. As these are measured for the people, so the people are measured for them.

1. Signifying, none are to be admitted to the first Gospel Ministry without
measuring.

2. In the Gospel is a measure for all Saints, by which Infants are known to be
Infants, young men known from Infants, and Fathers from either; but of these
more largely in an Exposition I intend to set forth on the Revelation, if God
permit.

Appli. That God will in these days have the Gospel estate re-erected
according to the pattern, in which Ministry, means and members shall be all
made answerable to the Gospel pattern or measure.

3. All Forms come short of this, can stand no more then Dagon before the Arc.

I shall add one place more to those in my other Tracts, used to prove mixed
societies to show how invalid they are, and how unfitly applied.

2 Timothy 2.20. In a great house, are vessels of gold, silver, wood and earth;
therefore say some, in the Church are to be good and bad.

Chrysostom. in locum

Quemadmodum in majori domo necessaria est magna differentia vasorum, ita in
toto orb; non enim eam similttudinem ad Eccelesiaem refert, sed ad universum
mundum.

Throp. in Verb.

In magna domo vasa esse diversa, hunc mundum esse non Ecclesiam dicit in hoc
loco; nam in Ecclesia nil vult ligneum esse, sed ex auro universa effecta;
aurea qui virtute sunt praediti; lignea sunt impii; si non ad virtutem, ad
mundi tamen confirmationem and statum sunt utiles, vel ad dispensationes
nonnullas maxim conferunt ut Pharao.

1. It will appear more plain, if we consider God when he compares the
Church, compares it to heaven and heavenly things; this is too earthy to be a
representative of the Church. Rev. 21.18.21.

1 Gal. 6.10. God speaking of the Church as of a house, calls it the household of
Faith.

3. The Church is the Pattern of Heavenly not Earthly things.

Object. The Church is compared to a grain of mustard seed, leaven etc.

Respons. These thing a respect the grace of the gospel in men, and the power
of God, and not the societyes of Saints, which here is said only to be intended.

18. That this form of Government is aimed at by the Apostles, is also clearly
seen in the general form of the Epistle; (which is no small Argument to prove
it) as well as part cular instructions and instances contained in particular
places of Scripture. The Epistle I shall instance in, is that of the Apostle
Paul to the Colossians.
THe first general part of the Epistle, I take to be generally applied to the
whole Church, and is contained in chap. 1. unto the first four verses of the
second Chapter.

1. Part whereof contains Salutations and Prayer for the whole Church, chap. 1
from ver. 2. to 11.

2. From verse 12. to the end of the 4 verse chap. 2. he holds out Christ, and
the Communion Paul and Timothy had with them, and they with all Saints in
Heaven and Earth in Jesus Christ, as members in a body, of which Christ is Head
and Savior.

In the next place, the Apostle prepares or makes way to descend to the
particular Church societyes.

Ver. 5. He comes to mention the order observed by them in the government of
their Church.

Ver. 6. He exhorts them as they have received Christ, so they would walk in
him, which implies there was among them a different receiving of Christ; some
received him in the gospel milk, others in the gospel meat, some received him
from the Doctor in his Ministry, others from the Pastor in his Ministry
differing first in Degrees, secondly in Means, thirdly in the Word and
Ministry also.

Ver. 7. He sweetly and plainly illustrates this truth by a threefold Metaphor.

1. Rooting, an allusion taken from a tree, and fitly to be applied to the
Doctor-Ministry, who teaches the Principles and Fundamentals of Christ, the
first way of receiving Christ.

2. And built in him, a Metaphor taken from a house not founded, but built up,
having a higher degree in it of Christ, another way of receiving Christ.

Note the change of the Metaphor has in it a signification of difference to
be in the societies the Saints had among them at Colosse, and also of their
differing condition in Christ; he otherwise might have used one Metaphor as
significantly, and have said being founded on and builded up in him, etc. but
changing the Metaphor, he significantly sets out and implies a Mystery therein
to be unfolded.

3. And established, which is the last way of receiving Christ, under the
dispensations of the Gospel Ministers in this present life.

Ap. That in these clearly the order named verse. 5, is here explained, how and
in what it did consist, in the Ministeries right rooting beginners, and
building up other believers, and establishing others in the grace of the Gospel
by several degrees, as they had received Jesus Christ.

Object. The Apostle, if he meant the change of societies in the change of
metaphors in the first, Why he did not change them in the last?

Resp. The thing was sufficiently cleared in the first metaphor to those
Churches, who had this order erected among them.

2 This of established may be applied to other metaphors, as well as that of
building or planting.

3. Though the metaphor be not changed, the act is a different act, which shows
a different means to be used for the end intended by the Apostle in the thing
spoken of.

1 The text clearly proves it, that this order generally, for the rooting,
building, and establishing, is to be done by teaching: so says the holy Ghost,
As ye have been taught.

2 The adverb (...) shows, that in the quality of teaching was contained the
manner of receiving Christ; and shows, that as they differed in the receiving
of Christ, so in the teaching Christ.

2 General. From verse. 11 of chap. 2. to the end of verse. 11 of chap. 3. the
Apostle applies himself only to speak unto the rooting of rooted Christians.

1 Showing there was to be a spiritual Circumcision wrought in them, by which
is occasioned a putting off the body of the sins of the flesh, verse. 11. which
consists in a spiritual sense given them of sin and nature, and an abominating
of them required of those made members.

2 After this they are to be baptized, in which they are said to be dead, and
risen with him through the faith of the operation of God.

3 After this, verse. 13, 14, 15, ye have what Christ has done for those thus
baptized, and how he is to be preached unto them.

4 From verse. 16. ye have the end contained, the abolition of ceremonies,
things which usually were a trouble to the weak, or the infant-society of the
Saints.

5 From chap 3. verse. 1, to the end of verse. 8, he provokes the Saints to a
spiritual trial of themselves, their estates and conversations, and shows what
accompanies true regeneration in the Saints. V. 9. he gives the reason, they
have put off the old man with his deeds, making a public renunciation of the
deeds of the flesh before baptism, ver. 10. and have put on the new, that is,
by covenants, promises, by sacraments, in which all are alike interessed: for
nor Greek nor Jew, circumcision nor uncircumcision, Barbarian nor Scythian,
bond nor free, but Christ is all in all. Application in these verses predicted
and applied, ye have generally set down what is to be taught the society of
infants, and what is required of them, though the first Epistle of John is that
which solely concerns the Infants of the Church; the Apostles, as they saw
occasion, writing sometimes more largely of the duty of one Society to one
Church then to another, as they saw occasion required in the Churches estate
they wrote unto.

The second part of Ministry, or the Society of Young men, as concerned in
verse. 12, 13.

1. Is intimated in a second putting on of Christ, which is to be according to
the elect of God, as holy and beloved ones.

2. This is to be manifested in the inward spiritual operations of Christ in
the mind, set out in bowels of mercy, kindness, humbleness of mind,
meekness, long-suffering, ver. 13. Forbearing one another, forgiving one
another; If any man have a quarrel against any man, even as CHRIST forgave
you, so do ye also.

1. In these do I suppose are contained the things chiefly to be pressed on
the Saints of the Pastors Society, and to reprove those that fail amongst them
in obedience hereunto.

2. Not that here, or in any other Epistle in particular, is all to be taught
in this Society; but the whole Scripture pertaining to that Society, is, that
is only sufficient to instruct them to, and fit them for the perfecting
Ministry.

3. 1 Ep. of John is only for the Rooting of Saints.

1 Ep. of Peter, for the building up of Saints.

Ep. to the Hebrews, for the stablishing of Saints, which here now as the Third
general Part of Ministry; comes to be handled; and is contained in Verse 14,
and Verse 17. In which Christ is to be put on in Charity, which is said, To be
above all.

First, This is said to be the bond of perfection; here, I suppose the word
(...), has respect to Church bonds, by which men were bound to Christ in some
public way, and to one another.

Secondly, Verse 15. they should have the peace of God rule in them.

Thirdly, The Word of God dwell richly in them, in all wisdom, teaching and
admonishing one another in Psalms, Songs, Hymns.

1. It is clear, these things were not to be applied to the Society of Infants,
nor were all believers capable of it, only the men in Christ are here spoken
unto, who were to have these things in a more abundant and excellent way then
others were, and whether these Psalms were the Scripture-Psalms only, or
whether those of that Society only were to be spiritually gifted therein; I
shall not undertake to determine, they were to be eminently gifted doubtless in
all grace.

That that makes this doctrine the more clear; is,

1 That with these he ends his doctrine to the Church, there being no other
Society but these in or of the Church.

2 Hence he applies himself to domestic duties in the family.

1. Verse 17, 18. is set down what is required of the wife to the husband, and
husband to the wife.

2. Verse 20, and 21. what is required of Parents to children, and Children to
parents.

3. From ver. 22, to ver. 25. Servants duties to their Masters.

4. Cap. 4. ver. 1. the duty of Masters to their Servants.

5. Ver. 2, and 3. Family duties to God are set down to be exercised in
private; which are; 1 Prayer. 2 Watchfulness. 3 Thanksgiving.

6. Ver. 4. Especially they are to pray for, 1 The Gospel. 2 The Ministers
thereof.

Now from public Duties in Church, and private in the family, he comes to
show what is to be done toward those that are without the Church, Ver. 5. and
6.
1. In respect of their behavior, it must be in wisdom.

2. In their Speech, it must be seasoned with Salt.

And thus having showed them, how things ought to be with them in the
Gospel-way, he comes to show them how things were with him; knowing they would
be desirous of his welbeing, that showed such a desire to them in him of theirs.

1. And thus he leaves in general, to the report of Tychicus and Onesimus,
Verse. 7, 8, 9.

2. Verse. 11. He tells who minister with him at Rome, Verse. 12, 13. Commends
Epaphras, Verse. 14. Remembers the salutes of Demas and Luke. Verse. 15. Salutes
the Laodiceans. Verse. 16. Commands the Reading of the Epistle. Verse. 17. Minds
Archippus of his ministry. And Verse. 18. Concludes the Epistle.

19. For the setting of the Gospel state up, it must be set up as in the
beginning.
1. There must be a Mother Church, in which the true form is to be set up.

2. Then there must be Elders ordained, and sent forth to those Cities first
that will receive the Gospel, Matthew. 10.23. Luke 8.6. Christ preached in the
villages, preparing for the Gospel-Government. Ezekiel. 47.8. as under the Temple
state the warers were prophesied to be.

3. And then a way and means is offered to those other Towns, that are capable
of this Government, to set it up in them also.

4. Before this can be set up, Parochial bounds ought to be dissolved.

5. Where are not public meeting places, there any convenient private houses
are to be made use of.

6. That those Ministers that are not of the Church ministry, be not admitted
to baptize, or administer the Sacraments of the Lords Supper in the place they
exercise.

8. That they are to be subject to the Presbytery of that Church, they are
Members of, that so they preach no other Doctrine, but what is to be taught
without the Church.

7. That the Ministers, without the Church, be Members of some Church near
them, or not be admitted to minister, to which they shall minister, preparing
men for it. It is observable, there was no standing ministry in the Apostles
time, but where were Churches of Saints in Communion; the other ministry, if
they were persecuted in a place, may leave it.

9. Those that teach without the Church, should be maintained by the state
allowance, Tithes dissolved, Gal. 6.6. Let him that is catechized, communicate,
etc. which without the Magistrates help, would not be done by unbeleevers, who
love their Gold not their God.

10. The Church Teachers should freely be maintained by their Members, as by a
freewil-offering.

11. The whole of the Papal, Episcopal, Presbyterial Form, is to be dissolved.

1. This was done in the Mosaical Government, and shall it not be in the
Antichristian?

2. Christ says, no man patcheth a new garment with an old piece, no not a
piece.

3. It seems to me plain, That the single Antichristian Minister, Matthew. 25.18.
had nothing Gold but the Talent he hid, which was the Word in a strange tongue;
or if any thing else, it was and will be taken from him.

4. It is well observed by One, Deum solere uno sigillo varias materias
signare. The truth whereof we may see in the two Temples before Christ; the
first was burnt and destroyed by the Chaldees; so the first Temple estate by
persecution, was destroyed by Antichrist, and the Heathen Emperors; the second,
is builded by Zorubabel, which is by Interpretation Fan Babble; which is as
truly to be verified now, as then, and more fully in us, then them; for they
did not indeed Fan Babble, but those set up the second Temple under the Gospel,
shall do it.

5. Revel. 21.5. Behold, I will make all things new. All things, not some, in
the business of the new Jerusalem, are to be made new. The manner how it shall
be done, is set down by Peter, and men cannot prevent it, but those are happy
that further it, 2 Pet. 3.10. The Heavens and the host of them, they pass away,
and are dissolved, and burnt up. I shall, God willing, in my Exposition of the
Revelation, speak of the new Earth. Verse. 11. Then there is the new Heaven
follows, in which dwells in Righteousness; so that it is a most certain
truth, all present Forms, Government, and ways of worship must be, yea, shall
be dissolved before, yea, and for the advancement of the true way of Gospel
worship. Revel. 6.12, 13, 14. shows you the time when this shall be, and that
is under the opening of the sixth Seal, in which, we at this instant are under,
and see the effects produced, according to the truth of the great God revealed;
however the mockers and scoffers of the world, have derided it; so that they
must and shall have their mouths stopped, and be made ashamed at it.

Object. In many great Towns and places, where have been a faithful, painful
Ministry, and are a godly people to constitute a Church in, they have but one
public meeting place; and how then can the several Ministries be set up there
in.

Resp. The Synagogues were the places the Apostles preached in, to men without,
and separated the Disciples to private houses. In which, for the purest times
of the Church, the Saints were ministered unto, and had no public meeting
places as now. Which order is so clearly set out unto us in Scripture, that it
cannot be excepted against, Acts 28.30.

The necessity hereof appears.

1. From the confusion in the Church, and Church-Ordinances; in which, as they
are now exercised, nothing is done to the Saints edification.

1. Men without the Spirit, and without understanding, cannot pray, nor praise
God; but mind the things sung or said, in a carnal manner against the mind of
God, they are dead to God, to whom God is not a God, nor they a people.

2. In Preaching to Saints, the Doctrine to be preached to the world, cannot be
to edification.

2. And as there is a necessity of dividing the World from Saints, so Saints
from Saints; without which can be no right edification among the Saints.

Illust. The Gospel is compared to Leaven; by degrees the lump; so the Gospel
is to be preached to men without, to leaven them, or gather them to the Society
of Saints, which would be gathered as yet into a few Churches. Now as the
Saints are increased, and fit matter of a church prepared, the Minister of the
place may require helpers to be joined with him for the constituting of the
church to be constituted.

Obj. The people will not endure it.

Resp. The people ordained to eternal life will rejoice in it: others that do
not, are not worthy of it.

In Hebr. chapt. 8.20. we have mention made of two covenants, the new and the
old; under which two covenants there are to be differing administrations; the
one of which cease in the being of the other. But before we proceed, we may
(for the better understanding of things) consider the covenant as it was made
with Abraham, Genesis 17.2. and 7. which is made to one man, a believer in Christ.
Galat. 3.16. to Abraham and his seed were the promises: he says not, And to
seeds, as of many; but as of one, and to thy seed, which is Christ.

Now the administrations of divine Worship were exercised by the firstborn of
the Family: they were the Priests during its time of standing.

The Apostle in this chapter speaks of the state of the covenant as after it
was made to Moses, ver. 9. when God took them by the hand to lead them out of
Egypt. Now in this there was (in respect of the administrations and extent of
it) such a difference, as if it had been another covenant.

1 It is made to the whole Nation, Exodus: 6.6, 7. Say to the children of Israel,
etc. I will take you to me for a people, and I will be to you a God.

2 The Priesthood is now a National Priesthood, ver. 3.

3 The sacrifices are for all the people, Heb. 8.37.

4 The Tabernacle is the standing place for public worship to the whole
people, mentioned ver. 5. Which clearly proves, that God respected the
administrations under the covenant, as made to the Israelites nationally in
Egypt, and not as made with Abraham before; under which the people lived until
John the Baptist.

Ver. 9. He shows that the covenant made with man under the Gospel should be
far differing from that made with the Israelites in Egypt, and therefore called
a new covenant, to which the old should give place, decay, and vanish away.

1. The ministry under the new covenant (or rather, new administrations of the
covenant) is said to be a more excellent ministry, Christ himself being the
high Priest and Mediator, and not Moses, intimated ver. 2. nor Aaron.

2. Having better promises, Exodus 6. v. 6. it was to bring them from the
burdens of the Egyptians, and redeem them, and bring them into the Land of
Canaan: This to be heirs of the Kingdom of heaven, and redeemed from hell.

3. A better covenant, in that under it they have the Laws of God written in
their hearts and minds: under Moses, in stony Tables.

4 Showing, That God would under these administrations have none to be his
people in communion, but such as had his Law, that is, of Faith, written in
their hearts: The Law was given by Moses; but grace and truth came by Jesus
Christ. And so shows, that the Gospel covenant, or the administrations of the
covenant under the Gospel, admitted not of a National Society; and in this the
new covenant is said to excel the old; this being the ground of the covenant,
and being to go before it.

This is illustrated, in that when Christ set up the Gospel Church, he called
men out of the National Church, requiring that men first should be taught and
believe, before they be added to the church: in which was plainly the vanishing
of the old, and the administrations of the new set out. So that to maintain a
National church, is to abolish the new, and set up the old covenant, and is
Judaising, being quite contrary to the tenor of the Gospel administrations.

Ver. 10. The holy Ghost sets down the time when the administrations of the new
covenant take place, that is, after those days: viz. after that Moses Ministry
should have an end, then the new covenant should take place and begin.

Ver. 11. It is said, They shall not teach every man his neighbor, and his
brother, saying, Know the Lord (as under the old covenant,) for all shall know
me from the greatest to the least.

The Eposition some make of these words to elude the true sense of them, is,
That in the last days there shall be such abundance of knowledge, that all shall
know God; but if we apply the words before or after this, its easily refuted,
as that all shall have it written in their hearts, or that God will be merciful
to the unrighteousness of all, and not remember their sins any more, is a thing
I think that none will dare affirm, when all that have this knowledge here
spoken of written in their hearts shall have.

1. Note, that these words were to be fulfilled after the date of the old
Covenant, under the Administrations of the New, in the Apostles times or in all
times to come, in which the true Gospel-Dispensations under the New Covenant
shall be administered, and have no respect more to time to come, more then the
Apostles times past.

2. The words, all shall know me, are not to be understond only as a prophecy
of the abundance of knowledge to be revealed of God under the Dispensation of
Grace: but also are to be understood as a conditional thing that was required
of all, even the least Christian, the Infant in Christ, before he could enjoy
Communion of the Gospel. Administrations with the Saints; this is clearly held
out, 1 John 2. l 3. I write to you fathers (who are here said to be the
greatest,) because ye have known him which is from the beginning; and then
after, I write to you little children, because ye have known the Father, (and
these are here called the least,) who without this knowledge are incapable of
being writ unto, or preached unto in the Gospel way, how much more unfit are
they then for other more spiritual exercises.

And hence the Apostle shows, That the New Covenant requires the least
Christian to have the knowledge of God in him, or he is not to be admitted a
Church Member, or accounted a Covenanter with God.

This knowledge and Communion with God shall have forgive-of sins and iniquities
with it, which make the knowledge of God sweet in its soul to it.

Quere, Are none to be admitted Members under the New Covenant, but those have
the Law written in their hearts, and have their iniquities pardoned?

Resp, All that are true Members have, and all that are admitted should have.

2. The condition of making Members must be something visible, the Church being
not able to judge of the invisible estate of men.

3. Here the condition is contained in the 11. Verse, which is, That the least
Member shall have a knowledge of God, and be able to manifest it to the Church,
whether it be in his heart or not, God only knows.

3. To make him a Covenanter, he is to profess his faith in God, according to
the knowledge he has of God, in which he is said to take God to him to be his
God, and so became a visible Member of the Church.

4. This Covenant was made with the Gentiles, drawn from Idolatry, 2 Cor. 6.16.
And after the great defection made under Antichrist, it comes to be made again
at the beginning of the estate of the new Jerusalem, Rev. 21.3. which time is
yet to be.

I desire that it may be seriously considered, how this making National
Churches does wholly destroy, not only Christian privileges, but how it also
makes void much of the Scriptures, which are by this means as good as razed out
of the Book of God.

As in the Scriptures that speak of the world, as opposed to the Church.

1. I desire those that maintain National Churches, to show where the world is
in this Kingdom, that they account wholly to be of the Church or a Church. John
15.29. I have chosen you out of the world, therefore the world hates you. John
17.9, I pray not for the world: Verse. 6. I pray for them thou have given me out
of the world. 1 Cor. 11.32. That ye should not be condemned with the world, and
elsewhere, be ye not conformed to this present evil world.

2. I desire to know how these Scriptures can be made right use of, or be
rightly applied to the use of Saints, until these are divided one from the
other.

3. How this does hinder the Manifestation of the Calling of Saints, and the
Manifestation of their love to God and Graces.

4. Now it hardens wicked men, while there is no difference made between Saints
and them in Church Privildges, and how it suddens the hearts of Saints.

5. How the Glory of God in the Saints is obscured by these means, whom God
has endowed, as it were, with glorious light to shine to the world by.

6. How the government of the Church can otherwise be then confused, whiles
carnal men are admitted, who by no means cannot bear the yoke, or tread the
path of the Lord Jesus.

7. How this destruction, 1 Cor. 10.32. gave no offense, nor to Jew, nor to
Gentile, nor to the Church: here the Jew and Gentile are set down in opposition
to the Church, which the Saints must not offend, according to the Apostles
mind, can be observed among us.

Application to Ministers, to take heed of consenting to these things; this was
the great abomination Antichrist was to do in the world, even to make desolate
the Church, pull down her walls, pull up her marks, and destroy her bounds.

2. In this grand defection Antichrist has no less part in England then in
Rome; and Popery is never destroyed while this remains, nor Reformation made

3. Nor will God make any peace with the people of this Land, until this be
reformed, and the Church liberties and privileges be restored, 2 King. 2.22.

Appl. 2. I shall end all in the exhortations of Haggai to the Magistrate, as
being that properly pertains now to you, as then to them to whom God
immediately sent it.

1. The house lies waste.

2. God ends the Prophesies with the Gentiles, Haggai 2.22, 23 in which God
would let you know this book concerned the Gentiles, and that the Scripture is
never fulfilled, until done among them; That that Scripture speaks will be
found true, and no lie, in these days, amongst us, which some say is only
proper to us of Europe: O ye of the Magistracy, arise, begin to build the Lords
house.

2. To the Ministers, Dan. 9.27. for the over spreading of abominations he
shall make it desolate.

2. This desolation is said to be to the end of the war, that is, that war that
Antichrist shall make with the Saints, v. 26. Rev. 13.7

3. This desolation is to be until the confirmation, and that determined, be
poured on the desolate.

Quest. 1. If the Church be not in her desolate estate?

2. Where or when that time is out?

3. If our War be not part of that wrath said to be determined to be poured out.

4. Where while the Church is left to its desolation, it be not a certain token
all is not poured out; and the farther that time is off, the more wrath is to
come?

5. Where those hinder the restoration of the Temple-estate, are not the only
causes of our lying under this heavy estate?

6. Where if the Church be once restored, God would not immediately give us
peace and mercy? try the Lord in this thing, and you will be blessed that trust
him.

7. Do not fear the Lords providing means, comforts, and mercy necessary, the
Lord will not be wanting to us in his own way, and break us better in Gods way,
then all earthly good in any other: that which generally we have had other way
have come to little.

Appl. 3. To the People: Do not you show your selves backward in Haggai 1.2?
This people say, the time is not come to build the Lords house.

1. God has cursed you as the Jews, v. 6, 9.

2. If you show your selves willing, God will then bless you as them, Hag.
1.11. Mat. 12.28. Take my yoke upon you, my yoke is easy.

Appl 4. To the Soldiers. 1. Be faithful in your undertakings, be humble under
your victories, be thankful for your deliverances; labor to do all you do for
the glory of God, and the advancement of the Gospel, that the Lords cause
suffer not reproach, and the Lord may give you leave to see the glorious
goodness will at last arise to this poor harrowed Nation from your hard labor,
and be made partakers of the Lords grace your selves, and do it not for others
only, that only is able to sati fie you for your loss of Blood, your lack of
Means, and restless pains. O look on this as your arrears, and you shall find
in God a better play master then any you have yet met withal, and from whom you
have much more to receive then from the Estate, and with whom your service is
more acceptable then with man, as has been abundantly witnessed; keep close to
him, you have had, and may again have much need of him, and can do nothing
without him: let not the world nor conscience be able justly to say, ye do any
thing against God, and be sure that in what ye do for God, ye shall not want
help to do it, and at last God will make your enemies love you, and the Saints
of God will pray for you, and love you in the Lord always

Appl. To the City, Rev. 16.19. The City of the Nations fell. This is the
falling time; if ye fall from Antichrist to Christ, it is a happy fall, if not,
a woeful one is predicted, in you is found all the blood of the English Martyrs,
the injustice and pride of the land.

Appl. To men of differing Judgments:

1. Ye that are for Episcopacy, in this is the Angel Ministry ye contend for,
Rev. 2.1. cast out of the Church as extraordinary, brought in again.

2. Ye for Presbytery, in this ye have the true Church Presbyters, they
governing jointly the Church.

3. Ye for Independency, here is a Church governed by its own Officers, within
it self, without any others to rule in it.

4. Ye Antinomianists; here is the gospel purely preached to the Saints, the
Law to unbeleevers.

5. Ye Seekers, here is a Church Government a long time hid, now to be revealed
according to your expectation.

6, Ye Anabaptists, as the Assembly say, the constituting of the Church was and
is to be of Believers, which are after to be baptized, as confessed to be done
in the Apostles day.

So that without all question, when the true way of God shall be revealed, the
spirits of all that are led of God, shall be gathered sweetly, unanimously, and
gladly into communion one with another again, though now divided, that Ephraim
shall not envy Juda, nor Juda, Ephraim more; which is that which is only sought
for by me, and to be sought for of all that love the Lord and his Saints in
truth, and expect mercy from him at his appearing.

FINIS.

