An Excellent Piece OF Conceipted Poesy; Divided into two Subjects: A VOICE
from the VAULT; AND AN AGE FOR APES.

With other exquisite Ayers, and select Fancies; no less ingeniously than
modestly descanting on these times:

And extracted from the choicest Wits of our Age.

Opera nostra tales fructus afferant, ut neque in Lectoris vitium, nec Auctoris
convitium redundent.

LONDON, Printed by R. Hodgkinsonne, and are to be sold by Tho. Vere, at the
Angel without Newgate, 1658.

THE HONEST GHOST, OR A VOICE FROM THE VAULT.

-- In noxam sectatur and umbra. LONDON, Printed by Ric. Hodgkinsonne, 1658.

To my Stationer Health, Wealth, and Liberty.
IT is a frequent fashion in this Nation
To publish Books in Term time, not Vacation:
But I would have my Reader thus much learn,
That Westminsters vacation is my term.
Now some will say, the Term does wondrous well
To vend such fly-blown works as will not sell;
But mine is none such, with confidence I tell it,
'Twill vend it self, it needs no Term to sell it:
Health then and Wealth unto my Stationer,
And Heavens preserve him from a Censurer.
For Health and Wealth do well, yet we do see
These relish harshly without Liberty:
Where if he suffer for me there is small reason
But Stationer and Author have one Prison.
Yea, but will some say there were danger in it,
For so my Pate might plot and he might print:
But take my word, we will do the State no wrong,
But be as merry as the day is long.
For if the World a Prison be, then we
Who lodge in the Fleet, are but as worldings be:
The only difference, as I take 't, is this,
Their Prison's something larger then ours is.
Which though it be more spacious, yet our care
For the World is less then wretched wormelins are;
Whose highest aim is shame, and deepest drift
Is how to starve their bodies by their thrift.
Come then my Stationer, and make thy station
In this same petty corner of our Nation;
Where though we live by Worldings unregarded,
We shall be kept like Princes, double-warded.
Come then my Boy, it is many good man's fate
To make restraint their Tent, their glass their gra^e.
To the ingenuous State-Censor.
MY younger years composed these rural Rymes
To tax the errors or corrupted times:
When we a State-Monarchicall possessed,
Which Government our Politics held best.
Pandora's Box poured forth such plenteous store
Upon our Isle, she could enjoy no more.
We knew not then what Drum nor Trumpet meant,
No Garrison lodged in our Continent.
Arms and Alarms were strangers to our Coast,
No Civil-Warre, nor State-imbroiling Host
Disturbed our calm repose: Phebean rays
Of glorious Peace shone on our halcyon days.
Our Islander might sit and pass his time
Under his Fig Tree, or broad-spreading Vine,
And fear no Foe to reap what he had sown,
Or seize on that which Conquest made his own.
Kings reigned secure: Scaffolds were reared then
For Scenes of Pleasure, not for heading men.
Our peaceful Olives then their fatness showed,
Our trine and Oil increased, our Cups o're-flow'd.
Each State knew then its proper residence,
The Lower gave their Lords preeminence.
Platonic parity was then as far
From us, as now the Rules of Princes are.
High Powers on Ours had such an influence,
As every object satisfide the sense.
So as no sorrain State observed our bless
But envide and admired our happiness:
And in that glowing Envy might conclude
"We wanted naught but civil gratitude.
For what did fulness of our bread bring in
But carnal liberty and height of Sin?
Vice rid on's Foot-cloth; Churches grew to be
Nurses to Sacrilege and Symonie.
More Tares then Wheat were sown in every field;
Our unprun'd Vines did only wild grapes yield.
The Countrey-Cormorants begot rich heirs,
And made Sons Prodigalls by Fathers cares.
The City-Cheats made Fools of Country men,
And with their Tweaks they gratified them.
The Court a Mint of Congies and quaint words,
Of Silken-civet-comfit-curtain-Lords:
Who in their quest of favors took delight,
And gag't their Honor to decline a fight.
Imposts fed State-Imposters, Pattentees
Hackney'd the Public with Monopolies.
These made MVSAEVS bustle in this sort
With Church-abuses, City, Country, Court.
These Poems then you may suppose of His
Reflect on former times, and not on this:
For had he meant that Task, Heed drawn all Shapes,
Like Protean Pictures, save Assembly Apes:
Whose forms are such, should He be catechis'd,
He knows not how those Monkeys are disguised.
Twenty four Harvests now are spent and gone
Since This received its first Conception;
So as you may suspect there is something in it
That kept this Work so many years from print.
Which had it been continued to these Times,
Had made an English Iliad for high Crimes:
High-swelling Crimes, which rightly understood,
Might Stage a Rubric Story ach't in blood:
Where Presbyterian-Independent-Levell
Make work to enlarge the Kingdom of the Devil.
But who stalks too near Truths heels (under favor)
May have his teeth quite struck out for his labor.
To all, or none.
LIving on earth, I silenced my wrong;
Now shut from earth, my griefs have found their tongue.
Which to make good, behold my wronged Ghost
Having both friends and hope of freedom lost,
Re-visits earth, of purpose to reclaim
Such as do live unto their Countries shame.
I aim at all, high and inferior men,
Appearing now to these, and then to them;
Whose sight if it affright, know that it is
Their Guilt, and not my Ghost procures this.
But see, some great men swell! Why, let them burst,
I slight their fury, let them do their worst:
On earth they did all that they could unto me,
Now I Am secure, they can no more undo me.
The Honest Ghost, or a voice from the Vault.
Dum video, rideo.

O Ferrea aetas.

Dum moror hic, morior

Exilium virtus patitur.

Quid tu si pereo?

Adesdum. mitte manum in Marsupium.

Parthenius Osiander Auth:

full page woodcut illustration,jail with jailor and prisoners

The honest Ghost, OR A Voice from the Vault.
THrice to the sin-sick world
my Muse has come,
And has been thought
too bitter unto Some,
Who, for to show how much
they 're discontent,
Have meant to keep me tongue-ty'd by restraint.
But can this do it? No, I 'm same I was,
And though my earthen vessel cannot pass
Nor pierce these walls of stone where I 'm restrained,
And for twelve mon'ths with patience remained,
I have a Ghost, as now it shall appear,
Sojourns abroad, while I am caged here.
For what can these spruce Silkworms do at me?
Shut me from air of high-priz'd liberty:
And in this vast and irksom residence,
Remove me from the object of each Sense?
For first my Eye no object views of State,
But such as to and fro pass by my grate:
And for my Ear, no object does assail her,
But noise of Keys, and clamor of a Jayler:
And for my Smell, because naught likes me well,
I catch a cold, whereby I may not smell:
And for my Taste, my palate does decline
From relishing ought pleasant at this time:
And for my Touch, I feel naught but distress,
And more I smile, the more it does oppress:
Yet for all this, I do enjoy as much
In the faculties of Eye, Ear, Smell, Taste, Touch,
As he who glories most; and you shall hear
How I enjoy them too, if you 'll forbear.
I have a grate, where I do see men pass,
And this same grate I make my looking-glass,
And there I see, and I do laugh to see
(For only laughter now is granted me)
An aged gray-beard, whose dimensions have
Traced half their Pilgrim journey to his grave,
Ambiciously aspiring, as if he
Should never grapple with mortality.
He plots and projects, poor decrepit fool,
Lest his insatiat Messaline should scoule,
To gain such honor as his Lady choseth,
Which got, he dies, and by the bargain loses.
Or else perchance, some high-priz'd Favorite
Presents his Suit and works him this despite,
And must forgo his place by his esteem,
Although he know not what the Office mean:
Neither concerns this Him, for know you what?
It is not place but profit he aims at;
What matters it how he discharge it then?
He is above the privilege of men;
For his firm grounds are reared on stone, not sand,
And shrink he must, that dare him countermand:
Yet is it strange to see how he, whose place
Resigned is to one new-crept in grace,
Would gull himself, and bear the world in hand
He is advanced to place of more command,
Although I 'm sure he could be well content
To keep his Place and be no An easy Inquest of Inquiry may inform the
ingenious Reader touching this discovery.
President.
O how this tickles me, to see a Swad,
Who never so much as education had
To make him generous, advanced to state:
And like a Parachito 'gins to prate
More then he ever knew or ever read,
Yet must this grand-Sot be authorized,
And held so grave a Statist, as if he
Were the only man on earth for policy!
Nor am I so restrained, but if I please
I may behold variety of these;
For, wearied with this counterfeit of State,
Unto another corner of my grate
I straight betake me; where I may behold
A Bulk of honor, like that Ass of gold
Which bore the name of Isis, reared on high,
Yet when I view him with an inward eye,
I find naught in him but an outward show,
Nor care I much if He so much did know;
For all the Honor which this man possesses,
As sometimes, in his cups, himself confesses,
D^riv'd their late beginning (as it is said)
From mere extortion in Zacheus trade:
But, till he change his habit, I forbid
That he ere do as good Zacheus did.
Of whom, I think, it may be truly said,
That he 'll prove Banquerout in every trade;
For he has shown himself a malefactor
Both while he was a Statesman and Contractor.
But, besides him, some other Foists there be
Deserve a censure full as well as he:
But the State is wise, and with an expert hand
Can squeeze these Sponges who do soke our Land.
Another personage I see approach,
And what he is, I guess by Arms on the Coach;
A great-Man sure, and yet for ought I see
He cannot be of great antiquity,
For the Coat he bears, implies it is not long
Since he bore arms, or the Herald did him wrong:
Who may He be then? I durst pawn my life,
One that is honored merely for his wife;
So as the only stay of his affiance
Supported is by means of his alliance:
Great must he needs be then, he cannot choose,
If Mushroms by his means be honored thus.
But see, good Malecontent, who 's he goes there?
I Will call him to me, Pray good Sir draw near;
He Will not come, He does not like a grate,
Though he had self-same Prospect but of late,
Yet I 'll display him to, and in a word
Uncase you Pomander sweet-sented Lord.
He 's such a Sage as he would be thought by man,
A grave, judicious, learned Justinian,
A Column of the State, and such an one
As all our Isle were worse if he were gone;
Yet hear me and i will tell you what he is,
One who has wronged the State by rearing his;
A subtle Censor, who his passion smothers
Till it burst out to the ruining of others,
Wherein he shows his spirit most of all,
By base insulting over a wretches fall;
A Neuter Lord, who walks as in a mist
And shows himself a cunning formalist,
A mere State-Rhetorician, whose desire,
Having now gorged himself, is to retire
From business of State, because he fears
That some ere long will have him by the ears
For courses indirect, which he would shun,
By living privately un-look'd upon.
But lest this should not hit, he has conveyed,
And, by his Art, a clear conveyance made
Of all his Lands, for he observes the time
Apt to take notice of a rich man's crime;
Which to prevent, he thought to take this course,
That He who begged his state might fare the worse;
Yet I 'm resolved, as widows tears and cries,
Sent from their voice and from their doleful eyes
Seldom return without revenge from high,
Like feathers in the air his state will fly
From his deputed Heir, and so decline
From him and his unto another line.
Yet this I wish not, but would rather see
His Seed succeed in their posterity,
That grand-oppression, that same crying sin,
May never survive in his, but die in him;
So shall that name which he deserved here
Appear like ashes scatt'red here and there.
Now Eyes what see you? Is the grate so strait
As ye can see no object? Yes, deceit
In every corner does encounter me,
Men be and seem not, seem what least they be;
For be it Courtier that I eye, whose sense
Consists in Sent and Sycophants pretense,
I find no part in him of that esteem
To prove him same he outwardly does seem;
For where He lives it is the only fashion
To gull the simple with a Protestation:
His life is formal wholly, and he owes
Far less to substance then he does to shows.
Or be it Citizen, though he protest
The wares he shows you first are still the best,
Because he knows you 're of so brave a mind,
The choice you make is best, that you can find;
Yet some evasion still he has in store
To gull you now as he has done before:
Wherefore believe him not although you grieve him,
For you deceive your self if you believe him.
Or be it Countryman, whose simple seeming
Would in opinion clear him of misdeeming,
Yet in his cottage has he learned this art,
To make his Tongue a stranger to his Heart;
So as all States this maxim learned have,
He cannot live that knows not to deceive.
Thus may you see, though I be lodged here,
Where scarce one glimpse of Sun-light may appear,
That I have sundry objects to employ me,
Which sometimes, I confess, so over-joy me,
As they in me leave such impressions after,
That to my self I 'm often enforced to laughter.
Nor can your eyes dart half so far as mine
In the survey of this corrupted time,
For were the Curtains never so closely spread
Where Livia with her Drusus wantoned,
The Coach close shut, the eyes of men to dim,
Yet know thus much, she is so light within,
As she no more her wantonness can cover,
Then if she only had heavens arch above her.
NOw to my second-Sense, if you 'll draw near,
I will make known unto you what I hear.
I hear, and by no mean intelligence,
That Barbicon is troubled with the French,
And are made famulists, as some suppose,
Because they speak so strangely through the nose:
But I do hear more serious news than these,
And you shall hear them briefly, if you please.
I hear of One who has been long pent up,
And, with his Lady drunk of sorrows cup,
For some egregious crime at first committed,
With punishment enjoined them, as befitted,
Are to be freed now and quite released,
As if both blood and Whoordom were appeased
By some few years restraint! But I do know
Superior powers will grieve it should be so;
For tell me, can that liberty be given
On earth, which never was allowed by heaven?
Shall Naboths blood cry for revenge and have it?
Shall Abels cry for vengeance and receive it?
Shall snarling Curs, as sacred stories tell,
Lick up the blood of wicked Jezebel,
To show how every creature seems to smother
Their just revenge, whose hand 's deep dipped in murder?
And shall These purchase freedom, or obtain
Such favor to review the light again?
Shall Barbarous Nations, where did nere appear
That glorious light which shows her beauty here,
Enact such Laws, enjoin such punishment
On persons that are held incontinent?
Shall savage beasts, who measure their delight
By satisfying of their appetite,
Hate to partake in love with more than one,
And either live with that or live with none?
Shall ayrie birds so sort them to their make,
That they will sooner die then they will take
Themselves to others? Yea, shall every creature
Perform the proper office of their nature?
And shall man, freight with knowledge and with reason,
Act against God and Nature such high treason?
No, Heavens forbid; what once was said, say I,
We have a Law, they by the Law should die.
Yet if compassion move you to assent
To give them all their life time to repent,
(As ten lives were too little for such crimes)
Send them not forth to these depraved times,
But guard them close, as Lepers kept have been
Causing them cry aloud, We are unclean.
But this report I scarcely can believe it,
I will address me elsewhere then, and leave it.
I hear a noble-spirit that 's composed
Of all Heroic actions lies enclosed
In straitest durance; thus much sure I am,
Howsoever his cause be, he 's a Nobleman,
And one who may redeem the time is past,
And by his Prince as well as others graced,
For nere did any one more hopes inherit,
Or by descent express more native spirit.
But I do hear a Marriage like to be,
Which has procured this Lord his liberty;
What do I hear? Marriage his freedom get*
No, rather he by Marriage loses it;
For how can married-men their freedom get,
When never any was his own man yet?
But if his ayms be such, all hap betide
This lively Martialist and lovely Bride;
She, to retain his love at any rate,
He, to regain his love with Prince and State.
Nor do I fear, but when deserts are known,
Some shall mount high, who have been long kept down,
For carpet-honour still the bays must yield
To that which valor gains him in the field.
For tell me, tell me, you perfumed Squires,
Nere scorched with powder but licentious fires;
You, whose perfection does consist in this,
To complement a wanton for a kiss,
And glory more in such a booty gained
Then if you had a richer prize obtained;
What could you do, if you were to resort,
Leaving Loves charms, to raze some stately Fort?
Or grapple with some daring enemy
To fight or fall, no other remedy?
Sure, I persuade me, you would little care
For Bracelets twisted with your Mistresse-haire;
You would forget your congies, your salutes,
Fingring and quav'ring on your sweet tuned Lutes;
And learn to toss a Pike, and speak in thunder,
To make your unknown-valour seem a wonder:
But, I much fear me, this were hard to do,
When you should fight, you would begin to woo,
And sue for peace on any terms you could,
Than gain renown, as noble spirits should. When this Poem was first composed,
this noble personage whom the Author intends, was not to Liberty restored,
nor his Nuptials as then solemnized. Now since decased, and withal martial
renoun interred in the bed, of honor.

How happy were I, if I might but hear
All you sweet-sented-Gallants lodged there
In Albion's peaceful court, to be pressed over
And see each made a Soldier of a Lover!
What sad adieus would young don Phoebo take,
And kiss the ground for his Amicla's sake?
What heavy news were this to Cinna's ear,
To lose the presence of her spritely Clear?
What grief would this be to that new-wed-Lord,
Who on my conscience never unsheathed his Sword?
When he must leave his nuptial sheets scarce warm
With his delicious Dinah, and go arm
Those tender civet-corps, who never bore
Arms, but what Nature stored him with, before?
Zlid, I do think, should they receive command
To hoyse up Sail for Brabant out of hand,
The rumor of these news would be so bad,
As many of our younkers would run mad,
At least (like Ithacus) would feign them so
If so they might excused be to go.
For alas! so long has this same golden dream
Of Peace survived, they know not what wars mean;
Restie their arms, their armor rustie too,
And if they durst fight, yet they know not how.
But be there no rare Corants thou hear'st more
Related near thy grate? Yes, there be store,
Yet none so much perplex me, as to hear
The fall of One who once the State did steer,
And was thought worthy to enjoy his place,
Till profuse followers brought him to disgrace.
Of whom, Some say, he so corrupt has bin,
It were a sin to shed one tear for him;
Yet, in respect of merit, I lament
That he who was of such accomplishment,
Yea a combiner (as he seemed to me)
Of humane-learning and Nobility,
Should show himself so weak as to delight
More in preferring of his Favorite,
Than in discharge of the office where He sat,
Or to support the ruins of his State;
For worser name never any one did git
To reap so little benefit by it.
But there is something more than his disgrace
That moves me to compassionate his case,
And it is this; to note how others be
Taxed for as high and heavy crimes as he:
For his to such a number never did mount,
Yet who dare call these State-moaths to account;
He must be censured, these may live secure,
Pill Church and State to keep their hands in ure,
Suck Orphans blood, drain tears from widows-eyes,
And fill both heaven and earth with shriks and cries,
Join land to land, like privileged men,
They wipe their mouths and say, Who seeeth them?
Alas none! Who dare do it? They may be allowed
To do what ere they list, and in a Cloud
Walk as unseen, for very few there be
That see their hateful crimes, dare say they see.
Now, for my life, I cannot see the cause
Why this should be, unless they have the Laws
Under their girdle, meaning to draw blood
Not from themselves, but where they hold it good,
Which cannot be; So might I justly tax
The Law it self to be a nose of wax:
Wherefore I cannot think this is the matter,
For God forbid that Laws should learn to flatter,
But I do rather judge the case so stands,
They make their peace with great-ones under hand,
Whose awful countenance is the only cause
To stay the execution of our Laws.
If this be so! O ye who injure most
This peaceful State, hear my incensed Ghost,
Who like a Fury haunts you; cease for shame,
To lay upon your honors such a stain!
You should be like to Beacons on a hill
To give your Country notice of what ill
So ever assail's her, and by your wise care
Divert all dangers that might happen there.
You should be like to Pilots to direct
Our Ship of State, lest some should intercept
Our hopeful commerce, which (I heard last day
Even through my grate) was fallen to great decay,
So troubled were the Seas as none would venture
Their goods, because the Ports were hard to enter.
Yea, upon serious conf'rence I did hear
A rich french-Merchant on his Conscience swear
That by one loss which he of late sustained,
He lost more wealth then he three years had gained.
You should be like the Sun, to clear the mist
Of each sly state-exacting Alchimist,
State-Politician, base Monopolist,
Church-peace-disturbing-factious Novelist:
To these, like Besoms, it is your behoof
To show your selves, to sweep them from the roof
Of Albions special Palace; for this Crew
Are not to have least countenance from you:
You should be like bright Lamps, light to bestow
Both on your selves, and upon others too;
Upon your selves, that you may patterns seem,
Adding unto your Honor an esteem;
On others too, that they may take a view
Of what is good by taking note of you.
You should be Stars in this same darkesome night,
Where many walk in blindness, few in light;
That by the light which your examples give,
You may procure you love, teach them to live;
For many Batts we have and Night Owls too
Do more by night, than they by day dare do;
These are of Beliall, the sons of night,
For wicked men do ever hate the light,
As those who are sworn vassals to the Devil,
"Hating the light because their works are evil.
And what are these, but of that forlorn tribe
Who will dispense with conscience for a bribe,
So 't be in secret, sell the Orphans right,
Oppress the succourless by the arm of might,
Divide the Stake, and share in others State,
As an occasion I did hear of late.
"Three youths, all Brethren, when death had bereft them
"Of their deer Father, who good portions left them
"Amounting to nine hundred pound in all,
"Some legacies discharged, which were but small,
"Were by some friends, who wished their welfare, moved
"To take their Fathers Will, and get it proved.
"Along they went, and unto One they came,
"Who had authority to prove the same;
" One, who with long connivencie had made
"His place a Stale and mercenary Trade:
"The Will he reads, and sometimes questions them,
"To try if they were understanding men;
"Which had he found, without'en more ado
"I am resolved He had not used them so:
"But he observing that they were but weak
"Thought not to slip the occasion he might take
"To benefit himself, no matter how,
"And thus he gulled, and satisfied them too.
"Young men (quoth he) I have surveyed your state,
"But I must tell you, it is so intricate,
"As I protest, I either have no skill,
"Or I never saw a more defective Will;
"But leave your names recorded by my man,
"Some sev'n-night hence I Will do you the good I can.
"Thus as he wished, for that time he dispatched them
"By means of which delay, hark how he caught them.
"The matter, as he thought, might first be driven
"By them to whom the Legacies were given,
"With whom he dealt so cunningly, as they
"Either for fear or profit gave him way;
"On which foundation he his project reares,
"Extracting treasures from the Orphans tears.
"For when the time came, they repaired unto him,
"Expecting the good he promised to do them,
"But the Copy of his countenance was changed,
"His meer-pretended promises estranged,
"As one remorstess of the state of men,
"For in this manner he accosted them:
"Since you were with me, I perceive in Law
"This Will you brought is farcely worth a straw,
"For it relation has unto some other
"Which you out of your cunning seek to smother.
"But for as much as I do hereby gather,
"There was affection born you by your father,
"Both in respect of nature and of blood,
"Whereby I think he meant to do you good;
"I will persuade effectualy with these
"To whom your Fathers Will grants Legacies,
"And who, for ought that yet to me appears,
"May claim as much as you that are his Heirs,
"First, that all suits and differences might cease,
"And you to have a hundred pound a piece.
"Which, simple souls (for little did they know
"Their own estate) they condescended to,
"Whereby he gained, as I have heard it said,
"Five hundred pounds, all Legacies defraid.
Now was not this a brave Probationer
To keep a Register for Lucifer?
Could one devise an apter instrument
Those sullied wares of Machivell to vent
Than this Impostor, this Egyptian Rat,
Whom I have seen both whoop'd and houted at.
And must he live uncensur'd, and remain,
As if his spotless life were free from stain?
Must he enjoy his Place as he has done,
And hug oppression as he has begun?
Must he be cap'd and congi'd where you meet him,
When, on my conscience, I had rather beat him?
Must he retain opinion and esteem.
Yes; What Is the reason? He has to redeem
The name he lost; With what? With lads of gold;
Why then is reputation bought and sold.
Alas for grief, that gold should find a cover
To case vice in, and so to gild it over!
O so to gild is, but to gull the eyes,
And force poor virtue lend her robe to vice;
Had he by order been a Benedict,
And of such crying crimes as these convict,
He should have heard of nothing but confusion,
Till he had made a threefold restitution.
Had he, who thus from Justice did decline,
Used such corruption in Severus time,
Were he the greatest man within his Court,
Selling his people smoke, had smoked for it;
Or borne the highest sway in Xerxes days,
And fed his Client-Subjects with delays;
He had been sure, as in his life appears,
To have his hateful skin pulled ore his ears:
Yet has this got a Pardon, and much more,
By an imposed fine begged long before;
For this same worldly wise oppressing Hammon,
Has made him friends by his unrighteous Ma^mon,
Foreseeing well he stood on such false ground
His naughty cause would force him to compound.
Whence there appears great wrong, for it is sed
Such have his Fine as nere were injured.
The poore-ones suffer, and their wrong express,
But all their cries can get them no redress:
Which if our Prince (so gracious is he) knew
He Would cause him make what restitution's due,
And feed none such in their unbounded riot,
Who with their surfeits do the State disquiet.
But see, by talking of these corrupt Benches
I Would like to have forgot three of my Senses;
Nor were 't a wonder, Some by being crossed
In course of Justice all their Senses lost:
Well might I then forget my Senses too,
Having with unjust men so much to do;
But I have heard more than I mean to tell,
My Ear is closed, now must I to my Smell.
THis Sense in me does such delight begit,
As Mines of Treasures shall not purchase it;
In every secret corner of my Grate,
I can Smell some abuses in the State.
Here one both great, and of as strong a savor,
By going brisk and neat creepes into favor;
Another holds concurrence with the time,
And he will fall before he will not clime.
Here a brave spritely Youth, who, as they say,
Was but a Ladies page the other day,
And (such was femal bounty) lived upon her,
Refines my Smell with his perfumed honor.
There one who has more worship far then wit,
And more estate than pate to manage it.
Here one, a lovely Lady in her time,
Paints to repair those Lillies that decline,
Who old in years, but youthful in desire,
Cold in the pulse, but hot in fancies fire:
And her I Smell, for though her face be dyed
With purest colors, she is Mortified:
No Saint, yet earthly sented, for her breath
Proves she is mortal, and must cope with death.
But who coms here? I smell one near approaching;
What Madam would do, all the day long Coaching?
I know her well, she does a Husband want,
And 's held the only choice Court-visitant
For feminine discourse, though now and then
She talks so broad, she would shame a thousand men.
How far this Dame is out of knowledge grown!
Some ten years since she came but to the town
With a french fiddler and sung northern jigs,
And after sold false Tyres and Periwigs:
The very first inventresse of Goats hair,
Ceruse from Venice and adultrate ware;
Besides she purchased of a Jew of late
A fucus for the face at such a rate,
As had Some Ladies nere desired to try it
And paid well for 't, she had been loser by it;
Yet howsoere this Maquerella trade
She 's taken in Court and City for a maid,
Though I suspect, for I have heard it said,
She stood in need once of Lucina's aid:
But she is now grown great, what matter then,
If Lais like she cope with twenty men?
For there is none held now in all our Nation
So f^r^^^ give young Ladies education,
So g^a^efull in her carriage and discourse,
Though virtue say, she never heard a worse;
For she whom virtue guides, will never seek
With shop bought beauty to adorn the cheek.
But 'zlid who 's this smells in my nose so rank?
Pandora that same Lady Mountebank;
Who keeps a Catalogue of all diseases,
And choice receipts, to cure them as she pleases;
Beside^ Provocatives she has such plenty,
Her well-frequented Shop is never empty.
If an affection to a wench should move you,
She has a powder too will cause her love you:
Are you by night time troubled with the Mare?
About your great toe she will ty a hair:
Or subject unto dreaming? she 'll assure you
She has a sovereign oil will thoroughly cure you:
Or pained with aches? she has, in her pack,
A Balm that cured one tortured on the Rack:
Or hyde-bound? she has by her such a Stone
As it has power to raise the skin from bone:
She has a water, that in little space,
Will take away all wrinkles from the face,
Reube the blood, refresh a wasted brain,
And, like Medaeas charm, bring youth again.
And if you would believe what she will relate,
She 'll tell you of a cure she wrought of late,
Upon a great and noble person too,
Who struck in age, yet had a mind to woo
A fresh young girl; but he thought the sight
Of his white-haires would dash his motion quite:
Which to prevent, he to this Artist came,
Who by receipts as quickly cured the same;
Within four days all his white-haires were reft him,
Which I believe, for not a hair was left him.
Briefly, for all cures she so far surpasses,
Galen and Paracelsus were but Asses
Compared to her, since there be greater store
Of Maladies then have been heretofore;
When national diseases that did show
Their dire effects to some one place or two,
Are now grown universal; for since than,
French, Dutch, Italian, Neopolitan,
Have sought unto our Coast their Sores to carry;
Where they are grown in time hereditary.
But who is this I sent? A sack of dust
And mouldred ashes, yet as full of lust,
As if her stirring blood begun to melt
With thought of youth, and nere had winter felt.
Has she no Husband? me thinks she should stir him;
She has a Husband, but she cares not for him.
Those that are chaste affect no choice, but she
Would surfeit, had she not variety:
So strong 's her appetite, that in her plenty,
She glories more then if she were but twenty;
"Such sweetness brings sins custom, as once in,
"Delight in Sin, removes all sense of Sin.
More do I smell, for I am not invited,
But with my Smelling only am delighted;
A solemn bride-pie, which upon my life
Is for that fox-furd Burgomasters wife
Now gone to marry, and has hope to breed,
Yet has not one found tooth in all her head:
So as this youth struts by his old Trots side;
For all the world like Battus with his Bride.
But stand; for see his Crest displaid in paste,
One who nere loved the church, to church does haste
To spouse his youthful Bride, whom, as it is said,
He in her Husbands life time formalled;
Whose corpse scarce cold, no nor the poorest worm
Entered his coffin, nor his shroud-sheet torn,
His Obits done or funeral-torch burned out,
But she is so hot, she needs must go unto 't:
Where arm in arm and cheek to cheek they meet
Leaving her dead Lord to his winding-sheete.
Whence I conclude, as Sexton once did cry
With a loud voice to such as passed by,
"How short 's a woman's grief, within three days,
"Rosemary sprigs are turned to gilded Bays!
Thus may you see when I no Flowers may take,
Of Weeds for need I can a posie make
And smell them too, although they give no Sent
To cheer my Sense or tender her content.
But men that are restrained of liberty
Must make a virtue of necessity,
For unto choicer Gardens those may go,
And I 'll not say but they may gather too
Far choicer Flowr's, who never were restrained
Then we who are from common air detained.
Yet in this grate, although I be no Cat,
I can as quickly see and smell a Rat,
As he who may have liberty to range
From Court to the Burse, from Cheapside to the Exchange:
For it 's not Liberty that gives man sight,
Unless he use that Liberty aright.
For Some will s^e more in the darkest Cave
Than other Some who greatest freedom have;
Yea I may swear, since I was here confined,
How ere my eyes be, I 've a cleerer mind.
But have thou nothing to delight thy Smell?
But such rank weeds as these that sent not well?
Have thou no flowers, thy cloyed Sense to please,
But such unsavery Mugweed slips as these?
Yes, I have flowr's and odors too which give
Soul-solacing refreshment where I live:
But these are such as shall not be made known,
Lest by these weeds they should be overgrown,
Who from their loathed lives cast such a steem,
As with their venom they might poison them,
Which to prevent, prevention must be used,
Another proper Subject I have chus'd
Now to discourse on, yet I will not waste
Much time in satisfying of my taste;
For that were sensual, and would discover
I were no Prisoner but some brainsick Lover,
Who by his wanton mistress task'd to more
Then he could do, his spirit to restore,
Feeds on all dainties, that he strong might grow
Both in himself and for his mistress too.
HOw should I taste ought well, since I am placed
Where I can relish nothing but distaste?
For here in this vast Cave where I do live,
My very Consorts no contentment give:
Not the least beam of comfort shines upon me,
But like the Plague Sore all my friends do shun me.
The language of rude officers beside,
Whose base condition sticks not to deride
My hard mishap, and twit me to my face,
Saying, my wit brought me to this disgrace.
When feeble nature craves some small repast,
Though I be hungry, I had rather fast;
For my weak stomach cannot well digest
The meat I have so sluttishly addressed.
Which makes me muse and wonder much at these,
Who waste their state in superfluities,
Storing their luscious Epicureall board
With forain cates to feast some forain Lord;
Who will accept their love, as well he may,
And, with a french shrug, laugh and go his way.
Now by my hopes, there 's naught distasts me wors,
Then see a grand gull thus abuse his purse,
To gratify a Mounseur and his train,
Whom he perchance shall never see again.
For this Vitellian Lord, that he may please
That great-mans palate with varieties
Of all delicious meats, by Land and Sea
Sends his Purveiors out, who stored must be
What e're provision cost them, it is no matter,
Their Lord will sell his Land to fish the water.
Yet it is brave to sport and spend the time
In luscious fare, choice consorts, and rich wine;
To take delight in meats that best do please,
Fill Poland Salmons full of ambergreece;
And like that Prince of prodigal expense,
To please his Humor rather then his Sense,
When far from Sea, would only feed on fish,
But near the Sea, made flesh his only dish.
To revell unto midnight, and come home
A sleepie Sibarite, a heavy drone:
Next day address himself to some new task,
As make a set speech to his mistress mask;
Go see a Play, and when each Act does end,
Rise from his Stool to commune with his friend;
Of purpose to induce those that sit near
To think it 's State that they discourse of there;
When alas, poor Stage-gulls, they 'r so far from that,
As they never knew what such things aimed at:
Then to make choice where they will sup that night
And make their life a progress of delight.
Next day invite some honorable guest,
A favorite, or follower at least,
To make the world take notice of him then,
That he will grow great by means of such great men.
Or at his own charge some Court-shew to frame,
And make the Ladies think it was his brain
That did contrive it, when, Some near him know it,
His purse and not his pate did play the Poet.
Or in his entertainment of some State,
Make Conduits run with Rhenish at his gate.
True; this is brave indeed and princely too,
Which Some may better far then others do,
Who racket it abroad and keep a table
Free for all comers, when they are unable
To feed themselves; the Cock on hoop is set
Hoping to drink their Lordships out a debt.
I heard of late a Millener complain
Of a great Lord that is prodigally vain,
Who run upon his score within three quarters,
Five hundred pounds, for sho-ties, points and garters:
Yet runs he on and feeds him with delay,
And either cannot pay or will not pay.
Yet is his mind good, for he does afford
A graceful presence and a grateful word
Where ere he stands engag d, and it does grieve him
To be so long in debt, if they 'll believe him.
But the Suite, thus he pretends, he last obtained
(And this 's his grief) comes short of that he aimed,
Or else he is out of cash, or who collects
His rents, detains them more then he expects.
But howsoere he shroud it with his wit,
Nor this nor that is any cause of it;
"His luscious palate and delicious Cook
Withhold him from discharging of the Book.
His many Items daily so much spend him,
As either must some Patentees defend him,
Or all his ancient Manors are forgone,
Which may be soon, for he had never none,
Only some few he got since he came hither,
Which with himself are shrinking both together.
But stay; me thinks there 's naught distasts me more
Than to behold a rude uncivil Bore
Whom nurture, nor good nature ever had,
Whose father lived by naught but selling Woad,
By means of better fortune to obtain
More grace then men of more deserts may gain;
His honor is his purchase, and his fate
To raise himself to greatness by his state:
For merit who esteems it? When men crave
To know not what we are, but what we have?
Now by those hopes I have of future bliss,
There Is nothing mads me half so much as this;
For who can brook to see a groundling rise
To titles of such honor and high prize,
Doing no worthy act in all his time,
Unless it were the gelding of a Swine,
As I heard once a mad-conceited Jig,
Of one made Knight for rosting of a Pig:
And Dietloph Brand obtained (some say) as much
With Rostock Bear who overthrew the Dutch,
Which story made me laugh, for on a time
A boon-Companion and a friend of mine
Telling this tale, one of a light conceit
(Which made the jest more full) replied straight
By thus retorting it; Now by this light,
I wonder much why you 'r not made a Knight;
For if to healths such knightly vailes befall,
You 's drink a health with any of them all.
But to the purpose; though I force a smile,
I Would rather mo^e th'abuses of our I Will.
Again, to see those who have well deserved,
How they can show their warlike bodies carved,
Their arms di^joynted, or their legs cut off,
Yet for all this rewarded with a scoff;
Their service wants least solace, for our Peace
M^kes us conceive small pity toward these:
Yet their designs were glorious, and the cause
For which they fought deserved no less applause,
B^t see their end, for all the time they served,
The most of these are either hanged or starved.
Now to propose some due reward to these,
N^ught were more fit, if it the State would please,
Than to injoyne the miserable Chrone
(I mean the usurous oppressing one)
Whose only sport it is, and recreation,
To see a dearth of grain in all our Nation;
Who grates, regrates, grinds and engrosseth all,
L^ughs when our markets rise, grives when they fall,
Who will not sell his Corn if men should die;
B^^ stops his ear against their ruthful cry:
Th^n to enjoin (I say) his stony heart,
Some portion of his substance to impart
To a deserving Soldier, and know
My reason 's this why I would have it so.
This earth-adoring and admiring wretch,
Who craves no more then that he may be rich,
Lives safe at home, his family attend him,
But all this while the Soldier does defend him:
Snayle-like at home he ever makes abode,
And little feels the dangers are abroad;
While the encamped Soldier does endure
The worst extremes the Miser to secure:
From sleep he wakes, with noise of least alarm,
Surveys the Camp, prevents ensuing harm;
Rampters he reares, Fortes, Bulwarks, Palisadoes,
Mures, Countermures, stores his wel-rig'd Armadoes:
The key-cold ground, the field-bed, where he rests him
Where not one minute but some fear molests him:
All which he bears with patience for this Elfe,
Who cares not who fall so he save himself.
Now ought not he to share in his increase,
Who by his danger does secure his peace?
Do we not see each one relieve his Cur,
Who on the nightime barks and makes a stur
To shield his masters house from those would venture,
But for fear of discovery, to enter?
And shall a Cur so kindly be entreated,
And a poor Soldier of his right defeated?
Can one delight so much a Cur to cherish,
And suffer one, endowed with reason, perish?
Nor for my self do I this comfort seek,
For (as I think, I 'm in for all the week)
Although perchance I have as great delight,
In a good cause, as any one to fight,
And would be loath to spare my dearest blood,
If shedding it might do my Country good:
But diverse means are formed for diverse men.
Some are to fight with pike and some with pen;
Either of which requires a spirit stout,
To vanquish fiends within, or foes without.
But say, can neither eye, ear, taste, nor smell
Afford thee ought that may content thee well?
Can no choice object to thy eye appear,
Nor no melodious accent to thy ear,
No fragrant perfume to refresh thy Scent
While thou art here in lists of thraldom pent;
No sense-affecting-solacing repast
That may delight or relish thy distaste?
Can none of these thy drooping spirit cheer,
Or ease thy grief while thou art lodged here?
Yes, yes, in every faculty I find
Something to give contentment to my mind;
For thus I argue; If these breed such loathing,
I must infer, on earth there can be nothing,
Be 't nere so pleasant-seeming or so moving,
That may in any measure merit loving.
Which to confirm, as I conceived distaste
In all those former Senses that are past,
Now, for my love I bear the Commonweal.
Hear but the griefs I for her sake do feel.
MUch do I feel, for even my heart does ache,
Not for my self, but for my Country sake,
Wherein there is naught does me so nearly touch
As to see great-men wrong the State so much.
For there is no place, we hear not some of these
Taxed and reproved for their Monopolies,
Which they will beg that they their turns may serve,
No matter though the common people starve.
O age me thinks thou art distracted grown
To squeeze a whole State for advancing one!
And what is that one? a profuse Rioter,
Who spends upon a painted Sepulcher
What ere he gains by begging; thus the poor
Are forced to maintain a great man's whoor.
They want, he surfeits; they may pine and die,
He hears, but takes small pity on their cry.
They crave one crum of comfort, he denies them,
And when he meets them, stops his nose and flies them;
He all enjoys whatso'ere may like him well,
And on his foot-cloth rides in state to Hell.
O ye high peering Mounts incline your ear
Unto the counsel of a Prisoner!
For do not think, although I be in thrall,
That I will humor any of you all;
I have not learned to flatter hitherto,
And I do scorn to take the trade up now.
But what is my counsel? Labor to deserve
Well of your Prince whom you are bound to serve,
Hate to inhance your State, or fill your purses
With woeful widows tears and poor-mens curses;
That gain must needs be ill, be 't more or less,
That Is sucked and strained from the fatherless.
Scorn to enrich your selves by others hate*
Or raise your selves by razing of the State.
And for as much I hear that Some of you,
Which I protest does much my grief renew,
Support your Followers in an unjust cause,
Against the course and tenure of the Laws;
So as they care not what they undertake,
Because they shall be favored for your sake:
Surcease for shame to countenance a wrong,
Either by Letter or persuasive tongue;
For there is naught on earth, right sure I am,
Detracteth more from any Nobleman,
Then with the brand of injury to stain him,
For love of any one that does retain him.
For this such deep impression leaves behind it,
As on your graves succeeding times shall find it,
Where it will live long after you be dead,
And sprinkle hateful poison on your seed.
And you the reverend Judges of the Land,
Stand in defense of right whosoever withstand
Your just proceedings, let no favor draw you,
Nor fear of any great-one over-aw you.
Do you not think it were a shame to hear
Such men as you, who on your shoulders bear
The burden of the State, and should take care
To guard the Prince and those his Subjects are,
E're to decline from doing what is right,
For love, or lucre, enmity or might?
Patrons and Patterns you should be of truth,
To curb the misdemeanors of our youth,
Whose unconfined wills are rather bent
To ill then good, unless they feel restraint:
But for as much as I have heard Some say,
That great-mens power has ever born much sway
In Seats of Justice, which should be so pure,
As neither power could awe, nor love allure;
That you from course of Justice less may swerve
Observe the Rule which Cato did observe:
Who on a time, when he in judgment sat
Professing truth, the scope he aimed at,
Received a Letter, which in post-haste came
From One who was esteemed a special man
Then in the State; addressed to this end,
To spare pronouncing judgment on his Friend.
But He, suspecting what the contents might be,
Meant to prevent him by this Policy,
And that he might proceed in judgment better,
First Sentenced him, and after read the Letter.
O then to all alike just judgment render
As you the safety of the State do tender!
Grant great ones no exemption, who allege
They may offend by writ of Privilege;
But make them know, that you have power to strike
(If they impugn the Law) all men alike.
This if you do, which Conscience bids you do,
Good men will love, and ill men fe^re you too.
Yea God himself, who is present i^ your Court,
Sees your uprightness and shall ble^^ ^ou for 't.
And you strife-stirring Lawyers, who have sold
Too often your souls, more often you^ tongues for gold;
Like some foul Leprosy my Muse would shun you,
But that the State complains so much upon you.
Eye your profession, and examine then
If you your selv s be such conditioned men,
As both the State requires at your hands
And with the form of your profession stands.
And what is this, but that you should take heed
What cause you take in hand, for whom you plead,
Whom you persuade, and with persuasion mad,
Saying their cause is good, when it is bad,
How you do earne your fees? for some men's ayms
Are by delays to multiply the^ gains:
For know, that you, who should judicious be,
Are first to weigh the cause, then take your fee;
And if 't be such a Cause 'twill bear no water,
Persuade your Client to compound the matter:
But if the cause be good, fall soundly to it,
And slight it not, for so you might undo it.
What shame were it then to see men of your Coat,
Di^temperd wi^h a swelling in the throat:
A dangerous inf^ct^ous disease,
Sp ung from the practice of Demosthenes;
Whom the Milesians feeing on a time,
That to their cause he might the more incline,
He, when he should the matter fully break,
Had got the (...). Vid. Demost. apud Gellium, lib. 11. cap. 9. 82.
Squinancie, and could not speak.
O take you heed of this, lest God withhold (Gold!
Speech from your tongues thus tipped and tide With
And you the Gentry, who retain the name,
But not the Worth, of those from whence you came;
You, who should be life, hope, and all that is dear
Both to your selves, and such as neighbor near,
Observe your rank, and in your rank so live,
As to your House you may no scandal give.
Alas, for grief, that ere it should be ^ed,
So many hopeful Plants are withered;
Such ancient houses, where relief was found
By way-beat Passengers, now raz't to ground!
And whence comes this, but from improvidence*
Neglect of State, profusenese of expense?
So as me thinks, I hear poor earth complain
And chide her brats for being so profane;
That the ancient badge of Hospitality,
Should be defaced by prodigality;
Clothes, made to cover shame, and color sin,
Are now habilliments to glory in:
Meats, given to suffice nature, not delight,
Must satisfy our liqu'rish appetite:
Drinks, to refresh, times so distempered are,
Must drink down debt, apply a cure to care,
Of which disorderd rank, I knew of late
A youth of fair and eminent estate;
Who in few years had his estate to seek
from pissing Conduit that does stand in Cheap:
But in my judgment, there is none of these
Brings ruin to our ancient families,
So much as profane swearing, which does call
Like that handwriting shown upon the wall
For vengeance on them that the same do use,
"Gods curse must nere depart from swearers House.
And yet I see, and sigh to say I see,
How in this Land, where God should honored be
With duest praises, for her great increase
Of earthly blessings, and continued peace,
The Gentry of our I Will, should think no shame,
With new coined oaths to profane his name:
Which is their Parents fault, who so much love them,
That when they hear them swear they will scarce reprove them*
Yea though they curse ere they be weaned from teat,
And learn to swear, before they learn to speak,
They must not be rebuked, but mark their ends,
And you will conclude their Parents, their worst friends.
And you, deceitful Tradesmen, whose great'st care
Is to contrive dark shops, to vent false ware,
Scorn with injurious practice to deceive
Such as in you, their trust reposed have;
And day by day the Chandlers case remember,
As you the welfare of your necks do tender.
Lastly to you my Brethren, who by nature,
Are woodmen borne and gotten by a Satyr:
Examine ere you publish any line,
For I must tell you it is a dangerous time;
The State is jealous, and will have an eye
O^ such wild headed waggs as you and I.
Be wary then good Boys, and have a care,
Least in my censure ye do likewise share,
Which could not choose but turn to your disgrace,
^^sides your lothsom lodging in this place:
Where, trust me, though I do not lie with any,
Spite of my teeth I go to bed with many;
And which is strange, Backbiters have I more
Since I lay here then e're I had before.
But hark, while I am taxing others sin,
My fellows they are roaring now within;
I must withdraw; my Keeper he does call,
And now my grate is shut; goodnight to all.
Exit Spectrum.
A Postscript.
NO sooner was my Grate closed, than I from my Prospect barred; retiring my
self to my rest, which was as restless as my fortunes hapless^ my friends
hopeless and help esse. Neither did this lessen, but heighten my misery to
have mine eye barred from liberty by being shut from my P^ospect of vanity: But
beggars must be no choos^rs, nor prisoners dispos^rs; w th Patience I retired,
resolving to enjoy my self, though of all outward joys d prived and ^oy in
the liberty of my mind, though of bodily freedom restrained. Neither indeed
(to do my surly C^^^erus right) was my Argus-eyed Porter so relentlesse, as
wholly to restrain me; for his promise was unto me, next morning betime to
tender me a courtesy* by giving me f ee recourse to my Grate; where I
resolved to spend the next day in a serious survey of such passengers and
passages as happily might encounter me, and make themselves objects to an
emblem of misery. But see how humane purposes a e diverted! implying, that
nothing can be by man, so long as he is man, firmly resolved: For, next day,
addressing my self to my old task, I understood by One of the Knights ward,
that diverse broken and decay^d Merchants, whose estate, howsoever it seem to
the eye of the world, razed yet (so wise is humane policy) their supposed Heirs
are to great fortunes raised; were inquisitive how they might procure a trusty
and faithful Retainer, who had knowledge in keeping of a book, casting an
account, and such necessary parts as properly concerned men of their rank Upon
which enquiry, ^he whole H use, to do me a courtesy, and add some small
comfort to my present misery preferred me; knowing me to have a little
smattering in Arithmetic, and in that respect fittest to be employed for such
an instrument* since which time I have used all diligence to tender them all
possible content; wherein I have so far prevailed, as with the general
suffrage of these decay d Magnificoes, it is lately concluded, that if it come
to pass (as much may be) that they may either by means of Protection, or s
me other e^franchisem^nt to them granted, attain to the honor of a Company I
shall forthwith be made their Remembrancer; which place I shall ^ight
willingly accept, intending to rem mber them upon all occasions. Hence then
appears the cause why I am from further survey restrained, being in affairs
of higher consequence employed; having no time to betake me to writing or from
wasting my Spleen with laughing; to see so many deluded Creditors bemoaning
the fall of my politic Masters, whose well-cram'd coffers are so well stored,
as they will feed the Breaker, though the Creditor be starved. To discover
their Treasure, were to betray their Trust; I were a knave then to be less
then trusty, although they be knaves in grain that do trust me; only know
thus much, there are many here in this City, to my knowledge, that bear their
he^ds high, keep their shops open, walk the Exchange, and retain an opinion
of mighty Merchants, who come many thousands short of these in substance. So as
my comfort is (for gold to the eyesight is very sovereign) I have enjoyed the
sight of more treasure since I was restrained, then ore I enjoyed being freed.
But silence b comes a man of my Pla^^; let this suffice, I enjoy more by sight
then ever their thirsty Creditors are like to possess; so high am I in trust
with those who have advanced their fortunes by best be trust. Now to these, who
would have me proceed further in my Survey or Display of vanity; ha^ing found
Poverty an individuate to Poetry, my answer is; when I have hope to gain so
much by my Reader as by my Breaker, he shall hear further from meee. Now to
my charge. -- 10 -- 100 -- 1000 -- 10000 -- 100000 --

"Thus my wi^^ M there is burnish though they burst;
"Foxes fare ever b^st, when they are cursed.
The Copy of a Letter sent from a Burgess of the Lower House, to the brittle
Society, or broken Company of Bankrupt-Merchants, 1625.
MASTERS and Magistrate^ whose timely policy has got you the deserved name of
a provident Company; Know that both-Houses, wherein I was employed as an
especial Member, have taken into their Consideration the quality of a
Breaker: Wherefore I thought good, in respect of that ancient familiarity, and
inviolable league of former amity which did sometimes cement us so near
together, to propose certain cautious observations, not so much for your
behoof, who are excluded from this number; and consequently exempted from
their Censure; as for our dispersed Bankrupts who have broke since the sixth of
October, whose persons and estates are only made liable to the extent of a
legal Censure. First therefore to discover to you and your brittle Corporation
some apparent Remonstrances of my affection (yet not so as my love should
forget form, o^ my Letter method;) my purpose is to reduce this schedule to
you directed, to four main heads or principal points; where, in the first
branch, I mean to make known what was objected against you; secondly, what was
answered for you; thirdly, what was Enacted; and lastly, certain directions, by
way of prevention propounded, that the force or virtue of that Act might be
frustrated or diverted. For the first, diverse Bills of complaint were preferred
against you, and with much heat prosecuted; sundry main objections press d,
the substance or effect whereof I have no less freely couched, then friendly
touched, that in your memories they may be the deeper imprinted. It was
objected, and that with much vehemence, by a rawbone Knight, who, is it seemd,
had been formerly conversant with men of your quality, which occasioned him to
exasperate the business against you more feelingly. That if such as you were
suffered to get men's estates into your hands under pretense of Commerce, and
then fraudulently shut up shop, as if the light of you fortunes had received a
Dampe, there would in time be no Commerce in this Island, but an utter decay or
decrease of all trades; the reason he alleged was this, Because, said he,
every Profession by way of Commerce, uses to have dependence upon men's
reputation or credit; now if this reputation (the buttresse of every
profession) fail, needs must all Commerce, relying upon men's reputation fall.
This objection was illustrated by diverse apt similitudes, to add more luster to
his proposition, and detract the more from your profession. The State, quoth
he, is a body politic, and may be aptly compared to a body natural and
org^nicall; the Belly or Maw of this body is the Commonaltie, whereto other
parts stand eng^ged to relieve her necessity; with these she confor^e^h and
Commerceth, and on their engaged reputation she relyeth: The eye promises to
direct her; the hand to relieve her, and the foot to support her: If these
^nfringe their promise she of n^cessity must perish, because their mutual
supporta^ce requires a mutual assistance; which neglected, the whole fabric
must be dissolved: so fares it with the body politic, where one vein draws
blood from an there; if one v^i^e grow t^o full the whole body suffe^s for it,
whi h ^^^^mper admits no prevention but by Pa^^bo ^my and incision; Full bodie^
m^ (...) purged; spungie and rank Vines p^^^ed; grounds ov^^fl wing d^ained,
and impostum'd sor^ (...) ^ed; much mo^^ this Gangrene of our State, which
menaceth ruin to the whole body, if it be not p evented by a speedy remedy:
For tell me, shall th se ulcerous Scarabees, who feed on others fortunes, and
fat themselves with others ruins, receive countenance from us, respect by us,
or expect less then an exemplary Censure of us? Shall these Horsleaches, who
suck till they swell, swell till they burst, be suffered any more to nestle
amongst us? Shall these lazie-Labourers reap what they have not sown, eat of
the fruit they have not planted, or receive profit for what they never
ventured? And more tolerable were it, if they parted but stakes, or only
sha^ed in the benefit of others adventures; although for this they never
labored, but like egregious Land sharks. to strip their honest Creditors (and
ruin others to enrich themselves) of all, and appropriate all to themselves;
what civil or well Go-govern'd State can endure? I (quoth he) not without
just cause, am induced to prosecute this Argument, being a matter of such
general consequence, as many Families must suffer while they surfeit, and want
the staff of bread, while they grow fat with the bread of deceit: Neither am I
ignorant how many impious ^mps of that Society, make the Royal Exchange their
Plotting-Gallerie, or State Con^istory, where they project ruin to their
Creditor, and advancement to their seldom-thriving-Successor: Nay, which ^s
worse, I have seen in my time one of these Bankrupt Merchants, after recovery
of their pretended ^reach, brave it with such insolency, as I have wondered how
a Christian face could be so brazed, or with such impudence glazed, as so
soon to forget his sin or slight his shame; but what will not an habituate
custom produce, especially where greatness becomes a sub^er^uge to
guiltiness? It was an ancieat Law among the Persians, That whosoever was more
ready to receive then requite, should suffer death. What Censure then should be
pronounced on these, who receive more then is given them, retain more then is
due unto them, and infringe their faith to such as repose trust in them?
Violation, or breach of faith, was so odious and contemptible a thing to
Heathen men, as they preferred a noble end, before so ignoble a brand; their
reputation was their glory, their honor was their prize, and their good name
that precious odor which perfumed them living, and embalmed them dying. When a
poor woman complained to Tamberlaine, That one of his Soldiers had drunk
some of her milk, for which he had not paid, he caused the Soldier whom the
woman accused to be brought forth, and for this petty injury to be ripped up,
that it might appear whether her accusation were true or false; which if it
had proved otherwise then she affirmed, h^d been on her self inverted, by
inflicting on this woman the self same punishment which was practiced on this
Delinquent. If a Soldier, whose prof^ssion is commonly injury and repine,
des^^ved so h^avy a Censure, for so light and venial an error, what may he
seem to deserve who professes all urbanitie, lives in a State famous for
civilitie, and whose very garb is a complement of honesty? Sure (with all
reservancy of respect to you before whom I speak) I cannot imagine how any
Censure can be too rigorous to men of a condition so odious and injurious. How
much this Speech was approved and silently applaud^d might appear by the
serious attention of the whole H use; so as, doubtless the Bill had past
present y upon the delivery of this Speech, had not O^e, whose Copyhold this
Case concerned, boulted upright; who pulling a little down hi^ gregorian,
which was displac't a little by hasty t^king ^ff his Bever, sha^pning his
peake, and erecting his d^stended mouchato's, proceeded in this answer; not
only to avert the force of those object on^ already presse^, but to divert
their intentions toward this Act, to the furthering whereof he saw the House
generally inclined. It is admirable to note with what prepared facility and
singular propriety the tongue can make expression of the mind, in any subject
which it intends either to dignifie or disgrace; so as (to use Anacharsis
words,) It had need of a more strong restraint then Nature.

How violent this Gentleman who spoke last has been in disgracing, yea
suppressing the ancient company of Breakers you have partly heard: and the
reasons he alleged to confirm his discourse, which I must ingeniously
confess, were both many and weighty; so as I perceive by outward appearances,
that they have left such deep impression in this honorable Assembly, as the
prints thereof cannot be easiliy razed, unless reasons of equal or more high
consequence be produced, to answer those which have been already objected.
First therefore, I will lay open unto you what an excellent ground of
State-policie relies on the continuance of these broken Merchants; whose
suppression would be an occasion of sundry maine inconveniences in the public
State; for, if prevention be the life of policy, how soon would this life be
extinguished; if it had no subjects of prevention whereby it might be
exercised? If there were no Breakers to circumvent, the Merchants needed no
policy to prevent; which would in time inure them to security, and make them
ignorant in the cautions of preventing policy. Yea, But it is objected, that
these Bankrupt Merchants are professed enemies to all civil Commerce; Admit this
were so, yet in some Cases it is as necessary to have enemies as friends.
Nasica, when the Roman Commonweal was supposed to be in most secure estate,
because free of their enemies, affirmed; That though the Achaians and
Carthaginians were both brought under the yoke of bondage, yet they were in
most danger, because none were left whom they might either fear for danger, or
who should keep them in awe. The like course observed Oenomademus, in the I Will
of Chios, when he counseled his fellows, That they should not expel all
their enemies, but still leave some in the City; lest (quoth he) being void of
all our enemies, we should begin to quarrel with our friends: Besides, if our
wealthy Traders should not sometimes encounter with these rubs, their much
prosperity would make them insolent, so as laboring with their own burden,
they would become profuse Rioters in the smooth progress of their fortunes, so
as I may properly retort the last Speakers words upon himself, and confidently
affi me, That these Decayed Merchants are excellent Phlebotomists to purge the
full bodies of such Tradesmen, who by continuance of Commerce are grown to^^^ch.
Telephus, when he could find none amongst his friends to cure his wound,
permitted his ^nemy to do it; So he who purposed to kill Prometheus the
Thessalian, opened his Imposthume with his Sword; this Imposthum'd Member is
the rich Tradesman, who must be lanced before he can be cured; a continued
success in Commerce has corrupted him; prosperity, which best declares what
men be, has transported him; so as by all likelihood he would hazard the
lost of himself, if he encountered with no losses to make him feel himself;
the wisdom therefore of the time has found out an expert Chyrurgeon to lance
him, and lancing cure him; an experienced Physician to purge him, and purging
recover him; an exquisite Gardener to prune him, and pruning refine him: And
would you have such a singular Artist Censured? Besides all this, reflect on
the benefit which redounds to the public State, in their death as well as
life; for these broken Merchants having raised and inhanced their Fortunes, no
sooner die then they invest their wives in whatsoever their thriving providence
has scraped together; who after some extorted tears, forced with much pumping
from the Lymbeck of their eyes, plant their affection on some younger brother,
to whom they make an entayl'd estate of whatsoever was left them by this B
eaker. Thus, like honest men (though much against their will) they make decayed
Gallants their inheritors, who sing a requiem for their Souls while they set
their patrimonies at sale; And good women, when these young Rioters have left
them no hing but rag^ of misery, they never exclaim, but patiently conclude, it
was their destiny. Again, I can see no reason why these Tradesmen should
prefer any such Bill of Complaynt against these Bankrupts; seeing they
confess how much in their course of Trading they have gained by them, which
will not only countervaile their loss, but might be an inducement to qualify
their demands: Yea, suppose all were true as these Tradesmen affirm, and that
these broken Merch^nts were the utter ruin of their fortunes, who ^y getting
commodities into their hand and so b^eaking, have diverted the current of all
trading. Yet let these Tradesmen lay their hand on their heart, and tell me if
they have not by times cheated these Merchants Sons as often as they
themselves were ever cheated by their Fathers. All then that they can justly
complain of, is but a little delay of drift of time, for when opportunity shall
be offered I make little doubt, but these who were once deluded, and by the
subtlety of these ancient Merchants circumvented, will requite the Fathers
policy by working on his Sons simplicity. An age then at most will make all
st^eight amongst them, so as whatsoever was injuriously hooked by the
predecessors providence, will be as speedily retendred by the Success^rs
w^^knesse Neither have I produced all those reasons which might be here
alleged by Courtiers and State-favorites, who should incur great prejudice by
occasion of this Act. For, whereas formerly Protections were usually procured
to secure these decayed Merchants from a rests; and consequently enable them to
work their own peace; employments of which nature raised no small profit to
the busy Courtier; there will be now no occasion for any such employment,
which would drive the Courtier to a pitiful exigent. Lastly, for I hope I
shall not need any further to press this Argument, being with such pregnant
reasons confi med; how many grave, judicious and discreet States men have we
in this our Island (and some in this honorable House) who, if they had been
nip't in the head upon their first fall, had never attained the honor to sh w
their sufficiency in so brave an Assembly? whose aims as they were generous,
so were their ends glorious, resembling Antaeus, who so often as he was
thrown down to the earth, received fresh strength, but being lift^d up was
soon tamed: So they, when their Fo^tunes seem most depressed, means of
advan^ement diverted, and so many rubs to their future hopes objected, rem^ine
so firmly Resolved as they vanquished misfortune with patience: a^ crowned
their fortunes with a glorious co^q^^ This Speech, as it relished well in the
Pa^ (...) some, so it distasted others; for some there (...) who muttered
underneath, that they smelled a Rat (...) others stick't not to say, that this
last Speaker had surely some affinity with a Breaker: Some said tha^ (...)
Speech might not un^ (...) compared to that (...) Paradox writ aga n^ (...)
b^ry; or to him who confident^^ maintained this ha (...) argument, that Ha^^
was more courageous creatu^^ (...) a Lion: or rathe^ to (...) merry Greek, who
h^ (...) desperate assertion, (...) was more behoo e^ (...) Virtue in a Stat p
(...) Or to him, who Ma^i^s (...) bombasted his Stock^^^ ^bide the infirmity of
his small Legs.
So as in conclusion, to the great grief of many true-hearted fractors, as
well principal Merchants, as puny factors, who wished your crazie profession
well; the last man's Speech was utterly exploded, and the first approved and
applauded; upon which dolorous conclusion, with consent of the whole House, it
was in expre^^e terms thus enacted against you.

For as much as daily experience shows. That the number and multitude of
Bank^upts do increase more and more: and also the frauds and deceits invented
and practiced for the avoiding frustrating and defrauding the penalties of the
good Laws in that behalf already made, and the sa^d remedy by them provided,
etc. Be it enacted, That all and singular the aforesaid Statutes and Laws
heretofore made against Bankrupts, and for relief of the Creditors, shall be
in all things largely and beneficially construed and ^xpounded for the aid,
help and relief of the Creditors, or such person or persons as already be or
hereafter shall become bankrupt. And that all and every person and persons
using the trade of Merchandise by way of bargayning, exchange, bartering,
chevesance, etc. or shall use the trade or profession of a Look to your Ears
Scrivener.
Scrivener, receiving other men's moneys or estates into his trust or custody,
who at any time after the end of this present Session of Parliament, shall
either by himself, or others by his procurement, obtain any Protection or
Protections, other then such person or persons as shall be lawfully protected
by the privilege of Parliament, etc. thereby desiring or endeavoring to
compel or enforce them, or any of them, to accept less then their just and
principal debts, or to procure time or longer days of payment then was given
at the time of their original contract: or being indebted to any person or
persons in the sum of one hundred pounds or more, shall not pay, or otherwise
compound for the same, within six months next after the same shall grow due,
and the Debtor be arested for the same, etc. or being arested for debt, shall
after his or her arest lie in prison two months or more, upon that or any
other arest or detention in Prison for debt, etc. or procure his enlargement by
putting in common or hired Bail, shall be accounted and adjudged a Bankrupt,
to all intents and purposes. Be it further Enacted, that the like Commissions,
O ders, Benefits, Provisions and Remedies which are and be provided and
limited by the said former Acts of Parliaments made 13 Eliz and 1 Jac.
concerning his, her, or their Lands, Tenements, Hereditaments, etc. shall and
may be had, pursued, taken and expounded against such person and persons as
are herein and hereby declared, described or expressed to be Bankrupts, and
against his, her and their lands, tenements, hereditaments, etc. And be it
further enacted by the Authority aforesaid, That the same orders, benefits and
remedies, which are and be provided and limited by this present Act, against
any Bankrupts, or for, or concerning his, her or their lands, tenements,
hereditaments, etc. or the discovery of them, or any of them, shall from
henceforth be had, pursued, taken and expounded against such Person and
Persons, as are declared or expressed to be Bankrupts, by the said former Acts
of Parliaments, or either of them, and against his, her and their Lands,
Tenements, Hereditaments, etc, in such manner and form, as the same ought and
might have been, if the persons in the said former Statutes, or either of
them, described to be Bankrupts, had been mentioned and described to be
Bankrupts in and by this present Act And whereas by the former Laws and
Provisions ordained, the Commissioners appointed have limited power to examine
the Bankrupt himself, etc. But ^^me doubt has been made, whether their power
d d ex^end to examine the wives of the Bankrupts co^ h^^g the same, by reason
whereof the Bankrupts (...) do daily conceal and convey away, and ^ause to
be conveyed much part of their husbands moneys, wa es, etc. by means whereof
much of the B nkrupts estate is concealed and detained f^^m (...) Creditors.
For clearing the said doubt, (...) it Declared and Enacted by the Authority
a^^^esaid, that after such time as any person shallby (...) Commissioners,
executing the said Commission, or ^he greater part of them, be lawfully (...)
or declared to be a Bankrupt, the said ^^mmissioners executing such Commission,
shall (...) power and authority to examine upon Oath, (...) ^^fe and wives of
all and every such Bankrupt, for the finding out (...) ^e this (...).
and discovery of the estate, and estates, goods and chattels of such Bankrupt
or Bankrupts, ^^ncealed, secretly kept, or disposed of by such (...) or wives,
in their own persons, or by their ^wne act or means, or by any other person or
per^^^s. And that she and they the said wife and w ves shall incur such danger
and penalty, for not c ming before the said Commissioners, or for refusing to
be sworn and examined, or for not disclosing the truth upon her or their
examination or e^^minations, as in and by the said former Laws, or either of
them, is already made and provided against any other Person or Persons, in like
Cases. And if any Bankrupt shall upon his or her ex^mination, taken before the
said Comm ssioners, be found fraudulently or deceitfully to have conveyed away
his or her goods, chattels, etc. to the value of twenty pounds or above,
purposely to hinder the execution of this Statute, and shall not upon his or
her examination discover unto the said Commissio^ers, and (if it lie in their
power) deliver to the said Commissioners all that estate, goods and chattels,
so fraudulently and deceitfully conveyed away, shall or may be indicted for
such fraud or abuse, at the Assizes or general Sessions, etc. and if upon such
Indictment or Indictments, the Bankrupt be thereof convicted, he or she so
convicted, shall be set upon the Pillory, Mark this my sorrowful Sisters
wo^ull wives to the br k n rater. (...) and be not care^^ss^ o^ (...) l^st ye
become a (...) spectacle o^ the public Pillory.
in some public place, for the space of two hours, and have one of his or her
ears nailed to the Pillory, and cut off. And for that some doubt is conceived
whether the Commisioners, in case of resistance, have power by the former
Laws to break op^n, or cause to be broken open the House or Houses of such
Bankrupts, etc. Be it therefore Enacted, That in execution of the said
Commission, it shall be lawful to and for the said Commissioners, or any
other Person or Persons, by them, or the greater part of them, deputed by their
warrant or warrants, under their hands and seals, to break open the House or
Houses, chambers, shops, warehouses, etc. where the said Bankrupt, or any of
his or her goods or estate shall be, or reputed to be, and to seiz^ them, and
order the Body, Goods and Chattels, ready money, and other estate of such
Bankrupt, as by the said former Laws are limited and appointed. And for the
better division and distribution of the Lands, Tenements, Hereditaments, etc.
amongst his or her Creditors, Be it Enacted that the Commissioners, or the
greatest part of them, shall and may examine upon O^th, or by any other ways or
means, as to them shall seem meet, any Person or Persons, for the finding
out and discovery of the truth and certainty of the several debts due and
owing to all such Creditor and Creditors as shall seek relief by such course
of Commission to be sued forth, as aforesaid: And that all and every Creditor
and Creditors, having security for his or their several Debts by Judgment,
Statute, Recognizance, etc. or having made Attachment in London or any other
place, by virtue of any custom there used, of the goods and chattels of any
such Bankrupt, whereof there is no Execution or Extent served and executed upon
any the Lands, Tenements, H reditaments, Goods, Chattels, and other estate of
such Bankrupt, before such time as he or she shall or do become Bankrupt,
shall not be relieved upon any such Judgment, Statute, Recognizance,
Specialty, Attachment or other security, for more then a rateable part of their
just and due debts.

And be it further Enacted, That if any the Lands, Tenements, Goods, Chattels,
Debts, or other estate of any Bankrupt be extended after such time as he or
she is become a Bankrupt, by any person or persons, under color of pretense
of his or their being an accountant, or any way indebted unto our Sovereign,
his Heirs or Successors, that then it shall be lawful to and for the said
Commissioners, to examine upon Oath whether the said Debt were due to such
Debtor or Accomptant: And if such contract was originally made, it shall and
may be lawful to and for the said Commissioners to order, determine and
dispose of all such Lands, Tenements, Hereditaments, Goods, Chattels and Debts,
so extended as aforesaid, to and for the use of the Creditors, which shall
seek relief by the said Commission, And for that it often falls out, that
many persons before they become Bankrupt, do convey their goods to other men
upon good consideration, yet still do keep the same and are reputed the
owners thereof, and dispose the same as their own: Be it Enacted, That if at
any time hereafter, any person or persons shall become Bank^upt, and at such
time as they shall become Bankrupt, shall by the consent and permission of the
true owner and proprietarie, have in their possession, order and disposition,
any goods or chattels, whereof they shall be reputed owners, and take upon
them the sale, alteration or disposition as owners; that in every such case,
the said Commissioners, or the greater part of them, shall have power to sell
and dispose the same, to and for the benefit of the Creditors, which shall
seek relief by the said Commission, as fully as any other part of the estate
of the Bankrupt. And for the better payment of debts, and discouraging men to
become Bankrupts. Be it further Enacted that the said Commissioners (on whom
this Authority is expressly conferred) or the greater number of them, shall have
power, by virtue of this Act, by Deed indented, and enrolled within six
months after the making thereof, in some of his Majesty's Courts of Record at
Westminster, to grant, bargain, sell and convey any Manors, Lands, Tenements or
Hereditaments, whereof any Bankrupt is (...) shall be in any ways seized of
any estate in tail, in possession, reversion or remainder, and whereof no
reversion or remainder is, etc. to any person or persons, for the relief and
benefit of the Creditors of all such Bankrupts, etc.

And be it further Enacted, That if any person (...) now is, or hereafter
shall become Bankrupt, have heret^fore g^anted, conveyed or assured, or shall at
any time hereafter grant, convey or assure any Lands, Tenements, Hereditaments,
Goods, Chattels, or other Estate, unto any person or persons upon condition or
power of redemption, at a day to come* by payment of money or otherwise; That
it shall and may be lawful, to and for the said Commissioners, or the greater
part of them, before the time of the performance of such conditions, to assign
and appoint, under their hands and seals, such person or persons as they shall
think fit, to make tender or payment of money or other performance according to
the nature of such condition, as fully as the Bankrupt might have done, etc. At
the end of which Act these two provisions were thought fit to be annexed:
Provided further, That no Purchasor, for good and valuable consideration shall
be impeached by virtue of this Act, or any Act heretofore made against
Bankrupts, unless the Commission to prove him or her a Bankrupt, be sued forth
against such Bankrupt within five years after he or they shall become
Bank^upt. Provided further, And be it enacted by the Authority aforesaid, That
this Act, and all other Acts of Parliament heretofore made against Bankrupts,
shall extend to strangers borne, as well A iens as Denizens, as effectually, as
to the natural born Subjects, both to make them subject to the Laws as
Bankrupts, as also to make them capable of the benefit of contribution, as
Creditors by those Laws.

Excuse me now (my ancient and familiar friends) in that I have longer insisted
upon the verbal repetition of all material points and branches of this
Statute; for I am not ignorant how much the review and perusal thereof
concerns you; but fearing lest the length hereof might beget in you a kind of
weariness (having your heads at this time working about affairs of high
consequence) I have here reduced all those particulars to one abstract,
punctually comprehending the substance of every branch contained in th^s Act.
First, all such Laws and Statutes as were heretofore made against Bankrupts,
and for relief of Creditors, are for the better relief and redress of the
said Creditors, largely and beneficially construed and expounded. Secondly, the
quality, nature and condition of a Bankrupt is in his colors lively
described, displayed and discovered. Thirdly, the like Commissions, Orders,
Benefits and Remedies which are, and be provided and limited by the said
former Acts of Parliament made 13 Eliz. and 1 Jac. against any Bankrupts, shall
be prosecuted and expounded against such Bankrupts, as by their especial,
personal marks are herein declared or expressed. Fourthly, the same orders,
benefits and remedies which are by this present Act provided and limited
against any Bankrupt, shall henceforth be pursued and expounded against such
person and persons as by the said former Acts of Parliaments are declared or
expressed to be Bankrupts. Fifthly, the Commissioners power is illustrated; a
doubt, touching examination of Bankrupts wives cleared, and the penalties
whereto refractory women are incident, in cases of denying or refusing to be
examined fully expressed. Sixthly, what public punishment shall be on such men
or women inflicted, as upon examination shall be either found to have concealed
the truth, or conveyed such estates as were theirs, or to them upon trust
recommended. Seventhly, the Commissioners authority is enlarged, and to the
breaking open of the Bankrupts house, warehouse, chamber, shop, chest or trunck
authorized. Eighthly, there is a course proposed, how division and distribution
of the Bankrupts Lands and Goods, to the relief of the Creditor shall be
disposed, and how to every one a ratable part is to be apportioned. Ninthly, if
any Lands, Tenements, Goods, Chattels, Debts, or other estate of any Bankrupt
chance to be extended under color or pretense of being accomptant or any way
indebted to our Sovereign Lord, his heirs or successors; the said
Commissioners are to examine upon Oath, whether the said Debt were due to the
said debtor or accomptant: And if such bargain or contract was originally
made, the said Commissioners are to order and dispose of all such Lands, etc.
so extended, to the sole use of the Creditors, who seek relief by the said
Commission, and to whose behoof they are to be converted. Tenthly, if any
Bankrupt shall with the consent and permission of the true owner and
proprietarie, have in their possession any goods or chattels, whereof they
shall be reputed owners, they sh^^l be by the Commissioners power lawfully
disposed, and to the Creditors relief converted, that Debt; may be better
discharged, and B^nk^upts he^^after discouraged. Eleventhly, the (...) when
this authority or power should be to (...) Comm ssioners granted, in what
manner ^^^^bited, and i^ what particulars extended. Lastly, if any Bankrupt
shall convey his estate to any person, upon condition or power of redemption,
the Commissioners, or the greater part of them, before the time of performance
of such condition, may make tender or payment of money, or other performance,
according to the nature of such condition, as fully as the Bankrupt in his own
proper person might have done: Which Condition so performed, the said Lands may
by the Commissioners be sold, aliened and disposed to the benefit and relief
of the Creditor, for whose redress this Statute was Enacted. For these two
provisions annexed, they are to you no less prejudicial, then to the Creditor
useful.

Now, my Broken-Brethren, these twelve branches which arise from this one and
only Statute, must be the twelve men which you are to be tried by. Guilty
prit. God send you good deliverance. I assure me, there is not one branch of
all these which you could not find in your Conscience to break, but the fear
of the Pillory makes your Conscience more queasie. It rests then that we
propose certain cautions or directions, whereby the force or virtue of this
Act may be frustrated and diverted, your credulous creditors deluded, and you
from future danger secured: These remedies, receipts (or deceits rather) for
prevention, are three. Antidating, Insinuating, and Adopting. Antidating of
your conveyance or State-charter. Insinuating with some eminent Commissioner;
Adopting some graceful Courtier to be your Heir or Successor. For the first,
it is dangerous to your person if you be discovered; you must walk therefore
in the clouds, and hardly trust your own breast with this secret, yet you may
recommend it safely to the fidelity of your Scrivener: for both his ears he
dare not be your discoverer, you must therefore discourse your thoughts in
silence Otium and somnu^ loqui. Tacit.
, and be close brested to your wives, lest they give intelligence. For I would
have you, my shaken brethren, of all others to be wondrous wary, that none of
you make your wife your Secretary; for if she know it, your Foreman is sure to
be partaker of it: so as, while you make a shift to convey a part, they take
course to contract together for the whole. Those men who (as Cosmo says) carry
their heart in their mouth, are more to be pitied then feared: be you none of
these pitiful things; cast your selves rather in Tiberius mold, who gloried in
nothing so much, as in cunningly cloaking his purposes with fair pretenses,
going invisible, and deluding his Subjects opinions with a seeming good. None
can be open and wise; avoid then the former, that you may thrive by the
latter. He that will make gain his sole object, must not stick to make
dishonesty his path, nor a large Conscience his Inmate. He must Who exiled all
liberal Arts, Ne quid usquam honesti oculis occurreret.
Domitian-l ke, divert his eye from every object of honesty, and every day take
a new lesson from the thriving rules of Machiavels policy.

But for you (my Crazie Consorts) there is nothing so needful in this secrecy
of Antidating, as your intimacy with an expert counterfeiting Scrivener, whose
habituate profession in the exquisite grounds of forgerie, never brought their
Master within suspicion of knavery; whom that you may better know by his
character, and by my experienc'^ display, be cautioned to make choice of no Gu
l for your Scrivener; take along with you these personal marks, or
accontrements rather, of his profession. Let him by all means partake much of
the Jew, and learn to forget the bashful art of blushing; Let him
counterfeit, and that so naturally, as if it were ingraffed in him; ^n innocent
simplicity; to the end he may shroude his actions more covertly. Let the
brazen age shine in his forehead, and a voluble tongue to answer any thing that
may be obj^cted. Let him be no Piliorie-man, for I make some doubt whether the
Commissioners, by virtue of their Commission, may not make search whether he
has been ever at auricular Confession. To caution him in his trade of
swearing when he shall be put to 't, I need not; for that is one of their
first rudiments when they are Punies. Make this choice and be confident of
success, for a crafty knave needs no Broker, nor a cunning Scrivener the
brains of a Breaker; and this shall suffice to premonish you touching the
mysterious secrecy of Antidating. Secondly, you must insinuate, and as it were,
skrue your self into the respect or affection of some eminent Commissioner,
and by grateful arguments of Love, make him your bosom friend and familiar.
And if you cannot compass this your self, recommend the carriage thereof to
your wife. Sirens were not men but women, which makes me think, that men are
less persuasive then women; let this burden therefore be laid on them. Mean
Homines front and oratione magis, qua^ ipso beneficio, reque capiuntur. Cic.
time, for as much as men of generous quality, whose affections are not
subjected to the observance of any, are rather taken with a countenance
amiable, discourse affable, and disposition sociable, then with any benefit or
bounty whatsoever; you must understand this art or garb of gaining Love,
consiste^h much in your fashion or conversation; your disposition must be,
though inwardly surley, outwardly lovely; you must be passing officious, and
force them to a familiarity, though it be by palpable Parasiticall-Sycophancy.
But it is much to be feared, that these who be hereto authorized, as they are
too wise to be thus deluded, so they are too honest to be depraved; as they
are too understanding to be flattered, so they are too upright to be
corrupted: for the actions of Great ones have more eyes looking over them then
inferiors have, which makes them more circumspect in their behavior, lest,
for want of good take heed, they should incur an heavy Non putam hoc futurum,
nunquam hoc eventurum crededissem ecquid in eptius? Seu. de tranq. anim.
Censure. You must then address your course some other way (my endeered
Breakers) whereby your provident intendments may be effected, your secret
practices, to divert the furious current of this Statute, facilitated, and the
Port or Land-marke to which you direct your road, prosperously attained. For
the acquisition whereof, it were requisite you make choice of such, for
protection, as resemble you nearest in your course of Commerce, quality and
condition. Now who be these (my brittle-Vrinals) but our anfractuous Courtiers?
whose glory is like glass, bright but brittle: For Courtiers are most aptly
compared to Plutarc.
Counters, which sometime in account, go for a thousand pounds, and presently
before the Count be cast, but for a single penny. Cast the account of your own
crazie fortunes, and the allusion will hold. But you will say, by what means
may we make these eminent and conspicuous Comets our friends? whereto I
answer, by making them your Heirs. Bestow but on them adoption, and they
will freely bestow on you their protection; insinuate into their corkie
acquaintance, and promise them adoption upon your acceptance. Fear not but
they will bite, for such kind of fishes will nibble at any bayte. You know
Vulpones plot. personate him in golden promises, and leaden performance. Make
them all your Heirs by adoption, but none by grace. If it be any of your
fortunes to grow humerously great with any eminent favorite, your projects to
retain him must be more select and exquisite. Admire and honor him at first,
like Isis Statue; afterward, upon more familiarity, tender him rules of
parentall providence, protesting withal that your hopes are soly treasured in
him, and a day will come when you may express it. This will catch my
Golden-Gull, and cause him trudge to secure your estate, which he hopes you
will preserve and reserve only for his good. If there be any brains left in
the sconce of a Courtier, he will labor to free you from the penalty of a
Breaker, only to enrich his spruce self, who, he hopes, shall live to be your
survivor and successor. This will do admirably well, for not only this
Court-Popingey shall be palpably gulled and galled, Dum vult esse praedo, fi^
praeda. Aug
but you Hereditaments secured, your true intended Heir invested; and what
your Providence got, shall by your Prudence be preserved. These courses hold
better with thriving policy, and your states security, then fruitless
inventions against the severitie of our times, for enacting such wormwood Laws
against you, as no age heretofore could exemplify the like. Wherein, under
favor (my splitted-Brethren) you hold an erroneous assertion; for against
Bankrupts, former times may instance the like Constitutions.

Adrian Ordained, That Merchants, or such as dealt with exchange, by bartering,
chievesance, or otherwise ingrosse, or by retaile, that brake their Credit or
were Bankrupts, without just cause, but only of covetousness, by fraud to
enrich themselves and raise a fortune to their posterity; to be set upon the
Pillory in the marketplace, and afterward to be banished Rome for evermore.
From whence you may collect how much your censure is qualified in respect of
precedent times, where, though Paganism reigned, this Bankrupt-judaisme less
raged. Thus my (teare-swoln Termagons) have I briefly touched and couched all
such especial receipts, as duly applied, may allay your passion, secure both
your state and person, and deliver you from the Cimmerian Jaws of a Tartarian
Prison. If this will not afford any cure to your ear, no salve to your sore,
there is no other remedy in cases of such extremity, but as you have ever
within you a testem to condemn you, so have ever in readiness a restem to end
you: whereto I commend you, and so leave you.

May 29. 1624.
A Prisoners Picture, posture and pressure; all receiving form, feature, life
and lineature from this contracted Letter.
My truly noble and best honored;
SInce I last wayed Anchor, and parted from your fleet, where you safely rode
within Portsmouth; I bare up with a prosperous gale in my tall vessel, called
The little-Discretion of Cilly: bent upon a discovery. And for my better
assistance in the voyage, you know the strength of my Lord Cromwells Letter of
Mart, and so forth. Long I had not tempted the Maine, but a merciless Storm
most uncivilly drove us upon the extremes of a more cruel Element. For, no
sooner came we near the Gulf, but we were grappled by four
Turkish-Renegadoes, formerly Christians, and violently brought into the
Straights, unto Banco, where I now remain Captive. When first I entered this
paragan Sconce, more pregnable then Lillo, but far more strong and unsavory:
The grim Saraz^^, with a starch't Cales beard, which kept the Port, finding me
a man of action, declared to me the value of my Ransom: and so sorted me
with Rogues, that boasted more of prioritie, as being Slaves, then the welsh
Cadwalladers do their pedigree. The language of many old Soldiers, had many
several tones and accents, but all directed to one sense; That they were very
unfortunate, having been laid out Perdues upon so many dangerous executions,
yet not to come off with Credit. This Egyptian house of bondage had all the
Canels taken up but one; unto which, when night drew on, a fellow, (whose left
hand grasp't many Candles, I mistook for the dutch-Lyon on a double Stiver) by
the feeble glowing of a farthing Light did convey me. Seven (according to the
number of the wise-Masters) were the inhabitants of this pestred Mansion, all
save on was coucht between bisket-bags, or courser napery, which once were
whitish themselves, th^ugh covered with night, tobaccho and dark linen, durst
not discover there no shirts; But as I drank to them, each contracted his
sheet unto a Mandilion: and received his drink. The Captive soul that was up,
and as yet uncased, had a Monumentall Beaver on, which I presume was free of
his Company, for it was thoroughly crak't; a quondam haughty and lofty Crown
it had, but now depressed into half the value, flat as a Couchant, and shone
like one; fat and tydie it was, and in far better case then his Master; whose
meager body did show through the grate of his garment, like a Pypers Timbrell.
Whether he had breeches or coats on, I still remain doubtful, for they were
so tattered, that his lower parts seemed a Satyr, and his upper part no less
fearful. The more I surveyed him, the more my wonder increased, how Creditors
could sit on's skirts, for he had none; fly out he could not, for he had no
wings, for his doublet went out but that morning to borrow three pence, and
returned with a sleevelesse errand: and no wonder, for it was but one only rag
of gentile sarsenet, torn slashes, which Geometrically hung like Needles on a
Lodestone; and when the belching sluice of his neighbors Lungs chanced to
open; the fellow (had his shirt been clean) seemed like a March-pane hanged
with Streamers. To conclude; This poor penitent doublet, drench't with tears
that had wept out the eye balls of his buttons, seemed to be a sufficient
punished thing, both for his Masters Sins and Debts. This fellow I lay
^ithall, and lost nothing by him; but in the morning, my Mohammedan keeper
Renaldo placed me in a more pallated Room; where I lay at as brave a hanging
Ward, as the Germans Fencer, in the memorable bed of the late suspended
Footeman, each hour suspecting my suspected delivery.

Altanus Ponticus.

Two Poems

Penned by the AUTHOR, before his restraint, Entitled

Loves Lottery and The Cuckoo.

Whereunto are annexed,

The Trapanner.

The Tarpolin.

Messalina.

An Elegy on Phil. Porters death.

With his

Farewell to Poetry.

Or

Motto upon Misery.

Showing how the Muses are Patronesses of Poverty.

IPSE DEUS, SUMMUS MAEONIDUM MUSAEUS
SUNT aliis alii Studiis ab Origin nati;
Artibus ingenui, deliciisque proci.
Maeonii Musis sapiunt, opibusque Coloni;
Sole Comes Scrinii nunc Arethusa mei.
Ardua magis est provincia Palladis quam Plaustri;
Studii quam Stivae; Calami quam Coli; Cerebri
quam Coloni; Mercurii quam Mallei;
Minervae quam Manubrii.
"Who truly loves, and cannot loved be,
"May she lead Apes in Hell; she is not for me.
Loves Lottery.
I Pull, God send me fortune in my thank,
Either a Prize worth having, or a Blank;
What is it Crier? see the blousing fool,
How he stands cocking on a buffet stool,
And speaks his mind in silence! Sir, you,
That stands like to some Beacon, to the view
Of each beholder, tell me what do'est know,
Have I a Prize, resolve me yea, or no?
None; all the better, I am glad thy eyes
Are not a witness of a worser prize
Then nothing; it is love for which I drew,
And since I Have nothing for my self to show,
I am made free, that was in fear of thrall,
Which to avoid, I Will have no Prize at all.
No Prize, no booty! wellcome-heartily,
I am prepared, to embrace my poverty
With an extended arm, for there is want
Which makes man happy, as Cleanthes scant
Living a single life, got knowledge store,
In which (if married) he had still been poor.
Yet once I Will pull again, hap what hap can,
And may my Lot make me a happy man.
"Happy or hapless dole, what ere shall come,
"I will with cheerful brow receive my doom:
For this I know, if fortune mean me well,
I shall receive a Lot that does excel
So far the lower rank, as flowers grass,
"Gold lead, myrthe hemlock, diamond the glass.
"Now Sir, what has fate sent us, some cracked piece,
Not worth receiving? think thou this will please
A man, whose fortunes stand upon his Prize?
No sir, I Will ferret out your rogueries.
This is given out for some virginian travel,
Some Sea-gull voyage, and you mean to gravel
A country Codshead, and to cheat him too,
Telling him what the Merchants mean to do
With this grand contribution, but they
Mean no such thing: such voyages must stay
Till better opportunity admit,
And then perchance they will accomplish it.
And yet what strange pretenses do they make,
"All that they do is for their Country sake;
And that this expedition will confer,
Store of estate upon our Ilander?
Then, what rich oar in every cliffe abounds,
The fishie rivers, and fair spacious-grounds,
That without tillage yield them fruit enough
Without the help of either Share or plough.
Besides, what commerce will accrue thereby
To Albions people, and her Seignory.
Thus our Lot-novices, are drawn to the bait,
And brought to bite, not knowing what deceit
Lies shrouded under covert and pretense
O country profit, Dove-like innocence.
But hear! A prize, and that the greatst of all
Befallen a Tailor, who upon his stall
Scarce could sustain his wife and family
With stealing shreads, and other michery;
And now 's advanced by fortune and his Lot
To many hundreds: and yet knows not
His better fate, till that some friend of his
Come to bring tidings of his sudden bliss.
Where finding him heeling a pair of hose,
Or such like botcherie, He skrues his nose
After an upstart- Gallant, leaves his board,
Which many a piece of stolen stuff can afford:
Then straight he claps a piece or two in the hand
O his good Nuncio, And thinks what land
Where best to purchase for his sun and heir,
(Whose heritage was lists;) then do repair
His Bakers with their scroules, and call him cousin,
With -- Item for so many dozen dozen
All undefraid, yet much they will not importune,
Because they hear the issue of his fortune;
Which they admire with knee and veiled head,
And now this loopehole must be worshipped,
Whose Style by letters is engraven thus,
The Shrine of Suitor Vestiarius.
And this the Country gull, no sooner hears,
Then he is rapt with hope, and therefore bears
Some stakes of hazard in this Lottery;
And hopes in time to hit as prosprously
As ere the yard-man did, and had no doubt
If that he could with lots have holden out
Till he had gained his purchase; but how short
He came of that, his own ears can report,
Where all he got (so little was his thank)
For his disbursements was a Paper-blank.
And yet, O hope, how strong an Orator
Art thou in thy persuasion! where, thy power
Extracts content from shadows, telling us
That such events may fall out thus or thus;
Which though they have no possibility,
Yet hope assures them for a certainty.
This moves us often, to lose the substances
And real use of things, for semblances;
Merely fantastic fictions, which proceed
From the distemper of an addle head.
And such Ixion-like make their receipt,
Too overweening of their own conceit:
Admiring Merrha-like, what ere they make,
That naught is good, but what they undertake.
Where if event prove sometime sinister
To their intent; they presently aver
The ground whereon they built the plot was good,
Hows'ere the sequel may be understood.
O strange condition of depraved men,
Where fancy is distracted, how or when
Their own affections know not, but proceed
In their intendments without better heed
Then purblind Appius in his Cassian lot
Who for two Roman talents got a groat!
And was not this an excellent receipt
For such a sum disbursed? O deceit
As ancient as authentic! for we see
Acts of this kind gain an impunitie;
Because those grand Cayrs that do profit by them,
Are all too great for poor ones to discry them.
" Laws are like spider-webs, small flies are taken,
" Whiles greater flies break in and out again.
But the lot I draw 's clear of another kind;
Where many are, of the Carthaginian mind,
That brave Arminius, and we follow him,
Who thought it better far to lose then win
In Hymen's Lottery: yet in affection
Where single numbers be, there 's no perfection
Because too naked, if that one partake
"Not of an other, and assume his make
To make this number complete: but we find,
Says Timon, that made perfect in the mind,
Where Contemplation reigns, which can be
Hardly united with Effeminacie.
True yet the State, if with discretion used,
And not through wanton dalliance abused,
Which stains the light of wedlock, may be said,
And rightly too, of merit honored;
Where two divided bodies become one
by an interior union, bone of bone;
Having recourse to the Creation, when
Women had their beginning from us men:
So as that Mould which gave to us creation,
"Being rib-formd gave Woman generation.
And much I wonder whence these Women's pride
Had propagation! if from Adam's side,
Why should they glory in their beauties fl wrs
"Since their perfection is not theirs but ours?
But if (as other Sages do aver)
Eve took this from her Lawyer Lucifer;
Why should they such esteem of beauty make,
But rather hate it for the Serpents sake?
Who under color of commending fair,
Tells them by art they are fairer then they were;
Whence These practice how to dye well more than to live well.
they become (so pure has art displaind them)
Made by themselves, and not as God has made them.
Yet some there be whose Which (as St. Ambrose says) no age shall extinguish,
no death can take away, no sickness corrupt. Amb. de Virg. lib. 1.
virtues make them fair,
And such seem never fairer then they are,
Whose native beauty does her light retain,
Wh lest what art daubs, is soon dissolved again.
But stay, a Prize! most welcome, what may 't be?
"A Maid of Dian's train, whose modesty
Is without reach of Scandal; she it is
That 's fallne to thee to consummate thy bliss;
"Farewell then Contemplation, I have got
"A rarer prize, and I will take my Lot.
The Cuckoo.
Lalus once laughed to hear the Cuckoo sing,
Thinking it boded some man's cuckolding;
Where now in Spring, prime season of the year,
The Cuckows note sounds harshest in his ear:
For he suspicious Sot does make his life
A Scout to school the abuses of his wife.
HOw now you stutting Raskal, are you made
To tax our wives abuses, and upbraid
These manlie-horned monsters which appaere
Not rare, for they are dispersed in every Sheere;
And now have got prescription to maintain
That they their Predecessors style retain?
And must a scab, one that is scarce taught to speak,
With his harsh tongue, our ignominy seek,
Filling his hateful bill, with Fronde, rep ens rostrum, repetita voce
lacessit Acteonem, solitos balbutiendo modos.
hawthorne leaves,
And pestring poor Actaeon, with new grieves?
Unnurtur'd Lossell, can thou f nd out none
To make thy Libel on, but such an one
That has no time to answer such as thou,
Having a wife finds him enough to do?
And must thou sit near to his garden walk,
And like a stammering gossip 'gin to talk
What ere thou sees or hea^es, nay sometime more
Then thou did ever see or hear before?
Is there no Law against thy impudence,
No punnishment, our wrongs to recompense?
Me thinks if men of lower rank forbore
To chastise thee, that have incenst them sore;
Yet such as be of higher quality,
Should with impatience bear such injury.
And yet these branched great ones when they spy thee
"Will laugh one at another, and go by thee;
And misapply thy note, and say, this shame
Thou lies on honor, touches none of them;
But some silk grogran-Jacket Citizen,
Whose mincing Minx can limit where and when
Her Court-eringo trader will repair,
Whom she is for, while he is for the Fair.
And yet thou means of them, as well as these,
And stuts out that which all the world sees,
Reproving (harsh reproof) the bed of honor,
Which thus is stained with lust insulting on her.
Thou Jarring quirister, that wont to sing,
And caroll out thy tunelesse note each Spring,
Forcing suspicion in the Jealous ear
Of some long travailed Merchant venturer,
Whose fishing far for pearls has procured
An angler for his wife, who has endured
As many fiery trials in that quarrel
As Aetna's quarries or Selucus barrel
In Tenedos assault: and yet might she
Enjoy her pleasure with security;
If thy reporting tenure did not bear
The news of strange suspicion to his ear,
Ill-nurtur'd nuncio, that comes ever first
Saluting us with tidings that are worst;
Breathing a jealous spirit to the mind
Of him that sees his Wife but only kind,
(And in a modest sort) making him swear,
That for examples sake, he will mangle her,
Inflicting such strange punnishment, as time
Shall brute the act, when ages do decline.
And is not this brave dealing, when a Swad
That has no tune but one, nor ever had,
Must descant on our secret practices,
Which are so closely done, as Lynceus
With his transpiercive eyes can scarce look through
The night it is so dark, the place so narrow?
Must man endu'd with reasons excellence
Not reap the joy, and benefit of sense
With an embraced arm, but he must be
Checked by the harsh note of thy jealousy?
Is there no honor dew to the worth of man
That gains a privilege? No Artizan
Was ever equal to him, yet in vain
Has he expressed his art, when one poor stain
Can soil his beauty, and eclypse that light
Which man makes claim of, as his proper right.
Yet what Bird is there in the sp^tious wood,
Or desert forest, that so vainly proud
Assumes unto her self such daring state,
As to curb man, or privately to prate
What she observ's or sees, save only thou
That have done this, and do continue too?
Wood-building Vid. Calimach. and Tibull.
Robin does the woods refuse,
And for man's love, to dwell with man does choose;
The Vid. Plinium in natural. histo.
Summer-Swallow, though she chattering calls
Upon her mate, yet will she tell no tales.
The natural Basilius in Homil. 8. and 9.
Stork, when as her parents age
Makes them keep home, as pent up in a cage,
She feeds them with her travail and re-brings
Store of relief upon her tender wings,
Whence to remove, if any time they seem,
She is the hackney that does carry them.
The billing bussing Martial. in Epigram.
Turtle thought does teka
For naught but for the losing of her mate,
Whom lost she sighs, as if at his depart
She lost the better portion of her heart.
The warbling Faern. in Emblem.
Thrush chants out her cheerful lays,
Glad at the heart, that Flora now displayes
Her various beauties, and she seems to sing
A Caroll for the Spring times wellcomming.
The lively Carduelis, quia pascitur a Cardui pilis. Vid. Varr.
Lennet, that is wont to feed
Upon no other meat then thistle seed,
Cheeres up her self, and with her merry note,
Shows that content has ever been her lot.
N ght-mourning Ovid. Metamorph. 6.
Philomel forsakes her nest,
And sings wi^h pricking thorn s^t to her breast;
Prognes distress occasioned ruthfully,
Her self disgraced by Tereus v^llany.
The jealous, chaste, and pure Alciat. in Emblem.
Porphyrio
Will have his love, not loved by others too;
For if a stranger in his bed he spy,
Death-struck he leaves to live, and loves to die.
The sprightly Catull. ^e Most. Pass. Eleg. 3.
Sparrow, he his yong-ones feeds,
And as he treads he chirps, and chirps and treades;
Yet building in our Eaves, it likes him well
To hear us talk and do what he will not tell.
The wanton Sambuc. in Emblem. Avium.
Wagtaile chats not what he hears,
But as our bosom-Counsellor forbears
To publish ough^, though see full well he may
A thousand play the Wagtailes on a day.
Yea, the very Ovid. Metam. 6.
Scrichowle that may not repair
To the place where ot ers privileged are,
Haunts desert shades, and Cat like, sometime hies
To Barns and Graners, where she preyes on mice,
But never, Critick-like, will she defame
The mean that lives by staining their good name.
Thou only of all others that remain,
Displaies the fate of Lording and of Swain:
And justifies the fact, though never so foul,
And who is it dares thy impudence control?
Thou may sit brousing on the Hawthorne bough,
And flour, and fleere, and libell on us too;
Yet who, though thy harsh voice do never so rate him,
Dare bring thee in for Scandalum magnatum?
Thou may be priviledg'd and rest secure,
Whereas if virtue play the monitor,
To tax such vices as reign now and then
Amongst the best and highest-ranked men,
As she in conscience must; what is her reward
But present censure, torture afterward?
Here Minos, Radamanth, and Aeacus
Will be in judgment as censorious,
As if poor virtue should be forced to dwell
Where they have their tribunal reer'd in Hell.
They Will term her proud, and will avouch it too,
For what is it these great ones may not do?
She must (unhappy she) learn to be wise,
Observe men's humors, learn to temporise;
Desire to faune on great-ones, and reserve
An attribute for vice, and ever serve
A rising spirit, whose expectance gives
Life to his follower, by which he lives.
She must reserve a grace to such an one
Whose honors make him worthy, and bemone
The death of such a Lord, or such a Peer,
Onley to currie favor with his Heir.
And this must virtue do, or she must sterve;
For Idiot-like (poor fool) she is bound to serve
In guarded coat, or such like Liverie,
Or die in want, exposed to misery.
But Let her pass, I hope she will not show
Respect to them, where she does nothing owe:
Such vicious painted-coates, who have no worth
To glory in, save eminence of birth,
Or large-extended Manors, all which can
Add small perfection to the worth of man;
Who draws his Light, if he look well about him,
From worth within him, and not wealth without him.
No, Virtue, no; thou know what merit is,
And can discern twixt true and seeming bliss;
Thy praises which thou usest to recite,
Taste not of gain as does the Parasite,
Whose oily tongue is so inured to flatter,
As he will praise the man without the matter.
Nettle vice sharply, for it is now high time,
When she on footcloth rides, while such decline
As bear respect to thee; but let them feel
What Is to put honors spurr on vices heel.
And if thou want a Crier to proclaim
The purport of thy Edict, I can name
One that will do it, and exactly too,
Without respect to either high or low.
Whom if thou ask, to descant on this theme,
It is the loud-voic'd Cuckoo that I mean:
Whom i will importune, if thou think it fit
To play the Crier and to publish it.
To the Cuckoo.
NOw Sir to you I must my speech intend,
That it would please you to be virtues friend,
And vices perfect foe; it is her desire
That you would be, as well you may, her Crier:
No matter though you stut and stammer too,
So many Criers, when they are bribed, will do.
But forasmuch she knows that none at all
Will in their charge be more impartial,
She has made choice of you, not for your wit,
But for your voice, which will this charge befit.
O^e Spring will do 't, I pray, good Sir, begin,
And leave your harsh distasteful Cuckowing.
But you will ask, what may this charge import?
I Will tell you Sir, for I did call you for it.
First to disp^ay Court vices, which partake
To much of poison, for example sake;
For that place, like the Sun, communicates
Her cheerful beams to men of all estates:
Whose glory, if obscured by any mist
Of church invading pilfring Simonist;
O^ lukewarm Neuter, roming heretic,
Sect-inovatour, itching Scismatique,
Oppressing Ahab, painted Jezabel,
Sin-plotting Haman, or Achitophel;
Treacherous Agent that does undermine
His country like another Catiline;
Profane Puntilio, Buffon, Apple-squire,
Blood shedding Cain, that will do ought for hire,
Bribe-handed favorite or Sycophant,
That shoulders honor like an Elephant;
Cinnamon courtier, whose very hide
Is better worth, then all his parts beside;
Riotous spend-thrift, wanton Marmosite,
Dutch-sw^lling Hans, Saint-seeming Hypocrite;
Whose glory if obscured, I say, by these,
Or any one of such like crudities,
It presently sends out these vapors to
Such places, where it did her light bestow:
For the Court exemplar is, and seems to give
To other Parts the like prerogative.
N xt to unmask, for it will be a ditie
Worthy the shrillest voice, crimes of the City;
Where often is shadowed much impiety
Under pretense of mere simplicity.
There if you find a Tradesman whose chief care
Is to get richesse by deceitful ware;
A smooth chin'd Prentice or a Jorney-man,
That trades with 's mistress linen n^w and then;
An English Jew, that conscience-lesse inures
His godless soul to taking forfeitures;
A roaring Haxter, Pandor, Palliard, Bolt,
Pimp, Snap, Shark, Cheat, or any such l ke Colt;
Brothelling Punk, her Champion, or that Ape
Of man, though woman putting on ma^^
If any these, as some of these you may,
You shall by your quick-sighted eye
Sing out amain, and to their ears report
What they have done, though they beshrew you for 't.
Then to the Country, for you there shall hear
Many a biting-grating- Usurer,
Rent-racking Lanlord, hoording Cormorant,
That Is ever dreaming of a seven year want
Self pining Miser whose thick-leaved chest
Conteines his gold, the god which he loves best;
A Prodigal, whose fathers care is brought,
By his unheady providence, to naught;
Catchpoule from catch and pull taking his name,
Whose conscience's seer'd, and face admits no shame;
Counterfeite Pursevant, that dares appear
With forged commission though he lose his ear:
False-tithing varlet, that will take his book
He has tith'd right, when he has stolen a stooke;
Brazen-faced Tinker, that with pike in hand,
Budget on back, bids way-beat Trav'ller stand;
Shread-miching Patch, hearing what Taylers do
Above in the City, he must pilfer too;
If these, or any these you chance to find,
Pay me them home for all that is behind:
So you shall purchase every man's good word,
And afterward be styled virtues bird.
What Cuckoo, will you turn your haggard tail,
Shall neither virtue, nor her suit prevail?
Will not you leave your harsh-offensive note,
To follow virtue, and to wear her coat?
Well Sir, I Will paint you out a knave in grain,
And what I speak, think not but I Will maintain;
But to particulize your rogueries,
An endless volumne hardly would suffice;
Some of the, chiefest therefore I Will impart,
That the world may know how dangerous thou art:
Which in a tale, I purpose to relate,
To make short work, and thus it chanced of late.
"A zealous brother of the family,
"By trade a Malster, so religiously
"Employed himself in mysteries divine,
"As he was taken a mirror in his time;
"For there was scarce a Sermon preached near him
"Within seven miles, but he would go to hear him;
"From morn to night, all Sunday would he fast,
"Starving his body for his souls repast;
"And night by night, he would to Church repair,
"Where he did shout, and bellow out his prayer.
"In brief, now great in estimation grown
"With chiefest Famulists in all the town;
"He was esteemed the only Rabbi there,
"So great was the reputation he did bear.
"And some, as I have heard, did give him power,
"Or thought him fit to be Expositour,
"Of any point when any one did move it,
"And ipse dixit was enough to prove it.
"This holy Brother now grown famous there,
"And deemed a professed Doctor of the Chair,
"Moved as the Spirit would, for the spirit moved him,
"A Sister loved, and she as deerly loved him.
"These famulists now grown familiar,
"About Springtime, when birds begin to pair,
"Upon mature advice resolved either,
"To marry there, or leave the town together.
"But forasmuch it was for certain known,
"This Ma ster was engaged unto the town,
"Owing far more then ere he meant to pay,
"He thought it fit no longer there to stay;
"But with his holy sister, to prepare
"To leave the Town, and taste the Country air.
"This simple Sister doubting no deceit,
"Addressed her self one evening very late
"To his direction, closly to depart
"And follow him who now possessed her heart.
"Three days they had not traveled on their way,
"Till resting them about mid time of day,
"Under a blooming H^w-thorne they did hear
"The Cuckoo sing nere the place wherein they were:
"And over them he hovered, as if they
"Had been the persons which he would display;
"A Hawthorne leaf he in his beak would put,
"And then would stut, and sing, and sing, and stut.
"Which the zealous brother noting once or twice,
"Now jealous grown, strait from his place did rise,
"Using these words: Nay, if the birds of the air,
" Whose gift I know in prophecy is rare,
" Fortell what shall befall my lot and me,
" And in the Sky thus blab my destiny;
" Sister farewell, return from whence you came,
" I will not wive to weave the web of shame.
"How ill his Sister took this foul retrait
"Of that Saint-seeming faithless counterfeit.
"May hence appear: for I have often heard
" She fell into distraction afterward,
"Though I suppose She greater reason had
"To be surpised with joy, then to go mad
"For love of such a hair braind Sot as he,
"Famous for naught save for his perjurie.
Now Sir, to whom may I impute this wrong
Done to this Maid but to your lucklesse Song,
Which so perplexed the vow-breaking miscreant,
As she, poor she, must now her Darling want,
And live deprived of love and life together,
Running distractedly, she knows not whither?
But (good Thalia) whose blessed influence
Gives sweetness of discourse and utterance;
Thou yt have power over tongues, restrain his tongue,
And make this bawling Cuckoo henceforth dumb;
So yearly Maids shall to thy Shrine resort,
And free from jealous Tel-tales thank thee for it.
A Vivitur ex rapto.
Trapanner.
LOok to your Brain-pans, Boys;
-- here comes a Train
Of Roysting-Rufflers that are knaves in grain.
No corner can secure you; they will rush in
And strippe the downy Gosling to his Skin.
Yet they will accost you with a civil greet,
And with Shark-cringing congies brush your feet.
Nay, they will encounter you with curt'sies too,
Before they practice what they mean to do.
-- Their first encounter.
Pray Sir excuse us that by chance are come
In this intrusive manner to your room.
But we'll redeem our error: -- Drawer bring
Bottells of Sack drained from the Hesperian Spring,
Where the Watchful The Hesperian Sisters, Who kept their constant Sentinall
over those golden Apple^, which Alcides after took away.
Sisters kept their Sentinall;
-- Quick, Rogue, we cannot brook a second call.
Mean while this wilke, who near saw any clyme,
But his Dads pale, or pantry all his time:
Nor ever viewed Luds-Tarases before,
Begins to tremble when they 'gin to rore.
A feverish qualme surprizeth every part,
His vital heat plays rebel to his heart;
His chilled senses, cold as any stone,
Partakes no other itch but to be gone:
But he finds Remora's; He scapes not so,
Whole troops of healths come pealing on a row.
This to this Princes Hero; this to that
Enameled fancy Dangling on his hat;
This to his Bracelet; This to that choice String
Impales his hair; This to his Diamond ring;
-- This to his Gippo; to his Agget watch;
This to his Tuck charged with a double hatch;
This to the Microcosme of this spruce youth,
With his auspicious welcome to the South.
Round run these Healths, far rounder runs his brain,
Though surfeit sick, it is folly to complain.
And now this birth grown full and perfect too,
Which yet aspi^'d but to an Embrio:
A A Pickhatch Girl new-casten in a Kanters Mould.
gaudy-giddy-giglet is convei'd,
A virgin pure, as any Hackney Maid,
Thick daubed with Cerusse, Stibium and Vermillion,
Like Ericina's amorous Pavilion;
A rare sense-seazing Tweake, whose Speaking eyes
And Spintrian art, complete this Enterprise.
For when they cannot press him to offense,
They must commence a quarrel by pretense.
But these no more his edglesse fancy please
Then Lais Lures did cold Zenocrates.
Yet left he must be to this Daughter to Sol and Persis.
Circes charms
Like to a Lambkin in a Tigres arms.
For his seer pulse, though naught be wrought upon,
These Blades Their pretense is to Slice this Brain-strap into Sippets: or
mince this Land-gull into a galle-manfrey. No hope, unless his pocket purchase
him a reprieve.
rush in, as if the Feat were don,
And in this sort accoast him: -- "'Slid my Wife!
"Can thou redeem her honor, with thy life?
"My Sister, says another! Leave 't to me,
"It is a Stain laid on my family.
"My Cozen, says a third! -- I Will flea his Skin,
"And pound him into mummey for his Sin.
"1. Actaeon me!
"2. Distaine my ancient house!
"3. Corrupt my Cousin! -- Hark Boys, a carouse
"Shall quart it in his blood,
"1. I Will second it!
"And expiate what folly did commit.
"Who could have thought this downy Lapwing would
"To such extremes his reputation sold?
"But we shall prune his wings, and seere his crest,
"And leave him never a feather to his N^st.
"The Dwindling Shallop in this grand dispute
"Sits silent all the while as any Relating to the Turkish Mutes.
Mute,
Reft both of sense and accent: and must die
Were no compass'onat Complice standing by
To soften their resolve: Compose this strife
By begging pardon for this Wigeons life.
The Motion's made; and they incline unto 't,
So they may plunder Him from head to foot:
His substance he is contented to forgo,
To save his life, and hold 't a curt'sy too.
"1. This Beaver, says the first, falls to my due;
"2. This Diamond shall to my lot accrue;
"3. This Scarlet Gippo and his Agget-Watch
"Fall to my share, they may advance my Match;
"4. His Belt and Tuck are mine;
"5. His Suit I claim
To hang up for an Ensign in Long-lane.
The act's performed; the weakest goes to wall,
The Naked man is left, to pay for all.
No Two select Societies distinguished by Several colored Ribands: and sworn
to a Pla^onick Comunity.
Bugle Blew, nor frisking Titire tu
Could be compared to this frontlesse Cru.
No Land-sharke of such metal, in our I Will
As this TRA-PANNER: -- eye his State and Style.
Others can play the Cheats, but short of these
Who shroud their shame, by shameless Dabrides:
And make their Doxies Agents, to secure
Their subtle Projects with a sugared Lure.
A Tar-paulin.
TAr-paulin is a Sea-Rat or a Sharke,
A Barnicle bred of the Aegean foame,
A Passenger shut from Noah's ancient Arc,
And since a Bandite-Galley-Slave become,
IN th'liquid Region destined to a Tomb.
This quality by nature 's to Him given,
To prey on men, but seldom pray to heaven:
Unless there be a Storm; which past, his breath
Braves Fate, though distanc'd but three Nauta tribus digitis gaudet divisus ab
undis; sacipiens satis prospice Nauta tuis. Marian.
inch from death.
Upon our Ages MESSALINA, insatiat Madona, the matchless English- Corombona.
HERE lies Lust,
Revenge, Defame.
Woe to man,
to woman shame;
Fair and false
as great as ill,
Weak in Grace,
but strong in Will.
Honors blemish, Hymen's stayne,
Virtues poison, Beauties baine,
Albions-Siren, tyrant-woman,
Faith-infringer, true to no man;
Femall-Divell, plots-contriver,
Worths-tormenter, life's depriver;
Tragic actor, blood effuser,
Times-corrupter, States-abuser;
Brothel-Turner, virgin-Trader,
Husband-hater, Lusts-perswader;
Ages-monster, youths-deflourer,
Worlds-rumor, wealths-devourer;
Painted-Idol, Arts-new-creature,
Lady in a Pages feature;
Soil to the soil where she was bred,
Poys'ning most where she was fed;
Vices-harbor, times quotation,
Double troth'd by Dispensation;
Nights dear. Minion, Lights abjurer,
Souls-eclipser, sinnes-securer;
Vault of darkness, horrors-Heire;
Child to Mischief and Despair;
Saint-appearing, maid-protesting,
Yet both Saint and Maid molesting;
Saint with sorrow, Maid with fury,
Tried by a woman-Jurie;
Seeming-try'd, yet was afraid
To be censured for a Maid;
Therefore chus'd a Maid indeed
To be searched in her steed;
Masked, for so did shame require,
Suited in her own attire;
Thus she passed undescryde,
Found a Maid, yet never tryde.
One that knew the way to marry
Not by Priest but Pothecarie;
Whose Receipts, which Art allowed her
To apply, were Spiders powder,
Copprice, Vitriol, which in part
Showed her skill in Chymick art.
Thus she lived, and thus she di'd,
Serpents brood, and Satan's bride,
Pitied least when most distressed,
Hated most when envied lest:
So as question may be made,
Whether that her Corpse now laid
And interred in Natures breast
Will endure in Earth to rest,
Or her ashes after death
Will not with infectious breath
Stain that holy plot of ground,
Where her lustful- Corpse are found.
But howere her body be,
Sure I am that infamy
Will never leave her, but will have
Still her foot upon her Grave.
Graving this upon her Tomb
As a Theme in time to come:
Here lies young Messalina, whose foul lust,
Pios'd with revenge, proves thus much; God is just!
For heat of lust, immixt with height of blood
Had never deeper dye in Womanhood.
PHIL. PORTERS Elegy: In answer to a Libelling Ballader, seeking by his
mercenary Pen, to traduce his honor.
CEase Ballader;
in censuring PHIL PORTER
Thou do but bray thy Brainpan in a Mortar.
He was a Man of men,
and women too,
And could do more then Others Hectors do.
For the Style of Honor he stood stiff upon it,
And would far sooner give then take affront.
Besides, he showed compassion all his life
In taking a doomed A Cap^ive in Newgate, shortly after executed at Ti^urne.
Prisoner to his wife,
Saying, "She should be cheered before she die;
"Wedding and hanging go by destiny.
"In one word, none to Fortune less beholden,
Who was in Fare more choice, nor Pocket golden.
His death divined a rare Prophetic fate
By his prevention of an Act of State;
Where Hectors are a strict account to give
How, and by what ways, their ranting humors live:
For armed with resolution, he thought fit
To pass from hence before he answered it.
Should Death thus seize on all our ruffling Fry,
That Act might cease, because the Actors die.
His farewell to Poetry. Carmina secessum, scribentis and otia quaerunt.
BOOKS fare ye well!
your Author now is hurled
Like a transformed thing
into the World.
Now am I grown as like
as like may be
To earth-turn'd Chremes in the Comedy;
Now must I take more care then does become me,
For many Items which have quite undone me.
Item for soap and candles are but small,
Compared with those that I Have to deal withal.
My cares be many, though my coin be more,
Which add affliction to my careful store.
Those Tales which I on winter nights have told
When I was casten in a merry mold,
And those same Songs whereof I had such choice,
Not only I Have forgot, but lost my voice.
I who of late so cheerfully did look,
And with a wench could drink a Sillibooke,
Am of that ashie hue, scarce one among ten
Can know me now, that knew my visage then.
Yea, I Am so muddy grown, as now of late
I can scarce laugh at any good conceit;
Yea, one may talk to me a summer day,
And I nere hear one word that he does say;
So clotted am I grown with worldly pelf,
As I much fear I shall forget my self.
If I but miss the key of such a chest,
Till I have found it I can take no rest,
For I am jealous still and full of care
Lest some base knave should in my fortunes share.
Besides, when rest should my lul'd senses keep,
Strange visions startle me, and break my sleep.
Sometime I see a sharke, which makes me shake,
The keys of all my treasure sliely take
Under my pillow; and awak't with fear,
Me thinks I catch the Rogue fast by the ear;
But coming to my self, I find right soon,
My hand upon no Rogues ear but mine own.
Straight in a broken slumber do I hear
Fire, fire (me thinks) resounding every where,
Which fear of fire begets in me desire
To piss my bed, that I may quench the fire.
Much better was my State, and far more free,
When I remaind in the University;
Where as I had naught, so I cared for naught,
But for the pitch of knowledge, which I sought:
Having both cheerful sleep, and healthful air,
And Stomach too, hows'ere my commons were.
What chioce delights were then afforded us
In reading Plutarch, Livie, Tacitus,
Or the Stagyrians rare Philosophy,
Whereto the Indi may not compared be
With all their precious oar; For I did find
No Mine on earth could so enrich the mind?
But see how I am changed from what I was!
For now I prize more Isis goldan Ass,
Who has more means then brains, then such an one,
Whose parts are many, though his means be none.
Besides, no Authors can I brook to read,
But such as in me hope of profit breed.
I have no time to think of Conscience
For timely thrift, and Ant-like providence.
I weigh no Protestant nor Catholic,
Give me a Georgick or a Bucolick,
To teach me what a Grazer does befit;
And for my tillage how to husband it:
Yea, lest I err in rules of husbandry,
An Erra-pater keeps me company,
To tell me which are good-dayes, which are ill,
And this I keep closse in my bosom still.
With Pallingenius too I often converse,
Whose sense I relish better then his verse;
Where I collect by th'influence of each Star,
What year is marked for famine, what for war;
And if I find a dear year like to be,
My store shall make that year my Jubilee.
Nor have I only bid my Books a dieu,
But ye that are good-fellows, unto you;
For what should I do sitting of a shot,
Who set more by my penny then my pot?
It Is strange to see, how with a little state,
I Am wholly metamorphosed of late.
Before I could not brook to have a moate.
(So brisk and spruce I was) upon my coat:
Now earths affections are to me so moving,
As I am grown a very arrant sloving.
Besides, I feel a misery in store,
For I am far more sparing then before.
My care of thriving makes me one of those,
Who ride their Gelding barefoote to save shoes.
Nor can I be dissuaded from the same,
Till under me I feel my Palfrey lame.
The smallest trifle makes me discontent,
And with my household so impatient,
As all the day I chafe, I fume, I fret,
And for no cause at all my servants beat.
If any Neighbors do less then become them,
I presently commence a suite upon them;
And for a Goose-gate (that I more may spite them)
Of trespass at next Sessions I Will indite them;
So as of late, by trifling Suits I Am grown
The Commonst-Barretter in all our town.
And for as much as I do know the fashion
Is now a days bartring Impropriation
And Presentations too, it is my thrift
To seem to give, yet profit by my gift:
Free from which crime, of beneficed men,
It Is very rare to find one among ten.
For Symonie is such a common sin,
More Prelates by the window do get in
Then by the Door, so as my manner's now
To wipe my mouth, and do as others do;
For I do hold that rich Drones doctrine best,
Who though he cannot preach, can cram my chest,
For my Donation then who will come by it,
Be he nere so sufficient, he must buy it.
More then all this although I know no sorrow
May of more baseness his beginning borrow,
Then to lament, as many worldlings do,
The sudden loss of either Ox or Cow;
I Am grown so tender hearted as I Will cry,
And like a child put finger in the eye
For every niffle, and distracted run,
As if my State were utterly undun.
So as I Am grossly pointed at by some,
And called old Mammon wheresoere I come;
Though neither I, my Marmosite nor page,
Can make amongst us fifty years of age.
Besides, if any Debtor now of mine
Should chance to Bankerout before his time,
And leave me in the lapse; I Am so oppressed
With grief, as night nor day I take no rest,
But roving here and there, as one forlorn,
I wish the morn were night, the night were morn.
Early before 't be light I fetch the Statute,
Where all the day long I am poring at it,
To see if it will tender me relief
To ease my State, cure care, alay my grief;
Which if I cannot find, I pule and cry,
And like a bull-rush hang the head and dye.
And yet I dye not (this my fates forbid)
Though happy were my Neighbors if I did:
For next time I come out to take the air)
Though for my wealth then health I take more care)
I presently some pretty Toft espy,
Which to my own conveniently does ly;
And he is a very Naboth that does owe it,
Which makes me hope in time to creep into it;
For I do wish a famine but to see,
And sure I am his Toft will fall to me;
For either want of bread will disestate him,
Or to the naked bones I mean to grate him.
I am to the ears in Law, nor do I care
Though I lose by it; my purpose is to spare
So much at least in dole-dayes to the poor
As will maintain my Suits of law and more.
The other day, my friend made me an offer,
But I set light by the curt'sy he did proffer,
That I might Knighted be, if I would buy it,
Whereto I answer made, I Would rather fly it,
Then purchase such a state by which I lost,
For the Proverb is, much worship and much cost.
All my discourse, when any visit me,
Is to inveigh against Prodigality,
And what distempers our excess does breed,
In hope my guests more sparingly will feed;
Lest they should surfeit, which were hard to do,
For all my dishes are but one or two.
This my discourse store of examples has,
As Adam, Lot, Moses, Methuselath,
Who lived many healthful days no doubt,
Yet best of their provision was a root:
Why should not same provision at this day
Content our liqu'rish tastes as well as they?
Yet thanks unto my Stars, I am as able
To feed as freely at another Table,
And with as luscious fare delight my taste,
As those that had their breeding in puffe-paste.
Yea, mark the extent of misery in this,
My hyde-bound Nature so restrained is,
As for this twelve month I was never found
To ease my self within another ground;
Because I would be very loath to see
Any man's Land made fruitfuller by me;
For all the good I may or ever can,
I wished my self, and to no other man.
Besides, I Am so surpised with my estate,
As I Have no Stomach to my meat of late;
Like to a Picture made of dough, mop I,
While others gormandize it that sit by:
I all a dinner time scarce eat a bit,
But muse how I may such a Purchase git,
Yea, Midas-like, if I might what I would,
I could wish all my meat were turned to gold;
So should I quickly without more ado,
Famish my self and all my meynie too.
Before, my care was how to prize my health,
And next my health, my wench, above all wealth;
Wherein I showed compassion to the poor,
In clothing now and then my naked whore;
Where now I Am more perplexed then can be told,
If my Tweake squeeze from me a piece of gold;
For, to my Lure she is so kindly brought,
I look that she for naught should play the naught.
Besides all this, since I came to such wealth,
If I enjoy my Wench, it is by stealth;
For store of eyes are on me, and report
May bring a Rich man to the Chapter-Court:
Where, in bare fees, I might much money spend,
Although the Commissiarie be my friend.
I care not much if every Month were Lent,
Not that I mean the sooner to repent,
For I no Sac-cloth wear, nor ashes neither,
But that I and my house might starve together:
Yea, fasting I commend so much the more,
Because spare-Dyet does preserve my store.
I Have taken a course naught in my house to keep
Save Rats and Mice, shall eat when I Am a sleep.
For Reputation, I so lightly prize it,
I hold him only wise that does despise it:
Yea, this shall be the mark whereat I pitch,
Rather to be dishonest then not rich.
Well, if these be the fairest fruits of Wealth,
I hold him blessed has liberty and health;
For who will desire that Treasury to keep,
That reaves him of his meat and of his sleep;
Yea mads him too, for thus much sure I am,
No Worldling ever yet was, his own man?
I will not play the Ass thus, nor contemn;
The only sweet society of men:
The Dev'll shall have it first, hows 'ere I seem,
(The Devil at St. Dunstans I do mean)
Rather then like a Stoick-worldling strive
To hoord up that would famish me alive.
At Ducks and Drakes we on the Thames will play
And pave the street with gold to Halloway,
Next day, my Boys, at Ratcliffe we'll make merry,
And bring our Suburbs Tweaks, down in a wherry.
From thence to Rumford, where I mean to rore;
Thus shall my Sharks share in a rich man's store:
For Minus rule shall my direction be,
I Will rather drown my Wealth, then it drown me.
Vltimus haeres Domus es licet Prodigenil maeres

In Fluminn, Luminn verto

Iasanire gregem, ridetis volo

full page woodcut illustration, full page illustration

His Vision.
CLose by a Rill, where Springs
sweet murmuring kept,
I took a book to read, and
reading slept;
And whilst I slept, presented were such shapes
Of wanton Monkies, Marmosites, and Apes;
As more I gazed, I mused still the more
To note their shapes and habits which they wore.
For One took on him state, and at a feast
Sat as he had been some great Lord at least:
Those that with all obeisance did salute him,
Were Parasite and Sycophants about him;
Who with Earth-scraping congies devty show
To this State-Marmosite Magnifico.
The next, a pleasant Ape, came to my sight,
And he was all for pastime and delight.
He played such tricks, I thought some Fan begat him,
And I had like awak't with laughing at him.
Now would he skip upon a Ladies bed,
Then down again, as one had surfeited;
Straight for some other pleasure took he care,
As how to get choice Harriers for the Hare,
Or with what Hawke to make his evening flight,
Or with what Consorts pass the weary night:
So as me thought each hour he did complain him,
Wanting some new device to entertain him.
The third held in his claw a verbal story
Larded with ayrie titles of vainglory;
Wherein his carpet honor was displaid,
For the painted flagg confirmed what ere he said:
And this same Ape did for his Seamen call
As if he had been some great Admiral,
Who had command; or else been thither sent
To keep in awe the liquid regiment.
His styles were many, and of such esteem,
I mused much at first what they did mean;
So as I asked one Ape that stood hard by,
What had he done to gain such dignity?
Why, naught at all (quoth he); for all his store
Of Titles now, he was sometimes as poor
As meanest of us all: but this same Ape
Has gained him estimation by his shape;
Which makes him so vain glorious as he is,
Prizing no man's deserts so great as his.
Having taken full and perfect view of him,
As he went out an other Ape came in,
Tide round with ribband favors which he ware
About his wrest, or in his ear and hare;
The Ape of fancy termed he well might be,
For Ape had never more variety
Of Ties, Toys, Rings and Bracelets, which he said
Were each one booties from a several Maid,
Whose hearts he held, so lovely were his parts,
And might be rightly styled the King of Hearts.
An amorous Ape he was, fixing his eye
On his Spectators as he passed by;
For self conceit of his deserts did move him
To think none looked upon him, did not love him.
No sooner was he vanished, then an Ape
Of complete fashion, and unequalled sh pe
Approch'd methought, who as he drew more nie,
He struck more admiration in mine eye;
For clothes he wore were all of distinct fashion,
And had a taste each one of several Nation.
His quilted doublet French, his hat Polonian,
His breech Italionate, his boots Ionian;
Yea view his formal Suite from head to foot.
Seven Countries were at least required unto 't.
Yet though his lims were neat, his face was hard,
And set with Rubies like an Aenobarbe;
So as when ere he came in public place,
He had a mask to sconce his fiery Face.
Yet I perceived of all the Apes that were,
None more esteemed then was this Traveller;
For he was most accomplished, and did seem
By help of foreign Courts where he had been
Of choicest Entertainment, though his fashion
Appeared to me an apish affectation:
"For that is best which wi^h our selves is bred,
"And not from other Nations borrowed.
Next this, an other made himself expressed,
By seeming wiser far then all the rest;
An Ape of Observation, who pretended
He was from matchless Machavel descended.
And unto such mysterious knowledge come,
He knew what ere was done in Christendom.
Nor was his knowledge grounded on pretense,
But Speculation and intelligence:
So as more treasures were hid in his brain
Then all the Seventy Provinces contain.
Yet did I smile to see how the rest did grin,
And mop, and mow, and flout and fleere at him;
For though he seemed all others to surpass,
He was esteemed a selfe-conceited Ass,
Whose Observations were not worth a stroe,
Nor knew he more then all the World did know.
But yet some still would praise him to the sky,
Style him the masterpiece of policy,
And with their oily tongues extol him so,
As on these Fauns he would whole Farms bestow.
This made me laugh, that such a simple Ape
Should of himself grow so opinionate,
As he would have the world to believe
The wisdom of ye wise hung on his sleeve.
But while these Apes and all their pranks were shown,
A Silken Ape came in and put them down;
His breath was naught but perfume, and his skin
As sleeke and smoth as any Ladies chin;
Ranke-set with gold and pearl was his coat,
As if he had been one of special note.
Yet when he had shown all that he could show,
One whispring in mine ear; said he, I know
This gilded Trunck, this rotten painted Tomb,
And how of late he 's to this glory come.
"This Cinnamon Tree, quoth he (for his proud hide
"Is better worth then all the bulk beside)
"Took first plantation in the I Will of Wight
"From whence he, forced with famine, took his flight;
"But ere this wagg did to a beard aspire,
"He was by fortune made an Applesquire
"To a right active Lady, who it is sed,
"Advanced him from the Basket to her Bed.
"Since which auspicious fate, he did resort
"Like one of Cynthia's followers, to the Court,
"Where he remains as spruce, you see, as may be,
"Fed only by reversions from his Lady.
"Yet note this Court-Ape, and you shall obse^ve
"More state in him, then those who best deserve!
"Rich is his Robe, his presence scornful too,
"For he on better men will scarce bestow
"Least semblance of respect, so proud is he
"To those where he should most respective be.
"Yet what are his deserts, that they should seem
"Worthy such congies or so great esteem?
"Perchance this Ape can court; admit he can,
"This makes him not a complete Gentleman.
"Dare he with resolution enter list
"With his Opponent or Antagonist?
"Dare he contend for honor in the Field,
"And yield up life before one foot he yield?
"No, dainty milk-sop, these would soon out dare him
"He must not fight, his Lady cannot spare him.
This said, this Court-Ape thought he was displayed
By that long private whispering we had made;
So, as one conscious of some special crime
Which this neat Youth had acted in his time,
He straight retired; To stay, none could entreat him,
Till that the Citie-Ape ^y chance did meet him.
Who after due salutes in seemly sort,
"As, Brother Ape, when will you come to Court
"To see a Mask; or, if you think not fit
"To come your self, your wife may visit it.
With equal thanks, his curt'sie to requite,
The Citie-Ape did tender him the like;
"If he unto the Exchange would but repair,
"And make his choice of such rare knacks were there.
The Court-Ape took his leave, his leave was light,
While the Citie-Ape displaid him in my fight:
In comely habit, and of grave aspect;
Yet was there one thing I did disaffect,
Which to my view, was represented there,
And long ere this had cost the City dear.
For still me thought this Ape could never find any
To consort with, though there were Consorts many,
But that same Ape of Honor, who did look
As if he meant to get into his Book;
Which was his aim, and therefore did embrace him
As his dee-rbosome friend; For so to grace him
Would, as he thought, be the way to tie him to him;
To tie him! No, but rather to undo him.
Yet see this credulous conceited Ape,
He credits the protestations he does make,
And to the utmost of his State he proffers
To give him trust, and he accepts his offers.
Nor skils it much what gain he means to reap,
"He that will never pay, gets ware good cheap.
These had not long conferred, but I might see
A Country-Ape attyred flovenlie,
And he was ever poring on the ground,
"Counting how many pence came to a pound:
An Almanac he had within his breast,
On whose judicious Rules he set his rest;
For they did calculate (for so he thought)
Whether his Heir would thrive or come to naught.
He held no happy days were worthy naming,
But such as spoke of some ensuing Famine;
Which having found, with ceremonious show
He kissed the Book, and blessed the Author too.
For this same Ape (as he appeared to me)
Was for engrossing, biting Usurie,
And all oppression, so surpassing conning,
As all his Country had their handfulls on him.
Which other Apes observing, had displaid him
In worser terms before he had convei'd him;
But, by a private path or passage, he
Retired himself, and gaind him liberty.
Thus did this Worme-sprout shield him from their hate,
Or he had paid for wronging of the State.
Next him a Rotchet-Rooke, the slough of sloth,
Looked as he had ten Steeples in his mouth:
For Silence had so charmed this Moath of men,
As since he preached he could not tell day when,
Yet had this witless Bird-bolt so much reason,
That he could make himself a Diocesan,
By Symoniack-Contract, and dispense
(For an usurped Pale) with Conscience.
With great ones too He could insinuate,
Sow pillowes to their sleeves to'enhance his State.
Close to the poor was his penurious fist,
But for Church Livings a Monopolist.
For his Religion, howsoere he use it,
He Is not so well resolved but he could choose it;
Whether a Rhemist, Calvinist or Luther,
Or what fits his profession best, a Neuter.
Care of a wife and numerous progeny
Excludes all rites or rules of sanctity.
Who for his family provides not well,
Is worse, you know, than any Infidel.
Yet this Levitick progeny, I wis,
Might be his Chaplains brood as well as his.
But still, me thought, this Porpoise could not keep
His leaden eyes from falling fast asleep.
For fumes of wine had so surpised his brain,
After midday he could not wake for Spain:
So as, me thought, I left him to his rest,
Leaning his drivling chin upon his breast.
Close as the shadow does the body follow
Came in an Ape far wiser then Apollo,
O^ all the Sages which renowned Greece,
If one could judge by outward semblances:
But still, me thought, as he assaid to break
His mind, an Asthma would not let him speak.
Corruption did oppress him out a cry,
With a black jaundise which had seized his eye.
Nor Arguments with him were worth a straw,
Unless they had relation to the Law.
Authors were Heathen Greek and disallowed,
Because they were not by him understood.
A rout of raged Law-drivers did attend him,
Which from a Bastinado did defend him,
But he persuaded these to let them pass,
Tearming his Gown his Supersedeas.
So heavy were his eyes, he seemed to me
Surprised with some fearful Lethargy,
Or by the Nightmare rid, or at some Show
An Epicureall Feast had made him so;
So as to bed his Followers did take him,
Enjoining silence lest they should awake him.
Asleep no sooner was the Synod-Ape,
But a grave reverend Sire his place did take;
His words were maxims, aphorisms profound,
Sententious morals, and positions sound,
His answers solid; if he chanced to jest,
It was a pregnant Apothegm at least;
In brief, so rarely wise he did appear,
Some Solon or Lycurgus seemed there.
And yet me thought his aims did ever tend
More to a private then a public end:
For he had been a Politician ever,
And could such rules of Policy deliver,
As I may swear wheres'ever I have bin,
The Sages were but Novices to him.
Yet were his Axioms dangerous to maintain,
For he did hold, No man could ever gain
And hold concurrence with Religion too,
And therefore thought it best to make a show
Of what we least profess, and to dispense
In State affairs, with Faith and Conscience.
" For if ye will be truly wise (quoth he)
"Be what ye seem not; seem what least ye be.
Now this Political time-studied Ape
Could soon transform himself to any shape;
For if with holy-men he had to deal,
He could pretend a counterfeited zeal;
If with the Worldling, he could worldly seem,
And nothing less then of devotion dream;
With the voluptuous he could likewise share,
As if delight and pleasure were his care;
And, in a word, no humor do I know,
He could not frame his pliant mind unto.
But ripe in age, discourse lul'd him asleep,
While a scorched Ape did from a Limbeck creep;
For he in Chymick arts had spent his wit,
And yet had little got but smooke for it.
He of no Subject talked but still of one,
And hoped at last to get th'unvalued Stone,
And Kellie-like, whose Art did Art surpass,
Of Lattin Silver make, and gold of brass;
Yea in his house he would not leave a kettle
But should be changed into the purest mettle.
For wit and wealth, poor Ape, were so bereft him,
As in his house a kettle scarce was left him.
This All-a-mist, or Apish Alchumist
Dreamed he had both the Indies in his fist;
Golden-oar'd Tagus, Ganges, Pactolus,
Were held by him as merely fabulous;
Out of one Caldron he more gold could gather,
Then these rich shores were worth, or Indies either.
It was rare sport me thought, to see him nod,
Strut like a stalking-horse, and point, and plod,
And laugh at his device as if h'ad found it,
When he and all his shallow wits were grounded.
One day (quoth he) Boys, we will be passing merry,
When all the Candlesticks in Lothberrie
By my mysterious Art which I uphold,
Shall be transfused into Angel-gold,
Yea not a Spit, Jack, or Landiron there,
But like to Ophirs metal shall appear.
Thus he discoursed, but prated little after
He saw the Apes were like to burst with laughter.
But specially amongst all the rest was One,
An unthriv'n meager Ape, but skin and bone,
Who with a Critic visage did deride
This Chymick Monkey more than all beside.
Nor was it rare; for he could never afford
Any amongst them all the least good word:
So tart he was and eager of his tongue,
As he would seldom speak, but he would wrong
Some in their name, fame, honor, or esteem;
And this his use and custom still had been.
Besides, on Palmestrie he was affected,
And by an Erra-Pater had collected
Some erring rules of Art, which he professed,
And in each Village made himself expressed.
Where he pretended rules Political,
Auspicious days, and seasons Critical;
And would sometimes three hours or longer stand,
Like an Egyptian, poring on a hand;
Where on the Lines he would large Co^ments make,
Saying, This year you shall a Husband take,
A Courtier says this Line; but I divine
You will play fast and loose in Progress time.
But as this Critic did his tricks begin,
The Master of these Apes, me thought, came in;
At whose approach, submissively they bow them,
While I observed what he would do unto them.
For, unto me, as one incensed he seemed,
As if these Apes his pleasure had contemned,
Or played some tricks which he did much dislike,
And therefore showed as if he meant to strike.
At last, me thought, his Countenance grew smooth,
As surging Ocean after Tempests does,
Causing them to be singled one by one,
While he, erected on a marble stone,
Used these words, as he their Weal did tender,
Which I, 'twixt sleep and wake do well remember.
Come Jack an Apes, Come aloft, come aloft, for your
Masters advantage:
Come, with your tricks get relief, or ye die, to my grief,
in a skant age:
Show me what tricks ye have played while ye staid, be they weak,
be they witty,
In shadie Lawne, flourie Plain, Country, Court,
University, City.
The Ape of Honor.
I Must, and will; and as my rank is best,
In foremost rank I Will make my self expressed.
Since I played tricks it is now the 13th Su^mer,
In which my aim was still to purchase honor.
Where e're I ^aw one held in more esteem
Then I my self, I vented straight my spleen
Upon his person, and would labor too
(As much as lay in me) his overthrow.
I could not brook Corrivals; yea my heart
Did swell with grief to see men of desert
Respected where I sojourned, for I feared
My fortunes should be razed, if theirs were reared.
This caused me plot and practice some device
To move the State, their service to despise;
Suggesting how these men were Popular,
And though their course of life seemed regular,
Their study was but how to broach division,
And gain them titles suiting their ambition.
Or else, I made a show of love unto them;
And told them, this retirement would undo them;
It were more fit for them to be employed
In State Affairs, in which all good men joy'd,
Then bury those choice parts which Nature gave them
In airie hopes, which quickly would deceive them.
Now if they chanced to follow my advice,
My task was still to cross their enterprise
By undervaluing what they had effected,
That by the State they might be less respected.
Thus did my Honor take more true delight
In thwarting of some rising Favorite,
Whose blooming hopes were now to ripeness growing,
Then if my own Estate were overflowing;
"For, like to Jacks moved in a Virginal,
"I thought ones rising was another fall.
But now, secure of these, my Coach I took,
Where I perused a little Table Book,
Wherein such Citizens recorded be
As were to lend me Coin, or credit me
For such commodities as I did want,
And these my Honor hugged, these did I hant.
Having now got my purpose, straight I Would flee them,
And though they knocked, my Lordship would not see them.
My Honor was my Sanctuary made,
And by Protection all my debts were paid.
For if I grant Protection to another
To Conicatch, or to defeat his brother,
My shallow Sconce is run on no such Shelfe
As to neglect Protection for my self.
And yet some Apes I had were my delights,
And these were Sycophants and Parasites,
Who would so humor me, as I protest
No meat without them could I well digest.
From these I had directions for my pace,
Look, habit, speech, to add a greater grace
Or luster to my Honor; so as I
Would set my Countenance to look scornfully
On these inferior Vulgars, whose estate
My Honor scorned once to commiserate:
For I have ever held it derogation
To men of place, to harbor this compassion.
In forain Courts I ever Leaguers had
Who did inform me, were they nere so bad,
What projects Statesmen use to gain esteem,
And eagerly I still observed them.
For this same Idol Honor was the Saint
Which I adored, and for whose Shrine I meant,
Rather then by my weakness it should fall,
To hazard Body, State, Renown, and all.
For my She-Ape, I mean my plumed Lady,
Our loves were both indifferent as may be;
For either heat of Summer, or for hate
To Nuptial servitude, or for more state,
Though we did plead distemper of the wether,
Seldom or never lay we both together.
For this my Leaguers told me forain States
Observed, and this my Honor imitates.
Yet did my Lady play me once a trick,
Pretending on a day, that she was sick,
So as a Doctor might be sent for streigh,
( Lucina rather, for to make her light)
For first news that I heard, God send me joy,
My Fates had blessed me with a goodly Boy;
Yet might I eaten all my part of him,
without committing any mortal sin.
But yet I seemed to joy much in the Lad,
As if he head been mine, and I his Dad;
Whereas in truth, I probably could gather,
My Page, and not my Honor, was his Father.
All these could I dispense with as light Crimes,
Being scarce held for errors in these times,
Provided that my Lady look unto it,
And thenceforth sought more secretly to do it.
For well I knew, if I divorce did wish,
I could procure't for lesser faults then this;
But much I doubted, she would turn flat Rorer,
And do as other some had done before her,
Tax my debility since she was wedded,
Which foul aspertion would have split my credit.
But now the Wagg is grown a Boy of prize,
Inured to every Lordly exercise;
Though in the height of all his hopes I doubt
Such Bastard-slips will never take deep root.
Now must I show, to make my self displaid
In University, what tricks I played.
If any Dunse had but desire to skip
To the preferment of a Fellowship,
Were he never so incapable of it,
I was a means that he the place might git;
Provided that his Parents made him way,
And for his insufficiency would pay.
Then thick as haile-shot did my Letters go
To such a Doctor and She-Doctor too,
That as he tendered the respect I bore him,
He should prefer none to this place before him
Whom in my Letters I had so commended,
Thus was my Suit effectually ended.
And reason good they had to yield consent,
And in my Suits to give me all content,
For now and then some notice would I send them
Of such a late fallen Living, or Commendam,
Which I resolved, such was my zealous care,
To give to them whose lives most blameless were.
Though all my aims were rather to procure
Gain to my self, were the means nere so impure,
Then place such men, whose life and conversation
Deserved my love with choicest approbation.
In Country too, had I my Tarriers laid,
By whose Intelligence such tricks were played,
As I may swear, when I do think upon them
I needs must laugh, so nimbly have I don them.
When I did hear One had desire to get
Unto the title of a Baronet,
Or that his itching humor did aspire
To leap to Knight before he was Esquire;
By these my Tarriers I made known unto him,
I Would do him all the kindness I could do him,
But for the price of Honor, it was more
By means of some occurrents then before;
Besides, he should have some additions granted,
Which all his former honored Neighbors wanted.
And thus I soakt my spungie Knight, that he
Might honor gain to cope with Beggerie.
Again, if any one within our Nation
Had a desire to get a Toleration
In matters of Religion, I Would procure
He might enjoy his Conscience so secure
As none should trouble him; provided, he
Did but observe and keep true touch with me.
And yet would I, enforced sometimes by want,
Practice right closely with a Pursivant
To ferret him, and get a composition,
And yet this Act never moved me to Contrition.
But much abridg'd our profit now of late is
Since Papists may have Tolerations gratis.
Have Tolerations! no, that time is past,
Since hope to match with Spain is wholly dashed:
Anselme and Wright are now returned again,
And left the English pale to visit Spain.
Yea, our State-Agents carefully have sought
That the Spanish Legate to account be brought,
Whether he has (for this they seek to know)
Exceeded his Commission, or no.
If this report be true, Shavelins adieu,
The State intends but little good for you.
But I do hear a motion like to be,
Which, I confess, does much distemper me;
But ^ather then the State consent unto it,
I will by all means labor to undo it.
And it is this, Some Protestants complain,
But their complaints, I hope, will be in vain,
That they are almost weary of their lives,
They pay so much for the Conscience of their wives.
The light of Protestancie darts upon us,
And drives two hundred fifty five Vid. Tract entitled, The Foot out of the
Snare,
in his Catalogue of Popish Priests names.

Priests from us.
Which to redress, they crave (as does become them)
The State would take commiseration on them:
Which, in good sadness, I must needs confess,
Deserves, in each man's judgment, due redress:
For it does little stand with Conscience,
That the husband he should pay for the wifes offense,
Seeing among them there is scarce one of seven,
That by their Husbands will be lead or driven.
But what is all this to me, though they fare worse,
I aim not at their Conscience, but their Purse.
In brief, were he Monopolist, or any
Who to enrich himself undoeth many;
Were he Engrosser, who, if he may serve
His own base turn, cares not how many sterve;
Were he Forestaller and Regrater too,
Whose use is all our Merkets to undo,
Made he recourse to me, he might allege,
By virtue of my powerful privilege,
His Liberty, whats'ever should befall,
In spite of any Justice of them all.
Thus like a nimble Honour-prizing Ape,
I have transformed my self to every shape;
That by this means I might insinuate
By secret paths, into another state,
And so support mine own, which would decline
If others were not props to bear up mine.
Now when I Am dead, some by my Tomb will pass,
And say perchance, Here lies Pherecidas,
Venting aspersions on me as they please,
As that I di'de some lousie vile disease,
Or of some State-Impostume swollen so big
It had no cure but die a Spanish Fig,
Or scorcht with some outlandish Tinder-box,
Di'de eaten by the Bubo, Piles, or Pox.
Thus must my styles and titles be forgotten,
And rot on Earth, as I on Earth was rotten.
Thus all life's pleasure's but a bussing game,
Which leaves us liqu'risher then when we came:
Some glim'ring rays of honor we may get,
Which once obscured, straight is our Summer set.
But this I seldom think on, I Have no time,
Mine aim is to advance these Imps of mine,
Whose shade shall spread so broad, as none may doubt
But they are derived from a spacious root.
Now I refer it to your self to show
Whether your Ape deserve not praise or no.
The Ape of Pleasure.
IS it not strange to hear this
Cock-horse Lord,
Who has a Branched forehead
on my word,
Thus magnify himself, when I his Page,
And at that time scarce sixteen years of age,
Was more respected by his youthful Madam
For two yeaes space, then all the time she had him!
What Masks, what Shows, what Enterludes could be
Contenting to her self withouten me?
What late Reere-bankets could delight afford
Without her Page, far deerer then her Lord?
And yet this burnished Idol, whose esteem
Consists in this, That he does precious seem
In eye of Vulgars, whose conceits appear
In prizing men by the Garments which they wear,
Preferres that Fame which Fondlings have of him
Before that place of Honor he is in.
But what concerns this me? it is my delight,
And in this do I glory, that the night
Has spread her Curtains close, as one at leisure
To tender all content to the Ape of Pleasure.
See, See, young Messalina how her eye
Assures me she affects variety!
Her once admired Lord grows out a date,
So as her love is turned into hate.
"For choicest cates may minister delight
"At first, but after, cloy the appetite.
But l^st those tricks which I have played, should seem
Weak in respect of what this Lords have been,
Though I be young and want experience,
As one directed by a youthful sense;
I can as Apish be as others are,
Yea and for honesty as little care
As any Suburbs trader, whose sole aim
Is by pollution to inhance their gain.
For three whole Years I have employed my time
In reading baudie Boccace, Aretine,
With those ripe Sibaritick merriments,
Which our Court-Ladies hold for ornaments
Of an unvalued price, they are so witty,
And these I read in Country, Court and City.
But in the Court when I a Comment made,
More they conceived then I discoursed or said;
For a grave Lady standing by the pew
Where I my Lecture red, did forthwith show
More grounded Rules for the Subject that I chused
Then all my wanton Consorts ere had used.
So as desiring much to know her name,
She haughtily replied, "Of public fame,
"Whose Love-attractive Beauty had obtained
"More high prized booties then ere woman gained.
"Nor be my hopes extinguished by my age,
"For I have One (quoth she) my pretty Page,
"Who would be loath for to degenerate
"Either in heat of love or height of State.
"And though her Honor, Luster, and Esteem
"Be not so great as sometimes it has been,
"Yet her experience with my discipline
"Has trained her so in postures of this time;
"As scarce that Lady is in Europe bred
"Who by her Lecture is not bettered.
"This I admired, which she observing told me,
"While she about my middle did enfold me,
"That if I sought employment in that kind,
"She could a place of entertainment find,
"So I would secret be and not discover
"The sly effects of some intrusive Lover.
"For we (quoth she) who feed imagination
"With hope, till means bring hope to recreation,
"May in our sleeps our waking thoughts disclose;
"Now Boy (said she) if you were one of those
"Who publish to the world what they do hear,
"You might destroy our reputation clear,
"And make our names such Emblems of disgrace,
"As we might seem unworthy of our place.
"For what if I should send to such a Lord,
"That in the Evening he would keep his word,
"And in the appointed place or arbor seat him,
"Where I resolved assuredly to meet him;
"While you, corrupted by some friend of mine,
"Acquaints him with this meeting, place, and time?
"Would this show well in you, seem fair to him,
"To see one wear the prize which he did win?
"Again, we Ladies many secrets have,
"Which in our Pages secrecy do crave;
"For we have Chamber-motives of delight,
" Powders to cause men love us at first sight,
"Amorous Broths, and cordial Receipts,
"Love-drawing Lures, and fancy-forcing baits,
"That our unbounded pleasures may be fed
"With same desire as they were nourished.
"Again perhaps, such may our humors be,
"(Since want of change begets satietie,)
"We Will daigne sometime our Pages to be tasters
"Of such choice Cates are due unto their Masters.
"Now would not this your secrecy deserve
"When you may them enjoy, whom you do serve?
This proffer tendered; " Madam, replied I,
"You need not doubt your Pages secrecy,
"(If you so please to term me;) I have bin
"For Ladies Secrets ever trained therein
"Since my first infancy, and was thought fit
"(So present and so pregnant was my wit)
"To carry diverse messages among them,
"Yet was I never taxed once to wrong them.
"Often by a private Entry have I brought
"One to my Lady, yet suspected naught;
"For, in a Nightgown, womanly arraid,
"I took him for some Ladies Chambermaid,
"So as I took in hand at all aventer
"To open the door, that he might freely enter.
"Among the rest One was I sometime toward,
"Who was so peevish, testie, and so froward,
"As she in nothing took more free delight
"Then to become her Husbands opposite.
"If he at any time should make resort
"Unto the Country, she was for the Court;
"Were he for Court, she to the Country went,
"For contradiction was her Element.
"Yet, which is rare, this peevish wilful thing
"Was much addicted still to wantoning,
"So as, amidst the heat of all her rage,
"Naught could allay her fury but her Page.
Thus I the progress of my life did tell,
Which this grave Lady liked passing well;
Wherefore, concluding with one joint consent
To leave the Court, I with my Lady went,
Where I presented was some sennight after,
As a rich booty, to her lovely Daughter;
Who did so much affect me, she thought meet
To lodge me nightly at her own bed feet.
None would she suffer scarcely to approach,
Or take her hand to bring her to her Coach,
But only I; none would she else admit
To hold her chat, or in her Coach to sit:
I was her Ingle, Gue, her Sparrow bill,
And in a word, my Ladies what you will.
How many Ev'nings Coached she and I
With Curtains drawn, that none might us epsy?
But now grown weak, when I should be rewarded,
For want of strength I was by her discarded.
Mean time, had I occasion to remain
Here in the City, hoping to regain
That estimation which I late had lost,
But ^y a little Monkey was I crossed,
Who in short time into such credit crept,
As ever since he with my Lady slept.
But see my fate! through my too sumptuous port,
While I remained in presence of the Court,
Hoping my Lovesick Lady would supply
What ere I spent by prodigality,
I was attached, and in the Counter thrown,
Yet less disgraced, because I was not known.
Where I sojourned some fortnight space and more,
Till a rich Drapers wife did me restore,
Whose former knowledge me enfranchised,
With whom I shortly after married:
For having solemnized her Widow rites
By space of fifteen tedious winter nights,
It pleased her to make choice of such an one
That might supply the place of him that is gone.
And now I live as free from thought or care
As those who have in fortune highest share:
My pleasure is my treasure, whose delight
Extends it self from morning unto night.
Sometime I hunt the Hare, sometimes I spare
The earth, to take my pleasure in the air,
Where my skie-soaring Falcon makes his way,
Lessning himself till he has got his pray.
Sometimes my House and Garden use to yield
As much content as does the spacious Feeld,
For there at Bowls, at Tables, or at Chesse
My wearied spirits use I to refresh:
Yea in an Arbor have I made a Caul,
Wherein's an Ape I brought from Portingal,
A nimble thing, so tutord and so tame
As it can play at any kind of Game.
At Chesse it knows where the Bishops place should be,
With all the Grooms that keep him company.
And it will laugh, so witty is the Wagg,
To see them put together in a bagg,
Wondering that He who held a Bishops room
Should play Check-mate with his inferior Groom.
Thus do I sport, thus do I pass the time,
For pleasures are those purchases of mine,
Which I the most affect and most admire,
To feed with oil the flame of my desire.
Only my Wife, since her rich Draper did
To me espoused, seeks to be Ladifide;
Which honor I have got her, with a Crest
To make mine honor anciently expressed:
Wherein I hold the Herald did me right
In finding for my Coat a Marmosite,
Whose nature is, (so far does lust prevail,)
For want of better food, to eat his tail.
Thus have you heard my whole discourse at large,
How I have wasted been in Pleasures Barge,
Where I have fed and feasted on such store,
As Surfeits make me I can feed no more.
For as variety begets delight,
Delight begets a moving appetite:
So pleasures tried, like snow-balles melt to nothing,
And end their longing with an endless lothing.
The Ape of Vainglory
DIsplay, display those Annals and Records
Of time renouned Heroes, Peers and Lords,
Their Actions, their Designs; and you shall see
These Apes are imitators but of me.
For what have they by resolution won,
What Conquest have they got, what have they don?
Has Fame erected Trophies in their praise,
Or girt their Temples with triumphant Bays?
Are Statues reared to memorize their worth,
With all those Acts Antiquity brought forth?
Trophies, Bays, Statues add no longer time
To their exploits then Fame has done to mine.
In Court while I reside, I show such State
Even in my Nod, my Countenance and Gate,
As there is none that casts their eye upon me
But says that Garb does properly become me.
If at the Justs I chance to break a spear,
Methinks the Ladies eyes are fixed there;
Whose approbations gain me more renown,
Then Leaves can make expressed, or Colors shown.
Among my Consorts, Letters do I show
From State of Venice and from others too,
To me directed, as one whom they deem
Of choice, select, and principal esteem.
Though I to Venice never traveled yet
But caused these Letters to be counterfeit.
The great Mogol that Title cannot crave,
Which on my self conferred I would not have;
For as my aims are only popular,
So is my substance merely titular.
With Ladies of accomplished quality,
Rank, and descent, I hold concurrencie:
From whom if I a favor chance to git,
I glory in the purchasing of it,
Vowing and vanting, not the wealth of the Land
Should ransom such a booty at my hand.
If I do any work, as few I do,
I Would have the world take notice of it too.
In public Entertainments I would be
Observed sole Heir of liberality;
Which to express, this only task is mine,
To make our City-Conduits run with wine,
Scramble Cakes, Wafers, Suckets in the street,
And tread whole carts of Biscuit under feet.
Far more affection have I to bestow
My bounty on some public Antic show,
So I may have my name endors'd at large,
That it was reared at my proper charge,
Then building of a Church, or any use
Which simple people term religious:
These works I hate, and all that do begin them,
For their hot zeal show too much Conscience in them.
Like Jove in Danaes lap my gold I shoure,
When I invite some great Ambassador,
Where at one Supper I do more bestow
Then to defray, my Lordship knows how.
And by this means I seek to gain esteem
Where this great Legate and his Lords have been;
Though they perchance deride me and my aims,
And with a french-frump gratify my pains.
Of all, there is no act delights us
So much as that of brave Herostratus,
Who to gain glory made himself exemple,
In setting fire upon Dianas Temple.
Neither shall Nero's glory e're expire,
Who played on's Lute while Rome was all a fire,
Sending wild beasts into the public street,
Such to devour as they withal should meet.
So as, 'twixt fire and fear, amazed they run,
Feeling the one, while they the other shun.
In all my time, I never have desired
(Such my ambition was) to live retired,
For that I thought would gain me no respect,
The only object which I did affect;
So as my choice was ever to resort
Near to the Sun, the Mansion of the Court;
Where others correspondence kept with me,
As self-conceited too as I could be.
Yet for exchange, because I had desire
That vulgar eyes my presence should admire,
Unto the City daign'd I to approach,
Never without six Jennets in my Coach:
Where, if encountering any, I use ever
To press salutes with motion of my Bever.
To breath the common air, or walk the street,
Or entertain discourse with those I meet
I hold it derogation; yet to show
I prize my friend, I Will give a nod or so;
For he that will not on his postures stand,
And prove his education from the Strand
By carriage of his body, I do hold
(How os'ere he be in Honors-booke enrol'd)
He Is but a Goard that does his Leaves display
By one nights growth, and withers on the day.
Yet in the entertainment of a friend,
Though I seem nice, if he have power to lend,
Or yield supply to my necessity,
I will admit him my Society.
Though from familiarity exempt,
For that begets in us too much contempt.
Now the practice I have ever used, when
I would persuade some wealthy Citizen
To lend me money to supply my want,
With ayrie hopes I feed my Cormorant;
Telling him how by reason of my place,
I every day have Offices in chase;
Which if he free the Bonds that I am in,
I will not stand much to bestow on him.
Again, amongst all my retinue, no knave
But knows the styles and titles that I have;
For such my pleasure is, that every Rogue
Within my Sculrie have a Catalogue
Of all my Titles; which, they do pretend
Were given to me for some especial end;
Whence these obsequious Shadows that attend me,
Persuade my Creditors great sums to lend me;
Alleging how by reason of my power,
It is a credit to my Creditor
To gain esteem with such an one as me,
Whose many Styles proclaim his dignity.
Besides, if any injured by my men
By taking up commodities of them,
Shall sue their Bonds for payment such a day,
Which, I Am resolved, they never mean to pay,
With number of my Styles they so apall
Their Creditors, they let their Action fall;
For so upon my greatness they do stand,
They fear no right is gotten at their hand.
Nay more, their Creditors may seem so fond,
That they will plead an Error in the Bond:
For, as it may by specialty appear,
They unto such a Lord retayners were;
Which Style, as now it seems, is wholly drowned,
And higher Titles for his Lordship found;
Whose Style being changed, avoids their former state,
"Their Master is not same as Bond bears date.
So as his Title either must be same,
Or else there is an Error in their claim.
Thus do I flourish, and my followers too,
As free from debt as those that nothing owe;
Nor owe we ought, we may be bold to say,
For they are said to owe that mean to pay.
But that I may in the City keep a quarter,
I Will promise them for to enlarge their Charter
With this addition; Any Citizen,
Having so many years a freeman been,
Though he be able for estate, may break,
And have Protection granted if he seek;
Provided that he pay yearly revenue
To me, to mine, or one of my retinue.
Thus do I lure my City-birds unto 't,
With hope of that I nere can bring about.
Sometime, for change, the Country air I choose,
Where my well-seated ancient Mannor-house
Joys in my presence; I Have no sooner shown me
Then all the Country-Gentry come upon me;
Whose presence choice of presents straight begets
Of Phesants, Pigeons, Pluvers, Caponets,
All which come to my Cook humbly beseeching
They may supply provision of his Kitchen.
Next day a stall-fed Ox sent by a knight,
And he resolves to suppe with me at night,
Which, though it were discourt'sie to deny him,
Yet when he comes, seen am I scarcely by him:
For strangeness suits with greatness, which may seem
To gain to us more popular esteem.
Now for my house, delightful is the Site,
The base-Court paved with colored Porphyrite,
Where two fair Statues curious as may be,
One for my self, another for my Lady
Erected are, with Columns reered high,
Which force an admiration to the eye
Of the Beholder, and their state is such,
The golden-Calfe was nere adored so much.
As for my House, it is open unto all,
And they for Beer or any thing may call;
Yet have I so provided, though they crave it,
My Buttry hatch is shut, they cannot have it.
In Country-Musters, it is some Task of mine
To take survey of all their discipline,
And teach them what those martial-postures be,
Trains, Stratagems, and feats of policy;
Though, for my knowledge, I do freely grant,
That I in these am wholly ignorant;
For I may swear I never yet conferd
With any one of all the Artil'ry-yard.
Yet joy I much to hear the vulgar say,
A braver Leader never did display
His Colors in the field, for I Am the man
Would seem more to the world then I am.
In my discov'ry further to proceed,
Excuse me Fellow Apes, I shall not need,
For few or none in Albions-Court there are
But they do know my fashions to a hare:
Nor am I such a Snake to cast my slough,
My Titles make me Great, and that is enough.
The Ape of Fancy.
Do but admire me, it is all I crave,
For as I love my self, so would I have
All ravished with my presence, which obtained
I have attained the Port at which I aimed.
For if Narcissus, selfe-conceited Elfe,
Did love himself by looking on himself,
I cannot see, my beauty being such,
But I may like and love my self as much.
But that ye may the better understand
My education, Race, Descent, and Land,
Where I was borne, where bred, and how I came,
I will acquaint you briefly with the same.
Some will not stick to call me foreign brat,
But I were mad if I Would be moved at that,
For I do know I am no Forrainer
But a right natural English Ilander;
For even my disposition tells me so
Through selfe-conceite which I am subject to.
Yea I Will tell truth, how ere ye wonder at me,
A Courtier of a Succubus begat me,
From whom such secret night-works have I learned,
As what I do can never be discerned.
In a Court-entry dark of purpose made
Fit for encounter am I oft-times laid,
Where I enjoy a prey as rich as may be,
And for the Maid encounter with her Lady;
Which she, such rare humility suites honor,
Receives as freely as is put upon her.
I must make one in every Mask and Show,
Or our Court-ladies care not for 't a Stro;
For I 'me their Ape of Fancy, whose delight
Does please them more then any Marmosite.
If I find any Lady discontent,
I can prescribe a cure incontinent,
And with an active application too
Use far more art then other Apes can do.
For be 't Green-sicknesse, which few Madams have,
Or Honors Frenzy, which will make them rave,
Be It the Scotoma, or the Nightmare ride them,
Their cure's soon wrought if I may lie beside them.
Pills have I store and choice Confections too,
Which on my Patients freely I bestow,
Not like our base impostur'd Mountebanke
Whose aim 's to sell for gain and not for thank.
Free is my bounty and so well approved,
As in Court, City, Country I am loved,
The Trophies of whose favor I do wear
About my wrest, my Hat-band and my ear.
For be she Lady conversant in Court,
To her as to my Shrine I make resort,
And with such Apish complement accost her,
As she 's surprised with my Courtly posture.
To the Cent we go, where we at Cent-foot play,
By which our hidden meanings we bewray.
Her Feather for a Favor do I carry,
While she protests if she were now to marry,
The Ape of Fancy should enjoy her heart,
And this contenteth me, and so we part.
Again, sometimes unto the Burse I go,
Of purpose there to take a turn or two;
Not to make choice of any new thing there,
But to survey what beauty might appear
Most grateful to mine eye; and there I find
A pliant nature sorting with my mind.
A Widow-Wife, whose absent Husband gives
Access to world of Suitors, and she lives
No less observed then fancied; yet her wit
So smoothly and demurely carries it,
As she preserves her fame so unsuspected,
As more she acts the more she is respected.
All which proceeds, as probably may seem,
In that she trades with men of choice esteem,
Who ferret-like still sport them in her Burrow,
With whom she revells it the evening through.
Though I confess ingenuously my shame,
That on a time I lay upon her name
Such deep aspersion, as it did surpass
The compass of redress, and thus it was.
"Upon a day withouten company,
"I went to cheap a rich commodity;
"Here and there sought I this, but in a word
"Not any shop in Burse could like afford
"As this fair Curtezans, who seemed nice,
"As if she would not sell't at any price;
"For know (quoth she) this stands not here for Sale,
"But only set to grace the Shop withal.
"This answer did not please me, for my fortune
"Did promise me, that if I would importune
"Or press my suit, hows'ere her breast seemed steeled,
"By hot assault she could not choose but yield.
"On this foundation grounded, I did show her
"How much respect I ever tendered to her,
"So as no fancy could be more expressed
"Then the faithful service I to her professed.
"And know (dear Love) such is my present state
"As I will buy this Gem at any rate,
"Rather then lose what I esteem so much,
"The boundless limits of my Love is such.
"Besides, it will no derogation be
"To cast the eye of your respect on me,
"For I may grace you more then any other,
"Both by my own means and my high-priz'd brother,
"Whose rising-fortunes gain him that esteem
"As blessed are they that may but follow them.
"So moving was this lovely Rhetoric,
"A^ it began to touch her to the quick;
"Silent she was, Silence implies consent,
"Whence I perceived my profer gave content:
"For there was noughr that wrought so much upon her
"As when I gave her notice of mine honor,
"And that my Lordship would reward her more
"Then all her Silken-guls had done before.
"For these Court-punies, What could they effect
"That might deserve the height of her respect?
"These are but great-mens-shadowes at the best,
"Who suit themselves with shreds of interest,
"Learn to look big, and keep their postures too,
"But which of these has money to bestow
"On his affected Mistress, whose repair
"Must not rely on Castles in the air?
"Yea, which of these, how ere they seem to prate,
"Dare whet their knife near to the Counter-gate?
"Such gilded Puppets are these Courtly-Apes
"Who gull fair Idols with deceiving shapes.
"Having obtained my Suit, I made expressed
"By bounteous gifts, the Love which I professed,
"So as amongst all paid tribute to her beauty,
"I was the man to whom she tenderd duty
"With most observance; But behold my fancy
"Grew in the end distempred with a Phrensy,
"So as I could not any thing conceal,
"But amongst the rest told how I had to deal
"With this fresh amorous Bursan, and what rate
"She prized the traffic of her body at;
"So as in brief (so far had reason crossed me)
"I told my wife how dear that pleasure cost me.
"She, though I was distemperd, did apply it
"To her conceit, and thought in time to try it;
"Which on a day, her Lady-mother being
"Of her opinion, and in one agreeing,
"With jealous thoughts, they to this Sempster go,
"To try if this report weee true or no.
"The Shop descride, these subtle Sirens take
"Their walk by her, She asking what they lack,
"Little suspecting (simple Soul) that they
"Should in those shapes her secret crimes display.
"Show us some Ruffs, quoth one, of choicest fashion,
"Spanish, Italian, or some other nation,
"As the Venetian; where no Country can
"Compare in State unto their Curtezan.
"Chiefest and choycest of her Ruffs she shows them,
"For she presumes (so perfectly she knows them)
"That none would give content but such were best,
"Though worse would serve for such a thankles guest
"Choice do they make of such as best do like,
"And at a price they now begin to strike;
"What she demands they give, but pay, they said,
"Was more then needs, She was already paid.
"By whom (said she?) By such a noble Lord,
"Who has engaged his honor and his word,
"That such a time and place, what would you more?
"Just to this Sum he paid you long before
"She (modest Matron) guilty of the Bill,
"Stood as a Statue, silent, hushed and still;
"Yet with Vermilion tinctures she displaid
"That such a Sum had been by me defraid:
"Which they observing, left her sore perplexed
"Through my distemper, thus impeached and vexed.
After, by means of Physic and good diet,
My Phrentick humor grew to be more quiet;
So as when they did any time upbraid
Or tax me now with that which I had said,
I straight recanted that which I had spoken,
But femal spleen is not so soon forgotten;
For those aspersions though I did disclaim,
Imputing them to the weakness of my brain,
My Lady-mother will not let me gad,
But keeps me still restrained, as I were mad;
So as the cause why I can scarcely know
My friends, is this, my Lady makes me so.
One have I heard speak in my forlorn room,
"A madder Lord is not in Christendom,
But he may thank his genius for it
And not his honor, if he have more wit.
Now all the tricks which I must henceforth play
Are few or none, for I poor Ape must stay,
Like to a starved Snake or drouzie Drone,
With house-Baboons and Marmosites at home;
Unless I go sometimes unto a Wake,
Where I such Stoics for my Consorts take,
As Rumford, Ratcliffe, Hallowell can show,
For these are farthest Wakes I go unto,
My Tutors be so strict, unless by chance,
About a May Pole I dare hardly dance,
Or give a wench a green-gown on the grass,
So much the time is changed from what it was.
Only (kind-Bearward) rests it in your power
To make me free as any Emperor;
Whereby you may redress my present wrong,
And make me merry as the day is long.
The Ape of Fashion.
FAshion thou art mine Idol, Pride my Prize,
My glass, my globe, my corpse, my Sacrifice,
Which I one day must offer to the Mace,
For cloth a silver, scarlet and gold-lace.
Twelve years and more I have a Trav'ler been
In France and Italy, where I have seen
Variety of fashions, whose rich fraught
I now, at last, have to my Country brought;
For I was he that did the first discover
Your Saffron yolkie band, and brought it over;
Your paned doublet, and penurious breech
Were undescride, till I began to teach
The rudiments of Art, nor have I lost
All by my voyage, though it deerly cost.
For now admires each Gallant my invention,
And gratifies me with a standing Pension;
Four Spanish-Mares have I to carry me,
With all accoutrements so properly,
As in more state himself he cannot bear
Who may dispend ten thousand pound by year.
Now to acquaint you where I make resort,
My residence is for most part at Court;
Where I such tricks as I bring over, show
To such, whose dispositions I do know
Most itching after novelties, and these
I Will pawn my life, that I shall quickly please.
For give these noble Courtiers their due,
If the fashion I present them with be new,
They care not how ill-favord it appear,
For they would be observed what they wear;
Nor is it decency that they respect,
For we shall see a kind of strange neglect
In our apparel gain us more esteem,
Then those who in their clothes more punctual seem.
As for example, let our cloaks fall down
Upon left shoulder, or go sweep the Room
In a neglectfull fashion, with sleeves drawn
Up to the elbow, to descry the Laune
Or Cambrick shirts we wear, unbutton'd too,
That our laced Linen may more neatness show,
With points untruss'd, as if we did not care
For pride so much as for the subtle air:
And we, by this, shall more observance git,
Then if, with ginger pace we minsed it.
Of all those servants that I entertain,
A Tailor and a Broker be the men
I most esteem, and where I most relide,
Though I have many hangers on beside;
For the one with new-clothes still renues my state,
The other broaks such clothes are out of date.
And howsoere some people do condemn
These Brokers for unconscionable men,
I know them to be bounteous and kind,
For if you leave in paune your Suit behind,
You shall be sure, so freely will he show him,
To find more on it then you gave unto him.
Nor is my Tailor such a man of sin
As some young cheated-gulls would make of him;
For what is the cause they bear such hate unto him?
It Is this forsooth, he has his Hell below him.
If this procure their hate, it does behove them
To find out some that have their Hell above them.
I must confess he will od-shreds conceal,
But that is a small fault in our Commonweal,
For, in our State, some greater-Theeves there be
Whom none dare tax, yet steal far more then he.
He one Command'ment breaks and so does fall,
But these State-sharks infringe not one, but all.
Now for the place where I do most frequent,
Court, City, Country, are my continent;
Where, to the garb of every place I live,
And such a form of fashion use to give,
As there is none who would not imitate
The fashion I affect at any rate.
Which joys me much to see an humerous Lord,
Whose formal habit only does afford
A personal esteem, so mad to be,
As in an Apish garb to second me.
But I in change can vie with none of them,
Which makes me curry favor with their men,
Who set their Lordships-wardrope at a sale,
From whence I hook some Suit be it nere so stale,
Which I reduce to fashion by my wit,
And this their Lord admires and follows it.
For little knows he, when he notes my fashion,
That from his Wardrope it received translation;
Where if he knew what to my self is known,
He would be loath to imitate his own.
I have likewise a Venice dame brought over,
Whom our Court-Ladies eye, and eying love her;
For choice attyres she labors to invent,
Mixing with English Venice complement:
So as no Curtezan observes there
Ought worthy note, but's nat'ralized here.
Rounding of hair, short-wasted doublets too,
Steeletto-pockets are stale fashions now;
"Inventions Mint must go both night and day,
"No matter though our money-Mint do stay.
Long was I bringing of a work about
A Looking-glass, to view from head to foot,
Before, behind, so as my very Spur
Could scarcely move but I might see it stur.
And this invention gained me much esteem,
Chiefly amongst such who most deformed seem,
Whose crooked shapes, if they perfection lack,
I could apply a level to their back;
Whose equal feature by the reflecting-glasse,
Made them admire themselves as they did pass.
And to some Ladies much deformed, of late
I have prescribed another choice receite,
Which now for modesty I will omit,
Because Cornelius-tub produces it.
Nor is my Venice-urinal so brittle,
Though she felt once the furnace of the Spittle,
But she demurely can observe all times,
And with her Saintly outside cover crimes.
So as the City bears her such affection,
She Is only thought the first to give direction
For matters of discourse, attire, behavior,
Striving among themselves who may receive her
With most extended bounty; yet will she
Requite their boundless liberality
With Husbands ruin (she has vowed to do it)
And with excess of Charge to bank her out.
For go they but to Rumford to a feast,
Their clothes proclaim them Ladies at the least,
Though all that while, their wronged-husbands spare it,
And satisfy their hunger with a Carret.
Nor only there, but on the Country too,
Some fashions out a date do I bestow;
Where she and I marching some fortnight after,
Are like to burst our selves (I swear) with laughter.
For in a Country-Church you there shall see
The May Pole wenches wear my liverie;
But in their form of fashion so displaid,
None can discern the Mistrisse from the Maid.
Yet they are persuaded what they wear is new,
And that their fashion is but known to few
Save to themselves, which makes them to appear
Scornful to such who go in Country wear:
Yet if they knew as much as I, they would say
Themselves were out of fashion more then they.
Thus have I lived, and thus am I beloved,
For State appointed, and by States approved,
Where of no Law I do so much complain
As of one late-enacted now in Spain,
Touching restraint of all excessive 'parell,
Which I Am resolved would make our gallants quarrel;
And reason good; for would one think it fit
To reave them that they more esteem then wit?
Surely the Task were hard, the Law severe,
Yet this they do who strip them of their wear.
For these are they who descant on one strain,
And with no care disturb their giddy brain,
Save only how they may in fashion git,
And be the first that may encounter it.
These are they whom I love, with whom I live,
And unto whom this Legacy I give;
They who prefer a Coat before a Pate,
Shall die without a Coat, Wit, or Estate.
The Ape of Observation.
THat I Sites, States and Natures might descry,
Columbus has not traveled more then I;
In Princes Courts I have a lodger been,
And there observed whats'ever I have seen:
Which to compile it did me highly please,
Entitling it my Ephemerides.
I have been present at late wars of Rhine,
Though I to neither party did incline;
I heard the Electors sing a doleful dirge,
At winning of renowned Heidelberge,
Redoubling thus the subject of their care,
"Our neighbors House a fire, bids us beware.
I followed warlike Tillie at the rail,
When with straight siege he closed Frankindale;
To Berg'apsome I did my progress make,
Where I much muz'd how Spynola could escape,
When in his Camp he was so gyrt about,
As fear got in, but nothing could get out.
"Though plots seem deep, one may their bottom sink,
But I were mad if I 'de speak all I think.
Nor is my observation so restrained,
As if it earthly objects only aimed;
More high Mysterious speculation's given,
To view those Signs and Wonders are in heaven,
Prodigious forms and figures in the air,
All which impressions lately frequent were
Near sieged Prague, and other Cities too,
Who have sustained what foe or fate could do.
At Turein, two miles from Egeria
Within the kingdom of Bohemia,
Next to a Stew, where I with others stood,
I saw a Table and a Form sweat blood;
Which I observed, and forthwith did divine
There would succeed a blood-effusing time.
From whence dislodged no sooner did I come
Unto the famous City Lintium,
Then there appeared a fear-increasing vision,
Which ore the City showed this apparition;
Two Swords stood pointing one against another,
With furious Armies skirmishing together;
All which I made the inhabitants believe
Would some impressions in their City leave;
Assuring them, to make mine Art more known,
These ayrie Armies would surprise the Town.
This caused a strict watch to be duly kept,
And I did laugh at this while others wept;
For it was far above my element
To know what these strange Apparitions meant
Though my conjectures were esteemed more t^
Then the unknown Palmistry of any Jew.
But lest the Statute bring me into question,
This is the least I use in my profession,
Unless in foreign Countries where there be
So few that practice this same Mystery,
As they will lodge a Wizard in their breast.
But ever prize North-Britain Wizards best.
Thus I Have enriched my self with Observation,
And gaind me such renoune within this Nation,
That be my weekly Corrants nere so strange,
They pass for current-novells on the Exchange:
So as upon my knowledge their esteem
Has staid the vent of better labors clean.
Yea, there be diverse Stationers in the City,
Who had been broke (the more had been the pity)
Had not my high prized travels been brought hither
Which kept them up from going down the wether.
And now these are, which seems to me most rare,
Held by our Stage-gulls for oracular.
Not any story or occurrent passes,
But is authentic truth with these sage-Asses,
Who neighbourly confer upon a bench
Of such a Rampire, Palisado, Trench;
Of such a Conquest, such a Battle lost,
And what a world of Christian lives it cost.
This they peruse, which they perusing send
Into the Country to some special friend,
Who may p^^take these news without delay,
And these become as credulous fools as they.
For though, to give my thriving-works their due,
Scarce among twenty one relation's true,
Yet on their truth not one of them will stand,
But sp^ead their fame abroad from hand to hand.
Nor be my Corants only Alehouse talk,
Nor for Duke Humfries Knights, who Paul's do walk;
For I have seen the very Pulpits smooke
With some extractions rifled from my book,
Which howsoere they could not well bear water,
Yet would they serve for want of better matter.
But there is no place so highly prizeth me,
As where our Ordinary-Gallants be;
For there am I admired, and to my grace
Preferred ever to the highest place:
Where my loose glibbrie tongue is prating still
Travels more strange then those of Mandevill.
Yea, you sh ll see some score of Gallants stand,
Each with a Table-booke within their hand,
To take observance of such special heads
As from the forge of my discourse proceeds:
Which they relating duly, now and then,
Makes them esteemed for most accomplished men.
Now what may you imagine I deserve,
When these extract but that which I observe?
And gain such praise, as those Land-gulls who hear them,
Account them highly blessed who neighbor near the^?
But now because I Am to my Country come,
I Will show you what I have observed at home,
And in each sev'^all place where I have been,
Briefly unfold what I have heard or seen.
In Court I lived, and living felt no scant,
But bravely surfeited on others want;
It was my aim, and I did aim aright,
To wind me in with some Great-favorite,
Whose graceful countenance might support me still
In all my courses, were they good or ill.
Where I observed, more good might be effected
By means of One who was in Court respected,
Were his Cause never so faulty nor so weak,
Then a good Cause, if he no friends could make:
The reason was, though Justice bore even hand,
From some of these there came a countermand,
Which, cause he was a great-Antagonist
They durst not his authority resist;
Or else his means advanced them to that place,
Which moved them veil to him in any Case.
(...) this I held a grounded observation,
justice to Greatness ever had relation;
^or some of these often get a place worth choosing,
By being married to a great-mans Cousin:
So firm's the link of mutual alliance,
Against all opposits it pleads defiance.
For other silken-Apes who spend their time
In making their seer-bodies brisk and fine,
I hold it needless here to make report,
Because there is such an Ape, just now, in Court;
Who will describe himself in every lim,
Which makes me leave that labor unto him.
For our Court-Ladies, very few I know
Who racket it with their Comradoes now;
Our spritely Lords do either Treasure lack,
Or else they want agility of back,
So as amongst a number there is scarce one
But she is either mortifide or gone.
"One did I hear of but the other day,
"Who now has thrown her lighter Roabs away,
"And by a firm-friend whom she well approved,
"Sent to the wife of that same Lord she loved,
"How she resolved her good esteem to win
"By wearing of a mourning-gowne for him.
"But what is the answer she returned to her?
"I wish, quoth she, your Lady may not wear
"But what becomes her best in public sight,
"Her Suite must suit her self, her self is light;
"But if with me she will keep a mourning part,
"She must not mourn in Habit, but in Heart.
And so no question does she; for long since
She lost the eye of her concupiscence,
Which makes me hope the eye-light of her mind
Is cleerer far, since the outward eye was blind.
Thus be our Ladies matchless Converts held,
To whom no Suitors make but are repeld;
Though One I know, nor was old Lais liker
Unto her self, then she is to a striker.
In City likewise I remained a while,
Where I observed how Tradesmen did beguile,
And in some dark part of their shop took care
How they might vent their most deceitful ware.
Here did I stay far longer then I need,
That I with laughter might my humor feed;
For here I might observe a Country-gull,
Whose fathers death had made his pockets full,
Mount Ludgate Hill to buy a Spanish felt,
Pull out his money, bid the Knave go tell 't.
Notes from Blackfriars I presently might gather,
For now this Cornish-Chough mourns for his fathe
in a Carnation-feather, wherewithal
He means to grace his fathers funeral.
By this he travells to Saint Martins lane,
And to the shops he goes to buy a chain;
Where every painted Babie that he sees,
With their horse-gilded varnish does so please,
As such commodities must not be lost,
For he will have them whatsoever they cost.
To the Royal Exchange fain would he take his course
If he had any money in his purse,
But the Long-shop has brought his pockets low
With Daggers, Bells, and Hobby-horses too.
For City-wives I will not press them much,
If they be pleased that I may only touch
Their errors, not their persons; which shall be
Shadowed so covertly as none shall see.
I have observed that nothing is more sweet
In their conceit, then when these gossips meet;
Nor would this half so much their husbands vex,
If all these gossips were but of one Sex:
But this the grief on 't, forth they will not go
But they must have their foremen with them too.
Which to redress, and for a quiet life,
Let every one be foremen to his wife;
For this in short time will her humor tame,
And purchase to her self a better name.
For the gum'd grogran Citty-usurer,
He is observed so much by Lucifer,
I need small observation take of him,
Being known to be the Engrosser of all sin.
Not all his furrs nor vermin-skins shall save him,
He has contracted with him means to have him;
And reason good, for you shall truly find
The master and his man both of one mind:
For there is naught the Usurer does crave,
But that he may Security receive,
With whom in this his master does agree,
For all he seeks is but Security.
Yet for all this I cannot choose but love him,
Because he cheats so many men above him,
And by a Forfeiture or such like Sentence,
In time he brings them unto true repentance;
Whereas if they had never met with him,
Perchance they had still rioted in sin.
Besides, he 's charitable, for to his door
You cannot come but you shall see the poor;
Yet the cause hereof he cannot well conceal,
"He makes all poor with whom he has to deal,
Now for the Country, though there many be
Who make pretenses of simplicity,
Because they little know that part of speech
Which southern people to their children teach;
Yet in a home spun native Rhetoric
They show themselves as pregnant and as quick,
As those whose education may impart
Far more accomplishment by means of Art.
A subtle-piercing air has made these witty,
Apt to deceive as any in the City;
For the richer grubs, we properly may call
Broggers, Forestallers, and Regraters all:
And these prey on his state that weakest is,
As Whales and Sea-Bulls feed on lesser fish.
For the younger sort small policy discerns,
Yet as the old Cock crows the young Cock learns;
Though they be gulld oftimes by City ware,
They are by it made circumspecter far,
And now and then the City recompenses
With a commodity of stale-stuffe wenches,
Who by their carriage gain them such esteem
As many times they match with Aldermen.
For the higher rank, they live at such a rate,
As some of them cannot support their state
Without sinister means, yet these by aw
Seem to oppose and contradict the Law;
So as the Law grows tongue-tide, or else bent
To give these Bulls of Basan all content.
"Law 's as a Spiders-web, and ever was,
"It takes the little flies, lets great ones pass.
But let us draine these Rivolets that flow,
Those last are lost, they were so long ago.
If we extract not poison from each Rill,
Enjoin us Silence, we have lost our Skill:
But Pan should thwart the fancy of his Pipe,
Ceasing to play when Vices are so ripe.
Then to our Trillo; you shall hear more set
In this Composure then you heard of yet.
A nimble Ningle we did lately hear
Has purchased a thousand pounds by year,
Contracting for Delinquents, though some say'
He was Delinquent once as well as they.
And there is small doubt, when all Accounts are past,
He of his House, shall be both first and last;
For though his Fortunes to such grandeur swell,
A ranker Cheat breaths not 'twixt Heaven and Hell:
So dearly hugging private Interest
As fordid Lucre has intranc'd the Beast.
The Proverb is, "All evil comes from North,
And worse then This the North-coast nere brought forth.
Here you shall see, which I did smile to see,
Reteyners to some man of quality
Cheat a Sot of his Coin, or which is worse,
In the kings high street take away his purse,
Which they with winged speed will forthwith carry
Unto their old receipt or Sanctuary;
Where these Reteyners due account must make,
And with their state-split- Master part the stake.
Yet who dare say that such a man as he
Would give least countenance to theeverie?
His port does rather argue him a Giver,
Then to support his State with Stand, Deliver;
But so long he his bounty did display,
"He cannot as he would, but as he may.
Thus I in Observations of all sort,
Be they in Country, City, or the Court,
Have in my Progress such exactness shown
As I suppose no Traveller has done.
Yea in the Academie I observed
Those Drones enjoy best rooms who least deserved;
And many more, which if I should express.
Would force the hearer to amazedness,
That any one should possibly contain
Such store of Observations in one brain.
For Rules of Art so far do they excel
The diving plots of matchless Machavell,
That I of all the world could compose
An Abstract of her policies, and enclose
Each project and occurrent that befell
Within the compass of a Wallnut-shell:
For I never viewed the form of any State
I Would not Observe, observing imitate.
What rests then, but that ye do devise
Honors for him, whose knowledge makes ye wise?
The Court Ape.
SO brisk I am, so sweet and so perfumed,
I have no tricks, it may be so presumed;
But I do muse how any one should think
I could thus neatly go and have no chink;
For howsoever some Courtiers have said it,
They were supported only by their credit.
Tradesmen grow now so wise (the more's the pity)
The Court is out of credit with the City.
At this time have I nere the Minories
Two Coaches with distinguished liveries,
Eight Barb'rie mares, two foot-cloth Naggs beside,
On which, for more variety; I ride
The public streets, to visit such a Lady,
By whom I have a standing pension paid me.
Coach men and Pages diverse have I too,
On whom my cast suits use I to bestow,
With other vailes which accidental be,
Besides the grace they have in following me.
Nor is this all, Crowns must I always carry,
And hazard too when I 'me at Ordinary,
Where like true Heir of bounty I must show
Far more profuse then vulgar Gallants do.
I have a Tweake too, one of my retenue,
Who will expect a share in my revenue;
"If Phoebus had no light, could Phebe shine?
"No more can She without some aid of mine.
Now can one think, I on this charge should sit,
And have no means at all to second it?
A fire must fuel have or it goes out,
A Lamp must needs have oil applide unto 't;
Springs Rivers feed, Seas are by Rivers fed,
Bees suck sweet flowers, and so are nourished.
While these in distinct nourishment do share,
Must I Chameleon-like be fed with Air?
No; I have means in Court to show my light,
For I 'me esteemed a special Favorite
To such a Peer, whose greatness can support
The lowest Shrub that grows within his Court,
Much more such State-aspiring Pines as I,
Who on his grace without desert rely.
For if I should desert or merit weigh,
I 'de make a Conscience of those tricks I play;
But bare might I be as the slough-stript Snake,
If of my pranks I should a Conscience make:
For this my maxim is; "He that will blush,
"Or value honesty more then a Rush,
"Or so precize, he 'l no advantage take,
"May thrive in Court, but he 's not very like.
But now it rests, that I my tricks do show,
Which shown, judge if I may not thrive or no.
In Court I live and flourish where I live,
Apt to receive, but seldom apt to give;
In every Boat a private Oar I have,
Where the bargain 's ill I neither win nor save:
For I Have a brain has wit enough to plot,
And for a Conscience I know it not;
Because this Conscience such a Scarcrow is,
As it deterreth us from what 's amiss;
Which if we should observe, it would be like
Within short time to overthrow us quite.
If any State-employment be in hand,
I by some secret Agent understand
Whereto it tends, compounding with a friend,
To whom by means the State does recommend
This public task, that I may share with him
In the benefit that he 's employed in;
Which if he grant, to raise his estimate
I recommend his service to the State,
Extolling his deserts, saying; "'T were fit
"Such men as he should reap a benefit
"By their employments, otherwise 't would seem
"The State were weak and could not judge of them:
Yet I may swear sincerely from my heart,
I little prize or value his desert;
My chiefest aim and principallest care
Is how I may in his preferment share.
For to that end did I his worth improve,
Causing him think 't was only for his love,
Whereas peculiar profit drew me to it,
Nor care I much if all the world do know it.
For these are usual projects now a days,
And if contrived nimbly, merit praise
In the undertaker; yea I know a Man
High in the Courts esteem, who now and than
For all his outward luster will not stick
To gul the State with this familiar trick.
If any one, whose service has been tried,
Sue by some means for to be gratifide,
That he his hopes on stronger stays may ground,
He with this graceful Courtier does compound;
That if he shall procure him such a Sum
For all the former service he has done,
He shall be Sharer with him, and receave
Two parts and more of all that he shall have.
This moves this spritely Courtier to persuade,
That such a sum of money may be paid
For such State-service, which above compare
Deserv's due guerdon; for his only care
(As he pretends) is to prefer the suite
Of them whose name has purchased them repute.
The State weighs his deserts, and does bestow
What 's fit and equal for his service too.
But when it 's to be paid, this understand,
Seldom a fourth part comes to the owners hand;
For his persuasive Orator will share
Above the former composition far,
Telling him how, if it had not been for him
He had not got the value of a pin:
Then fit it were that he three parts allot
To him by whom his entire suite was got.
Thus must we plot and reap the greatest gain
Through their deserts, who in the Camp remain
Subject to all those miseries of war,
Which on the Soldier still inflicted are.
Our soft down beds be all the harms we feel,
Our silken-Roabes, our Harness and our Steel;
Our Crystal springs of luscious Hypocrice,
Our humors taste no warlike enterprise;
Our Congies, Cringes, amorous salutes,
Our Love-inducing-Sonnets, warbling Lutes,
Our Masks, Tilts, Triumphs and obsequious greetings,
Our closs encounters in our Entry-meetings,
Our dear Eringo love-provocatives,
Our Julips, Apozems, Preservatives,
Our secret plots to work our ends thereby,
Closing our drifts within an Oyster-pye,
Our private aims to purchase such a wife,
By laying siege now in her husbands life;
Our french-Moriscoes, motives of delight,
Our Parachito, Monkey, Marmosite,
Our Arbour-daliance, when we make resort
To those sweet groves and gardens of the Court,
Move us to joy in such a happy birth,
As those who do enjoy their heaven on earth.
In brief, what is choice we have it, and contemn
Those weak delights are used by vulgar-men.
Here you shall see a man of discipline,
One who came off right bravely in his time,
With all observance make recourse to us,
That we would deigne to be propitious
To his preferred Suite; which we set light,
Hows'ere his cause seem equal and upright.
The reason is, this Supplicant is poor,
And with a bounteous hand can scarcely shoure
Into our boundless skrips, what we expect,
"This is the cause his Suit takes no effect.
Thus in the Court do we our luster show,
And on inferior groundlings take a view
With such contempt, as they who us behold,
Would hardly think us made both of one mold.
For come we within distance but of those,
We hold a Pomander straight to our nose,
Lest their rank breath should any way infect us,
Or that the popular might more respect us.
Yet I protest I can no reason see,
That we of them more cautulous should be
For any such infectious air, I say,
Then they of us, corrupter far then they.
But far be it removed from my breast
To hatch least thought of stayning my own nest:
For there is enough that will this stain increase
In every coast, though I should hold my peace.
Now from the Court to City must I go,
Where I my tricks am purposed to show,
Which I 'm indifferent, please they or displease,
But to display them briefly, they be these.
I have choice Spies and Tarriers in the town,
Who by their long experience now are grown
Ripe in observance; now the use I make
Of these, is this; they serious notice take
Of such commodities as bear most sway,
And at what special rate they go away.
Which known, I hold it thriving policy
To make a Suit for this Monopoly,
By which the tradesmen shall be forced to stand
T^ll they seek composition at my hand.
Or else I cause the Impost to be raised,
Which new enhancement I Have no sooner caused
Then I make means (such is the course of us)
To get unto my self the overplus.
Or else I f^^me this Impost of the king,
But what is due to him I seldom bring;
F^r the Maxim is I hope, as it has been,
"Where there is much, much will be overseene.
Another fear I have, and it is this,
If any Tradesman in the town shall wish
To v^nt such Ware as he has now with him,
Before some new Commodities come in,
Let him annoint me well, I will make way
That no new Ware be sold till such a day.
As for example, if a Vintner would
Before new wines come in, vend all his old;
By my procurement I can cause restraint
O^ all new Wines, till he his old shall vent:
Yea, and inhance the rate too of his own,
Because such want of Wines are in the town.
If any likewise would Protection have,
Be he never such a State-abusing knave,
He shall receive it by some means of ours,
And wipe the nose of all his Creditors:
Yea break he in the morning, yet ere night
The Son of this same Bankrupt shall be Knight.
More curious feats I have besides all these,
Which to my waining coffers yield increase;
But in the City they so frequent are,
As they grow now like to their sullied ware:
So as of these I Will briefly make an end,
And to my Country Cormorants descend.
Has any man desire to have his nest
Or any of his brood graced with a Crest?
Though there were never Title of h s own
To any of his Predecessors known,
He shall to him and his a Style inherit,
Which after times may think he got by merit,
Or some Field-service that he never did,
Or some strange Act, which to the world is hid.
A Catalogue of Honors I have written,
Whereof he may make choice as he thinks fitting;
An Heralds arch these Titles are displaid on,
Barons, Knights-Baronets, or new-styl'd Vaidon;
Only I fear, some of these honors be
Of too high rank for such an one as he:
Yet if he will but lose his strong-ty'd-purse,
I Will get him one, a better or a worse.
For Honors as they should, so humble seem,
Many enjoy them know not what they mean;
Which the Herald shadows often times with a jest,
Devising for their Coat as strange a Crest;
As three Red-Herrings in a forest green,
With a souc'd Gurnet peering up between.
Or for one Comb, as I have heard it said,
A curry-Combe betwixt two Suns displaid.
But now admit the Country grow so wise,
It will by no means yield to such a price,
Alleging how there is no reason why
That they at such high rate should honor buy,
Seeing decrease of money it is such,
As there be few that have it, but will grutch,
Though they do value Honor as their life,
To pay so much as then when Coin was rife.
Or else perhaps Honors so common seem,
As now they fall into such disesteeme,
They Will have no more Knights made, it is so agreed on,
Lest they should want ancient Esquires to breed on.
Admit, I say, all this, I have a feat
To get me Lands and livings by Escheat;
For, by my Tarriers, I do understand
Of all improved and concealed Land,
Which presently I beg, and in an hour
Turn Husband, wife and children out a door.
Compound with me none can at any rate,
For now all composition comes too late;
I Am seized and in possession, taking care
To build a curious house to seat my H^ire;
Planting delicious Orchards to delight
With luscious fruits, the choycest appetite;
Contriving spacious fish ponds closed round,
With marble Columns raised from the ground:
In brief, there is nothing that you can devise,
Appears not in this earthly Paradise.
Now all these works are finished and done,
To rear a sumptuous Mansion for my Son,
Who many times before I turn to mold,
Has his Reversion to another sold;
Which so prevents my care, I Would think no sin,
But that I have conferred my State on him,
To strip this Wag, who in a Net does dance,
Of all the hope of his inheritance.
But it is no matter, I Have a State for life,
Which I suppose will mediate this strife;
For now of late I Am run so far on shelfe,
All I have left will scarcely serve my self.
Yet must I gull the time and make a show
As if I had more own then I do ow;
My foot-cloth bears me out, nor is my debt
So great as I need much to pawn it yet.
In Progress time, I likewise go to see
Amongst other Apes, the University,
Where though Licirius Valerianus-
Licinius-like all Arts I hate,
I must be made forthwith a Graduate
For which I promise, when they come to Court,
Some Chaplains place, but they must pay me for it.
Thus have I shown my tricks in every place,
And howsoere some twit me to my face,
Affording me (poor Snakes) no better word
Then of a Carpet-civet comfit Lord,
Though aged Court-Apes fall into contempt,
I Am none of these, my person is exempt:
Who have no tricks to cheat may droop and die,
But thanks unto the Stars, this need not I;
My happy Fate such apprehension lent me,
As I would see that man could circumvent me.
Now he that has a wit and will not use it
Unto his best advantage, does abuse it.
It rests, as you have heard so to report,
No tricks are like those tricks are played at Court.
The City Ape.
It Is strange to hear
this silken-gull prefer
Those plots by which his
Court ship seems to err,
Before those honest aims which ever are
Both more secure and more successive far.
It Is sure the corrupt age he lives in
Makes him thus vainly glory in his sin;
Or else he holds Confession of his crimes
Agreeing well with these absolving times,
Where sundry Rites they to the Church restore
Which we nere heard this threescore years before.
But does this painted Truncke, whose best repute
Depends on the fashion of his Suit,
Imagine all the Projects of the State,
To have no other Forge but from his pate?
Or that there is no Engineer so quick,
To vie with him in matters politic?
Yes, know thou powdered and perfumed Ape,
For all thy Cinnamon adulterate shape,
Though thou seem to disvalue other men,
I Will match thee with a grogran Citizen,
Who, as it will appear before we part,
Shall put thee down with tricks spite of thy heart.
Yet I never traveled far to get them neither,
Being a birth right left me by my Father;
So as in these I cannot well miscarrie,
Because they are to me Hereditarie.
Nor be my actions half so base as His,
For all his policy mere servile is;
He Is tide to dance attendance early, late,
And to Petition men for his estate;
Grounding his hopes on others overthrow,
But I Would be loath to raise my Fortunes so.
My Shop's my Ship, where I do vent my ware,
To which both Court and Country do repair;
Where if the buyer chance to bid too much
For his commodity, I am none such
To lessen what he offers; my receite
Of custom, is the place where I must wa^te:
Where if I should make scruple of my gain,
How should I pay my rent or port maintain?
I must and will for my best vantage stand,
"Let the gull take his loss in his own hand.
Yet some are thus opinion'd, Of all men
There Is none more simple then a Citizen;
For he can scarcely any reason show
For ought he sees, but asks where Malt does grow:
This makes them call us Cockneies, nor do we
Thrive worse for that we so accounted be.
For we darke-shops to vent ill ware may use,
And with simplicity our guile excuse;
Protest yes verily, and make a show
Of that which verily is nothing so.
Here you shall see a gallant-gull come near us,
When in our shops he shall no sooner hear us
Cry out to passengers What do ye lack?
But he is forthwith taken with some new knack;
Out comes gold from this Arabian Rat,
Which our keen lick'rish Teeth do water at.
More will we ask then we expect by half,
Of purpose to entrap this golden-Calfe;
For there is no purchase in the world can please
A Citizen so much as gulling these.
The reason is, our weakness they contemn
As silly, simple and plain-dealing men,
Because (forsooth) we no discoursers be,
But only of our own commodity.
We know no tillage, nor no pasture grounds,
The City-walls have ever been our bounds,
Unless along we with a neighbor go
To Croydon, Acton, Newington, or so.
Now there is naught on earth makes me so sorry,
As that this Court-Ape should so vainly glory
That we repair to him for his direction,
In the procurement of our own Protection,
Which is not so; for as we laid first plot
Of bringing that to pass which we have got,
So I Will maintain it, none of these but we
Are Agents too in this immunitie:
Which to confirm, I purpose to relate
A President which happened but of late.
"One of my Bretherhood of good esteem,
"As any near Long-lane long time has been,
"Pretending by a mighty loss on Sea,
"(Though this was but a mere pretended plea)
"That he through poverty could not defray,
"What he in Conscience was bound to pay.
"Yet long ere this, that he might Statutes shun,
"Had he conferred his State upon his Son.
"With this pretense he to a Courtier goes,
"To whom sincerely he his purpose shows,
"Imparting to him briefly his intent
"Was to make men believe his means were spent;
"That so he might by this deluding cheat,
"Increase his State, his Creditors defeat.
"Mean time his aid he humbelly would crave,
"That for his Debts he may Protection have;
"Which court'sie should so ty him during breath,
"His State should be the Courtiers at his death.
"This the spruce credulous silkworm seems to trust,
"And little dreams what State was made at first;
"But by Assumpsit holding the Grant secure,
"He a Protection labors to procure:
"Which got, my fox-fur'd Brother was at ease,
"Frolic and merry as a Mouse in Cheese.
"But now ensues the jest, when he should die,
"(As no Protection against mortality)
"Adoption did the Courtier so intrance
"In hope of his assured inheritance,
"He Would suffer none (so careful was the else)
"To visit this rich sick-man but himself;
"About his Bed still would he seem to be,
"Expecting that which he did long to see:
"But lo! his hopes were turned to despair,
"When he perceived another made his Heir;
"Which caused him vow that he would never after,
"Make his Protections instruments of laughter.
But I do wonder how Court-Apes should seem
So much our City-Apes to disesteeme;
They Are made, I Am sure, of selfsame element,
Hows'ere they seem inferior in descent.
N^, nor inferior in descent at all,
As might be proved of late from Girdlers-hall,
Where One of obscure race as one could be,
Without so much as a welsh-Pedigree,
When he deceased, so well his fortunes stood,
Was found descended of a noble blood.
Which makes me think, if so their race were known,
That there be many Tradesmen in the Town,
Whose high descent aims at a noble pitch,
Provided always, that these men die rich:
For then, for Heirs they need take little care,
Some noble unknown kinsman will be Heir:
The Law enableth him as heir apparent,
For why; A great man's claim includes a Warrant.
But while I make my Brethrens actions known,
I am forgetful wholly of mine own.
For the little time I did the Court frequent,
I found it wanton and incontinent;
Which I observing, though a City-Ape,
I had a great desire to imitate:
And that you may know how I profited,
I Will show you briefly where I practiced.
"To a Court-Landresse first did I repair,
"Encountering her at bottom of a staire;
"Which by experience I may safely swear,
"Within a fortnight after cost me dear.
"For she demanding of me where I dwelt,
"Weak^y and unadvisedly I tell 't,
"Whereof she made this use: One day being come
"Unto my Shop, when I was gone from home,
"(For by direction she my shop had found)
"She called for ware to the value of ten pound;
"My man expecting money, she delayed him,
"Asking where was his Master, she had paid him?
"Long had not he and she contesting bin
"Till I, as fortune bad, came rushing in;
"Whom she no sooner eyed, then by my name
"Saluting me, she justified the same.
"Where Duck (quoth I?) she, rounding in mine ear
"(But never blushed at matter) told me where.
"I, lest I should my credit overthrow,
"Told her, I did remember it was so,
"Entreating her excuse, I had forgot it;
"Thus did I color 't so, as none could note it.
But now my reputation does remain
Free from all touch, as if it nere had stain;
All causes unto me are now referred,
As the sufficientst man within the Ward.
If a^y child be in the Parish got,
I of the Parents take especial note
To take them jointly bound, be 't boy or daughter,
That the Parish be not charged with it after.
For I Am held none of these who prate non sense,
Spending the day in nodding on a bench;
For these, as if their beard held all their wit,
Speak scarce two words but they are stroking it.
I know right well, there is not an Officer,
From Treasurer unto the Scavenger,
But needs those choice directions of mine,
For I have borne each office in my time,
And in each place of note so well become me
As there was none could take advantage on me.
But I shall little need to press this theme,
The City notice takes of my esteem;
The Vergers too, so highly do approve me,
As scarce two Seats be in the Church above me.
Now having got such honor in the Town,
I Will take survey where I am lesser known;
If they dis-value me, impute ye it
To want of my acquaintance, or their wit.
To the University I nere repair
But once a year, and that is at Sturbridg-faire;
Yet am I known to many Scholars there,
Who buy of me whats'ever they do wear.
Silks, Sattins, Grograns, Serges of each sort,
Of me they cheap, and I do cheat them for it.
If a penurious Master have a mind
To Satten-face his doublet, though behind
It be of Buckram, he will to me resort,
And tell me he is enjoined to preach at Court;
So as he means, if God will give him leave,
To buy a Satten-forepart, with half-sleeve;
For that is as much he thinks as will be seen,
To gain unto his person more esteem.
Forthwith I find a Remnant of the best,
(So much at least I verily protest)
Wherewith I do sufficiently store
This choice Divine, who nere bought silk before.
Yet I confess this Remnant that he bought,
Such a commodity 'twas good for naught,
Being gumm'd throughout to make it neatly shine,
Which gave content unto this spruce Divine.
When the Fair is done I to the College come,
Or else I drink with them at Trompington;
Craving their more acquaintance with my heart
Till our next Sturbridg fair, and so we part.
Now for the Country; where I make my stay
In no place longer then at Beverley.
To Country maids, and Gentlewomen too,
My newest and alluringst stuffs I show;
Which do so mad them, they perforce must buy,
And I perceive their humor by their eye:
So as I ever hold that stuff most dear,
To which these Gooslngs most affection bear;
Swearing it cost me more then all the rest,
For P. and G. 's the mark which proves it best.
Then with shop-usual formal Rhetoric,
I touch these itching tamefowles to the quick,
For I do tell them, if they hold 't too dear
I Would wish them to go try some other where;
But I Am persuaded, though they do complain
My rates too high, they will come to me again;
For sure I am, wheres'ever they do try,
There Is none can sell at lower rates then I.
Thus I adjure them, yet perhaps they will go
To make a trial, to a shop or two,
But this the j^st; we have a practice made,
The better to enhance our thriving trade,
Amongst our selves no secret must be hid,
But we are to give notice what they bid,
That we may altogether sing one song,
And by ou^ rates not one another wrong.
Yea, by our art to gain our trades their due,
We have a trick to sell old ware for new;
Which country people seldom do perceive,
For they are too simple to smell out a knave.
Although sometimes they fit us in our kind,
When they with easy gale and ready wind,
In every Coast do take especial care
To change stale wenches with our slubberd-ware;
Which we accept, and if good luck bechance them,
To great-mens wives their fortune may advance the^.
Thus have you heard the tricks that I can play,
Which smoothly carried profit more then they,
Whose glorious outsides paint their projects over
With nothing else save with a gilded cover.
If Wags be gulld by running on our shelves,
We were not cause on it, they may thank themselves
We in our Shops do stand, they come unto us,
To profit what we can they will allow us.
But if it dislike them that we should do so,
Truth is we will do 't whether they will or no;
For it was never yet to any known
But One might make best use he could of 's own.
Which whether I have done or no, review
My courses over, and I Will be judged by you.
The Country Ape.
HEa^ke how this silken civet Citizen
Esteem of us poor silly Contrymen;
As if we were of no account or note.
But had a brain as simple as our coat.
Why, pray you Sir, if I may be so bold,
Are you of pure^ or of choicer mold?
Or do you bre^^h on fresher air then we?
Or shines some Star on your nativitie,
Which keeps her light from us? or is your wit
So pure, as all draw influence from it?
Are you so subtle, as you only have
The trick to Cheat, to Cozen and Deceive?
No Sir, though I live in a wilder place,
For sleights and feats I Will bate you never an Ace.
Your darke-loom'd Shops shall never have it so,
False Balances, base Compositions too,
Counterfeite Stuffs our haire-brain'd Fopps to gull,
In every Country shop we have them full.
For you must know the Country's no such Ape
But it can City-fashions imitate;
Yea we have nimble Monkeys of all sort
Can personate both City and the Court;
Which near resemblance that it may appear,
Give ear to my discourse and you shall hear.
First we have Lords and Ladies very many,
As proud and hautie as the Court has any;
There Is not a fashion known but it comes down,
For such as these have Tailors in the Town,
By whose intelligence they are informed
What Is new, which they observe hows'ere deformed.
Being thus attyr'd, they are presently addressed
To show their bravery at some Gossips feast;
Where many Country gentlewomen are,
Who by observance take especial care
What these great Persons wear, for they intend
To be in fashion ere the sennet end,
Which if their frugal Husbands but deny,
They hope by putting finger in the eye
To get their purpose; for they little stand
Whether new fashions make them sell their Land.
Which our May-morish Wenches likewise follow,
Who think they bear aw^y the fashion hollow.
Nor do these only imitate the Court
In sumptuous habit, and are beggard for 't;
But forasmuch as they in Court do see
No great respect of hospitality,
They hold it providence to shut up door,
No matter though they famish all the poor:
Or that they may their private waste maintain,
Both Lords and Knights do table with their men.
Here you shall see a Farmers door barrd up,
Where the poor may cry but is from alms shut;
His cries, his tears can no compassion force,
For th'more he beggs, he ever fares the worse.
What boots it, though his Barnes and Garnars be
Stored with all fruits, yet he pleads poverty?
His aims are how to get, and if he can
To make his Mushram impe a gentleman.
Besides all this, I would be very loath
That Court or City either of them both,
Should show more art in any Contract making,
Then we can do for all their undertaking.
Yea I my self can of my self aver,
I know no griping-grinding Usurer,
Whose practice is oppression, but I Will vye
With him or any one under the sky.
For Courtiers no such business intend,
They only borrow, Usurers do lend.
But show me that Man at a full Exchange,
Be he home borne or to our Country strange,
Whose long profession, give the man his dew,
Has a seer'd Conscience worse then any Jew,
And I will cope with him in his profession,
Be it Church-sim^me or State-opression.
For this my practice is the whole year through,
When any come to me in hope to borrow;
First to examine his necessity,
As, Wants he Bread to feed his family;
Or is his Living gag't, and day at hand,
He either must redeem or lose his Land;
Or is he in such bondage, as his gri^fe
Requires without delay present relief;
I Will hold his Nose to Grindstone and so use him,
He shall do what I please, or let him choose him,
Statutes on Statutes forthwith so pursue him,
As like Actaeons hounds they still do view him,
So that unless he hye him all the faster
They will in time devour their breathless master.
For Conscience haggard-like I do disclaim her,
Since He that has her, seldom proves a gainer.
Two bags I have, the one whereof I call
Just All the World, and it holds naught at all;
The other Bag, with which I use to lend
Money to those that want, I call my Friend;
Whereof I make this use; if any come
Requesting me to lend them such a sum,
If the offers they propound, content not me,
As want of pan or good security,
I presently reply to these who crave,
In All the world I not one penny have;
But if such come as I may profit by them
Be 't the same instant, I will not deny them:
For though I have no Coin, as I pretend,
To give them all content, I Will use my Friend.
After this manner am I wont to deal
In all my practice with the Commonweal.
Now you shall hear how cunningly I lurch
By Simonie the Pastor of the Church.
Impropriations have I one or two
With some Advousons which I thus bestow,
Least any of my profits should be lost,
"I hold them best deserving who give most.
These I induct, for I do value them
Well worthy the place who are well-monied men,
But least some censure should on me befall
By being found thus Simoniacall,
Whereby the Princes privilege might choose one
To take the benefit of my Advouson;
That I more smoothly may delude the State,
I in my sale use to Equivocate.
As for example, I do take a course
To sell the Parson whom I choose a Horse,
A Library of Books to furnish him,
Because he wants Books when he enters in;
And these I rate to him at such a price,
As serves for Horse, Books, and for Benefice.
Now who can say that I do sell this Living,
Whose bounteous hand is so inclined to giving?
Tell me what Great one makes them fairer play,
To give both Books and Benefice away?
No, No, the most of all our Clerks will swear,
Though the Benefice be cheap, the Addition's dear:
But let them look to this before they enter,
I make no conscience of it, Caveat Emptor.
Yea I do hold these kinds of Sale as good,
If they be well and duly understood,
As to make tender of them for ones life;
Provided that he take her for his Wife
Whom they shall choose; which voluntary offer
Makes me suspect, her Master has made proffer
Of some familiar curt'sie long before,
"I count him mad will for a living bore.
But if he must, let him be his own Carver,
"Who chooses not his Wife does ill deserve her.
She Is his impropriation, which through hate
Unto his person, might ingraffe his pate;
Whence in his Parish would abroad be known,
"He had a Commonplace Book of his own.
But let these Contracts pass, they are known enough
Both in the Church and in the Country through;
I Will now descend to show what fiery spirit
Our native Country people do inherit;
Which I persuade me, will seem strange to all,
Because we seem as if we had no gall:
But we do scorn that any place should be
More malapertly factious then we.
For when I was a Tennant I do know,
(Though I Am no Tennant but a Landlord now,)
I would commence a suite upon my Lord
(Because I knew the Law) for any word.
In which Commencement, many flockt together
Like Birds all of one brood and of one fether,
Who with joint Combination made a purse,
To put their seame-rent Landlord to the worse.
Yea I have known so insolent a Nation,
As when they heard the Princes Proclamation
Tend to the extinguishment of Tennant right,
They in a braving manner set it light,
Affronting their weak Landlords at their gate,
Vowing they would force them to confirm their state
Nor be their haughty Lords less domineering,
Puffed up with present hope of a next Hearing;
For now am I a Landlord and must sharke
(For Priest forgets that ever he was Clarke,)
As others do, by raising Fine on Fine,
And cram my self how ere my Tennant pine.
Great are my debts, and my expenses large,
Now whom should I think fitting to discharge
This heavy task which thus ore-burdens me,
But these rich Gormaws who my Tennants be?
Which that it may more covertly be done,
In all my State I do invest my Son;
On which Estate does presently ensue
A General Fine, which has been ever due.
Scarce is this Fine paid, till I make a claim,
By re-estating of my self again,
Of a new Fine, whereto they must consent
Or have a trial for their tenement.
Which if ^he Court adjudge once to be mine,
To Demaine land convert I it in time;
So as Depopulation is as common
As is inconstancy unto a Woman:
For in the Country many Farms appear,
As neither Farm nor Farmer had been there.
Now forasmuch as we all Learning lack,
Unless we have it from an Almanac,
For I do know no Nation under Sun
In a Prognostication puts us down;
You shall perceive (for so I hold it fit)
What special use we daily make of it.
Herein we note and take observance too
Whether our Heir be like to thrive or no;
Which we collect by this rare-erring form,
We seek the Planet when he first was borne,
For we assure our selves this cannot err,
Proved and confirmed by Shepherds Calender.
If any days foretell ensuing dearth,
Those be our days of Jubilee and mirth;
For my own part I speak it, I do fear
Nothing so greatly, as a plentuous year:
For so much grain I Have in my Barns engrost,
As if it prove not dear, it will be lost;
For till the Markets rise, as now they fall,
I Will bring none forth, let Ratts consume it all.
What do I care, though Justices do seek
My Barns and well-stor'd Granars week by week,
Vaults and close-arched caves I have below
Within the earth, of which they little know
Nor ever shall; so I my self may serve
I take no thought if all the Country sterve.
"They who for others good their course contrive,
"May live beloved, but dye before they thrive.
To Court or City seldom I repair,
Nor do I know any employment there.
To University I never come,
Unless along I carry up my Son
To get a Scholars place, and after rise
By my fat purse unto some Benefice.
Mean time that he a lesser charge might be,
To my Estate I still plead poverty;
Which Master of the College often believes,
Whereby my Son a Scholership receives:
Though I 'me resolved for money I have more
Then many of their Founders had before.
Thus have I lived, and thus I mean to live,
Apt to receive but most unapt to give;
Thus hoord I Treasure for my Son and Heir,
And get my Harvest while the season 's fair.
Oppression is my darling, which I take
From none so much as from the City Ape;
Whose contracts are the stories that I read,
So as I find my knowledge bettered
By daily use and practice I observe,
From whose choice Rules I would be loath to swerve;
Mean time let me be rude and simple thought,
So may my purpose to effect be br^ught.
The Church Ape.
I Am a Levite and a great one too,
And can observe the time as others do;
In my Opinions I am wondrous wary,
Lest I offend the State and so miscarrie;
For the only Scar-Crow that I boggle at,
Is not distaste of conscience but the State.
And twice a year I commonly resort
For observations sake unto the Court;
Where it is the sum and substance of my care
To note how men in Grace affected are
Unto Religion, for it is only these
Who at their Gyrdle hang Saint Peter's keys:
To whom (I wis) sole Sovereignty is given,
To open on earth, but to be shut from heaven.
If they be pure, I show my heat of zeal,
As much as any in the Commonweal;
But if I find a coldness where I come,
Or an inclining to the Sea of Rome,
Mine Arguments like pellets I bestow
The English Discipline to overthrow.
Most men are of opinion where I live
That I am rich, for I no alms do give,
I keep no House nor Hospitality,
But for extortion, fraud, and usurie,
I keep receipt of custom; thus say they,
But alas poor fools, they know not what they say;
For if they knew how my Corrivalls crossed me,
How much in bribes my Consecration cost me;
How much procuring such a Ladies Letter
To such a Lord, though I was nere the better;
How, though I bear the Title, yet I am
No Real-Bishop, but a Serving-man
To such a great man, for his Farmer am I,
Who though I would, cheat him hardly can I;
If they knew this, they would right soon confess
I were the poorst in all my Diocese.
And though a Pastor should be none of these,
Who share both in the Flesh and in the Fleece,
I must not only Fleece but Flea them quick
Till I have paid well for my Bishopric.
Nor is my charge the less, when this is done,
For I Have a wanton wife, a wastefull Son,
Who must have fresh supplies to feed their riot,
Hows'ere by hook or crook they may come by it.
I have a Lord, and daily I attend him,
Who made me once a grant of the next Co^mendam
Should fall into his Lapse; but I do hear
A Simoniack Slaves inducted there,
Which if I prove, he is forfeit his Induction,
And be suspended henceforth from his Function.
Yet though these Motes in others I make known,
I never note these Eye-beams of mine own.
I can dispense with private Symonie,
And make a virtue of necessity;
Yea and maintain that common error too,
Framing Apologies for what I do.
It Is ill you will say, which you observe in some,
Who by the window to the Temple come;
But I must answer, They Are mistaken quite,
For to the Church no way can be more right;
For though Noahs-arke, ye Churches type, had doors
And windows too as this same Church of ours,
Yet that gall-wanting Bird when Noah had sent her
To take survey, did by the window enter.
An Olive branch she in her bill did bear,
Implying that the dry-land did appear,
And to the Arc, the Churches figure hies,
And through no Door but by the Window flies.
To us this Simile may have relation,
Who should resemble Doves in conversation,
Our way is by the window not the door,
Since to the Arc Doves led that way before.
In great assemblies I do seldom preach,
Lest I false doctrine to my flock should teach,
For I confess I am no great Divine,
Nor in such studies do I spend my time:
At Bethel once indeed I made assay,
When most of the learned Doctors were away,
Where some report, my Doctrine moved much laughter,
Which made me vow I Would never come thither after.
And I Have observed my vow; nor do I care,
When I do hear that such a Chaplain's rare,
And that he is flockt to by the better sort,
Or gains himself a singular report.
For this opinion, like a dangerous shelfe,
Makes a poor Preacher often undo himself
With a continuate study, yea not one
Of these is ought but only skin and bone.
But let me come more near them; what is their aim,
But to receive preferment by their fame?
Which I have got, and now may silent be,
While more deserving men attend on me.
Unto the City seldom I repair,
Unless it be for some delicious fare,
Wherein I take more absolute delight
Then ere in fasting did the Anchorite.
Sometimes perchance I to the Exchange may go,
To buy my wife what she enjoined me to;
Some new-invented Dressing that is in grace,
Sweet powders for her skin, oils for her face,
Or some provocatives which may move sense,
And cause me give her due benevolence.
All which I buy where they are to be sold,
For I must tell you I am growing old,
And gladly would my imperfections smother,
By giving her content one way or other.
For else she might, which would a scandal be,
During my Visitation cuckold me,
As some have done, whom I Would be loath to mention,
Who now maintains One with her Bishops Pension:
And this is better far as I suppose,
Then have her keep a knave close by my nose,
Who night by night with her would closly drab it,
And change my Rochet to Actaeon's habit.
Tertullians opinion I despise,
Who held this tenent, None should marry twice;
With which strange error I was nere misled,
For I have two, and neither of them dead.
Of Basils mind among us there be few,
Who would not change his old wife for a new.
"Much of one thing breeds loathing, therefore we
"Must cheer our palats with variety.
I hold that act of Luther bravely done,
Who made Besse Bore a Lemman of a Nun,
Which spritely action wondrously rejoiced her,
In hope to get a clister for a cloister.
With Romish-Catholicks I could agree
In all their points of Doctrine save these three,
Fasting, Prayer, Alms-works, for these be those
Which we profess to be our greatest foes.
First Fasting, whereto they ascribe a merit.
It takes both of the flesh and of the spirit,
Disheartens Nature, weakens her delight,
Consumes the marrow, dulls the appetite;
Seares up the radick humor, and does quench
The native ardour of Concupiscence.
Indeed it makes devotion ferverous
And full of zeal, But what is that to us?
Let Hermites for devotion give exemple,
Zeal has been long since whipped out of our Temple.
Secondly Prayer, though sovereign and good,
And rightly styled the Souls eternal food,
Our business being many, I think meet,
That our devotion should be short and sweet.
For many worldly affairs have we in hand,
Which if we should upon promotion stand
Might often miscarrie, whence may gathred be,
Long Prayrs can no way stand with Policy.
For Almsdeeds; All mis-deedes I observe,
For by Good-works I mean not to deserve;
'Ti^ superstitious Doctrine, Babels stain,
And such as none but Rhemists will maintain.
Time was indeed, but time's not as it was,
When no wayfaring traveller could pass
Without relief, for Hospitals were then
Harbors and Inns to all distressed men.
Which bounty was by Abby-lubbers shown,
Who had no wives nor children of their own;
Which we account of as an old-wives fable,
Our Olive-branches spread about our table,
And though they seldom prosper, yet must we
Have special care of our posterity:
For worser far then Infidels they are,
That of their families will have no care.
Men of our rank, there is nothing so much raises
As gaining great-mens Love with Bribes and Praises;
This is that Cement joins us unto them,
Whence we contemn inferior Clergymen,
Whom the hand of greatness to small honor lists,
Because they are not, as we are, Men of Gifts.
Some muse why any one would me enstall,
Having no Learning nor no worth at all;
But I reply, these Places where we be,
Require small learning but much policy.
There was a time, which time's estranged from ours,
When we were Rabbis and Expositours
Of holy-Writ, and taught the heavenly way,
And in our Gen'rall-Councels bore great sway.
But we account him simple now, that cares
More for Divine then Temporal affairs.
Learning's an useless Relic, or a Prize
Got with a wasted body, and dim eyes
Which often contemns preferment, with desire,
Like a sequestered Ermit to retire
From the view of earth: while we take little care
For this esteem, which vanishes like air.
Our contemplation is how we may skip
To some more rich, commodious-Bishoprick.
Where we may hatch our eggs, and feed our brood,
And labor to get good, but do no good.
And thanks unto my Fates, I Have now in hand
The richest-Bishoprick in all the Land,
And privileges too, so great and many,
As more or higher there enjoyes not any.
To instance some whereof, that I have here,
I Have power to choose the Sheriff of the Sheere;
If any Justice shall my Grace displease,
I Will thrust him from the Commission of the Peace,
And make him veil to the lowest of my Train,
Before he be restored to 's place again.
No Suite may be commenced in any Court
Against (...) mine but I will f^^k him for it.
If any one no present chance to send,
He shall ere long find me his heavy friend;
So as of late, I Have brought them to that use,
As Country Presents will maintain my house.
Some works of seeming zeal I do profess,
Yet is my love to the World nothing less;
For out of fear lest some men should complain
Of my extreme hard dealing, I retain
Some semblances of pity to the poor,
And for them make a dole-day at my door.
Where, that the world may know my ardent zeal,
Both to the Church and to the Commonweal,
I manifest my charitable ends
With sound of trumpet, and invite of friends;
Which in my judgment well deserve expressing,
To sound alarm to a Bishops blessing:
For bounties of this kind are held so rare,
It Is good to publish those poor few that are.
In Visitation time, because there be
Many poor people that do pester me,
I give direction wheresoever I come,
Mine Almoner tender relief to none,
Before I go from thence, which makes them stay,
While I out of the back-gate slip away.
Hows'ere this be, I zealously pretend
My close departures for no other end.
Then to prevent vainglory; which would meet
So great a Bishop in a public street:
And therefore I a private passage take,
That ostentation I might better escape.
Now in the Country where I make retire,
My Senses have whats'ever they desire;
As first, for curious objects which delight
The moving apprehension of the sight,
Eye-drawing Pictures in ea^h chamber stand,
Which show such lively motion and command
In their attractive beauties, as they woo them
That are Spectators, to do homage to them.
Wherein it is one State-axiom of mine,
To choose a Picture sorting with the time.
For while Spain had the name, it was mine aim,
To have the Infantaes Picture sent from Spain,
Which in my dining chamber I set up,
Or in my private Parlor where I sup,
Where any one, by drawing up the latch,
Might judge how much I did approve the match.
But see what chanced! Last day a busy knave
This Spanish Picture happened to perceive,
Which he observing, told me he did muse
Why I would hang such Pictures in my house,
As gave distaste unto the public State,
And made their proffers projects of deceit;
Where I replied, it little me behooved
To hate that Picture which my Prince once loved.
Yet lest it should give scandal or offense,
I caused it straight to be removed thence.
Nor is my eye delighted only there,
But with selectedst melody mine ear,
With choycest cates my liqu'rish appetite,
With odorous perfumes I my smell delight,
And with embraces amorous as may be
Touch I my Lordships wife, but not a Lady.
Thus every Sense enjoys his earthly bliss,
As if my heaven were where my Palace is,
For naught on earth does in me grief begit,
But only one, and I will tell you it.
It is intended, having cure of Souls,
That upon summons I should preach at Paul's,
Which though it come scarce once in twenty year,
I Am sick when I should make my Sermon there;
So as enforced by my infirmity,
(Or want of brains) I hire a Deputy:
Which done, I make return from whence I came,
And thank my wits for shielding me from shame.
Some other useful projects I intend,
Now when I feel I Am drawing near my end,
For doubtless some would think I foulely er'd,
If I should leave my children unprefer'd.
So as grown weak, my wife and children doubt me,
And like Jobs comforters they cling about me,
Advising me, as they poor Orphans are,
(Not for my Soul, for that is their least of care)
But that I would take course to settle on them
Some means, that they may live as does become the^,
Likewise my wife puts finger in the eye,
And says her jointure dies, when I do die,
This makes me plot how these things may be don,
When other matters should be thought upon.
First, how my offspring may preferment have,
Before the mete-wand measure out my grave.
Secondly, how their Mother may be sped
Of some young Ruffin when her Bishop's dead.
Which to effect, there is naught so fully pleases,
As the renewall of concurrent Leases;
Admit they do defeat him that succeeds me,
This gainful guilefull contract much besteeds me;
For by this means, revenues I bestow
Both on my wife and on my children too.
This makes me send my Briefes from day to day,
If any one will Leases take, they may.
And at more easy rate then ere they had,
Which makes my Leasers run as they were mad.
Thus live or die, seven years apprentiship
Has taught me how to geld a Bishopric;
Which to good use converted, I see not
But it may thrive though indirectly got,
For, if no ill-got-goods thrive in this Nation,
Some would seem base who now are men of fashion
The Judicial Ape.
BRave Apes; brisk Bungs;
yet they must leave the field,
And to an ancient Bencher learn to yield;
Fox-fur'd 's my Gown, and smooth my close-cut chin,
But far more Foxly-smooth am I within.
Gravely can I for lucre-sake protest,
And clap mine unctuous fist upon my breast,
Even when my heart's as near unto my mouth,
As East is to the West, or North to South.
Musaeus came the other day to me,
(A curious wit for strains of Poesy)
And he besought me in a Cause as good
As truth could make it, if well understood,
To be his friend, and I did promise him,
But breach of promise is with us no sin.
He me accoutred with his words of Art,
And I admit'd him too for his good part;
Ripe was his judgment, and his wit as quick
Garnished with copious flowers of Rhetoric.
But these are tongue tied Orators with me,
Who would have me his friend, must bring his fe^.
Yet for all this, I will not stick to chide,
If any come to tempt me with a Bribe.
For I would have these wittalls understand
Fees must pass by my servants to my hand,
I take no Fees my self, they may fee Ned,
"They need not fear their cause if he be sped.
For we have Tarriers, Agents, Instruments,
To open the Cabinet of our intents
And plot our purposes, give them their due,
And these we use as men should use a scrue.
These be our Harping-irons that will draw
Like Ferrets, these minc'd-Maggots of the Law:
Who when their cause must to a hearing come,
Next night before unto my chamber run,
And currie favor all the ways they can,
To get admittance to me by my Man;
Which got, they find me in Majestic sort,
Starching my beard, or reading a Report.
While each of these more scurvy Court'sies makes
Then upon Whitby-Strand are shapes of Snakes;
Which country Congies, were they ten times worse,
Show State enough, because they cram my purse.
Suppose then how these Russetings appear
Wholly divided betwixt hope and fear.
At whose approach I lay aside my book,
Teaching my face a Radaman^h^an look:
Sirrahs, What make you here? who sent you hither?
Your man, scarce mutter they, walk knaves together;
Thus fret I like gumm'd grogran, which once past,
I deigne to take a superficial taste
Of their ill-open'd cause, and give them hearing,
Which I ^^tend next morning to appear in;
Yet so, as if it naught concerned me,
B^^ out of mere respect to equity,
Though I do prize the justice of his Cause
As much as old Sysambris did his Laws.
Bu^ being heard, I do d^meane me so,
I get ^oth coin and good opinion too.
Thus do my plots work for a thriving end,
I ^oll the poor, yet I Am the poor-mans friend.
N^^ am I always held the same I seem,
For in my time I have a Nigler been:
So as in privacy I sometimes must
With my seer'd bones quench the desire of lust.
A fair poor Client fall she in my dish,
I Will tickle her for forma-pauperis.
Down go my trunck-hose with their gravity,
To cope for once with acts of levity;
Her Case I Will put, like to a man of Law,
B e'^ right or wrong I do not care a straw:
My Bon-a-Roba she the day shall win,
Nor ^pend a grain, but what she spent in sin,
I weigh not what the world does Judge of me,
My saplesse-age pleads my Apology.
" Appius has silent tongue, but speaking eyes,
"Yet who says Appius loves Virginia lies.
Yet they can tell you that do better know me,
How none sometimes can have admittance to me.
Fit were it then ye were advised when time is,
For now and then I drink a cup of nimis,
So as to sleep so soundly I betake me,
A thousand Cannons scarcely could awake me.
Yet see my boldness! while my thirst I drench
In profuse cups, I sometimes mount the Bench,
And gives my cup-shot-judgement out of hand,
Ere I the Case or Preadings understand,
And who dare well control me? since these shelves
Which wrack my wits, my fellows feel themselves.
Besides, if any in my friends Case do oppose me,
I am their Advocate, if they will chose me.
They cannot stand for Seconds, I Am the man
By all their Pleadings bob me if they can,
Some I have had, and in th^s English Nation,
Who have stood firmly on their generation;
That they were greater and more ancient borne
Then any descent was; but I held in scorn
Their fruitless Pleas, to the Judges I did write,
And made express my Birth, Descent and Site.
Whereto they condiscended out a hind,
And doomed my worthless brood take upper-hand.
Our Titles are, as we do make them good;
And if they cross u^ they are mis-understood,
For what is for us we embrace and love,
But what is against us we do dis-approve.
Zlid, do you think that our rich scarlet may
With such a Pension our Retinue pay
Unless we^ lose by 't? No, we know our time,
And with Duke Humfrey we will be loath to dine.
Now for my Circuit so imperious am I,
That though I purchase the distaste of many,
Yet I Am indifferent how they censure me,
I justify my legal Sovereignty.
My white-lock is ambitious of honor,
Yea, I must tell you, I do dote upon her.
But in no place am I predominant
So much as when I Am Judge-itinerant:
Where stocks of country Gentlemen do meet me,
And in submissiv'st manner use to greet me;
Like Widgeons some behind and some before me,
As a terrestrial Idol they adore me.
Blessed is the man, to whom I Will daigne to speak;
And how admired when I a jest do break.
It Is wonderful to see what preparation
Is daily made for me, and in what fashion
Each County entertains me and my crew,
Who take upon them, give the knaves their due,
As they were petie Judges in commanding
Weak officers, who have no understanding
But only to admire them, and give way
To their commands, whats'ere they do or say.
My Tipstaffe is esteemed a witty man,
And one (so says the witless Commonty) who can
Prevail much with me, for he ever knows
What way the wind of my opinion blows.
Nor err they in their judgment, for indeed
He that would in his business succeed
Must make this man his Orator unto me,
For he so fitly, to my profit knows me,
As be the Cause you recommend to him
Never so foul, ye shall be sure to win.
For, truth is, I dare hardly say him nay,
He knows my courses so, which to display
Would shame me quite, so as whats'ere I show,
I must keep in with him whats'ere I do.
Now when I leave the County where I sit,
(I cannot choose but jeere them for their wit)
The generous Fry swim to my Chequer bag,
Where one presents me with a summer Nag,
One with a cast of Hawks, and now and then,
Some Shires Scotch Daggers to my Serving-men;
Others give hunting Leases, which remain
For Customs now, and must not off again.
Yet were these bounteous Babies blessed the while,
If all their bounties could procure a smile
From my composed Countenance, but they err
That do expect me to be popular.
No, I must punctual be, and set my face
According to the tenor of my place.
My posture is accoutered with braves,
In calling of the Shrieff and Gentry knaves:
None dare affront me while I am in place,
And whom I please, I put to all disgrace.
In Counties where I am at my own finding,
My richly-moultred Mill is ever grinding.
The Gentry, they have notice by the Shrieves,
And furnish me with Muttons, Veals and Beeves;
Others do send me Venison and Wine,
So as my Circuit is a joviall time.
For such abundance of provision have I,
As it would furnish near a Royall-Navie.
Now lest ye doubt my numerous Retinue
Should want their due or competent Revenue,
I give the meaner sort which do attend me
Reversions of that store the Gentry send me;
As broken-meat, and beer, all which they prize,
And sell poor people at the end o'th Size.
There Is naught unvalued that may money give,
So well my Meney is informed to live.
But for the better sort you may suppose,
(Specially such who help to trusse my hose)
I mint some other profits more then these,
As my Subscription unto Refrences,
Which ignorant people bring, hoping thereby
TO affright their strong and factious enemy:
But they are deceived, for they no more prevail
By our Refe^ments then an old-wives tale,
Nor shall this trouble us; our men gain by them,
Come they as thick as hayle we will not deny them.
Thus far our Country life has been expressed,
In Court and City we will display the rest.
In Court we seldom come, yet great men know us,
And in a Courtly-garbe petition to us
By their ingenious Agents, and we hear them,
And though their Crimes be odious we forbear them.
Or if to us they should a Letter send
In such an ones behalf, to be his friend,
Then Stoic- Cato wee'r instructed better,
We pass no Doom before we read the Letter,
For wee've experience of a tickle-seat,
How dangerous it is to offend the Great:
We Will not distaste them then in any case,
Lest they be means to put us from our place.
Sometimes we are invited to a Play,
Upon some joviall ceremoniall-day,
Where we do press, as other Sages use,
With grave aspect unto the Banket-house,
And there in Conscript manner do we sit,
Admiring of some passages of wit
Which we do understand as well as he
That took Opigena for Mercury.
But in reserved jests we have a care,
To make men deem us wiser then we are:
If Great-ones laugh, it is a pregnant jest,
And we approve it as we hug a Feast.
If we be widdowers, though saplesse, old,
Decrcpit, crooked, rhumatick and cold;
Yet see what wealth can do, w^ straight are chosen
As fit to match with such a Great man's Cosen,
Though she, poor Gi^le, ^ather would be led
Unto her Grave then to a loathed bed:
Yet Will a^ old man serve them for a cloak,
And be a Chimney for a greater smoke.
And that is the cause, no question, when we die
And leave our wives so large a Legacy,
Why they set their affection on Sol^a^oes,
That can discourse on naught but Barracadoes:
For such is their strong-temperd resolution,
They love no Judgment like to Execution.
But it is no matter for the worlds Sentence,
We get us honor by our wives a^quaintance;
Which we so idolize, that we can show it
Even in our pace, as we were borne unto it.
Were it not fit then we should show all grace
To such as these who raise us to our place?
For tell me seriously, how many have
Deserved well, who never could receive
Any ^steeme at all, for all their worth,
Because they had no friend to set them forth?
These lived obscurely, and as poorly did,
Nor cap'd nor congi'd, nor so much as ey'de,
Or popularly viewd; what was the cause?
They had naught but the knowledge of our Laws
To give them countenance, whereas such as we
By our Alliance more authentic be.
For there is no place nor person in the Court,
Whereto we may not readily resort
And have access, by consequence, success
In whats'ere we Petition, more or less.
But now I must unto the City go,
Where I am Councellor and dweller too;
Neighbors I have, but principally three,
Who now are Wardens of a Company,
Men of sufficient wealth, I can assure ye,
And now and then impannell'd in a Jurye:
Of one whereof (I cannot choose but laugh)
For all he walks now with his Civil-staffe,
Being made Juror of a grand Enquest,
And in 's opinion wiser then the rest;
Unto his fellows that himself displayed,
"Thus long have we our Verdicts (friends) delayed,
"And as ye see it draws near to night,
"And we by Law are barred from Candlelight,
"Meat, drink, and necessaries, till we give
"Our Verdict up, which die; or which to live.
"Now hear me (friends) we have twelve Indictments here,
"Against twelve prisoners as may appear;
"To what end should we thus precisely watch them
"Let Us hang six and save six, and so dispath them,
Yet this is held a man of choice esteem,
And in his white fox-fur sits to be seen
Upon his well-couch'd-Bench, whose Pillars be
As fit to advise a Company as he.
Yet deigne I with these sage-gulls to discourse,
Nor do I hold my judgment any worse.
The Sun may shine on dung, none can deny it,
And yet receive no stayne nor blemish by it.
The object of their knowledge is my jest,
The ground of my acquaintance is to feast,
And jeere them for their bounty when they do it,
Though I must tell you I toe gladly to it.
But for requital they have none from me,
It is suffi ient they have my company.
"Once in his life the Churl make's his feast,
"And by that feast, his byrth-day is expressed:
Whose rule is my direction, and shall ever;
I Would rather be a taker then a giver.
If they invite us to them we will meet them,
"Though fools make feasts, wise men may go to eat them.
Nor are these all the delights I cope with here,
I have variety through all the year.
Here a f^esh Erithrea of choice price,
Came last day privately for my advice,
"Whether a Citizen lawfully might
"Having, (as she put case, laid with a Knight)
"Challenge precedence for her eldest Son
"Fore such an one as had no such thing don?
Whereto I answered; might I put her Case,
I little doubt but she should have the place,
And for her Son get that prioritie
Which did belong unto my Progeny.
At which reply, smiling away she went
Silent, which silence did imply consent.
Thus both in City, Country, and in Court,
With a reserved gravity and port
I spread my beams of honor, and descry
A select affectation in mine eye.
I look about me with a glorious vain,
While my fastidious wagg bears up my train:
Groundlings I dis-esteeme that cross the way,
As if I were of better clay then they:
And in a word, so sweetly do I breath,
I fear no Enemy so much as Death.
The Political Ape.
ALas, fond Apes; how shallow do these show,
Thus to discover whatso'ere they know?
They have no Project be it nere so slight
But must be published to the open light:
Their hearts are in their mouths, which they disclose
Not only to their friends, but to their foes.
Which lightness I abhor; for nere shall he
Be scholed in the grounds of policy,
Who by experience has not got the art
To make his Tongue a stranger to his heart.
He only to the hight of wisdom grows
Who seems as if he knew not what he knows.
His Projects must be neatly shadowed,
His drifts with secret Curtains covered;
His Plotts so smooth as the quick'st sighted men
Cannot with all their sleights discover them.
There Is nothing in the World I more detest
Then to have transparent Windows in my breast;
For by this means my inside should be laid
Open to the world, and all my tricks displaid:
Which would not only grieve me, but enforce
The World to love me ever longer worse.
In my opinion those Cilician Geese
Are wiser in their secrecy then these,
Who have exposed themselves to public view
By making others known to what they knew.
For they (as it is reported) When they fly
Over mount Taurus, least they should descry
Their flight by cackling to those Eagles there
Which in abundance to those Hills repair,
With winged speed (for there they dare not tarry)
They have, and in their Bills small Stones do carry.
Thus by instinct they use a policy
To save them from their furious enemy:
While these tame fools, whom silly Geese condemn
Will give their foes advantage over them.
But these that dance so blindly in a net
Shall be excluded from my Cabinet;
They are too full of chinks, so let them rest,
"My Secretary shall be my own Breast.
In all those Coasts wherein I have remained,
I Have some experience in my courses gained,
Which I made use of to my own behoof;
And where I ever seemed to hold a loofe,
I was most interessed still in that,
Yet few could reach the perch I aimed at.
I never saw that Statseman in my days,
(Nor would I have it spoken to my praise)
Whom I in short time could not make my friend,
And find as soon whereto his aims ^id tend.
For thus I wrought him; First I sought to wind
Into his Nature, how he stood inclined,
Which found, I most affection used to show
To that, which he stood most aff^cted to:
Whereby, as Jet attracts the yielding straw,
Just as I would, could I his humor draw.
Or by his ends, if once I had displaid him,
I by that means would labor to persuade him,
Which he could not resist, seeing me bend
My speech to that wh^reto his course did tend.
Likewise if my observance found him weak,
I of his We^kenesse would advantage take,
And if he were to stiff I could not draw him,
His Weakness gave me strength to overaw him.
But if he could by none of these be rested,
By means of Some where he was interested,
His bosom opened to receive me in,
Where seized, I took in hand to govern him.
In all my time, Man was my only book,
On which with serious Study I did look:
Tracing all his demensions to and fro,
For still I dogged him where he used to go.
Were he a Statist I observed him straight,
And poised him too, to find if he were weight;
And now and then I found him wondrous light,
Or else bleere-ey'd and blemished in his sight.
For either his Ambition did so mad him,
As he would do what ere his fancy bad him;
Or else his bleered Judgment so depraved him,
As still in State-affaires he misbehav'd him.
In which observances I wondered much
(Not without just occasion) any such
Should be advanced to place of that esteem,
Who never knew what State-affaires did mean.
So as more aptly could I not compare
These Spongie Statesmen who are naught but air,
Then to that world-wasting Phaeton,
Whose ayme's to guide the Progress of the Sun,
When they alas (so simple are these Elves)
Can hardly give direction to themselves.
Nor did I only limit my Survey
To these who have the glory of the Day,
Sitting like Pilots at the stern of State,
But such as were of lower Estimate.
Where I observed, there was not any vice
Derivative to man form Paradise,
That could her secret Poison so much smother
As not infuse it self in one or other.
For men of all degrees employed were
How to their Seed they might a fortune reere;
Wherein they all contended how they might
Incroach the farr'st upon an others right.
Which practice I approved, yet much condemn
The weak and open passages of them;
For their projectments scarcely were begun
Till they discovered all that they had done;
Which gave their foes occasion to prevent,
By timely circumspection, their intent.
I rather relish him can play the knave,
Yet seems as if he knew not to deceive:
For in my books He is the only one
Who has a wit, yet seems as he had none,
There is no walk that me so much does p^s^
A^ tracing clouds with Aristophanes;
To walk, I mean, obscure, as censure may
Tax neither what I act nor what I say.
Which to ^ff ct the better, I do give
Such satisfaction wheresoere I live;
As there is no rite nor custom that can show it,
But I can soon conform my self unto it.
Y^a of my faith a nose of wax I make,
Though all I do seems done for Conscience sake.
(...) I addr^ss^ my self in any case
U^^o the disposition of the place:
At R^me I live just as the Romists do,
Elsewhere I live as they are affected to.
At pu^e Geneva, Prot^stant I am,
At Dow^y or at Rhemes another man,
In Germany a s^lfe-inspired Luther,
At Amsterdam a Laodicean Neuter,
Amongst zealous men I seem a hot Precisian,
But when I come within the Inquisition,
L^st* touching my profession, they should doubt me
I carry store of Rel ques still about me;
Which I suppose to be the only course,
For without these I well might fare the worse.
Thus I conform my self to any Rite,
Be he Armenian or Hugonite;
State-stirring Brownist, or a Broughtonist,
Licentious Famulist, or Barrowist,
His Ape I am, and will be so professed,
To ma^e me more familiar with his breast;
O^ which I work my aims, for by my wit
What ere I act, my Conscience shadows it.
For prosper in the world few I know,
And hold concurrence with Religion too;
Which m^kes me gull the world with a pretense
O^ hyp^critick zeal and cons^ience.
For popular opinion 's my desire,
So as in the Country I have built a Quire
Where I and my religious family
M^ke our repair (as seems us) usually;
Yet from the Pulpit far remote's my Seat,
Be^au^e I am not well resolved yet
In cas^ of Conscience, therefore would I be
Far of, that is doctrine may not trouble me.
The cause is this; as yet I have no time
To treat of any thing that is Divine;
My ayms are plots of profit, plants of pleasure,
For points of Faith, I Will think of them at leisure.
"Who wish unto their aims an happy end,
"Must in their aims no other thing intend;
For he that deals much in the world, I trow,
Without the Church, he has enough to do.
Nor with these Politic Rules do I resort
Only to City, Country, and the Court;
For I these grounded axioms can show
Unto the learned Academie too:
Where with quick eye I may observe their tricks
Withouten Aristotles-politicks.
Here a grand Senior-Dunce will keep his place,
Although he have a Parsonage in chase;
Which having purchased, yet concealing it,
Some year or two heel keep his Fellowship.
The selfsame smooth politicall-abuse
Have I observed in Masters of a House,
By whom such Fellows only are appointed
As had their oylie-fists before anointed;
So as, though it seem much different to their function,
"Naught they affect so much as extreme unction.
Where no Election can be freely granted,
If he that would be chosen fellow, wanted;
For no admission can be ever made
Until the Master of the House be paid.
Besides, conveyance of their Colledge-Leases,
Is as the President or Provost pleases;
Which many times themselves they so befriend,
As they convert them to their proper end:
For it is daily seen what course they take,
And what commodity of these they make.
To all which acts I approbation give,
"For he that cannot sharke, he cannot live.
All Engines must be used that we may git
Unto our selves a certain benefit.
Nor can be thrive that cannot well dispense
For profits sake, with Faith and Conscience.
From foreign States intell^gence I have,
Which like (...) ^^e^ly Corran^s I receive
By me^ns of such as are employed for me
In ev^^y place where their occasions be.
These, like Architas wooden Dove, can bring
Tiding^ from such a State, or such a King;
So as naught can be done in any Nation,
Whereof my Agents give me not relation:
Which betters my experience in each part,
M^k^^g my best friends strangers to my heart.
For h^ that has the humor to display
Himself unto his friend, although he may,
Yet his too open breast shall at no time
Partak^ of any sec^e^y of mine:
I may p^^sume my Counsels must be shown
By him, who has not b^ains to keep his own.
I ho^d i^ to be oil and labor spent
H^^e (...) ^course what the Spanish-treaty meant,
But (...) had bu^^^^sse so strange a carriage;
To m^^^ mo^^ sh^^s and less^ intend a marriage
But this was so well shadowed, giv^ it due,
By the Spanish Jipsy and her wandering crew,
A^ I ^ill press no more this Subject now,
"Only the Cinque Ports must be looked unto,
Thus have I sto^'d my well-experienc'd pate
With Politick-Rul^s extracted from each State,
Where I h^ve lived or conversant have bin,
As there (...) n^ne but I could humor him.
For was he zealous? I could make a show
Of servent zeal and of devotion too;
Was he a worldling? I was worldly given,
Discoursing more of Mammon then of heaven;
Was he voluptuous? I Would consort him right,
As one devoted wholly to delight;
In brief, there was no rank, degree, nor state,
Which in my self I could not personate.
Nor car^ I much wh^ts'ever the world deem,
This is my Mott: I am not what I seem.
The Chymicall Ape.
ALL rules of Art, of small esteem I hold
To his, who can extract refined gold
From copper, brass, or such inferior mettle,
For he can make pure Ophir of a kettle.
Besides, so rare is Art expressed in him,
He may from Lattin, Alchimie or Tin
Draine store of silver bulloyne, with the which
He maks himself and his attendants rich.
The Stone, the Stone, O that I had the Stone,
By means whereof I might be such an one!
Which Stone I have long studied to obtain,
Wasting my oil, weakening my Chymick brain,
And still me thought I had it, yet was crossed,
For longer that I sought, the more I lost.
Yet forasmuch as I did understand
That many did profess it in the Land,
Whose solid judgments could not choose but see
That such a thing might well effected be,
Or else they nere would such estates have spent
In trying of a mere experiment;
I reassumed spirit, and betook
My self more strictly to my golden-Booke.
Besides all this, I heard how Kellie came
By practice of this Art to special fame;
An other likewise so experienced grew
In this mysterious Art revealed to few,
As he an artificial tree of gold
Had curiously contrived, which daily would
Bud, bloome and blossom, and in branches spring,
Which might be soon a beneficial thing:
For these Hesperian-plants in time would prove
By their increase to be a golden-Grove.
All this encouraged me, hoping one day
The charges I had been at to defray
With plentuous interest; but the more I traveled,
The more I found my senses to be gravel'd.
Limbecks, with artfull forges builded I,
And places too where I my gold might try;
Sev'n years and more have I my wits thus bet,
But not a penny-weight extracted yet.
Sometimes unto the Braziers I Would repair,
And laughed at my conceit while I staid there;
For I was half resolved within short space
To change the brass and copper of that place
Into pure gold, and make my copesmates merry
With transmutation of all Lothberry.
Thus fed I on opinion, laying out
Great sums, till I my purpose brought about,
Which once disburs'd, I never shall receive
But count it lost whats'ere I ventured have.
For having spent my fortunes and my wit
In diving to the secrecies of it,
My aims I bended to another mark,
Resolving now to learn the art to sharke.
For which, that I might more enabled be,
I straight betook me to a company
Of witty Rake-hells, roaringly professed,
And in all forlorn courses bravely flesh't.
Flankt were my troops with bolts, bauds, punks, and panders.
Pimps, nips and tints, Prinado's, highway-standers;
All which were my familiars, and would do
With quick dispatch whats'ere I put them to.
So as some of my crew of choice account
Did every Sessions time up Holborn mount;
Yea I my self could Miserere sing
Or I had gone to heaven in a string.
For to relate those nimble tricks we played,
Though on the public Stage they be displaid,
As the subtle headed Alchimist can show;
Or the Alchimists own Ape, Tom. Trinculo,
One hold I fitting to be here expressed,
By which you may judge better of the rest.
"One of my Foists resolving to resort
"In the habit of a Courtier to the Court,
"Where he demeaned himself as none could deem,
"But he was just the man that he did seem;
"Nor any Courtier there of sweeter scent,
"Nor choycer in his form of complement,
"More punctual in his gate, or in his look,
"As one whose postures had been all by the book;
"After a turn or two, to the Table came
"Where two great personages were at game.
"The one whereof, had laid his purse close by,
"His loss upon occasion to supply;
"My Bung observing this, takes hold of time,
"Just as this Lord was drawing for a prime,
"And smoothly nims his purse that lay beside him,
"And all this while the other gamester eyed him,
"At whom he winks, to move him to conceal it,
"As one that had no purpose for to steal it.
"He that perceived him, thinking him to be
"One of the Court or of his company,
"Smiling, continued play, and so it rested
"Until this Lord seeks for his purse, but mist it:
"Whereat the other laughed; quoth he, enquire
"Of such an one, and clad in such attire,
"One of your own acquaintance, I suppose,
"Who nim'd you of your purse before your nose.
"Diligent search was made all there about,
"But my ingenious gue had got him out
"Before this inquisition, which secured him
"Better then when the court-wals had immured him.
Thus were my Limetwigs laid in every place,
Who like Bloodhounds had still some game in chase,
Which they pursued with such an eager mind,
As where they seized they left small store behind.
Scarce could two country fopps together meet
To hear a cheating- ballad in the street,
But presently some Accomplices of mine
Took hold of the opportunity of time;
For while these to the Ballad-monger flocked,
My nimble- Nipps dived deep into their pocket.
But for as much as I perceived these shifts
Were merely grounded on apparent thifts,
And that some private foe through inbred malice
Might be a means to bring me to the Gallows,
This sharking trade relinquished, I became
A wondrous strange reformed honest man;
An Emp'rick-Doctor, who had Art at will,
Which I derived from my Chymick-Still,
Where I such waters made, as in short time
Doctor Stevens water was less prized then mine.
Balms, apozems, confections had I store,
Yet the more I had my Patients wished for more:
Such rate effects were daily wrought by these,
As they were Cures for any strange disease.
But that I might seem learned in mine Art,
Of late I Have got an Herbal all by heart,
Whereof I make this use; when I can give
No reason why this dies, or that should live,
(For no such depth as yet mine art affords)
I straight confound them with abstrusest words.
As Cataplasms, Diarrhicks Cataclisms,
Concucurbetuls, Emplasms, Paroxisms,
With which I so conjure them, as they cease
To ask me any qu^stions tou^hing these.
"Who for his practice can no reason show,
"He must have words or he is not worth a stroe.
Besides all this, such Authors can I number,
As they that hear me are enforced to wonder:
For thus hold^ Galen, thus Hippocrates,
Thus Silvius holds, thus Dioscorides,
But Paracelsus thus, who in my breast
Has more esteem then any of the rest.
Though I was never so on learning set
As I read any of these Authors yet;
Nor care I much, it is my desire to seem
More then I am, to gain me more esteem.
Some twenty Patients have I here hard by,
Who know not what they ayle, no more do I,
Yet lest of negligence they me condemn,
Morning and night I duly visit them;
Prescribing them receipts to cheer their blood;
Which many times do far more harm then good.
Yet am I crowded to on every side,
So as of late I on my foot-cloth ride
By means of such a Lord, who had occasion
To try my profound Art this last vacation;
Whose hand of bounty did my state enrich
For curing of an ulcer in his breech.
How glad am I my Chymick-works are done,
Amalga like they had more Moon then Son?
More profit do I reap by one direction
To mine Apothecarie, or inspection
Into my Patients water, then I look
Ere to receive from all my Chymick-smook;
For Alchymie with piercing Antimonie,
Upon my knowledge caused a want of money.
Mineral metals, Niter, Oro^halke,
By the use whereof I in a cloud did walk,
Hatching such quaint Chymeraes in my brain,
As reaping wind was all that I could gain.
Hope trained me on till all my wits were reft me;
I sought for gold t^ll I no brass had left me.
But why do I my weakness thus descry?
When men have er'd were wiser held then I,
In making search for this unvalued Stone,
But I must leave them and their wits alone;
They hope a day will come will pay for all,
But I fear such a day will never fall.
So as me thinks I cannot well compare
These men who build strange Castles in the air,
More fitly then to those who once did labor
To take a Hare with playing on a Taber.
Fly brass; no Chymick but a Physick-ape
Since I left Mercury for Aesculape:
My practice now 's clear of another nature,
Trading before in Smoke but now in water.
Now am I used with choycest entertain,
Had in esteem wheres'ever I remain;
In City, Court, and Country harbored,
With free access unto a Ladies bed,
Whilst her weak husband thinks she Physic wants,
And for my Potion gives me hearty thanks.
Straight she protests my Pills do only please her,
Thus much I Am sure, they for that season ease her;
For application is the soveraignst thing
That may conceiving to a woman bring.
There is a lovely-Lady in this land,
Whom I have had these two years under hand,
Yet I for manners sake will lain her name,
But trust me, sh^e's a hen that loves the game,
Wh^ ha^ been long time barren; yet have I
By art and other things I did apply,
Made her a f^ui^full Mother; yea some say
That she conceived the very self same day
That I did minister; but I divine
It came right neeere unto that very time.
And I am glad on it; for I do not see
How he had Heir'd his Land withouten me.
The babe is full of hope, and will no question,
For h^s Syres sake, love men of our profession.
But it is no matter, now in grace I am,
And shall be dead before he be a man;
Thus much entirely shall I wish un^o him,
Hee^d be no Alchymist, it will undo him;
For other Arts, a Gods name take his venture,
This is so deep I think it has no center.
Nor am I only practiced in the Court,
But in the Country too to make me sport.
Here Granam Gurton will be sick for love,
And I must scent some love-procuring Glove,
To cause her sweetheart more affection show,
And this I promise out a hand to do.
Some four hours after I make known to her,
That I Have conferred with my familiar,
Who has engaged his word before one week,
He whom she seeks shall for her fancy seek.
She pays me well, and hopes all shall be mended,
But I am gone before half week be ended.
Young wenches too I have exceeding store,
And I content them all, what would they more?
Only some zealous-Sisters do refrain
To come unto me, but I know their aim;
They daily so increase and multiply
Among themselves, they need none such as I.
Thus have I traced many dangers ore,
And now at last arived on the shore;
I like the Horse-leach feed upon their blood
To whom I seldom tender any good:
My Patients are my profits, nor care I
Leg of a Dog whether they live or die.
This is the highest pitch of all my skill,
How to draw up a Pothecaries bill
Of ounces, drams and doses, which long Item
(Were not for gain) would ty^e me much to write'em.
Within few months I hope I shall not need
On other men's infirmities to feed;
My ten years practice so much treasure gain me,
As ten at hundred now may well maintain me.
The Critical Ape.
NOw by my life, a blind man may discover
A Ship of fools or Dottrells new come over.
Have you heard such a crew of brainless Skulls,
As if they had been bred i'ch' I Will of gulls,
Boast of the Vilanies that they have done,
Meaning to end just as they have begun?
Here a great Lord like one of Isis Asses
In my conceit all other fools surpasses;
For he consumes his Lungs when he does see
Any Man graced or in esteem but he.
It Is worth observing too, to note how sin
Retains a kind of privilege in him.
Be his vile courses nere so indirect,
The greatness of his place will him protect,
And give such luster to his vices too
As they like virtues shine in outward show.
For where Ambition or Oppression either,
Yea all enormious vices put together
Are covered with State, inferiors love them,
At least there 's few dare censure or reprove them:
So as that maxim's true in my conceit,
"It is a rare Sight to be good and great.
But I do hear this high-aspiring fellow,
Is in a single combat or Duello
Upon disgraces offered, pressed to fight
With an Hispaniolized Favorite;
But I 'm persuaded neither of them both
(So highly graced they are) but will be loath
To shed one others blood, hows'ere they prate it,
Unless they be dispenst with for the Statute.
But should one kill the other in this sort,
I think the State had cause to thank them for 't.
Now Verulam, good Man, is in his grave,
I muse who shall his House and Title have;
That spatious-specious-pretiouss refectorie,
Which cost a wo^ld of wealth, so says the story:
Those peble-paved B^ookes, empaled Lakes,
Thick clad with countless sholes of Ducks and Drakes.
For 's Lady, she has got one now, will busse her,
And changed her U^^lesse Vicount for her Usher;
Whence the Cross inn may report, as sure it will,
"A Countess dain'd to lie her Under hill.
For him whom some call his adopted Heir,
Our waggs point at the Tower, and say he is there,
Where he with his She Cousins plays at Gleeke,
Though some make bold to say he is in by th'weeke.
But what is that to me! this would I know
Whether he be Saint Alban yea or no.
Saint Alban! no; yet Alban was a Martyr,
And one each gate, in the Town bestowed a quarter;
Now the State might well afford it to bestow
That Style on him, would he be Martyr too.
For I never read that any Age did call
Saint Alban Martyr Lord High Admiral.
But God will have a stroke in every Man,
Witness the dismal shot of Eglesham,
Whose fate was this Dukes fall, enforced to loose
Those Honors by a stabbe whereto he rose;
"So weake's that Arch of Greatness which relyes
"On Complements and mere formalities:
But God is merciful, as he is just,
To whom, with whom I leave him, so I trust.
Next him, an Ape of pleasure or delight,
A very sensual fleshly Sibarite;
And he triumphs, fond Ape, as much as may be,
In favors shown him by his wanton Lady.
Yet should he but unto the world be sent
Naked, he would die for want of nourishment;
For then his outward beauty would deceive him,
His consorts loath him, and his pleasures leave him.
For this r^ine axiom is, He that does find
"Move comfort in his body then his mind,
"May feed, and glut, and gormandize his time,
"Yet all this while he lives but like a Swine;
"Who spends his days in Surfeits and in Sinning,
"Making his end far worse then his beginning.
Ne t him, a shallow, weak, vaine-glorious-gull,
Or styles and titles who is stuck so full,
As there is none, such honors do befall him,
That know to day, to morrow how to call him.
Yet lend your ear, I Will tell you in a word
What this Colossus is, A Spongy Lord,
Whose merit's mean, whose apprehension small,
Great only in his Titles, that is all.
The way by which he seeks esteem to gain
Is this, he strives great States to entertain;
Conduits run Rhenish, and the Kings high street
Smells of his odours and his perfumes sweet.
In public ways his bounty he displayes
In Sucket, Biscuit, Wafers, Carawayes;
At one reere-supper in expense more large
Then all his years Revenues will discharge.
The height of his Ambition is to get
By Citizens acquaintance into debt;
But I suppose till he has paid old score,
They will be loath to lend him any more:
Then let him paune his Honor, but this age
Is far too wise to credit such a gage.
This Ape hows'ere in State himself he bear,
He can with patience take a box of the ear
And n'ere repine, as if he did allow it
More Courtier-like to take a wrong then do it;
For he through me^kenes of his spirit does prize
Patience above the weight of injuries.
Next a licentious selfe-conceited Ape,
Who in the Court such sport does daily make,
The Ladies, he protests, so value him
They would not want the Wag for any thing.
His Parentage he likewise does disclose,
Least his descent should admiration lose,
Which he describes, and I believe him, thus;
A Courtier gat him of a Succubus;
Of whom both bred and flesht, he nightly trades
In dark Court-entries with his Ladies maids:
Which Ladies well observing, do attire
Themselves like maids, that they might have like hire,
In every Mark, Court-sh^w or Interlude,
He must make one, or it is holden rude;
For (as he thinks) he is by Ladies eyde,
More then all those that are employed beside.
Yet let me tell you, this conceited fancy
Whereof he labors, brought him to a phrensy;
Nor is he yet recovered, but inchain'd
Until his madding humor be reclaimed.
Next him a wastefull, formal fashion-monger,
A finicall, superfluous state-wronger,
Who boasts of his invention in devising
All those strange f^shions in our State arising,
Which ^y h^s travail were first brought a shore,
For to this I Will they were not known before.
Nor is his foreign travel unrequired,
So much are we with his conceit delighted;
For to discharge the debt that we do owe him,
A yeerly-Pension do we pay unto him.
We pay unto him! No; I scorn it I,
That any such Pie-colour'd Butter-flie
Should gain by me or any one of mine,
To geld the State, or gull the present time.
Yea rathe^ ^h^n I Would second such a Cheat,
I^e s^e his c^rrion gutts about his feet.
B^t I commit him till he pay his Tailor
To B^okers-Lavender, or to the Jayler,
Where let him lie in nastie, nittie-linnen,
Till he make satisfaction for his sinning.
Next an Observing-Ape, who travels Nations
To gain him knowledge by his Observations,
Glories in those strange coasts where he has been,
And in the Novels he has heard and seen.
Naught he observes but he relates it,
And yet me thinks, he something does omit:
Which if he had remembered, sure I think,
Could not so soon into oblivion sink.
But I must tell him of it; " Sir, do you hear?
"A strange Conjunction happened this last year
" Twixt Mars and Jupiter; pray now divine
"What this Prognosticates to after time.
"Some, and the wisest, of opinion are
"That it presageth famine, others war,
"Others, some pestilent-disease occurring,
"Causing men die on heaps by such a murrin.
"But what is your opinion? -- l'as poor sot,
He either has forgot or knows not
What Constellations mean! But sir, you,
Who knows more coasts then ere Columbus knew;
While forraine-Country wonders are made known,
You much forget this Country of your own.
For in this Island where your self was borne,
Did you nere visit Glastenbury-Thorne?
Saint Thomas Beckets path, his Shrine, his Cell?
The Civit-senting Moss of Win'freds well?
The Stones of Salsbury- plain, which none can number?
The Stones of Whitby-strand, that Snakie wonder?
Bruertons Logg which on a Mote does lie,
And sinking bodes, The Ancestor must dye.
Or of Saint Quintins (as Ive heard it told)
Whose ancient Seat is Harpham on the would,
Where at such times as chief of the house shall die,
A Drum to the hearing of the neighbors by,
For three days space together sounds alarm,
(A gentle easy summons to prepare him.)
Which dying march, (as I have understood)
Issues from the covert of a shadie wood,
But whence or how produced, that know not I,
(A Sacred-Secret Sealed from mortal eye.)
But it implies (this Charity will grant)
He dies a Champion in the Church militant.
Or of those Cornish-Choughs I Am sure you hear,
Which built at Claughton once in Lancashire,
Who, as I Have heard it there reported often,
When a late Ancestor surnamed Croft
Deceased, fled straight from thence (but God knows whither)
Where they had built for many years together.
Which ominous or no, I cannot tell,
Nor what it boded can I gather well,
But people thereabout affirm, it wants
Her ancient priviledg'd inhabitants,
Who left their Country-coast, their native nest,
And took plantation where they liked best.
Or of those rare, intestine, civill-warres,
Or fatal skirmishings of Irish-Stares,
Where son with father fought, daughter with mother,
Shedding the reeking blood of one another:
Nor could their quenchlesse rage extinguished be,
But by an universal Tragedy;
For there was scarce one left (as I Have heard say)
To bring their fellows word, who won the day.
So hot is fury (as appeared by these)
As it respects no State, Sex, nor Degrees,
But breathing forth revenge holds on the fight
A tedious Summers day from Morn to Night.
But sure these These stale news the Critic purposely recounts, to tax this
Observer of palpable weakness.
News are come unto your ear,
The bruit whereof's dispersed in every sheare:
The fatal vesper (Man) where the Romish pastor
Brought to himself and numbers more disaster.
Which tragic act should not so censured be
As if those men had sinned more then we;
For those on whom the Tower of Siloam fell
Were not the worst, as is observed well:
But rather let us this application make,
(That of Gods judgments we may warning take:)
"If the best employment that a Christian has
"Be not secure from the violls of Gods wrath,
"And that he spares not, for our exemple,
"To chastise those who do frequent his Temple;
"How can we look, when any of us come
"To Sinks of Sin, but he will pay us home?
"We make our Brothells Temples, and in Stews
"Our Saintly-formalists erect their Pewes;
"If Places of devotion then receive
"Such fearful ruins as of late some have;
"How can these sensual Synagogues but fall?
"well, Boys, a day will come will pay for all.
But sure he hears these news, for none be newer,
I mean that Ratsbane-Academick Bruer,
Who rather then he would his Bev'rage lose
Poisoned rare hopeful Plants, as the rumor goes.
Yet he lives still and flourishes, nay more,
Continues selfsame trade he used before;
Whereas if Justice executed were
Upon the offender, as his crimes appear,
"Who caused these Scholars such Rats deaths to die,
"Should die a dogs-death, more have thought then I.
But sure you hear, (for who is 't hears not)
Of the monstrous fish in Vistula late got,
Which wore a triple-Miter on his head,
And on whose back were lively figured
Saint Peters-keyes, a partizan of war,
Which Wizards do divine predictions are
Of some strange thing that is likely to ensue,
Now what that is I Would gladly know from you.
Fall upon Rome, you answer something will,
But I would hear whether 't be good or ill:
For under cope of heaven no State I know
But some occurrent it is subject to:
Wherefore resolve me, Sir, before you go,
Whether it bodes our State some good or no;
Or whether this same monstrous fish divine
Some doubtful alteration in our time;
For sure I am naught can escape your dish
(If fit to be observed) be 't flesh or fish.
But sure you 've heard or seen that fearful vision,
Which the wiser sort have held in great derision;
That white-mayl'd-Army marshalling her power,
All rankt in battail'^ay on Burnley Moore;
Where not a man but vented his conceit;
One said it was an enemy to the State,
Some Spinola that mortally does hate us:
Some thought it was a Posse Comitatus
Raised in the County, purposely to seize
On some Recusant for arrerages.
But most men held it was great Bacchus train,
Had shot those Squibs and Streamers in their brain:
For most of these that for this Vision stood
Could scarce discern a Soldier from a Cloud.
But sure you hear (for 'twas within this sennet)
How Birds would be of the Order of Saint Bennet,
How Raven, Crow, Pie, Sparrow (pretty Soul)
Flockt about Bennet, as sh'ad been an Owl:
How Raven taken in a golden dream,
Would needs a naked Benedictan been,
Till the sweet tuned Finch with his melodious pleading,
Split Raven quite and plumed him for his treading.
Which sharp encounter cost Musaeus more
Then all these Fowls could ever yet restore.
But zlid, I Would like forgot! he cannot choose
But hear of Bugle-blues and Titre-tues,
Choice blades, brave youths; yea I durst almost swear
That he has notice what their Projects were,
So as whats'ere he speak in 's own defense,
He cannot choose but have intelligence,
And therefore should be censured; -- alas not he,
Though he pretend some Rules of policy
Whereon his erring Observations stand,
He Is held the veriest Widgeon in the land;
"For like a bottle (howsoere he show him)
"Naught he retains, unless 't be put into him.
"So as me thinks I fitly may compare
"This simple Sot unto that muddie Maire,
"Who of his wisdom self-opinionate,
"Like to some state-observing Magistrate,
"Among other things which he was glancing at,
"Observed one wear a ribband in his hat
"Of dangerous color, for the field was blue,
"Whence he inferred he was a Titre-tu,
"An enemy to the State: straight to the place
"He sends his ale-tipt- Sergeant with his Mace,
"To summon this Titerian to appear
"And show some cause why he such toys did wear.
"The youth accosts the Maire; the Maire the youth;
"Who having stroakt his beard and wipt his mouth,
"Charged him upon the Allegiance which he bore
"His Prince, to show why he such ribbands wore?
"Sir, quoth the youth, most Boys in all our Parish
"Such ribbands wear in honor of our Morish.
"In honor of your Morish, quoth the Maire,
"You and your Morish shall taste both one fare.
"Brethren this Morice is a welshman borne,
"Who on Saint Davies day wears Leeks in scorn
"Of us true English-Brittains -- I think meet
"To set you and your Morish both by the feet;
"For we do know hows'ere these Ruffins prate,
" Ribbands and Leeks are stratagems of State;
"Which well effected, to the Court I Will come,
"And show the Prince what service I have done.
But were this State-sot ignorant of these,
Has surely heard of the massacre of Reze,
So many Ensigns, Colors, Streamers, Standers,
Ancients, Lieutenants, Colonells, Commanders,
So many Heroes which we sometime had
In Coat of male, but now in Durance clad;
So many maine Land-pieces which did breath
The seldom welcome Embassy of death,
Seaz'd and surpised, so as it may appear,
The French at no time sold their salt so dear.
While some do think the English had won the day,
But that their General was slunke away;
But this is but some flying-false report,
And they that spread it would be censured for 't;
For is it likely such a man as he,
So stout (So says the Corrant History)
Should be on Sea, and scarcely understand
How his Commanders fared that were a Land?
Or He rest safe from shot of Enemy,
And his whole Navy in such jeopardy?
Or so well entertained at his approach,
As to be sent for by the These Novels relate to the time wherein they were
first writ, being according to the Original. An. 32.
Kings own Coach?
Bells to be rung in consort, which descry'de
The sorrow they conceived for those that did?
Bonefires erected in each public street,
With perfumes mixed, fit for a man so sweet,
And he deserve so ill? I cannot see
How a wife State should so deluded be.
For nere was England brought to such a lurch,
Their Colors trail'd unto Saint Michaels Church
And reer'd in all contempt, as who should say,
Nere France ore England had a fairer day.
But our adherence now helps one another
As well becomes a reconciled Brother:
Which gallant Juncto may enrich our State;
Becoming sharers in the Silver plate.
Nor do we fear, but we next year shall catch it,
Should Argus and the H^sperian-Sisters watch it.
Yet I Will be thus opinion'd till I die,
And so are many persons more then I;
Had but that martial military place,
Seen but his sweet and amiable face,
It would have been with admiration charmed
To see Adonis like Bellona armed;
For had those Amazons so bravely bred
Been there encamped, they would have yield or fled.
But we are quite deceived, the Golden-Fleece
Surprizeth Soldiers more then Ambergreece.
Where has this great Observer been the while,
And never viewed these wonders of our I Will?
In Court he will say to make himself some sport;
Well go to Sir, you must be jerked for 't,
And that will learn you wit another time,
To draw a curtain over a great man's crime.
But see you Silke-worme! who is one of those
Who scents the street with perfume where he goes;
A Courtly carpet-Ape who takes delight
In giving Raines unto his appetite.
There Is many things which he does glory in,
As first, he makes a p^ofit of the king,
Farming his imposts at such easy rate,
As he both cheats the Prince and wrongs the State.
The next abuse, which adds no less disgrace
To men made eminent by rank or place,
Is that he has power wheresoere he please
For to dispose of all Court-offices.
Besides, there is not a Captain in the Land
Receives Exchequer-pay but from his hand;
Which must be guelt, as use has been before;
To make the Courtier rich, the Captain poor.
He bestows Honors too, which to the cost
Of the receiver, fall on him bids most:
So he who has deserved no style at all
May have his penniworth when Markets fall.
To dignifie his undeserving pate,
The Academie makes him graduate,
Where if the Master of a House deceases,
He places and displaceth as he pleases.
I wonder much the State will suffer him
Thus to triumph and riot in his sin;
But sure he plays not such vile pranks as these,
Boasting too highly of his rogueries;
For many Court-pips be there that I know,
Who make a show of more then they can do:
If this be so, he well deserves descrying,
And to be cudgelled roundly for his lying.
But see yon City-Mammon how he struts,
As full of Sins as he is stuffed with Guts!
For nimble tricks I do not know his match,
So sliely can the Vrchin Cony-catch,
As none but he would think and see his feat,
That he had served a Prentiship to cheat.
If he owe more then he intends to pay,
He seeks by all the conning means he may,
To frustrate his weak Creditors whose Wits
Go a wool-gathring, he Protection gits:
So as the hopes they ground on are but small,
For by this course he wipes their Nose of all.
Yet tickles he my itching spleen with laughter,
And makes me smile, I swear, a sennet after,
To think how he deludes that Ape o'th Court,
Who labors his Protection in this sort.
He tells him, he shall in his Fortunes share,
And at his death he shall be made his Heir,
Upon which deed of gift the Gull relyes,
And 's like to hang himself when the Merchant dies;
For now when he should seize upon his store,
He finds an other seized thereon before.
In every Fair too he his tricks can play,
And sharke, and cheat, and profit day by day;
For Country people they so simple are,
They scarce discern good from adulterate ware.
Besides all these, if the Academie look
Not to themselves, and shun his dangerous hook,
He has a trick to gull them with the show
Of Satin foreparts, Silken halfe-sleeves too.
But let him look to 't, though his profits be
Great to him self, yet his posterity
Drawn from ye loins of this broad-spreading tetter,
I Am so resolved, will never thrive the better.
Next him the Country Boar comes leering in,
So simple-seeming as he knew no sin;
But he that holds him so 's a simple man,
For he can cheat as well as others can:
Yea he that holds him so let him but try him,
And he will find himself no gainer by him.
He makes a show, that so his tricks may pass,
That he can hardly tell to Michaelmas,
And so precise, some will not stick to say,
He will not lend his Bull on Saboth Day:
Yet for Oppression, Biting usurie,
Rapine, Extortion, hateful Simonie,
He scorns that any one should put him down
In Court, in University, or Town.
Yet see this Erwig, How he starves himself,
For all his substance and injurious pelf;
The more he has the more he seems to lack,
Indebted both to Belly and to Back:
For his hid trash he labors so to smother,
He Will neither feed the one nor cloth the other.
But leave him to himself; for such as these
May be compared to Hermocrates,
Who when he saw sad deaths approaching hour,
Did make himself his own Executour;
And being asked the reason, did reply,
I got my wealth, who should dispose 't but I?
But eye me yon Church Chuffe, how broad he struts,
With thighs and legs o^e pentis'd by his guts!
A formal apish tim^st, who delights
In fauning on our rising favorites;
Who once professed compassion to the poor,
Bolts cha^ity and pity out of door.
A zeale-pretending halting Laodicean,
Or Mountebank adulterate Physician,
Who with 's infectious drugs corrupts his sheep,
And with his leaden Sermons makes them sleep.
If a sound Lay-Divine profoundly write,
His work gets scarce admittance to his sight:
For this spruce-damask-Cassoked Divine,
Will have no books divulged in his time,
But such as relish of his oyl^-spent Lamp,
Though like base bulloigne they deserve no stamp.
Thus Ignorance must censure what we do,
Raze and deface our choi^est Labors too:
So as this Aenobarban Bacchanist
For the Press is now made sole Monopolist:
Fo there is no Author without Achans wedge
May ever hope to ^et his privilege.
If this be longer suffered, I profess
To m^ke my Trunk my Print, my Oleum quod impendi circa vineam,
immisi in Scrinum.

Deske my Press.
He has confessed he counts it as no sin
By the window to a Living to get in,
For he has presidents of diverse men
That do the like, and he will follow them.
But if he see a virtuous exemple,
It Is not so soon admitted to his Temple.
Well, if Oppression, Rapine, Injury,
Equivocation or Church-Simony,
Ambition, Assentation, Insolence,
Licentious life, and loose Non-residence
May under Church-mens copes securely fight,
I vow to God I Will be made Deacon straight;
For there is no Profession in this Nation
Save this, for such crimes may get dispensation.
Now shield me dear Justinian! who comes here!
O Sir, I know you by the Robes you wear:
That conscript habit cannot shroud your sin,
Unrip your case, Sir, show me what is within.
Shall I be your Anatomist? I will,
And squeaze your ulcerous corrupted ill.
This Lime-hound ha^h disparaged the State
By his injurious judgment, and with hate
Of God and all good-men, as well appears,
Grows rich by O^phans cries and Widows tears.
He may for form sake to the Temple go,
Because he has no other thing to do,
But it is only done to take a nap
And thank God for 't: he sleeps in the Churches Lap.
Bribes have so stuffed his Cushion none can wake him
Till wrath and fury dog and overtake him.
He Would hug Astraea if she were a Whoor,
But being pure, he kicks her out a door.
He Is in such grace, he scorneth opposition,
Conscience he will harbor upon no condition.
His chap-fallen chin is shrunk below his Navell,
Yet hugs he gold till's mouth be filled with gravel.
He limits his nice Dame, what she shall pay
For this or that, who hopes to see a day
When his corrupted corpse reduced to dust
Shall give free scope to her restrained lust.
But note yon politic State-underminer,
Of Machiavels opinions late refiner;
How he condemns those Apes which went before,
Yet to be censured he deserves far more
Then all the rest: For has not he confessed,
And made himself as guilty as the rest?
He tax^th them of opennesse (poor Elfe)
When he incurres like weakness in himself.
So as I think, whats'ere he seem to know,
He Is less in substance then he is in show.
Tracing the clouds with Aristophanes,
He comes far short of Aristomanes,
Who strait-immur'd, as stories do report,
Within a ragged Rock, an aged Fort,
When he with other noble Captains were
In Lacedemon kept close prisoner;
To free them from these unrelenting Rocks,
For shame (quoth he) Let Us imitate the Fox,
Who were he here, he would gain him liberty,
Let Us not come short of him in policy.
No more they did, for digging those raged shelves,
Within short ti^e they after freed themselves.
But this State-polititian works his ends,
By making all he treats with his firm friends;
And with pretense of Conscience ties them to him,
Causing the^ think he is same man he does show him:
But I make little doubt, when these have tried him,
But they'^ detest him, having once descride him.
"This I Will avouch, and stand to 't when I Have done,
"He that is friend to all, is friend to none.
Let him then gull his friends, engrosse his sin,
Till he have no friend left to bury him.
But hold sides that ye burst not, luck befall
Thi^ Paracelsian Chimick-Vrinal!
Who would not laugh to h^are him cry, the Stone,
The Stone, the Stone, as if he had just none?
Or that his pain had caused him sh w the madder,
By reason of some gravel in his bladder.
But alas, poor seered thing, he cannot see
His Chymick-works will ever useful be.
For though he once presumed on his wits,
To turn Spits, Jacks and brazen Candlesticks
Into pure gold, his muddie brains grow weary,
"Brazers may use their trade in Lothberrie.
This Cricket now is turned a water-caster,
Since which blessed time his wealth grows daily faster;
For as he vaunts, where ere he make resort,
Be It to the City, Country or the Court
He Is only prized and had in all esteem,
Yet knows not what the Rules of Physic mean.
If this be so, it cannot be den^de,
Under his hand but many men have did,
So as no other reason see can I,
But that the Law^ should censure him to die:
An Homicide is hanged if he kill any,
What sense is 't he should l^ve has killed so many?
Thus have these Apes displayed them, so could I
If I my tricks would labor to des^^y;
But this my fear is, if I should des^ry them,
By their discovery some might profit by them;
Which would much grieve me, such an one I am,
As I nere wished for good to any man:
Yea I may swear, I know not one alive
That with my heart I could desire to thrive.
But if I might impeach their name; I Would do it,
Or do them any harm, I Would quick^y show it:
Their imputation is my joy, their hurt
The only pleasant game that makes me sport.
When Timon, my dear friend, once chanced to see
A man's wife hanging on a wild-figtree,
O (quoth he) It would Timon highly please
That every bough brought out such fruit as these;
For then our wives would sing a silent dittie,
And we should need no Cuck-stools in the City!
The like wish I; nor do I only wish
To woman kind that heavy doom of his,
For I Am indifferent for sexes both,
This could I never love, and that I loath.
Aesope I hug, and I do honor him,
Who in a tale brought Arist. de part. anim. l. 3. c. 1.
M^mus chasing in;
An^ in reproof of nature did proceed,
For setting Bulls-horns rather on his head
Then on his shoulders, being stronger part;
In which respect preferred he curious art
Before the hand of nature: for quoth he,
Such over sights in Art We seldom see.
His steps I follow, for I tartness show
To the choicest works of art and nature too:
Nothing can please me in this globe of earth
But others woes, whose moans afford me mirth.
If on a learned work I chance to look,
Though I Have no judgment I can tax the book,
And call the Author for his pains a fool,
Yet past two Months I never went to School.
By means whereof, and homebred education,
One taught me the rules of a Prognostication;
Straight by direction from an Erra pater,
I knew each distinct Planet and his nature.
Which known, I could not brook my Country well,
But in acquaintance with some Gypsies fell;
Whose chiefest Bung and Captain now I am,
And held in Palmistrie the only man:
Where though I cannot sing the Gypsies song,
I am as merry as the day is long.
For if a Milk-maid come to me and crave,
I Would tell he^ when she shall a Husband have;
Or an old Chrone, that I to her would show,
Whether she must outlive her Grub or no;
Hows'ere their fortune be, better or worse,
My dainty-Doxie nims away their purse;
With which we merry make and bravely rore,
With some stolen Pullen that we have in store.
Truth is, since I kept square with these, I find
My self and my affections worse inclined
Then ere they were before; nor do I care,
"They that fare well may reputation spare.
"He must be stained, consorts with such as these,
"He that lies down with dogs must rise with flees.
Thus in each Village I and my ragg'd nation
With canting gibrish do we make our station;
In Corporations we do seldom tarry,
Because of Statutes to the contrary.
For other Coasts such Officers we find,
That though they see us, yet they will be blind;
For now and then, they are such kind natured men,
They will not stick to eat with us a Hen.
But I repent me, I so much have said,
Lest some that hear me, come to learn my trade.
To the State-Critick.
WHy, who are you? whence came you?
what is your name?
That you should tax the State,
or touch her fame?
Is it your manners Sir, to chide great men,
And with your tarter lines to nettle them?
Admit you me^t with some that nere did good,
As deep in sin, as they are high in blood,
What privilege have you received from us
To mix your Ink with gall and Copprice thus?
Are you a man of such account I pray,
As the State should notice take of what you say?
Have we not in ^his famous I Will one Sage,
N^r one Wise Master in this latter age,
That can reprove the errors of our time
Without the help of your caprichious Line?
Is now your rural strain of Melibaeus
M^xt with Thersites humor or Tirteus?
Are great men's crimes your Subject? and must they
Taste of your Whippe, when they do go astray?
But let us hear how you your sp^eene express,
Which Sir implies your male-contentednesse.
Some have so blushl^sse and so shamel^sse been,
To let their Coach and foot-cloth Horse be seen
At common S^rumpets doors; to rouse a whoor;
Why, I have seen this Critic, and much more:
And vaild my bonnet, with God save your Honor.
Just as his Lordship came dismounted f^om-her
And I connived at this, and would not see,
Though light was not more manifest to me
Then his Licentious actions: now must you
Bring these concealements to a public view?
I know a Lord with choicest gifts enricht
Who, as report goes, is of late bewitched,
And to a Doctor goes to cure those spells,
But they that know him, think it is something elss.
And will not stick under the Rose to speak
That this same Docter is (indeed) his Tweak.
But what have they or I to do with him?
If it be so, it is but a Lordly Sin.
Many have been, and so no doubt will be,
Bewitched with Object^ meaner far then she.
Yet I Am resolved they judge not far amiss,
Who say that he 's Bewitched, for so he is:
For who, unless drawn in by some impostor,
Would such a Blouse to his dishonor, fost^r?
Now were it fit, lik^ Glow-wormes, to discover
M^ting and meetings of so great a Lover?
Admi^ you know extortion in the Land,
In officers cor^upti^n under hand,
Symony, B^ocage, Rapine, Sacrilege,
May you not see the Age grant privilege
T^ such State-epidemicall dis^ases?
"What profit gets, it generally pleases.
Why Sir, I see as much as you can see,
For my whole life is Albions scrutinie:
In City, Court and Country I do want
For no inte^ligence, for I do hant
With ci^cumspection every nooke and angle,
And how our State-impostors do entangle
Ou^ unexperienced New comes, I observe it,
And how they 'r honored most that least deserve it.
All which I could display, and draw the lines
Of all their actions to succeeding times
To make men wonder at, but pray thee, say,
Would this reclaim these State moaths any way?
Or dart a blush in any of their faces?
Or ^ake them weary of their purchased places?
Or strike a terror in their conscience?
Or eins^all lost justice to her Bench?
Would it m^ke one man good that now is evil?
Or weane one s^ule from serving of the devil?
Less no Sir; Though from God you have your warrant,
And fai^hfully perfo^m his sacred arrant,
When so small ben^fit is w^ought by the Pulpit,
D^e you by Satyrizing hope to help it?
Is all the Tribe of Levi so far short
Or shallow to improve, reprove, exhort,
As they must silenced be, while you begin
To tax the^ Coat, because ^hey tax not sin?
You are too bold, Sir, in you^ fluent strain,
And tenders that which none will entertain:
For do you think we live in such an Age
A Clergy man will loose a Parsonage
Before he scourge not sin? it cannot be;
For how should he relieve his family,
His hopeful O ^ve branches with his Spouse,
With all the h^ly Meynie of his house;
If he should not dispense with his Creator,
And smooth the sin of his Impropriatour?
Or that an Officer in any Court,
Will rectify himself by your report;
Or purchase to his soul least hope of bless
By taking of a poor man one fee less?
For though Extortion be, I g^^ (...), a sin,
This course would go well near to beggar him:
A place that at so dea^e a ^a^e is bought
Most be employed for gain, not so^d for naught.
Or that a Lawyer should his practice make
Less^ for himself, th^^ for his Clyents sake?
Or use that glibberie m^mber of hi^ Tongue,
To further right, and not to bolster wrong?
For so he sh^ul^ g^^w out of practice quite,
And wrong himself, by doing others right.
For right and wrong though they contraries be,
Yet wrong does right, if it bring in a fee?
Or a Physician, whose Empyrick H^nd
Must kill down right before he understand,
Should apprehend remorse, when, as by doses
He weighs his Physic out, but not the losses
O^ his abused Patients, who with g^ones
Must loose their lives and substance both at once:
These having novght to give must be forsaken,
And if they die the care is quickly taken?
Or a Civilian th^ugh Conscience be
The O^j ct of his Law, will loose his fee,
Or not protract a Cause and make a stir
By plodding some impertinent demurre:
For he such store of Presidents can show,
That then examples tell him what to do,
And will secure him: only le^ pretenses
Gilded with sanctity disguise offenses.
Or that a Rorer w^ll his Oaths forbear
Or shudder when he does Gods judgments hear;
Or leave his Brothell^, or his midnight revells,
O^ leave consorting with his f^mal Devels?
For so he should abandon all his joy,
And loose the Title of a roaring B^y;
No, S^^, these taskes surpass ^ Critic strain,
And make him wash the Blackamoore in vain.
Yet I p^^s^ade me, you expressed your zeal
In you^ dimensions, to the Commonw^ale;
And that your meaning was to waine the State
From some of that which all good people hate.
But where sin 's grow to ripeness^, you must know
Good meanings and intentions will not do:
So delicate a^e these corrupted times,
As none must tax or taint heir swelling crimes.
But tell me in good sadn^sse what is the cause,
To think your Lives more powerful ^hen our Laws?
If an Oppressor hateful Contract^ make,
Our Laws can bring him h^^^ a B^^re to the stake;
The Cunningst Church thief be he near so great,
When on e detect^d for a Counterfeat^,
Must not uncensn^'d pass, nor any one
Who in a civil State shall throw a Bone.
So as in my Opi^ion from the State
Such Stigmaticks do highly derogate,
Who judge their Muse among men to have more command,
Then all the Laws and Statutes of our Land.
But to remove this Error, I think fit
If any one have mind to show his wit,
That in obscurer manner he disclose it,
Least too much plainness make the Satyr lose it.
This moved some, as in their works we find,
In Hieroglyphics to express their mind,
Or like choice Heralds to find out a Crest
Fitting the form and nature of the Beast
As some of our spruce-silken Curtain Lords
Who show their worth in their imperious words
Have been displaid and shadowed to their shame,
Yet know not who nor where they wounded them.
"But most of these their Dingity have lost,
"And can of naught but painted Scutchions boast.
This Course was held at first, and ever since
The freest from distaste and from offense.
For when we darkely write, thanks be to Heaven,
So small a portion of conceit is given
To our Magnifico's, as when they read us,
They understand us not, or never heed us;
Which happy ignorance secures our pen,
And makes them laugh at us, that nettle them.
In these dark colors have I drawn the shapes
Of vicious Silk worms in this Age of Apes.
Which sh^dow'd with a Vision, may do good
To purge, if not to purify the blood.
Nor would I have this to be held in me
Weakn^sse of courage or timiditie;
For in a Cause where I intend to do
Service to God I never did terror know.
Nor do I see ought in this vale of tears,
Which should beget in me such fruitless fears.
The Substance I enjoy, I nere did gather,
But as a Birthright left me by my Father;
For had my fortunes hung upon my care,
My part had com'^ unto an easy share.
But what I now possess, be it more or less,
I never w^sh God may it longer bless
Then I shall willingly forgo^ the same,
To honor God and magnify his name.
Nor is my health so good that I should fear,
When s' ere 't please God, my dissolution here.
Besides, gray-hayres have caused me change my song,
Assuring me my days cannot be long:
Should I ^hen in my Glorious Makers sight,
P^^y servile Sycophant or Parasite?
Should I now when my one foot is in grave,
Learn the obsequious posture of a knave?
Should I contemn my Soul when death is nie,
O^ complement when I should learn to die?
Should I who never could fawn in all my days,
An unjust Man against my conscience praise?
No, heavens forb^d! that I should tax that thing
In Subjects, which I would not in a King?
O praise that in a King which I Will not do
Even in his Groom or meanest Subject too?
For howsoever our Statists Some times frown
Seeing those darling vices of their own
Touch'^ to the quick, yet why should good men fear
Such Impes who Satin in and out side wear?
No, in that cause where I desire to please
My gracious God, I scorn the threats of these.
But I return unto my Critic now,
And will inform him too what he shall do.
I know the Sat, Sir, desperately sick,
Where some Sores should be Lanced to the quick,
For they must not be smoothed or smeer'd with Oil,
Least they attract a more impressive soil:
But how should this be done, or how app^de,
Before the member grow quite mortifide?
An art-full and experienced hand were fit,
And to that act^ve hand a pregnant wit.
A grave and serious outside too wou^d prove
That they were types of what their selves did move:
For him unfit I hold to chastize sin,
Whose youth admits no down upon his chin.
He should be of authority and power
If he would be a powerful monitour,
For such men's words like nails enforce our passion,
Stru k by the Rulers of a Congregation
Yea this our own experience does teach,
We eye as much the person as the speech:
For if he be a man of worth or prize,
Speak what he will his person makes it wise.
Besides, that life of his should be approved,
That his example may be better loved:
For it redounds unto the Teachers shame
To tax, when he is guilty of the same.
Who aims to shoot his shaft at many men,
May chance to hit himself too, now and then,
Unless he blameless be, which is so rare,
As to se^ke such our labors we may spare.
Lest then this frumpe should (...) our dish be laid,
Physician cure thy self (as has been said,)
Our Life's should form our Lines, that after times
May say, our Life's did parallel our Lines.
But why should we pursue this fruitless task
By striving Great-mens errors to unmaske?
Their discontent may by some censure move us,
But them we cannot hurt, so far above us.
I hold it best then Critic, we begin
To let these Peers take their Careere in sin,
While we restrain our liberty of pen,
Until we see Gods judgment waken them.
Have we not known of late some raised high,
That they with more disgrace and shame might die?
Who would have thought in such a civil State
(I rather touched because it chanced so late)
That Witch of Endor, who (I think) had force
In magick-art much like my crop eared horse,
Of whom 'twas propheci'd (I can assure ye)
Three years ago, that he should die in fury,
Should be in the Street with stones and brick-bats slain,
And not one known of all that bandlesse train,
Who murdered him? Sure 'twas his profuse sin,
Which when he would not mend, God met with-him
But let him rest, they do exceeding ill
Who rake him from his ashes with their quill:
He troubled us enough ere he was slain,
It were not well to raise him up again.
Should we peruse the Actors and the Crimes
Both of preceding and succeeding times;
To what command their Sovereignty extended,
And with what shame and misery it ended;
What glory they expressed, and how their state
Was blemished by their fault, not by their fate:
What port they bore, yet in the end no gainers,
But split themselves, and ruined their reteiners.
We would admire Gods lawful judgments show^
No less on other States then on our own.
See those Sicilian tyrants, how their power
Still labors one another to devour
Envy wrought with suspicion, both conspired
With hot revenge: to have wh^t they required,
Yet what effect produced these plots to all
Those state-aspiring Flies but timelesse fall?
Though Caesar with victorious honor come
To be sole Monarch ore triumphant Rome,
And ride in 's Ebor to be seen of all,
A stab will serve him in the Capital.
"Much have I seen, yet seldom seen I have
"Ambition go grayheaded to his grave.
This then (State-Critick) would I thee advise,
"To leave to God the censuring of vice;
But if thou needs must show thy wood-bred nature
Let it be shrouded in a shadowed Satyr.
The Apes Censure.
EXcellent Apes; ye have your selves displaid,
Now hear what shall again to you be said.
And first for you grand-gull, whose ayrie vants
Consist of Titles and of Sycophants,
I here degrade you, and injoyne you more,
To live as private as you did before
You came to greatness: they that cannot tell
How to demean themselves when they are well,
Must by severer means be brought unto it,
I do this to reclaim you, pray you show it.
For you licentious fl^shly Libertine
Who in delights surfeit away your time,
Go from our presence; we have here enough
To train our Lords in lightness besides you.
Cynthia's pure rays should not be dark't by those
Who live like Venus friends, but Vesta's foes;
Retire, Retire, your follies are descride,
And live from us till you be mortifide.
For you Vainglorious Ape, you do appear
So proud, we cannot brook your being here.
God has ordained before the heav'nes begin,
A fall for Pride, A punnishment for Sin;
The proud are ever plagued by prouder ones,
"There must be had sharp Steel to smooth rough stones
Leave us, you are not for us, nor be we
For you, or yours, till you more humble be.
For you, my pretty Guga, whose vain fancy
Has brought you to a carlesse, curelesse Frenzy,
I will not censure you, for as it seems
You understand not what a Censure means;
Yet that you be restrained, I hold it fit,
Till diet and restraint restore your wit.
Which done, you may regain your former freedom,
"For mad-braind boys our court does little need'em.
For you, new fangle Jack, whose aims aspire
To gaudie and fantastical attire,
For your abuse both to the State and us,
We censure you and your distemper thus.
Till you a fashion find, rome too and fro,
That may content our hum'rous gallants so
As they shall never change that fashion more,
But keep them still to that which you bring ore.
For you rare Ape, your observation's such,
I cannot well admire your worth too much;
Yet I may partly guess what is your aim,
And I will labor to effect the same.
It Is your ambition to beget esteem,
In public places to be heard and seen,
And so you shall; for trust me you shall be
Reer'd on a public place, the Pillorie.
Now my sweet Ape, how brisk my Courtier goes,
A if for want of feet he went on 's toes?
You, or I much mistake me, make a sport
To buy and sell our Offices in Court;
Our Imposts too you farm for such a sum,
And glory in your tricks when you have don.
For which, neat Sir, you shall by the heels be laid,
Till restitution to the State be made.
For you rich City-Ape, who can devour
Poor Widows houses, cheat your Creditor,
And by Protections bearing such a date,
Wipe others of their own, inhance your State;
These I suppress; and if it shall appear
Your Son was not estated a whole year
Before you broke, your Creditors shall share:
Mean time of Pious Works you must take care.
For you penurious drudge, who pores one earth,
And joys in naught but in your Country dearth;
Twenty poor Souls you weekly shall maintain,
During which time you shall not sell a grain;
For th s's the aim which I do level at,
The lean Kine are to feed upon the fat:
For if the fat yield not the lean supply,
The fat may riot, but the lean will die.
For you Law list, for Laws are in your fist,
Ruling our Courts of justice as you list;
You shall be spared for climing up our stayres,
Betake you now unto your private prayers:
Mean time this Labell shall be writ and hung
Upon your Gown, to manifest our wrong:
"For love of bribes, and for contempt of right,
"My Master is become Anacorite.
For you Church-gnat, who can observe the time,
And make your Coat a cover for your crime;
Who Church Revenues with your tricks inhance,
And pride you in your blockish ignorance;
Who to oppression and extortion sold,
Dishonor God, idolotrize your gold:
Since gold (my Prelate) is to you so dear,
To India go, you shall be Bishop there.
For you Sir Politic, you are so wise
I know not well what Project to divise
To keep your Brains a work; but for a space
My Pleasure is that you do leave this Place,
And not return, until you understand
What causes dearth of money in our Land;
What way our best commodities do go,
And whether they bring back as good or no.
For you my Chimick Ape, I muse you would
Pore in a glass and lose your hope of gold;
But let this pass: I hear you have no skill,
And that in curing one, you twenty kill;
Which to redress, I have by Act decre'd,
Your Vrinal be broken on your head:
And that you be indicted of ma^slaughter
If ere you practice rules of Physic after.
Now for my Critic Ape, that Demophon
Who sweats in the shadow, shudders in the Sun,
Who never saw that man in all his days
He could find in his heart to love or praise;
He with his Gypsies is so fitly mated,
He will be taken hold on by the Statute.
Mean time let, him by Foists and Bungs be friended
It is not long till he must be suspended.
Be gone, my Censure shall not be disputed,
This is decreed and must be executed.
Affrighted with the Censure of each Ape,
Fearing my self were one I did awake;
But finding it a dream I thought it fit,
Only for pastime-sake to publish it.
Similis mihi Simia nulla est.
Upon the Censure of his Vision.
SOme Familist or punctual Precisian
Will slight this work, because it is a Vision;
Saying, "That Visions are deceitful things,
"And to distraction our affection brings;
"That this Luciferan Spirit takes the shape
"(To gull the imagination) of an Ape.
Whence he inferres, to prove these Visions evil,
That this same Ape is an incarnate devil;
All which I grant, but likest of all other
When he resembles such a Zealous Brother.
Truth is, for sins survey, who would descry it
Must closly do it, or soon be censured by it;
Whereas 'twere against all reason, that to Prison
One should be sent for seeing of a Vision.
But whether I be censured or no,
This will I say and you shall find it so;
Viewing these gross abuses of your mind,
This for a grounded maxim you shall find:
Of all the Tyrants which the world affords,
Your own affections are the fiercest Lords.
Ista Poemata, non sine lepidula Genii facetia primum Conscripta fuere; An.
Dom. 1625. The life of POLYMORPHUS SIMIANUS Author of this Poem.
POlymorphus Simianus a Florentine born, a younger brother, but well descended;
and during his minority, in all generous and freeborn Studies trained. He was
naturally affected to Poesy; from the delight whereof his Father, being of
eminent esteem in Florence, labored to waine him; by diverting his course
that way, and importuning him to the study of the Law. Whereto having for some
years applied his mind, he grew in short time indifferently furnished.
Neither was his practice less useful then his knowledge fruitful. Albeit
inwardly he could never relish nor palate that profession; being, as he termed
it, a practice whose material were extracted from extortion: yet to give all
possible content to his father, he ever extended his best endeavor, seemingly
to further what he could not favor. Being now grown a pretty good proficient
in a profession contrary to his element; you shall hear upon what occasion he
became degraded, from the benefit of his practice excluded, and by a judicial,
though incompatible censure, silenced. Pleading one day with great vehemency
for his friend Farnesio, a Citizen of approved honesty, and whose cause
deserved no less success; being in the judgment of the whole Court, grounded
on equity and uprightness: He perceived the Judge of the Court to be more
indulgent to the Advers part; so as the more he pressed it, the more did the
Judge sl ight and disvalue it. Wherefore being without expectance of relief
for his much injured friend, as one either transported with passion, to see
corruption seated on the throne of Judgment; or transpierced with affection,
to see his honest friend so high^y wronged, with a spirit no less resolved
then enraged, he thus accosted the Judge. My Lord, quoth he, my comfort is,
though this gentleman my clyent, be by your Lordship injuriously censured, the
date of your commission for sitting on Judgment is almost expired; so as our
hope is, by your Successor we shall be redressed. Expired (said the Judge) how
do you mean? I mean (replied Simianus) you are at the point of death. Your
reason, (quoth the Judge) for I feel no such matter in my self. The more
dangerous is your malady (answered Simianus;) for diseases insensible are ever
held most incurable; but to resolve your doubt with an infallible reason; your
Lordship knows it is an ancient sacred ceremony here in Florence, as in all
other Catholic Countries, for the sick immediately before the approaching
instant of their dissolution, to receive from a religious man thereto ordained
and consecrated, extreme unction. The Judge perceiving whereto his meaning
tended, covertly implying corruption by those words of extreme unction, with
present passion transported, commanded him forthwith to depart the Court, in
these words. Sir: for your small reverence to this place, hear your censure.
So long as the State of Florence shall authorize me to sit in this Seat of
judgment, I injoyne you Silence, to caution others by your example to show
more reverence. No sooner was this heavy Censure pronounced, then Simianus
left the Court; allthough he had many friendly Orators, who with their best
persuasive Rhetoric labored to mitigate the Judges censure; whom they found
steeled with relentlesse rigor. About this time when Simianus was silenced,
his father died; by whose death he was more troubled, then with his former
sentence disquieted: for of such general esteem (as I formerly noted) was
this old man, as he was no less for his wisdom and judgment approved, then
for his discreet carriage and amiable conversation generally loved: so as his
virtues gained his progeny much honor in Florence. Simianus being thus by
public censure from hope of future preferment excluded; of his fathers
advice, whose piety was a mirror to his family deprived; and in some debts by
reason of his too affable or easy disposition engaged; being brought to these
straits, as one doubtful where to retire: it fortuned, even then when he had
resolved privately to convey himself from Florence, and expose himself to
some foreign adventures; to fall in acquaintance with a Zealous brother of
Amsterdam; with whom in short time he grew so familiar, as none but HE was of
his Cabinet council. Away he must go with him, so powerfully had his zeal
wrought with him, unto Amsterd^m; where, as he pretended, he was a merchant of
especial note, rank, and quality. Simianus, who had even from his infancy an
excellent art of insinuating into men's knowledge, professed; that howsoever
other occasions of maine consequence had reason to avert his resolution from
that course, yet so far had the opinion of his sanctity, the grounded conceit
of his sincerity, and those ties of familiar society and sociable amity
prevailed with him, as he would leave his Country with hope of all promotion,
merely for love of such a Zealous and faithful Companion. At Amsterdam within
few Months after they arrived; where Simianus found as ma^y religions, as the
world had regions; or the Gergason possessed with Legions; but in principal
esteem grew he with a devout fraternity, by means of this Zealous Merchant;
who made him acquainted with all those mysterious rites used and practiced by
that Saintly Society Within short time being a proper man and well approved of
by the Sisterhood, who had their free voices in the election of every Officer;
he stood in Election for a place, which they call the Emunctorie; the special
charge whereof is this. At a certain time, (which upon sign given is duly
observed) when the Conventickle is full, and all things in readiness, he is to
snuff out the Candles, for the Zealous assembly to exercise their works of
lightness in darkness. This Place by general suff^age he obtained; wherein
he demeaned himself so closely to the Sisters content, as no one Officer stood
so deep in their books. Nor was he l^sse resp^cted for his secrecy, then
affected for his diligence and alacrity: so as one day, these Zealous Sister^ w
th one consent resolved to prefer Simianus to a place of more credit and
profit; and this should be done without the approbation of any of the
fraternity. Alleging that their prerogative was no less in the election or
taking in of a Brother, then theirs in admission or putting in of a Sister: so
as if their Br^thren incorporated the one they would make bold to matriculate
the other. Upon this resolution grounded, they preferred him to be Secretary
of the Conventickle; a Place of highest honor, and only recommended to such
whose untainted secrecy had purchased them a singular opinion of retentive
fervor.

This Office had these Sisters no sooner conferred on him, then the Brethren
generally opposed him: saying, the Election was not to be approved, for as much
as their voices were excluded: Whereas formerly, no Officer was to be admitted,
unless he were expressly by their fraternal suffrages elected Whence there
arose such opposition, as no Conventickle was observed, no Conclave frequented,
no nocturnal-rites acted, nor no due benevolence to the Sisters tendered; for
the Brother would not go to the Synagogue without his Sister; nor the Sister,
till reconciled to her Brother: For this is a maxim in their Divinity; One Sex
without another can never edify. While they were thus contesting and
contending, Simianus, either with heat of passion incensed, or hate to their
profession induced, disclaiming all secrecy: became an open discoverer of all
their impurity, not sparing to say, That there was old tickling in they
Conventickles With which aspersion the whole Fraternity being much ^nraged,
withdrew their Pension from him, which formerly had been duly paid him. So as
now he was left to himself, to repair his fortunes by encountering with some
new occurrents. L^ng had he not sojourned; after his expulsion from the
Fraternal tribe but he was entertained by a Provincial Deane, who using rather
to flea then fleece, took more care to have his due, then discharge his duty,
to receive his Tithe, then intend his Cure; to look to his Tenths and gather
his Rints, then to repair those many Ruins and Rents of his Church. Now
Simianus, for want of better employment, was appointed to be his
Tythe-gatherer; whereto he seemingly addressed himself with all diligent
endeavour^ but small profit redounded to his Master so long as he was
appointed to gather. For when any Farmer set out his rucks of Corn, whereas
he was to receive one at ten, he showed himself far more Conscionable,
receiving only one at fifty: saying; Feed not my master better then he feeds
you; he gives you but one Sermon in fifty weeks, render you him but one at
fifty stookes. This the avaricious Prelat soon perceived; so as this
conscionable Gatherer, who cut such large thongs of others Leather, was
discarded, and he again to seek his fortunes, to the wide World exposed

So miserable was that time wherein he lived, with such an universal famine
distressed, and through populousness of the place so pestered; as he, being a
strange^ and having no present employment to relieve or sust^in himself,
became much enfeebled, and likely to have perished; had not a Venetian-Merchant
(one of excellent parts) received him, even then when extremity did most press
him, penury pinch him, and the height of all disasters surprise him. For such
was his present estate, that albeit upon his return to Florence he could not
want, being by such powerful and eminent friends supported, and to so many
flourishing families allied; yet so high was his spirit, as he could not
endure to stoop to such baseness as to acknowledge his want. But now by
means of this Venetian-Merchant, who took especial notice of his
sufficiency, being by means of his education (as we have formerly observed)
made accomplished in all Liberal-Sciences, he was in a better way of preferment
then either during his abode with that zealous Family, or his unprofitable
service in that covetous Dean^y; for of all trades the Merchant, and of all
Merchants the Venetian, as he is highly prized for his generous rank and
quality, so is he worthily praised in spreading the extended sails of his
bounty. Nor is he less nobly affected in his port and hospitality at home,
then liberally minded in his carriage and expense abroad. With this brave
Merchant, Simianus long remained; by wh^m he was highly graced, in affairs of
weighty consequence employed, and in his bosom faithfully lodged. Where
doubtless, he had continued, as there was no just cause to divert it, had not
some unworthy instruments traduced and maligned him; by suggesting to the
Merchant that he read a weekly Lecture to his fair Lady, out of Boccace.
Which su^mise added fuel to the Merchants j^alousie, an infi^mity whereto he
was naturally subject; so as presently he imagined his pillow to be stuffed with
horne-shavings, giving no less credit to their report, then if it had been an
Oracle. Such were the interch^nges of inconstant fortune, which ever
accompanied Simianus; so as now he must encounter with new billows, before he
can come to Harbor. For howsoever his virtuous Mistress, the Lady Celia,
labored to clear her self from all occasion of suspicion; so deeply was this
impr^ssion of jealousy grounded, as no Receipt so sovereign could be applied,
no Reasons so strong or irrefellible produced, to waine him from this conceit
so causl^sly harbored. Simianus now perceiving, that nothing could remove his
jealous Master from this unjust surmise: he resolved from thenceforth no longer
to accomodate himself to the servile d^spositions of such humerous Commanders,
but rather to return into his own Country, to see what entertainment it
would give him. Whose resolution his distempered Master no sooner perceived,
then he, for all his jealous conceit had of him, furnished him in all points,
showing especial arguments of his bounty at his departure. Wherewith Simianus
grew something encouraged, recalling to mind, how his friends could not disvalue
him, when they saw him so well provided. For well understood he, that popular
judgments were seated in their eyes: and that outward habits, with some other
superficial preparation, did gain one often times more credit and estimation,
then more deserving Ornaments. Wherefore after solemn leave taken of all his
Comrades in Venice, he made for Florence; whereupon his arrival he was, far
above his expectance, with all due solemnity received; and by means of diverse
eminent and powerful friends in the City, elected (with a liberal Pension for
that Task allotted) to take Survey of all Countries, and in his Survey to
describe the Sites and States of those Count^ies: the natures of their people,
how affected, how d^sp^sed, and withal to compile such remarkable occurrents
as might seem worthy his observation. Which Task, after a modest reluctance,
as one more jealous then was needful of his own insufficiency, he
undertook; being within these few years resident in this Island, the
description whereof, with the nature of her people then inhabiting, he has
here in a Poem industriously discovered; where by way of Vision he runs
division, cleanly but closely carried, covertly shadowed, and smoothly closed.
Which we likewise from his own Original have faithfully transcribed. Wherein
if ought be omitted, which might give better light to their discovery: we are
to impute the error to his short abode and want of acquaintance to inform him
in these parts. Neither indeed is it possible, that he should amplify his
discourse in every particular; or serret out all private abuses secretly
lurking in a State. For this Task would require his industry, who should apply
himself to the Survey of one Country only Though I confess (so ripe are all
States grown in the overspreading growth of all vices) as where one Country
was observed more for one particular sin then another; we shall now find one
State possessed of all those enormities, which formerly were to be sought in
many. For whereas Pride has been observed to be most conversant among the
Babilonians, Envy among the Jews, Anger among the Thebans, Covetousness
among the Tyrians, Gluttony among the Sydonians, Sorcery among the Egyptians,
and all Effeminacy among the Cretans: this labor now may be saved, for we
shall find some one flourishing-State, whose long Peace has fatted her in
prosperity, of all these maladies seized; But to return to our Author,
whereas it may be thought by some, that he has shown too much of spleen in
the reproof of sin; they are to understand, that no faithful Relater can be
a time-observer; and that nothing so much darkens or blemishes the light of
History, as that spreading tetter State-flatterie; besides he was a stranger,
and did little care for any ones Censure: which in a Poem of his own, he no
less elegantly expresses.

He who thinks I can flatter is deceived,
For in my youth when I instruction sought,
And some small glimpse of knowledge had received,
My Spirit wrestled in me as I thought,
And so in time upon my weakness wrought,
As I gave way; which given, she caused me write,
To purge the State, and scourge the Parasite.
Yet so, as thou shall never personate
Or high, or low, or any one in place,
Lest thou incur the censure of the State;
Nor men but manners thou shall have in chase,
Causing shame paint their vices in their face:
For then this Rule, a safer there is none,
"To tax the sin, but let the man alone.
Be jealous what thou hears, spare in reports,
For some there be who on this string do strike,
How they may vent disgrace on Princes Courts,
Yet these can closly play the Parasite,
And with their servile humors force delight:
Which ere I Would do I wish with all my heart,
I may hang for a Sign at Franck-fort. Mart.
This well tempred resolution He expressed in an Anagram composed on his
friends name, included in this Distich:

Virtue has but bare credit; what is the matter?
Because to gain a Kingdom she would not flatter.
His honest resolution sprung from an inbred generosity of mind he likewise
manif^sted to the World in this free attestation: which with a constant mod^st
spirit he delivered in a public resort, at the time of his restraint.

Who can prohibit me abroad to tell
The Crimes of such high-peeres as do not well?
Why, this Obsequious, Odious, Vicious time,
That weaves a Cobweb over a great man's crime.
But Masters, would ye know how I am served
Whose honest actions never from goodness swerved?
" Sense by Petition has procured that Reason
"For writing naught but truth, should go to Prison.
His well-composed temper and peaceable disposition he likewise expressed; when
as being sometimes entangled in Suites of Law about his Patrimony; as One
wasted with expense, wearied with expectance, and impatient of longer
attendance, he thus concludes.

After this Suite, as I am now resolved,
Shall be decreed, determined, and dissolved,
I Will take a long farewell of my Laws journey,
Unless it be by Proxy or Attorney;
For who from Hippocrene would Rivers draw
Must not employ his Bucket in the Law;
Far from Courts clamor then I Will build my nest,
'A smooth-composed line requires rest.
Privacy likewise He highly affected, though by sundry Persons of rank and
quality mainly diswaded. So as, on a time when at Milan a Diet was intended,
wherein the Peers and Commons of the Realm were to be assembled, redress of
all State-aggrievances generally expected, Writs exhibited, Bills preferred,
and he for a Burgess in the Lower House by general Suffrage elected; yet he
rejected this honor, and privately retired to his Country manor; the reason
whereof being demanded, he briefly returned this answer.

One asked of me what might be my intent
To leave the Town in time of Parliament?
Why, answered I! because I held it fit
When the City has engrossed the Country wit,
And that scarce seven wise Masters now were left
Which were not to the Parliament enfeoft,
That purposely I to the Country came,
Where I am held a nimble-pated man;
For though a Swan's a Swan, yet when the Swan's gone,
A white-plum'd Chough is held a comely one.
Where this Author now remains, it is diversely conjectured; some reporting him
to be now at Florence, where he is made Remembrancer of the City; others
report, that coasting through the Province of Cecuba, upon some disgrace
offered by him to a Lyrick, who contended with him for the masterprize in
Poetry, he was by the inhabitants of that place surprised, and in a Vinepresse
squezed to death: for the truth whereof I will not stand much. Let this
suffice, that this Poem now published, was writ by him in the xxxv. year of
his age; which being gratefully accepted, shall be by others of his works no
less useful (if the Manuscripts may be procured) hereafter seconded.

The Draught or Portraict of every Ape with their distinct properties,
chararacters, and differences, expressed in several pieces.
1, THE Ape of Honor, Is to have a little Flag, Banner or Streamer in his
claw, wherein are to appear several Coats, Arms, Crests, etc. the Emmet,
Hedghog, Cuckoo, Seagull, Owl, etc. The princip^ll Crest, a Rat-Rampant: which
is the only Imprezza this Ape of honor has.

2. The Ape of Pleasure, Is expressed by sporting with a Marmosite, with this
Imprezza, Dainty content.

3. The Ape of Vainglory, Is Characterized, or Emblematized thus: He is
carried by four Apes in a Case resembling a Cabinet, windows of each side, and
all open, to discover him sitting in State; his Imprezza, Heaven upon Earth.

4. The Ape of Fancy, is expressed by hastening toward a Lure made of Feathers,
Ribbands, Garters, Gloves, Rings, etc. Which Cupid winged and hovering in the
Air is shown throwing out his Imprezza; Love is my Lure.

5. The Ape of Fashion, is expressed in his doublet and hose, phantastically
made up, a plume of feathers in his head, amorously eying himself in a glass;
his Imprezza, I like my humor well.

6. The Ape of Observation, is expressed looking through a Trunck or
Prospective; directly before the end of the Trunck is a Dunghill; his
Imperzza, I smell a Rat.

7. The Court Ape is expressed sitting mopping in a Tree full of flourishes,
above him this Imprezza; The Cinnamon Tree.

8. The City Ape is expressed as in a Rialto or Royall-Exchange;
Tapestrie-works, Needle-works, Chains, Girdles and Hangers, Belts, etc. to
life shadowed. A walk as in the Exchange, with Signs of either side. On the
one, an Unicorn, a Bull, an Heart, a Ram, a Goat: On the other, directly
opposite, a Tigre, a Panther, an Elephant, a Wolf, a Fox; his Imprezza, What
do ye lack?

9. The Country Ape is expressed poring seriously upon an Almanac; his
Imprezza, an Erra Pater.

10. The Church Ape is expressed fat and corpulent, a Mitre or corner-Cap upon
his head; the Basis or end of a Steeple sticking out of his mouth; his
Imprezza, Silence.

11. The Judicial Ape is expressed of meagre or sallow complexion, wasted or
decayed constitution, close shaven in a Counselors Cap and Gown, a Roll or
Scedule in his hand; his Imprezza, Ambidexter.

12. The Political Ape is expressed with a pair of Spectacles upon his Nose,
a pair of Compasses in his hand, a Globe before him with a Jacob's-Staffe,
with which he measures the Globe; his Imprezza, A sound head piece.

13. The Chymicall Ape is expressed holding a pair of Bellows wherewith he
stands blowing against a solid Rock: There are Kettles, Landirons,
Candlesticks, etc. to be shadowed, implying his Chymick Art; his Imprezza, Fly
Brass.

14. The Critical Ape is expressed laughing and jeering extremely, holding his
sides as one oppressed with an immoderate passion of Joy; his Imprezza, Hold
sides.

15. The Censuring Ape is portrayed according to his humor, with a rugged
ridged Countenance, fiery and spleenefull eyes; corded-Whipps in his hand:
Looking with an eye of scorn upon the rest of the Apes, his Mott: A shole of
Shallops. And pointing at them with a jeering visage closes in these words,
Have among you State-Shufflers.

Parthenia's Passions. To the right Honorable THOMAS Viscount WENTWORTH,
Afterward Created Earl of STRAFFORD.
Baron of Woodhouse, Oversley and Newmarch, Lord President of the Council
established in the North, and one of his Majesty's most honorable Privy
Council: O quando renascitus aller.
His thrice-honoured MECAENAS. The western-Knights Pasquill.
MArshall! an hall there! Pray
you, Sir, make room
For us poor Knights, who in
the fag-end come.
Mad is my Muse, and now
of late affrighted
Out of her wits for fear she should be Knighted.
Knighted! defend me, Lord, from such an h^nour,
I shall not git whole Clothes to put upon her.
Nay, since with Knights there is so great a do,
I for my Summons will make ready too.
"Come Masons, come, erect an Hospital,
Since we must all be Knights whom Statutes call:
For England never had unto this hour
More* Chevaliers for number, nor more poor.
Whence many of our Russetings deplore it,
That they 'r not worth so much as they paid for it.
Yea, Almanacks, I fear, will bear record
In Rubric Letters, next to the year oth' Lord,
Which by Succeeding times will be recited,
"How long it is since ye Commonty was Knighted.
Yea, Justice vows, should she pay twenty five,
She cannot do 't with honesty and thrive;
"For some of her Bench-Whistlers States be such,
Their means and vailes will scarce raise half so much
Yea I could pick out One of these who might
Be made GRAND SOPHIE full as well as Knight:
"For Justice-sake this imposition wave,
Lest they be forced to pay more then they have.
But since my Pinke amongst others runns a shelfe,
And every one is nearest to himself,
I must debate my Cause before I go,
Judge whether I speak reason, friends, or no.
"May my State-lov'd MECAENAS but give way
"To what the meanest of his Knights can say.
Now, my good Lord, your humble Suppliant comes
To know the cause why he should pay these Sums.
Object. " Our Princes Coronation by a Statute,
"Inflicts these fines on those that were not at it:
"Provided they have forty pounds by year
"Of free hold Land, the Statute makes it clear.
Answ. It Is true; but this reflecteth not on me,
For I was at that high solemnity,
And In The best note my rural Muse could sing,
Tendered my Poemes to my gracious King,
Object. " Yea but the Proclamation did forbid it,
"You were not well advised then, when you did it.
Answ. 'Slid, should I neither then be here nor there
But like a Ball hang hovering in the air?
Object. No; though the Coronation wil'd you come
"The Proclamation wished you stay at home,
"You should not have come up Sir;
Answ. No more did I,
For I, as fortune fell, was there already;
Where my ambitious Muse did Knighthood crave,
But what I had I hold, no more I have.
Discuss my Lord, then each particular,
I shall be found in naught irregular.
" I came not up; I broke not the Proclamation;
"The Statute 's kept; I was at Coronation;
At which (I Will justify with heart and hand,)
I joy'd as much as any Knight in the Land.
These duly weighed, your Honor Umpire be,
Whether I pay the King, or King pay me.
His regal rites received this Muse of mine,
And were this reason, think you, for my rhyme?
I sung, my Sov'reigne heard me, now we say
The Hearer, not the Singer, usd to pay.
I judge then what soever to me is done,
Is by that figure Vsteron, Proteron.
You for the King demand of me a fee,
When it is meant that He should pay it me.
But lest this should by me too much be thought,
So I go free, my Song shall go for naught.
But hushed! no more; with this approved Position;
Your constant Servant closes his Petition;
"More Knights, my Lord, your State has little need on,
"Let me be a poor Country Squire to breed on.
Now if these Reasons take no place, my Lord,
I must Obey if you but speak the word:
A Knights fee for your Honor I have here;
"Knight and no Knight; the Purchase is too dear:
But I 'm resolved, my Reasons are so plain,
Your squire may with his Coin go back again.
AMPLITUDINI TUAE DEDITISSIMUS MUSOPHILUS; EBORACENSIS EQUES, EQUITUM
HUMILLIMUS.
* Area quot spicas, quot profert Silva myricas,
Curia quot curas, Semina terra tenes:
Quot scatebrae venas, quot mittit literis arenas,
Tot Milites inopes Anglia semper habes.
Upon his Hon. Election of Deputation for Ireland.
FOr Ireland, Lord!
what will become of me?
For Conscience Sake
look on my Family.
Would you receive
more honor then you have;
And so relinquish those whom you may save?
Is any one more earthly-blest then you?
Firm friends, fair fates, brave Bards, corrivals few.
And who is he that is so richly blessed
Will hatch his Airy in a foreign nest?
There the best Hawks, indeed, they say are bred,
But there High-flyers often have perished.
Those that do love my Lord, do hold it fit,
As the Country honors him, so should he it.
Admit, my Lord, that you entitled be
Yorks President, and Irelands Deputy;
Where you are five years only to remain,
Which time expired you are to return again!
Nay more then that, when every third Month ends,
You may revisit here your constant friends;
What Is this to me? while you at distance stand,
I Am forced to write my sorrows in the sand.
"It is a week ago since I did dream,
How you and I were swimming in a stream;
Rough were the Billows, for the water swelled
While I for safety by a Willow held;
Which you caught at, but, alas, it would not be,
That failed you what had supported me,
For when you strove to save your self from Wrack,
Rude-chattring Reeds (me thought) still held you back.
"Now such as are Expositors of Dreams
Might thus interpret it; "These troubled Streams
Betoken danger; Willowes, friends (indeed)
But such as fail us most, when most we need;
Rude chattring Reeds, such as do make a sport
To blemish Honor with a base report.
But dreams are dreams, and such as rightly know them
Will nere give trust nor confidence unto them.
But why, my Lord, should you transplanted be,
And reave me of that hope supported me?
'Zlid, all the world knows you to be wise,
And played in the Parl'ament your Master prize:
But what is all that? God knows what some will say
In heat of hate, when you are gone away.
Excuse me, Lord, my zeal conceits the worst,
If I should silent be, my gall would burst.
No Sycophant am I, upon my word;
I Will speak as Servants should unto their Lord.
Then tax not my discretion for the matter,
But praise his honesty that cannot flatter.
Here then a tatterd Knight comes sneaking in,
And jeers the Honor you bestowed on him;
And swears that Diotolph Brand who looked so big,
Being made Knight for rosting of a Pig,
Was never to more desertlesse honor hurled,
"For he is scarce worth a Pig in all the World.
Here a rack-rent Recusant cries amain
O my dear Conscience! and repeats your name;
And vows since Abbeys were dissolved here,
A Romish Conscience never cost so dear:
So as you must not be, till they be freed,
E're in their Paternoster or their Creed.
Some say you are grown to that resistless might,
He is not wise dare be your opposite;
For you will crush him be he nere so great,
Having such free access to Caesar's Seat;
Whose gracious rays are such, as they impart
Verdure and vigor to your known desert.
These and such like reports they 'l spread on you;
Which, though I Am confident, are far from true;
For in that equal Scale your actions stand,
As I Will avouch you just with heart and hand.
Yet too maliciously will some men deem,
When the wide Sea has severed you from them.
Naught 's left to answer for you but report,
Which good men know you by, and love you for it.
Alas my Lord, for Ireland! many one
Have gone forth laughing, that come weeping home.
Our Modern Stories have sufficient
To show, we need no other President.
"Nor can you there do service to your King,
For, as I hear, there breaths no venomous thing:
What then can Justice find it self to do?
Plant rather here where there be snakes enough,
"Such as deserve a Censure: "He that is just
Must find offenders, or his Sword will rust.
Some from the height of their concealed hate
Do much malign the fullness of your State,
And say, "One day a Parliament will come,
And then we hope Some will be paid home,
If these, while you live here, so envious be;
Judge what they will do when you are beyond the Sea?
Your Presence then 's the way to make you strong,
"Just men have often through absence suffered wrong.
"Pardon my boldness, Lord, the Case is such
Did I not love you, I Would not speak so much.
Often to your Honor have I made resort,
Yet nere Petitioned ought unless in sport;
It was your self I sought, whose love I gained
And that was the only mark at which I aimd.
Your choice discourse and judgment I confess,
Made me all yours, I could be nothing less.
I should write more, But Seas begin to rise,
And with their brinie waves overflow mine eyes.
Thus then with firm resolve, my knee I bend,
So you thereto be pleased to condescend:
Mount to the Moon, you cannot mount from me
My Muse and I will keep you company.
"Only vouchsafe a line, for if you go,
England farewell, I Will be for Ireland too.
Upon his Hon. return from Ireland.
Upon his attendance. MY Lord, I think
I have more hours attended
Then pearled Rills
From Taurus ere descended.
Still have those rising waters troubled him,
But when He strove a greater man stepped in.
Scotch, Irish, English in such numbers came,
As none would deigne to tell your Servants name:
"Well, my good Lord, though you are the Heir of time,
"That I Am the same, peruse this troth-plight ryme,
Upon his admittance. BLessed Patrick, are you come
To your long-expected home?
None I swear ere came here
To my leaping heart more dear
Saving my dread Sovereign
In his wished return from Spain.
Sail not from us back again,
Unless it be your Princes aim,
But amongst your own remain,
"This is the Prayer of your Swain.
'Zlid you have discharged that task for which you went,
Live now unto your own a President.
For the Right Honorable CHARLES HOWARD, Commander in chief over Cumberland,
Westmerland, and Northumberland, Upon the Decimation.
DEign Sir, in your perusal
of these lines,
"To clear their Score,
who'r clear of all Designs:
"Which crowns your Honor; when those Shires that bear
"Your fair Commands, are only now found clear.
Though change of State, no doubt, some levelled at,
Twixt hopes and fears: But hushed! no more of that.
Assess'd afresh! what have we done or said
That this new Tax should on our States be laid?
Dear Goldsmiths Hall six tedious years ago
Brought the Revenues of our State so low'
As with Rent-Charges, we may safe aver,
Some of our Lands ly now in Lavender.
Such is the Burden our condition feels,
As we can scarcely keep our Cart oth' Wheels.
Weigh our calm temper too, how all our time
We made the Muses Wardrobe our design:
And those who were not qualifide that way,
For Grazing or for Culture made assay.
No Project nor State-action plundg, our brain,
"To know God and our selves was our sole aim.
And merits this a Censure, pray you say!
Must our Retirement this Assesment pay?
To the world we appeal! -- where we do live,
Our precious Minutes are contemplative.
Our thoughts act not for Changes: our content
Is to dispose our Souls to the government
Of their affections: They that have arrived
And seen as many years as we have lived,
Should make 't their only task their souls to save:
And in e'ch pace to measure out his Grave.
This, is our Warfare: if 't be held unfit
Teach us some other Trade, weel practice it.
But to find out a safer way then this
Trace Heaven and Earth, we know not where it is.
This all Saints used, where were we joined in one,
We 'd hold our Passage happy to be gone.
Weak be our nerves and arteries to fight,
"Heavens Ord'nance is the Shot gives us delight:
And in these aged-deafned Ears sound louder
Then any Shot that takes his Charge from Powder.
From the first Nonne major nobis concedenda est gratia, amplior Clementia
primo a Bello cessantibus and pacifice degentibus, quam iis, qui in Castris
assidue fuerunt versati usque ad ultimum Worcestriae certaminis exitum?
War some have not struck astroke
But from the Camp betook them to their book.
Or if their profit did not that way look,
They plide the Plough-share or the Sheepheards Crook,
For we collected by our Conquering Foes,
What Heaven decreed 't was folly to oppose.
For this, our Composition has been paid,
Wherein his GRACE afforded One such aid,
That even in Goldsmiths Hall He did apply
His hand, and sought their fine to qualify:
Had not a Ridge of Hasles stood in the way
And with a rough obstruction raised his pay.
"Burned Child fire dreads: Our penance has been such,
We acted little, but we suffered much.
Had no man's hand been Conscious of more guilt,
Much blood had been preserved, that has been spilt.
Some of us may be Hermits for our years,
There Is no occasion then from us of fears.
Besides, SOME Pricked, though not personally summoned.
Justices were called of late,
Which would sound harshly to a ruined State.
Do not Assesse us then, unless 't be shown;
That we enjoy more fortunes then our own;
Much less, I Am sure, then we might justly claim:
"Heavens steer our Bark in this tempestuous Maine.
"Your self 's the North-Starre yt directs our Sail,
Clear our Land-voyage with a prosperous Gale.
Pensions, D^bts, Portions have our States so reft,
Like Banbery Cheese, there 's naught save pairings left:
And if we must both Crum and Crust forgo
We Will welcome want, because heaven ordered so;
In hope, when y^u those Golden Mines obtain,
These Taxes shall be paid us back again
But Grace appears! -- the Instructions give consent
That those who entertain this Government
With a Composed and Submissive will
Should be exempt from this Assessing Bill:
And, sure, Experience taught us so much wit
To know what Sovereignty is, and to submit.
Wee'r now become Good Boys (thanks be to God)
First take correction, after k^sse the Rod.
"They who intend t'improve their Means at Court
"Must take a wrong and give a Congie for 't.
Tender the favor these instructions show,
"So yours prey not on us, we 'l pray for you:
Wishing with all our hearts, Heaven would decre
Our Purse as full, as wee'r of Charity.
If all this will not do, we hope our Zeal
Unto the State will grant us an Appeal;
Wherein by plea if we appear not free,
May this same Grand Assesse re-doubled be.
But rather then offend, we will meekly fall
Under your Doom, without Appeal at all.
-- This renders no disgust; So you reprive us,
We Will try what benefit the Law may give us;
Wherein if we unfortunately slip,
We Will hold the Adventure worse then Should a Case of Necessity he urged; the
like was in that Argument of Ship Money pretended: and by some of our
judicioust and sincerest Judges evinced and held illegal.
HAMDENS Ship.
Should none of all these Arrows hit the mark,
But like Tiresias Shafts be shot in the dark;
Our only way to cement this Division
Is to officiate and take the Commission.
Which, if it may with your affection suit,
To the Tenure of that Writ, we will execute:
And do as justly too, or we would be sorry,
As we were dealt withal, -- so ends the story.
After his Assesse at Penrith; Addressed to his Honor. January 31. 1655.

H"Ow now! Mount I to
twenty pounds Assesse,
"When my Rint-charges rise
to such a rate
"As no inferior Judgment could hold less
"Then free indulgence to my squiezed State?
"You doom, I melt; shall I the Cause impart?
"Your Honors civil usage won my heart.
"Yet that those Grounds were good I stood upon,
"Peruse these Reasons, Sir, and I have don.
What 's twenty pounds Assesse to him that may
Improve the State more by his Pen then Pay;
When He to foreign Nations shall make known
The Bounty and great Pity you have shown
To State-Delinquents! when with face to face
They Are looked upon like Children of Grace.
As the late Act of Oblivion seemed to approve,
That we were all One Family of love.
Thrice Sacred Cement! when Revenge must cease;
And Patience smile on fore past Injuries.
By which your Fame might to Successions ring;
"To have Power and not to do, 's a noble thing:
A Princely-Lyon Ire: vhen hostile force
Puts off the Roabs of Rage, and donns Remorce.
No Marble, Topaz, Ivory, Thracian Stone
Could rear you Shrines more to be looked upon;
Nor more admired: Statues are works of time,
True worth admits no period nor decline.
Now to my self; -- Should I in brief relate
The form of the Spartan or the Theban State
In their necessitous times; you might perceive
What Privileges they to Penmen gave:
For by their Panorm. de Jure Civili. C.X. Conrad. de Magistrali discip. C. 5.
Palud. de Antiq. Leg. L. 3. C. 6. Carnead. de Princip. Regim. C. 8. Paragraph.
7. Pelarg. in Quaest. Aristocrat. fol. 30. Camerar. de Gest. Orient. Li. Z. C.
6.
Annals I shall make 't appear
From all Assessments They exempted were.
First, that their Writings might disperse their Fame;
Next, that their Penns more gingerly might blame
The Errors of those times: and Palliate
In a smooth Style the Abuses of the State:
Seeking by artfull secret mists to smother
The Soil of Sin, but to display the Other.
Sometimes have I extolled you in this sort,
And if too much, pray God forgive me for it.
Nor did I only in that Land-skip show
State-virtues, but emergent vices too.
"Good faces are with Choicest Perfections art best discovered by their
Opposites.
Moals much beautifide;
" Venus seemed fairest, when Nais sat beside.
"Vice setts off Virtue best: -- No Pearls spread
"Their Luster more, then when they 'r set in Lead.
There Is none that ever knew me One of those
That for a und y Places of Corresponsive esteem and benefit profer'd me, if
my retired Condition would have entertaine^ any such Remora's to Privacy and
Contemplation: or could have stooped to that servile lure of Assentation.
Diadem could learn to gloze.
For had I practiced the Art to Flatter
"The increase of Fortune had depraved my Nature.
Yet had I proved Proficient in that Art,
I Will tell you, Sir, the secrets of my Heart,
(For I dare venture to unrivet it
To one of Honor, Judgment, Worth and Wit,)
I Am confident, I had not so long waited
On your Commission to be Decimated.
Since SELDAN that Authentic Instrument
And constant Servant to the Parliament,
Directly proved no Tenths at all were due
Unto the Clergy; then much less to you.
Whom though our B. Mountague. B. White. Dr. Helyn. Mr. Wotten. Mr. Burton, etc.
Rabbis labored to confute,
They might have Silence kept with more repute:
For such Antiquity and Reason met
As his Assertions were not answered yet.
BESIDES all this; the Spartan State decre^'d
That all such Parents as their Children breed
In Arts and Studies of Philosophy
From all Assessments should exempted be:
And by deductions from Rint-charges granted
Supply those Tacklings Education wanted.
Which Law one day when Cleon did oppose,
Tyrtaeus in defense oth' Edict rose,
Saying; "If these so near us might not share
"In our Provision and Parentall ca e;
"May this strict opposition be ob^y'd
"And al Male-children henceforth Eunuchs made.
Which smart Reply drove th'Court to such a laughter
As the like Motion never was heard of after.
To those object, "'It Is folly to delay
"This Grand Assesse, our Soldiers must have pay;
My answer is; "I Am Natures deepest debtor;
"I love a Soldier well, but Children better.
But since I must their Benefactor prove,
Their prayers, me thinks, should gratify my love.
But though I pay them more then does become me.
They pray not for me, but they prey upon me.
When aged Priam over Sacked Troy did reign,
Never had he more Children to maintain;
Must I dis-owne whom Nature bids me own,
To furnish Those, to whom I am unknown?
The case i^ Ours: let Application draw
From the Spartan Act, life to an English Law:
For if such Masters worse then Ethnicks be
Provide not for a private Family;
Those Fathers, surely, should be held unfit
To live, who take no care of those they git.
"Those wild Oats youth has sown, Old age must reap the^.
"And what we got, an other must not keep them.
Dear Sir give ear; what Native Love alleges
Concerns us all; the tender of our Pledges.
But you 'r so truly Noble; as no fear
Of your just Care dares put in Anchor here.
Your most devotionall decimated Servant R. B.
With your HON. Certificate, let me partake this noble favor from your
approved Goodness: To have my Assesse (after the merit of my Cause) respited,
till my repair to London, which I purpose (God willing) early next Month. Where
I hope by application and your HON. assistance, to mitigate, if not wholly
mediate my Assesse.



Upon his additionall Assesse; continued in address to his Honor.
February 2. 1655.
" What Bill's here posted on our Tything door!
" Fiv^ pounds to the State-advance -- And who bids more?
"Not one Scotch Plak; it is feared the State at length,
"Will seize nine parts, and leave us but a tenth.
SIr I was lately bit, but knows not how,
Nor whether they be friends to the State or no.
For surely those who represent such zeal,
And constant service to the Commonweal;
Should not be used so. -- I Am lately I heard your Honor much opposed it,
But votes pass often more by Beards then Wit.

cast
By your Grave Synod, since the Assessement last
In five pounds more: if this be not a Shelfe
(I must appeal unto your Honored self)
Of dangerous consequence; -- when hearts and hands
Become addressed to your fair commands,
Must these be made State-Martyrs? Where should we
But in Committees look for unity
In their harmonious Votes? How does this show,
When one day acts, what next day does undo?
This strange dis-uaion held a partial Sin,
Caused old Sysambris sacrifice his skin
In brave Cambises time; who wisely saw
How it opposed the level of the Law;
And that it alien'd much the hearts of those
Who were his Friends to be his private Foes.
Affection is of such transcendent price,
Assesse should not eclipse it nor Excise.
Redress this, Sir, for unto you I ow
Such cord all ^ervice and devotion too,
As you, I Am sure, on whom I do depend,
In my just Cause will prove a faithful Friend.
Which done, if there be Springs in Helicon,
I Will fame your honor in our Albion:
And make her Face so terrible to Spain,
As if our Army were all- Charlemaine.
This Pibrac freed from Taxes in his time,
Why may it not to th^s low Muse of mine?
Whose wings so richly plumed, as She can fly
And meet Occurrents with an Eagles eye:
And make those grant who 'r ill-opinion'd on us,
That we do naught, but what may well become us.
Which, though it seem a Paradox to Some,
They will acknowledge it when I have done:
For that Bards Genius is not fit to write,
That cannot make white black, and black of white.
For since Pharsalians Fields were never in
More mouths, th^n our late Civil Wars have bin;
If home bred Triumphs purchase such renoune,
Much more when We have foreign Nations won.
"You must my Patron be in this address,
"Your Pension my Exemption from Assesse.
Your Hon. most affectionately devoted re-decimated Servant

A parcel of partiall-guilt Justice.
HOw! a Commission! Pray thee
from what ground?
"To salve the Assessement of
three hundred pound.
Well, GIB though this device thy Coffers ease,
The Cu^e may prove far worse than the disease.
I could, but dare not whisper in thine Ear,
Lest some Eve-droppers for the State draw near;
One day there may a Fowler come to set
And catch a Timing Baron in his Net.
No Scottish Style will leave thee Scot-free than,
Fames Pencile shall ingrave: -- Lo there is the man!
Who spared no time with Conscience to dispute,
But roundly underto^k to Execute;
"Whom? Justice; "How? To hang her? No, to Save;
" What? His Assesse. -- So dyed this worldling Slave.
"Was e're wealth worse bestowed? -- Stay, Sun's not set;
"More's to be done: -- Last Sceane's not acted yet.
For Colonel ROBERT WATERS, Upon his Yorkshire Summons.
"These late Inquisitions have So my Senses Confouunded,
"I am now in a Strait, as if I had never compounded.
THe Laity ought to pay their Tenths; it is true;
But they of old were to the Vid. Parae. in Eccles. discip. Just. de Jure
civili. Casel. in med. Theol Crescent. ib.
Altar due.
If the Altar be suppressed, the Offering dies,
For where no Altar, there no Sacrifice.
Yet though Delinquents Fatlings be exhaust,
Their poor Remains must be the Holocaust:
And tho in them small fat be left to fry,
Some must be Squiezed forth until they die.
So as Jobs Maxim will admit no doubt,
"Nak't came they in, and nak't must they go out:
And stripped of State, well were it if they from sin,
Might go as naked forth as they came in:
But Caesar with his Power can never impose
More outward Mulcts, then they have inward foes:
Which They by temperate diet may repress,
And this Assesse will keep them from Excess.
Thus Sinnue-shrunk all rising Starists shun us,
"Our In ostium, Rubrae Crucis si figamus characterem, perniciosae pestis
Spectantium oculis ominatur indicium. Cordel.
Cross oth' Door cries -- Lord have mercy on us.
But should all the Elements combine to fail me,
There 's One at Cundale, sure I am would bail me.
Excuse me, Sir, I am not every where,
My Person 's One, and that One Summond here;
Nor do I fear, though I with Others Share,
So just's my Judge, but I shall carry fair.
For my increase is not in Coin but cares,
Aches, Reumes, Tisicks, Children, and Gray-haires:
Wherein, if the State take Ti^hes in every part,
I wish them the Tenths of these with all my heart.
From him, who In Storms, Winds, and Showers, Subscribes him truly yours.
December 28. 1655.
For Mr. Ralph Rimer, a discreet State Commissioner.
RImer, Me thinks
thou should a Poet love,
Though more then Rhime's
required in Poetry;
A word in season's precious; Pray thee move
That I from decimation may be free,
So shall Swale^ Banks fame thy Civilitie:
For such a friendly Office done in Season
May store Musaeus both with Rhyme and Reason.
Rhyme gives the Close and Accent to our verse,
My dearest Ralph approve thee one of those
Who may deserve Inscriptions on their Hearse,
And gain more Friends then others gather Foes;
By clothing such as Imposts do unclose;
So to thy Line such honor may be won
Time shall Ensh^ine thy Fame at Brafferton.
Since this was writ, good news from the Parliament,
Our Decimations are quite taken away,
God grant this Ease raise not our discontent
And rack us more then we before did pay,
Which would make up the Malignants holy day,
But if our shoulders must Atlantic be,
Let thine own, Caesar, bear as well as we.
We have been Asses made while they were freed,
Lean not too much upon a bruized-Reed.
For Captain Aitee and L. Bolland.
WHen young Leontio was so straightly set
As all his State would scarce discharge his debt;
Decius the Serjant was enjoined to come,
And seize of all his Movables in Rome:
Who dealt so fair and mildly in his place,
From the Mace he vowed he never found like grace.
That I may render every one their due,
This Story might be instanced in you;
Though Some profess themselves your mortal haters,
I Will justify you Civil Sequestraters.
Such Atteus was in honest Appius days;
Hold on; Nullo minore pretio assequenda est Amicitia, viventium Anima, quam
Candore et Clementia.
mild Spirits merit highest praise.
"Your Temperance, no doubt, retained a sense
Of honest Ned Crofts cordial Innocence:
Who without Boots or Arms was proved to be,
Which were strange Habits for hostility.
If his resolvs had been addressed that way,
He would have marched in a more martial 'ray.
But of his Case if there be no remorse,
"His sentence may conclude, -- Gramercy Horse:
For if he might have got his price at home,
He had not felt the weight of such a Doom.
Trust me, high-valued friends, had this been so,
Horse-Faires had been Sequestered long ago.
Malton and Rippon might have sent us News
That both their Markets were removed to the Mews.
In Smythfield no Horse-Couper to be seen,
But vanished quite as if they had not been.
Though fire and faggot, and a stern Commission
Denounce his ruin, if a late Petition
Or a Mild Parl'ament beget not sense
In steeled Spirits by their influence:
But I am confident, though Durance tie him,
It is not meant to crush him, but to try him.
In The Recluce of a pure-hero^ck breast.
Candor and Valor claim like interest.
To have a Power to do, and not a will,
Has been the Signal of true Honor s^ill.
Really yours, PEREGRINE STRANGEVVAIS.

To Captain Sadler; a rare Scarlet dyer.
Noble Sir, I am here, Near unto your proper Sphere:
Visit Him who holds you dear.
DEarest Friend, who all thy time
Have been blessed in each design;
And have Color for thine ends,
To improve and right thy Friends:
May thou live in Honors Eye,
Till thy Scarlet lose her dye.
"Love's a Color did in grain,
Whose reflexe admits no stain.
Neque dives, nec egenus,
Neque satur, neque plenus;
Nec agrestis, nec amoenus,
Nec sylvestris, n^c serenus:
Palmis nec mulcendus paenis,
At in omni sort lenis.
Upon the Commissioners sitting at the Wildman in York.
AT the Wildman for Commissioners to sit
Some hold it strange, but I do think it fit.
We have been Wildmen all; and we 'r to git
From a Wild-man means to re-gaine our wit,
But not our Means: who can recover it?
This made Alcides wise, was wild before;
O that I had h^s Limms, I Would ask no more!
For so might I re-gaine my Means at length,
Though by no force of pleading, yet by strength.
The Quaker.
WItches were Seers called in antie^^ time,
And Speakers now are held to be divine.
But why ca^l'd Quakers can I not deliver,
Unless their Spirit turn an Hectic fever.
I rather think this Name of Tophet smells,
Where quaking, shaking shame and horror dwells.
But if Community their Title prove,
It Is all in all with Family of love.
Where like our wandering Gypsies in mixed seeds
Without distinction One with other breeds.
No marvel then if we have Mungrells many
When Fox Breeds Cubbs, and unrestrained by any
Nay priviledg'd in their impostur'd Service
Like Souls inspired: but what is all this to Jarvis?
Thus Folly with a Cup of fornication
Deludes the Saintlings of our English Nation.
But Coal or Walker with their zeal, no doubt,
Will either hunt or smoke these Foxes out.
Or some choice Archer will their Legions sever
With pile-head Arrows from a Justice quiver:
Or clothe them in a Suite of durance ever,
Till the Act of Reformation them deliver.
In Answer to this Paper of Verses, entitled The Quaker; whereof He was
reported to be the Author.
HOld thy penurious Pen, injurious Else,
In taxing Quakers, I might touch my self.
These last seven years I lived in this Clime
And showed my self a Quaker all that time.
For when I saw a stern Committee-man
I from that Sight a Quaker straight became;
Quercedulae sumus omnes,
-- Alis volitantes vagis. Plane.
For Fox I hold him a magnetic Sead;
And NAILER, One that hits the nail oth' Head.
* Vt Magnes ferrum, Vulpes subtilius attrahit aurum.
Or when I saw my Name fixed on a post,
I turned to Quaker, and my Senses lost.
When an Excise-man or an undertaker
For State-assesse; these Sights made me a Quaker.
Tracing those Streets where I did money ow,
The smell of Mace made me a Quaker too:
For They who on Parnassus bund their nest
Are Slaves to Fortune; Subject to arrest.
Now in my age too when I weigh my sin,
I Quake to think Oth' State that I am in.
Cease Critic then, thus to traduce my quill,
I have a Quaker been and must be still.
My Body is the Court-loft where I live,
From whence no Mortal can me freedom give,
Nor from my Grate procure me a release
Till my arrival at the Port of Peace;
Where being once infranchis'd in that City
I Am priviledg'd from Debt, Assesse, Committee.
For you, my Quaking Sisters, ye do make
Me when I see your rivell'd beauties, quake;
That you should pine, and spend your Spirits and die
Like forlorn Sceletons, and know not why.
I wish, dear Ducklings, you would understand
That God requires no such thing at your hand.
How is it that you cry Repent, Repent,
And wast rich hours in fruitless discontent?
Why do you hour and houle and take no rest
As if in HOPE you had no interest?
"Shun such impostur'd fancies; Fly to Him
"Whose light can clear your cloud and cleanse your Sin.
"Judge not; That power to you was never given,
"But judge your selves; for that is the way to Heaven.
"Rend not your Clothes but Hearts: The Saints desire
"That you should try your selves, not Clothes by fire.
"Make use of what is requisite and fit,
"You should not hate your flesh, but cherish it.
Be frolic then my Girls, and freely feed
And propagate your Doctrine by your seed.
"If Quaking proper be in any Sense
It Is in the sweet enjoyment of a Wench.
This was well known to Adam and his Eve;
And what they loved, let not their Children leave:
Yet so, as each may reap what he has sown,
And every Adam have an Eve of 's own:
For though there were no Statute to forbid it,
God has pronounced a'Curse against Him that did it.
A Button-Bung, or, A Westminster Snap.
AT Westminster my Cassock chanced to find
A Button-Cutter, who was much inclined
To meddle with our furniture behind;
From whence my native Genius divined,
"Though Westminster above no Spiders show,
"It has a brood of Nimmers hatched below,
Who can Trapan poor Clients where they go,
"Leave them not worth a Button nor a Stro.
Beware dear Contrymen of Mollerstang,
Least rural faction make you sing like Sang;
Contest not where your Foe and Cause prove strange,
Lest you confess that all things go a-wrang:
For though your Countess pay, I can assure ye,
When the Game is played, your purse must pay the Jurie.
Desist then, Friends; no more Commissions sit
Unless it be at Fleece to quicken wit.
This short advice comes from a friendly hand
As any you can have in Westmerland.
Upon the Northern Feast, observed at Salters-Hall, the sixth of October; 1657.
Addressed to his worthy Countrymen, The Northern Society.
OBserve the bounty of these Northern Ladds,
And you will say, the North-Part glory adds
Unto the South: and that their Freedom is
An Honor to our great Metropolis;
Whose Union and Communion is such,
They may be eyed, but not admired too much:
Whose fair Comport has razed that Proverb forth,
"That no good thing came ever from the North.
For what is good, or free, or friendly-rare
Derive their Essence from our Northern air.
Your native knowledge is not ranked with those
Who can bouze Ale, yet wonder where Malt grows
Your Country Cock crows, and he does not ney;
You know a Daple from an Iron-gray;
You know that Sun which shows his splendour here,
Is the Same Sun shines in your Hemisphere.
You of your Clothes have no such Simple care
As to o're-pentise them from hence to Ware.
Your Language, though not curiously refined,
It can express the dictates of your mind;
And with more brevity and aptness too
Then These with their minced Dialect can do.
Your Northern warlike Habitants of old,
Inured to Sultry heat, and Shuddring cold,
Against Picts, Scots, Saxons, and Lordly Danes
Displayed their valor, memoriz'd their Names.
Such was the Martial prowess of your Nation,
As it preserved your Frontiers from Invasion:
And in one year did more joint hearts combine,
Then Other Countries did in all their time:
And in composing of their Interests,
Made Savage Foes become their Servile Beasts.
Brave gallant Blades! disperse your living Fames
From Twede to Trent, from Trent to princely Thames
That Times may revell in your Annual joys,
And vow, No lineage like our Northern Boys.
May all the Muses, when they dip their lip
In your rich Bolls, joy in your Fellowshippe.
While precious Nectar cheers your Poets brain,
And gives him hope to visit you again.
And you may trust him; when joint votes succeed
For your next Feast, He shall no Ticket need.
These Tickets are Half-Crown-men: Our North Zone
Stands either for a Whole-One, or for none.
Annot. Egregia Fax illa Germaniae, quae talem stammam toto Orb, facilitate
calami, vel subtilitate ingenii latius intulit, ut peraegre extingui poterit,
in uxorem duxit Catharinam Bore, ( nomine Elizabethae transeuntem in Poemate;)
puellam elegantulam; quam mollitie Carnis, seu Oris sui blanditiis, de
Claustris perperam illexerat. Page 24. lin. 12. Vid. Isich.

The Bankrupts Remembrancer; and the Bankrupts Register; being Titles to
distinguish the two first Letters relating to the Voice in the Vault, are
omitted. Page 38. and page 41.

THese Papers bearing the Title of Parthenia's Passions, were privately
procured without the Authors knowledge. Excuse then these Errors: being at the
instancy of Persons of quality, published without his direction.

FINIS.

