The Loyal Prophet: A SERMON Preached in St. Peter's in York, upon Monday the
13. of July, at the Summers Assizes, Anno 1668.

By William Bramhall Rector of Goldsbrough, and one of his Majesty's Chaplains.

The King by Judgment establishes the Land,

Prove. 29.4. God stands in the Congregation of the mighty, he judges among
the gods,

Psalm 82.1. (...).

Imprimatur.

Ioh. Garthwait, Reverendissimo in Christo patri, ac Dom. Dom. Richardo,
Archiepiscopo Eboracensi, a sacris Domestic^s.
July 29. 1668.
Printed at York, Anno Dom. 1668.

To the Right Honorable Baron Turner and Baron Rainsfordes; The Right
Worshipful Sir Richard Mauleverer Knight and Baronet, High Sheriff of the
County of YORK; Richard Hutton Esquire; of Goldsbrough, my honored Patron, Safety
here, and Salvation hereafter.
Honorable and Worthy,
THE Design of the Preacher in committing that to the Press in this censorious
and critical age, under your Patronage and Protection, which was delivered
before you from the Pulpit, ^s not out of any crafty or undermining Policy, for
self ends and Interests, but merely upon the account of honesty and loyalty,
for the common and public good, for the advancing the honor and glory of the
King of Kings, the promoting the safety of our Sovereign and his Kingdoms, the
preserving of the honor and credit of our Religion, as it is professed and
practiced in this Church of England, and the perpetuating the memory of your
great Fames and good Names to succeeding Ages and Generations. This, this is
the design of him, who is and shall ever be

Your Honors and Worships faithful servant in all Christian Observance WILLIAM
BRAMHALL.

Daniel VI.XXI. O King, live for ever.


NEver did that Prophet sanctified in his mothers Womb, more plead his weakness
and insufficiency, for the Discharge of that weighty work and employment
whereunto God called him, Ier. 1.5, 6.
as wanting both gravity and ability, then I have done mine, for the declining
of this duty and service; but at last their importunity prevailing, whose
Authority might have commanded me, it was no small trouble to me to pitch upon
a Subject every ways suitable and fit, for such an Honorable, Reverend,
Learned and Religious Assembly, till at last my divided and almost distracted
thoughts like the weary Dove, fell and settled upon this Ark of safety and
sacred ground in this Text. For when I considered that happy Government under
which we live, a Monarchy, and such a Monarchy, whose Royal Prerogative does
not enterfear with, or entrench upon the liberty and privilege of the Subject,
nor yet the liberty and privilege of the Subject, does in the least cloud or
eclipse the Beams and luster of the Royal Prerogative. When I considered the
Kings several Counses: Cokes Institutions lib. 1. page 110.


1. Commune Concilium regni, the Court of Parliament.

2. Magnum Concilium Regis, the Peers of the Realm, either in or out of
Parliament.

3. Privatum Concilium Regis, the Kings Privy Counsel.

And if I may give a name to the fourth, Regium Concilium Legis, the Kings
learned Counsel of the Law, the Judges, Prove. 15.22
Surely in the multitude of these Counsels and Counselors, the kingdom is
established.

Again, When I considered our Courts of Judicature, supreme and subordinate,
superior and inferior, of Equity and of Law, and all our wholesome Laws and
Statutes; which indeed in comparison of the Laws of other Nations, deserves
that Character (which a learned and honest Judge of this Country, Sir Richard
Hutton of precious Memory) has observed out of a Dialogue and Discourse that
passed betwixt that famous Sir John Fortescue Sergeant at the Law, and Lord
Chancellor of England, and that unfortunate Prince Edward, the only Son and
Heir of good Henry the sixth, in the time of their exile in France: The Prince
being too much addicted to Martial Affairs, was by the Chancellor persuaded to
the study of these excellent Laws, and was brought to this Resolution and
commendation of them, Fortes. Dial
Lex ista mihi semper peculiaris erit inter caeteras leges orbis, page 132
inter quas ipsam lucere conspicio, ut Lucifer inter minores stellas, This Law
shall be ever peculiar unto me, above all the Laws of the World, amongst the
which, I see it shine, as Luciter the bright morning Star, amongst the stars of
a lesser Magnitude, of which Laws, if I now should presume to show the
Antiquity and Excellency of them before these learned Sages and Students of the
same, I might justly be taxed of the like indiscretion and folly, which
sometimes we read the Philosopher Phormio at Ephesus was, Plutarch.
when the great famous Captain and Carthaginian General came into his School
with King Antiochus of Asia, who leaving off his Lecture of Philosophy, began a
Discourse De Art militari, whose presumption received no small check from that
experienced Commander Hannibal, in an elegant Oration concerning the same,
wherein he made it appear, that the Discourse had better beseem'd him who had
brandished his bloody sword in the high places of the field, then an obscure
Philosopher, that only flourished with his pen in the Schools: Yet give me
leave, to remember you of a double benefit, that this daye^ Prospect presents
before you.

1. When you view these honorable Brethren and noble Barons, you may conceit
you see so many Daniels preferred to the places and seats of Judicature, because
an excellent spirit was found in them; Dan. 6.3.
against whom their Enemies could never yet find any occasion, as matter of
accusation, they being famous for their observation of the Law of their God,
Verse 4.
as for their Administration of Justice, according to the Laws of their King:
nay more you may conceit, you see Samuelem redivivum, not one but two aged
Samuels going their Circuit, to Bethel, 1 Samuel 7.16.
and Gilgal, and Mizpeh, to judge this Northren part of our Israel.

2. When you view the several Tribes here assembled, the Nobility and Gentry,
the Clergy and Commonalty of these parts; you may conceit you see them enjoying
those benefits and privileges which sometimes Gods ancient people the Jews
enjoyed, who were the first people of the world, to whom any written Law was
given, whose Judges sat in the gates of their Cities, where they did pronounce
their Judgments, equally and impartially administering Justice unto all, to the
end that both all men might see the indifferency of their Proceedings, and that
no man should need to go out of his way to seek justice: This is the happiness
of our condition at this time, Foelices nimium bona si sua, etc. O happy
England, if thou knew'st thine own happiness? we cannot but proclaim it, and in
way of gratitude ingenuously confess, That we have greater cause to pray for
our British, then ever Daniel had for the Median and Persian Monarch.

O King, live for ever. But because it is not only the custom, but also
absolutely necessary for the Preacher to implore the divine Assistance; and
long Prayers being displeasing to some, and short Prayers offensive to others:
That I may not offend either, O Lord open thou my lips, and my mouth shall show
forth thy praise: Lord hear our Prayers, and let our cry come unto thee, etc.

Dan. 6.21. O King, live for ever. Darius was king of the Medes and Persians,
upon that sacrilegious Princes Fall, (who caroused his drunken healths in the
sacred Plate of the Sanctuary) he is advanced to the kingdom of the Caldeans
too: Dan. 5.2.30.31.
Upon his advancement he prefers Daniel, above all his Presidents and Princes,
because an excellent spirit was found in him. And happy is that Kingdom,
blessed is that Church, where preferments are conferred, according to men's
Worth, Parts and Deserts. The Princes and Nobles of Babylon envying Daniels
honor, maliciously confederate and conspire to work his Ruin, in his Trust
and Charge, in his Life and Manners, they could fasten nothing upon him, or
object any thing against him: In his Religion, (and especially that part
thereof, his devotion) they thought they should, knowing that Daniel would lose
Honors, Offices, and Life also, rather then transgress the Law of his God: Now
by their fraudulent and crafty undermining policy, they procure from the King
an unjust Decree, injurious both to the King of Kings, and King Darius himself:
Hereby Gods holy Prophet is ensnared, and his life exposed as a prey to the
cruel paws, and hungry, and devouring Jaws of the Lions: Here was a malicious
and mischievous combination; but see the issue and event of it, in a miraculous
preservation, God was with his Prophet in the Den, restrained the fierceness
and fury of those Creatures, shut the Lions mouths, Dan. 6.22.
that so they could not fasten upon his Anointed, upon his holy Prophet; And
here you have the thankful acknowledgement of Gods preservation of him, and it
is to the King, who had too rashly condescended (being circumvented by his
Court-Parasites) to that wicked Decree, and by whose sentence he was unjustly
condemned, Then said Daniel unto the King, O King, live for ever; which is a
religious and loyal salutation and supplication for the Kings safety, Live^ for
his salvation hereafter, Live for ever: In which, (as in all salutations) we
may observe, 1. The person saluted. 2. Saluting. 3. The Salutation it self.

1. The Person saluted; Darius, a great King of three Kingdoms; Media, Persia
and Chaldea.

2. The Person saluting, Daniel, a great Prophet, famous for his wisdom, piety
and devotion.

3. The salutation, a loyal prayer for his Sovereigns safety and prosperity
here; a religious one, for his salvation, consisting in the enjoyment of an
happy Eternity hereafter: Live for ever.

From these three parts arises three points:

1. All Kings must be honored by all their Subjects, by the best and holiest,
as well as the greatest and meanest

2. Gods best Saints, should be the Kings most faithful Subjects.

3. He is a faithful Subject, whom in his prayers desires, and in his actions
endeavors, the safety of his Sovereign here, and his salvation hereafter.

For these three points, there are these three Reasons.

1. Institutio divina. 2. Religio Christiana. And, 3. Gratitudo humana: The
Ordinance of God, the honor of our Religion, and the duty of Gratitude, under
the Kings government we enjoy safely, and the means of Salvation; so that we
receiving by him what we desire, should return unto him what we owe, our
prayers and endeavors for his safety here, and salvation hereafter, giving all
his kingdoms cause unanimously to join with us, in this loyal and religious
Supplication, O King, live for ever.

OBSERVATION I.
All Kings must be honored by all their Subjects, by the best and holiest, as
well as the greatest and meanest; by Gods choice Saints and holy Prophets, as
well as by their Nobles and Princes, and common Subjects: so did good Daniel
here great Darius; O King! a speech of affection, of honor natural and civil,
Dan. 2.4.
not only used by heathens, but also by the people of God. Thus the greatest,
the Queen her self honored King David, 1 Kings 1.31.
bowed with her face to the earth, and did reverence to him and said, Let my
Lord king David live for ever: She addressed herself to him as a loving wife,
and as an obedient subject; and no less respect showed she (when Queen Mother)
to her son Solomon, when advanced to the Throne of his father.

Thus did Nathan the Prophet, 1 Kings 1.23.
bowing himself before the King with his face to the ground: Not the nearest
Conjugal, or maternal Relation, not the Prophetical function, exempts any from
civil subjection.

Thus did good Nehemiah, Nehe. 2.3.
when he desired only to promote the good of Gods people; he gave evidence of
that great respect and honor he had for King Artaxerxes his Master. And I said
unto the King, Let the King live for ever.

Thus does the greatest Commander, as well as the meanest Soldier: All the
Congregation bowed down their heads, 1 Cron. 29 20
and worshipped the Lord and the King: The same word is attributed to God and
the King, yet in a different respect, God with a religious and divine honor,
the King with a civil reverence and worship: So when Solom^n sat on his royal
Throne, called The Throne of the Lord, because all Kings bear the Image of the
Lord, by whom they rule. ^ Cron. 29 24.
It is said, That all Israel obeyed him, even all the Princes and and mighty
men, (that is, all that had Command of Soldiers, all that were eminent for
Honor and Wealth) and all the sons likewise of King David submitted themselves
unto him, though born of royal mothers, yielded to the Will of God therein by
some external rite, as bowing the head, or kissing the hand, gave signal
testimonies of their Fealty and Subjection to him. And thus did good Jehoiada:
The Levites and all Judah, the Captains of Hundreds; and all the people pray at
the Coronation of King Joash, who had been detained from his Right by the
usurpation of Athaliah, and who only of the seed Royal had been miraculously
saved from her rage and cruelty: They clapped their hands; A visible expression
of their great joy, and said, God save the King. Heb. 2 Chro. 23.9, 10, 11.
Let the King live, an usual acclamation at the Coronation of Kings.

But what honor is due to them by the new Testament? The Apostle in one place
prophesies of Perilous times, 2 Timothy 3.4
and that which made them so, was, That amongst other sins, there should be
sinners of the greatest magnitude, (...), that is, Traitors, Heady: And
speaking of those in another place, Jude v. 8.
(...). They do despise dominions, speak evil of Dignities, reject not only the
Governors, but the government, revile and reproach Magistrates, 2 Pet. 2.10
even subordinate and supreme too, who are dignities, Persons of Honor, aod so
ought to be esteemed: Therefore in their Epistles, they do put them in mind of
that, which they are too apt to forget: Put them in mind to be subject to
Principalities and Powers: Titus 3.1.
under which words are comprehended all civil Powers. And who must be remembered
of their Duty? the same Apostle tells you, Every soul: Let every soul be
su^ject, Romans 13.1.
the holiest, the greatest; as Chrysostom descants, though an Apostle, though
an Evangelist, though a Prophet: The Pope too, (as one said well) except he
will be excluded out of the number of all souls.

But who are these higher Powers to whom they must be subject? Kings, and all
that are in Authority: says St. Paul, that is, 1 Timothy 2.2.
The supreme and subordinate Magistrate. 1 Pet. 2.13
says St. Peter, (...), To the King, who is the high, the excellent Authority,
and to Governors that are sent by him.

As in nature the Sun is Commander in chief among the Planets, whose light is
communicated to them from that body: Thus in body Politic, God has set Kings,
Nobles, Judges, still in a descent, 1 Pet. 2.1^
and those powers are of God; so that if there be any fear of God, there will
be an honoring of the King, and of those that are sent by him.

REASON I.
IN^titutio divina; It is Gods Institution, he requires it; Monarchy is the
vent to Theocracy, and God himself never instituted any other form then
Monarchical. He himself vouchsafed to be King of his people, and gave them
first Moses as his Viceroy, for he was King in Jessurun; Deuteronomy. 33.5.
and when the people multiplied, and the burden of Government was too heavy for
his Shoulders, according to his Father-in-law ( Jethro's advice) he provided
able men, such as feared God, men of truth, hating covetousness, to be his
Assistants, Exodus 18.22.
(as our Judges are the Kings learned Council) to judge the people at all
seasons, and God himself avowed his authority, in the just and miraculous
punishment of those presumptuous Rebels; so that when the Government was
Paternal, Number. 16.32.
Patriarchal under a General, their valiant and victorious Joshua, yea Judicial
under those famous Judges, it was still Monarchical; and therefore in that
acterregnum you have declared the miserable condition of a State, and People,
who live in an Anarchy, every one doing that which was good in their own eyes,
because there was no King in Israel; Iud. 17.6.
then must every Micah have his Idol, and his Priest too: then shall the most
notorious uncleanness and Sodomitical filthiness, be not only committed, but
countenanced by a whole Tribe, But afterward God gave them a radicated
succession of Kings, Deuteronomy. 17.14, 15.
according to his promise; So that the Scepter departed not from Judah until
Shiloh came, according to that ancient Prophecy; and when he did come, he
himself was the King of the Jews, Genesis 49.20
(though his kingdom was not of this world) for he owned Caesar, in working a
miracle to pay him Tribute, and his Answer to the captious Question was, To
maintain the civil power, Mat. 22.21
as well as Religion, to render unto Caesar the things that are Caesar's, as
unto God the things that are Gods; And his Apostle advises all believing
Christians, Romans 13.5
to be subject for conscience sake, and for the Lords sake; so that it must
needs be (...), a divine Order or institution. 1 Pet. 2.13
Though some object, that St. Peter calls it, (...), an Ordinance of man; as if
the Magistrate was an humane Creature, and as a King created by man; yet the
ready Answer is, Monarchy is (...), secundum substantiam: (...) secundum modum
and finem; called there an humane Ordinance, not because it was invented by, or
has its Original from men, but because man was the subject of it, humane
Affairs the Object, and God as the Author and Efficient, instituted it for the
good of mankind; For as our natural Parents bear the image of Gods power, who
are the instruments of our being, and beget us; and our spiritual and
ecclesiastical Parents, bear the image of Gods wisdom and knowledge, who are
the instruments of our spiritual and wel-being, to teach and instruct us: So
our civil Parents, who bear the image of Gods power and authority, are Gods
instruments for our civil being, to govern and protect us. In them Gods
Sovereign Majesty shines brightly, in their Crowns and Scepters, the beams of
his favor are most apparent; for he investeth them with his robes of Majesty,
armeth them with his own sword of Justice, adorneth them with his own Diadem of
royal dignity, and graceth them with his own style of Deity: I have said, ye
are gods, and all of you children of the most high; p 82.6
above all others therefore, we owe duty and rerpect unto Kings; as here Danil
did to Darius.

USE.
NAy we have more cause to do it, if we consider what Darius was, Ecclesiae
inimicus, Author perditionis: He was an heathen Prince, an enemy to Gods
Israel, Church and people, he kept the servants of God in captivity: he assumed
unto himself religious Worship, he was the Author (in humane probability) of
Daniels Destruction, though his Lord advised him to it, yet it was his Law
ensnared him, his power condemned him, his ^ommand cast him into the Den, his
^ignet sealed the stone, and yet Daniel ^onours him, prays for his prospe^ity
here, and eternity of life here^fter.

Religion does not exempt us from honoring our Superious, though they ^e
enemies to the Church. Dominion (...) and Sovereignty are the ordinances of
God, instituted upon earth by him, as he is the Author of mankind, not as the
God and Author of Grace; for Cyrus is Gods anointed; even Pilate himself has
his power from above: Mat. 22.21
no wrong, no injury can exempt or excuse us from honoring them.

Daniel was injured, was wronged sufficiently, and yet how respective? Infer we
then, and conclude hence our Duty, What honor is due to good Kings? If to a
heathen, what is due to a Christian King? If to an Enemy of the Church, what to
a nursing fatherr of the Church? If to one who assumes religious worship to
himself, What to him who is a true Worshipper of God himself? and enjoynes us
to worship the God of our Fathers. If to him who is an instrument of our death,
what to him who is under God, the greatest Protector of our lives and
liberties? under whose government we duly frequent Gods house, and quietly
enjoy our own: so that this Scripture is an Argument of no small force, to
resolve the consciences of those, that doubt in these days, Wether a lawful
Sovereign may be honored and obeyed, if he be an Heretic, (as they call those
that are of another opinion) He may, he must, though he be of a false Religion;
How much more, when he is of the true, and the King; Our King commands no false
Worship, as Darius did, Dan. 6.26.
but the Worship of the God of Daniel, and enjoynes no other worship, then
according to his own Laws, the undoubted Register whereof is the sacred word:
This honor God himself requires in his Law, Christ in his, the Law of Grace.

Let us see what the Laws of the Land says to it? Mr. Henry Bracton, who lived
in the time of King Henry the third, says, Rex sicut Dei Vicarius and Minister
in terra potestatem juris habens, The King is Gods Vicegerent, 9. and 10 chap.
and Minister upon earth, having power of the Laws. Henry the Lord Beaumont was
for his unreverent ^peeches to King Edward the second, ^ommanded out of the
Council house, though it be said therewithal, that he was juratus de magno and
secreto Consilio Regis, sworn of the great and privy Council of the King; and
our famous Sir Edward Coke says, 1 lib. Instit. page 7.
our Kings were honored with the styles, Of Sovereign Lord, Liege Lord,
Highness, and Kingly Highness, that Grace was attributed to King Henry the
fourth; Excellent Grace, to King Henry the sixth: Majesty to King Henry the
8th. and since that, the King and Queens Most Excellent Najesty; so that now
for those that canonize themselves for Saints, and pretend to have a more
excellent spirit then Daniel, as attained already to a higher degree and pitch
of sanctity and Piety, and yet do speak evil of dignities, Jude 8
revile the Rulers of the people, do prove themselves to be the spawn of those
filthy Dreamers and Blasphemers, having only (...), 2 Timothy 3.2 5
a mask and vizor of godliness for their true piety and fidelity to God, ought
to be evidenced by their loyalty and honor of their Sovereign, as holy Daniel
was here, which brings me from the person saluted, to the second part.

OBSERVATION II.
2. The Person saluting, Daniel; and then, Gods bests Saints should be the
Kings most faithful Subjects. Daniel was a person of no ordinary rank and
quality, of no ordinary size or pitch of Piety; he was preferred by three great
Monarchs, by Nebuchadnezzar, Belshazzar, and lastly by Darius. He was chief of
the Trium viri or Presidents; Thus still is unity sought after, as best for
Peace in State and Church; and Parity avoided, as tending to Disorder and
Confusion in the one, and Schism and Division in the other. Daniel was a rare
person, famous, 1. For his Wisdom by a common proverb, He was set as a pattern
thereof in Babylon: Ezekiel 28.3.
The King of Tire who thought himself so wise above others, is taunted, Behold
thou art wiser then Daniel. 2. He was famous for Prayer and Sanctity, and
joined therefore as a fit intercessour with two Worthyes, to divert Gods wrath;
Ezekiel. 14.14.20
Noah a just man and perfect: Job a man perfect and upright, that feared God
and eschewed evil: He was greatly beloved of the Lord, as the Angel Gabriel
told him; and unto him did G^d make known his Will. Dan. 9.23.
3. He was famous too for his Fidelity and Loyalty; even his enemies gave thi^
testimony of him, That though they sought to find occasion against him, yet
they could find none, no subject matter of accusation, no color or suspicion
of negligence or unfaithfulness in him, or his doings. He was faithful to the
King in the Affairs of the Kingdom, as he was also to his God: So that persons
eminent for their Piety and Holiness, ought to be eminent also for their
Loyalty and Faithfulness: Caesar had Saints in his household, who was obedient
to him, and to God too, otherwise the great Apostle would not have so lovingly
saluted them. 1 Cor. 1. 26
Obadiah was a faithful Courtier to wicked King Ahab, and yet true to his God,
as appears by his affection to the Lords Prophets Nehemiah was faithful to his
God, Nehem. 2.1.
and yet an obedient servant to his master, when Cup Bearer to the great King
Artaxerxes: So was Daniel here in the acknowledgement of Gods miraculous
delivery of him, he pleads his own innocence, Before thee, O King, I have done
no hurt. Dan. 6.22.
Gods dearest Saint and servant proves here the best and most faithful Subject.

REASON II.
CHristiana Religio; the Honor, the Credit of our Religion enjoynes it; for
our honoring of Magistrates, and obedience to them, must be out of obedience
to God, and Conscience of Duty, who has ordained civil Magistracy, and
enjoined subjection unto it; for so is the Will of God, that Christians should
stop the mouths of Unbelievers, Titus 3.1.
which are opened against our Religion, because of the Professors disobedience
to their Rulers. He that truly fears God, the great King of heaven, will
cordially and conscionably serve these earthly gods, Kings of the earth; for
Conscience (that poor neglected thing) is the strongest tie of Subjects hearts
unto their Sovereign, which neither man nor devil is able to dissolve, and will
support all loyal hearts erect and unshaken in the greatest storms and
confusions: Now the honor of Religion should be very dear to one that fears
God. Let the world say what it will, Religion is a friend to Magistracy,
commanding civil Duty by a sacred bond and obligation. Eccles. 8.2.
I counsel thee to keep the Kings Commandment, and that in regard of the oath
of God; not only out of fear to them, because of their sword, but because of
Conscience toward God, Romans 13.5
and of those vows that are upon us, which obliges to faithfulness. Those that
are faithful to God, I shall expect them to be faithful to me, said the father
of Constantine the great: Certainly none ought to live so sweetly under the
same government, Eusebius. lib. 2. de vita Constan.
as those that are united in the same faith, and cemented together with the
same blood of Christ. The Protestant^ Doctrine always taught, That Religion
was an enemy to Rebellion; always cried down, (says Hugo Grotius) Armatum
Evangelium; always cried up, Obedience, Honor and Reverence due to them;
teaching good Magistrates must be obeyed as God, those that are ^ad for God.

USE.
AND if at this Touchstone we try those that would have been accounted our
modern Saints, by their Loyalty and fidelity, we shall not find this virtue in
them: They could not be religious unless they were ^ebellious; They could not
fear God, ^nless they dishonored their King: ^or obey their heavenly father,
unless ^hey disobeyed their earthly: That ^uch counterfeit Saints there was and
^s: That such a generation, prove. 30.12
pure in their own eyes, etc. Such spirits that will be under no other Law or
Rule, but their own lusts and interests: That it has been and is still on
working, none can be such a stranger in our Israel as not to know. That roaring
and thundering (not only crying) sin, the murder of our late dear and dread
Sovereign, had been the greatest Scandal and dishonor to our Religion, had not
that glorious Martyr by his royal pen dashed it out; when he writ, That scarce
any one who had been a Beginner, or an active Prosecutor of the late Ware
against the Church, the Laws and his royal person, either was or is a true
Lover, and Embracer, or Practiser of the Protestant Religion, as it is
established in England; which neither gives such Rules, or ever before set such
Examples. Had not our gracious Sovereign, who now is, in his royal Proclamation
declared, Those that had a hand in that unparalleled sin of the greatest
magnitude, That they were as far from being good Protestants, as they were from
being good Subjects: Thanks to the royal Pen! True it is, our Adversaries in
both extremes do clip the wings of Monarchy: The one denying the Kings
Supremacy in Causes Ecclesiastical: The other (if their power were equal to
their Wills) compelling the royal golden Scepter to bow down to the Scepter of
Christ, and good reason if it were so) as they are pleased to call their
classical Consistorian, Power and Authority: Of which discipline one prophesied
not amiss, when it was newly broached in the Church, and was commended to the
liking of another Nation, Timetur al^era Tyrannis. Novus Pontificatus, a new
Popedom was the judgment of another; but whosoever peruseth the Doctrine of
the Church of England,, ^s it is expressed in the 39, Articles, Act. 37.
and her Discipline as contained in the Cannons and Constitutions, may without
partiality, conclude, Can. 1.2.
The Pro^essors thereof are the truest, fastest ^riends to Monarchy; amongst
whom God has his faithful servants, and ^he King his most loyal Subjects; They
^eeping the good old way; Ier. 6.1^.
the golden mean betwixt Tyranny on the one hand, and Popularity and Parity on
the other. True it is, sometimes confcionable Christians have been falsely
accused, as Daniel here, for not keeping the Kings Laws, Christ was accounted
an enemy to Caesar, and so his servant Jeremy a seeds-man of sedition: Luther a
Trumpet of rebellion: So Francis King of France desiring to excuse to the
Protestant Princes of Germany, his cruel persecution of the Lutherans in his
Kingdom, wrote to them, That he looked upon them all, as Anabaptists and
Enemies to civil government, and therefore used such severity against them.
This caused Calvin to write his Institutions, and elegantly in his Preface to
it, (...)
repeats the objections, Sceptra Regum e manibus extorquent, ^ri^unalia
judiciaque omnia precipitant, subvertunt ordines omnes and politias, pa^em and
quietem populi perturbant, leges ^mnes a^rogant, They wrest the Scep^^r out of
the Kings hand, they over^urn all Tribunals and Courts of Judicature, confound
all humane orders and Societies, disturb the Peace and Quiet of the People, and
abolish and abrogate all Laws. By the spirit of Propaccy calculated for our
British Sectaries, but no ways true of the Gallicane Hugenots. And sure I am,
they cannot be accounted or esteemed true Christians, who are for such a
liberty, as owes no subjection to Magistrates; We may say to such as St.
Barnard has done before us, Ubi timor mentis, rubor frontis? Where is either
Conscience toward God, or reverence to his Anointed? Tertullians Apology for
the Christians in the time of the heathenish persecuting Emperors, was, Nos non
sumus Nigriani, nec Cassiani, We are no Traitors, no Rebels, we fill all your
Cities, Islands, Towns, yea your Palace and Senate: What were we not able to
do? If it were not more agreeable to our Religion to be killed, then upon any
pretense to kill: And if these Saints were good Subjects to bad Princes, surely
it concerns us Christians, to show our Religion to God, by our Loyalty to our
Sovereign, who is Nutritious Ecclesiae, Defender of the Faith, the Preserver of
our Peace, who delights in our prosperity, and therefore we should pray for his
Saf^ty, as Daniel does for Darius, O King live for ever: which brings me to the
third Salutation it self:

OBSERVATION III.
IT is the duty of a good Subject in his Prayers to desire, and in hi^ actions
to endeavor the safety of the King here, and his Salvation hereafter; his
temporal prosperity here, and a happy Eternity hereafter: Thus did Daniel, here
was the trial of his Worship; he was thought to be (...) factious man,
seditious, but here he showed himself a faithful Subject in his Prayers to God
for him. The Israelites expressed their affection to David their King, in that
unnatural rebellion of Absolons, they preferred his safety before their own, 2 Samuel 18.3
Thou shall not g^ forth, and gives the reason, Thou ar^ worth ten thousand of
us, better it were that many of us should miscarry, then that the light of
Israel should be extinguished, thou that the least hurt should befall him, who
was the stay of them all, in whose safety consisted their safety; For as Kings
are called The Anointed of the Lord, so the breath of our nostrils: Lam. 4.20.
Breath is necessary to our being and life, so is a King to our well-being and
preservation of that life. It must be acknowledged, that the Original of all
our happiness is from heaven, yet it must be confessed withal, that the golden
pipes through which blessings are conveyed to a Nation or a people, is the
supreme Magistrates Government, our peace is from his Wisdom, our Plenty from
our Peace, our Prosperity from our Plenty; Our Safety, our very lives are by
Gods providence wrapped up in his welfare; whose precious life, (as the Orator
speaks) is Vita quaedam publica: Why should there be any murmuring or
complaining in our streets for those necessary Taxes, to support his
Government, which supports us all, therefore are Kings called the foundation of
the earth, (...) quasi (...), psalm. 82.5
a phrase borrowed from a building, whereunto the Kingdom is compared; for the
body Politic is like the body natural, the foundation of it stands upermost.
The Prince seems to rest upon the people as the head on the body; but indeed
the people do rest upon him, and if it were not for the influence of the
Sovereign heads Government, the members of the body politic could not sustain
themselves: To conclude this point, The benefit and use of Monarchy and
Magistracy, is hyerogliphycally and excellently set forth by the Tree that
Nebuchadnezz^r saw in his Vision, Dan. 4.10, 12.
Under which the beasts of the field had shadow, and the fowls of the heaven
dwelt in the boughs thereof, and all flesh was fed of it; signifying unto us,
the dignity of a King, whom God ordains to be a defense to all kind of men, ^.
6. 24.
and whose state is profitable to mankind. A wise King is the upholding of the
people, and therefore a wise people will uphold the King. It is recorded in
Apocryphal, but the sense thereof often taught in canonical Scripture: The
Reason, Gratitude humana, the Duty of Gratitude persuades unto it; For what is
Loyalty? but gratitude to Princes, as Religion is gratitude to God: it concerns
us to defend them, who are the Defenders of the Faith; to save them, who are
the breath of so many thousand nostrils: This is but gratitude; we rest secure
from birds of prey, under the Eagles wings, we are kept from heats and storms
under the shadow of these trees; defended from oppressions at home, from
invasions abroad; Prove. 29.4.
The King by judgment establishes the Land: Why should not the Land establish
his Throne? O let us not be like the ungrateful, the murmuring Israelites, Quid
nobis cum Davide? What have we to do with this son of Jesse? That even when God
himself was pleased to order their civil affairs, repined and were not
contented even when they had Manna as when they wanted it; But I hope we are
Christians of a better alloy: It beseems not us of all others to be so
injurious to God, who has selected us out to be a happy people: It beseems us
not to be unthankful to our Sovereign, under whom we enjoy those blessings:
There is a civil ambition and covetousness in the members of every Kingdom, and
each man would devour his brother; Ephraim against Manasses and Manasses
against Ephraim, ^say 9.21.
and both against Judah, until the kingdom of Israel be laid waste: for in
every state there are powerful and poor, the wolf and the sheep, the Lion and
the Lamb, cunning and simple, strong and weak: That the powerful do not oppress
the poor, that the crafty do not circumvent the simple, Iu^g 17.16
that the strong does not offer violence to the weak: The reason is, There is a
King, otherwise every man would be his own judge, and do that which was right
in his own eyes. What then remains, but that our gratitude should result from
all to make our happiness complete: his safety shall be dear to us, under whom
we enjoy Safety: nay more his salvation too, under whom we enjoy the means of
salvation: let us pray then, that he may live for ever, have a long and
prosperous Reign upon earth, a blessed end and life everlasting: It was the
Motto of the Emperor, when he had one Crown on the sword, and another Crown
upon his head: Tertiam in caelis: the third he had in heaven: and the famous
Dr. Rodley the great Benefactor to the University of Oxford, gave for his Arms
three Crowns with this motto. Quarta perennis erit: the fourth shall be
Eternal. God has honored our Gracious Sovereign with three Crowns here, when
God is pleased to take off these from his Royal head, let us pray that God
would set on a fourth: (a Crown is the Emblem of eternity) a Crown of life, an
immarcessible, an immortal Crown, that he may go from one kingdom to another,
from a kingdom on earth, that has been often shaken, to a kingdom in Heaven,
that cannot be shaken, that he may be a crown of glory in the hand of the Lord,
and a royal Diadem in the hand of our God, and so Live for ever.

In a word, to conclude this point I hope we need not much persuasions to the
performance of our duty, if we either respect Gods institution or ordinance,
the honor and credit of our Religion, or the duty of gratitude for our own
safety and preservation: ^sa. 4^.23.
It was Gods promise. Kings should be nursing Fathers to the Church, and the
Poets calls them, (...) the Shepherds of the people. How should the impotent
Child live without a Nurse ^ The sheep would be a prey to Wolves and Foxes, to
Heretics and Schismatickes, were it not for the Shepherd. That we may fit
under the shadow of peace and teach our Children to know the Lord, that the
l^mps of our lives be not snuffed out with violence, that our devotion^ be not
mol^sted with schisms and faction^, that our temperal e^^at be ^ept in
liberty, and our spiritual esta^e improved with piety, let us bless the Kings
of Kings for such a King of men, and let us once more pray as Daniel did here.
O King Live for ever.

And now I have done, with this Loyal Salutation and Religious Suplication, yet
something by way of application must be added, that so this Text may be fitted
to the business in hand. Daniels course in the first place is commended to you
(right honorable) or rather you are to be commended for walking in Daniels
steps and following his Course: He was a Deputy under King Dari^s to the Jews,
so are you under Carolus secuudus our Gracious Sovereign in these parts. He in
his deputation was faithful to God and his Prince too: and let me speak it
before ^ll (and without flattery) I never heard you ta^ed by any (Nobles or
Commons) for unfaithfulne^, either to your God or to your Sovereign. I shall
first therefore drop down the oil of my Exhortation upon your Reverent and
ancient heads, and then upon the skirt of your clothing, all that have any
thing to do in the weighty affairs of this grand Assize, for thou^h all be not
Daniels, preferred to the seats of Judicature, to sit upon the Bench to judge,
yet ought they all unanimously to concur, for the production and bringing
forth of the sacred act and child of justice, that judgment may run down as a
stream, and righteousness as a mighty water. I shall give therefore a word of
Exhortation, and a word of Caution

1. A word of Exhortation, to you (right Honorable) I need not set Daniel the
Presede^t as a pattern before you, Ruth 4.11.
bu^ your selves to your selves: so do^ at this Assizes, as you have done
formerly, to do wotthily still in this our Ephratah. And to that end give me
leave to use to you those lofty and sublime expressions, which concern indeed
Christ mistically and principally (as all Interpreters agree) but King Solomon
and his Judges, and inferior Magistrates literally being composed as an
Epithalamium, at the celebration of the Nuptials, betwixt him and Pharaohs
daughter. Gird your sword upon your thigh: psalm. 45.3, 4.
ride prosperously because of truth, meeknes and righteousness and your right
hand shall teach you terrible things; for the Scepter of this kingdom is a
right Scepter. The quiet state of a kingdom stands not in worldly pomp and
vanity, but in truth meeknes and justice; but oftentime^ truth and meeknes
would be oppressed if the sword of justice, was not sometimes drawn out for
their releif, as the King therefore has girded it upon your thighs, yet let me
tell (your honors) the iniquity of the times, calls for the unsheathing of it;
when Gods laws writ at the first upon Tables of stone, are quite rased out of
the fleshly tables of Men's hearts, and the lives and conversations of men are
nothing, but one continued act of rebellion against God, and our duty to him,
contained in the first Table, against man, and our duty to him, expressed in the
second Table, it is high time for you that are keepers of both, to bestirre
your selves: Up and be doing as God told Joshua, when Israel had sinned. The
more sinners; the more speed must the Magistrate make, with his sword of
justice, to ent off immedicabilia vulnera, those gangred members of the state,
that could not or would not be cured without it; upon which sword methinkes I
read the Motto, which was engraven upon the sword of Charles the great
Utriusque tabulae c^st^s Carolus. Charles is Lord Keeper of both Table^: and it
is my duty at this time to set an edge on it, that it may be like that,
Romphae^ bis acuta, non solum ictu sed tactu penetrans, like that two edged
sword of the spirit which will pierce, not only with a stroke, but a touch, and
how can I better do it, then by showing how both tables are broken: by vain
immagination, and heretical opinions, Unlawful we may call them, the persons
frequenting them, and even when we are performing the great act of charity for
them, that God would be pleased to bring into the way of truth all such as have
erred and are deceived, discharging their vollies of bitter malice against us,
blaspheming God and their King, revileing all Rulers Civil and Ecclesiastical,
all Pastors and Teachers, as the grandest Cheaters and Imposers: Pudet haec
opprobia nobis, et dici potuisse, et non potuisse refelli: Other profane
persons there are in another extreme, converting or rather perverting, B.
Andrews
Sabbatum domini, in Sabbatum asini, vituli, aut Dialoli, spending the day
either idly, or wantonly, eating and drinking and rising up to play, or lewdly
in gaming, rioting and drunkenness, whereby as one says well, God is more
dishonored, and the devil better served, then on all the six days besides.
open These of the hand: who are always neighing after their neighbors wives,
Ier. 8 5
Humano capiti cervicem jungere equum. by those sinful Ahabs who are sick for
their Neighbors Vineyard, house or lands: so that considering all those
trangressions of the Law, we have just cause to renew the complaint, Help Lord,
for the goldly cease, the faithful fail from among the children of men: psalm
12 1
we need not wonder for some years past, great Britain has been all in black,
when those grand Scourges was upon us at one time, the destroying Angel with
his sword cutting down old and young in our great and famous Cities, the tender
mother with the Sucking infant, Rev. 6.5
and the sword of an enraged enemy threatening of us at our ports: We have seen
the pale and the red horse and their Riders; God grant (for our ingratitude and
repining at our plenty, who is now as Canaan for fruitfulness; and now sor our
murmuring at Magistracy when we are as Salem* for peace, we do not see the
black horse with his Rider, and so have our judgment completed, as sometimes
God did upon Samaria and Jerusalem, which the Prophet Jeremy most passionately
lamented: To prevent which, Lam. 4
you (right honorable) like Noah, Job and Daniel, must stand in the gap, to
divert so great wrath: for when men's affections run wilfully in a course of
sin, as the horse rusheth into the battle, Ier. 8.6.
they ought to be held to their duty by the bridle of the law, which is (...),
the Judge^ power and authority, being to settle every man in his regular course
of life, and so you become instruments of the King and Kingdoms safety: The
famous Chancellor Fortescue in that excellent Dialogue, informing us,
Imperatoriam ma^estatem non solum armis decoratam, sed and legibus oportet esse
armatam; That it concerns the Imperial Majesty, not only to be guarded with
arms, but to be armed with Laws: intimating, that Judges are the Kings guard in
times of peace, as Soldiers are in time of War; Though we must confess, all
sorts of Togati (as well as the long Robe) must and are bound in duty, to be
his guard, and of the life guard in time of Rebellion, according to that,
Tertul.
In laesae Majestatis reos omnis homo miles est: But in times of Peace Judges
are especially; If they do Justice and judgment, it shall be well with him, 2 Chronicles. 7.17, 18
and with his Kingdom too, For by them his throne is established. To all of us
it is safety, and to your selves salvation: for where Justice and Judgment is
kept, Esa. 56.1.
Gods salvation is near: And Justice as it must be executed, so it must be
speedily, against those that will not do (obstinate sinners, Ezra 7.26
not weak offenders) the Law of the Lord, thy God and the King, then Judgment
must be executed without delay: Impunity makes such men grow senseless and
shameless, connivency is a bad and cruel nurse, it nourishes up sin from a brat
to a monster, till it be as strong as Leviathan, that it breaks all hooks of
Law, all bonds and cords of Justice, and so brings nothing but a Chaos of
disorder and confusion into the Church and Kingdom; therefore it is very
dangerous to be prodigal of mercy: a little severity in time, prevents the
letting of a greater quantity of blood. And as Justice must be executed
speedily, so impartially; There must be no respect of persons in judgment:
There is but one Law pro parvo and magno: Deuteronomy. 1.17
The precept and example of him who is both our Savior and our Judge must be
followed. Judge not according to the appearance, but judge righteous judgment,
and this will be accounted unto you for righteousness, John 7 24
and to your seed after you.

But whilst I plead for justice, do not judge or censer me, as though I were
against Mercy. O Mercy, mercy! the choicest Attribute (in respect of us) in the
King of Kings, and the most resplendent virtue in his Vicegerents upon earth:
And let mercy and truth (as well as justice) always preserve our King, and all
in authority under him; prove 20* 28
for by it his Throne is upholden. The merciful Judge is of Chancellors
Fortescues opinion, who confessed, Mallem revera viginta facinorosos mortem
evadere, Forte. Dial page 62.
quam justum unum injuste condemnari: I had rather twenty guilty persons should
escape the stroke of Justice, then one innocent should fall by it. And amongst
guilty persons, it must be the Judges discretion, to discern who they are that
deserve the stroke of Justice: Dallin Aphor
The State Aphorism is to punish rather the motion of the head, then the
actions of the hand or foot; the Seducer rather then the seduced; Plus peccat
Author quam Actor. Fleta*
To spare the silly sheep is Mercy, but to spare the Wolf, (though he be in
sheeps clothing) is cruelty: Judgment and Mercy must be rightly tempered, yet
so, that Mercy do not hinder Judgment, and yet that of the two, Mercy rejoice
against Judgment. And now I have done with the word of exhortation, I proceed
to a word of Caution: Use of Caution


1. To the Lawyers, Take heed of Envy and Injury, which commonly go together:
1. Envy at your Superiors, Gods Daniels, who are preferred to places of dignity
before you, a dangerous sin. It was Envy that threw Daniel Dan. 6.4
into the den of Lions: The Presidents and Princes, out of ambition, could not
brook the preferment of such a stranger: The wicked cannot abide the graces of
God in others, and therefore maliciously slander him with great ingratitude, as
if for his Honors conferred upon him, he returned Contempt and Rebellion. It
was Envy in the sons of the Patriarch, verse 13
that made them so unnatural to their brother: When men are conceited of
themselves, Genesis 37.4.
they storm that others are preferred before them, whereas we should conder,
that God is the great Master of the Scenes, that presents the world with a new
Stage of Acts and Actors: 1 Samuel 2.7, 8
The Lord makes poor, and makes rich, he brings low, and lifts up: He is
no Leveller, he will have some upon the Throne and Seats of Judgment, and we
must submit to his overruling Providence: The Planets and Stars in the
heavens, the bruit beast on the earth, and Fishes in the sea, continue all in
the same estate wherein they were first created, not complaining against, or
envying one the other: Why should man in honor have no understanding, psalm
49.20
and be not only like, but worse then the bruits that perish.

2. Take heed of Injury: for my self, Nemo vestrum mihi injuria cognitus, I
know no hurt by any of your Profession: I know many worthy persons that are
grave, honest, learned and religious men, and I hope and pray, that the rest of
that noble profession may be so: The way to preserve the decency and gravity of
the Law, is to do nothing of partiality, to proceed not according to opinion or
appearance, Exodus 23.2, 3
but according to Right and Justice; in Charity to have respect unto a poor
man's necessity, but in point of Justice and Equity, to regard neither the Power
and Authority of the rich, nor the misery or Penury of the Poor, but his Right
only. A good Lawyer must have an heart without affection, an eye without lust,
and a mind without passion, otherwise wrong and wrested Judgment may proceed
to the Prejudice of the most righteous Cause: And if wrong Judgment do proceed
through your means, you have cause to fear the Lions. But what Lions?

1. The Kings Throne, like Solomon's, is supported with Lions, men of courage,
who will not be afraid to punish wrong doers; and the Kings wrath is as the
roaring of a Lion, prove 19 12
a Messenger of death. But i^ you escape these, there are others you cannot:
The Lion of the Tribe of Judah, who though at his first coming was a Lamb, at
his second will be a Lion, a just Judge, who at the general and great Assizes,
will sit upon his Throne of Judicature, where the Charge shall ^e read, psalm 50
21
and sin set in order before you; and if you be there found guilty, and have
the sentence passed on you, I^e maledicti, delivered up to the Executioner,
Carnifex irae divinae, that roaring lion, that goes about here daily seeking
whom he may devour, but there shall actually devour, but not absolutely destroy
to all eternity. If there by any that forget God, or his Justice, let them
consider this, Lest he tear them in pieces, when there is none to deliver them.

2. To the Jurors: Take heed of ^imerity or partiality: The lives and goods of
men are referred to your discretion and honesty. Darius was much to blame, for
rashly condescending to Daniels Destruction: David was to hasty to give
Mephilosheths goods upon his servant Ziba's forged and false accusations; you
bind your selves to God by an oath, 2 Samuel 16.4
and therefore you must deal as in his sight; you have a Rule to walk by, Mutum
Magistratum, the Laws of the Land: you have the Interpreters of these Laws,
Leges loquentes, the honorable Judges and learned Counselors, to direct you
in this way; you cannot plead ignorantiam juris, the ignorance of the Law for
an excuse; and if you remember your oath, and set the fear of God before your
eyes, it will make you bold as a Lion to do justly. I have read in Cokes
Institutes, Lib. 3.
That none should be returned as Jurors, but honest and good men, of good
degree and quality, substantial persons for Estates and Ability, such as need
not be afraid to speak their conscience and do justice, nor yet to stand in
need to be bribed, to wrong their conscience and pervert Justice: which crooked
paths that you may decline, weigh all things with judgment and deliberation in
statera legis, and trutina conscientiae, linguae calamum in cord tingentes, in
the balance of the Law, Scales of the Sanctuary, and the Court of your own
conscience: Let not the pen of your tongue utter any thing, before it has been
dipped in the ink of your heart. The punishment of Perjury in Jurors for a false
V^rdict, (if it be inflicted) is severe by the common Law, but the punishment
due to it by Gods Law, is far greater, Pejurii poena humana dedecus, divina
exitium; with man it is usually disgrace, but with God destruction and
everlasting confusion of face, such an expectation must be, as the Apostle
says, (...), a fearful expectation of Judgment: Heb. 10.27 21
I beseech you therefore in the fear of God, to consider, that sincerity is the
Attribute of the oath of God; Remember his eye ((...)) is upon you; an Act of
Justice is a service acceptable unto him; Do your parts, God will not be
wanting in his: when the great Assizes of the world shall be kept, That which
you have done in secret for him, Mar. 6.6.
shall be rewarded openly.

3. To Accusers and Witnesses, to join you both together, Take heed of Perjury,
Remember Daniels false accusers escaped not the punishment: The Lions mouths
that God shut for the preservation of his innocent servant, he opened for the
destruction of his malicious enemies: Dan. 6 24.
Here was Lex talionis on Gods part: Thus did their mischief return upon their
own pate, they sunk down in the pit that they had made: The Lord is known by
the judgment which he executes, psalm 7 15 and 9.15, 16
when the wicked is snared in the work of their own hands. Thus are all Gods
Creatures his host to do his Will for reward or punishment: Innocence finds
protection with savage Lions, when the guilty find their ruin and destruction.
I might give you many examples of this nature, I shall but mention one.

Narcissus that famous Bishop of Jerusalem, Eusebius. Eccl histor.
who was an austere man, and of upright life and conversation, was falsely
accused by three debauched persons (that feared to suffer justly for their
misdemeanors by his authority) to be guilty of some great crime notorious and
capital; and to persuade the people (who had a great respect for the good
Bishop) the sooner to believe it, they endeavored to confirm their forged
accusation with oaths and strange imprecations upon themselves. The first, If I
lie, let me burn to Ashes. The second, If I report not the truth, let me be
tormented and pine away with some lingering disease. The third, If I bear false
witness, let me be smitten with blindness. The good man was sore troubled at
this aspersion unjustly cast upon him, that he retired himself, and lived
obscurely for many years. But observe how God cleared the innocence of his
faithful servant, and caught those Conspirators, bringing the same curses upon
them that they had imprecated upon themselves: A small spark fell in the night
upon the house of the first, which broke out into such a fearful flame and
fire, as consumed himself, house and family to ashes. A most filthy disease
ceased upon the body of the second, which miserably tormented him, and put a
period to his miserable and wrethed life: The third seeing the terrible end of
the two former his lewd companions, and being convinced of the sin, freely
confessed unto all their compacted combination and conspiracy against that holy
man, and did so afflict himself with penetential sorrow, and shed such rivers
of tears, that he lost his sight, and so in mercy escaped eternal, though not
temperal judgment; was judged Chastned here of the Lord, that he might not be
condemned with the world, exemple tristia sed salubria: sad examples, yet very
useful and instructive. ^ Cor 11.32.
These may astonish all false accusers, and witnesses, perjured persons, These
may* strike with terror the profanest sinner, suborners, Knights of the post,
(as they call them) and like the body of Amasa wallowing in his blood, make
them stand still at these gashly sights in the midway, and stop them in their
course of sin; you know the false witness by Gods law, is to be punished lege
talionis. Deuteronomy. 19.16
Thou shall do to him as he thought to have done to his brother. By man's Law,
before the conquest, it was punished sometimes by death, sometimes by
banishment, and sometimes by corporal punishment. Cokes: Justic: lib. 3: c: 74:
Afterward it came to fine and ransom, and never after to bear t^stimony.
Atrox injuria est quae omnium nobilium amissionem confert. An heinous offense
certainly that was punished with the loss of all movables. Fleta. lib. 2: cap:
1:
It is good to remember man's, but much more Gods judgment; for as the Apostle
speaks, Knowing these terrors of the Lord, we seek to persuade men. 2. Cor:
5.11


4. And lastly, To all in general: As we tender the safety of our King, and the
prosperity of the kingdom, Let us all take heed of Iniquity, especially of
those crying sins which of late years have reigned in this land, damned Atheism
prodigious intemperance, notorious uncleanness, Luciferian pride, bloody oaths,
and treacherous combination and conspiracy, not only against the supreme
Magistrate, but the subordinate, such as Daniel, for which God has had a
controversy with this land, and has already smitten us: The sins of the body
of the people has an influence of the Sovereign head: For the transgressions
of the Land many are the Princes thereof. Good King Josiah died in peace with
God, pro: 28.^.
tho slain by the sword of an enemy in the bloody field of Vegiddo, and then
was lamentation made for his fall, by virtue of an ordinance in Israel. 2 Chro
35.25.
And sure I am, we have great cause annually to renew our sad lamentation for
the untimely fall of our good Josiah, not only our Prophets and our Priests,
but our singing men and singing women, (those who are most addicted to mirth
and music) With a Woe unto us that we have sinned. Lam: 5.16.
But it concerns us now to bless God for his mercy restored unto us, that
Wisdom and the true Religion, (yea Justice and Judgment) does now again cry in
the chief places of concourse, Pro: 1.21:
in the opening of the gates, that in the City she utters her words, Let us
bless him likewise for his government who upholds it, and to our Hallelujah's,
to matter of gratulation and rejoicing, let us all join Hosanna's, matter of
supplication^ and prayer for our dear and dread Sovereign, as here Daniel did
for the great Darius: so shall we end as we begun shall we pray as the Syrick
Poet? for his Macenas the great Augustus. S^^us in coelum redeas Carole, diuque
laetus intarsis populo Britannico. Give him a long life here O Lord, to reign
over his British Subjects, before thou give him everlasting life, to reign
hereafter with thy glorious Saints. Or shall we offer our united devotions, as
Tertullian in his apology informs us, the Primitive Christians did for the
Roman Emperors: that God would give him: Regnum tutum, vitam prolixam, Senatum
fidelem, exercitum fortem, populum probum and orbem quietum* a safe Empire, a
long Life, a fai^hful Council, valiant Armies, an obedient People and a quiet
world: nay more; Give me leave to turn an ancient prophecy into a Prayer. The
Prophecy was. The Scepter should not depart from Judah, until Shiloh came, and
the Prayer is: Lord (if it be thy blessed will) let not the Scepter of these
Kingdoms depart from our gracious Sovereign and his Line, till Shiloh come
again: And now Lord establish his throne by righteousness here, Exalt his Crown
with honor, his Scepter with power, preserve his person that he may live in
safety here, and crown him with thy salvation hereafter, that so he may live
for ever. And Let all the people say: Amen, Amen.

FINIS.
The POSTSCRIPT.
Pro captu Lectoris habent suafata libelli.

I had no sooner (in vita Minerva) appeared in the Pulpit, and the Sermon after
that desired to be published, but some of my good friends informed me of some
learned Censors, who presently judged me Oriontalium linguarum rudem: To whom I
reply, with the great Doctor of the Gentiles, We know but in part, 1 Cor: 12.9.
etc. and in the Church had rather speak five words, with my understanding,
that by my voice I may teach others also, than ten thousand words also in an
unknown tongue: 1 Cor 14.19.
Give me leave therefore to propound three Quaeries to the Supercilious
Aristarchus, the conceited Gnostick, and backbiting Zoilus.

1. Whether, this Salvation, O King live for ever, and that, God save the King,
be not Synonima's?

2. Whether our English Translation be not authentic, and according to the
Septuagint^, and the learned Doctor Wallons (our la^^ Lord Bishop of Chester)
(...) The Syriack, Chaldea, and Hebrew tongues bea^ing the same sense with it.
O King ^^ve for ever.

3. Whether Daniel wrote the book part of it in the Syriack, another part that
^^^cean'd the ^ffair^ that fell under the Chaldean Monarchy in the Chaldee
tongue, and the third part, which concerned the Jews in his own ^^tive tongue,
the Hebrew?

Dic mihi q^^ ling^^, si^ ori^
mihi magnus Apollo.

