THE UNKNOWN BEING OF THE Spirit, Soul, and Body; ANATOMIZED.

WHEREIN Very many Scriptures falsely Translated, and corruptly Interpreted, are
clearly Explained.

By which, many Doctrines now taught that subvert the Faith of the Gospel, are
discovered.

Written by him that is unworthy to be a Witness of Divine Truth, JOHN BRAIN.

LONDON Printed for Richard Moon at the Seven Stars in Paul's Churchyard, near
the great North-door. 1654.

TO My very Noble Friend Colonel John Pine.
Noble Sir,
YOur being avocated from bearing the Burden of the People, which for so many
years in the Two late Parliaments, and Parliamentary Trust, first and last lay
on you, invited me to commend this ensuing Treatise to you; As serving much to
make a Man wise in leading him to the Knowledge of Himself; Not after the way
of the Schools, but of God, in which the use of Christ is rightly known, and
Salvation clearly seen according to the Grace of God, and Jesus Christ, in the
Gospel; To which high Mystery I commend you, to direct your choicest Thoughts,
and remain

Yours, to serve and honor you in the Work of the LORD. JOHN BRAIN.
January the 18th. 1653.
A DISCOVERY OF THE Unknown Being of the Spirit and Soul of Man.
BEcause I find that the darkness occasioned by the not right understanding of
Man in his true nature of Being is very great, the Scriptures strangely veiled,
the Doctrine taught wonderfully corrupted, and the right use of Christ detained
from the spirits of men; I thought my self bound to publish this ensuing
Treatise, the ground whereof I lay down in the words of the Apostle, 1 Thessalonians.
5.23. The very God of peace sanctify you wholly; and I pray God your whole
spirit, and soul, and body be preserved, etc. In the Original, (...), this is
indeed (...), if ye take away and divide any part of these, it is only (...).
Of which, says Ireneus, Lib. 5. cap. 1. Neque enim plasmatio carnis ipsa
secundum se homo perfectus est, sed corpus hominis and pars hominis; neque
anima ipsa secundum se homo, sed anima hominis and pars hominis; neque spiritus
homo, spiritus enim and non homo vocatur; commixtio autem and unitio horum
omnium perfectum hominem efficit; and propter hoc Apostolus seipsum exponens,
explanavit perfectam and spiritualem salutem hominis in I ad These. cap. 5.
verse. 23, etc. Vide August. lib. quest. cap. 67.

These three before, the Spirit, Soul and Body, are three distinct essential
parts of Man, which I shall speak in order particularly unto. But before I do
that, it is necessary I should show you how the life and the breath in Man are
distinguished by God in the Scripture, which will show us, that men need not
(that have the Word of God) to go to Aristotle, Plato, etc. to learn
Philosophy; they were in the dark, and knew it not; a thing in time God will
purge out of this Nation, it being forbid in the Word by God expressly, Levit.
18.3. Ye shall not do after the doings of Egypt and Canaan, nor walk in their
Ordinances: Levit. 20.23. Ye shall not walk in the manners of the Nations I
cast out Hence the houses of learning set up among the Jews were houses of the
Prophets, that is, such houses in which the Prophets were first taught to be
read and written, and then understood; and other learning then this God allowed
not, nor does allow his own people; and other houses then these are not houses
of the Prophets, whose Students by an Hebraism are called children of the
Prophets, 2 King 4.38. as those study the Heathens are the sons of Aristotle:
Matt. 11.15.

1. We need know no more then is in the Word, that is only necessary.

2. In the Word things are more excellently laid down, then in all the writings
of the world.

3. That is full of Truth; Aristotle, Ovid, etc. full of Corruption, and Error,
and Atheism; fit to make Atheists (as all by Nature are) more Atheistical,
corrupting them in their minds at the first receiving of instruction against
Solom.

4. The Word is light, Philosophy of the Heathens darkness.

1. The Soul and the Life are distinguished,

Psalm. 33.19. To deliver their Soul from death, and keep them alive in famine:
Vatablus Hebraismus est pro servet eos in vita. Thus Psa. 49.18. He blessed his
Soul in his life: in which are (...)

2. Job. 33.18. He keeps back (...) his soul from the pit, and (...) his life
from perishing by the sword. Verse. 20. His life abhors bread, and his soul
des^rable meat. Verse. 22. His soul draws near to the grave, and his life to
the destroyers. The Seventy render them by (...). Verse. 28. He will deliver his
soul from going into the pit, and his life shall see the light. Vide Verse. 30.

The spirit of man from the Spirit of God, 1 Cor. 2.11.

The Life and the Breath are distinguished,

Acts 17.25. God that gives (...), to all life, and breath, and all things.
Romans 8.2. Rev. 11.11.

1. Note here, As the Soul and Life are distinguished in words and Being by the
Prophets, so Life and Breath by the Apostle.

2. Life by James is set forth as a far inferior thing to the Soul: James 4.13,
14. speaks against men's presumptuous dependence on the Being of their life:
(...); What is your life? for it is but a vapor for a little time appearing,
and after that it vanishes: This cannot be said of the Soul, nor of the
breath. Act. 8.33.

3. Here in this ye have such a definition of life, as all the Platonists and
Aristotelists on Earth cannot exceed, nor on like grounds attain unto, but in
comparison of this theirs is vain Philosophy.

This being undeniable truth,

1. There is matter arises hence of exceeding great note and concernment to
all men, which is the gross corrupting of the Word of God in the false
translating of it; the Translators putting down in a hundred places near, life
for soul, rendering (...), life, and sometimes (...), soul, which ought not to
be; the word and sense is destroyed by it, and false Doctrine taught to the
people: wherefore in especial there is an extreme necessity for another
Translation to be published, and this called in: The Old Testament in this
particular is better translated then the New, though some such is in the Old,
as that the mind of God is no way expressed, but clear contrary things, as one
especial place I have expounded, and fitted for the Press to publish, but had
not where with to do it, which is of high concernment to the people of God, and
for the Opening of the Prophecies.

2. The Breath is as a ligament by which Soul, Spirit and Body are kept
together, and is one both that the Beast and Man enjoys.

These places, and many more in our Translations, for (...). soul, have life
put in them, against the Syriac, and the Arabic, which retain the Hebrew root
(...) in their Translations. Matthew. 6.25. Luke 12.23. Mat. 10.39. and 16.25.
Mark 8.35. Luke 9.24. and 17.33. Joh. 12.25. Luke 9.56. and 14.26. Joh.
10.11.15.17. and 13.38, 39. and 15.13. Acts 15.26. and 20.24. and 27.10, 22.
Romans 16.4. Joh. 1. Ephesians. 3.16. Revel. 12.11.

Note, If the soul and life are two distinct things in Man, then to write life
where God writes soul, is a presumptuous destruction of the Truth of God: and
the natural life in Christ is the same with that in us, he being in all things
like us, sin only excepted.

That the spirit, soul and body are three distinct parts of Man, I commend
these Scriptures to you.

Note how God speaks to us of himself, Genesis 6.5. My Spirit, and my Soul. Mat.
12.18. My Soul. Mat. 10. As having a Body. 1 Thessalonians. 5.23. as before, (...) Luke
1.46, 47. Mary said (there is the body) (...), My soul does magnify the Lord,
and (...), my spirit has rejoiced in God my Savior. Job 12.10. For in his
hand is (...) the soul of every one (...) living, and (...) the spirit of every
fleshman (or all mankind,) which is the Adam soma.

In respect the Scripture says, that every truth is confirmed und r two or
three witnesses, and here Paul, Mary, Job are produced, which is the number
required, I shall proceed to particulars; and first of the Spirit.

Joh. 11.33. Christ's Spirit is troubled, which was his humane spirit: And Cap.
13.21. of his Soul: Joh. 10.15. and 12.27. (...)

The Spirit is not by propagation conveyed from man to man: Job 26. verse. 4.
Whose spirit came from thee.

The first thing necessary to be considered is the Being and Beginning of the
Spirit, Genes. 2.7. (...) Plasmavit, the word respects the forming of a thing
out of a gross body, as a Potter of the clay his vessel, so God formed (...)
the Adam of the dust of the Earth, when he breathed in his face spiraculum
vitarum, the breath of lives (not of life, as the corrupt Translations read,
but lives in the plural, viz. that of the soul, of the spirit,) and the Adam,
the Earth, became (...) which I thus expound, And the Earth IS to the Soul
(vivens) living, where the Soul and the life are distinguished, Isai. 38.19.
Genesis 7.21, 22. Numb. 31.40.

2. Whereas it is said, the Lord breathed into Adam (...) which is lives in the
plural, not life, as it is corruptly translated, and admirably cleared, Isai.
57.16. the spirit and spiration, showing,

1. That God placed in man differing lives.

2. That the spirit has its life, the soul its, and the body its, by this
Breath.

3. All were far differently from the beasts by God communicated to man in his
Creation, as I shall show hereafter, Job 35.

Of this Life of the Spirit.

1. As God of the same (...) tohu and bohu, chaos and confusion, made Heaven
and Earth, Man and Angels, Beasts and Fishes; so of the same spiration or
emission he made life in the soul, the spirit, the body.

2. As he divided between the waters above the Firmament, and the waters
beneath; so he divided the soul life from that of the spirit, Man, the (...),
having in himself, as the perfection of the Creation, that which corresponds to
all these.

3. A darkness that lies hereby on the spirits of men is removed, because
whereas God said, Genesis 2.17. Adam should dye in the day he eat of the tree of
knowledge of good and evil; some expound ing the day by a thousand years, others
other-ways; but I forbear, and commend to you this, That God, in that day he
spoke to man, alluded to the natural day of man, not God; this sentence was
made good on him, not by taking away his soul-life, but his spirit-life, which
was then dead in him, as appears, in that his access to, and familiarity with,
and innocence before God, was lost, together with all farther actings of the
spirit within him.

4. Hence, as Tim. 1.5.6. of the wanton widow, she is dead whiles she lives,
which shows, that she was some way or where dead, that is, in spirit, and in
some thing or part alive, which was in body and soul.

5. That the spirit was dead, appears 1 Cor. 15.44. for Christ was made a
quickening spirit to Adams generation, who by his fall became only a living
soul, the spirit being dead in him; Ephesians. 5.14. this spoke to men alive in the
flesh, but dead in the spirit.

6. This quickening of the spirit is the great work of Christ on man in the
days of the Gospel, to raise the spirit from its death, which is called the
first Resurrection, Rev. 20.6.

7. Those that confound soul and spirit, do destroy the faith, and put men
either to expect that now is to be done hereafter, or that hereafter is to be
done now; indeed now is to be the resurrection of the spirit by the Word and
Spirit of Christ, or that at last will be nothing available; many Souls by this
delusion have been undone.

8. This death first entered into the world by Adams sin, (so the restoration of
this life is first,) and is called filthiness, 2 Cor. 7.1.

9. This resurrection is by believing in Jesus Christ, John 11.25, 26.

10. As the soul is to the body, so the spirit is to the soul; the soul is in
the blood as its seat, and the spirit in the mind as its seat, being the
sublimest part of the soul, informing and leading the soul and body.

To make a definition of the Spirit no man ever could since the fall that was
mere man: Solomon, whose Philosophy exceeds all else that men call so, Eccles.
3.21. Who knows the spirit of man that ascends to supernals? (...),
according to that (...), that above and above of the Apostle.

1. Showing that the spirit of man was of an unknown excellency; if any had
known it of men, Solomon had: Adams death of spirit, was, that he lost the
knowledge of God, himself, and sense of his Soul-misery.

2. In the Restoration thereof we have some discovery made of the exercise
thereof, Gal. 5.22, 23. among which, Faith, that excellent grace is said to be
one, which, since the death of the spirit, is the gift of God, and a part of
the spirits resurrection and life.

3. The spirit is that which is immortally with God, as in Eccles. 12.7. The
spirit returns to God that gave it; and who dares say more returned, either
that the Soul or life does, and not be guilty of adding to the Word?

4. It was the Spirit Christ breathed out, and no more, and the Spirit he was
so careful of to commit to the hands of God, and nothing else, Mat. 27.50. Mark
15.37. Luke 23.46. all which Scriptures show that nothing went forth of Christ
at his death but his Spirit, and as not out of him, so not out of us, Psalm.
76.13. and 78.39. and 104.29. Judge. 15.19. And thus Stephen, Acts 7.59 Lord
Jesus receive my spirit; had his Soul then left his body, he would have been as
careful of the one as the other: See 2 Cor. 5.6. the spirit is with the Lord,
the body dead.

5. As the spirits of just men are immediate with God, so unbeleevers return to
God also, and receive the sentence of condemnation, and commitment to prison: 1
Pet. 3.18, 19, 20. But quickened in the spirit, by which he (Christ) went and
preached to the spirit in prison, that sometime were disobedient, in the days
of Noah. 1. The spirits, not Souls not bodies, are in prison, yea see Genesis 6.3.
2. They are the spirits of those bodies were disobedient in the days of Noah at
his preaching; so that what men falsely attribute to the Soul, is in truth by
God in Scripture only said of the spirit.

6. The spirit is to be raised by the Spirit of Christ, not the Soul nor body;
John 6.63. The flesh profits nothing, it is the spirit quickneth: So that the
delusion of the times takes off men from the true and immediate use of Christ
and the Scriptures.

7. The spirit thus raised is that which God mainly respects in his service;
Joh. 4.23. Those that worship God, shall worship him in spirit and in truth: 1
Cor 14.15. If I sing, I will sing with the spirit, etc. Phil. 3.3.

8. The spirit seems to be of an unknown excellency by what Paul says, 1 Cor.
5.3. Col. 2.5. Though absent in body, yet present in spirit: How the spirit may
be present in the absence of the body, and how the Apostle intends it, is a
mystery.

9. The seat of the spirit is the mind, which is the sublimer part of the Soul,
as the Soul in the blood the most excellent part of the body, (1.) That so it
may have the more command and readier influence on the whole man, (2.) That
being the next or nearest to its self in being and in likeness, To. 12.2.

10. The converse of God is with the spirit, as the spirit with the Soul, the
flesh and spirit are contrary; the flesh in those are sanctified wars against
the Soul, 1 Pet. 2.11. 2 Timothy 4.22. Phil. 25.

11. Whereas men are the fathers of the flesh and soul, God is the Father of
spirits, Heb. 12.9. Eccles. 12.7.

12. Every man has a particular spirit; Christ as man calls his, my spirit;
Stephen his, my spirit; Mary hers, her spirit, both male and female, Genesis
45.27. Jacob his spirit, 2 Cor. 3.17. and 2.13.

13. In this part of man it is the Apostle alludes unto, when he says, that in
Adam all dye, 1 Cor. 15.22. The actual sins we after commit are not of Adam,
though death of soul and body are annexed to it, Romans

Death reigned over those had not sinned after Adams transgression: Vide Acts
5.5, 10. 1 Chronicles. 5.26. Dan. 5.20.

14. That every man, even wicked men, have each a distinct spirit, Deuteronomy. 2.30.
see how the King of the Amorites is said to have his spirit hardened, and heart
obstinate.

If any shall be so blind as to deny this truth, see Job 32.7, 8. I said, days
should speak, and multitude of years should speak wisdom: But there is a spirit
in man, and the inspiration of the Almighty gives them understanding. 1 Cor.
6.17.

1. It is not in days or years, or other acquired habits, that inables men to
speak profitably, effectually, feelingly, but the spirit in man makes a man
more wise then his Teachers.

2. The Almighty, when the spirit is quickened, gives it understanding, which
the Soul should never have, or can have, from God; for the Soulman
understands not the things of God, nor can he; but the spirit is taught of
God the things eye has not seen, nor ear heard, nor has it entered into the
heart of man to consider. Acts 6.9, 10.

3. Hence the regenerate man is called (...), 1 Cor. 2.15. of which Origin on
Romans 1.4. Puto quod consuetudine sua Apostolus utatur etiam in hoc loco, sciens
mediam semper esse animam inter spiritum and carnem and aut jungere se carni
and effici unum cum carne, aut sociare se spiritui and esse unum cum spiritu,
ex qu^ si quidem cum carne sit carnales homines fiant, si vero cum spiritu
spiritales and idcirco extrinsecus eam non nominat sed carnem tantum vel
spiritum scit enim alteri horum necessario animam cohoerere sicut in his ad
quos dicit vos autem in carne non estis sed in spiritu. Per Archon. Lib. 2. de
anima, Orig. 32 Homil. John understands what is written of the flesh and spirit
in Gal. 5. from verse. 17, 23. is meant of our flesh and our spirit, and not of
the Spirit of God.

4. Solomon gives the most clear description of the spirit, Prove. 20.27. (...),
The candle or light of the Lord is the spirit of man, or the inspiration of
man; he alludes to what was done in the Creation. 1. Signifying, when man fell,
this candle was put out. 2. When men are regenerated, the Lord lights it, Mat.
5.15. 3. The Conscience is the remain of that light in man, of which Job says,
Job 18.6. The light shall be dark in his tabernacle, that is, his Conscience
within him shall be extinguished, Job 21.17. sinning against the light of
Conscience, they put out the candle light: Job 29.3. When his candle the spirit
shined on me, my head, by his light I shall pass the darkness: 1 These. 5.19.
Quench not the Spirit.

5. This breathing of God into the face of man is a metaphorical expression,
used of God for condescension to man, and commends to us some immediate way God
had to communicate himself to man, more then to the other of the terrestrial
Creatures, by which he was said to be after the image and likeness of God.

Object. Ephesians. 2.18. There is one Spirit; so that men have not each a
particular spirit in them; and Ephesians. 4.4.

1 Resp. This is not spoke of the spirit of man, but God.

2, Nor as man a Creature, but a Christian; all Believers had this Spirit, but
no Unbeleevers.

3. This is not the spirit of man, but that Spirit is the Spirit to the spirit
of man, and gives it life again as at first.

4. Of this it is said, If any have not the Spirit of Christ, he is none of his.

Object. Eccles. 3.19. Man and beasts are said to have one (...), that is, one
spirit.

1. (...) here, is taken for wind, or breath, not spirit; he in the same place
speaks of the death of them both, in which they are one, though not in the
Resurrection.

2. Verse. 21. he comes again with the same word, and then distinguishes the
beasts spirit from man's, the one goes up to higher beatitude and enjoyments,
the other descends to its first matter and being at its end.

3. The now ignorance of the Soul and spirit among men, sufficiently shows what
a vail of darkness is on the faces of the wise and prudent of the times, who
cry down New Lights, because in love with the old darkness: The Philosophers
saying is useful, Nosce tei psum.

Acts 17.28. We are his offspring. The Poet in this alludes to Gods breathing
into man the breath of life, in which he came to spring off or from God, he
having in him a likeness of God through the immortality of spirit, and its
spirituality of nature with the other endowments of his Soul.

The Soul and Spirit are so distinct,

1. That now the Soul feels not the death of the spirit.

2. Nor when the Soul and body dye, does the spirit feel any thing therein of
pain, but the Soul only.

Object. God at once breathed in Soul and spirit, therefore they are one.

1. They are not one as in their names.

2. There are said to be lives begun in man at that one breathing, which must
distinguish them in the effence and being of them, and one must hereby be
better or greater, more like God, and have more of God, then another.

Ephesians. 4.23. Be ye renewed in the spirit of your mind.

1 In this ye have the seat of the spirit, which is the supreme part of the
Soul, Job 20.3. Datur homini ut maneat, and quasi caput ejus sit. Ambrose, 1
These. 5.23.

2 Its effects or acts there, are to spiritualize the mind, Romans 8.6.

3 The survay of man is of the spirit, 1 Cor. 2.11. which now only does remain
in that obliterated fragment of the Conscience in man.

4 The spirit under the Gospel-state in time of grace is to be renewed, this is
the now work of God and Christ, Titus 3.5. in which he is born again.

5 The mind without the spirit to God, is as the body without the soul to man
1 Pet. 1.22. the Spirit by the Word comes to purify the soul.

6 The carriage of man is from his spirit, as high spirited, meek, hasty, Elias
spirit, Luke 9.55. Ye know not of what spirit ye are of. O but we know not we
have any.

Jude 19. (...) soul men, not having a spirit.

1 The spirit being dead, as Genesis 42.13. they are said not to be.

2 They wanting the light of the spirit, did corruptly corrupt the truth and
way of God, and did their own wills instead of Gods: setting up Churches,
administering the Ordinances of God according to their sense, not the Spirit of
God.

Object. If any say these distinctions are made by me only, I commend to him,
Heb. 4.12. The Word of God is quick, etc. divides a sunder the Soul and the
Spirit.

1 Ye see here is a Soul and Spirit.

2 The Word of God divides a sunder these, and not confounds them.

3 The Word shows what the Spirit is, and what the Soul is, and what Christ
has done for either; and will do in them, and shall be done to them.

4 No man has the use, knowledge, or the understanding of the word of God,
until he sees how these are divided, and thereby divide the word aright to
them.

5 Those that speak against the dividing of them, seek to take away the edge of
the Word, the life and power of it, and so to make it useless to men.

1 Cor. 15.44. It is sown (that is by birth) a soul body, it is raised (in the
first resurrection) a spiritual body; there is a soul body (the natural man)
and a spiritual (the regenerate) Ver 46. But the spiritual body is not first,
but the soul body (the natural man) and after the spiritual body (that is
after regeneration.)

Ver. 47. clears this truth, The first man Adam was of the earth, the second
from heaven, vide ver. 48, 49.

Vide 1 Cor. 2.15. The spiritual man judges all things, the natural (...)
the soul man, understands not the things of God.

The divine nature of man's spirit appears to be far above the soul, in that
it has not respect to creature delights as the soul has, Eccles. 2.11.
Solomon of all found nothing but vanity and vexation of spirit; so that the
spirit is vexed with the delusions and deceipts, it seduces and wars against
the poor soul, with 1 Pet. 2, 11.

Gal. 5.17. The flesh lusts against the spirit.

1 The flesh lusts for temporal food, and neglects spiritual; the spirit
lusts for spiritual, and neglects temporal, to keep under his body.

2 The flesh and spirit are contrary, but not flesh and soul in the natural,
nor soul and spirit, in the regenerate man.

Eccles. 8.8. No man has power over the Spirit to retain the Spirit, nor has
he power in the day of death.

The words are thus to be read, no Adam (flesh) has power over the spirit for
the restraining of it nor has it power in the day of death.

1 The Spirit is not under man's, but Gods authority.

2 Nor has man in the day of death any thing to do with the spirit, no not to
Judgment: who art thou that judge another?

3 So that what ignorantly is applied to the foul, that the Scriptures in the
name of God applies to the spirit.

4 This was excellently fulfilled in Paul, vide Gal. 1.16. of the soul it is
said otherwise, Romans 13.1.

1 Pet. 4.6. For this cause was the Gospel preached to them that are dead: that
they might be judged according to men in the flesh, but live according to God
in the spirit.

1 The Gospel, that is the Grace of Christ, is only to be preached to those
who are dead, that is, spiritually dead to the world and themselves.

2 Speaking graciously to them, and of them in compassion to their infirmities
as it is said of God, he remembered that they were but flesh, so God in the
Gospel speaks to man as in flesh, in weakness and infirmities of body.

3 Yet that they should live according to God in the spirit.

4 The Gospel is to be preached to none but these.

5 Nor to no other end, but as before.

The death of the spirit in Man

1 Is in this excellently manifested, that man knows it not, Eccles. 3.21. who
does know the spirit of man?

2 That he is so insensible of it, that he knows not that he has a spirit in
him, but takes soul for spirit, and spirit for soul, nor can he distinguish
any operation of the spirit, distinct from the soul.

3 If he do, it is to place it in some inferior region in the body below the
soul, as the animal, vital, natural; how far these are below the spirit,
and how far contrary to that God in his philosophy speaks, every man may judge.

4 Nor does man miss the lack of its use and knowledge, so that his spirit
indeed is not to him being (...) only.

Theoph. on 1 These. 5.23. By the spirit of man understands the Spirit of God
in man. Says he, Spiritus, id est, donum quod per baptismum jam accepistis.
Augustine on the words, Quid hic spiritum vocat, donum spiritus. Ambrose says
thus, Ut integer sit spiritus datus nobis: and after, ad hoc enim datur homini
ut maneat, and sit quasi caput ejus: In this whether he speaks of it as of the
Spirit of God or man, judge ye; But I take it as of man, if not, see into what
a darkness the world was fallen in, in four hundred years time after Christ,
when men had lost the light of the word, that discovered to them the being of
the Spirit in them, and with it the right use of Christ in the time of grace,
and what his work was, and whereon to be.

1 That the Spirit here is clear, a part of us, a part of the lot of mankind.

2 That this spirit is to be sanctified as well as the body or soul, and needs
sanctification by the Spirit of God.

3. Eccles. 3.21. and in many other places; Stephen said, my spirit, not thy
Spirit, Lord receive: and so Mary; who knows now indeed the spirit of man,
when men know not that they have a spirit of their own within them? Ezekiel. 13.3.

No wonder Austin and others run to philosophy (having lost the knowledge of
the Spirit which was immortal) to prove the soul immortal against the
Scripture: upon which philosophical hinges the Divinity of the now times are
hanged, in which untruths, error, and deceipts are told the people, to the
overthrow of hope, and shaking of faith in men, and destruction of the Truth:
and in this follow not the Lords Spirit but their own, Ezekiel. 13.3.

Psalm. 103.16. (...) For the wind passes over it, and it is gone, which is a
gross corrupting of the word by the mistranslating of it.

In Ver. 15, The Prophet speaks of (...) the sorrowful man, saying, for the
Spirit was in him is departed, and he is not to us, his place shall know it no
more, which is said of the fallen flower or soul of man, see the part of the
soul in 1 Pet. 1.24.

Object. The Spirit God breathed into man is God.

Resp. Amos 4.13. God is said to create the spirit as other things and that
(...) here is spirit, not wind; he after in the next words mentions (...) the
body and soul.

Heb. 4.12. Dividing between the spirit, and soul, and marrow, and bones, and
joints, and sinews.

1 The word divides between soul and spirit, which proves they are not by Gods
word one and the same, as men after themselves teach and affirm.

2. Whereas other object, that it is but a dividing of the same thing expressed
by several terms, as a dividing marrow, joints, bones, which are all of the
body.

Resp. 1. It is granted, the soul and body are of different natures.

2 The body indeed being a gross corporeal substance may be divided betwixt its
several parts, but the soul being of a spiritual nature is individual.

3 The spirit being more spiritually sublime, is more unpossible to be divided
then the soul.

4 Nor is the spirit a part of the soul; no more then the soul is a part of
the body; but far more exceeds the soul, then the soul the body.

Exodus 21.23 If there be death (...) (the word signifies murder) thou shall
give soul for soul, we corruptly read life for life.

Jerem. 38.15. As the Lord lives made us this soul; but the spirit, Eccles.
12.7. is said to be given of God, so that the being of one in man, is in a
different way of being from the other.

5 It seems to me all the souls of men are but one soul divided, Deuteronomy. 24.7.
and Act. 17.26. which is the ground of love, all being as one man, and so thy
own flesh, Isa. 58.7. Jer. 38.15.

The first general of the soul.

That every natural man before regeneration is called (...) a souleman, 1 Cor.
14.

1 Because his spirit being dead in him, his soul is the most excellent part
in being in him.

2 He is guided by the dark light of his soul, to act all, and only according
threunto.

3 He knows nothing higher then that of his soul is dictated to him; yea, nor
can he receive, before his spirit be quickened, anything of a higher nature, 1
Cor. 2.14.

(...)

Romans 13.1. Let every soul be subject to the higher powers, In the Sir. and
Arab. it is nephes, and Sultanan as the Heb.

Note God speaking of the spirit, Eccles. 8.8. Says no man has power Schallit
over the spirit, which the Greek 70 renders by (...), which shows the highest
power was of the (...), etc.

1 The soul and spirit are two.

2 They strangely differ, one is subject, the other not to power.

3 That, that is subject to power, power can reach by the sword, but the other
that they cannot.

Of the second part of man (...) the soul (...).

The excellency whereof is noted Matthew. 16.22. Mark. 8.37.

1 In its creation or original being, it was spired into man of God
immediately, which proves sufficiently it far exceeds the beasts soul, which
with the bodies had their being together from the earth, Genesis 2.7. Genesis 1.

2 The ordinary way of continuance of the same.

1 It is not said as of the Spirit that God gives it.

2 But of the contrary are said to come out of the loins of the parents, Genesis
46.26. Exodus 1.5. vide Ezekiel. 16.5. Heb. 7.10.

3. It is not said to return to God, but go to the grave, Act. 2.27, 31. Job
33.18, 20, 22, 28, 30. Isa. 38.17. Psalm. 49.15. and 94.17.

4 That with the body it is to partake of the resurrection, Act. 2.31. seeing
this before spoke of the resurrection of Christ, that his soul was not left in
hell, nor his flesh did not see corruption.

1 Here are two parts, the flesh and soul.

2 These were in the grave.

3 These had both interest in the resurrection of Christ.

4 What was done in Christ, is to be done in Saints, because done for them. Now
of the soul of Christ 1. It is said he poured out his soul to death, Isa.
53.12.

2 He is said to give his (...) soul for his sheep, John 10.11. ver. 15. he
lays it down, ver. 17. he says, the father loved him because he laid down
(...) his soul. O did God love his Son for this? and shall this so great a
cause of love be hid from us? Have not we much more cause to love him for it,
and inquire into it, that it may be a cause of our love to him? also what need
have our hearts to be stirred up thereunto. O know to lay down (...) the life a
vapor is nothing like this, to engage Gods love to Christ, or man's either.

3. 1 John 3.16. in this we have known love, because he laid down his soul
for us; as if without this laying down of his soul, no soul can know his
love, not in laying down of his life, or being man, etc. Io. 15.13.

4. What Christ did, we may, and ought do, by laying down our souls for the
brethren.

5 Isa. 53.10. His soul was made an offering for sin, in which we may see how
far the soul of Christ acted in the work of our salvation, and how unable we
are to be saved without it, and believing it, against all which, men oppose
themselves in these days.

6 His soul was in the grave, Act. 2.31.

7 He says, his soul was heavy to the death, Math. 26.38.

Quer. If all this were done in Christ's soul, whether our souls are not capable
of, and liable to the same things in this world, he was in all things tempted
like us.

Object. Christ suffered in the flesh for us, 1 Pet. 4.1. and therefore not in
his soul.

1 His suffering in the flesh, contains all those sorrows, afflictions, pains
and torments, were laid on him before his death.

2 In his death, and death of soul was the last end of all his sufferings.

3 The pouring of his soul out to death, was in the soul a suffering in a
special manner.

4 As he that says Christ ascended into Heaven with his body, in so saying,
denies not he also ascended into the heavens in his soul; so in saying Christ
suffered in his flesh, it is not denied that he also suffered in his soul.

8 The soul and body of Christ being thus carried home to the house of death,
the grave, Christ by his Spirit and Almightinesse redeems his soul, and in
that others, destroying death, delivers the body from the grave, and the bonds
thereof, Hos. 13.14.

9 The excellency of the soul Mat. 16.22. Mark. 8.37. what shall it advantage
a man to gain the whole world and lose his own soul, or what shall a man
give in exchange for his soul?

10 If figurative speeches would prove any thing, Rev. 16.3. were effectual,
where men's souls of the Antichristian estate are every one said to dye, which
shows it concerns men of the false Church estate every one of them to mind
their estates.

Matthew. 20.28. He gave (...) his soul a ransom for many.

1 The soul of Christ was the ransom.

2 This ransom was paid by death, or could not be paid, Mar. 10.45. 1 John 3.16.

Rev. 12.11. They loved not their souls to death.

1 That is, they gave their souls to death.

2 This the word injoyns saying, he that saves shall lose his soul.

The fleshy nature of the soul is clear, in that it came out of the loins by
propagation, in that God says, what ever is of the flesh is flesh, Joh. 3.6.

1 This is notably manifested in the seat of the soul, that it is in the
blood, Eccles. 6.2. Luke 12.23. is not the soul more then meat, and the body
then raiment? Math. 6.25. Luke 12.22. Take no thought for your soul, what ye
shall cate or what ye shall drink, Eccles. 6.2, 3.

Note 1. Raiment, that is proper to the body, that looks for it.

2 The soul, that minds meat and drink, careing for it as being very sensible
of the lack thereof, and delighted in the enjoyment of it, Salomons Prove. 27.7.
The full soul loatheth the honey comb, but to the hungry soul every bitter
thing is sweet, Psalm. 107.5. Hungry and thirsty, their souls fainted in them.

Note it is observable, God speaking of spiritual hunger, he says not he has
filled the hungry soul, but the hungry (only) with good things, Luke 1.53. or
as Psalm. 107.9. he distinguishes the soul hungring for goodness, and that for
meat and drink.

3. Job. 33.20. His life abhors bread, and his soul desirable meat, the
soul it longs for meats that are pleasing to its appetite, in which is the
sensuality of it.

Note this is an emminent argument of the souls fleshy nature, and
subjectnesse to mortality.

4 If the soul may live without, why says the Lord to it, to take it off,
your father knows that ye have need of these things?

5 Why does he use this Argument to the soul, that it is more then food, as to
the body that it is more then raiment; if the souls necessitys were not
supplied in the one, as the bodies in the other?

Reason of it, is because the seat of the soul is in the blood, which is fed
with food, meat and drink.

6. Genesis 34.3. Shechems soul clave unto Dinah, which shows the terrene carnal
nature of the soul being conversant about fleshly things.

Object. Fleshly lusts war against the soul, 1 Pet. 2.11. here it seems the
desires of meat and drink are not of the soul, but the flesh, here by wars
against it.

Resp. 1. I beseech you as Pilgrims and Strangers to be taken off from fleshy
lusts which war against the soul.

Noting that the fleshly lusts of the soul did oppose and hinder it from those
things, did more especially concern it, which were offered to them by the
Spirit, but care of eating and drinking would not give them leave.

This is no more then what Christ did before, in saying, take no care what ye
shall eat.

Here in the flesh they are but Pilgrims and strangers to the world, and
therefore the soul to seek satisfaction in these was against it self.

1. In that he exhorts them to be taken off from them, shows the whole man,
flesh, body, and dead spirit were once all fixed upon it, and after quickening,
troubled with it.

2 And whereas the flesh and spirit may say and object, why we must care for
meat and drink, these are so necessary that our soul cannot be without it.

Note the Spirit of God makes as it were an answer to it, saying, the lusting
after these things do war against the soul, and were enemies to it.

And shows that these things they should have, without having their minds
carried after, and perplexed with care for them, as in Luke 12.22.

3 It is usual that the mind of man is divided into carnal and spiritual;
whiles it is set on cloth and food, it is carnal; when on God and Christ,
spiritual.

Note now, the soul of the regenerate is for spiritual things, but the souls
care of food, wars against him in those desires of life God has quickened in
him, to kill and destroy them.

4 It shows how the soul is affected with fleshy things, the delights,
sweetness, pleasure, gain, loss of them, and how the gay outside things of
the world are in its mind, being said to be carnally minded, and men sowing to
the flesh.

Note Solomon, Eccles. 6.7. All the labor of the Adam is for his mouth, yet
his soul is not satisfied.

1 In these words are the Adam body, and nephes the soul.

2 What the Adams labor is for, it is for his mouth, that is, meat to give it.

3 After it is in the mouth, then it comes to the soul, that is not satisfied
with what the hands can get, either it is not sweet enough, or good enough, or
it has not quantity enough for to keep him many years. Having got one
thousand, why, it is not enough, it would have ten thousand, yea, all the
world, Prove. 27.20. The eyes of man are never satisfied; the body serves an ill
Master in the soul; it is like Death and Hell, whiles it is carnally minded;
What shall I eat, what shall I drink, what shall I have to morrow, next year?
he thought he had pleased his soul well, Luke 12.18, 19.

Psalm. 66.9. He holds our soul in life.

1 The soul and life are distinct.

2 The soul of all are held in life, or they would dye.

3 God it is holds our soul in life, and suffers not our feet, that is the
bodily being to be moved, Psa. 78.50. and 1.16.8. and 22.19.

Ester 7.3. She prayed for the soul of Ahasuerus.

Psalm. 22.29. All they that go down to the dust shall bow before him, (and his
soul is not living) or none can keep alive his own soul.

1 The body goes down to the dust.

2 They are said as dying men to bow and stoop to God, Isa. 10.4. vide Pagnine
on (...).

3 The soul that is not alive, none, when the body goes to dust, can keep
alive his own soul.

4 This John 19.30. was fulfilled in Christ, he bowed the head, and gave up the
spirit, man bows before he dies, Genesis 49.33. and thence are stretched out after
death.

Acts 27.10. I perce^ve that this voyage will be with hurt and much damage, not
only of the lading of the ship, but also of our souls.

1 The souls were subject to loss and ruin, as ship and goods.

2 If the soul were immortal, then he would not have put the goods and soul
in the same state, as in ver. 22. there shall be no loss of any soul. that
is, none shall die.

Romans 2.5.16. Shows in this chapter the day of Judgment is looked on and
spoken of.

Ver. 6. When God renders to every man according to his deeds, Ver. 8, 9. Then
on every soul that is contentious, and does disobey the truth, shall be
tribulation and anguish.

And first shows that until then the soul of man suffers none of these.

2 If it were immortal it should do as well as the spirit, 1 Pet. 3.19. which
proves the spirit immortal, the soul mortal.

The next General that proves the mortality of the souls is.

1 That it is joined, with the flesh, and called flesh.

2 That when dis-joyned it is called blood, which pertains to flesh, and
divided by the word flesh.

1 The Scripture calls the Soul and Body flesh.

Genesis 6.3. My spirit shall not always strive with man, for that he also is
flesh, the words may be better read thus, My spirit shall not strive in man for
ever, because that he is flesh, by which the 1 Pet. 3.19. is only to be
interpreted.

1 Note the spirit was dead, what else was in man was of a fleshly nature; yea,
God calls it flesh.

2 Though he calls man Adam, as if he meant his body, yet after saying [ hee] he
comprehended soul and body, as all flesh was in being in him.

3 While man is flesh, there is but a striving with them, and as it were an
outstanding by them of the spirit, called a resisting of the spirit, Act. 7.51.
(...), fall against the holy spirit.

Matthew. 26.41. The spirit is willing, the flesh is weak.

1 Flesh and spirit are opposed only, the soul not mentioned.

2 The soul is fleshly in good men, not spiritual, and therefore is to be
understood in flesh, and not in the word spirit.

3 Whereas it says weak only, it speaks of the inclinations of the soul, not
the flesh, Romans 7.18. In me, that is in my flesh, dwells not any good thing.

John 6.63. It is the spirit quickens, the flesh profits nothing.

1 Here are only two parts as before.

2 It signifies that where the spirit is not a quickening spirit, there the
flesh and soul profits not.

3 That the first resurrection is of the spirit, the next of soul and body,
and that of the soul and body, without this of the spirit profits not, but
rather aggravates its misery and woe.

2 When it speaks of the natural man whose spirit is dead, and so is said not
to be, Genesis 42.13. as Joseph, whom his brethren thought was dead, is said not
to be, so the spirit in natural man being dead, he is called by the name of
(...), as if he had no spirit, 1 Cor. 2.14. and 15.44. It is distinguished by
flesh for the body, and soul for the blood: The Reasons of it.

1 Blood is the soul of Beasts, or the soul is said to be in the blood.

2 Blood is the seat of the soul of man, it is called the blood soul, Prove.
28.17. he that has done violence to the blood soul, shall fly to the pit,
Deuteronomy. 27.26.

1 Here is violence to the blood.

2 That is done to the blood, is done to the soul.

Note, In this is the d^stinction of the soul of man and beast.

1 The beasts blood and soul were together out of the earth at once.

2 Man's blood was out of the earth, but his soul by which that blood came to
be inanimated was from God, yet the blood in man was the seat of the soul as
in beasts.

3 Yet in Genesis 9.5. It is spoken closely hereunto, thou shall not eat the
flesh with his soul, his blood Genesis 9.5. (...).

1 Which shows the grosnesse of the nature of the soul, and its fleshy kind.

2 It shows how we are to understand the word blood when set down in opposition
to, and distinguished from the flesh or body of man, and therefore called the
blood of the soul, to show, that when the blood was spoke of, the soul was
intended thereby, not the body.

Matthew. 16.17. Flesh and blood has not revealed this to thee.

1 If by flesh and blood be nothing else here intended, but that one part of
man, his Adam, (...), body, it is clear this without the spirit knows nothing.

2 (...) The soul man that has body and soul, knows not the things of God,
of which here the spirit speaks, 1 Cor. 2.14.

3 Hence by flesh I understand the body.

4 By blood the soul.

5 These two by any innate power of their own, or acquired habits, cannot
manifest to the spirit the mystery of God, and salvation by Jesus Christ.

6 The soul is so dead, that what it has, it must have from flesh and blood
which is corruption, or from the father, it is in a state of death, and all it
has is under the same, before Christ has raised it.

1 Cor. 15.40. Flesh and blood shall not inherit the Kingdom of God.

1 By Kingdom of God here is meant the Church, as it does comprehend the
dispensations of the spirit within, and of Christ in the Church Discipline
without.

2 By flesh, as before, is meant the body.

3 By blood, the soul of the natural man.

4 By these, until the spirit be quickened, no man on ear^^ can lay claim to
the Kingdom of God, but is by the institution of God debarred it, and
therefore faith, one of the fruits of the spirit in those are quickened, is
said to be, that by which men were admitted to the Kingdom.

Gal. 1.16. I consulted not with flesh and blood.

1 [ I] In his spirit now quickened, when the Adam had no power over it, to
restrain it.

2 This power is so far by the quickening of the spirit destroyed in him, as
that he immediately consults not with it, but discovers it to be an enemy to
Christ and his own felicity.

3 By flesh and blood is meant his soul and body, who had before conspired so
together against the Lord and his truth.

4 The reveal^ng of Christ in him was the raising of his spirit from that death
it lay in; as it was said of Christ, he was revealed to be the Son of God by
his raising from the dead, which in us is called the power of his resurrection,
Phil. 3.10.

2 Cor. 5.16. We know no man according to the flesh.

1 For blood it is said clearly, God has made all men of one blood, hence the
prohibition in marriages did arise to prevent its confusion. A thing of
special note,

2 The flesh, which is of a more external concernment.

1 He shows one man is not better according to the flesh then an other, nor
fitter for the Kingdom.

2 It is prohibited by any prerogative it can have of the Kingdom.

3 That it were the gifts of God, not the inward endowments of nature, or the
outward beauty of the body was in the administrations of the Gospel to be
respected.

Heb. 2.14. For as much as the Children are partakers of flesh and blood, be
also himself took part of the same, that through death he might destroy him
that had the power of death.

1 By flesh and blood the natural man's body and soul are in this place set
out, of which Christ was a real partaker, being made like to us in all things,
sin only excepted.

2 As far as Christ was flesh and blood, he suffered death.

3 By this death of his he destroyed him that had the power of death, which is
the Devil, which death was the pouring out of his soul to death.

4 Without the right understanding in what and how Christ died, no true, nor
right use of his death can be made.

The understanding of flesh and blood in this sense opens many hid Truths.

1 That when the spirit of God names the body, the soul is usually added to
it, when flesh, then blood sets out the soul.

2 As flesh and blood are together, so soul and body are, as appears in the
Scripture dialect.

Note, Moses sprinkling the people with the blood of the beasts, called the
blood of the Covenant, sprinkled them with the soul of the beasts; and the
blood of the new Covenant is the blood of the soul of Christ, though not the
soul.

1 Cor. 11.27. He is guilty of the body and blood of Christ.

1 If by blood be meant the soul, how necessary is the cup? Christ gave not his
flesh, but blood also; how do the Papists abuse poor men in keeping it away?

2 If by the blood be meant in the Scripture the soul, multitudes of Scripture
are not yet understood but in a carnal sense, which will spiritually in glory
appear on their manifestation.

3 Luke 13.1. Pilats sin, namely, in mixing man's blood with the blood of the
beasts which he sacrificed to Satan, aggravates the sin.

4 If the body comprehends the blood, or the blood be spoke of as of the body
only, why are they thus distinguished? in a word, it is to set forth the Lords
death, who dyed in soul, as well as body.

Job 2.4. All that a man has will be give for (...) his soul, ver. 6. He is
in thy hand, but spare his soul.

And this agrees with that of Christ, What shall a man give in exchange of his
soul.

Acts 20.24. I account not my soul dear to my self.

1 The regenerate part speaks (the spirit) which was above the soul.

2 It speaks its esteem of his soul.

3 On what account it speaks so, it would not speak so upon any other occasion
whatsoever.

Ezekiel. 18.20. The soul that sins, it shall dye. Orig. 13 Tom. on John page
191.

1 The spirit dyed in Adam, in Adam all die, by that which is called Original
sin.

2 The soul that lives by another life in the body, and is under the law
Moral, the transgressions whereof were death; so that ^ere is intended the
Lords mediate punishing of man with death by the Magistrate, or else immediate
by himself.

In V. 3. Ye shall not have occasion any more to use this proverb, the Fathers
have eat sour grapes, and the Childrens teeth are set on edge.

1 This proverb was true in the spirits death, by that sin is called original
in Adam.

2 God says it should be so no more.

3 Now the next death is of the soul, to which in the after Scripture he only
alludes, Ver. 4. All souls are mine, as the soul of the Father, so of the
Son, the soul that sins it shall dye.

4 No soul by justice dies, but for breach of the moral Law ^^one, which is
properly its by act, not imputation.

5 It is clear, each man has a particular soul, as well as spirit or ^ody, if
any two bodies had one soul, it were the Father and ^on, which the word does
say are distinct.

6 If ye understand by death, eternal death only, then ye make void the Law
of God.

7 There is a notable distinction used by the Apostle, 1 Cor. 6.18. Fornication
is sin unto the body of all other sin; and James, sin arises from lust.

1 Pet. 1.24. All flesh is grass, and all the glory of man as the flower of
the grass, the grass withers and the flower thereof falls.

1 The body is the flesh, the grass.

2 The soul, the flower and glory of man.

3 As the grass withers, the flower falls,

4 The end of the one and the other seem to differ, as they differ in
themselves, but fade and fall together.

5 The grass and flower are of one nature, and subject to change, though
differing in their form and beauty.

Object. 1. 1 Pet. 4.19. Commit the keeping of their souls to him in well
doing.

Hence men are to commit their souls as well as spirits to God.

Resp. 1. The soul is committed to God in well doing, not in dying, (as the
spirit is said to be) before, not in death.

2 The soul is kept from the evil of sin, the spirit from the evil of
punishment; the one before death, the other after death, Phil. 4.7. 1 Pet. 1.5.

Object. 2. James 5.20. Shall save a soul from death. Which proves a believers
soul dies not, or is not subject to death.

1 The natural man's spirit is already dead.

2 The salvation here is not temporal but eternal; not now, but hereafter.

3 That is, he saves the soul from hell, the second death, from which Christ
saves soul and body of believers.

4 That this is the mind of God is clear, for God saves not the elects soul
from the temporal death, or sleep of the soul.

5 Nor is it desired of, or beneficial to them, for death is theirs, and death
is to me gain, says St. Paul: so that this doctrine of the souls sleep is
not condemned, if understood according to the mind of the Gospel.

Object. 3. James 2.26. As the body without the spirit is dead.

1 This shows the dependence of the body, for its natural life is on the
spirit as well as soul, when Christ gave up the spirit he dyed.

2 This is true, if ye understand breath here by spirit.

3 And that the souls dependence is on the spirit also for life, in the real
absence whereof it dies.

Object. 4. Act. 20.10. Trouble not your selves, (...), his soul is in him:
whence it appears the bodies dependence is on the soul only.

Resp. 1. He speaks of the soul, because he felt the soul, and while that was
felt in him, his spirit was in him.

2 The soul is more discernable and material then the spirit.

3 As soon as the spirit leaves a man, the soul is no longer discernable to be
in a man.

Object. 5. Rev. 21.8. The lake burns with fire and brimstone, is the second
death.

Now you say the spirit is dead, you say the soul after dies, then that of
hell is the third death.

Resp. The death of the spirit, and the after death of soul and body, is but
one death on the whole man.

2 The second death is not of a part, but the whole man, the one before, the
other after the day of Judgment.

3 As the widow woman 1 Timothy 5.6. so all men natural are dead (in spirit)
while they live (in body and soul) being partly dead, and partly alive, until
death has put an end to body and soul, foregoing the resurrection.

Job. 33.30. He has delivered my soul from death, that my life may praise him
in the light.

1 Soul and life are distinct.

2 The deliverance of his soul was when God chap. 2. said to Satan, he should
not meddle with his soul, and all the rest was given into his hand what ever
he had.

3 Satan's desire was to have his soul, Skin for skin, and all that a man has
will he give for his soul.

4 See what a corrupting of the word it is to read here, life for soul, as one
word, and in it, one thing for another.

5 Whiles he was denied his soul, he was denied his life, because his soul
was delivered from death in the continuance of his life.

Quest. How Job knew God had given all except this, and that Satan asked his
soul.

Resp. Doubtless by inspiration, all Scripture is given thereby.

2 He wrote doubtlessely his own life, and then he did it as moved of God to
do it.

1 Note, if by soul were meant the immortal part of man, Satan durst never
have asked it.

2 To these distinctions of spirit, soul, body, life, breath, etc. laid down in
the word, how have the eyes and hearts of the wise and learned of the world
been shut up, concerning which as Paul 1 Cor. 1.20. (...) yea, and let me say
(...) could not all the learning of the Academies find out this? no, but destroy
it; men sought it in Aristotle, Plato, etc. where it was not, not in the word
where it is, and by their corrupt principles came to measure the Truth of God,
not measuring them by the truth, whose philosophy compared with Gods is vain
Philosophy: a poor man having his spirit quickened by God, and the eye of his
understanding opened to understand the mind of God, may out of the word teach
all the Philosophers in the world, and swallow up their Philosophy, as the sun
a small stars light. Oh let the word, and its principles be studied, and these
vain studies be laid aside! I make bold to say the day and time is coming it
will be so. The world knows not the worth and use of Gods word, that use those
beggarly rudiments and dunghils, the forms of all tropes, metaphors, syllogisms
are laid down therein, and to be learned thence, that were a way taken to teach
men thence, would sanctify the speech and understanding of youth, and not
corrupt it and darken it.

Object. Eccles. 3.19. That which befalls the sons of men befalls beasts,
even one thing befalls them, as the one dies so dies the other, yea, they
have all one (...) breath, so that Adam has no pre-eminence above a beast.

V^^. 20. All go into one place, all are of the dust, and turn to dust again.

It seems man and beast are equal, and no difference then by this Scripture.

Resp. 1. He here speaks of the Adam that turns to dust.

2 The breath or air the beast and man enjoy, for the enjoyment of life in the
world, is the same indeed.

3 And as for their death, as one dies, so dies the other.

Note he yet distinguishes them in this.

1 That though they dye alike, the body and soul of the beast, that never
rises again, as that of man does, chap. 11.9.

2 He has clearly distinguished them ver. 21. in their spirits, who knows
the spirit of man that ascends to supernals, and the spirit of a beast that
descends, because from beneath to its bed of earth, as the spirit to God from
whence it came.

3 God has excellently distinguished them in their first forming, and in their
more excellent being then the other creatures, shining in reason,
understanding, wisdom, knowledge, speech.

Polyc. Lyserus on the first of Genesis gives this distinction between the
soul of man and beast. Anima omnis carnis sanguis ejus est, de hominis autem
anima nuspiam ita loquitur.

Ill. The soul in the grave to the body, is as the life of the seed in the
earth, which when the first body dies, it rises up a new body, 1 Cor. 15.42.

Object. 6. Since God breathed but one breath into Adam, he had but one life,
Genesis 2.7.

Resp. 1 Our translation says so, but corruptly, the Scripture in the Hebrew
has it in the plural, lives, of different nature.

2 This appears, because there are several deaths spoke of in the word, and
fulfilled in man, one on his spirit, which differs in kind from that of the
soul, and then there is death in hell; as God of one matter made many
creatures, so of one breath many lives.

Object. Adam was created mortal.

Resp. Death entered by sin into the world, and first ceized on his immortal
part the spirit, and after on the soul, had not man finned, death had never
been on soul or spirit.

Object. 6. Luke 12.20. This night they shall require thy soul.

It seems hence the soul is immortal, and was taken from the body by the
devils. Note the words are parabolicall.

Resp. 1. Who these they are, is not set down in the Scripture before going, or
that that follows after.

2 By they are meant the grave and death, of whom God says, I will ransom
them from the hand of the grave, and power of death, Hos. 13.14. death has the
soul first, and after the grave has soul and body.

3 That the grave requires such a soul as fitted for it, and the manner, Isa.
14.9. the grave from beneath is moved for thee, to meet thee at thy coming. And
Isa. 5.14. the grave opened her mouth wide. And Salomons Proverbs tell what she
means by her cry, give give me this or that soul, Job 17.1. the graves are
ready for me.

4 As the grave, so death and the law, compare Ps. 118.18. Ier. 15.2. (...)
those are for death to death, God gives him up to death to take him.

Object. 7 He should rather have spoke of his body then.

Resp. As the fool spoke to his soul not body, so does God also.

2 If the soul be required, the body must be.

3 The soul and body lie in grave.

4 The fool had more wit then we, he saw his soul did partake of the meat he
eat, and drink, and mirth in them; which I have not understood.

Quest. In what was his folly then?

1 In that he made provision for the flesh not spirit, and took up his rest in
these earthly things, as if he needed no more.

2 In that he had goods for many years, and his soul might take its ease, and
never thought his life was of so short continuance.

3 That he was now to go to the grave, when these should be left to he knew not
whom, and he have no more to do with any such things.

Object. 8. Rev. 6.9.10. The souls under the Altar cry, how long before thou
avenge our blood?

Hieron. ad Vigilantium Ep. Lib. 3. ais enim etc. subter aram Dei animas
Apostolorum and martyrum consedisse, nec posse suis tumulis, neque ubi
voluerunt esse presents in terra.

Resp. 1. The way of answering Tropological sayings has been, Theologia
symbolica non est argumentativa.

2 But to answer it indeed, is to know what the Altar is, and that is Christ,
at whose feet the Martyrs, as the beasts slain, had their blood poured out,
and to which here the Spirit alludes.

3 Where the souls are that are said to be under the Altar? Resp. Where ever
they are, they are under the Altar, and not forsaken of Christ; as Christ's
soul was not left of his Father; hence they are said to sleep in Jesus: and
the dead in Christ, 1 These. 4.13, 14. Matthew. 27.52.

4 The souls are said to cry after they were slain, ergo, not dead. Resp. A
soul has no articulate voice to cry with, and therefore can be nothing else,
but Gods beholding the blood and past death, the enemy of Saints, Antichrist,
had cruelly spilt.

Obj. Here are the souls, and blood of souls; the cry is from the soul, not
the blood: Res. It was the same in Abels blood, Genesis 4.10. Heb. 12.24. the soul
is not seen nor heard.

6 Of this Altar speaks the Apostle, We have an Altar, which they that serve at
the Tabernacle have no right to eat.

7 As the Altar is a metaphorical speech, so the souls cry, and the souls
being under the Altar, under which some Gospel truth, is mystically represented
thereby unto us; as that the blood of Saints now came to be inquired after,
Revel. 18.24. and 19.2. and 16.6.

Note from the nearness of blood and the soul.

1. Genesis 9.4, 5. God giving leave to man to eat flesh, forbid him to eat
blood before the Ceremonial Law.

2 Under the Ceremonial Law.

3 After the Ceremonial Law in the Gospel estate, Act. 15.29. by which the
esteem, and mystery of Christ's blood in the Sacrament is exalted.

4 On this ground Marriages of such as are of consanguinity and next affinity
with the Husband and Wife, are forbid, because of confusion.

5 There is in eating blood a confusion of souls with souls, as Pilat mingled
the blood of men with blood of beasts.

Obje. 9. Every creature of God is good, etc. for it is sanctified by the Word
and prayer, 1 Timothy 4.4, 5.

Resp. Note the dependence of its lawfulness because sanctified by the word,
but if the word forbid a thing, then it is otherwise.

Object. 10. Not that goes into a man, but that which comes out does defile
a man, Mat. 15.11.

Res. This is spoken in contempt of a natural defilement by meat, eaten without
washed hands, as being the cause of Christ's speaking the words.

Note under the Gospel the eating blood is forbid, for the reverence to be had
to the drinking of the blood of Christ Sacramentally, also.

Obj. Tit. 1.15. To the pure all things are pure. 1 Cor. 7.14. Their Wife and
children are pure, yet not to be eat, so blood is pure, but not to be eat.

1 Timothy 4.3. The Apostle shows it was a sign of the false Teachers to command
to abstain from meats, calling it doctrine of devils, Col. 2.21.

1 See abstinence was from meat, not from drinking blood.

2 It was on a religious ground, not a moral ground, as this.

3 There was an abstinence from meat sacrificed to Idols, 1 Cor. 10.

Object. 1 Cor. 10.25, 27. What ever is sold in the Shambles, and what ever is
set before you, eat.

Resp. The Gentiles themselves, but in their Temples and worship, did abstain
from eating and drinking blood.

4 The abstinence spok of to the Colossians, was Judaizing abstinence from
meats.

5 That of Timothy was Antichrists corrupt worship, and religion placed in such
things.

Object. 11. Matthew. 10.28. Fear not those that kill the body, but cannot kill
the soul.

1 This Scriptures obscurity is to be explained by Luke 12.4. which was spoke
at the same time, and the same thing intended in that of Luke, as that of
Matthew, as in the verses before these Scriptures, and after, they being the
same words, matter and occasion in one, as in the other.

2 In which this general rule is to be observed, for the understanding the
historians of Christ's life.

1 That what seems to be obscure in one, we are to seek an explanation of in
the other.

2 What seems wanting in one, we ought to seek the supply thereof in the other.

3 That the mind of God is not fully known in one history, if the same be
recorded by another, nay, nor in two, if recorded in three, as many are; Now
this story and words are only set down in this Matthew. 10. and Luke 12 in which
two, ye have the mind of God concerning the same.

Matthew. 10.28. Fear not them which kill the body, but are not able to kill the
soul, but rather fear him that is able to destroy both soul and body in hell.

Luke 12.4. Be not afraid of them that can kill the body, and after that have
no more that they can do; but I will forewarn you whom ye shall fear, fear
him, which after he has killed, has power to cast into hell.

1 Life is distinguished, as I showed you before, from the soul. which dies by
the death of the body, but not in it, being distinct from it.

2 Life as thus distinct from the soul, is said to be taken away by the sword,
Job 33.18. He keeps back his soul from the pit, and his life from perishing
by the sword. Thus also in ver. 22. In which life which perishes by the sword,
is that called here the killing of the body, for that is that man does; on
which dissolving the chain of life, the Spirit leaves the soul; and the soul,
say some, lies in the body asleep in the grave, and under the Altar.

Nor others it is dead by the spirits departure from the soul, as the body by
life's departure from it, in which is dissolved the most glorious fabric of the
earth.

3 Luke speaks of that killing of the soul which is after death, and not at the
dissolution of the body in death, even of casting the soul and body into hell.

1 Note on the killing of the body you have completed the first death of
spirit, soul and body in unbeleevers.

2 In that is to be done after, is the second death, which men have no hand in,
when God only casts soul, and spirit, and body into hell, which is the second
death; which is that Christ's eye is upon,

3 Or that is after the death of the body to be done on it, is to raise the
soul and awake that, quicken the body, restore the spirit, and then bring it
to Judgment!

It is appointed to all to dye, and after that to come to Judgment.

Note in this place clearly are expressed but two parts of man, his body, his
soul, (...), the spirit being dead before.

2 Man, every man, undeniably consists of three, soul, body and spirit.

3 The spirit must be understood here as well as the rest; and that in the soul
which cannot be killed nor dies, not in the way of man.

4 He speaks of the soul rather then spirit, because the men of the world are
(...) in their very spirits; yea, God Genesis 6.5. says, man is flesh: soul,
spirit, body, are called flesh in that place, through the carnal mind which
was in them, eating, drinking, marrying, building, planting, only thought on.

Note from the word, (...) signifies trucidare, to tear, rend, cut and slash,
which may be done by man on the body, or beasts; but the soul men cannot come
at to use it in like kind, being of a more spiritual substance and nature.

2 That Christ's eye is especially on this, to take away the discomforts hung on
the hearts of his people, seeing some whipped, others cut, stoned, 2 Cor. 11, 25.
sawen asunder, slain with the sword, scourged, Heb. 11.37. why this trucidation
of men is but on the body, the soul they cannot make suffer in this kind, that
joys within whiles the body indures this without; they cannot tear that, if
not that, much less the spirit, Job 33.18, 20, 22, 28. the life the sword
destroys, not the soul.

Heb. 6.19. Which hope we have as an anchor of the soul:

Acts 2.26. Having spoke that the heart should be glad, and the tongue rejoice,
in which the soul was intimated, my flesh also shall rest in hope.

1 It hopes as the soul, and with the soul.

2 The soul and flesh, though they go to the grave together, yet hope in the
Word, Truth, Power and Promises of God, it shall arise and be incorruptible,
though it see it not.

3 This is significantly manifested in the (...) moreover (that is, besides my
soul) my flesh shall rest in hope.

4 In that hope is the souls, and the only use of it when the soul and body
lie in the grave, it describes the souls nature, and estate.

The Metaphor is thus opened.

1 Whiles the spiritual man in spirit, soul, and body was carried through the
sea of this world by the gales of the Spirit of God, and help of the north
star, and the Word its compass steered its course toward heaven.

2 But when the Spirit, the Pilot left the ship, the body, the soul went no
f^rther, but made use of hope as its Anchor, and there rested where the Spirit
left it.

3 W^ere it waited for the return of the Spirit from the Lord, and the Lord,
bringing it to the desired port and Haven of rest with the Lord, in heavenly
places.

Heraclitus said, Animis mors est aquam fieri.

1 The Naturalists say, the water that came out of Christ's side was that was
contained in the Pericardian.

2 What relation this had to the soul, or the soul to it, I dare not
determine.

3 This we know, that the Sacraments of Baptism was instituted with water, the
Lords Supper with blood. August. Sacramenta manant e latere Christi.

Clemens. Alex. paed. liq. 1. cap. 6.

Sanguis enim invenitur primum genitus in homine, quem nonnulli ausi sunt
dicere substantiam animae.

Austins wrote 16 chap. to prove the immortality of the soul, in all which I
remember not; he makes use of one Text of Scripture, but Philosophically
handles the Question; nor does he mention the spirit; such a darkness in his
time Philosophy had drawn on men who, seeking to be wise became fools.

Ezekiel. ^6 9. I said unto thee when thou wast in thy blood live.

1 A natural man in that estate is as a child at his birth, in blood and
corruption, as he came out of the womb.

2 God in his blood-estate said live, that is quickened her by his Word and
Spirit: Thrice live, first in soul, then spirit, naturally, then spiritually.

Verse. 8. God in love covers her nakedness, makes a Covenant, and becomes her
Husband.

Verse. 9. He washed her with water baptism, and washed away her blood, and
anointed her with oil, that is, with the Holy Spirits Baptism after believing
and baptism, which shows in this place Gods eye in especial was on the
estate of the Gospel Church.

Verse. 12. A Crown on her head, the state of the Gospel, Rev. 12.1.

Verse. 14. Her renown went among the Gentiles, when followed the Gentiles call.

Note she was alive yet in her blood, when God says again and again live, and
shows her life was nothing which she had in her blood. I might on this subject
exceed, were it to the purpose propounded.

Verse. 5. (...) In the casting forth of seed was thy soul, where is the male,
in coition with the female. Ver. 6. He is in his blood in the womb, when God
first gave life to him, as to Adam.

Blood is the seat of the Soul, and so related to, and concerned in it, that
great are the mysteries of it, as concerning Jesus Christ.

THe new Testament was made in the blood of Christ, Heb. 13.20. Luke 22.20. 1
Cor. 11.25.

1 Without shedding of blood is no remission.

2 The blood of Jesus cleanses the conscience, Heb. 9.14. and from all sin, 1
John 17. Rev. 1.5.

3 Heb. 10.19, 20. By his blood we have an admission to God.

4. Verse. 22. Water is for the body baptism; blood, the conscience.

5. The use whereof was set out in sprinkling pots and cups, Heb. 10.22. 1 Pet
1.2. this speaks peace, Heb. 12.13.

Note in this was the glorious act of redemption wrought and justice more
excellently satisfied then in what was done on the body.

1 God requiring blood for blood, when a man was to dye for staying of a man;
so now, man being for sin to dye, he cannot be saved, but by the death of his
Son for Man.

2 He requires soul for soul, which are indeed the same, and without this
there is no remission.

Ap. the necessity of this knowledge I commend to all to judge of, 2 King.
10.24. Genesis 9.5, 6. Exodus 21.23. typified in the beasts slain for sacrifice
Deuteronomy. 19.21. 1 John 5.7.

3 Three bear witness in heaven in the Godhead, the Father, the Word, the
Spirit.

4 Three bear witness in earth, in the manhood of Christ, the Spirit, the
Water, the Blood.

Now these three accordingly are applied by Christ to man, for and toward his
restoration descending to him, in which as Eliah, 2 King. 4.34. Christ applied
himself to man to restore him.

1 Using his Spirit to quicken the dead spirit of man, by which the Lord is
called a quickening Spirit.

2 After that he applies the water, answering to his humane nature, to wash
the body by baptism.

3 The blood in the Lords Supper, and in redemption by his blood, which is the
soul part of Christ, to cleanse the Conscience. John 19.34, 35.

1 If we have not the use of Christ in these several ways as he has appointed
to communicate himself to man, our faith is vain.

2 This of the spirit is all that, and the first only necessary thing to be
apprehended, for the flesh profits nothing, it is the spirit quickens, Joh.
6.63.

3 The end of grace here is, that men may be raised in spirit, and be partaker
of the first resurrection, Rev. 20.6. unless this be done, Christ does
nothing, and this is to be done on the dead spirit, or there is nothing done.

4 As the spirit has its good by Christ's Spirit, so the soul by Christ's
soul, and flesh by Christ's flesh.

5 The good of each was properly to arise from the several parts of Christ to
those in man, as the sinner needed them; Christ being proportioned, and fitted
to be a perfect Savior.

Object. Genesis 35, 18. As her soul was going forth, (for she died. The soul) as
the spirit goes forth of the body at death.

Resp. 1. The dissolution of that unity was between spirit and soul, and soul
and body, as the cause of death.

2 It is like the soul goes forth with the spirit, though it is not said to
go to God, but dies; or sleeps, as with the soul follows after the life, and
the body dies.

Object: The soul and the spirit are one.

I Answer, that is against Scripture.

Object. As the spirit goes forth to God, so the soul.

Resp. The Scriptures say not such a word of the soul.

The word (...) in the new Testament so often used has a notable significancy
in it, to set this out; for it signifies man the whole at death, to suffer a
resolution of parts; the Spirit divided from Soul, and Soul from Body in the
corrupting thereof.

That the Soul suffers not hell Torments until the last Judgment.
Romans 2.8. speaks of the day of wrath, which the soul that is impenitent
treasures up wrath by rejecting Gods Counsel.

2 This day is called the day of the revelation of the righteous Judgment of
God, which must be understood the last and great day of Judgment, when, and
not before, the judgment of God is revealed.

3 Ver. 6. Then every one shall receive according to their works. Ver. 7. When
our mortality shall put on immortality, and not before.

4. Ver. 9. Then, and not before, shall be tribulation and anguish on every
soul of man that does evil, the Jew first, and then the Gentile.

Wisdom 3.1, 6. By so much authority as it has being Apocryphal proves it;
which whiles it agrees with the word, I prefer before any authority that is
mere humane.

Under the old Testament these were set forth distinct in Christ, and so in us.

1 The Goat was slain and sacrificed, the body.

2 His blood poured out, the soul.

3 The Scapegoat went away into the wilderness, the spirit, which is not
under the power of man.

Obj. This Goat is meant the divine Nature.

Resp. 1. They were two Goats, of the same nature, and did represent the same
person of the humanity; only part, as the body and soul dyed; part was beyond
the power of man and death.

2 How unpossible the divine glory of the Divine nature of the Lord Jesus could
admit of any shadow of change, as to be set out dividedly under the
representation of a Goat, the note of reprobates, I leave all to judge.

To reconcile the seeming differences, it is first necessary they be stated and
compared.

1. Part of the difference is about the place, or ubi where they are, which are
set down in Scripture.

1 To be in the grave.

2 To be under the Altar.

3 To be in the body.

4 To be in heaven.

1 Note the first two are thus reconciled; those that die the natural death of
all, and are interred, their souls are in grave.

2 Those whose blood (as that of the slain beasts) was for Christ poured out at
the feet of the altar, and had no grave for their bodies, nor burial, their
souls are under the altar, and not as others; the manner of their souls
presence with Christ is a cry against those that shed their blood, in which the
soul and blood are distinguished.

3 As Paul 2 Cor. 12.2. Whether in the body or out of the body I cannot tell,
yet by what is said Genesis 35.18. it goes out of the body when it hovers over
it, and lies down with it in the grave, or after enters into it, when dead,
and sleeps in it; the spirit and life departed from it not being willing to be
alone, may return to the body as before; it not vanishing, as the life; nor
going to God as the spirit.

4 No Scripture says that any soul is yet in heaven: Christ is the first
fruits of them that sleep.

Second part of the difference is between these Scriptures, say,

1 That the souls dye.

2 That they only sleep.

Note, In this is the great controversy; for by the one it is mortal, and the
other it seems not to be so.

1 For reconciliation we are to distinguish between the differing nature of
Death in these parts of man; for as the parts differ in themselves, so their
deaths differ; the spirit is dead while in the body, and the soul and body
alive, but never suffers corruption as the body does in its death, whose death
is a total privation of life, sense, and motion, ending in corruption.

2 The souls death differs from that of the spirit, and that of body.

1 Gods leaving the spirit, it dies by withdrawing the spirits operation from
it, which when by Christ it returned into man, he is raised from the spirit
death.

2 The soul leaving the body, it dies.

3 The spirit leaving the soul, it suffers its death; as the body lives by the
soul, so the soul by the spirit; so that when the spirit is gone, the soul
is dead; as the body moves not without the soul, so the soul acts not without
the spirit be in her, who is its life, in its as well natural as spiritual
being.

Conclusion,

1 Unbeleevers, and all men by nature are subject to this death of soul, as
that of spirit and body, as being the way and means designed of God for their
dissolution.

2 Believers now, though their spirits forsake the soul, yet the spirit of
Christ being with their souls, and they said to sleep in Jesus, it is a
sleep to them, though a death to others.

3. As somnum is imago mortis, it shows the difference seems not much between
these, there is at least the image of the one in the other, though not the
other.

4 This is a further clearing of the preciousness of the first resurrection,
and Christ's so often saying to his people, they should not see death, nor taste
of death.

Use, To show what a sweet use of Christ in man's forsaken condition is lost and
unknown. Now if Christ be with us, and we in Christ, though in the grave,
what matters it? we are safe enough, whiles in Christ.

5 The death of the soul is, that it is not with God, nor God with it, in the
absence of its spirit, its natural life and body; but sin and death has
dominion over them, which it has not over those asleep in Christ.

Object. Christ's soul is said to dye.

Resp. 1. Christ's soul was left of its spirit, as ours, which was one part of
this death.

2 He cries out, My God, my God, why have thou forsaken me? which was that
other part; God forsook the creature, the soul in Christ, of which, O how
sensible was he, though we are not of the spirits death.

3. This is more clear, Thou will not leave my soul in grave, that is, no
longer but the appointed time of three days, and after God and his spirit
would come to the soul, and also raise the body.

4 This was he in soul to suffer with man, that he might become a ransom for,
and redeem men from death and the grave, where he endured what man by sin
should suffer, under death in the grave.

5 Hence those that believe not, and are not in Jesus, do not sleep in Jesus,
but are dead; and so only are ye to understand the Scriptures, when it speaks
of the dead in soul and body, it calls them dead only; but of the believers as
of men that sleep, and sleep in Christin the soul.

6 When as the Scriptures speak of the dead in Christ, then they chiefly
respect the bodies, not the souls of Saints.

Use, Shows what multitudes of lies and errors are taught in the name of
Christ, and how destructive the doctrine now taught is.

2 How obscure the faith of Christ and the Gospel is in this, and multitudes of
other cases, is not seen nor credited.

3 Use. Confirmation of this is deduced hence, The spirit dies, and the body
dies, and by the argument of the souls mortality; that though God has said in
many Scriptures, the soul does dye, and the soul that sins shall dye.

4 The wages of sin is death, and the soul that sins shall dye; and yet it
must not dye, how contrary this is to Gods word, and Justice, and man's desert,
let the world be judge.

5 It is set down in the future tence, shall die, and shows that it is to be
another death on the soul, then what was on man by Adams fall.

Object. They make the soul does dye, but it is in Hell hereafter.

Resp. That death of soul is a death in which spirit and body does partake
with it, and is after the resurrection, as they confess.

1 But that death is called the second death, Rev. 21.8.

2 In that it is called the second death, and soul, body, and spirit are to
die, therein it is clear all these must first suffer a first death, before
this second, which by the now doctrine the soul does not.

1 These. 4.14, 16. In one the souls are said to sleep in Jesus, in the other,
the body dead in Jesus, the same persons being spoken of.

Reasons why the Souls of Saints sleep, but of Unbelievers are dead.
FIrst, The believing soul through the seed of faith and hope, sleeps only,
and is not dead as those without hope.

Secondly, The soul though it be left of its own spirit, yet it is in the
spirit of Christ.

Thirdly, In this is fulfilled, that the believer sees not, nor does he taste
of death, he being by his faith, in the name of the Son of God, kept from the
power of death.

Fourthly, Christ has by his souls death, redeemed theirs from that death, the
souls of unbeleevers dye.

1 This is in Lazarus set forth, John 11.4. This sickness is not to death, his
soul not dying. Ver. 11. Our friend Lazarus sleeps, they not understanding
the souls sleep. Ver. 14. he spoke more plainly, he is dead, speaking of his
body. Ver. 4. if not thus understood, is a mystery, that the sickness was not
to death, and yet he dyed.

2 This is seen in Stephen, Act. 7.59. He commends his spirit to Christ, ver.
60. his soul is made asleep, his body chap. 8.2. is committed to the grave,
the significancy of (...) for his death, chap. 8.1 is exceeding great, and
signifies his resolution; as the taking down of a house.

The life of the soul is maintained within it by hope, and differenceth the
dead and living souls.

1 Hence hope is said to be the anchor of the soul, Heb. 6.19.

2 The Apostles 1 These. 4.13. I would not have you ignorant Brethren concerning
those that sleep, that they mourn not as (...) those others, those that have no
hope.

Thus Mark. 5.39. Why lament ye and weep? the child is not dead but sleeps,
In Ver. 35. the Text says, she is dead. And Ver. 40. They derided Christ for
saying, she was not dead but slept; may they say, do ye call this a sleep? it
is a deadly one: know ye no better when a man sleeps, from when he is dead?
for which they were shut out, and not suffered to see the salvation of God.

1 Christ he speaks here of their sorrow and howling.

2 Of her souls estate, not bodies, and that they had no cause to lament thus
for her, she was not of the number of dead souls that dyed without hope, but
of the living souls that sleep by Jesus.

3 That this is the mind of the spirit in this place ver. 41. he says (...),
and (...), which shows she was in body dead, and was raised by the Lord Jesus,
not only from the place she lay down on, but from the dead.

1 These. 4.14, 16. Do set forth a distinction as in the body and soul, so in
Christ's virtue extended to them.

1 The souls are said to sleep, (...) per Jesum, by or through Jesus, if it
were not for Jesus they would be as the rest, not asleep but dead; where now
they are not dead, but sleep.

2 The bodies they are dead (...) in Christ; Jesus is applied to the souls
salvation, and Christ to the body; though elsewhere this distinction is not
used, but 1 Cor. 15.16. If the dead are not raised, Christ is not raised, Ver.
18. those that fleep in Christ are destroyed here: the sleepers, or souls are
said to sleep in Christ.

Resp. The Apostle, 1 These. 4.14. Says by Christ setting out the efficient and
meritorious cause of man's sleep to be Jesus, who delivered it from its death,
and gave it sleep.

2 The soul may be said, as well as body, to sleep in Christ, by the power of
Jesus salvation.

3 This here of 1 Cor. 15.18. is a supposition.

1 Showing that if they slept in Christ, and rose not, they slept not by Jesus,
they had not effectually salvation by him.

2 The soul and body were destroyed.

3 The dead and sleepers are distinguished in the 16 and 18. verses.

Note only in the Epistle of the Thessalonians he speaks to men believing, and
assenting; in this of the Corinthians, to men doubting, questioning,
contradicting, which is the ground of that difference seems to be in his speech.

1 Cor. 15.20.

Note by this only that 1 Cor. 15.20. is most significantly opened, where it is
said, Christ is the first fruits of them that sleep.

That is, Christ in his soul was the first was raised from sleep, and entered
into heaven, and ascended to his Father with his dead body made alive.

1 Where the controversy of Enoch and Elias going to Heaven before Christ's
resurrection is to be allowed of without questioning this Scripture-Truth; for
it was of those that sleep, Christ was the first fruits; he says not of
others, that slept not, as Enoch and Elias did not.

2 That this must be the soul, not the spirit, for that goes to God
immediately, of all Saints.

3 Nor of the body, that is dead in the grave: nor is he said to be the first
fruits of the dead, because the souls, not the bodies estate distinguishes the
Saints from unbeleevers; in themselves the one is as well dead, rots and
corrupts, as the other, but the soul of one sleeps, the other is dead.

Object. The soul while in the body is called the souls, but when it departs
it is called the spirit, because distinct from the body.

Resp. The soul is called the soul after death, as well as before.

2 The spirit is called the spirit in the body, and out of it, when joined to
the soul and body.

3 It is not one thing in the body, and another out of it.

And here I cannot pass by a mystery not yet clear to the world, in expressing
the word for the dead in the plural (...).

1 Sometimes as alluding to mankind, among which Christ lay, and from among
whom Christ was raised.

2 Othertimes, as Romans 1.4. being declared to be the son of God in power,
according to the spirit of sanctification, through the resurrection of the
deads; that is, his dead body and dead soul.

3. Luke 7.15. (...) The dead sat up, speaking only of the body, that part
sat up, and therefore expressed in the singular number.

4 When Christ is said to rise from the dead in the plural (or any other) I
understand their souls rising from dead souls, with whom their souls were,
being in their state as of one of them. And I understand their bodies rising
from dead bodies with whom they were as one of them during their estate of death.

5 This I take thus to be cleared, man consists of spirit, soul, and body, who
have differing lives subject to differing deaths, from which deaths man by
Christ comes to be redeemed in differing ways, by differing means.

6 In our translations deads should be put for dead, when expressed in the
plural, and in the singular, when by the spirit set down so in the original.

Application of this point of the blood of Christ, as it concerns the Soul of
Christ, it is of admirable use and concernment to us.

2. General. As Christ communicates his Spirit, so his Body, Matthew. 26.26. Mark
14.22. Luke 22.19.

1. 1 Cor. 10.16. The Bread that we break, etc.

2. 1 Cor. 11.29. Unbelievers discerned not the Lords Body in the Bread, and it
was the sin of the Capernaits, that cry out, How can this man give us of his
flesh to eat.

3. For not discerning the Lords Body, they were guilty that did partake of the
Sacrament of the afflictings and tormentings the Jews put him to, 1 Cor. 11.27.

4. The necessity of its being received (when in the way of God) because the
Lord enjoined it to be done in remembrance of him: And farther, John 6.53. If
ye eat not the flesh, and drink not the blood of the Son of Man, ye have no
life in you, vid. Verse. 54,55.

Note. The flesh is communicated to our flesh as flesh, as his Spirit to our
spirit; but the flesh, without the spirit, profits nothing; or the Spirit
quickneth the dead spirit, and the flesh feeds those made alive, when living,
not before.

3. General. Christ having a Spirit and Body, communicates them, and shows the
necessity of our partaking of them.

Quaere. Whether Christ having a Soul, it be not as necessary we be partakers
of that, as of the other parts of Christ, if we expect Salvation by him.

2. Whether the soul be not communicated in the blood of Christ, or whether
there be any other way of communion of it.

3. Whether our communion of the blood of Christ be not of inestimable price,
use and comfort to us, and to be remembered of us.

4. Whether his soul was not poured out to death, as well as body crucified and
broken.

The third part of man is (...), the body (...) and (...) the flesh, (...).

2. Adam respects the matter ex qua, as it was in its form, as fitted for the
Spirit and soul its informing form.

2 Ephar respects the matter ex qua, out of which God at first took the Adam,
and gave it its form.

3 Basar respects the body of man abstractively from soul and spirit, as it
was after it became a living soul, every part being flesh.

4 Sooma is spoken of relatively, as it is the Tabernacle of the soul, and
spirit, having completely in it all the members that make up a perfect man in
the bodily part.

1 This (...) lives, who was made of dust.

2 It is said Genesis 2.5. (...) which words I thus read, and there was to the
soul of Adam life, so as that the soul was of the Adam, the earth.

3 This flesh is contrary to the spirit, between which the soul is placed, who
respects the flesh in its inferior parts, and the Spirit in its superior.

These two are contrary.

4 The flesh maintains a war with the regenerate soul, 1 Pet. 2.

5 The fleshly estate is such, men cannot therein please God, Romans 8.8. and
Romans 8.6, 7. the wisdom thereof is death, and is excluded the Kingdom.

6 Man owes nothing to the flesh, to live thereto, Romans 8.12.

7. Ephesians. 6.5. Masters are said to be Masters according to the flesh. In which
was fignified

First, That their dominion was only over the flesh to command it, and on
disobedience, to punish them in the flesh.

Secondly, As the Magistrate called the higher power, had command over the
soul of man.

Thirdly, The Spirit that was only under the Lord, in which sense it is, that
he that is called to be a Servant, is the Lords Freeman, that is, in his spirit
estate, for if the Son has made you free, then are you free indeed.

Note by which 1. No man is naturally free.

2 No man by any means can make himself free to any spiritual good.

3 The best man is made free by Jesus Christ.

4 The freedom from Christ is that freedom indeed, in which the dominion of
Satan is destroyed.

3 There is a freedom which is not a freedom indeed, as in carnal, natural,
ordinary things, when the soul is so in bondage to Satan, that it cannot have
leave to restrain it from evil, or to act any good.

4 The natural service or bondage of the flesh was first inflicted on Cham by
his fathers sentence, for mocking of him in his nakedness after wine.

5 His curse was, he should be a Servant of Servants, serving such as served
Satan, and sin in the lusts of the flesh, which was indeed to be a drudge to
the De vill manifested in the flesh.

Note this, that flesh is of the flesh, Joh. 3.6. Heb. 12.9.

1 It withers and dies, and is thence called mortal flesh, 2 Cor. 4.11. yet
Ephesians. 5.29. no man hates his own flesh.

2 Being dead it resolves again into its first matter, which is dust, and
differs herein from the death of soul and spirit.

3 It corrupts alive and dead, and is very noysom to its self, and others, to
see or smell of.

4 It shows their vanity that glory after the flesh, 2 Cor. 11.18.

Note John 1.14.

1 The word was made, or became, flesh, Heb: 2.14. of the seed of David
according to the flesh.

2 In this flesh God manifested himself, 1 Timothy 3.16.

3 In the body consisting of Bones, Nerves, Sinews, covered by the flesh,
called the body of his flesh, He has reconciled us by death.

4 The time of Christ's being here with men, are called the days of his flesh,
Heb. 5.7.

5 The Jewish Antichrist was he that denied Christ come in the flesh, 1 John
4.2. The Gentile Antichrist took the authority and place of Christ to himself,
2 These. 2. the Jewish Antichrist is indeed (...) 2 John 7.

6. 2 Cor. 5.16. We have known Christ after the flesh, henceforth know we him
no more.

7. Heb. 10.20. The flesh is called the veil of Christ, by which the Godhead
and glory of Christ came to be shadowed from the eyes of those unbeleeving
mortals the Lord had to do with, whiles he was among men here below.

8 By which he is said to prepare a new and living way for man to God; men
before coming to God by Aaron, and bringing Beasts, and Fruits, and Foul not
appearing before God empty, which God on the Sons assuming flesh Heb. 10.8, 9.
rejected and now the new way (because the other waxed old, and was done away,)
took place; no man more with the sacrifice of beasts being to appear before
God, but the body God had prepared; Christ to be a Sacrifice for us, to which
the Apostle alludes, Heb. 9.8: the Spirit, the holy signifying this, that as
yet the way of the Holies was not made manifest, whiles, the first Tabernacle
was standing.

9 Christ was put to death in the flesh, 1 Pet. 3.18. and 4.1.

Note the flesh, though it is the meaner and baser part of man, yet it had
means applied to it of God for sanctification, and is said to be the Temple of
the Holy Spirit.

1 In the Lords taking our flesh, in which it was exalted above the nature of
Angels, it being assumed to the divine nature of God, God and Man making one
Savior.

2 Among the Ordinances under the Law, was circumcision of the flesh.

3 The Law of the Ten Commandments was a fleshly Commandment, though of a
spiritual nature, it being to judge the flesh by, and direct the body.

4 The blood of Bulls and Goats that washed away the filth of the flesh, which I
take not to respect the outward uncleanness contracted by any natural
pollution, but soule-pollution: for all pollution is comprehended under
filthiness of the flesh and spirit, which I take thus to be done.

1 That there being sin committed, by which pollution was contracted, the soul
could not draw near to God without some flaine beast, for an offering, by which
the flesh was said to be cleansed and preserved from that filth brought death
corporal.

2 The Spirit shows it was the blood of Christ offered up by the eternal Spirit
to God, cleansed the Conscience from sins, presenting it blameless to God,
which the other offerings could not do; by the other, they came to God, but not
as by this.

Now under the Gospel, Baptism is an Ordinance said to exceed these 1 Pet.
3.21. where to baptize, is a type, and now saves us, being not the putting
away of the spot of the flesh; but the Answer of a good Conscience to God by
the resurrection of Jesus Christ.

3 Yet the flesh of Christ profits nothing, those to whom the Spirit of Christ
is not given, so that all mankind who have not his Spirit, have no profit by
his flesh, because it is the Spirit must teach the flesh to profit by Christ,
or he gains nothing by it.

Vid. Aug. Lib. Quaest. Cap. 67. Anselm on the words, Gregor. Mor. lib. 4. cap.
30. lib. 8. cap. 4.

Romans 8.19. The expectation of the creature (that is, man's body, as in Phi.
1.20.) from without waits for the revelation of the Sons of God, 1 John 3 2.
It being not until then glorified, but corrupt.

Ver. 20. The creature (man) is subjected to vanity, it not having (ought) but
through him that has subjected it in hope.

Ver. 21. For the creature it self (by which is strictly taken the body) being
made after the form of the other creatures (in the creation, from which the
spirit and soul differed) shall be made free from the bondage of corruption
(when at the last day it shall have put on incorruption) into the liberty of
glory (God being to be seen with these eyes, that now cannot see God and live)
of the Sons of Gad in the flesh.

Ver. 22. For we know that all (or the whole, creature) man, in his spirit
soul and body) he before having spoken of the soul distinct, in the hope, and
the body in its vanity, nowspeaks of all) groan together, and travel in pain
together until now: That is, the body labors under the wants of the soul;
the soul, of the body; the spirit is burdened with the temptations of both,
Romans 7.24. until now, that is, none as yet being possessed of this felicity.

Ver. 23. And not only ((...) the body) but they, the spirit and soul) having
the beginning of the spirit (his spirit quickening our spirit, that it cannot
see death, but is partaker of the first resurrection, and the soul supported
by hope, sleeping in Christ is free from corruption, far differing in its
estate from that of the body; and thence after, we our selves is opposed to the
body altogether, before spoken of.

We our selves, in our selves groan, looking out to the felicity, the
redemption of our bodies. Here the revelation of sons is reserved to the last
day, when believers shall be separated from unbeleevers.

Ver. 24. For by hope we are saved, in which he alludes to the looking out, and
expectation of the creature, ver. 19, 20, 23 and shows man is this creature, as
being the only adequate object of hope.

Ver. 25. Who only by patience wait for the manifestation hereof upon the
persuasions of the spirit assuring man hereof by the Word of God.

Note verse 23. Not only the creature (the creature is added in Translation,)
signifying the body distinct from the soul and spirit; or the natural man of
the first creation, from the spiritual of the regeneration, as after.

Mark. 16.15. Go out into all the world, preach the Gospel to every creature.

That the soul, body, and spirit is the key of Scripture, and this hid, the
mystery of salvation is many ways hid; but especially the way of teaching it,
appears in this truth.

1 How men corrupt the sense of the Word, and loose the mind of God, for here
they read every creature, and therefore St. Francis goes and preaches to the
fishes, and why we on this command should not preach to the beasts and fowls,
I know not.

2 Others there are, that say the Gospel is to be preached to every, etc. and
therefore remission of sins and salvation of Christ is to be applied to all the
men on earth.

1 Say they, Christ redeemed all.

2 The Word commands the Gospel to be preached and applied to all.

Note the word (...) usually translated omnis, every, as respecting the number
of things, but when it admits not number, it is read all, as in the same ver.
and Col. 1.6. for ye cannot say in every world, there being but one in all.

N. Now so here, teach the Gospel to every creature, why, no creature is
capable of the teaching of the Gospel, but man; and therefore God enjoined the
teaching of none but him; if he did, as men read he did, then we that teach do
not well to neglect them.

N. (...) I rather therefore translate all the creature, as before all the
world, and then shows,

1. That the whole man has sweet mercies set out in the Gospel.

2. That the Gospel is to be distributed to its several parts by the wise
workman, to make him perfect.

1 There is Gospel to reform the body, and form it to Christ, with most sweet
promises of its resurrection and glory.

2 The soul, the Gospel has multitude of precious balmes for its wounds, and
instructions how to take heed of the flesh, to leave the world, to enjoy
Christ, and what the Lord is, and will be to the soul.

3 The Word divides between soul and spirit, and reproves the ^^^thinesse of
that, and reformes it to the glorious image of the Sons of God.

The Doctors Ministry was the first of these, 1 Cor. 3.1, 3. for as yet they
were not fitted to embrace the more spiritual knowledge of the Gospel, nor were
they reformed in their lowest part.

2 The soul, the Pastors, 1 Pet. 2.25. Peter was Pastor in Jerusalems Church,
and he faith ye are returned (...), unto the Pastor that was an Office as
ministering, and the Bishop that was, he was a Ruling Officer, who was to
reform the affections and mind by exhortations, Romans 8.19, 20. (...).

God having quickened the spirit, he by rules,

1 Teaches the spirit as it is able to hear and know God, and bear his yoke;
which first is concerned in the reforming the outward man, or flesh, and the
soul in the lower parts thereof.

In the ministry of the Teacher, Heb. 6.1. Repentance, Baptism, Resurrection,
and Judgment concerning the flesh, Romans 12.1, 2.

2 In the instructing of the soul in its more excellent part of the mind,
affections, Act. 14.22. and 15.24. (...) 1 Pet. 2.10. (...) ver. 11. fleshly
lusts fight against the soul, 1 Pet. 2.25. (...) the Pastor is of the soul, 1
Pet. 1.22.

3 In the instructing of the Spirit, which is the Evangelists work of ministry.

1 Under which three the Believer is to be perfected, in the first, he is as
a Babe, in the other as a Youth, in the last as a strong man in Christ.

2 These three have as by a line the word laid out to them, 1 Cor. 15.29.
baptized for the deads, the spirit, the soul, the body (...) if the deads are
not altogether raised, etc.

1 Hence Paul taught the Corinthians not as spiritual, but carnal, as babes in
Christ where there are set out spiritual, and carnal, the carnal babes in
Christ 1 Cor. 3.1, 3. 2 Cor: 4.10, 11, 12, 13.

2 Hence Christ says, I have many things to say, but ye cannot bear them now.

3 This beginning is set out, Romans 8.13. If ye by the Spirit do mortify the
deeds of the flesh ye shall live. ver. 23. The first fruits of the spirit, Col.
2.11. to the end, and cap. 3. to the end of the 11. where wrath, uncleanness,
covetousness, lying, etc. are spoken of, and thus the Corinthians first
Epistle is against anger, malice, uncleanness.

4 The Scriptures speaks of the new creature, which God as in the beginning
begins with the Adams creation, Gal. 6.15, 17. Ephesians. 4.23. is the spirit, ver:
24. the soul, ver. 25. the body.

1 Pet. 4.1, 2. Romans 8.11.

Irenaeus Lib 5. Cap. ult.

Commoratus est Dominus sanctorum mortuorum suorum little qui ante dormierunt in
terram stipulationis, and descendit ad cos extrahere eos and salvare eos, etc.
and after:

Ascendit, quid est autem nisi quia and descendit in inferiora terrae? hoc and
David in eum prophetans dixit, and eripuisti animam meam ex inferno inferiori,
etc.

Si ergo Dominus legem mortuorum servavit ut fieret primo-genitus a mortuis,
commoratus usque in tertiam diem in inferioribus terrae, post deinde surgens in
carne, ut etiam figuras clavoru^ ostenderet discipulis, sit ascendit ad patrem,
quomodo non confundenter qui di^unt inferos quidem esse hunc mundum qui sit
secundum nos, interiorem autem hominem ipsorum derelinquentem hic corpus, in
supercaelestem ascendere locum, cum enim dominus in medio umbrae mortis abierit
ubi animae mortuorum erant, post deinde corporaliter resurrexit, and post
resurrectionem assumptus est, manifestum est, quia and discipulorum ejus
propter quos and haec operatus est Dominus, animae abibunt in invisibilem locum
definitum eis a Deo, and ibi usque ad resurrectionem commorabuntur sustinentes
resurrectionem. Post recipientes corpora, and perfect resurgentes, hoc est
corporaliter, quemadmodum and dominus resurrexit, sic veniet ad conspectum Dei.
Nemo enim est discipulus super magistrum; perfectus autem omnis erit sicut
magister ejus. Quomodo ergo magister noster non statim evolans abiit, sed
sustinens definitum a patre resurrectionis suae tempus, quod and per Jonam
manifestum est, post triduum resurgens assumpted est, sic and nos sustinere
debemus ad definitum a Deo resurrectionis nostrae tempus praenunciatum a
prophetis, and sic resurgentes assumi quotquot Dominus hoc dignos habuerit.

Thesence of the latter part is this.

If therefore the Lord kept the law of the dead, that he might become the first
begotten from the dead, and abode in the lower parts of the earth until the
third day, and then after arising in the flesh, that also he might show to his
Disciples the figures of the keys, he forascendeth to the Father, so that they
should not be confounded who affirm hell to be this world, which to us is so,
but here the body forsaking the inward man, it ascends into a super-celestial
place, (that is the Spirit.) For when the Lord departed in the midst of the
shadow of death, where the souls of the dead were, he after arose bodily, and
after his resurrection assumed; as is manifest, because the souls of his
Disciples, for whom the Lord did these things, departed into an invisible place
appointed them of God, and there are to remain until the resurrection,
expecting it after receiving their bodies, they perfectly arise, that is,
bodily, as the Lord arose, and so shall come into the sight of the Lord. No
Disciple is above his Master, but will be perfect, if he be as his Master; as
therefore our Master forthwith did not fly forth and depart, but bearing the
appointed time of his resurrection from the Father; which was also manifested
by Jonas who arising after three days was taken up, so we also ought to bear
the defined time of our resurrection set of God, and foretold of the Prophets,
and so rising as many as the Lord account worthy to be assumed.

In this ye may see how the times near Christ, taught of death and the soul,
and the spirit. I confess I saw not this in any of the Fathers, until I had
written what goes before; many things herein I cannot assent unto, though most
I have, on the Scriptures cited before applied: the Lord give thee judgment
and understanding herein, that thou may know the truth and worship God
therein.

Tertull. says thus of the soul in lib. resurrect.

Quasi nos seorsum ab anima simus, cum totum quod sumus anima sit. Denique sive
anima nihil sumus ne hominis quidem, sed cadaveris nomen si ergo ignoramus
animam ipsa se ignorant: and yet we know not the soul, nor nothing less then
it.

In his book on the first Epistle to the Thessalonians against Marcion.

Apostolus optans ut spiritus noster and corpus and anima sine querela in
adventu Domini conserventur, nam and animam posuit and corpus tam duas res,
quam diversas, licet enim and animae corpus sit aliquod suae qualitatis, sicut
and spiritus. In which I suppose he strangely erres, and knew little of that
which he thought every man that knew any thing, knew very well, the nature of
the spirit being far differing from the soul, as the soul from the body.

De Resurrectione habet enim de suo solummodo cogitare, velle cupere, disponere
ad perficiendum operam carnis expectat; sic ad patiendum societatem carnis
expostulat, etc.

Ireneus Lib 5. Cap. 1.

Suo igitur sanguine redimente nos Domine, and dante animam suam pro anima
nostra, and carnem suam pro nostris carnibus, and effundente spiritum patris,
in admissionem and communionem Dei and hominum, etc.

Ibid. Ut ab initio plasmationis nostrae in Adam, eaquae fuit a Deo inspiratio
vitae unita plasmati animavit hominem, and Animal rationabile ostendit; sic in
fine verbum patris and spiritus Dei adunit us antiquae substantiae plasmationis
Adae viventem, and perfectum efficit hominem capientem, mortui sumus sic in
spirituali omnes vivificemur.

Ibid. Si mortale non vivificat and corruptibile non revocat ad incorruptelam
jam non potens est Deus.

Idem. Perfecius autem homo, commixio and adunitio est animae assumentis
spiritum patris, and admixtae in carne, quae est plasma secundum imaginem Dei.

Ibid. Cum autem spiritus hic commixtus animae, unitur plasmati, propter
effusionem spiritus, spiritualis and perfectus homo factus est, and hic est qui
secundum imaginem and similitudinem Dei factus est; si autem defuerit animae
spiritus, animalis est vere qui est talis and carnalis, derelictus, imperfectus
est, imaginem quidem habens in plasmate similitudinem vero non assumens per
spiritum.

Idem. Sunt ex quibus perfectus homo constat carne, anima, spiritu.

Ibidem. Quid est, aut quid, ut granum tritici seminatur and putrit in terra
nisi, corpora quae in terr^ponuntur, in qua and semina jactantur, and propter
hoc dixit, seminatur in ignobilitate and surgit in gloria.

Idem. Quemadmodum enim corruptelae est capax caro, sic and incorruptelae, and
quemadmodum mortis, sic and vitae.

Concerning the two Opinions of the soul.

1 Whether the soul dies and lies with the body in the grave.

2 Whether it sleep in the body, as the life in the seed sown.

There is no destruction of the faith whether we understand one or the other.

1 Because both agree that it is in the grave.

2 Sleep and death are as one to it, sleep is imago mortis.

3 Both agree that it injoys not God for the time of its being in the grave.

4 That it is with the body to partake of the resurrection, if it be dead it
must be quickened, and that as the mortal body, if asleep then it must be
awakened.

Origin de principiis de anima, Lib. 2.

Haec de rationali anima discutienda magis a legentibus quamstatuta and
definitia protulimus.

Hierm Ep. to Vigilan Lib. 3. Epist.

God is not the God of the dead but of the living, Mark. 12. I am the God of
Abraham, which he applies to the soul, but indeed is more proper to the
spirit, now of the soul he uses, Rev. 6. Ais enim in sinu Abrabae vel in loco
refrigerii, vel subter aram Dei, animas Apostolorum, vel Martyrum consedisse,
nec posse suiis tumulis and ubi voluerint adesse praesentes.

1 Those men whose bodies were burned, given to beasts, and destroyed; not
buried; their souls as wanting the grave and place of rest for souls; are said
to be under the Altar.

2 No other souls have that benefit, but rest with their bodies.

3 The reason, Because they are not in the grave, and with their body, or in
Heaven, where they would be.

4 Have they no better place for the spirit, which the Scripture says is with
God?

Clemens. Ep. on James alludes to this, but is strangely corrupted, so as not
fit to be cited; he tells that as a reward of God, Enoch that was found just
remained longer in the body, others translated to Paradise; others not so just,
their bodies are dissolved, but souls in pleasant places, that in the
resurrection of the dead, their bodies should receive and enjoy the eternal
inheritance.

And here, because of what my adversaries may clandestinely abuse me, and the
truth, calling it Socinianism, Arminianism, or the like. Note I declare against
their doctrine.

1 That what now men against the Scriptures among us, falsely attribute to the
soul, that I hold is in Scripture given to the spirit, who suffers at its
departure out of the body by the death of the soul, weal with God, or woe with
Satan and sinners.

2 The souls of good and bad, whiles dead or a sleep, remain so until the
resurrection of the body at the last day.

3 That good and bad then shall in soul, body, and spirit, be raised, united,
and judged by Jesus Christ and suffer in all evil of pain and loss, if
reprobates; and enjoy blessedness, and joy, if they belong to Gods election.

4 It shall be the same body, soul, and spirit, and not others, against the
Doctrine of the Remonstants and Socinians, which I could sufficiently prove,
but that it is not my purpose at this time to speak any more hereunto, then to
prevent offenses and scandals that may arise either through the disaffection or
mis understanding of men.

To understand what the Spirit of Christ is to us, by the help of the divine
Essence of the Godhead, assisting the same thereunto, is of special
concernment.
1 CHrist speaking of his humane spirit says, Job. 6.63. It is the Spirit
quickens, the flesh profits nothing; here by Spirit is meant that more
excellent part of the humane nature, in Scripture opposed to flesh.

2 1 Cor. 15.45, The first man Adam (by sin) came to be a living soul, the
last Adam a live-making spirit, Christ being made and fitted of God on purpose,
to quicken the spirits of men dead in them, by Adams sin, in which the great
mystery of the Gospel is hid.

Joh. 5.21. As the Father raises and makes alive the dead, which was Christ,
Act. 3.15. and 4.10. and 5.30. and 13.30. whom God made a quickening Spirit,
and raised his dead soul and body from their several deaths.

So the Son makes alive whom he will, which is the spiritual work of Christ's
spirit on the spirits of the Elect, with which compare, 1 Cor. 15.21. As by man
came death, also by man came the resurrection of the dead. Ver. 22. As in Adam
all dye, so in Christ shall all be made alive; to whom as Mediator before the
giving up of the Kingdom, death shall be done away and put under his feet, in
which is the utter overthrow of death, etc. But to return.

John. 5.26. As the Father has life in himself (in the raising of Christ) so
he gave the Son to have life in himself. Ver. 24. That whosoever believes in
him that sent him, and hears his word might have eternal life; and not come
into judgment, but has passed from death unto life; which of necessity must
be meant of the spirits death and quickening.

1 Note, This quickening of the spirit, and passing from death to life, is
called the first resurrection, Revel. 20.5. It being the sole work of Christ in
the time of grace, to quicken the spirits of the Elect, and to make them
partakers of this first resurrection, which precedes that of the soul and body;
so that the resurrection which men have by the soul and body of Christ at the
last day, is no profit to that man, who is not first raised or quickened by the
spirit, to the first resurrection.

2 This is opened 2 Cor. 4.14. Knowing he who raised the Lord Jesus, also does
raise us by Jesus, and shall present us with you.

Romans 8.9. Ye are not in the flesh but in the spirit, if the spirit of God
dwell in you, but if any have not the spirit of Christ, he is none of his.

1 You have the Spirit of God said to dwell in men.

2 The having of the Spirit of Christ.

3 Without the one, man cannot please God; without the other, he is not Christ's.

Ver. 14. Those are led by the Spirit of God, are the Sons of God. Gal. 4.6.
Into whose hearts because they are Sons, God by his Spirit sends forth the
Spirit of his Son, teaching them to cry abba Pather.

The Spirit of God is usually called the Spirit of promise (the Spirit, the
holy) which we read the Holy Spirit, the Spirit of God given as a seal of the
grace of God in Christ to man, and the work done on them.

Romans 8.26. The spirit also helps our infirmities for we know not what we
should pray for as we ought; but the Spirit it self makes intercession for us
with groans that cannot be uttered, Ver. 27. He that searches the heart
knows what is in the mind of the Spirit, because he makes intercession for
the Saints according to the will of God.

Note, Where by the Spirit, and Spirit it self, the Spirit of Christ, sent
forth of God into the hearts of Saints, be not intended, is commended to your
judgments to consider of, or where the Spirit, the Holy.

1 Because here is no especial epithet to it, as usually given to God the
Spirit.

2 It is the spirit of intercession, which is the Spirit of Christ, stirring up
in us sighs and groans, as in him.

3 Bearing our infirmities, which is done by Christ as man, Heb. 4.15. and c. 5
2. Act. 9 4.

4 God the searcher of the heart, is put as distinct from the Spirit of Christ
in the heart, who is said to intercede according to the Will of God.

5 This Spirit is not ours, as it is not Gods, for says he, We know not what
we should pray for as we ought; whereby we, is meant, the whole regenerate man,
who without Christ's Spirit assist him in prayer, knows not how to pray, nor for
what to pray as he ought.

Appli. If this be truth, the Doctrine taught makes Christ void, and in him God
is put off from us, because none can come to the Father but by him.

Illust. To set before your eyes the spirits resurrection, see it fulfilled in
Cyrus a heathen lying under a dead spirit, when quickened, works wonderful
things, Hag. 1.15. 2 Chronicles. 36.22. he is not that man he was before.

The excellency of Christ's Spirits operation in the Elect, is wonderful and
precious.

1 The Spirit of life in Jesus Christ gave the new Law or Covenant (as Moses
the Mediator of the Old gave that) by which we are freed from Moses Law, called
the Law of sin and death, Romans 8.2.

2 It is called the Law of the spirit of life.

1 None being under this Law, until quickened by the Spirit of life, but were
under the law of death.

2 It is the law of the spirit of life, in which those made alive must walk in,
and live under it, as its Law, as Moses Disciples under its.

3 This Law was for the spirit to walk with God in; when men are said to walk
in the spirit, and live in the spirit, when men are only said to please God.

4 That this is meant of ours, and Christ's Spirit, because opposed to the
flesh, which cannot walk in this Law. Romans 8.8.

Note, It is one means by which the Spirit of Christ is distinguished from God
the Spirit, is that which comes by hearing, Gal. 3.2, 5. which differs far
from that Act. 10.44. called the Holy Ghost, said to fall on them, having the
gift of tongues.

The Spirit of God after is given for confirmation of such as do believe Ephesians.
4.30. and manifested it self in dreams, visions, tongues, discerning of
spirits, prophecy.

The Spirit of Christ works faith, love, desires, Gal. 5.22. which Origin
would have to be meant of the regenerate man's own Spirit, which indeed is a
fruit of the Spirit of Christ in us; for of our selves we are not able to think
a good thought, It is Christ that works all in all.

Illust. Act. 8.12. People of Samaria, Believed Phillip which was the act of
the spirit of Christ in them, who yet ver. 16. are said none of them to have
received the Holy Ghost; though by the first the Spirit of Christ they were
baptized and so said to be Christ's, ver. 16. after which ver. 17. they were
established having the Holy Spirit powered out upon them, by the laying on of
hands by the Apostle, the one is mediately by hearing given men, the other,
since the Apostles days immediately of God.

1 To this being of Christ in his Spirit in the Saints, the Apostle eminently
alludes, saying, Christ in you is the hope of glory, as Col. 1.27. now if he
have the Spirit of God in him, God is in him; if of Christ, Christ is in him.

2 By the Spirit of Christ, before he has the Spirit of God in him, he has
the hope of glory, but not the seal of glory, which distinguishes the spirits
in their distinct operations.

3 Thus the Apostle, 2 Cor. 13.3. Since ye seek a proof of Christ speaking
in me, which to you ward is not weak, but is mighty in you, Ver. 5. Know you
not Jesus Christ is in you except you be Reprobates; Romans 8.9, 10. If any have
not the Spirit of Christ, he is none of his. And if Christ be in you (that is,
by his Spirit, as before) the body is dead because of sin, but the spirit
(that is, man's spirit) is life (being quickened)) because of righteousness.
Gal. 2.20. I live, yet not I but Christ lives in me; the life that I now live
is by faith in the Son of God, which comes by hearing, and is an effect of the
Spirit of Christ, sent out of God the Spirit, as well as Father, unto the heart
of sons Ephesians. 3.17. Christ lives in the heart by faith.

4 The use of this spirit is hinted at, Phil. 1.19. This shall turn to my
salvation through your prayers and the supply of the Spirit of Christ. Phil.
4.13. I can do all things through Christ that strengthens me, Act. 16.7. Some
translations read, The Spirit of Jesus suffered them not.

5. Joh. 3.5. Except a man be born of Water and of the Spirit he cannot enter
into the Kingdom of God. Here by Spirit, I understand the Spirit of Christ, by
which he is one Spirit with the Lord, and grafted unto him by baptism.

Reas. 1. It is not said the Holy Spirit, but (...) of the Spirit only, as
before.

2. Ver. 12. In this saying, Christ tells them, he told them of earthly things,
it being to be done by the quickening Spirit of Christ's humanity assisted
thereunto by his divine power.

3 Hence it is the Scripture says, he that is in Christ is a new creature.

4. Verse. 6. That is born of the Spirit, signifies, that regeneration is by
Christ's Spirit only, not of our Spirits. The Spirit of Christ working Faith
and Obedience to Christ in Baptism, in which is regeneration.

Application 1. Men are taught that there is no other Spirit, but God the
Spirit who works these; and all that have any of these, have the gift of the
Spirit of God.

2 The Spirit of Christ which works these, is not known, men oppose against
it, and deny it to be, who yet would be Christians.

3 Hence, as Christ said to his Disciples, so the men of this age know not what
spirits they are of, that have the Spirit of Christ in them, and not the Spirit
of God.

4 Few men have the Spirit of God, and they that have it, have it in a hidden
way which is by dreams and visions; being all that, as I know of, as yet
accompanies the gift of the Spirit of God in these days; to which I might say
something, or may do when this generation is made fit for it, Act. 2.17, 18. By
which men shall prophecy, I speak not this to glory in, but to glorify God in
it, and in his accomplishing his truth, of which Husse had sweet experiences,
as his Letters testifies cited by Fox.

1 I speak not this to countenance any fancies or corruptions among men, try
the spirits if they are of God. Therefore

2 I speak it, that men take heed least they scoff at the grace of God, and
his gifts, as those, Act. 2.13. a work which is done to the grief of the
spirit in gross manner amongst us, and that among the learned, for which, as a
judgment it is kept from the world, and men hindered from looking to God for it.

3 I speak it to encourage those that have it, to see if they have the spirit
of Christ, and then to look on this as the seal of God, to that Christ has
done in thee, and on thee, to thy exceeding joy.

4 When God shall restore the Church, and this glorious mercy in its glory to
men, how will they then wonder at the enmity and evil that was in the world
reigning among those men who professed themselves Saints, and Sons of God,
having the spirit in them.

Note, Because man is carnal and needs helps even in these, that are,
comparatively, but earthly things, compared with other divine mysteries of God
and Christ, I commend these considerations,

1 The unknown excellency of the spirit of a man, as in Paul, 1 Cor. 5.3, 4.
For I verily as absent in body but present in spirit, have judged already as
though I were present.

Note, Though absent in body, yet was he present in spirit, though his body
(being at Phillippi) was one hundred of miles from them.

2 His presence in spirit was such, as that it was as sufficient as if he had
been bodily judging the man with them.

Verse. 4. In the name of the Lord Jesus Christ, when you are gathered together,
and my spirit with the power of our Lord Jesus.

Colos. 2.5. For though I am absent in the flesh, yet am I present in the
Spirit with you (a place in which Paul never was, ver. 1.) joying, and
beholding your order and steadfastness of faith in Christ.

Now thus far the spirit of a man may do, even be present with men afar off
from his body, and joy in their good, and suffer in their sufferings, though it
can but look on it, it is the Spirit of the Lord Jesus that acts in and over
all only, who is not only a spectator or stander by in his spiritual
presence among the Saints, but walks among the seven golden Candlesticks, and
acts, and knocks, etc.

Again 1 Cor. 14.32. The spirit of the Prophets is subject to the Prophets.

First Conclusion, That there is a notable place here, to say with Solomon, Who
knows the spirit of a man, Eccles. 3.21.

2 If in the spirit of man is such an unknown excellency, how then is the
Spirit of Christ.

3 God making Christ and fitting him with such a Spirit, by which he might
raise the dead spirit, and communicate himself to it, and be always present
with it, through the operation and assistance of the infinite God dwelling in
him, 1 Cor. 15. ver. 45. God making this the end of making Christ, Isa. 11.23.

4 Whiles Christ John 17.11. says, I am no more in the world, that is, in
soul and body, yet he says, ver. 23. I in them, and thou in me, which must be
in his Spirit, speaking of himself as distinct from God, in the person of the
Mediator.

Of the natural spirits of Men.
THese are differing in themselves (the bodies differ not in height, beauty,
and strength, in quality and condition of constitution, as a Giant from a
Dwrafe, as a strong man differs from him that is never so weak, and the most
beautiful and personable man differs not from the most deformed Blackmore,) so
much as one natural man's spirit from ano^^^r.

Some are strong, some weak; some rash, some patient; some proud, some humble;
some cruel, some meek; some well, some sick; some high some low.

In which corruptly remain the appearances of the seven Spirits of God, Isa.
11.2. Wisdom, Might, Knowledge, Understanding, as a capacity to receive them,
or the Spirit of Christ, in whom all these treasures are.

Of whose unknown worth the Scriptures speak, Eccles. 3.21. Who knows the
spirit of a man.

Eccles. 11.5. There is not to thee the knowledge of the way of the spirit, nor
how the bones of him does grow that are in the womb, etc. which proves it is
spoke of the natural spirit of man.

Note it clears that objection that may be made, How does the spirit of a man,
his body being in one place, come to be in another; And shows.

1 The spirit has a way of its own, that the body has not.

2 The way of it is unknown to any, even the wisest.

3 Especially to those who know not that they have a spirit at all in them.

4 To all such, who though they know they have it in them, yet it is dead, and
never found the use of them.

Note, The use of the spirit is excellent, Prove. 18.14. it being the spirit of
natural man that bears his infirmities, as the Spirit of Christ in the
believer bears his.

The good man is said to have another spirit, as differing from the natural
man's, Numb. 14.24. compared with Chap. 13.30, 31. show how the spirit in a man
does change him and make him differ from others.

It is a great question may be made, Whether Christ's humane Spirit was not in
being before it was joined to the flesh, soul, in the Virgins womb.

1. 1 Pet. 1.11. The Spirit of Christ is said to have been in the Prophets of
old, which is that part of the Lord which was oynted, as distinct from the
anointing of the Holy Spirit.

2 Because it is said, the spirit of Christ is the spirit of Prophecy.

3. John 3.13. The Son of man, is said, as man, to come down from heaven, which
was that part of him called his Spirit, which also now whiles he is on earth,
is said to be in heaven, as the Son of man.

4 The Godhead cannot be said to go a loce, ad locum.

5 The Scripture speaks of Christ in his being to the Saints long before his
incarnation, Isa. 63.9.

6 How Christ is Rev. 1.4. He which is, and was, and is to come, etc. ver. 8.
that he is Alpha and Omega.

7 That he is the first fruits, and the foundation of the Church.

8. 1 Cor. 15.47. (...); How he is said to be from heaven, and in what? and how
to be the second Man? and whether he had not in spirit a being when first
promised Adam.

9 Before Abraham was I am, says the Lord, speaking as Mediator, Joh. 10.58.
Verse. 56. Abraham rejoiced to see my day and saw it, and was glad, Ver. 57.
Thou art not fifty years old, and have thou seen Abraham? that this is only
fulfilled in the Divine nature of Christ is the question.

10 The Rabbis understand, that always the word Adonai is distinct in the Old
Testament from Jehova in the persons signified by them, God, and Christ,
unless some other divine Epithet be added.

11. That it was the Lord Christ appeared in the form of man before he had
flesh.

12 He is said to be the same yesterday, and to day, and for ever; he was man
yesterday, by having man's spirit before he took flesh, and when he had flesh,
and since, viz. that is, the Lord was Mediator for poor man before and since,
Heb. 13.8. he was in flesh among us.

13 He is said to be the beginning of the creation of God, Revel. 3.14.

14 Nor is it any where said, God inspired into him his Spirit, but the Spirit
overshadowed the Virgin, Luke 1.35.

Object. 2 Cor. 11.4. For if he that comes preaches another Jesus whom we
have not preached, or if ye receive another spirit which we have not received,
or another Gospel which ye have not accepted, ye might well bear with him; so
that it seems the spirit Christians have is but one.

Resp. 1. He speaks of the preaching Jesus.

2 The receiving the Spirit by that preaching.

3 That that was preached of Jesus was the Gospel.

Note, Which shows, that the Spirit here, was that came by preaching, and by
that means was ordinarily received, which was the Spirit of Christ, not that
called the Holy Spirit of God, which is also one Spirit proper to the person of
Christ, for excellency, power, life, and perfection.

3 That the Spirit of God and Christ in Scripture are variously distinguished,
I have proved before.

4 Christ was not man without the one, nor God without the other.

5 The work of the Godhead in Christ, was to make effectual the work of the
Spirit to man, that was humane in him.

Hence is he said to offer up himself on the eternal spirit to God,
distinguishing God the Spirit in him from that spirit of man in himself, Heb.
9.8.

6 To add one place more for distinction, Act. 5.3. Why has Satan filled thy
heart to lie to the Holy Ghost.

Ver. 10. How is it that ye have agreed together to tempt the Spirit of the
Lord.

Annanias bringing not the full price after he had promised it to God, and
saying, it was the whole to the Church, brake his vow to God, and lied to the
Holy Spirit; he being by the Spirit moved hereto, to a spiritual end.

Saphira being privy to the deceit only, but did not come with it before the
Church with her Husband; the evil of the fact was mainly in her Husband;
again, had she not been demanded, she would, it is like, have been silent in
it, the Text only says she was privy to it, not consenting.

1 Note hence, the Word says, the being privy, and the concealment of the fact
was a tempting of the Spirit of the Lord.

2 Note, The lying to the Holy Spirit was a more dreadful evil of a higher
nature, more immediately against God, then this of tempting the Spirit of the
Lord; In the lesser evil was one, in the greater the other; in the private the
one, in the public sin the other.

3 Note, Satan filled Annanias heart, but after that Annanias tempted Saphira,
who agree together to tempt the Spirit of the Lord, Mark. 2.8.

4 Note, Here is the ground of the fearfulness of the judgment, because it
was committed against the Spirit of God and Christ, and their operations in
them.

Object. John 1.13. 1 John 3.9. and 4.7. and 5.1.4.18. Men are said to be born
of God, therefore the Spirit Joh. 3.5. must be by the Spirit of God, which is
the Spirit of Christ, and cannot be understood that the humane spirit of
Christ, has any hand herein.

Resp. These are excellently distinguished and cleared, Tit. 3.5. by the
washing of regeneration: Mark, there is water and the Spirit of Christ, for
without the Spirit can be no regeneration.

2 He comes and after tells us of renewing of the Holy Spirit, when the Spirit
of God renews in man in a more divine way, this their regeneration in them,
Ephesians. 4.23. believers are to be renewed in the Spirit of their mind.

3 In the work of the Spirit of Christ, they are said to be Christ's, 1 Cor.
6.17. Romans 8.9. and having the Spirit of God, Gods, Romans 4 18. Ephesians. 1.13

4 These are more clearly spoke of, and joined together, Joh. 17.10. all mine,
that have the work of my Spirit quickening them, are thine, thy Spirit
renewing that Spirit of the mind within them.

5 That of Joh. 3.3. of being born from above is one thing; that of verse. 5. is
another, of being born of water and the Spirit.

1 By the one, men see the Kingdom of God, verse. 3.

2 By the other, men enter the Kingdom, verse. 5.

3. Verse. 12. distinguish them, that are Verse. 5. said to be earthly things,
because done on earth by the Spirit of the Lord in the use of means, and not
comparable, for it is divine Nature and glory, with the other.

4 The other is from above, that is, God and Heaven, and called in comparison
hereof heavenly things.

Object. 1 Cor. 12.3. No man speaking in the Spirit of God says, Jesus is
accursed; nor is any able to call Jesus Lord, but in the Holy Spirit, therefore
it is the Holy Spirit men are born of.

Resp. 1. Here is spoken of the first part of Gods Spirit on man, which is to
discover the things of the Kingdom, that so they be brought to believe them,
without which they call not Christ Lord, and having this they cannot despise
the Lord.

2 By which believing, the Spirit of Christ is introduced.

3 After all which, the believers being baptized, the Spirit was given to renew
that Spirit of the mind that was in them, by which the things of God came to be
apprehended more divinely and clearly; thus, the Disciples after their knowing
Christ, Joh. 14.26. by the Spirit knew him more divinely.

The Spirit of Christ perfects in men, the image of the Lord in the conformity
of his conversation to the Gospel, be ye followers of me as I am of Christ, and
learn of me, says the Lord Jesus, I am humble and meek. which is called a
putting on of Christ,

The Spirit of Christ quickens the spirit, when the Spirit of God renewes in
man the image of God lost, and again indues him with his likeness, by which he
is a new creature to his God, Hence Coloss. 3.4. When Christ who is our life
shall appear, etc. Verse. 3. Our life is hid with Christ; before he says they
were dead (that is with Christ) and now are alive with Christ, and their life
was hid with Christ's life, which lived in them, and quickened them, which the
Apostle Paul clears by his manner of speaking, Gal. 2.20. I am crucified with
Christ, nevertheless I live (that is, spiritually, which as if he had said
amiss, he again corrects, with a) yet not I, but Christ lives in me, and the
life which I now live in the flesh, I live by faith in the Son of God.

Note, in this to the full is opened that Joh. 5.17. My Father works hereunto,
and I work, Verse. 19. The Son can do nothing of himself, but what he sees
the Father do, whatever he does, those things also does the Son.

Verse. 21. As the Father raises up the dead and quickens them, even so the
Son quickens whom he will.

Verse. 26. As the Father has life in himself, so has he given to the Son
to have life in himself, that was in the Spirit of his mind, Hence he laid
down his life, and had power to take it again.

Note, Moses had not the less of the Spirit, by what the seventy had; nor
Christ, by what the elect have, the fountain is ever full.

Illust. If as in 2 Chronicles. 18.20, 21. one spirit is a lying spirit in the mouth
of all Ahabs Prophets; how much more shall the Spirit of Christ be in, and
direct all the elect of God.

Object. That was an Angelical Spirit.

Resp. The spirit of man was of an Angelical nature, having no flesh, nor
bones; yea if the Angels were created ex prima materia, as most hold, it may be
of a more excellent nature then they, being breathed of God into man, by which
man is called the offspring of God.

2 The Spirit of Christ, as joined to the Spirit of God, and sent out of God
into the hearts of his Elect, by far exceeds the Angels (who have their
dependence on him as on their head) in the power and way he has of
communicating it self to men.

3 By this, God makes the Spirit of the Man Christ, with his soul and body, to
be a root, a second Adam, by which believers receive life in spirit from him,
as death from Adam; without Gods assistance, the Spirit of Christ cannot be in
mine, nor work on mine at all.

Objections made by Mr.

1 That soul and spirit were expressed exegeticos, and that they are but one,
though they had two names.

Resp. That to maintain these two to be one, against the express word of God,
1 These. 5.23. Heb. 4.12. John 12.10. is heresy, Luke i. 46.47. and Luke 23.46.
with Act. 2.3.

Obj. Offering the testimony of Luke 1.46, 47. he said, That whereas it was
read my soul, and my spirit, it may be read, my soul my, soul.

Resp. To put down soul for spirit, the word soul being before, was to take
away from the Word of God, and to be liable to the curse of God; yea, to be
accursed, though an Angel.

Object. The spirit of man is the Spirit of God.

Resp. Was My that, that was blasphemy because God the Spirit is said to be one
with the created spirit of man, sinful, filthy, dead.

I confess in have I said, that the Spirit. Romans 8.1. was the Spirit of God,
which is meant the spirit of man quickened by Christ.

Quest. What the distinct difference was between the spirit and soul of man.

Resp. Solomon, Eccles. 3.21. who knows the spirit of a man, with whose death
the knowledge of it dyed also.

2 Yet a more apparent difference to distinguish them cannot be, then this,
that the one (the spirit) has its being imediately from God, Eccles. 12.7. the
other (the soul) from man, Exodus 1.5. Genesis 46.24. Heb. 7.10.

3 They in the dissolution of the fabric of Man, are distinguished the spirit
returning to God, the soul to the grave.

Note, So that to affirm soul and spirit to be one, I declared to be false
doctrine, and the Teachers, false Teachers that taught it.

Object. Genesis 2.8. God breathed into man the breath of life: Man therefore had
but one life, which was his soul life.

Resp. The word is corruptly translated, it is not life, but (...) lives, and
so the spirit life is comprehended under the same word.

Object. After it is said, and man became a living soul, therefore man had no
other but a soul in him.

Resp. The words are thus to be read (...) and the Adam the body, was for the
living soul, which had but one of the lives, the body being to the soul,
especially it being near to it, partaking with it in eating, drinking,
suffering etc. which the spirit does not, but is of a more sublime, and
excellent nature.

1 The soul comes from man with the body, in its beginning.

2 It goes to the grave with the body in its ending.

3 It is not said, the Adam was for the souls life, as before.

Quest. Matthew. 22.27. Mark. 12.30. Luke 10.27. Thou shall love the Lord thy God
with all thy soul, with all thy mind, with all thy strength, which is the
body, which the soul, which the spirit?

Resp. 1. The Question is propounded concerning a command of the law, which
command was given after man's fall by sin, and the spirits death.

2 The commands were given the fleshy part of man, whence it is said, by the
Law no flesh living can be justified, Ezekiel. 20.18. Romans 8.3. Romans 3.20.

3 Hence for the spirit of man, it could have no releife by the Law, Gal. 3.21.
it could not make alive, that is, the dead spirit, as Christ was to do, 1 Cor.
15.45.

4. Romans 3.19. What the Law speaks, it speaks to them under the Law.

1 The spirit when alive, it was not under any dominion of the Law, man then
was a law to himself, he needed none, nor was any given until two thousand
years after man's fall.

2 When it was dead it was under none, for Romans 7.1. The Law has dominion over
a man only whiles alive, not when dead; therefore Christ first quickens the
spirits before he give them that Law.

3 When the spirit is quickened by Christ, it is dead to the Law of the flesh,
and freed, and in subjection only to the Law of the Spirit of life, Romans 2.8.
distinguished Romans 3.27.

4 Here are not three parts but four, Heart, Mind, Soul, Strength.

1 Which shows that the Spirit, Soul, and Body are not aimed at, as in the
other Scriptures.

2 That here as the command was given the Natural man, the (...) the natural
man's parts of Heart, and Soul, Strength, and Mind, are intended and not the
Spirit, that was dead in man, and was not capable of obedience or command.

Object. The Law is spiritual, Romans 7.14.

Resp. The Law indeed, is said to be spiritual, but no where said to be a Law
of the Spirit.

2 The spirituality of the Law.

1 Is in mentioning the Name of God, and forbidding Idol-worship, and injoyning
the love of God.

2 It is spiritual in condemning coveting.

3 Yet see that God had a mind to the Soul and Body in these commands.

1 Consider the preface, I am the Lord thy God. etc. in which the deliverance
of the soul and body, not the spirit is mentioned.

2 By this Law men were judged by the Magistrate, to whom the soul was
subjected, not the spirit, Romans 13.1.

3 Hence Ezekiel. 18.20. the soul is said to dye by, and to be under this Law.

I proposed this to him.

1 That no Scripture says at death, the soul returns to God, or goes
immediately to Heaven, before the resurrection, but that it goes to the grave.

2 That no Saint ever commended his soul to God at death, but his spirit,
which is only said to return to God that gave it, and the Adam to the dust and
earth.

Ap. If the Scripture says in many places, the soul goes to the grave, and in
no place, that it immediately goes to God before the resurrection, who shall
assert it, and not teach false Doctrine, and not teach another Gospel?

2 If the Scripture says, at the death of a man, only the spirit goes to God
immediately for its judgment; and yet men teach that we have no spirit, or
make soul and spirit one, and confound those God has distinguished.

To which I add, this most weighty Query and Objection may be made; Since that
the spirit comes from God, whether then it be polluted or not, as it comes out
of Gods hand?

Resp. Adam sinning as a general person, dyed, not only in his own spirit, but
brought death on the spirits of his whole race, for in Adam all dye, whose
death was in spirit.

2 Hence God giving the Spirit, gives it not possessed of that spiritual life
as he gave it to Adam in its first being, but that it comes into man now
deprived of his first life and excellency:

3 That it is thus given dead, appears, in that as a remedy, Christ by God is
given to man, as a quickening Spirit to restore and raise the dead spirit of
man again.

4 As Adam, so Christ, is designed by grace a general person for good to the
Elect of God, as Adam was by Justice for death to all.

5 It is clear the spirits now created of men (that the grace of God might
abound) are not in the capacity Adams was before, but in that it was after its
fall.

Obj. Some will cry out, this is injustice in God, for God to give men a dead
spirit, and unbeseeming God.


