THE Last Will and Testament Of RICHARD BRANDON Esquire; Heads-man, and
Hangman to the Pretended PARLIAMENT. With his several LEGACIES to the
Parliament and COUNSEL of STATE. With a true Relation of all his good
Quallities, also his ungodly life, and sudden Death; and how before his end,
the Devil appeared ununto him, putting him in mind of the late good service
he did for his Masters the Regicides in murdering their most gracious
Sovereign Lord, King Charles the First; with one Tench that provided Hooks,
Pullyes and Roaps to force him, now grievously troubled with a Devil, and
consumes and rotts away. With diverse Instructions left to his Executors William
Low, and Sheeps-head Rafe. Justified by one Mr. Reynalds, and Mr. Carpenter,
and diverse of his Neighbors.

The Cities new ^ Mark of Honor.

Printed for the good of the STATE. 1649.

THE Last Will and Testament Of RICHARD BRANDON Esquire; Heads-man, and
Hangman to the Pretended PARLIAMENT.
IN the Name of the Parliament and Council of State, Amen. I Richard Brandon
Esquire, being sore sick in Body, but in perfect Memory, Do make this my Last
Will and Testament in manner and form following,

Imprimis. I give and bequeath my Soul to the Parliament, to be disposed of as
they shall think fit.

For my Body, That I desire may be Entombed in Westminster Abbey near Doctor
Dorrislaw, and to be attended thither by the Supreme Authority and Council of
State.

I give and bequeath 500 yards and a half of a Mourning Ribband, called
Gallow-grass, to all and every Member of Parliament, that they may wear the
same, or otherwise use it at their own discretions.

Also, I desire my Wife that every Member of the late Court of Justice for
trial of the King that attends me to the grave, may have close mourning out of
my Wardroabe.

I also give and bequeath to all and every Member of Parliament a precious
Receipt called a Hempen Cawdle to cure them of any disease.

I give unto John Bradshaw Lord President of the Council of State, a Receipt of
Choak-wort to cure his Conscience: Like wise I give and bequeath to him and his
heirs Parliament everlasting my Manor House of Newgate, that he and his Family
may live in it, and enjoy it to their lives ends: and in case the present
Parliament shall adjourn, if the people shall think fit, it may be thither,
where each one may take his place according to his Degree: And in case it be
too little, that they may have egress and regress, to a House known by the name
of the Sessious-House situate in the Old Bailey London, with all and every the
Appurtinances belonging thereto, to have, use, and occupy at their own
discretions, life everlasting, Parliament without end.

I give and bequeath to the ^a^e House of Lords, and to all and every Member
belonging to the same, my Manor House known by the name of Traitors Reward,
situate on Tower Hill for them and their heirs for ever; but that none shall
make entry thereon under the degree of a Lord, except it be the Speaker of the
House of Commons, the Lord President of the Council of State, upon forfeiture
of their heads.

I give and bequeath to Col. Poppum, Col. Doan, and Colonel Blague, the
Parliaments Admirals at Sea, my Honor of Wapping-Dock toward the Reparations
of their late losses at Sea; provided they enter not thereon, till the King
return into England, and then after his return it shall be lawful, for one, or
all three to enter thereon, provided, that they stay not there longer then the
next Spring-Tyde; and then it go directly in their Line to the heirs Male of
their own bodies from one generation to another Par^iament without end.

I give and bequeath unto the Iuncto and all Rebels in general, whether
distinguished by the names of Supream^sts, Commons, Committees Sequestrators,
Excise-men, Pursuivants. etc. my Manor of Tyburn, in the County of Middlesex,
with one parcel of Land lying by Mary-bone Park to build a Chapel on, and one
piece of Ground lying by the Kings highway for a burying place for them and
their heirs for ever, with all the Wood and Timber thereon for their Lives:
Provided, that they build a College on the said percel of Ground known by the
name of Doctor S^^ries-^app, and that Dr. Fairfax, Dr. Cromwell, Mr Goodwyn and
Mr Owen, shall be heads thereof, take their degrees there, and Commence
accordingly.

I give and bequeath several Classes of Blood to these persons following; I
give a Glass of Straffords blood to cure the three Kingdoms of the Plague,
commonly called the Bloudy-Issue.

I give a Glass of Canterburies blood to seroboams-Calves, I mean the Presby
torian Ministry, Dr Burgess, Mr Calamy, Sedgwick, Gouge, etc. to cure the
Church of all Heresies, Schisms, Blasphemies, Treasons, Nonsense, and
Contradictions.

I give a Glass of Tomkins, and Challoners blood to the wisdom of Gui^d hal, I
mean the Major and wise Aldermen of the City.

A G^ass of Burleighs blood, to the consideration of all Loyal hearts.

A Glass of commixed blood of Lucas and Lisle to Tom Lord Fairfax, and his
heirs.

I give and bequeath a Viol of the late Kings Blood to his Excellency Thomas
Lord Fairfax, General of the Forces raised for the defense of the King and
Kingdom, the Privilege of Parliament, the true Protestant Religion, and the
Laws of England, to be shared between him and his Lieutenant Genesis Cromwell, and
desire that this Viol may be retained and intayl'd on them and their Children,
ayders, assi^ters or abbetters for ever and ever Parliament everlasting.

I give a Glass of the Lord Capels blood to comfort all drooping Loyalists that
are afraid to suffer death for the testimony of a good Conscience.

I give both my eyes to the Commonwealth, that they may see how they are
cheated and deluded by perjured rogues and villains.

I give my Members to Harry Martin, with a proviso that he provide for my
Daughters (his worships sinners) in the suburbs.

I commend my Wife and aged Mother to the care and protection of the Council of
State, and to live with my Lady Fairfax and Mistress Cromwell all their days.

I give my Curtains and Hangings to the Judges of the High Court of Justice.

I give to Alderman Atkins all the old Shirts and Smocks in my Wardroabe to
make him clean, that he may be no more called Shit-breech.

I commit the keeping of all my ^lipps and Gibbets to the two Sheriffs, to be
used hereafter for the good of the Aldermen and City.

I bequeath my Neck-verse to all those that take upon them to Preach, before
they can read.

I freely give and bequeath into the hands of the Army, and every member of
them, my Burning-Iron with the mark T, because they shall be known to Tom T --
their General, till they T troop, T to, T tyburne.

Lastly, I (for want of an Heir of my own Body to enjoy my Office) do Will and
Ordain William Lo, and Sheeps-head-Ralph my Executors, to see this my last
Will and Testament faithfully performed, without any Fraud or Couzening,
according to the true sense and meaning hereof; and all and every the several
Legacies to be paid to the Persons before named, before the next
Rogation-Sunday after my death: And this my Will to stand and remain in full
force, revoking all former Wills, Bills, Bonds, Gifts or Promises whatsoever.

Witness my Hand and Seal, The mark of Richard ^ Brandon.
Witnesses. Joh. Reynolds, Gun-smith Will. Shelton, Halter-maker Tho. Jarman,
Gibbet-maker Rich. Axe, Cutler. Abrah. Carpenter, alias Jews-eares.

Will. Reve Scribe.
Sealed and delivered June 20. 1649. In the first year of the Subjects Liberty.
The manner of the ungodly life, and fearful death of Richard Brandon, Esquire.
one of the Parliaments Executioners of their Lord and Sovereign King CHARLES
the I.
THis Hangman Richard Brandon, being a lewd and notorious villain, that
formerly had been twice Condemned by the Law to be Hanged for having two Wives,
and by the mercy of the State pardoned as a fit Instrument of their new
Reformation; was naturally addicted to two of his Mrs qualities, viz.
Drunkenness and Lust; he was the only Son of Gregory Brandon, and claimed the
Gallows by inheritance; was a man for his time faithful to the Parliament and
State: The first he beheaded was the Earl of Strafford, before which time
(because he would be a good Proficient in his Art) he beheaded Dogs and Catts,
and others he quartered and hanged, so that in little time he became his
Arts-master, and proved as unlucky a Hangman as the best; and did behead, hang,
draw, and quarter better then any of his Predecessors.

Besides could shoot, could Bird, or any thing,
What e're belonged to Axe or Hempen string.
This young Gregory, proving so apt and good an Artist, that with a little
Snick-up, he could cure all Diseases or Maladies whatsoever in the Body
Politic, not too far gone.

He had a neat, assured cleanly trick
To cure any neck that had the crick,
Nay, all Diseases, call them as you please,
He had a Medicine gave them present ease:
But like a Rogue, he lately gave over those
That were his Sovereigns, and his Countries foes*
When Justice called him, then he would not be seen,
To search their wounds while they were fresh and green.
But now they are unto a Gangrena run,
There Is little good by Hempseed to be done.
Had Justice been impartial, it had been Reason
To hang up Traitors in their thoughts of Treason:
But now their thoughts are grown unto the Act
What helps it now to hang them for the Fact?
Yet hang they shall, and end their lives on Trees,
Take them Will Lo, for they are all thy Fees.
This (...) was by the Bloody Iuncto (...) out of his bed by a Troop of horse
at their late inhumane Butchery of their King; he making a show, as if he had
been unwilling to to do so vile and ungodly an Act; yet for the reward of
money, (the main Engine that sets all the Iunctoes wheels of treason a going)
was inwardly rejoiced, that he should have thirty pounds for one chop, though
at the Sacred neck of Gods Anointed. The abhorred Deed being done; he had his
reward; which served him but in the Stews and Brothers to purchase a Surfeit,
which: soon turned to the Naples Scabb, alias Morbus Galicus, which appeared in
his Neck and throat, his eyes an blood-shot ^ike a Ferrus; some of his
Neighbors going to visit him; he bid them have a care, for the Devil was in
the room, and stayed to fetch him; they bid him call on God, and that the^e was
mercy for him: he answered; That he expected not any mercy for obeying men
rathe^ then God, and murdering his King; moreover said; that his Majesty told
him when he asked him forgiveness; That he could not forgive any subject that
came to murder him: His Neighbors bid him repent; He replied, That one stood at
his beds feet, that would not suffer him, (meaning the Devil) they told him,
it was but his fancy; for they saw nothing; when on the sudden the candle went
out and such a stink of bromstone in the Chamber, that they were near choked;
and glad to groap their way out much amazed; and that night he died (a fearful
example for all Regicides.) His carcass was carried by four of his Gibbitteers
to Mary-Matt-Fellow, with great joy and whooring of the People, who pulled up
all the nettles and weeds in stead of rosemary, with which they strewn the
ways, and decked the poasts, and ty'de about their Hoggs and Dogs necks with
black parings of cloth; crying, Two of the Roagues are gone to the Devil,
(meaning Dorislaw and Greg.) and we hope the rest will follow.

There is one Tench a ^^^^-maker in Hounsditch, that provided roapes pullies,
and hoo^es (incase the King resisted) to compel and force him down to the
block, this Rogue is also haunted with a Devil; and (...) away.

Beware you (...) you must all adjourne
To (...) Court, where your black souls will burn.
FINIS.

