ASTROLOGY Proved to be the old Doctrine of Demons, professed by the
worshippers of Saturn, Jupiter, Mars, Sun and Moon. In which is proved That
the Planetary and fixed Stars are the Powers of the air, which by Gods
permission are directed by Satan the chief Power thereof, by means whereof
nothing can by their Configurations be foreseen but by Satan. Farther, As Satan
directs the ayery powers to act by in the unbelievers according to his will, so
God before the Gospel used the Ministry of the Elect Angels to direct the
Starry Powers for the good of his, and so in the state of Antichrist. After the
fall of Antichrist, and in the true Church still God immediately Rules the
Powers by Jesus Christ; and in the thousand years Satan is to be bound, he
shall not act by the Starry Powers to deceive the Nations more, when the Demon
Doctrine, by which the world three thousand years has been deceived, shall
cease, with the Doctrine of Antichrist, the Learning professed in Academies of
Aristotle, etc By which until the Devil is bound he deceives the Nations.

Written by an unworthy witness of the truth of God, JOHN BRAIN.

LONDON; Printed by M. S. for John Hancock, and are to be sold at the first
shop in Pope's Head Alley, next to Cornhill. 1653.

Johan. Pic. Mirand. in Astrol. l. 12. cap. 4. speaking of the Zodiac. Hanc
divisionem quasi natura non Arbitrio factam, and quot jam parts ipsi finxerant
sibi, tot influxuum vires and proprietates diversas esse decreverunt, tum pro
numero signorum duodecim loca divisere, sex supra finitorem, sex infra, sunt
sex quoque signa sub terra, sex supra semper revolvuntur. Ita magno errore
definitum observandum; Inprimis sub quo loco quo signo planeta collocaretur,
alias enim ad influendum pro loci signique varietate vires adipisci, etc.

Hermes. (...).

Porphyr. Cited by Eusebius. volum. 6. Evangelicae praeparationis, Say 's, that
the gods in the Oracles by the Motion of the Stars did foretell things to
come; as when Apollo was asked when a woman with child went with a male or
female, and told another, that an ill day was at hand to him, which Saturn and
Mars had together agreed on. A Soldier asked him why in such peril he should
stand upon the matter (the Question was about a thought he had) who answered
him that Mars being the Lord of his Geniture stirred him up to it. And in
another Answer; To day, says he, it is best for me to say nothing of the way of
the Stars; upon which, says Eusebius, Stellarum motu impeditur.

TO THE ASTROLOGERS, (...).
1 TIMOTHY 4.1. With those that give heed to the Doctrine of Demons, Greeting and
good will in the Gospel of God.


FRiends, I write not this for any offense taken from you, or do I write it to
give offense to you; but out of unfeigned love to God and the Gospel, with a
tender care of the good of your souls, and spirits, and bodies. This only I
crave, that as I write without prejudice, so that you also will read the same.
I have writ nothing out of bitterness of spirit, if any thing seem harsh to
you, know, there is no more intended but an honest handling the word of truth,
and plain dealing with the souls of such as it does concern; which ought to
be desired of all, in our converse about the things of God, to be in him that
speaks for God. Now so it is that a whiles Astrology, called Christian
Astrology, was with some delight looked on by my self, but when I considered
the Demons in their Stars, with the Heroes and Heraes in the Asterisms, with
the (...) in the Zodiac, and the Doctrine, God in mercy undeceived me, and
therein bound to seek the promoting of the same good to others also.

1. That Jupiter and Mercury are the Demons the Scriptures speak of, appears,
Act. 14.11, 12. Where the Lystrians took Paul and Barnabas for their Gods,
calling Barnabas Jupiter, and Paul (...) Hermes or Mercury. And from the
Doctrine of Demons they thought Paul Mercury, from his being chief in
delivering the Message. And for Diana (...), which is the Moon, the Ephesians,
Act. 19.27. she is called a Goddess, she had her Temple, and was esteemed of
great Magnificence, so that Asia, and all the world worshipped her, Acts 17.19.
Athens was (...), hill, where his Altar was.

2. They had their Priests, of which I take Dionysius called the Areopagit to
have been a Priest of Mars, there were the Priests of Jupiter, Acts 14.13. who
sacrificed Oxen to them, but to Saturn and Mars were men sacrificed.

3. These Priests were those men called Flammins, and the old Astrologers call
Philosophers, who to keep the people in a way of worshipping of them, did
teach that for doctrine to men that this day by tradition has been continued
and received for Astrology, which is no other then the Doctrine of Demons.

4. This will appear, Act. 16.18. in that the Athenians called Paul's preaching
Christ a setting forth strange Demons, he showing Christ a man dyed and rose
again, was in heaven and did minister salvation to men; which proves a custom
among them of setting forth their Demons, called by the Apostle the Doctrines
of Demons, that is, of men-gods, for which they were Magi, wise men, Seers,
that did thus set out the Demons doctrine to the people, and as there Prophets
or Diviners predict things thereby.

5. These Demons had their Stars in which they were supposed after death to
be in, and thereby to act on men as when they were alive. Thus the Magi, Matthew.
2.2. Where is the King of the Jews, we have seen his Star and are come to
worship him; the King is distinct from the star, so that there is the Demon
or Hero his Star. The Doctrine of the Demon, and the Asterisms, do so prove
one the other, that one being granted, the other cannot be denied; as if the
highest of the Planets be Saturns, then Saturn is supposed to be in it, and the
doctrine of that Star holds forth the Demon Saturn, not the star; and so of
Mars, Venus, etc. For the nature of the star is not known but by the nature
of the Demon, who is only described in the Doctrine and Emblem.

To which Demons after the way of Heathens the hours of the day, the days of
the week, and years of the world, and Climates of the Earth, and Cities of
the Nations, are said to be ruled and subjected in the Demon doctrine.

In opposition to which Lords, for so the Astrologers say of that they are
Lords in Genitures of Houses, of Ecclipses, and have dominion in such Quarters
of the world, and over such part of man's life, etc. in directions, 1 Cor. 8.5,
6. There are many are called Lords, but to us is but one Lord Jesus Christ,
opposing Christ worshipped to these Demons the Heathens then worshipped, and
eat and drank the blood and flesh sacrificed to them, 1 Cor. 10.21. and 8.10.
Which was done in the Temple built to etc. In which was an Idol where he was
supposed to be in on earth as in heaven in his star, which meat so sacrificed
and sold by their Priests to such as sold meat in the shambles, was an offense
to the Saints.

It is superstition and condemned of God to name the names of these, how then
to name the day from them, and to give the Rule of its hours to them? Why on
the first day must have the first hour at rising and begin the government of
the day when she is in opposition to us, and not seen by us, appears not to
me, but to confirm a Heathenish observation of the day to the Moon, and the
Doctrine of Diana, and the preserving of her Magnificence; for as God had a day
of rest to his service, so the Demons had theirs, on which, men, devoted to
them, did visit their Temples, and did sacrifice to them on their Altars. Some
Astrologers have said the seventh day was observed by the Jews in honor of,
and that we sin not keeping it.

To bring the people thereunto they did no other but hold out to them, how they
were preserved by them, and how their punishments came from them, and good was
conveyed by their Stars to them, hourly, daily, yearly, as in the Doctrine of
Astrology is set forth. Which was the tie they had to bind them to their
worship and service. Acts 19.27. Asia and all the world worshipped Diana the;
sure the Nations that call the second day day, did worship the on that day in
time of these names.

6. To hold out this distinction of the god Demon and his Star as distinct by
the Scripture, see Acts 7.43. And ye retooke up the Tabernacle of Moloch, and
the star of your god Remphan. Moloch was the Demon, Saturn whose star was
Remphan, that is, the highest of the Planets, according to the Arabian Dialect;
so that there was the god, the Tabernacle, and the Star, as distinct things,
the worship was set up, the Tabernacle, the influence ascribed to the Star as
the means thereof, and the worship given to the Demon.

7. Whereas the Scripture says, I would not ye should have fellowship with
Demons, 1 Cor. 10.20. Now where one acknowledging the Demons in their Doctrine,
in their days, in their rule, in their Characters, in their names, in the
stars as theirs, be not a having communion with them or no; Its good to
consider, Levit. 18.3. and to speak and foretell by their rules, Deuteronomy. 7.4.

8. In the Conjunctions, Retrogradations, and several aspects of the Planets in
the doctrine of Demons, is held out what men (acted, as they say, by them)
would produce among themselves, as if old men, melancholy, envious, etc. having
the disposition of stirred up in them according to the emergencies of the
times; so men borne under Mars, having a spirit of war and blood in them, are
by the influence of Mars stirred up to war and revenge. So those borne under
Venus, are as by a spirit of venery lead to dalliance, delights, neatness; and
Mercury to the god Demons, a manservant, to the goddesses a female, who as
their servant is nimble witted to council the worst and please the best, being
of a false and treacherous spirit: so of the Men of the Moon, the Sun, etc.
Now the difference if it be about Dominion with the, about women with Venus, or
Priesthood with and Saturn, be of the one side, and those acted by him, and on
the other side with those acted by him, the Judgment will be what the event
thereof is, say they, if have a hand in the business, unless by a prove a
Moderator, if it be but in a square, its but as it were, say they, a falling
out, and not as in an, or an open defiance; to which in agreements they compare
the and the signs, where fixed or moveable, helping in the Judgment, in the
undertaking whereof,

1. There is not only scientia, the art and rules therein:

2. But there is required in the man a spirit inclined to, and acquainted with,
or acted by the Influence of Mercury and in a prophetic way, which differs
from the spirit of divination, the one immediately, the other mediately, by
rules predicting things, as in that axiom; a te and a scientia, the knowledge
without this spirit is nothing.

3. This spirit is as much to inquire into the state of affairs in the world
below, as well as in the configurations of the heavenly bodies above; for it is
confessed that grounds of this art do depend upon experiences; these things
would require a volume, but my intent is only in a general way how they are
opposed, and what opposed, and what God allows of in the Stars, says
Mirandula; Ptolemeum plus conceptui quam geniturae tribuisse.

1. The seven Planets are Gods creatures, called by Jude, (...), erring
Stars, because of the irregularity of their motion, sometimes direct, then
stationary, then retrograde, opposing, conjoyning one with another, as friends
and foes.

2. By these Planets power and operations, the change of seasons, and airs,
and weathers, are produced, usually called by the Astrologers, in receptions,
oppositions, and other configurations, apertio portarum; but in the word they
are indeed said to be the powers of the air, Ephesians. 2.2. Signifying that the
heat, the cold, the moist, the wet, the dry, the wind, the snow, the hayle,
and exhalations are produced or wrought by these in the air, as heat in the
rising of the great Dog-starre.

3. By the air these powers work on the earth, and on man composed of the
Elements themselves were first made of, as by a tacture the Stars applying
themselves by the air to the several bodies of men as they agree with, or are
contrary to them, to sickness or health.

1. Hence some are said to be (...), Moon struck.

2. Others are said, etc.

4. The souls being ex traduce, their Influence extends to incite some joy,
hate, fear, wrath, as the temper of the body is first wrought on.

5. And because man consists of a spirit immediately given of God, and not made
of the matter other Elementary bodies were of, remains unwrought upon by them,
as being above them, and not to be corrupted by them.

6. To all these Satan he adds his operation, Ephesians. 2.2. who is the Prince or
chief of the powers of the air, who works with them, or by them.

7. On the children of disobedience he thereby works according to his will, 2 Timothy 2.26. and therefore as a spirit he is said to work it on the spirit, the
body, the soul, he directing their influences according to his several
purposes; hence in Scripture, Matthew. 12.29. the world is called the house of
Satan, the several Orbs or Spears as the upper Rooms, the earth, the Sea,
etc. the under Rooms thereof, in which he governs and rules the men of the
world, and being called powers in heavenly places, Ephesians. 6.12. Shows that not
as by a Law but by power he rules the powers of the air, assisting him
thereto, on the Inspection whereof at best does depend the Judgment of the
Stars, as it relates to Satan, and wicked men. Not that I deny but the
influence of the Stars may alter the state of Gods Elect in their bodies to
health or sickness; but free from that power of Satan's acting them on him,
they being redeemed from the world, and power of Satan, unless God permit him
for some particular ends. Hence the scars in the bodies of men under the
several Constellations are from them as natural without the coactings of
Satan, it being common to Elect and Reprobate.

8. In these very operations of Satan, the divine providence no less appears
then in the powers of the air, they not having power to act in the least, or
over the least, beyond the limits of Gods permission; says the Astrologer, Deus
regit astra, yea Demonem cum astris, Christ when he stayed the winds and seas,
he showed his power over the powers of the air.

9. It seems to me God sends out the Elect Angels* to direct the powers of the
air to the good of the Saints, Heb. 1.14. and to keep them that they dash not
their feet against a stone in all their ways; as the evil Angels on the
Reprobates, by whom God as vessels of wrath fits them for destruction.

In Jude 9. the good and evil Angels contend about the body of Moses, God not
suffering the bodies of Saints to be demonized, as Saturn, Mars, Venus, Diana,
Mercury, thieves, whores, murderers, etc. Spirits only fit to set out wicked
men by, and not good men, Rev. 12.

10. I have read with admiration, Heb. 2.5. He has not subjected the future
government to Angels. (Vide Hieronym. in Gal. 4.3.) Necesse esse priusquam quis
credat in Christo, illis arbitris, viz. Angelus gubernetur.

1. Implying that the government of the natural state of men in the world is
subjected to Angels, as the Astronomers say.

2. In what Saints are natural if subjected to good Angels.

3. That the government to come, that is, in Christ, has other power, Heb.
6.5. called the power of the world to come, and not that of the air, which is
ministered by another Spirit, even that of God, as they are of another house,
and another household, even the house and household of God, redeemed from the
world, and the power of Satan to God, Act. 26.18. That he is denied to act in
them as before, whiles they lived according to the Prince of the power of the
air.

11. Satan is called the God of this world, 2 Cor. 4.4. and Mat. 4.8. showing
Christ all the Kingdoms of the world, and the glory of them, saying, He would
give it him if he would worship him. How far God may make use of Satan in the
preferment and fall of some by the powers of the air, inciting men thereto, or
how far he may permit him to do it on others is not clear, but we may see
it in the Contracts of mean men with him to be advanced to the Papacy* and
other dignities in the world.

And indeed in this sense by this Doctrine I suppose Balam is called a Prophet,
2 Pet. 2.16. who went to the high places of Baal, and in Answer to the seven
Demons built seven Altars, and offered seven oxen and seven Rams, when the
Angel of the Lord, yea the Lord himself opposed him and his Demons with the
spirits, so that he cannot divine against him, his eyes in former divinations
were shut, but now opened. Its notably said in Jude of the Antichrists
Ministry, that they are (...), as if they had as men the influence in their way
on the world as all the Planets in Heaven had, acting one whiles as, anon as,
then as, anon as the, and then as, Retrograding, opposing and joining one with
the other, and engaging the world with them; of which see my expos. on Jude.
Now as for the true Ministry, Rev. 1.20. They are said to be held in the right
hand of Christ.

Again, whereas by is understood the Demon of Priests and Lawyers, and the
Astrologers have predicted their fall, which will be most certainly
accomplished; it proves that that Romish Ministry, as the Flammins, who were
first understood hereby, are of the house and government of the world, as they
were, or the divination were nothing, and under the powers of the world.

That which is eminently considerable to prove what I have said to be truth, is
this, the time is come in which Satan is binding, that he cannot deceive the
Nations any more, Rev. 20.2. In which he is not permitted to direct the
Planetary influences as before; for whereas before in the same Conjunctions and
Ecclipses he so ordered the same, that he advanced error, and the Rule of his
Kingdom by it, yet now he being bound the Influences of the powers of the air
are such on the inferior bodies as utterly dissolve the frame of the government
of the old world, Monarchy, Peers, Priests, People and servants, so oppose one
another, that the Rule is dissolved, for the Ruler thereof being captivated, he
cannot deceive the Nations with the Name of Liberty, or show of Religion, or
the pretext of succession, nor will any ways of reconciliation serve the
turn, a sign of which binding appears in the liberty granted Religion, which
Satan in Kings, Priests, People, have always until now opposed, persecuted,
etc. which binding continues a thousand years, and being loose by the powers
of heaven he deceives the Nations again. Now the Lord Jesus, Matthew. 24. with
the signs in Heaven, shall be a shaking of its powers, which produces a
change in the powers below, signified in the war between Nation and Nation,
which will be done in such a way then as never was, when men's hearts will fail
them for fear, looking for those things were to come on the earth, viz. in the
dissolution comes on the (...), the order and rule thereof, out of which
confusion arises the redemption of Gods people.

Note, among these Demons some are fortunous, others Infortunous, others
between both. By which means the persons, states, natures and conditions come
largely to be treated of in this Doctrine of Demons. And to hold up the honor
of the fortunes, say they, they would do good oft-times did not the Cacodemons
hinder, and oppose, and destroy the good they intended; by which one was
beloved, the other feared.

2. God in Scripture gives the ends of the Stars creation to be three.

1. For light.

2. For seasons, as summer and winter, autumn and spring, to sow, to plant, to
reap. Lactantius summer is from day, winter from the night.

3. For signs of drought and rain, heat and cold, wind and snow.

1. Hence the Scripture speaks of the Stars Cisli, which we profane the
Scripture by calling them Hyades, from the Demon Doctrine, which are in the
Asterisme of the Bull, and are to be read the unconstant ones, because they
rising signified the unconstancy of the weather.

2. By the other (...) which was as profanely read Orion which is an Asterism
of a Hero, and pertaines to the Demon Doctrine, is a great profanation of the
word, the Original understood would set out to us in the Stars the signs of
the weather they brought with them, which were better Astrology then the other,
and as much as need be known.

3. These Asterisms continued in our translated Bible, corrupt the Text, and
the understandings of men, and seems to own the Doctrine of the Demons, then
which God hates nothing more, Zeph. 1.4. God would cut off the Remnant of Baal,
the name of the Chemarims, the Priests, and the worshippers of the host of
Heaven, with such as swear by the Lord and Malcham, in which Baal has his
Chemarims, his Priests, his host, his worshippers, and those swear by him, and
all distinct, yet relating one to another, and in that sense depend one upon
another, among whom some swear by the Lord and Malcham. As among the Corinths,
some drink of the Cup of the Lord, and the Cup of Devils; so now may it not be
as dangerous to profess the Gospel, and heed the Doctrine of Demons, much more
to profess the one, and practice the other.

4. We not calling them by their proper names given them of God, agreeing with
their nature (...), but by the names of Demon gods, given them by their
worshippers, yea more using the Characters to distinguish them by that did set
out the virtue of these Demons to the world, as represented in a sith which
Saturn carried in the hand of his Emblem; thus Mars is represented carrying in
his hand a whip, and Mercury with, with his staff of Serpents, etc. Now so
far is this Demon way owned by us.

1. God is induced to leave and deliver men up to Satan to deceive.

2. Satan is engaged and at liberty in respect of us yielding to the temptation.

3. In respect of the rest of the Demon Doctrine, to lead us where or unto what
he please thereof.

5. In the Cabal of Astrology, they rest not in the Philosophy of the Flammins
or Priests of the Demons, teaching by the Stars and the Doctrine of the
Asterisms, but proceed to the Chemarims, Zeph. 1.4. That in the government
these Demons are assisted by Angels: Every Planet, say they, has his presiding
Angel, and Legions of assistants imployd by him, which Angels I take to pertain
to the retinue of the god of the world, called Secundarian Intelligences: The
good Angels are only sent out to minister to the Elect, and not otherwise.

1. The Angel or Spirit of Saturn is Oriful.

These Angels or Spirits are said to perside 354 years 4 months.
2. Zathariel the Spirit or Angel of Jupiter.

3. Samael the Angel of Mars.

4. Michael the Angel of the Sun.

5. Gabriel the Angel of the Moon.

6. Anael the Spirit of Venus, the Stars, and the Spirit at least.

7. Raphael the Spirit of Mercury or Satan acting by Mercury.

Now it being so that to each of these Spirits there are so many millions of
attendants, as some Authors report, as it is said, Heb. 12.22. The Saints
coming to God, come to an innumerable company of Angels. It seems in like
manner the Astrologer coming in every figure to the seven Demons, and in them
come to an innumerable company of Chemarims, which are above his Stars, and
Priests, when he need take heed of the great attendants about him.

In going from the first General of Astrology the seven Planetary Stars, we
come to the second, by the Demon Doctrine divided into two general parts.

1. The Zodiac or Circle of Living Creatures, called Signifer, which contains
the path of the Sun his course, completing the year by his ascending its
southern latitude, and descending to its North latitude from the Equinox.

2. The Asterisms contained in the Heavens between the Zodiac and the Poles,
North and South.

For the Zodiac.
1. By the doctrine of Demons those twelve Asterisms, the Ram, the bull,
Gemini, etc. which are all said in Heaven to be alive and acted by the spirits
of the gods, placed them there, having their Characters, Stars, Influence,
etc. as the Heroes, but Inferior to the Demons, who gave them their being there.

2. As the soul of the Rams and lesser Sheep is in the Ram above, and all
small Cattle, and the souls of Oxen, Horse, Cows, were in the Bull; above of
maidens and women in Virgo above, and of men in Gemini, and Sagittary, Aquary.

3. Hence in the Zodiac the twelve signs divided into twelve equal parts,
containing thirty degrees, make the four quarters of the year by its
triplicity, of which some are beastial, human, double bodyed, etc. Of the
nature of fire, fiery, of the nature of water, watery, airy, earthly. Some are
moveable, others fixed, then common, etc. but to come to the doctrine.

1. Aries the Ram by Demon doctrine came thus to Heaven; an Indian wanting
water, a Ram rose out of the Sand and brought him where water was; for which
the man asked of Jove he might be placed among the Stars, which to this day is
called Aries aequinoctialis.

2. By the Demon doctrine men borne under the sign of this Ram, are of the
nature of a Ram, beastly, rash, lascivious, unconstant, of a hot and dry
constitution, it being the Demons Mars house, and he there, it makes him worse.

3. An Eclipse in Aries in the 8 house or 6. brings a rot on the lesser Cattle,
Aries afflicted, as if the soul of these below suffered in the soul of the
Ram above, but if it fall in Taurus, then it falls on great Cattle, and why,
because it happens in Taurus, the Bull carried Europa into Creet, and placed by
Jupiter in Heaven, now in its affliction proves the affliction of all the
cattle called greater on earth.

4. No man can show any reason why in these divisions of Heaven, the greater or
lesser Cattle should suffer in Ecclipses more then in other, but by the
tradition only taken up upon the aforesaid doctrine and fables of seduced men,
as all lies do come from the Devil.

5. Nor can any reason be given why that Asterism should be placed in that part
of Heaven, and not in the place of the Asterisme of Leo, only it is the
Doctrine of Demons, delivered by the Flammins, and Poets fictions, and by
tradition conveyed to us.

6. Aries, though not known to be the first on no better ground, rules the
head of man and beast, say they, the nature of Aries fits best the head.

7. In a revolution if the house of Aries have a fortune in it, well placed in
the 6th, it will go well with the Farmer in his less Cattle, as if when its
well with that Ram above, it cannot choose but do well with the rest below.

8. The Astrologers not willing that the Basis of the art should seem to arise
from this dunghill, say, that the sign is called the Ram, because that the
Stars in Heaven make up the form of such a like body in Heaven, which
Piccolominus denies.

1. Concerning which none of the Ancients ever did assert, much less go about
to prove, but positively conceived it to be that Ram living in heaven placed by
the Demon for his good to the man in heaven.

2. Nor is it possible, through the multitude of Stars therein, and the
distance of the place, and the greatness of the space allotted to the body of
the Ram, for any man by all the Instruments of the world to prove the thing.

3. It best agrees with the doctrine that it should be a Ram indeed, by which
the good or evil should fall on Creatures of the same kind, and not the form
of a Ram shadowed in the situation of Stars.

Sagittarius by the Doctrine of Demons is a double bodyed sign, partly humane,
partly beastiall.

The divine Doctrine says thus; one Croton nursed by his Mother with the Muses,
was through their prayer placed among the Stars, who because he was much
addicted to hunting of beasts, had this various form assigned him, with a bow
in his hand shooting at the beasts he hunted; he is said to be famous for the
honor he gat at the Olympicks.

1. Hence as it is the house of Jupiter, its a Regal sign.

2. Because bicorporeal, in Ecclipses, men suffer, and because he rode on
horseback, braying beasts suffer.

3. It being the ascendant in a Nativity, it inclines a man to hunting, and
makes him a good horseman, and gives valor.

4. Now why men and beasts must suffer more under this sign then another, is
no reason but from this Demon doctrine.

5. In the first 10 degrees men, in the second beasts, because man part was
first in the Asterisme, the beast last.

6. Why the second decanat should pertain to beasts, and not the third, the
second and third relating to that part of the Asterisme, is beastiall, cannot
be any reason given but tradition from the Demon Doctors.

7. If any plead, experience proves it, which is no more but the proof of the
Demon doctrine tradicted, though against reason. And let it be in all meekness
considered where the Learning of Poets in our Grammar schools, of Astrology
and Philosophy, of Aristotle in the Academies, be not the way to Atheise men by
learning, when the cry of the world is, if this learning cease we shall return
to Atheism, when the learning and knowledge of the word is looked on as
nothing, laid aside as insufficient without this to complete a people; to the
contempt of God, his wisdom and word.

8. That Crotons fable is the ground of Demon doctrine from the Asterism of
Sagittary, is clear; for if they destroy the Asterisme and its double bodyed
form, the ground of the doctrine cease.

9. Abram was before Croton, and the Olympicks, who acknowledged not Belus a
Demon, though borne in his reign, he could not Saturn, who was son of Janus,
who lived in the time of the Reign of the Judges in Israel, and Jupiter his
son long after the death of Moses, whose body Satan had a design on to have
demonized by the people, so that he could not deliver this doctrine to the
people, and indeed to make them authors of this doctrine were great iniquity,
and to make their memory cursed, which God made blessed among the Saints.
Astrology beginning about Nebuchadnezzars days, as Picus Merandul. lib. 12.
cap. 2.

10. What is said of these two Asterisms is in the same kind to be proved by
any or from any of the rest by the doctrine declaring the Demon.

11. That the seven Planetary Stars should rule as Lords in the 12 divisions
of Heaven, called signs, as Lords in their houses, who in their Stars are so
far below them in the inferior Orbs, especially if considered that the
powers of heavenly bodies are emitted downward and not upwards, acting on
homogeneal things of their nature below, and not on themselves, who are not
subject to corruption or change, so that it is more proper these Stars in the
Zodiac should rule the Planets then the Planets rule them, and that by them
they emit their virtue to us.

Only this is understood, that the Demons though their Stars be the Planets,
their houses are above, as their places of abode, out of which as out of their
store they distribute to every native as they please.

These 12 signs in the Erecting of figures in genitures, Revolutions and
horary Questions are cast into 12 houses.
1. All the Demons save the Sun and Moon have their day-house and their
night-house, whence by the Planets they emit their virtue, so that the
doctrine-altogether holds out the Demons to do all, and nothing to be done
without them, and therefore to say that when they speak of Saturn, they intend
nothing but the highest of the Planetary Stars, for Saturn as a Demon rules
in the two signs of the Zodiac and, which are not in nor of the supreme Planet.

2. To advance the Demons honor in Genitures, Mars by Aries forms the head,
Venus by Taurus forms the neck, Mercury in Gemini forms the shoulders and
arms, etc. by which doctrine there was a tie on all to serve and worship them.

3. For the well being of men borne in time of the agreement of the Demons to
bless him, out of the first house one bestows his education, out of the
second another bestows on him wealth, out of the 6. another gives Cattle, out
of the 5. another children, out of the 10 honor, out of then 11 friends, etc.
so that whereas the native came naked out of the womb, the Demons out of their
houses as out of their store furnish him with all things, which ties the man to
give all to their worship.

4. If a native borne and Marks in the 7th, he stirs up lawsuits against him
and envies, Saturn in the 12. imprisons him, Mercury in the second R, and the
Dragons tail makes him poor and foolishly wast his patrimony, especially if
conjoined with other Stars of the nature of and or and, which is enough to
make a Heathen adore the Infortunes or the Cacodemons for fear.

In Horary Questions about sickness.
The Demon doctrine teaches thus, if the Lord of the 6th be a fortune, and in
a moveable sign in to the Sun or Moon in his own terms at the question,
its a sign the man will quickly recover, and e contrario.

1. Note, let the Star of be where it will, yet Saturn if the ascendant be
Aquary, is said to be Lord, in which is proved that by Saturn is meant the
Demon not the Star, the Star being in his Orb as in his Center cannot be
said to delight in Aquary more then in, and its usual to say by the lady of is
the first in a scheam; R in the 10th, they said the Lady of the first is in the
10, which is not to be answered by the figure of Metanomia subjecti, but that
where the Star is, the Lord is also.

In opposition to these Demon Lords, the Scriptures say to us, There is but one
Lord, if so, Jupiter is none, nor Mars, etc.

2. When they say Venus delights in mirth, feasts, music, dancing, neatness;
is any so simple as to think the star is addicted thereto, or are they not
according to the doctrine say that Venus was so when alive, and being in the
star as a soul in the body, by its influence effects the like in the Natives
borne under her dominion, so that were the men delivered this doctrine alive,
they would admire to see their meaning so corrupted, and Demons so deluded.

They say in the firmament are degrees, light, dark, pitted, deep increasers
of fortune, etc.
In the course of the Sun appears no such matter, it only tends to exalt
the Cabal of Astrology, the Scripture tells us, the heaven is stretched out
like a Curtain, or a line, that implies plainness, and in that it is a body
not of differing substances, there is no cause of inequality.

If they say they are not really deep or pitted or dark, but are supposed, so
it proves the doctrine fictious and uncertain in the very grounds, what then
must the doctrine thence deduced be?

The chief of the Planets fortitudes, his exaltation is the greatest, which
gives him four essential dignities.
1. The Suns exaltation is in the 19 of Aries, say they.

2. The reason why that is his exaltation, they say, is, because he was in the
Creation placed in that degree of heaven.

1. For which they have no more but a mere conjecture to prove it, which is too
weak a ground to carry four dignities in a Judgment, and sets out the
uncertainty of its foundations.

2. Why the first day it enters the Equinox should not be the degree of its
exaltation, or why it should not be exalted in Libra as soon as in Aries.

3. Or why it should not be in that part of heaven they assign him for his
house, viz. Leo, since that in the Creation every herb had his seed, as in
summer time, and not as in spring time.

4. Whereas they say in the Sun increases the days, therefore his ascension
must be there; true, in the North Latitude it does, but shortens them in the
South: They in the South plead that in Libra it lengthens their days, and
therefore its ascension by the same reason to them must be in Libra, as to us
in Aries.

Here by the by, I think good to show how the Demons are made tutelary gods,
every City his Demon, and Angel, and Star, and sign to rule it from the
first laying its foundation, and the Planet then reigned, as for London, etc.
whose Lord is, so that as our Cities are our gods are.

As for the Terms faces and peregrinations of the Planets, they are merely of
the Cabal of Astrology.

Say they, a Native borne under the first of Aries directs the first 6 years of
his life, the next 8, the 7 following, and then the 5 after, and the last 4. in
which to increase the esteem of the Demons they are beholding to them all for
bringing up of a child only, the and excepted, who are mentioned in the faces
only, which makes the so often peregrine, in which he is as a man therefore to
be turned out of door, and not cared for then as the other Demons, when indeed
they are more beholding to them then to all the other Demons and Stars.

Albumazes cites five opinions of the Terms, the ground of which is that the
Philosophers, Magi or Flammins, by experience found a Planet was of more force
then out of a weak ground to give dignities by. Bonatus says, there were two
opinions of them, one of the Egyptians, the other of the Chaldes, and that
Ptolomy followed neither, but the sayings of some Ancients he found in an old
Book.

Quest. Which of these 9 opinions was best, had most experience, which men
commit to Ptolomy's Judgment alone, and follow him who left the practice of
the Egyptians and Chaldeans, who were the first Inventors of it, vid. Picus
Mirand. lib. 6. cap. 17. From these terms arose the ground of the Planetary
government of the world 354 years; in which I wonder at 3 things.

1. That the order of their succession in reign is not observed but inverted.

2. That the Planets not having equal terms should reign equal years.

3. That the and not having terms should govern the world, as those have
them, is a hanging over of the building of Astrology.

Hear what a Florentine Predicant says of the doctrine; Super planetam veneris
venus ipsa erecta appareat, crine subtili, sparso, effigy pulcherrima cultu
mulieri miro ornato modo vestibus talibus circumamicta qualibus Nymphae
circumamicuuntur.

A latere planetae Martis Mars armatus ardenti insideat equo Juxta planetam
Jovis seeds eburnea posita sit super quam Jovem deorum maximum (ut falso apud
Gentiles) locato qui Jupiter planetam suum pedibus tangat ipsoque pro scabello
utatur. And in the like manner he says of the other Planets, which clearly
proves the doctrine distinguished between the Demon and his Star among the old
Astrologers, and the new do the like in their saying when the Planet is in a
figure in the house of another Planet, they say the Lord of the 5 is in the 6th
or the like, which is more then the Planet indeed, the Lord and the planet also
by the new doctrine, though not so clearly confessed by them.

As for the difference among Astrologers about the number of the Spears, their
motions, the motions of the fixed Stars, who say the eccentricks,
concentricks, epicicles, retrogradations, trepidations, are fables of the
Poets, and not of God, nor nature, and by his own experience he saw it built
only on Imaginations, as Agrippa of the vanity of sciences on Astronomy.

He observes on Judicial Astrology the ground of its uncertainty, in that the
planetary influence (as is confessed) does not constrain but incline, but Satan
by these powers of the Stars rules in the sons of unbelief, as the Prince
of the powers of the air. But who are, and who not believers is the Question,
and makes the Judgment void, the good Angels using for good the planetary
Influence to Gods, as the evil Angels for evil to his; he says the beginning
and the end of the houses is not agreed on. I desire this above all to be
looked on, that whereas the conjunctions of the Stars to natural men may
stir up an inclination to this or that, yet what use Satan will make use of
the influence in this man what on that, is above all the art in the world, to
which the Stars say nothing, and must produce an Impossibility in all men of
giving Judgment by the Stars, even to natural men, then how far God by a
special providence shall order their influence, restraining or over-powring
Satan and the Stars, as in the case of Pharaoh, is another means to prove the
vanity of Astrology. And to say that any of the Stars as the first planetary
Star, or the third called Mars-starre, or that they are misfortunes, is a
dishonor to God, who made all good, only by sin that that was good is by a
Judgment of God become evil, the evil is in us not the Stars, to make one
a whores star, others, a thieves, or murderers, is abomination. Lactantius
de Orig. Erroris cap. 17. de daemonibus inventa sunt Astrologia aruspicina
oracula necromantia, etc. Idem ibid hi sunt qui fingere Imagines and simulacra
docuerunt qui ut hominum mentes a cultu very Dei avertent and fictos mortuorum
regum vultus and ornatus exquisita pulchritudine statui, etc.

As Picus Mirandul. lib. 3. cap. 7. makes it an argument against Astrology in
their falsely asserting to be cold, Mars hot; sure to me the seeming difference
in the color is not sufficient to prove the variety of their nature only, by
an instinct God has infused into them a power to act on the inferior bodies,
without such mixed qualities as in mixed bodies, as of the Sun (...) illic
ignis, so all the other with the Sun are of a pure Elementary nature, who by
the Creators will, by its heat cherishes all things in the earth as in the
womb of nature, helping her to bring out and perfect her fruit by the help of
the Moon.

The Moon with her influence no less effects its operation on the sea, then
the Sun on earth, which depends not on the watrinesse or moystnesse of her
nature, but the Institution of God, God impowering her as a power of the air;
so the winter cold from Saturn, winds and rain by the celim, etc. are not to
be applied to their mixed qualities, which cannot according to nature be found
in simple bodies. But the ordinance of God who did by a decree appoint summer
and winter, to fulfill whose will these by his providence are directed, though
in the fulfilling whereof he uses Satan's power and malice as his servant
therein. My intent is not to write more of that truly noble Picus Mirand. but
refer you to his 12 learned books.

Again in that a great part of Astrology pertains to Elections of hours and
days to begin and do businesses in, its vanity appears.
1. Time is Gods; Times and seasons are in the Fathers hands.

2. To observe times, not only holy, as feasts, etc. but as that one time is
better then another to do a business in it self without relating to other
adjuncts and concomitants, and in particular cases only, is indeed a thing the
Scripture condemns as a superstitious vain and evil thing.

2. God says, a man should do things while it is in the power of his hand,
that is opportunity, for who knows what a day may bring forth, Prove. 27.1. The
Astrologer puts a man on deferring many days to do his business, as
pretending a knowledge, what days, times and years will bring out, and say it
is not in the power of their hand to do it as yet, such and such will oppose
and hinder, but at such a time it will be good.

3. Things are appointed to time, in which they are to be so, that time is not
a thing to be disposed of by Election; for that a man may think he has time,
indeed he has none. Time in a special manner being reserved in Gods own hand,
as a peculiar means to dispense his providence: and therefore James hints at
such like presumptions in men, saying to morrow we will go (as if one time
were better then another) to such a City as our direction guids us to, and
continue there a year, the time of a promising revolution, and get gain.
After all which he says, James 4.13, 14. Whereas ye know not what shall be to
morrow. What is your life? it is but a vapor, on which depends all the
purposes and actions of man, if he fail his very thoughts cease and dye with
him. Ambrose, Austin, Tertullian, Bazill, Chrysostom, and others, condemned it.

According to the Doctrine of Demons in the 9 sphere are 48 Asterisms or
bodies placed in heaven by the gods son Heroes and Heraes, and other
creatures and Instrumente, who for some especial good done or found in them,
were as by a reward placed there, who have their Stars placed in them, by
which they act as souls by their bodies on things below.

1. Who are said to participate of the nature of two Demons oft-times are said
to be of the nature of and, and, and and.

2. When the Planets are in Conjunction with any of their own nature, they are
as men of one mind agreed on the work intended good or evil, and so act the
more vigorously, the Demons helped by the Heroes.

1. Merach is in the Asterisme of Andromeda, in whom she acts, and is of the
nature of Venus, that is, inciting to neatness, lust, and pleasure, she was
the wife of Perseus, placed in heaven by Minerva, now in with Mirach, it is as
if Venus and Mirach bestowed their wits and time to make the native neat, and
incline him inwardly to love, and adorn him with beauty.

2. Regulus said to be of the nature of and, signifies indeed the true nature
of a Lions heart, which they say is the Lion Hercules, showed in the Nemean
forest.

3. He that is borne the 24 of ascending, is inclinable to wantonness, because
of the Pleiades, who are said to be the 7 daughters of Atlas; now he that has
the spirits of 7 wenches working in him or upon him, cannot choose but be a
wanton, especially if be with them in Conjunction. If the head of Medusa
ascend, the Native is addicted to evil, and subject to violent death, which is
but Medusa's story revived again in the Native.

4. Orion in the 17. is said to sharpen the wit, if according to the fable
Orion was the son of Jupiter, Mercury, and Neptune, three of the Gods, and
pertakes of all their natures, and makes the Native pertaker of his, who
withal was a cunning huntsman, and placed in the heaven by Diana, who yet was
said to have his being from urine.

Let me deal plainly, and freely deliver my soul before God in this thing,
Satan by these fables could not delude men if he did not know that the
Influences of the heavenly powers of the air then inclined not men to subtilty
more then other times, and thereby seduced men to believe these lies, and
worship the Demons, as if it were from them and their adjutors the Heroes,
which things were first under these fancies delivered by Satan.

2. Satan deceives by the very word of God, much more by the Planets, Stars,
and powers of the air, which he could not do, but by the Doctrine of the
Demons, and lies of Poets in this way.

3. One cause that induces me to think the same, is, because that that part
of knowledge remained in man that was of God, is lost or adulterate, for what
the Stars, Job, Micha, and others mention, are, and in what part of heaven,
none of the Astrologers, Jews, or other know not nor agree upon, but altogether
Jews and Gentiles are now lead by this Demon discovery of heaven, and its
powers and order, which are lies and fables, and means of Idolatry and
Superstition.

The lesser Dog star in called Procion, the dog of Erigonus, signifies a
petulant saucy fellow, prone to anger, rash and giddy, how this sets out the
nature of a little waspish Curre, who does not see, so that the man is as if
Procion lived, acted, and ruled in him.

Hercules 18. Induces spirit, valor, audaciousnesse, mix^ with cruelty and
rashness, what does this doctrine but set out the Hero his life and agreeing
with it, and now his star must he living in it induce the Native borne under
it thereto. Whose Ensign in heaven is the Lions skin he slew in the Nemean
forest, and placed among the gods for his valor.

The Scorpions heart star signifies a rash ravenous headstrong person,
destructive to himself by obstinacy. The Demon doctrine says thus; That Orion
boasting of his strength said, no beast could kill him, this Scorpion then rose
out of the earth, and slew him. Orion with a Dart slaying him also, Jove placed
the Scorpion among the Stars for a Document to mortals not to presume above
their strength.

The Eagle 26. a bold confident valiant person, never yielding, guilty of
bloodshed. This Eagle, Jupiter placed among the Stars for carrying Ganimydes.
How the doctrine and the nature of an Eagle agrees, who apprehends not, which
made the Romans to carry for their Ensign in war the Eagle.

The Dolphin from the 9 to the 15 of Aquary, portends one of simple looks,
cheerful, delighted in pleasing sports of double intentions, speaking one
thing, intends another. The Doctrine says thus; Arion a cunning harper desired
of the Saylors that were casting him into the Sea, that he might play on his
Harp first. When the Dolphins came and sported about the Ship, he cast himself
on the back of a Dolphin, who carried him to the King of Corinth: The Dolphin
dying, the King erected a Statue to the Dolphin. The Mariners returning said,
Arion was dead and buried, who by the King were commanded to swear by the gods
in the Dolphins Image that Arion was dead, when Arion came out of the Image of
the Dolphin, for which Apollo caused Arion and the Dolphin to be set among the
Stars.

1. The natural form of the Dolphin is a simple looked creature.

2. Delighted in the pleasing sport of a harp.

3. In the Image appearing a Dolphin not able to discover ought.

4. But in Arions coming out of him put in by the King, was another thing
intended then to the Mariners appeared.

5. It is easy for a man to prove Astrology from all the other Asterisms to
be nothing but the pure doctrine of the Heathen Demons.

6. My appeal is to you Astrologers, if you received any footstep of your
Astrology in the Asterims doctrine or practice, from the Scripture? or where
you have in the foundation, practice, or doctrine declined the Heathens in
their delusions?

I come now to speak of the state of Saints as in communion with Christ in the
true state of the Church, how far they are above the powers of the air, and
how subject to them.
1. They are said not to be of the world, as Christ is not of the world, John
17.16. That they cannot be looked on as in that capacity.

2. They are delivered from Satan, Acts 26.18. so that though the stars have
an Influence on their earthy part, yet it is without the direction of Satan,
his power acts not with the powers of the air.

3. They are of another world, called the new Heaven and Earth, Rev. 21. they
themselves are new creatures, so that the heavenly bodies do in another then
ordinary way act on them as harmless, as holy, and sanctified to them.

4. Heb. 6.5. This new heaven is that that is called the world to come, in
which are powers proper and distinct from the former,

1. Satan has no power there, Rev. 12.7. The good Angels of God direct for
them the starry powers for good to them, as the evil to evil in the old world.

2. Whereas in the first world out of the Church Estate the government of the
world was committed to Angels, the state of the Church is not, Heb. 2.5.

1. As under the Law, Dan. 12.1. In the 9 of Jude, as in the Church Wilderness
estate, Rev. 12.7.

2. As in the world estate, Ephesians. 2.2. 2 Timothy

3. Now in the Church estate, when Satan is cast down, comes the power of God,
authority of Christ, and Kingdom of God, as ruled in another and more
immediate way then before of God, he living in, walking and dwelling in them,
so that as concerning them, old things are past away, all things are become
new, Rev. 21.3.

4. Consider whether it be not a just judgment of God that such as observe the
Names of the Demons days, and their doctrine, should be acted by Satan at his
will for giving heed to them, when Cyrus, Julius Caesar, and others, that
heeded them not, though Heathens, were made succesfull against the predictions
of Astrology.

5. It is emphatically spoke, Rev. 11.17. Thou have taken to thy self thy
great power, and have reigned when the Kingdoms of the world are the Kingdoms
of the Lord, and his Christ; God then takes the government from Angels to
himself.

6. Thus it is clearly predicted, Isa. 9.6. The government shall be upon his
shoulders, until the Church estate it is committed to Angels after the Lord
Jesus is received he governes those that receive him, Joh. 17.11.

7. It is easily apparent, for after the sanctification of the heart by the
powers of heaven, a proud heart by nature is the most humble when changed, the
most unclean natural heart made holy, is most chaste, so, etc. the world is
overcome in him, and to him, Christ has redeemed him from his vain
conversation, that the ayrie power, nor Satan's cannot act in him.

8. The Stars and the powers of the air are in themselves good, and do not
stir up to war, lust, or other evil, but as they meet with corruptions in
mixed bodies, and as they are directed by Satan, and managed to further his
designs in the world on all occasions, which is unpossible for man to know but
by Satan.

9. And the reason is because Satan as he is a power himself, and the chief
of the powers of the air, by his power he does direct and overruled the other
natural powers to serve his temptation, as every occasion requires, and as
every individual natural person is to be wrought upon.

10. Christ prayed the Father to keep those are his, Joh. 17.15. I pray not
that thou would take them out of the world, but keep them from the evil.

1. (...), may be understood from the evil one.

2. By Evil of the world, if it be understood in a larger sense, it then
comprehends finne, and the means of it, whether it be by Stars or else.

3. In that he said, I pray not that thou take them out of the world, it shows
that they are under the Influence of the heavenly powers, as well as others,
they only are kept from the evil of them, others are not.

4. That these powers may occasion corruption in the bodies of Saints, and
ordinarily by their influence, as the means thereof bring forth death, in or
on them, I see no reason to deny, they having mortal and corruptible bodies.
Yet so as,

1. It is not mixed with any power of Satan.

2. This acting of these powers is free from evil, it is not the evil of the
world to Saints, but it is gain to them, as all other things in the world are
theirs, so death in this kind is theirs also.

5. God himself undertakes in the new world to give every good thing to the
Inhabitants thereof, and against and above the ayery powers, to make a man's
enemies to be at peace with him; as in the case of Jacob and Esau, Jacob and
Laban. Yea God himself, Hosea 2.20. God will make a Covenant with beasts,
fowls, creepings things for them, and war shall cease: let the starry powers
meet and oppose, and square again, it will be nothing.

6. Then the heavens will speak for the Saints, not against them, the earth,
the corn, the wine and oil, will hear Jezrael, as if Jezrael should then be
beloved of them, and as if in nature since the fall men were beloved of them,
Hos. 2.23, 24.

This is excellently set out in that the Stars are said in their order to
fight against Sicera, as it were God directing those heavenly powers to work
fear in the one, and at that time God wrought valor in his peoples hearts,
Judges 5.20. Which I would rather read, the Stars in their way fought, etc.
That is, in the way they fight, and signifies, that they have a way of fighting
against such as God imploys them, or from their influence or powers. And that
they fought for Israel, God by his Angel directing them, as ver. 23. Curse ye
bitterly, says the Angel of the Lord, etc. The Angel helped them by the Starry
powers, and declares a curse on the Inhabitants for not helping them.

7. The ground of this appears, because Satan being bound a thousand years,
Rev. 20.2, 3. the world will be free from his power and malicious actuating the
ayery powers, they then acting in their own way and nature, as in the
Creation, and directed by Gods immediate providence to his, and the Ministry of
his Angels to others, who will no more be esteemed as fortunes and infortunes
to men.

8. In this binding the doctrine of Demons shall cease, and Astrology shall be
laid aside, for Satan has not deceived the Nations more then by the Demon
doctrine, and the doctrine of Antichrist by Astrologers and Antichrist
Ministers, both which in the binding of Satan cease, together with the Human
teaching of Aristotle in the Academies, by which the world has been much
seduced.

9. Whereas before the binding, Gods Elect were delivered from him, but after
that the very world in general shall be delivered from these ways of deceit,
a thousand years after which he is to be loosed a little, all which proves the
binding has not been as yet, for Satan did never deceive the world more then
since the days of Constantine, when they say he was bound, these being the
days of the Reign of Antichrist, after whom the whole world followed.

Note; As the Kingdom of Satan and Christ differ, and Christ and Satan, so the
powers differ, one is a power acts by darkness, the other is a power acts by
light, one to deceive, the other to direct.

1. Between these powers is an enmity; as it is said, The wisdom of the world
is Enmity with God, James 3.15. Says, it is earthly, sensual, Devilish, but
that from above, verse. 16. is pure, peaceable, gentle, easy to be entreated,
etc.

2. These powers show themselves in the men acted by them, so that God says,
Genes. 3.15. I will put enmity between her seed and thy seed, Gal. 4.29. He
that was borne after the flesh persecuted him that was borne after the spirit.

3. The greatest power is in the world to come, that destroys the work of the
Devil; Greater is he that is in you, then he that is in the world, 1 John.
Romans 16.20. God shall tread down Satan under your feet. Satan's power is a
created power, and so limited, the power of a servant only to do what he is
appointed, and no more.

4. All these are set out excellently in him, Mark. 6.2. What is there to me
and thee thou Jesus, etc. As if he should say, I am not of this world under thy
power, I am Satan's, thou have nothing to do with me, nor I with thee, so that
though he worshipped Christ, whiles he was under Satan's power he had no desire to
be under Christ's, that seemed a torment to him, but when he was under Christ's,
he would not again be under Satan's.

5. Hence though the number of Satan's subjects are more, and the nature of his
power more agreeable to the world, yet the virtue of his power being weak it
cannot prevail, no not so much as against the weakness of God, or the weak
ones of the Lord Jesus, who are mighty through Christ, the poor fishers cast
down Devils out of their holds, take away their captives, discover his
deceipts.

6. The conceit was too high that Eusebius cites of the Stars, that they are
for signs, and so are as a book in which are set forth the natures and state
of things below, with the revolution of the times thereof, which is expressly
against the Scripture, who says, That the times and seasons are in the Fathers
hands, that is, known only by him, so as that Christ himself as man had many
things hid from him of that nature, and therefore not revealed in the book of
the Stars, Act. 1.7. Matthew. 24.36.

FINIS.

